OF THE REDEMPTION OF MANKIND THREE BOOKS: Wherein the controversy of the
universality of Redemption and grace by Christ, and of his death for all men,
is largely handled.

HEREUNTO IS ANNEXED A TREAtise of Gods Predestination in one book.

Written in Latin by JACOB KIMEDONCIVS D. and professor of Divinity at
Heidelberge, and translated into English by HVGH INCE Preacher of the word of
God.

BY WISDOM PEACE BY PEACE PLENTY.



AT LONDON Imprinted by FELIX KINGSTON for HVMFREY LOVVNES.

1598.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR THOMAS EGERTON KNIGHT, LORD Keeper of the Great
Seal of England, and one of her Majesty's most honorable privy Council.
Having finished the translation of this volume, (Right Honorable) I was in
doubt whether I might safely send it forth as a matter that would, as it ought
to be embraced and favored of eueryone into whose hands it should come: or to
offer it to the view of some honorable person, and to commend it to his
favorable protection, and in his name to publish it. If I had resolved upon
the first way, as I doubt not but it should have found many friends, even all
the lovers of the truth, that would gladly have accepted it: so I know it
should have had many adversaries among us in this land, as it has had in other
countries already, and comes now abroad in our own tongue, from thence
greatly reproched, and withstood with a spiteful enemy, albeit to his
shameful foil, and disgrace in the end. And therefore I thought it best to
follow mine author, as he offers the knowledge and custody of the truth,
which he here maintains unto a high and mighty Prince: so I am bold to offer
my translation of so worthy a work, unto your honorable protection and
defense, against evil tongues and erroneous spirits. The cause that is handled
here is Gods; the ground that it has, is the truth of his holy word; the
witness and testimony thereof, is the uniform consent of the Church of
Christ, believing and confessing the same; the matter hereof is the redemption
of our souls, the comfort of our consciences, the stay of our faith, and the
anchor of our hope. If the certainty of these things (right Honorable) be
called in question, and taken from us that are mortal men, what joy can we
have in any thing, that here for a time we enjoy? What hope can we have of a
better life, when this frail one shall be taken from us, and we all shall be
called to give our account? But as Satan the enemy of our salvation, has
always heretofore sowed tares among the wheat, and corrupted the sincerity
of the truth with errors and lies, and that under a fair pretense: so at this
day, when he could not effect his purpose so far as he desired, by the late
and lamentable strife that he has raised among us, (though thereby he has
quenched the zeal of many, and made them fall from their first love) has even
now in our Church, as he has done in others, raised a doubt, and bro^hed a
controversy in the maine grounds of our Religion and faith, to wit, in the
doctrine of man's Redemption by the death of Christ, and of Gods eternal
predestination. Wherein as he does not greatly prevail, because the governors
of our Church and the consent of all that be godly and learned for the most
part, therein are against him: so, that he may proceed no further in time to
come, and that the minds of men may be settled in the truth of their
salvation, I have thought it my duty to the Church of God, to testify my love
of the truth, and my unfeigned care of the knowledge of the fame among us, and
continuance thereof in our posterity, by taking pains to translate into our
vulgar tongue these books. Herein you shall plainly see, that albeit the death
of Christ the son of God, as touching the greatness of the price, be
sufficient for the redemption of whole mankind in the world, yea if there were
many worlds of them, as Anselme says: yet the propriety of redemption
belongs to those that are not the vessels of the devil, but the members of
Christ by faith, and the grace of regeneration: the rest, who live without
faith and regeneration not belonging to this redemption from sin and death:
Or, which is all one, you shall see it proved by infallible testimonies of
Scripture, by general consent of antiquity, and of new writers, and by
substantial arguments, that redemption from sins, righteousness and salvation
are benefits proper to the Church, and not common to all and every one, elect
and reprobate, believer and unbeliever, to the saved and damned. You shall
plainly see (I say) that the Savior promised to the world, and preached of
always in the Church, by the mouth of all the holy prophets and Apostles, is
appointed by the father to be a propitiation through faith in his blood in all,
and upon all that believe only: and that this benefit of the restoring and
redemption of mankind, albeit it be proper and peculiar to the Church, as
touching the efficacy of it, yet it is universal altogether in that sense,
wherein we believe and confess the holy Church of Christ to be universal.
Against this truth the adversary fights eagerly and impudently with bitter
reproaches and lies, grievous blasphemies, flat contrarieties, gross
absurdities, perverting the natural sense of the sacred Scripture, and abusing
the ancient writers. But all these his weapons wins him not the victory, for
either they be blunt and cannot hurt our cause, or else the edge of them is
turned against himself: and his own masters in whom he glories, Luther,
Brentius, and the rest, whose disciple and follower he would feign be, leave
him in his bad cause, nay are brought in plainly, reproving and condemning his
opinion as erroneous, and speaking for the truth on our side. Nay further it
is here flatly avouched, that the old Pelagian heresy and impiety, which
Augustine long ago confuted, and the Church of God then condemned, is the
father of the birth, and beginning of our adversaries opinion.

As for the treatise of Predestination annexed hereto, it serves specially for
the fuller evidence and greater certainty of those things that are handled in
the former books concerning the universality of grace and redemption. For the
remnants of the Pelagians of old, and at this day, affirming none at all to be
excepted from the redemption of Christ's blood, and in respect of God
maintaining eternal life to be prepared for all, are therefore fallen to the
extolling of such grace, because they would in no case confess, that God
according to the purpose and counsel of his own will, in his secret judgment
but manifest work, makes one vessel to honor, and another to dishonor: nor
will assent hereto, that the number of the predestinate can neither be
increased nor diminished. Both which points are fully handled, and plainly
proved against them in this book.

Praefat. ad Romans
Luther says notably: Ex praedestinationis sententia sola pendere omnia, qui
accepturi sint verbum, qui non: qui credituri, quinon: qui liberandi a peccato,
qui occaecandi: quidamnandi, qui iustificandi. That is, Upon the only sentence
of predestination all things depend, who shall receive the word, who not: who
shall believe, who not: who shall be freed from sin, who blinded therein: who
shall be damned, who saved. Therefore seeing God saves some men, and
condemns others, and that willingly, (for nothing can be done if he be
simply unwilling, and against it) we must of necessity confess, that both are
done according to Gods purpose, and that eternal. For there is nothing
temporal in God, otherwise he should be mutable. And this is nothing else, than
that God has chosen some, and rejected others from everlasting.

Touching the certain number of the predestinate, Augustine says truly: De
Cor. and gra. cap. 13 and 7.
Praedestinatorum in regnum Dei ita certus est munerus, etc. that is, The
number of them that are predestinate unto the kingdom of God is so certain,
that nothing can be added to them, nor any thing of them diminished. And
again, Electorum si quisquam perit fallitur Deus, and vitio humano vincitur,
etc. that is, If any of the elect perishes, God is deceived, and overcome of
man's sin: but none of them perishes, because God is not deceived, nor
overcome of any thing. This treatise also teaches, that a man may be certain
of his election and salvation, and by what means he may know it: what we are
to judge of the election of others: how necessary and profitable this doctrine
is, to know Gods mercy and justice, and his free grace against all Pelagians
and Semipelagians, and to teach us humility, patience in adversity, love
toward God, and an earnest study of all good works. This is briefly the sum
of these books, which I have translated for the benefit and help of the
common sort, that understand them not in the Latin tongue, that by reading and
understanding hereof they that err, may return again to the truth and
embrace it hereafter the better; they that doubt, may be fully resolved hereby;
and they that have held this doctrine as the truth of God in time past, may be
confirmed therein, and encouraged to profess it to their lives end.

Now these my labors I present to the view of your Honor, craving pardon for
my boldness, and the protection and defense of these mysteries of the Gospel of
Christ, I commend unto your Honor, assuring my self, that as the great and
mighty Christian Princes of the world account it an honor unto them to be,
and to be called defenders of the true faith of Christ, by whom they reign: so
your Honor will gladly and willingly receive the protection of this his
truth, who has not only advanced you to so high a place of dignity in this
Commonwealth, but has also given you an heart to fear him, to minister true
judgment, and to promote the Gospel by furnishing this Church with learned and
able Ministers, and that freely in this corrupt age when all things are set to
sale. The great good report that generally is given of your Honor in every
place for these things, of all persons, but especially of Ministers and
Scholars, as it draws the hearts and affections of men unto you in all
duty, and causes many a hearty prayer to be made to God for your life and
continuance in weldoing: so among other, it has moved me though the meanest
of all, oftentimes to bless God for you, and to rejoice in your behalf, and
that so much the rather, because it has pleased God out of Chesshire my native
soil, to advance one to so high a place and authority, and to make him so
famous for weldoing, as he has done your Honor. Go on still (good my Lord)
in that good course that you have begun: honor the Lord with your authority,
and he will yet more honor you: keep a good conscience in all things, and the
remembrance thereof shall be your joy. Bona conscientia (says Bernard) afficit
gaudio viuentem, consolatur morientem, eternumque durat: that is, A good
conscience gladdeth a man in his life, comfort him in his death, and
indureth for ever. And after your Honor has served your time according to the
counsel of God, and shall be ready to be called before that great Master of
the Rolls and records of all the world, you shall with the Apostle say to your
endless comfort: Certamen praeclarum decertaui, cursum consummaui, sidem
seruaui: quid superest, reposita est mihi iustitiae corona. I have fought a
good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith: from henceforth
there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness.

Thus ceasing any further to interrupt your Honor from your weighty affairs,
which I know be many, I humbly with all dutifulnes take my leave, praying God
long to preserve your Honor in health, to make you zealous of his glory,
constant in all weldoing to the furtherance of his Gospel, faithful to her
Majesty, careful of Justice, profitable to the whole Realm, prosperous in
all your ways, and comfortable to your own soul, that at length you may
sleep in peace, and make a joyful account, Amen. Grensteed in Essex. October.
31. 1598.

Your Honors most humble at commandment in the Lord: HVGH INCE.

TO THE MOST EXCELLENT AND RENOWNED PRINCE, AND LORD, THE LORD Frederike the
fourth, Count Palatine on the Rhene, Duke of Bauarie, of the sacred Roman
Empire, chief Sewer and Elector, his most gracious Lord and Prince.
MOST noble Prince Elector, and gracious Lord, many things are required in a
good Prince, being Gods Vicar among men: among other, wisdom, which
contains the knowledge of divine and humane things, is a singular beautifying
of him, and a passing good defense. Hereupon Platoes judgment was that Commonweals should then be happy, when either Princes studied philosophy, or else
Philosophers ruled Commonweals. And to use a grauer witness, Wisd. 6.
the multitude of wise men is the safety of the world, and a prudent king is
the stay of the people, says the wise man. For which cause also Solomon David's
son, the wisest king of mortal men, when in his tender years he had received
the government of the kingdom, having choice offered him of God to ask what
he would, craved only wisdom. In Alcibiades
Plato also reports what was the custom of the Persians in bringing up the
eldest sons of their kings, that were to succeed in the kingdom, and how
they aquainted them from their tender years with the study of wisdom and
virtue, to the intent they might govern the kingdom at length with honor.
After this sort it was. At their age of fourteen years the kings
schoolemasters (as they were called) being four chosen out of all the
Persians, the wisest man, the iustest, the most temporate, and the valiantest
man, did undertake the charge of them. The first taught them the worship of the
gods, and kingly instructions. The second advised the^ to affect and favor the
truth in their whole life. The third that they would not be overcome with any
desire, but accustom themselves to live like freemen, and in very deed kings,
ruling themselves above al things, and not serving any desires. The fourth made
the^ stout, least through fear they should commit any thing not beseeming
their dignity, and become servants. This instruction of one that should be a
Prince flourished among the Persians. And surely they rightly judged, that he
ought to be trained up in the precepts of wisdom, that is, of religion, and
of the kingdom: but that being ignorant of Gods truth, they embraced a false
religion through the magical instruction of Zoroaster. An instruction not
unlike, albeit every way far better, as being taken out of the cleerest
fountains of heavenly wisdom, has happened unto your Highness, most
gracious Prince. Neither have the prayers of Solomon been wanting, both of your
Highness, (which from your childhood having taken delight in the knowledge of
profitable and good things, has been earnest in daily prayers with God, and
is incessantly instant, desiring to be endued by him with an understanding
heart:) and also of all good men, who publicly and privately have most
regarded that thing, and not without cause. And how much has been effected
thereby, manifest experiments do testify, and such as shall be with
thankful hearts made known to posterity to the honor of God. First because
that noble Prince and Lord, the Lord John Casimire, Tutor, and a second parent
as it were, to your Highness, being lately taken out of this life, your
flourishing age, and already ripe to government, and your judgment riper than
your age, (most excellent Frederike) have afforded us a refuge and solace in so
hard a case. Then, because after you had taken upon you the government of most
large Dominions, we ^oyfully have seen such trials of your great virtue, and
such foundations have been laid of good government, although in a lamentable
and wicked time, that it has lifted up the minds of all men unto a singular
good expectation. Go on forward therefore in this mind and virtue (most
noble prince Elector,) be strong in the Lord and in his mighty power, remember
the Lords exhortation in old time to Joshua: I will be with thee, as I was
with Moses. I will not leave thee, nor forsake thee. Be of good comfort that
thou may do according to the Law. Let not the book of the Law depart from
thy mouth. Then thou shall deal wisely and prosperously in all things. In like
manner also the holy man David (as we read) diligently exhorted his son
Solomon, 1. Kings. 2.
when being as yet a child he was now consecrated to reign. The Lord God,
who takes away, Dan. 2.
and appoints Princes, and from whom comes wisdom and fortitude, endue
your highness more and more with virtue from above.

But most noble prince Elector, and gracious Lord, seeing these four books
of the Redemption of mankind, and Gods Predestination being written by me a
year ago, should now come abroad under the authority of your government, I
thought that this my duty should be acceptable to your Highness, if I should
entitle and offer them most humbly unto you: and that in respect of that
thankfulness, whereunto I am many ways bound to your Highness. I know well
enough, that I am not able this way to make a full recompense, yet freely to
profess the same is the property of a thankful person. Further because in
these and the like Ecclesiastical controversies, that arise from restles wits,
it is meet that Princes especially should have the knowledge and custody of
the truth, to the intent that malicious detractors and deprauers may do the
less hurt to Christian religion. At this day we are slandered of malicious men
with a new crime that is fained against us, as though we should deny that
Christ died for all men. An impudent reproach. For according to the Scriptures
we also confess the same, but we deny, that thereupon it follows that all
mankind without exception of any one, are by the death of Christ indeed
justified, saved, and restored into the bosom of grace, having received the
pardon of their sins, whether they believe or no. This is a devise of man,
and therefore to be refused, if we will retain the consent of the Prophets
and Apostles, Acts 10. Ioh. 3.
to wit, that every one that believes in Christ Jesus, receives remission of
sins through his name, the wrath of God abiding upon the unbelievers.

Now the doctrine of Predestination, according to which God saves in mercy
some of the damnable lump of mankind, and in justice punishes others for
their sins, being in the same lump utterly forsaken, is of it self plain,
if we desire rather to follow the direction of Gods spirit, than the
consequences of foolish reason. But reason being troubled with the depth of
Gods grace and his judgment, leaves here nothing vnassayd, as we may see by
the example of the Pelagians old and new: the first Augustine of old time
soundly confuted, and Luther the latter. De ser. arb. and alibi.
Therefore let those men that would be counted Lutherans, look to it, how they
do agree in judgment both against Luther, and the truth it self also with
the Pelagians But I make an end, praying God, that under your Highness the
studies of peace, learning and piety, may always flourish. Amen. At
Heidelberge the 12. of March. 1592.

Your Highness most humbly bounden IACOBVS KIMEDONCIVS, D.

A table of certain places of Scripture expounded in these Books.
Genesis 3. The seed of the woman, etc. 100 I will put enmity etc. 101 Genesis 12.
and 22. In thy seed shall all nations etc. 105.201 Leuit. 16. Of the Escape
Goat. 107 Deuteronomy. 7. God has chosen thee to be a people. 283 Esaias 53. He has
laid the iniquities of us all etc. 103. 202 Esaias 62. Tell the daughter of Sion.
205 Ierem. 23. In his days Israel shall be saved. 204 Ierem. 31. I will make a
covenant with the house of Israel, etc. 203 Ezech. 18. I will not the death of
a sinner etc. 335 Osea 13. Thy destruction is of thy self. 334 Zach. 2.
Rejoice O daughter Sion. 204 Zach. 3. I will take away the iniquity of that
land. 105 Zach. 9. Thy king comes unto thee. 204 Psalm. 2. I will give thee
the heathen for etc. 106 Wisd. 1. God made not death. 334 Ecclesiasticus 33. As
one day excels another. 285 Matthew. 1. He shall save his people. 180 Matthew.
7. I never knew you. 210 Matthew. 18. Of these little ones that believe in me.
166 The parable of the debtor. 126 Matthew. 26. Which is shed for many. 181 Luke
1. He has redeemed his people. 182 Luke 2. I tell you of great joy. 183 A
light to lighten the Gentiles. 184 Luke 11. Of the strong man armed. 103 Luke
24. The Gospel must be preached, etc. 95 Ioh. 1. He lighteneth every man that
comes. 42 Of his fulness we all receive. Behold the Lamb of God that takes,
etc. 76 Ioh. 3. So God loved the world. 74 The wrath of God abides, etc. 184
Ioh. 3. and 12. I came to save the world. 79 Ioh. 6. I will give my flesh for
the life. 77 My father gives you a heavenly bread. 78 Ioh. 10. I lay down my
life for my sheep. 185 Ioh. 11. That he might gather the sons of God. 186
Ioh. 12. When I am lifted up I will draw. 187 Ioh. 15. That a man should lay
down his life for his friends. 187 If I had not come, they had had no sin.
175 Ioh. 17. I pray not for the world. 188 For them I sanctify my self. 190
Thou have given me power over all flesh. 70 None of them is lost but the lost
child. 71 Act. 5. To give remission of sins to Israel. 199 Act. 10. To him
give all the prophets witness. 199 Act. 20. God has redeemed his Church with
his own blood. 9 Romans 2. Whosoever sinned without the Law. 175 Romans 3. The
righteousness of God upon all that believe. 191 Romans 5. He died for his enemies.
188 Verse. 19. Through the obedience of one etc. 8 Verse. 18. The benefit
redounded to all men, to the justification of life. 63 Romans 8. He gave him for
us all. 58 192 Romans 9. The place of predestination is discussed. 286 The elder
shall serve the younger. 291 Jacob I have loved, Esau I have hated. 293 O man
who art thou etc. 313 Romans 11. He has not cast away his people whom he
foreknew. 297 Of the Jews cut off through unbelief. 125 That he might have
mercy upon all. 69 Romans 14. Destroy not him with meat, for whom Christ died.
116 Romans 14. According to the things he has done in the body. 282 Romans 16. The
Gospel declared to all nations. 96 1. Cor. 3. If any destroy the temple of
God. 116 1. Cor. 8. Thy brother shall perish for whom Christ died. 117 1. Cor.
12. He works all in all. 42 1. Cor. 15. All shall be quickened. 66 2. Cor. 5.
Reconciling the world. 79 One died for all. 56 Galath. 3. When ye began in the
spirit. 122 Galath. 5. Stand in the liberty. 124 Ye are fallen from grace. 122
Ephe. 1. As he chose us in him. 297 All things are restored in Christ. 66 Ephe.
5. He gave himself for his Church. 194 Col. 1. I fulfill the afflictions of
Christ. 12 He has reconciled all things in heaven. 66. 67 He has delivered us
from the power of darkness. 195 Ye that were sometime strangers. 195 If ye
continue stable in the hope. 69 1. Tim. 1. and 4. Of such as fall from faith.
109 1. Tim. 2. He will have all men to be saved. 51. 53. 54 He gave himself
for all. 56 1. Tim. 4. He is the Savior of all specially of the faithful. 196
2. Tim. 2. If any man purge himself. 306 Tit. 3. The grace of God has
appeared to all men. 96 Heb. 2. All things subject to Christ. 59 He that
sanctifies and they that are sanctified. 60 He tasted death for all. 61 Heb.
5. He is made the author of salvation to all that obey him. 196 Heb. 6. It is
impossible for them that were once enlightened to be renewed by repentance. 113
Heb. 9. Of Redemption of sins under the former Testament. 2 If the blood of
goats etc. 197 That the Called might receive etc. 197 He took away the sins
of many. 198 Heb. 10. Seeing therefore brethren we receive liberty. 115 1.
Pet. 1. Elect according to foreknowledge. 308 Revealed for the believers. 199
1. Pet. 2. Whereunto they were appointed. 122 2. Pet. 1. He is blind and has
forgotten. 119 2. Pet. 1. Make your election sure. 307 2. Pet. 2. They deny the
Lord that bought them. 117 Of such as return to filthiness. 117 2. Pet. 3. He
will have none to perish. 261 1. Ioh. 1. The blood of Christ cleanses us. 199
1. Ioh. 2. We have Christ our advocate. 80 For the sins of the whole world.
80 They were not of us. 111. 333 1. Ioh. 3. That he might destroy the works of
the devil. 212 1. Ioh. 5. They that believe not make God a liar. 127 Apoc. 1.
He has washed us from our sins. 200 Apoc. 5. He has redeemed us to God. 200
OF THE REDEMPTION OF MANKIND BY CHRIST.
The first Book.
CHAP. I. Wherein is showed the sum and division of this doctrine.
THE mystery of the Redemption of mankind by the only begotten Son of God
our Lord Jesus Christ, the Apostles faithfully and most sincerely have
testified at large, The sum of the Catholic says, and confession of the
redemption of man.
first by lively voice, and then by writings both to the Jews and Gentiles: to
wit, that the eternal word, Romans 15.8.9.
(which is the eternal Son of God) to confirm the promises made to the
fathers, and that the Gentiles should glorify God for his mercy, in the last
days, when the fulness of time was come, Galath. 4.4.
took upon him the true nature of man, of the Virgin Mary his mother, by the
operation of the holy Ghost; and in the form of a servant, Phil. 2 7.
was obedient to his father unto the death, even the death of the Cross, that
by his precious blood, 1. Pet. 1.19.
as of a Lamb undefiled and without spot, he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify us a peculiar people unto himself, Tit. 2.14.
zealous of good works. The same Apostles have also witnessed, that to the end
we may be partakers of this redemption, a true faith in Christ is required of
us, whereby as it were by a hand, we may apprehend him, and apply him with all
his merits and benefits unto our selves.

This is the Catholic faith and confession, which the Apostles taught, the
Martyrs confirmed, and the faithful as yet do keep. For so the holy Apostle
Paul describing this whole mystery in few but clear words says: Romans 3.23,
24, 25, 26.
All have sinned and are deprived of the glory of God and are justified freely
by his grace through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus; whom God has set
forth to be a reconciliation through faith in his blood, to declare his
righteousness by the forgiveness of the sins past, that he might be just, and a
iustifier of him which is of the faith of Jesus. And the Author to the Hebrews
writes on this manner: Heb. 9.11. to 16
But Christ coming a high priest of good things to come, by his own blood
entered once into the holy place, and obtained eternal redemption. For if the
blood of bulls and goats sanctifies the unclean to the purifying of the
flesh; how much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit
offered himself without spot to God, purge your consciences from dead works to
serve the living God? Therefore he is the Mediator of the New Testament, that
through death which was for the redemption of the transgressions, which were
under the former Testament, they which were called, might receive the promise
of eternal inheritance. Where, by the way is to be considered, that (by sins
past) in the saying of the Apostle to the Romans, are properly understood the
sins committed under the old Testament, which could not be purged with the
blood of goats and calves, but the righteous did expect a better oblation,
Heb. 10.14.
which should consecrate for ever those that are sanctified. Acts 15.11.
Whereupon Peter also said: By the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ we believe to
be saved as well as our fathers.

But this whole place of redemption is large, and worthy of great
consideration: to wit: 1. Whence, 2. By whom, 3. How, 4. When, 5. For what
cause, 6. Whereto, and 7. Who are redeemed. All these truly have a profitable
and necessary consideration, and be every where taught in the Scriptures. Of
these propounded questions the six former we will briefly touch: but the
seventh and last, for which cause chiefly we undertake this labor, we will
more fully and largely expound, as the Lord shall permit.

CHAP. II. Whence we are redeemed.
THerefore as touching this question: Whence we are redeemed, the holy
Scriptures sufficiently teach us, Our redemption is not corporal, but
spiritual and eternal from Satan, sin and death.
that the redemption, whereof we speak, is not temporal from some corporal
bondage or tyranny, such as the redemption was of Israel from Egypt, from the
house of bondage, and the hand of Pharao by Moses: and after from the hand of
the Canaanits, and Midianits, and other their enemies by Gedeon and other
Judges, and specially from the most grievous 70. years captivity in Babylon,
by Cyrus the king and Monarch of Persia: but this redemption is spiritual and
eternal, shadowed of old by those corporal deliverances: to wit, from the
power of darkness, and the slavery of sin and death, Coloss. 1.13. Heb. 2.14.
and of him who had the power of death, that is, the devil. And these be the
enemies and haters, whereof Zachary the father of John Baptist makes mention
in his song, greatly extolling this redemption: Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel, Luke 1.68. to 76.
for he has visited and redeemed his people, and has raised up a horn of
salvation for us in the house of David his servant, as he spoke by the mouth of
his holy Prophets, that he would save us from our enemies, and from the hand
of all that hate us: that being delivered from the hand of our enemies, we
might serve him without fear in holiness and righteousness before him all
the days of our life. And albeit this benefit of spiritual and eternal
redemption is usually contemned of carnal men, who savor nothing but the
things of the flesh, and to whom the slavery of sin and the world is so
sweet, as Satan the God of this world has blinded their minds: yet such is the
greatness, and so inestimable is the dignity thereof, that they who have
rightly tasted the redemption of Christ, whereby liberty to captives,
salvation to them that perished, and life to the dead is repaired, do easily
understand that even the riches, kingdoms, and pleasures of the whole world
are to be esteemed as nothing in comparison of it. For what does it profit a
man, Matthew. 16.
if he gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what recompense shall
a man give for his soul?

CHAP. III. By whom this redemption came.
Our redeemer is Christ true God and man holy and righteous. 1. Tim. 2.5.6.
But now the Redeemer, who has delivered us from the slavery of sin, death,
and the power of Satan, is none other, then the Mediator of God and men, our
Lord Jesus Christ, true God, and true man, like unto us in all things except
sin. For there is one God, and one Mediator also of God and men, the man
Christ Jesus, who gave himself a price of redemption for all, as the Apostle
says. And to the Romans chap. 3. Romans 3.24.
he teaches that we are justified through the redemption wrought in Christ
Jesus. And elsewhere the same Apostle affirms, 1. Cor. 1.30.
that Christ is made unto us of God wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption, that as it is written: He that rejoices, let him rejoice in the
Lord. John, who from the breast of the Lord had received hidden mysteries, 1.
Ioh. 2.1.2.
likewise testifies: If any man sin, we have an advocate with God, Jesus
Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins: and not for
ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world. But every where such
testimonies meet us in the divine Scriptures. Ephesians. 2.20. 1. Cor. 3.11. Acts
4.12.
For Jesus Christ is the foundation of the Scripture, of the Prophets and
Apostles: neither is there salvation in any other, nor any other name given
under heaven among men, whereby we must be saved. Whereupon their error is
worthily to be detested, who not contented with the only and perfect redeemer
Christ, seek part of their redemption and salvation elsewhere, in themselves,
or in the Saints: where as yet the holiest men, unless the grace of Christ had
saved and redeemed them, could never have been able to satisfy, no not for
themselves. Therefore also John, (as Augustine well considered) said not:
Augustine.
If any sin, ye have an advocate: nor said: ye have me, ye have not Christ:
but both named Christ, and not himself, and also said: we have, and not, ye
have. He would rather put himself in the number of sinners, that he might have
Christ his advocate, then put himself advocate in Christ's stead, and be found
among the proud that be condemned. Brethren (says he) we have Jesus Christ the
righteous an advocate with the father, and he is the atonement of our sins.
Hitherto Augustine, tractatu primo in 1. Epist. Ioh.

CHAP. IIII. Of the manner of the redemption finished.
NOw the manner of our redemption by Christ, The manner, is his abasing of
himself to the death of the cross, and to the shedding of his blood. Phil.
2.7.
being a mystery altogether and wonderful, but wholly agreeing to the justice
and truth of God, the Scripture sets down on this wise: to wit, that the
eternal Son of God for us and our salvation a based himself, taking the
form of a servant, being made like unto men, and found in shape as a man: and
submitting himself became obedient unto the death, even the death of the
cross, that by his passion, and death and shedding of his most sacred blood,
as by the only propitiatory sacrifice, he might redeem our body and soul
from eternal damnation, and purchase for us the grace of God, righteousness and
eternal life. For this cause says the Apostle. 1. Cor. 6. Ye are not your
own, 1. Cor. 6.20.
ye are bought with a price, be net the servants of men. But with what price?
S. Peter answers: not with silver and gold, 1. Pet. 1.18.19.
or other transitory things, (which nothing at all profit us to the eternal
redemption of our souls) but with the precious blood of Christ, as a lamb
without spot, who did no sin, neither was any guile found in his mouth: and who
bare our sins in his body on the tree: 1. Pet. 3.18.
and suffered the just for the unjust, that he might bring us unto God, being
dead in the flesh, but quickened in the spirit. Which opinion these sayings also
confirm: Ephesians. 6.2. Ephesians. 1.7.
He gave himself for us an oblation and sacrifice of a sweet savor to God.
In him we have redemption through his blood, Tit. 2.14.
even the remission of sins of his rich grace. He gave himself for us, to
redeem us from all sin, and to purge us a peculiar people unto himself,
zealous of good works. Heb. 9.14.
Also: By the eternal spirit he offered himself to God without fault, that
we being purged from dead works, should serve the living God. And in the same
chapter: Once in the end of the world has he been made manifest by the
sacrifice of himself to put away sin. Verse. 26.
And many other things pertaining to this point, does the Apostle in that place
exactly debate: as, that he gathers from the propriety and nature of a
Testament, that Christ must needs dye, because the death of the Testator is
required, that the Testament may be ratified. And confirming the same from the
rite of the old Testament, he adds, that that was not dedicated without
blood, and that all things almost according to the Law were purified with
blood: and that the paternes of heavenly things were purged with the blood of
sacrifices: but the heavenly things themselves required a better sacrifice and
a better blood, namely the same, whereof Christ himself, purposing forthwith
to fulfill the New Testament, witnessed: This is my blood of the New Testament,
Matthew. 26.
which is shed for many for remission of sins. Likewise his beloved disciple
says: The blood of the Son of GOD cleanses us from all sin. 1. Ioh. 1.7.
But now we speak of the means of redemption accomplished in the first
coming of Christ. For there is another to be performed in his second coming,
whereof is spoken Luke 21. Lift up your heads, for your redemption draws
nigh. And Paul speaks of the same, Romans 8.23. and 1. Cor. 1.30. This shall be
as the fulfilling and consummation of the former: for now we are saved in
hope, but not as yet in deed, as the Apostle writes, Romans 8.24.

CHAP. V. The answering or taking away of certain Questions about the manner or
means of redemption.
But there is a question in this place; 1. question. Why he must needs redeem
us by a price, and not take us out of Satan's power by force, who did unjustly
hold us captives.
what need was there of the payment of a price by the Son of God, that we
might be redeemed, who were the slaves of Satan? for it seems more
convenient, that he, who is violently and unjustly detained of another, be
taken away from him by a superior power, even without any price. And the
devil had unjustly invaded us. I answer, this price was not paid to the
devil, but to God, who had power over us to condemn us, and had made us
subject to the power of the devil by his just judgment. For as touching the
devil, he unjustly possessed man: but man in the mean while was justly made
subject as a slave to Satan through his own sin, and the righteous judgment
of God. Therefore Christ satisfied God, and reconciled us, offering himself
unto him by his eternal spirit, Heb. 9.
and so now the kingdom of Satan is necessarily destroyed, concerning us that
be reconciled to God, whom by our sins we had offended. Notwithstanding,
Ambrose lib. 9. epist. 77. writes that the price of our deliverance by the
blood of our Lord Jesus, was paid unto him, to whom we were sold by our sins,
that is, to the devil. But that is a very hard saying. For whereas it was not
lawful to offer sacrifice, but unto God alone, how much more ought this
peculiar sacrifice to be offered to none, but to God alone, which the eternal
high priest offered upon the Altar of the cross, by the sacrifice of his flesh
and effusion of his blood, and which only is the propitiation for the sins
of the world?

Further it is a question; 2. question. Why his death is a price sufficient for
redemption.
from whence that dignity of the passion and death of Christ arises, that it
is a price sufficient for the redemption of mankind? There be many causes
concurring to that effect.

I. Cause 1. His willing obedience.
The willing obedience of the Son to the death of the cross, Phil. 2.8. for
the passion of Christ had not been satisfactorie, unless it had been
voluntary. Hereof the Apostle, Romans 5. says: As by the disobedience of one,
many are made sinners: so by the obedience of one, many are made righteous. And
he speaks (as Theophilact well expounds) of the obedience of Christ's death:
by which obedience, death being destroyed, we are delivered from the damnation
of death. And for this cause, the Evangelists with one consent describing the
history of Christ's passion, have diligently noted many circumstances, which
declare that he suffered willingly. For he was offered, Esaias. 53.10.
because he was willing, as Esaias says, chap. 53.

His innocence. 1. Pet. 2. 2. Cor. 5.21.
but also he suffered death when he was altogether innocent, as a man who had
committed no sin, and in whose mouth there was found no guile. For such an
high priest became us, Heb. 7.26.
as was godly, innocent, undefiled, separated from sinners, who had no need to
offer first for his own sins, and then for the sins of the people.
Therefore because the just suffered for the unjust, 1. Pet. 3.
his blood, as of a lamb undefiled and without spot, is worthily counted
precious to work our redemption: as it is in Peter 1. Epist. 1.

Augustine largely urges this cause in his 13. book of the Trinity, chap.
14. He died (says he) who alone was free from the debt of death. Therefore it
was just, that debtors should be let go free, believing in him, who died
without any debt. The same man, chap. 15. The blood of Christ, because it was
his, who had no sin, at all, was shed for the remission of our sins. And in
the chapter following: The devil held our sins, and for them worthily bound
us in death: he who had none of his own, discharged them, and was by him
unworthily drawn unto death. Also Pope Leo says very clearly: The band of
death drawn together by the sin of one, was loosed by the death of one, who
alone owed nothing unto death.

His personal dignity, in that he was both God and man.
III. The third cause, which is greatest of all, the death of Christ was not a
mere man's death, although innocent and just: but it was his death, who is both
true God and man in one and the same person. And this exceeding great dignity
of this person, is the cause that this price of his blood and death, although
it was temporal, (if the continuance of it be respected) yet it is of infinite
force to save them for ever, who come unto God by it. Which the Author to the
Hebrews, chap. 9. teaches, saying: If the blood of bulls and goats and the
ashes of a young heifer, sprinkling the unclean, do sanctify to the purity of
the flesh: how much more does the blood of Christ, who offered himself by the
eternal spirit without blame to God, purge your consciences from dead works,
to serve the living God? And Acts chap. 20. Paul is witness: that God by his
own blood redeemed his Church. Not that the deity has flesh or blood, (for
God is a spirit) but that person which suffered death for us, is both God and
man: and so this blood is, and is truly called the blood of God, whose
excellency therefore and dignity is exceeding great.

To these this is annexed, that beside his power divine, His Lordship over us,
and his neerenes in blood unto us.
and

Thirdly also this has been a question, 3. question. Why must we be redeemed
by his death rather than by some other means.
as touching the means of redemption, whether the deliverance of us could not
possibly have been by some other means, then by the death of the Son of God?
We answer with Augustine, lib. 13. de trinit. that another way was possible
to God, unto whose power all things are subject: but this was the meetest way
and most fit with God to heal our misery. Or, as Thomas, part. 3. quaest. 46.
decideth this doubt, we do distinguish between possible or impossible simply,
and that which is after a sort. To speak simply and absolutely, it was
possible to God to deliver man by another means, then by the death of Christ,
because nothing is impossible with God. Luke 1.37. Because no other was
possible.
or by supposition of Gods foreknowledge and fore appointment it was
impossible, as ye Lords words do plainly show, Matthew. 26. Father, if this cup
cannot pass away, unless I drink of it, thy will be done. Whereupon Hilary
says: Therefore the cup cannot pass, unless he drink it, because we cannot be
restored but by his passion, because of the decree of Because this way was most
just with God
which God used through the passion of his Son. For it was a just thing, that
for the sins of mankind, the judgment of God should be satisfied through
punishment, and that the same nature which Most agreeable to his truth. Genesis
2.17.
to the truth, because a threatening had gone before: What day so ever thou
shall eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shall die the
death: and it was promised, and ever by continual testimonies showed, and by
diverse ceremonies shadowed, that the son of God, borne of a woman, should dye
for us, and so should confirm the new covenant by his To his goodness and mercy.
And to the goodness of God it agrees, because seeing man of himself could not
satisfy for sins, God of his exceeding great mercy gave unto him a
satisfier, even his only begotten son. Whereupon it was said of Christ
himself, John 3. Romans 5.
Ioh. 3. So God loved the world, that he gave his son, etc. And Paul: God
does set out his love toward us, that when we were as yet sinners, Christ died
for us. And truly this was a token of a far more abounding mercy, that he
did not spare his own son for us, then if he had remitted our sins without
satisfaction: Ephesians. 2.
so that we may worthily now say with the same Apostle: God who is rich in
mercy, because of his great love, wherewith he has loved us, even when we
were dead through our offenses, has quickened us together through Christ, by
whose grace we are saved.

This was most expedient to money to love God again
Besides, that way of deliverance was most expedient for our salvation. For so
we know by the greatest experiment of all, how much God loves us, and we are
provoked to love God again.

Then, an example is given unto us of obedience, love, humility, Christ
suffered for us, and left us an example that we should follow his Likewise
Paul, Phil. 2.5. and 2. Cor. 8.9. and elsewhere, To suffer afflictions for his
sake.
propounding the example of Christ, exhorts us to the duties of love and
other virtues. Further, because we are redeemed by the death of the Son of
God, To keep our selves from sin. 1. Cor. 6. A notable saying.
and washed from our To keep our selue: from sin. 1. Cor. 6. A notable saying.
that we should keep our selves to God undefiled in body and soul, as the
Apostle says: Ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your body
and spirit, which are Gods. And thus much of the means of redemption, a
mystery altogether wonderful and unspeakable, which the Author of
Meditations in Augustine chapter 7. excellently sets out in these words: O
state of wonderful reformation, A notable saying.
and disposition of unspeakable mystery: the unjust sins, and the just is
punished; the guilty transgresses, and the innocent is beaten; the ungodly
offends, and the godly is condemned; what the evil deserved, the good does
endure; what the servant has done the master does pay; what man does commit,
God does suffer and abide. This is a heavenly medicine, O good Jesus, this is
the preservative of thy love.

CHAP. VI. The use of the former doctrine for the confutation of certain
errors.
BY the doctrine already expounded, Heretics denying Christ to be true man,
are confuted by the former doctrine. Leo epist. 85, and 97.
those men are confuted which have denied the truth of man's substance in
Christ, as Eutyches, Apollianaris, Manichaeus, Marcion, and other old
Heretics, and at this day certain Anabaptists, who have wallowed in the
ungodly errors of old Heretics. Pope Leo urging these men says: Let them
speak, with what sacrifice they are reconciled, let them speak, with what
blood they are redeemed: who is he that has given himself an oblation to God,
So are the popish merits of Saints, and these pa^ker of pardons the upon
brought in, whereby Christ's merits are profaned.
and a sacrifice of a sweet savor? Furthermore by this same doctrine the
Papists are refelled, who join the sufferings of the Saints to the passions of
Christ, and thereof have confusedly made their fained treasure of pardons.
Neither are they ashamed to boast of the superfluity of merits, and humane
satisfactions, that the Saints have suffered more then they ought for their
sins: and heaping one error upon another, have fained that this their
superabundance pertains not only to the quick, but also to the dead in
purgatory. This is a mere mockery of Satan, and a profanation of the blood
of Christ, as Pope Leo notably shows in the forenamed Epistles against the
Papists of these times: whose words are these: A notable saying of Pope Leo
against the meritorious sufferings of Saints.
Albeit (says he) the death of many Saints has been precious in the sight of
God, yet the slaying of no guiltles person has been the propitiation of the
world. The righteous have received, they have not given crowns: and from the
fortitude of the faithful examples of patience have sprung and not gifts of
righteousness. For there were peculiar deaths in every one: neither has any man
by his end paid the debt of another, seeing among the sons of men there has
been one alone our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom all are crucified, all are dead,
all are buried, and all are also raised up again. And before Leo, Pope Gaius
of the country of Dalmatia being in that Sea about the year of our Lord 284.
wrote the same thing elegantly unto Bishop Felix, the doctrine of which ancient
Bishops I would to God the Roman Church had kept inuiolablie.

A saying of Augustine to the same end.
Upon the same point Augustine writes in his 84. treatise upon John: Albeit we
brethren die one for another, yet the blood of no martyr is shed for the
remission of sins, which Christ did for us, and bestowed it not upon us, that
we should imitate it, but that we should be thankful for it. The trifling
Pardoners, or more truly sacrilegious deceivers, object the words of the
Apostle to the Colossians: Colos. 1.24. Scripture abused by popish pardoners.
I rejoice in those things which I suffer for you, and I fulfill the rest of
the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for his body, which is the Church. But
the true sense of that place they might have learned even of Aquinas, who part.
3. of his Summae quaest. 48. artic. penult. disputing, that only Christ is our
redemption, obiecteth this place, and thus expounds it: The sufferings of the
Saints profit the Church, not by way of redemption, but by way of example and
exhortation: according to that, 2. Cor. 1. Whether we be afflicted, it is for
your exhortation and salvation. Which is very well, saving that for exhortation
a man may better translate the Greek word, Consolation. (...).
And in that the afflictions of the Saints are called the rest of the
afflictions of Christ, he does not mean, that the passion of Christ was
imperfect, (far off be such blasphemy) but therefore that is spoken, because
Christ suffers daily as yet in his members, but to a far diverse end and
after another manner. But those men are not ashamed (such is their wickedness)
to brag of the superabundance, as I said, of humane merits and satisfactions,
Our sufferings are not meritorious. Romans 8.18.
which redoundeth to the quick and dead. What? does not the Scripture plainly
testify, that the things which we suffer in this present life, are not equal
to the glory that shall be showed in the sons of God? What, that none can
redeem his brother, nor give the price of his ransom to God. For the
redemption of the soul is precious, Psalm. 49.8.9.
as the Psalmist sings. Upon which place Basil in his gloses notes, Basils
sayings thereof worthy remembrance.
that the whole world is not the price of a soul. And tom. 1. upon the same
Psalm, says: Man has no ability at all to offer a reconciliation to God for
a sinner, because he himself is guilty of sin. For all have sinned and are
deprived of the glory of God; and are justified freely by the redemption which
is in Christ Jesus. Therefore no man can give his own appeasement, and the
price of his soul to God; neither ought to seek his brother to redeem him,
but one, who surpasses our nature, that is, not man only, but the man God,
Jesus Christ, who alone is able to give himself to be a reconciliation to God
for us all. These things he.

Therefore all men must hope in him alone, We must then rest upon Christ alone
for redemption, propitiation, and salvation.
who only is the Mediator of God and man, the redemption, propitiation, and
salvation of all men. Let our heart say unto him: I will love thee O Lord my
strength, my rock, my tower, my deliverer, my shield, and the horn of my
salvation. I will trust in thee, and I shall never be ashamed. Having an high
priest (says the Apostle to the Hebrews) which is merciful, Chap. 2. and 4.
and faithful in things concerning God, to make reconciliation for the sins
of the people, even Jesus the son of God, let us go with confidence to the
throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy. Let us go in a true heart and
certain persuasion of faith, Chap. 10.19.20.22.
having liberty to enter into the Sanctuary, by the blood of Jesus by the new
and living way which he has prepared for us, through the veil, that is, his
flesh. There is no cause, there is no cause I say, why we should doubt to go
by him unto God. If we have committed grievous things, we have found a worthy
Physician, we receive the sovereign medicine of his grace. And not that
only, but also we trust, that he which has not spared his own son, Romans
8.32.
but given him for us all, will also with him bestow upon us all things.

CHAP. VII. Of the time of the Redemption purchased.
IT follows, that we consider diligently of the time also of this redemption
purchased for us by Christ. And it is manifest by the history of the Gospel,
that our Lord and Redeemer, our King and high Priest Jesus Christ came into the
world, Christ was borne in the 42. year of Augustus, Anno mundi 3963.
made of the seed of David after the flesh, in the 42. year of the reign of
Octauius Augustus, which was the year of the world 3963. after Funccius
supputation. Yet I am not ignorant, that others disagree from that account,
certain of the old Latins and Greeks ascending up to the 5000. year, but
by a plain error in account, which rises from the difference between the
Hebrew copies and the Greek Septuaginte. But to proceed in my purpose, the
Lord from the time of his coming and appearing in the flesh, sustained all his
whole life both in body and soul, the wrath of God against the sin of all
mankind: but specially in his end, 1. Pet. 2.24.
when he bare our sins in his body upon the tree, Coloss. 2.14.
and took out of the way the handwriting of death that was against us,
nailing it on the cross. And it is recorded, that this was done in the 34.
year of the incarnation of Christ, He suffered death in the 18. year of
Tiberius, being 34. years old: or as Epiphanius says, 32. years, and 74.
days, on the 12. day of the Calends of April, that is, 21. of March.
and in the 18. of the reign of Tiberius Caesar. Yet Epiphanius contra Alogos
haeres. 51. will have all the years of Christ's presence in the flesh from his
birth to his passion, (which he writes was done the day before the 13. of the
Calends of April) to be only 32. and 74. days, differing one year from the
former opinion. And the same man diligently refuteth the naughty supputation
of others, who misunderstanding that prophecy of Esai, chap. 61: that I may
preach the acceptable year of the Lord, thought, that the Lord, after he had
finished only one years ministry after his baptism by John, suffered death
in the full thirtith year of his age. In which opinion was Seuerus Sulpitius,
who notes that our Lord was crucified when the two twins Fusius and
Rebellius were Consuls. And their Consulship fell in the 31. year of Christ,
as Epiphanius witnesteth.

But now to omit the curious searching out of these things, least any should
marvel, that Christ after so many thousand years, should be made manifest
at the length under Tiberius, as it were in the evening of the world, Heb. 9.
and (as the Scripture speaks) in the end of the world to abolish sin by
the offering of himself: we must think, that it happened not so by chance or
fortune, but by the eternal counsel and providence of God, Wised. 81. and
11.17.
which (as the Wiseman says) reaches mightily from one end to another, and
disposes all things pleasantly, and orders all things in number, weight and
measure. Hereupon says Peter, 1. Epist. 2. Christ's coming into the world
after so many thousand years, was appointed so from al eternity in Gods
counsel, as the Scripture teaches us.
that the Lamb (by whose precious blood we are redeemed) was made manifest in
the last times for our sakes, being foreordained before the foundations of the
world were laid. And by the witness of Paul, Gal. 4. God sent his son made of
a woman, after the fulness of time was come. And he means the time of the
incarnation of the Son, and of our redemption by him, which was before
appointed of his heavenly father, which thing the similitude used in that place
does declare. For he had said that the heir being an infant is under tutors
unto the time appointed of the father. So, Ephesians. 1. he mentions the fulness
of times, for the restoring of all things by Christ.

And that we may more certainly understand, that this time of the restoring of
all things was by God from all eternity appointed, the same was by divine
inspiration plainly foretold by the mouth of the holy Prophets, 1. Epist. 1.
who (as Peter teaches) foretold of the grace that should come to us,
searching when, and at what instant, that foreshewing spirit of Christ that was
in them, should declare the passions that should happen to Christ, and the
glory that should follow. Unto whom it was reueiled, that not to themselves
but unto us they should minister those things. We have examples in the
prophecy of Jacob, Genesis 49. and of the 70. weeks in Daniel, chap. 9. And
every where the Prophets, when they foretell of the kingdom of Christ, have
made mention of the last days.

A question. Why came he in the old age of the world, and not in the beginning
after the fall? Acts 1.7.
But some man may ask, why in the old age, and almost end of the world has God
sent his son to be a Redeemer, and not rather straightwaies after the fall of
mankind? Although it be not our part, curiously to enquire into the counsel
of GOD, and it is sufficient to answer curious wits, as Christ answered his
disciples, It is not for you to know the time or seasons, which the father has
put in his own power: yet there are reasons of some account alleged by
learned men, Thom. part. 3. quaest. 1. art. 5.
of the redemption or sending of the Son of God so long deferred.

Four causes why Christ's birth was so long deferred.
and made manifest, not by the examples of one age only, but of many.
Therefore God left man first in the state of nature, that he might know the
strength or infirmity rather of his nature: after, when it decayed, he
received the Law, which being given, the disease increased, through the fault
not of the Law, but of nature: that so his weakness being known, he might cry
unto the Physician, and seek for the help of grace.

shadows, and promises of Christ to come, ought to have their course also: and
the greater the Judge or Lord is, that was to come, the longer rue of cryers or
heralds ought to go before, as the gloss says upon that to the Galathians,
chap. 4. When the fulness of time came.

Thirdly, it is agreeable to order, that that which is imperfect

Fourthly, that way the godly were exercised in faith, and

Augustine disputing against Porphyrie of the time of Christian religion, in
his book de sex paganorum quaestionibus, writes: that Christ did then come,
when he knew that men would believe. But the enemies of grace wresting this
speech, Tom. 7. fol. 1228. 1243. 1269.
caused Augustine to correct it, partly by interpretation, partly by calling it
in again.

CHAP. VIII. The question of the redemption of the old fathers is handled, and
a double opinion about the same is confuted.
But hereupon another question arises concerning the fathers, who dyed before
the birth of Christ, whether redemption appertained also to them? The error of
the Marcionits and Manichees
The Marcionites and their like, to wit, the Manichees of old time denied it,
who held, that no man was saved before the 15. year of Tiberius, as Epiphanius
reports. Epiph. de haeres. Manich.
Whom that most filthy Seruetus followed, and many other of the sect of the
Anabaptists, who foolishly say, Tertul. lib 4. contra. Marci. vltra medium.
that the Israelites no otherwise the^ as a heard of swine, were satted of the
Lord in the land of Canaan, without any hope of heavenly immortality. But this
monstrous error is easily refuted by many places of the Scripture, from which
we will only choose a few. Certainly the author to the Hebrews tieth
together a long rue of the old fathers, Heb. 11.
who pleased God before Christ was exhibited to the world, and were made heirs
of that righteousness which is of faith. Genesis 17.
What means that form of the covenant: I will be thy God, and the God of thy
seed? Exodus 3. Matthew. 22.
and that which was said: I am the God of Abraham, God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob? do they not show that they were partakers of grace, whereof Christ is
the only foundation? Whereto also tends that notable saying of the Lord,
Ioh. 8. Abraham desired to see my day, and he saw it, and rejoiced. Neither is
any kingdom promised unto us in the Gospel, then that wherein we should sit
with Abraham, Matthew. 8.
Isaac and Jacob, and all the elect of God that come from East and West. But
those fathers dyed before the coming of Christ in the flesh. What then? They
had in the mean while the promise of Christ to come, the ground of their hope
and confidence. Neither does the force of the death of Christ extend it self
unto our times only, but to the fathers also, even from the beginning of the
world. For Jesus Christ yesterday, Heb. 13.
to day, and for ever is the same, as the Apostle says, Heb. 13.8. He means
that Christ was not only in times past; as touching his divinity, as it is
said of him elsewhere: Before Abraham was, I am: but such as he is now, such
was he of old, and now is, and shall remain for ever, mercifully to save and
defend his own. In which sense also the place, Apoc. 13.8. is truly read, of
the lamb slain before the foundations of the world were laid, to wit, as
touching the counsel of God and the perpetual virtue of this sacrifice: (...)
as also among the old writers Ambrose takes that saying upon the 5. to the
Romans. Yet I deny not but the Greek text in that place may thus also be
construed: Whose names are not written from before the foundations of the
world, etc. because of the very like place, Apoc. 17.8. We conclude therefore
with Augustine, August. de na^. and gra. cap. 44.
that the same faith healed the righteous of old time, which heals us, even
the faith of Jesus Christ the Mediator of God and men, the faith of his blood,
the faith of his cross. And in another place he says: Lib. 1. de pecca.
merit. and remiss. cap. 11.
The only grace of the Savior destroys the kingdom of death in every one,
which grace wrought also in the old Saints, whosoever, before Christ's coming
in the flesh, leaned upon his helping grace, and not upon the letter of the
law, which commands only, and helps nothing.

Yet here is not to be omitted, Of the fathers Limbus.
that many do so extend the benefit of redemption unto the old righteous men,
that they notwithstanding deny that any one entered into the kingdom of
heaven before the death of Christ, whereby they understand, that the gate of
heaven was at the length opened. And if a man ask; whither then were the
souls of the godly in old time received? they answer: into Hell, that is
forsooth Limbus patrum. Hereupon the book de Ecclesiasticis dogmat. which is
fathered upon Augustine, chap. 78. and 79. defines thus: Before the passion of
the Lord all the souls of the Saints were kept in hell under the debt of Adams
transgression, until through the undeserved death of the Lord they were
delivered from that servile condition: but after his ascension into heaven, all
the souls of the Saints departing out of the body, go unto Christ, as the
souls of sinners unto hell. And Hierome upon Ecclesiast. chap. 3. writes:
that before the coming of Christ all went to hell to be held in darkness: and
heavenly things were shut up, until Christ with the thief unlocked the doors
of Paradise. Basil also mentions this opinion upon the 48. Psalm, and many
other of the old writers. And this is almost the common opinion of the
Schoolmen, who add this declaration, that the holy fathers suffered in hell
no punishment of sense, but only punishment of loss, to wit, exclusion from
the life of glory. And the cause of this detaining of the fathers in hell,
they make to be the guiltines of all man's nature through original sin,
which none of the Saints faith or righteousness was able to remove, but it
should be removed at length by the price of the blood of Christ. Thomas part.
3. quaest. 42. artic. 5.

But this devise of Limbus patrum, though it has many founders, yet it is
nothing but a fained thing. For there is but one way to loose us from the
guiltines of every sin, as well actual as original: 1. Ioh. 1.
because the blood of Christ does wash us from all sin, says S. John. Not then
from original only: as Paul also generally speaks to Titus: Tit. 2.
He gave himself to redeem us from all sin or iniquity. Neither does
Thomas deny it in the place before cited, part. 3. q. 49. art. 5. Cath.
archiepis. lib. Romae edit^ cum priuil. pap. 1552.
which is to be noted against the horrible blasphemy of Catharinus, and such
like Papists, who affirm that the passion of Christ does purge only original
sin, and those actual sins which are committed of a man before Baptism:
but all other sins which follow, are not now to be purged by that sacrifice,
but by the Mass. Certainly Thomas writes flatly: that by the passion of
Christ we are delivered, not only from the common sin of all man's nature,
both as touching the offense, and also the guiltines of the offense, he paying
a price for us: but also from the proper sins of every one of us, who
communicate with his passion through faith, charity and the sacrament of faith.

part. 3. q. 52. art. 5. Reasons against the old fathers being in Limbo, or
Hell.
But the holy fathers (as the same Thomas confesses) in old time while they
lived, were freed from the guiltines of the punishment of actual sins
through faith in Christ. Therefore by the same faith they were also freed from
the guiltines of the punishment of original sin of necessity: or else if
they



Between us and you there is a great gulf firmly set. It is absurd, as
Augustine notes, ad Euod. Epist. 99. that only two, Abraham and Lazarus were
then in that memorable bosom of rest. If (says he) there were more then two
there, who dare say, that the Patriarchs and Prophets were not there? From
hence thus I reason: The Patriarchs and Prophets and the rest that were
righteous in old time, were received into Abraham's bosom: therefore not into
hell. The consequence is proved, because hell in the Scripture is no where
taken in good part. But that bosom of Abraham is used in good part, as the
habitation of a memorable and certain secret rest. Therefore we must not
believe that that bosom was some part of hell. This reason is wholly
Augustines unto Euodius. And the same he proves by the words of our highest
teacher saying, that Abraham said: Between us and you there is set a great
gulf: whereof sufficiently appears (says Augustine) that the bosom of so
great felicity, is not any part or member as it were of hell.

He adds also this proof: If the Scripture (says he) had

Now let the reader consider, The Schoolemens fained devises of four hels.
whether these reasons drawn by Augustine out of the Scripture, deserve more
credit then the trifling words of the Schoolmen, who have devised four hels,
that is, the hell of the damned, Purgatory, and the two Limboes, one for
Infants, the other where the holy fathers were before Christ: which last they
make a part of hell contrary to the reasons brought out of Augustine.

Hereunto may be added, that a man may see the deuisers Limbus patrum to be
much troubled in assigning the deliverance of the godly souls out of that
prison. For sometime they attribute it to the passion of Christ, whereby he
loosed the guiltines of the punishment of original sin, wherein the fathers
(as they think) were detained in hell, and opened the gate of the kingdom of
heaven. Sometime they teach that it was needful for the soul of Christ to
descend into the hell of the fathers, that it might absolve there all the
Saints, who were bound with original sin, where they almost make Christ's
descension penal unto him, as Aquinas part. 3. quaest. 52. art. 1. teaches,
that it was meet for Christ to descend into hell, because he came to bear our
punishment, and that was (says he) not only the death of the body, Bonau.
did. 22. quaest. 6. lib. 3. Gabr. ead. q. artic. 3. Thom. part. 3. q. 52. and
57.
but also descension in hell. Sometime again they decree masterlike, that,
albeit those souls were made blessed in Christ's descension, and so heaven was
straightway set open unto the^, as touching the reward of bliss: yet it was
not open as touching the place, till Christ ascending into heaven, took them
together with him.

But why dissent they from the old writers, whose opinion they would seem to
follow? for Hierome (as we cited) would have heaven only shut up, A doubt
propounded to the schoolmen to be resolved.
till Christ with the thief unlocked the gates of paradise. Further, if they
would seem very skillful in heavenly secrets, let them show us, where then did
the souls of the Saints abide all that space of 40. days between the
resurrection and ascension of the Lord? For being loosed from the band of
original sin, wherewith they were tied in hell, they could not be detained
there any longer, but with their injury, and the injury of Christ's blood,
through whom liberty to enter into the Sanctuary was obtained, and yet (as
they will have it) they were not in heaven. Where then wandered they? The same
may be objected of the souls of the godly, as many as slept in the said space
of 40. days.

CHAP. IX. Of the impulsive cause of man's redemption.
But to speak of other things, this also comes to be considered, for what
cause the Son of God our Lord Jesus Christ took upon him the redemption of
man? But the question now is not of the final cause, whereof we will speak
something in the next chapter, but of the impulsive cause, as they call it,
that is to say: what moved him, that he being the workman and Lord, would for
his works sake, Two causes moved Christ to redeem us: 1. His love to us. 2.
His obedience to his father.

taking upon him the nature of it, humble himself unto the most base and
shameful death of the cross for us and our salvation? The answer is ready
and plain, that it was done of our Savior to show his love toward us, and
his willing obedience toward his father.

Of the love of the Son toward us in the whole work of his humiliation,
Paul speaks both elsewhere, Of the first.
and also to the Phil. 2. where he exhorts to the love of our neighbor, that
no man should seek his own, but the things of others, and confirms his
exhortation by the example of Christ, commanding, that the same affection be in
us, which was in Christ Jesus, who when he was in the form of God, abased
himself for our sake, of his mere love toward us, as the Apostle there
exhorts us to follow him. Of the second.
And of his obedience toward his father, Christ himself witnesses, Ioh. 5. I
seek not my will, but his that sent me, even the fathers. And more clearly,
chap. 6. I came down from heaven, to do not my will, but the fathers will who
sent me, that whatsoever he has given me, I should lose none, but should
raise it up at the last day.

And that it pleased the father to save us by the offering up of his Son, it
comes wholly from his divine favor, Nothing moved the father to send his son
to save us, but his mere love and mercy to mankind.
love and goodness toward mankind, as the Lord witnesses, Ioh. 3. So God
loved the world, that he gave his Son. Whereupon Paul also says, Romans 5. God
sets out his love toward us, that when we were sinners, Christ died for us.
And Ephesians. 2. God who is rich in mercy, of his great love, wherewith he loved
us, even when we were dead in sins, quickened us through Christ. And most
clearly of all to Titus chap. 3. The goodness and love of God our Savior
toward men appeared, and saved us, not by the righteous works which we had
done, but by his mercy. The sayings of the Prophets consent hereto: Esaias. 54.7.
In a moment of my wrath I have hid for a while my face from thee: in
everlasting mercy I have compassion on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer. I,
even I am he, Esaias. 43.12.
who does blot out thine offenses for mine own sake, and I will not remember
thy sins. He says, for mine own sake: that is, not for your sake, but for my
holy name, as it is expounded Ezech. 36. Neither does that tend to any other
end, which Esaias. chap. 9. prophesying of the incarnation of the Sun, and of
the redemption of the Church by him from the yoke of sin and death,
concludes the whole matter with this notable sentence in the end: The zeal
of the Lord of hosts shall bring this thing to pass: as if he should say; I
foretell of great things, but they be true, and the almighty father enflamed
with eternal love, and minding to save them, to whom he has promised the
kingdom of heaven, A double use of the love of God and Christ toward us.
will bring this thing to pass. See also what Moses Deuter. 7. speaks of the
cause of the redemption of the people of Israel from Egypt, which was a type of
this eternal deliverance.

The first use.
Further, the use of this consideration is, that we should humble our selves
unfeignedly before God, and that he that rejoices, should rejoice in the Lord,
and not in his works or own worthiness. For the opposition of the mercy of
God, and of the righteousness of works, is to be observed and urged always in
the matter or cause of salvation: as Paul did oppose these things: Tit. 3.5.
Not by the works of righteousness which we had done, but by his mercy he
saved us. And the same Antithesis is repeated, 2. Tim. 1. verse. 9. and Dan. 9.
verse. 18.

The second.
The second use is, that we also pondring in our mind the deeper sea (as
Damascene speaks) of Gods love toward us, Damas. lib. 3. cap. 1. orth. fid.
should love God again, and that not in word nor tongue only, but in deed
and truth, as he has loved us, and given his life for us, 1. Ioh. 3. And
chap. 4. joining both uses together in excellent words, thus he writes: Hereby
the love of God is made manifest unto us, that he sent his own Son into the
world, that we might live through him. In this is love, not that we loved him,
but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins.
And straightway adds: Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one
another. And a little before the end: We love him, because he loved us first.
If any man shall say, I love God, and hates his brother, he is a liar.

But seeing by the death of Christ we are reconciled unto God, as says the
Apostle, Ephesians. 2. An objection.
He has reconciled us to God through his cross, slaying enemitie by it: How
God did both love man and hate him.
it seems to disagree with that we have said: that through the love of God he
was delivered to death for us. For if we were before loved of God, to what end
is reconciliation? If any say, reconciliation was needful in respect of us,
that we might cease to be at enemitie with God, and among our selves, the
Jews with the Gentiles, and Gentiles with Jews: Ephesians. 2. Colos. 1.
he neither says nothing, nor speaks all, by the witness of Paul. For first
of all, it was the part of the reconciler to pacify the wrath of God against
us for sins, and to make him favorable and gracious unto us. How then can it
stand, that God prevented this reconciliation of his free favor and love, in
giving his son unto us? The reason is thus made: The same thing is not the
cause and the effect. But the love of God is the effect of reconciliation.
Therefore it is not the cause of it.


The wicked and his wickedness are alike hated of God. And Psalm. 5. Thou have
hated all that work iniquity. And Esaias cries: Esaias 59.
Our iniquities have made a separation between our God and us, and our sins
are the cause that he hides away his face from us, and hears us not. This
whole matter Augustine notably expounds in his 110. treatise upon John: After
a wonderful and divine manner (says he) God loved us, Augustines answer. God
hates sin in us, but loves his work.
when he did hate us. For he hated us, as we were such as he had not made us,
that is for sins: And because (says he) our iniquity had not altogether
destroyed his work, he knew in every one of us, both to hate what we had done,
and also to love what he himself had made: and this may be understood in all
men according to the saying: Sap. 11.
Thou have hated nothing that thou have made. For in that which he hates,
there is somewhat also that he loves. For he hates and misliketh the fault,
which swarueth from the pattern as it were of his workma^ship, yet he loves
that which is his own, even in such as are corrupted.

Furthermore, seeing he hates nothing of those things which he has made,
peculiarly (as Augustine there teaches) he loves the members of his only
son. But specially he loves us as we are members of his son.
For how (says he) should he not love the members of his son, who loves his
son? for there is no other cause of loving his members, but because he loves
him. Therefore he loves us because we are his members whom he loves: and that
we might be this thing, for this cause he loved us, before we were. For he
began not to love us, since we were reconciled to him by the blood of his son:
but before the world was made he loved us, that with his only begotten we
might also be his sons, before we were any thing at all. Therefore that we
are reconciled to God by the death of his son, let it not so be received, nor
so be understood, as though therefore the son has reconciled us, that now he
might begin to love whom he had hated, as one enemy is reconciled to another:
but we are reconciled to him that already loves us, with whom for sins we
were at enemitie: and yet it is most truly said unto him, Thou have hated all
that work iniquity. Mark this.
Hitherto Augustine. The sum of all is, that seeing GOD has loved us as his
work, but especially as the members of his Son before the foundations of
the world were laid, he of his mere and free love being moved, gave us his
Son, that being redeemed by his grace from sin, (whereby we were put away
from the presence and fruition of God) we might be made heirs of eternal
life. Bernard, Sermon. 20. of the 9. verse of the Psalm, He that dwells, etc.
very well says: Christ according to the time died for the wicked: but in
respect of predestination he died for his brethren and friends.

CHAP. X. Of the final cause of redemption.
THere follows that question, whereunto are we redeemed? wherein the question
now is concerning the end of our redemption. And the end is twofold: to wit,
Two ends of redemption.
the glory of God, and our salvation. The former end the Apostle extolleth,
Ephesians. 1. where he says: The first end is Gods glory.
that God has chosen us in Christ, before the foundations of the world were
laid, and has foreordained to adopt us for his sons through the same Jesus
Christ in himself, according to the good pleasure of his own will, to the
praise of his glorious grace, whereby he has made us acceptable in that his
beloved, in whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of
sins. In which words he not only teaches, that ye end of the eternal and free
election of God, is the praise of his glorious and rich grace: but also
shows, that the redemption of us by Christ is subordinate unto the same end.
Prou. 16.
For God has made all things for himself, even the wicked against the evil
day: that both the benefit of their healing who are delivered, and also the
judgment of damnation in the deserved punishment of such as perish, should
further his glory.

Wherefore we are here warned, Coloss. 1.
that with Paul we give thanks without ceasing unto the father, who has made
us meet to be partakers of the portion of the Saints in light, and has
delivered us from the power of darkness, and has translated us into the
kingdom of his beloved son, in whom we have redemption through his blood,
etc. 1. Pet. 2.
As Peter also admonishes us of our duty in this point, that we should
preach the virtues of him, who has called us out of darkness into his
marvelous light. It is well known what Moses, and the children of Israel did,
when the sea yielded a ready passage for all his people to go through: how
being protected by Gods hand, and beholding that wonderful redemption, Exodus
15. Sap. 19.
they leaped like lambs, and sung his praise: Thou O Lord art our deliverer,
thou art our strength. But what speak I of the old people and of the old song?
we have a new song, the song of the Lamb, let us, standing upon the glassie
sea of this world, and having the harps of God, sing it incessantly with the
universal Church; Apoc. 5. and 15.
to him that sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb: because he was slain,
and has redeemed us unto God by his blood, out of every tribe and language,
people and nation, and has made us unto our God kings and priests, and we
shall reign upon the earth.

The song of the universal Church in the honor of Christ.
To thee O Son of God, the lover of mortal men, O good Lord, O pacifier, O
rich Savior, and a king in deed, the creator and maker of all things, the word
and wisdom of the father, the light and brightness of the father, the power,
arm, and right hand of the father, to thee be blessing, and honor and glory,
and strength for ever and ever. Thou have redeemed us, being captives; and
serving sin, thou have delivered us by thine own death. Thou have given us
the adoption of sons. Thou becamest poor, that by thy poverty thou might
enrich us. Thou have freely given us the kingdom of heaven. Thou have
fashioned us a new, in darkness have enlightened us, and being dead men thou
have quickened us: thou vnloosedst the sorrows of death, and brakest the gates
of brass, and doors of iron, and have broken in pieces the yoke of sinners.

Eccle. 15.
And because praise is uncomely in the mouth of fools, and this wonderful and
altogether divine redemption is to be published of us, not so much in words as
in deeds themselves, go to, let us so be affected, let us so frame our life,
manners, actions, counsels, and all our affairs, that we be not found foullie
unthankful to our common Redeemer, (to whose glory we ought wholly to be
consecrated) and nothing better, yea every way worse then those obstinate
Jews, through whom the name of God was evil spoken of among the Gentiles, as
it is written. But let that sharp reproof of Moses never go out of our
minds in the song in Deuteronomie: Chap. 32.6.
Will ye give this recompense unto the Lord, O ye foolish and unwise people?
Is not he thy father who owes and possesses thee? has not he made and
prepared thee?

The second end of redemption is our salvation, The 2. end is our salvation,
which contains many benefits.
which comprehends many and sundry benefits, albeit knit together in one and
the same band, as these especially: Justification, which consists in the free
remission of sins: Sanctification, and newnes of life: Consolation, yea
rejoicing in

These so many and so great benefits of God, are purchased for us by the
abundant grace of the death of Christ, as the sayings of the Scriptures do
show: Romans 3. We are justified freely by the redemption made in Christ Jesus,
whom God set forth to be a reconciliation through faith in his blood by the
remission of sins. And chap. 5. When we were as yet sinners, Christ died for
us. Therefore being justified by his blood, we shall be saved now much more
from wrath by him. For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by
the death of his son, much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his
life. And a little after: Neither that alone, but also we rejoice in God
through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now obtained reconciliation.
Again, If death reigned by one offense, much more those, who do receive that
abundant grace and gift of righteousness, shall reign in life. To Titus chap.
2. He gave himself for us to redeem us from all sin, and to purge us a
peculiar people for himself, zealous of good works. Peter also joins these
things together, 1. Epist. chap. 2. when he says: that our Lord bore our
sins in his body upon the tree, that we being dead to sins, might live to
righteousness.

Of these things there ought to be a daily consideration, The true use of the
former ends, if they be well weighed. Ephesians. 1.
that we may understand the greatness of the gift of Christ, and give him thanks
without ceasing, weighing with ourselves, what is the breadth and length and
depth (as Paul speaks) of the grace of God, and what is the hope of his
calling, and the riches of his glory in his Saints. Further, the daily
meditation us more and more newnes of life. Having (says the Apostle, Heb.
10.) liberty to enter into the holy place by the blood of Jesus, and having an
high priest, who is ruler over the house of God, let us come with a true heart,
and a sure persuasion of faith, and let us hold the confession of hope without
wavering. And as touching the framing of our life, we are commanded to walk
worthy of the Lord, Colos. 1.
who, when we were the servants of sin to death, has delivered us from
sin, and made us servants of righteousness. Hereupon are those exhortations
of Paul: Romans 6.
Let not sin reign in your mortal body: and give not your members weapons
of unrighteousness unto sin, but give your selves unto God, as such as are
alive from the dead, and your members weapons of righteousness unto God. Again,
As you have given your members servants to uncleanness, and iniquity for
iniquity: so now give your members servants of righteousness unto holiness.
Certainly seeing we are the freemen of Christ, we ought to live unto him, who
has redeemed us, Tit. 2.
and would have us his peculiar people and followers of good works: neither
ought we as forgetful of our Redeemer, retire unto the camps of Satan and the
world, our enemies, and submit again our bodies and souls unto the yoke of
our old bondage, from whence we were redeemed with the blood of the Son of
God. O mad men, O vile traitors, and the wickeddest of all mortal men, who so
greatly reproach a Christian name, nay Christ the Redeemer, and do little less
then tread the blood of the covenant under their feet.

CHAP. XI. WHO BE REDEEMED BY CHRIST. The controversy of the question
propounded is rehearsed, and briefly expounded.
For whom Christ died.
THese things being declared, let us come to the question, reserved to the last
place: Who they be, whom Christ the Mediator of God and men, redeemed by his
death: or, for whom he died? And this matter shall be more largely handled,
then the former questions, (as far as the Lord shall assist us) for their
sakes that are desirous to learn, and for the defense of the truth of the
Gospel: seeing not long ago by occasion of the Conference at Mompelgart, the
matter has grown into a grievous contention, Huberus.
and a certain man inflamed with anger, and seeming to be mad, has too too
bitterly and reprochfully in his writings, which he has spersed abroad both in
Latin and Dutch, blown the same with the fan of contention: as though there
had not been before discords and strifes more then enough in this our corrupt
age in the Church of Christ, with often and most grievous offenses of the
weak. He ouerwhelmeth such as dissent from him with all kind of reproaches,
and railing words, as come into his mouth: The shameful reproaches and slanders
of Huber against us, and the truth.
That they come near to Mahometisme and Paganism: That they maintain
Satanicall blasphemy, are frantic, desire to extinguish the name of Christ,
and that they are hereunto inclined to drive away Christ, first out of the
hearts, then out of the Scripture, and lastly out of the Church it self. And
he terms them seducers, Pharisees, Scribes, a subtle, poisoned, and false
sort of men: and grievously abuses innocent persons with other hard words, as
often as pleases him, according to that his passing christian zeal toward
the Church of God: supposing by his brazen forehead (as I think) to get
himself credit with the reader, to think it written truly, what he should
write impudently: forgetting altogether the admonition of the Apostle: 2. Tim.
2.24. The duty of a Divine.
That the servant of the Lord must not be contentious, but gentle toward all,
apt to teach, forbearing evil men, with meekenes instructing those that are
contrary minded. This is the duty of a Divine. As for reproaches, railing
speeches, mockes, biting taunts, ill reports, backbiting, and all other
doggish eloquence, let scoffers and iesters take them to themselves. In 2. cap.
2. ep, ad Timot. A notable speech of Ambrose against contention.
Conference, (says Ambrose) and not contention ought to be among the servants
of God. For strife must needs wring out something, nay many things, which are
spoken against conscience, so so that inwardly he loses in his mind, when
outwardly he goes away with the victory. For no man suffers himself to be
overcome, although he know the things to be true which he hears. Therefore
let us speak of the thing itself. For to railing words and reproaches he will
answer who has said: Vengeance is mine, Deuteronomy. 32. Romans 12.
I will repay: unto whom for Christ's sake, who has pardoned us our sins, we
heartily pray, that he would forgive our adversaries those grievous wrongs
they do unto us, that he would take away discord, and plant love and peace in
the truth among the Churches, that with one mouth we may glorify God the
father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and receive one another, as Christ has
received us to the glory of God. Romans 15.

Therefore comparing matter with matter, and cause with cause, The state of the
controversy. Huberus These. 1.
let us begin at the state of the controversy. The question is: Whether Christ
suffered for the redemption of all, or not? Here straightway those men cry
out, that the Caluinists (so they call us for the hatred of the truth) raging
against the passion of the Lord Jesus Christ, do openly deny that he died
for the sins of the whole world. Compend. These. 1. and his Dutch book in the
preface.
Again, that the Caluinists both dissemblingly and plainly deny, that Christ
suffered and died for all men.

But in the very entrance (as it is said) they run on ground, fastening upon us
a false opinion, against which afterward they perpetually fight. For we
willingly acknowledge these manner of speeches: 1. John 2. 1. Tim. 2.
That Christ is made the propitiation for the sins of the whole world, and
has given himself the price of redemption for all men. For who can deny
that, which the Scripture would have to be expressed in so many words? But the
question is of the meaning of the words. For as he shall not escape the note
of impudency, who shall deny what the Scripture expresses: so we are to
take heed, least, not understanding what is written, we should think there is
some repugnance in the Scripture. For the same Canonical Scripture, which
says, that Christ died for all, and so makes redemption after a sort common
to all, does restrain in other places the propriety of redemption unto the
Church. The words of Paul are, Ephesians. 5. Christ loved his Church, and gave
himself for it to sanctify it, and present it glorious unto himself. And in
the same place, Christ is the head of the Church and the Savior of the body.
And 1. Tim. 4. He is called the Savior of all men, but specially of the
faithful. Also Heb. 9. For this cause he is the Mediator of the new covenant,
that through death which came for the redemption of transgressions, the called
might receive the promise of eternal inheritance. Of which called also that is
rightly taken, which is read in the end of the same chapter: Christ was once
offered, to take away the sins of many. What? does not Christ in his solemn
intercession pray for his own expressly, and not for the world? I pray not
for the world, Ioh. 17.
(says he) but for them whom thou have given me. Now the intercession and
sacrifice of Christ for us, be inseparable parts of his priesthood. Other
testimonies of this sort I conceal, which shall be produced in their place.

Therefore seeing the holy Scripture here, as elsewhere, requires not
contentious disputers, but understanding readers, the ancient fathers for the
explication of these, Of the distinction of sufficiency and efficiencie.
Aquinas.
have used the distinction of Sufficiency and Efficiencie. Thomas Aquinas the
best schooleman, who flourished 300. years ago, upon the 5. chapter of the
Apocalypse writes of this matter thus: Of the passion of the Lord (says he) we
speak after two sorts: either according to sufficiency, and so his passion
redeemed all. For it is sufficient to redeem and save all, Of the meaning of
the sufficiency of Christ's death.
although there had been many worlds, as Anselme says lib. 2. cur Deus homo,
cap. 14. Or according to efficiencie, and so all are not redeemed by his
passion, because all cleave not unto the redeemer, and therefore all have not
the efficacy of redemption. The same man, part. 3. summae quaest. 1. artic. 3.
when he had said that Christ came to blot out all sins, expounding himself,
he adds these words: Not that the sins of all men are blotted out, which is
through the fault of men, who cleave not to Christ: but because he exhibited
that which was sufficient to have abolished all sins. Whereunto also may be
referred the things which he writes, quaest. 49. art. 1.3.5. Christ has
delivered us (says he) as his members from sins, and his passion has his
effect in them, who are incorporated into him, as the members into the body,
and so are partakers of his passion. But such as are not joined unto the
passion of Christ, can not receive the effect thereof.

But let us hear others also more ancient then Thomas. Innocentius 3.
Innocentius 3.
Pope of Rome Anno Dom. 1200. repeating the same distinction, lib. 2. de
officio Missae. cap. 41. says: The blood of Christ was shed for those only
that are predestined, as touching efficiencie: but for all men as touching
sufficiency. For the shedding of that righteous blood was so rich in price,
that if the universality of captives would believe in their redeemer, the
tyrannical bands of sin and Satan could withhold none, because as the
Apostle says, where sin abounded, there grace did superabound. This later
whole sentence is Pope Leos, Epist. 83. and 97. which seeing Innocentius
alleges, Leo.
he shows apparently, that Leo was of the same mind. Unto these, that is not
much unlike, which Basil writes in Psalm. 48. Basil.
Man cannot give a propitiation for himself to God: yet one worthy price was
found out for all men, even the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which he shed
for us all. And that he speaks of the sufficiency and dignity of the price,
it appears by the words themselves, and by that which he faith elsewhere very
often respecting the effect, that the blood of Christ was shed not for all men
without exception, but for many, Chrysostom. Theoph.
that is, for the believers. Chrysostom also and Theophilact who abridged him,
acknowledge the same distinction, as we shall see.

Augustine.
Moreover, Augustine the chiefest of the ancient sound writers, does not only
acknowledge that distiction, but also does expound it largely, Tom. 7.
answering unto Articles that were falsely fathered upon him, whereof the first
was, that he was reported to maintain, that our Lord Jesus Christ suffered not
for the redemption of all men. But he distinguishes after this manner: As
touching the greatness and might of the price, (says he) and as touching the
only cause of mankind, the blood of Christ is the redemption of the whole
world, and so all are well said to be redeemed. Yet because all are not pulled
out of captivity, and many are not redeemed, the propriety of redemption
without doubt belongs to them, out of whom the prince of this world is cast
forth, and now are not the members of the devil, but of Christ, whose death
was not bestowed for mankind, that even they should appertain unto the
redemption of it, who should not be regenerated: but so, that what was done by
one example for all, should be magnified in every one by one sacrament given
unto them. This is as much as if he had said: As touching the sufficiency of
the price, the redemption belongs to all: but as touching the effect, it
belongs not to all, but to the members only of Christ. And anon he sets
out the matter by a similitude, saying: Augustines similitude.
The cup of immortality, which is made of our infirmity and the divine power,
has power in it self to profit all: but if it be not drunk, it does no good.

The new writers also allow this distinction as usual, very ancient, and
profitable, and in this point diligently to be retained. Stapulensis upon the
5. to ye Romans, Stapulensis similitude.
declaring the matter by a similitude, says: As light is able to drive away
infinite darkness, albeit the eyes of all are not enlightened: so Christ has in
himself the redemption of all, The new writers allow the distinction of
sufficiency, and efficiency.
not sufficient for us only, but to redeem innumerable worlds also, albeit
all, through their own peruersenes, are not made partakers thereof. Neither
otherwise does Calvin, Beza, Grineus, and other Divines of our confession, who
are hatefully spoken of by our adversaries, as though simply and without al
distinction they should avouch, that Christ died not for all. Which to be
falsely laid to their charge, he shall confess, whosoever shall weigh the
places of the authors, of whom now we have spoken: Calvin. in 1. Ioh. 2. Beza
in 2. Cor. 5.15. and often in the second part of his answer to the Acts of the
Conference at Mompelgart, fol. 217. and 221. Gryneus in Thesauro the fium,
class. 1 these. 13. Tossan. these. 31. in disput. de loco Pauli 1. Cor. 15.22.
Zanch. lib. 2. Miscel pa. 312. and Pet. Mart. loco de praedest. ad Romans 9. In
these places the forenamed writers, as many other writers of our side in their
books do retain with one accord the common distinction of Sufficiency, and
Efficiencie, not to be refused doubtless in this disputation. Only let the
terms, sufficiently, and efficiently, be rightly and truly understood.
Sufficiently, Sufficiently.
that is, by Augustines interpretation, as touching the greatness of the price,
or as Thomas shows, as far forth as he exhibited that, which was
sufficient to take away all sins. Effectually.
Efficiently, or as others speak, effectually, let it be understood in
respect of the effect, which is found in the only members of Christ, all the
rest being without redemption, who live without faith and regeneration, as
Augustine also has learnedly left in writing.

The opinion of our adversaries.
But this is the opinion of our adversaries, that Christ without any difference
died for the sins of all men, and that all the sins of all men are
satisfied and cleansed by sacrifice, not only sufficiently, but also
effectually. Which thus they do declare, that our heavenly father has
instituted and ordained in very deed a reconciliation with all and every man,
without any respect of faith or unbelief. But in them it abides effectual,
who by faith receive that reconciliation with God ratified by Christ his
sacrifice: and in those, who refuse it by unbelief, The adversaries simile.
it is abolished and taken away, no otherwise then if a common bath were
erected for many sick persons, wherein all in very deed are restored to health,
and some of the^ by intemperance do lose again their former health, which
continues in others which live soberly. Which similitude truly much differs
in sense, from those which Augustine and Stapulensis used before.

Furthermore, they profess and write plainly that Christ suffered, was
crucified, dead, and has satisfied no less for the sins of all which
already are damned, and hereafter to be damned, then for the sins of Peter,
Paul, and of all the Saints: that is to say, that Christ not only gave that
which was sufficient to have taken away the sins of all men: but also that in
very deed the sins no less of the damned, Mark this strange doctrine.
and such as shall be damned, then of those that are saved, and shall be saved,
are washed away in his blood. And they avouch, that it comes to pass, that
nevertheless the former sort are condemned, not for their sins, for they are
indeed cleansed by Christ, but for unbelief alone, whereby they destroy again,
and make ineffectual that reconciliation, which was made and done for them.

This was the opinion of Jacob Andreas in the Conference at Mompelgart, which
Huberus these. 19. sets down in this manner: to wit, That Christ suffered and
died not for some men only, but for all the posterity of Adam, none, (and to
speak it most plainly) none at all excepted out of the whole universality of
mankind, whether he receive to himself salvation by faith, and continue in
salvation obtained, or else through unbelief refuse salvation wrought for him,
and therefore perish again for ever. We see that he boldly avouches that
indifferently all and every one, believers and unbelievers have obtained in
very deed salvation in Christ, but that some in believing continue in
salvation received, others are deprived again of the same by not believing.
The same man in compendio these. 10. says: We boldly affirm, that Christ by
his death has mercy upon all men in very deed and in truth, and gave himself
a sacrifice for sins, no less for every infidel then for every faithful man,
to wit, that he may deliver from death, the devil, and hell, all men whosoever
they be: he means in very deed and in truth, (as we use to speak) and not
sufficiently only. And that nothing may be obscure, he maintains that the
work of salvation by Christ belongs to all sinners, and that such as by Ada^
have sinned, these. 49.
have righteousness by Christ imputed unto them: and that all judgment, these.
60.
and wrath of God is taken away and abolished from all men in very deed and
properly: these. 65.
and that all are truly and undoubtedly together delivered by the death of
Christ from all sin and condemnation, and whole mankind received in deed
into the favor and bosom of the father: these. 168.
and that all do belong to the communion of salvation, and kingdom of grace:
lastly, these. 270.
that all reprobates and elect are alike saved by Christ, whether they believe,
or not: and other like things altogether raw, new and strange, do meet us
here and there dispersedly in reading him.

Unto this opinion as new and unheard of, and many ways erroneous (as it shall
appear) we cannot subscribe: but following the old distinction we affirm,
that Christ surely exhibited that which was sufficient to have taken away all
sins, and so they are taken away, Our opinion of the death of Christ for all
men.
and that all are redeemed, as touching the sufficiency or greatness and power
of the price, as Augustine expounds. But as touching efficiencie, we say that
by the death of Christ, the sins only of the elect are blotted out, who
believe in him, and stick unto him as the members to the head: Christ
effectually died for the elect and faithful only, proved.
but such as are not incorporated into Christ, cannot receive the effect of his
passion. For as the Lord says: God so loved the world, that he gave his son
that every one that believes in him should not perish, but have eternal life.
He that believes is not condemned: but he that believes not, is condemned
already, Ioh. 3. Which in that place John Baptist confirming, testifies: He
that believes in the Son, has eternal life: but he that believes not in
the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him. And in this
sense, and not absolutely and without restraint, is it to be taken, as often as
it is read in our writers, that Christ suffered not for all: to wit in respect
of the effect of his passion, which belongs to such as are to be saved, and
not to them that shall be damned; to the faithful, and not to Infidels. And so
Beza also declares himself Colloq. Mompelg. pa. 217. And there is nothing in
him, which is not in so many words, and in the same sense written by the old
writers.

Neither are cauillers to be regarded, which say: what need is there to say,
Huberus these. 1154.
that Christ is a price sufficient for the whole world? why bewitch ye men with
these terms? I answer, this is no bewitching, but the ancient and right
explication of this controversy against them, that love to bewitch the world
with new opinions. Huber. comp. these. 5. and 6.
But (say they) the word sufficiently taken in that signification wherein
sacred antiquity took it, we refuse not, but rather approve it. But our
Caluinists (say they) devising a wrong and doubtful signification of the word,
do deceive the simpler sort. For this they mean, that Christ's death is so
mighty, that if he would help all men by the same, he could easily do it.
these. 1152.
But if they would use the word of sufficiency in another signification, as
when we say against the Papists, that the death of Christ is sufficient for all
men, that is, needs no help of man's works to redeem us: or else also in this
sense, when we say, that Christ's death is sufficient for all, whether men
believe and be saved, or believe not, and perish: yet that Christ has
satisfied for all, we would not refuse the use of this term in such a
signification.

But I think it is plain enough by the things which are recited before, how
antiquity has used those terms of sufficiency and efficiencie, neither that
we change any thing in the sense, or deceive any by doubtful signification.
In the mean while the thing it self proves, that the simpler sort are here
beguiled by our adversary, who when he would seem to allow the term of
sufficiency in that sense, wherein antiquity accepted it, yet he deuiseth of
his own head significations altogether unknown unto antiquity, in his
propounded opposition: otherwise we defend also against the Papists, that the
merit of Christ needs no help of man's works: neither deny we, that he has
satisfied for all whether they be saved or perish, to wit, as touching the
sufficiency and greatness of the price so mighty and rich for redemption, that
if the universality of captives would believe in him, the bands of the devil
should hold back none.

CHAP. XII. Another manner of universal redemption.
THis also we affirm, that albeit not all, All, taken for all that be
Christ's, and of his Church.
as many as are borne of Adam, are by the death of Christ effectually borne
again, redeemed and justified: rightly nevertheless it may be said, that
Christ died for all, even in respect of the effect of his death, justification,
regeneration, and such like benefits: not that they redound to all and every
man, but to all who are Christ's, as the Apostle says: If God be for us, Romans 8.
who can be against us? who also spared not his own son, but gave him for us
all. Who be those all, in whose mouth that saying is, and faith in their
hearts, If God be for us, who can be against us? Truly they whom he foreknew
and predestined, whom he also calls, justifies and glorifieth, the elect
of God, whose is salvation and eternal life, whom no creature can separate
from the love of God in Christ, as there it is said: Who shall lay any crimes
against the elect of God? The author of the books de vocat. gentium, a man
surely very learned, and eloquent, Prosper Aq.
whether he were Ambrose, or rather Prosper of Aquitaine, lib. 1. cap. 3.
writes notably in this sort: Therefore (says he) the people of God have their
fulness, and albeit a great part of men either reject, or neglect the grace of
the Savior: yet in the elect, and soreknowne, which are severed from the
generality of all, there is a certain special universality, that out of the
whole world, the whole world seems to be set at liberty, and out of all
men, all men seem to be received. Where let us note a doubt, A threefold
universality.
nay a threefold universality: namely, the generality of all men: then the
generality of the elect who are saved: and on the other side, the
universality of the reprobates, who perish. Of these as well elect as
reprobates, (as the same author well observes) the divine style does so order
his speech, Lib. 2. cap. 1.
that both those things, which are spoken of one part of men, seem to
appertain to all: and also, whereas there be some who perish, and some who
are saved, yet neither part is without the name of all men, the portion of
rebels bearing the loss of their salvation, and the dignity of the faithful
obtaining the account of fulness.

But the matter shall be made more clear by examples. When the Lord says,
Ioh. 12. When I shall be lifted up from the earth, All, taken for all the elect
only.
I will draw all things, (or after another reading) all men unto me: does not
the conversion of all men seem to be promised? and yet many thousands to this
day do serve the devil and the world. But rightly we understand with
Augustine, Aug. tract. 53.
all, that is, all men predestinate to salvation, of all whom none shall
perish. So that which is written in the Prophets: Esaias. 54.13. Esaias. 31.34.
Ioh. 6.
All shall be taught of God: and, all shall know me from the least unto the
greatest: are alike true, of the men of Gods kingdom, according to the
limitation of Augustine, Athanasius.
Tract. 26. See also Athanasius of these three sayings now alleged, in Euang.
de pass. and cruce Domini. What, when it is said: Esaias 65.
All flesh shall come into my sight, and worship in Jerusalem, says the Lord.
Or else that: Joel. 2.
And in the last days it shall come to pass, that I will power out of my
spirit upon all flesh. Or this: The Lord vpholdeth all that fall, Psalm. 145.14.
and lifts up all that are bowed down. Are not these so uttered, as though
no man were severed from this gift of God? Of this sort are these sayings also:
Until we all grow into the unity of faith, Ephesians. 4. 2. Cor. 5.
and knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man. Old things are passed
away, behold all things are become new: Matthew. 26.
Drink ye all of this, etc. Are these things spoken of the unbelievers also,
and such as be notoriously wicked?

Of the universality of the ungodly the sacred Scriptures speak in like
manner, All, taken for all the wicked only.
as Philip. 2. All seek their own. Ioh. 3. No man receives his testimony.
If no man, to what purpose came he from heaven? Therefore none of a certain
sort, because there is a certain people prepared for the wrath of God, to be
damned with the devils: none of this sort receives the testimony of Christ,
says August. Tract. 14. Many other examples the author of the calling of the
Gentiles brings. By all which is plainly showed, that All men are very often
in the Scriptures named for a part of men: the discerning of whom
notwithstanding, the Scripture soon opens, that the understanding of the
reader may be carried from the general term unto that part which is to be
understood. Hereupon Logicians give a rule of restrayning an universal note or
sign unto the subject matter, according to the rule: A rule in Logike.
Talia sunt praedicata, qualia permittuntur esse a suis subiectis: that is,
Such are the things that are uttered, as they are permitted to be by their
subject matter. Which precept has not only place in this case of elect and
reprobates, believers and unbelievers, but also elsewhere very often, as when
it is said: All things are pure to the pure: All things are lawful for me, etc.

CHAP. XIII. Some other ways of the universality of redemption.
All that are redeemed, are redeemed by Christ.
Moreover we affirm, that by the use of the Scripture and godly antiquity, it
is rightly said, that Christ died for all, and that all are redeemed and saved
by his death: by a fit distribution (as they say) that is, so far forth as
all, who are redeemed and saved, have redemption and salvation in none other
but in Christ by his blood. Cyr. de lap. hominis.
For all redemption (as Cyrill speaks) is in Christ, and through him comes
every good gift. 1. Cor. 15. Romans 5. Epist. 28.
In this sense those sayings of the Apostle: All are quickened and justified in
Christ, Augustine every where expounds, as we shall see at large hereafter:
Because (says he) as all men who die, die not but in Ada^: so all men, who are
quickened, shall be quickened in none other but in Christ. And in this very
kind of speech the same man, de pec. merit. and remiss. lib. 1. cap. 25.
expounds that saying in John, chap. 1. He inlighteneth every man that comes
into the world. Therefore (says he) is this spoken, because no man is
enlightened, but by that light of the truth. I know that Theophilact and some
other refer that saying to the light of reason, as of the inward eye: of
which exposition also Augustine makes mention. But this is enough for us
(seeing the other way also the words of the Evangelist may be well taken) to
have showed the use of this manner of speaking. We have a more manifest example,
1. Cor. 12. He works all in all. Where we have need of a double restraint:
All, that is, he works all powers and gifts whatsoever in whomsoever. For he
gives all to no man, much less all to all men: but whatsoever grace or
spiritual power is in any whomsoever, is from him. Philip. in paruis logical.
brings an example out of the 1. of John: Of his fulness all we have received:
and he warns, that it be taken exclusiuely: for the universal sign is
drawn to a certain kind, and there is signified the shutting out of others.
As many of us as have received grace, all of us have received it from Christ
alone. As if we should say of Augustines similitudes de not. and great. cap. 41.
one schoolmaster in a city, This man teaches all here letters: or of some
one De pec. mer. lib. 1. 28.
midwife in a city: She receives all: or as we may say, Contr. Iuli. lib. 6.
cap. 12. Christ justifies all, in what sense.

Ad Bonif. lib. 1. cap. 7. and alibi.


All enter into the house by one gate. There all and such like are well spoken:
yet we may not understand all men, but such as learn letters, and such as be
borne in that city, or else enter into the same house. In like manner Christ
justifies all men, as far forth as none is justified but by him. And this
Augustine diligently urges against the Pelagians, who thought that not all,
but many are delivered by Christ: for they would have some to be saved also
without Christ, by nature, and freewill and the law, whether natural, or given
by Moses, although in the mean while they would confess that the way of
salvation by Christ is more ready and commodious.

According to this sense Hilarie also writes Comment. in Matthew. Canon. 7. All
the salvation of the Gentiles is of faith, Hilarie.
and the life of al is in the precepts of the Lord. Ambrose.
But Ambrose somewhat more clearly lib. 9. Epist. 71. says: The Lord Jesus
coming, has pardoned all men their sin, which no man could avoid, and has
taken away the sin of the whole world, as John testifies. Therefore let no
man rejoice in works, because none shall be justified by his deeds: but he
that is just, has a free gift because after washing he is justified. Therefore
it is faith (says he) which delivers through the blood of Christ Jesus. He
says expressly that Christ has pardoned all their sin: but expounding
himself, he means not that al and every one in very deed are delivered by
Christ's blood, without respect of faith or infidelity, (for he does manifestly
restrain the propriety of redemption unto the believers) but this he means,
that they who are delivered from sin, are delivered by the free gift of
Christ, and not by their works.

Of the later new writers Wolfgangus Musculus in his common places expounds
it in this very sense, Musculus.
that the redemption of Jesus Christ is well called universal, because no man
is, nor can be redeemed without it; because there is salvation in none other,
Act. 4.
nor any other name under heaven given to men, whereby we may be saved. The
same man alleges this reason also of universal redemption, to wit, because
it is prepared for all, and all are called unto it, that is, as he himself
titulo de remiss. peccatorum quaest. 2. expounds: because, albeit the grace
of redemption does not happen to all, yet it is preached to all, and set forth,
and all are indifferently invited unto it: as in the Gospel the royal marriage
was prepared for all, Matthew. 22.
and all were bidden, although not all alike, were made partakers of the
marriage: because the marriage was in deed made ready for all, but they which
were called were not worthy: for many are called, but few chosen. As touching
therefore external vocation, Christ with all his benefits is set forth unto
all, with this annexed thereto, that all believe in him: Mark. 16.
and as the Lord commanded, the Gospel is preached to every creature, and
repentance and remission of sins is preached in his name among all nations,
Luke 24. Ioh. 3.
that whosoever believes in the Son, should not perish, but have everlasting
life. By this precept there is no difference made of any nations, De vocat.
gent. lib 2. cap. 1.
or any men. Unto all men is the Gospel of the cross of Christ sent, who has
excepted no man, has separated no man because of his stock or condition,
saying: Preach the Gospel to every creature: he that believes and is
baptized, shall be saved: but he that believes not, shall be damned. Hereupon
the Lord in the Gospel cries: Come unto me all ye that are weary, Matthew. 11.
and I will refresh you. In which words one thing is commanded, and another
thing is promised. Let us do what he commands, let us go all to the Lord,
and follow him, so we shall have what he has promised. For he casts not
forth, but receives and refreshes such as come unto him. In the mean while
who shall come, and who shall not come, he does know of whom the Son
witnesses: Ioh. 6.44.
No man comes unto me, except the father draw him, as it is written in the
Prophets: They shall be all taught of God. Whosoever therefore has heard of the
father, and has learned, comes unto me. For men (as Augustine discusseth
that place) preach outwardly, and beat into the ears the sound of words, and
so men do hear of men. But that they understand, it is given inwardly, it
shines inwardly, it is revealed inwardly by him who gives increase. Aug.
tract. 26. in Ioh. and pluribus tract. 3. in 1. Ioh. And Prosper lib. 2. cap.
9. de vocat. gent. says: They who come, are directed by the help of God: they
who come not, resist through their own obstinacy.

Lastly, learned interpreters do admonish, All, taken for all sorts or kinds.
and the examples of phrases in the Scriptures confirm, that the particle All,
often times ought to be expounded not for a thing simply universal, but
indefinite: so that All does note whatsoever, and rather All kinds or sorts,
then all particulars of every kind. So Augustine tract. 53. in Ioh expounding
that saying: I will draw all unto me, when I am exalted: By all (says he) all
the predestinate unto salvation, may be rightly understood, of all whom nothing
shall perish. Or certainly (says he) all, that is, all kinds of men, whether
in all tongues, or in all ages, or in all degrees of men, and whatsoever other
thing can be spoken according to the innumerable differences, whereby
(excepting only sins) men do differ among themselves: from the highest unto
the lowest, from the king unto the beggar, I will draw all unto me. This manner
of speech he at large teaches Enchir. ad Laurent. cap. 103. and de Correp. and
gratia cap. 14. In both places he brings this: Luke 11.42.
Ye tithe mint and rue, and all herbs. For (says he) the Pharisees did not
tithe all strange herbs of all strangers through all lands: but by all herbs,
we must understand all kind of herbs. And many places agreeable to this kind
of speech do meet us in the Scriptures: Matthew. 4.23. and 10.1.
as that Christ and his Apostles healed all sickness and disease in the people:
and all that were possessed with the devil. Act. 10.38.
And that all four footed beasts and creeping things were showed to Peter in
the sheet that was let down from heaven. Act. 10.12. Act. 20.27. and 21.2.
Ephesians. 3.9.
And that Paul showed to the Ephesians all the counsel of God: That he taught
all the Jews every where not to circumcise their sons: and which is more,
that he has made clear to all men etc. and that we are commanded to show all
gentleness to all men, that is, to whomsoever. Tit. 3.2.
Infinite such like places there be, which every where meet them that search
the holy Scriptures. What is more harsh and inconvenient, then for a man to
urge precisely the universal particle in such places? And that no man should
marvel at this our speech, let a man weigh these kind of speeches also: All
Judea went out to John Baptist, Mark. 5. Matthew. 10. Ioh. 16. 2. Tim. 1.
and all were baptized in Jordan. Ye shall be hated of all men for my name. All
that shall kill you, shall think they serve God. All in Asia are turned from
Paul. Here the meaning is not, that all the Jews none excepted came to John,
and were baptized of him: but many every where out of all Iewrie. And unless
the same figures Synecdoche be applied to other sayings, monstrous and strange
interpretations will arise. Those we shall avoid by observing the manner of the
Scripture, whereof August. epist. 59. says: It is the manner of the Scripture
to speak so of a part, as of the whole: which custom of divine Scripture
spersed usually throughout all the body of the doctrine of it, whosoever
shall diligently mark, shall plainly understand many things, which seem to be
contrary one to another.

What should be then the cause, that a man should not according to the usual
custom of the Scriptures, here also expound the universal note (All) after
the like manner? to wit, that Christ died for all, that is, (speaking of the
efficacy of redemption) for whomsoever? that rightly and without any heinous
offense it be referred, not so well to every one, as unto all sorts of men, of
whom without doubt the universality of the elect does consist. But of the
whole matter by setting down a new principle, it seems we must more
diligently entreat.

THE SECOND BOOK OF CHRISTIAN REDEMPTION, CONSISTING IN CONFVTATION.
CHAP. I. A transition unto the examination of the arguments of the Adversary,
and the distribution of them into certain ranks or orders.
THose things being briefly laid open, which we thought good first to handle
touching the sum of the controversy: let us now go to examine the arguments
particularly, whereupon the Adversary rests for the defense of his opinion:
afterward also we will confirm our opinion by fit testimonies and reasons of
the sacred Scriptures.

Therefore that Christ dyed for all Adams posterity, not one at all excepted
of the whole universality of mankind, and so truly, that he has satisfied
for the sins of all efficiently (as they say) and not sufficiently only, and
that all, whether they do believe or not believe, or never will believe, are
equally by the death of Christ from sin and damnation redeemed, restored
into the bosom of grace, justified, quickened, and lastly saved, they endeavor
to prove and convince by a threefold order or rank of reasons.

The first order contains those reasons, wherein universality





The Champion of this conflict trusting to this triple rank, deals no more
modestly, nor less boasts himself, and sings the triumph before the
victory, then even that fierce Goliath, 1. Sam 17. 2. Paral. ^2. 1. ^eg. 20.
arrogant and stout by reason of his sword, spear and shield: or that proud
Sanherib, or glorious Benhadad trusting in their horses and chariots to the
reproach of Israel. For he boasts boldly, that all attempt is in vain of
overthrowing those ranks, Comp. these. 14.
unless first they that assaie it, do accuse and convince the scripture of
falsehoode. But oh sirtha of good fellowship, (...).
sing not your triumph before the victory: and as it is set down in the
sacred Scriptures: Let not him, that puts on his armor, boast, as he that
puts it off, as we learn that Ahab long ago wisely answered Benhadad. 1.
Reg. 20.21.
The Scripture with us is of undoubted credit, and constant authority. But the
question is not of the truth of the Scriptures, which who so believes not, is
a Pagan and no Christian: but of the truth of man's opinion, which too boldly
truly thou do defend under pretense of Gods word, as we shall see.
Wherefore we nothing regard as well thine armies as thy triumphs.

CHAP. II. UNTO THE ARGVMENTS OF THE FIRST ORDER. A general answer to
testimonies of the death of Christ for all.
THe first order or rank, (as far as I observe) consists in a fourefold
kind of testimonies, as a foureparted rescuing army of soldiers: for the
places of Scripture of the old and new Testament are brought, wherein either
Christ

First of all, as touching the testimonies of the death of Christ for all, we
grant also after a sort, that Christ suffered and died for all men, as many as
have been, are, and shall be. What then? Shall it thereof follow, that all and
every one, whether they believe, or not believe, are in very deed reconciled,
justified, quickened, renewed, saved, and that all judgment and wrath of God
is truly and properly taken away in all men, and that all together are set
free from all sin and condemnation undoubtedly, and received as sons into
the favor and bosom of God? This thing this stout defender maintains in
these very words in his Theses: but we deny, and utterly deny these
consequences. For yt they may be admitted, this of necessity must be the Mayor
of the Syllogism:

For whomsoever Christ suffered and dyed, The opinion of the adversary drawn
into a syllogism.
they undoubtedly are freed from all sin and condemnation, and are in deed
made partakers of salvation, reconciliation, justification, regeneration and
other benefits purchased by Christ's death, without any respect of faith and
unbelief.

The assumption follows: Christ is dead for all, Therefore, etc.

Heb. 11.
who is without faith. And Christ plainly makes such a difference: As Moses
lift up the serpent in the wilderness, Ioh. 3.
so must the son of man be lift up, that every one that believes, should
have everlasting life. And straight ways: So God loved the world that he has
given his only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have eternal life. Again in the same place: For God sent not his
son into the world to condemn the world, but that the world by him might be
saved: He that believes, is not condemned: but he that believes not, is
condemned already. And about the end of the chapter John Baptist says: He
that believes in the Son has life: but he that believes not in the Son,
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him. Neither does Paul
acknowledge any to be justified by the redemption of Christ, Romans 3.
but such as believe. All (says he) have sinned, and are deprived of the
glory of God, and are justified freely by his grace, through the redemption
that is in Christ Jesus, who^ God has set forth to be a propitiation through
faith in his blood. This answer uses Theophilact upon Heb. 2. Theoph.
whom Anselmus there seems to follow. His words are these: He tasted death
not for the faithful only, but for the whole world. For albeit all are not
saved in very deed, yet he Peregit quod sua intererat.
wrought that which was his part to do. See how it does not follow, that, if
Christ died for all, all are straightway saved, which is the divinity of
Huberus, these. 270. Upon the 9. chapter to the Hebr. the same interpreter has
left it thus written: He has taken away the sins of many. Why said he of
many, and not of all? Because all mortal men have not believed. The death of
Christ surely was equivalent to the perdition of all, that is, was of value
sufficient that all should not perish, and it was paid for the salvation of
all, and Quantum in eo fuit.
as much as lay in him he died for all: yet he took not away the sins of
all; because they that resist him, make the death of Christ altogether
unprofitable unto themselves. These things he.

Stapulensis.
The foresaid answer Stapulensis (an interpreter among the late writers not to
be despised) confirms, upon the 2. chapter to the Hebr. in these words:
Christ truly suffered for all men, and his death is of value for the redemption
of all: but then his death has freed us from the fear of death, and from the
fear of bondage has restored us into the liberty of life, when we follow
him willingly. And upon the 10. chapter he writes: that by the oblation of
Christ there is a most full satisfaction for all the sins of the world, which
have been, are, and shall be: but their sins are remitted, who coming unto
Christ do ask grace, which he vouchsafed to obtain of the father for them:
but their sins are not pardoned, who refuse his grace, and contemn the
universal fountain of the washing away of sins, not knowing, or being
unwilling to purge themselves in him.

And Brentius does so declare it, Brentius.
Catechis. artic. de remiss. peccat. We are justified (says he) by the mere
mercy of God, only for the redemption, wherewith Christ has redeemed mankind
from sins, and for that reconciliation which he has obtained, and not for
any merit of man. But this benefit of God we receive not but through faith by
the preaching of the Gospel. For albeit Christ has redeemed mankind from
sins and reconciled with God, yet this benefit had nothing profited mankind,
if it were not preached unto them by the Gospel. And the Gospel requires
faith, and is to be received by faith. He that believes not shall be
condemned; and he that believes shall be saved. Wherefore remission of sins
purchased by Christ, and preached in the Gospel, is received of us and applied
unto us no otherwise then by faith. Huber. these. 19.
Hereunto the assertion is contrary, that all have received reconciliation and
salvation, whether they believe or not believe.

CHAP. III. Peculiar answers unto those sayings of the Scripture, which affirm
that Christ died for all.
THe former general answer is plain and sound and may suffice alone: yet we
think good particularly to examine the sayings of the holy Scriptures touching
the death of Christ for all.

The first place then let this be in this order, 1. Tim. 2.4, 5, 6. The first
place 1. Tim. 2.
God will that all should be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth: for
there is one God, and one Mediator of God and men, the man Christ Jesus, who
has given himself a ransom for all. Here they first urge the words, that
God will that all be saved: whereof they will have gathered, that therefore
once all men, none excepted, are in deed saved by the redemption of Christ,
without any respect of faith, or unbelief, although many afterward lose
again, through unbelief, salvation that was obtained. But the Apostle
entreats of that salvation which is by faith, as Theophilact well expounds,
and the matter it self shows: and not of a certain universal salvation of
believers and unbelievers. Further, the Apostle knitteth salvation and the
knowledge of the truth together, as things most nearly joined between
themselves. He will (says he) that all men be saved, and come to the knowledge
of the truth. After the like manner therefore let them infer, that all men
also, none excepted, come to the knowledge of the truth, that is, to faith, and
by consequence to eternal life, which consists in the knowledge of God and
Christ. Thus the argument is fully answered.

Yet as touching the mind of Paul, the place needs interpretation, as
Ambrose also admonishes. For if God (who verily is Almighty, and does
whatsoever he will, in heaven and earth) will have all men to be saved, and to
come to the knowledge of the truth, why is not his will fulfilled? Neither say,
as the Pelagians used to except, (as Augustine witnesses) that therefore this
will of God is not fulfilled, because men will not. For no free will does
withstand God being willing to save, as he teaches de correp. and great. cap.
14. for so to will or not to will, is in the power of the willer or niller,
that it hinders not Gods will, nor overcomes his power. For he himself
does the things that he wills, concerning those men who do not his will:
seeing even of the very wills of men, he does what he will. Therefore many
ways surely that Apostolical and divine sentence may rightly be understood,
that the very beginning of our faith shake not, wherein we profess that we
believe in God the father almighty, Of which ways we will recite one or two.

First, albeit none but the elect come to salvation, and that effectually
called by the holy Ghost, The first exposition of 1. Tim. 2.4.
by that vocation which is according to the purpose of God: yet God by his word
calls al to believe, and to convert, that they may be saved, and not judge
themselves unworthy of the kingdom of God. For this is that good, acceptable,
and perfect will of God, that all hear the Son, repent, and believe the
Gospel unto salvation. As also Ezechiel testifies, chap. 18. EZec. 18. and. 37
Why will ye die O house of Israel? Turn from all your iniquities because I
will not the death of a sinner: Turn, and ye shall live. And chap. 33. As I
live, says the Lord, I will not the death of the wicked, but that he turn
from his way and live. For God rejoices not in the destruction of such as
perish, Wised. 1. Act. 17.
neither approves an unfaithful and unrepentant heart: but (as Paul
testifies) warns all men to repent. But why this gift of grace, to wit,
conversion, (without which none can be saved) is not bestowed upon all by him,
who would have all to be saved, it must be referred to the hidden judgments
of Gods justice. For who has known the mind of the Lord? or who first gave
to him, that he should recompense him? This exposition Luther allows de seruo
arbit. handling the place of Ezech. chap. 18. Luther.
In that saying (says he) I will not the death of a sinner, we see no other
thing handled, then that the grace of God is preached and offered in the world,
which they only receive, in whom the law has already wrought his duty, that
is, the knowledge of sin. The rest contemn mercy promised in that saying.
But why some are touched by the law, and others are not touched, so that they
receive, these refuse grace offered, it is another question, and is not handled
here by Ezechiel, who speaks of the preached and offered mercy of God, and
not of that hidden and reverend will of God, ordaining in his counsel, whom
and what manner of men he will have to be capable and partakers of the mercy
preached and offered. Which will is not to be sought after, but with reverence
to be honored, as the secret of Gods majesty, reserved to himself alone, and
forbidden us. And anon after: God does many things which he does not show unto
us by his word: and he wills many things also, which in his word he shows
not that he wills. So he will not the death of a sinner, to wit, in his word:
but he wills it by that his unsearchable will. But we must respect his word,
and leave his unsearchable will. Again, comparing this present place of the
Apostle with the place of the Prophet, he adds: If thou speak of God
preached unto us, he will that all men should be saved, while he comes to all
in the word of salvation, and it is the fault of our will which does not admit
him, as it is said, Matthew 23: How often would I gather thy children, and thou
would not? But why the divine majesty does not take away this fault of our
will or change it in all, seeing it is not in the power of man: or why he
imputes that unto him, seeing man cannot want it, it is not lawful to
enquire, and though thou should seek after it, yet thou shall never find
it. These things so largely I am not ashamed to produce out of Luther, because
of our adversaries.

The second exposition of 1. Tim 2.4. Augustine.
Secondly, this may be the sense, and so Augustine Euchir. ad Laur. cap. 103.
expounds: He will that all men be saved: that is, all kind of men, severed
by what differences soever, kings, private men, noble, high and low, learned,
unlearned, wise, foolish, rich, poor, males, females, children and infants, in
all ages, in all professions, and if there be any other differences among men.
And this exposition agrees thoroughly with the purpose of Paul. For thus he
reasons: Whom God would have to be saved, for their salvation the Church
ought to pray. But God would have all, that is, whomsoever to be saved,
without difference of nation, sex, age, order, and dignity: Therefore for
all, that is, whomsoever, even for kings, and other kinds of men, faithful and
unfaithful the Church ought to pray. Thus rightly is that expounded, which he
says, that we must pray for all men. For if we should pray for all simply,
and without exception of any one, in vain had John said, There is a sin to
death, I say not for that that thou should pray. 1. Ioh. 5.

Augustine.
Elsewhere Augustine expounds these words, (he will that all be saved) saying:
that all the predestinate may be understood by them, because all sorts of men
be in them, says he, de correp. and great. cap. 14. But of those words enough:
which if the adversaries continue to abuse, let them also call to mind the
exposition of Heerbrandus, Heerbrand. Bidenbac. Osiander.
Disput. de praedest. th. 93. and of Bidenbacchius and Osiander, Respons. ad
assertiones Iesuitarum Dilingensium: where they also allow the received
distinction of the Schoolmen of the double will of God, which their
Schmidlinus afterward endeavored to confute: and they interpret the words of
Paul with Augustine, to wit, that he speaks not of every person of men, but
of all the orders of men: or, not of every singular one of all sorts, but of
the sorts of every one. Further, that which is an other reason of the
adversaries out of that place of the Apostle, they captiously catch at, in that
he says: one Mediator of God and men: that is, all men whomsoever that come
from Adam, say they: because also by the name of God, is understood whatsoever
is in God. But this is a mere shift. Paul speaks indefinitly, that Christ is
the Mediator of God and men: he adds not all: and if he had added it, the
same restraint should take place, whereof was spoken before. For it is the part
of a Mediator, Ambrose.
(as Ambrose observes in his exposition upon the 1. of Timothy) to be an
vmpire between him who has sinned, and him against whom the sin is committed,
that this party may pardon, and that man may hereafter abide in the faith of
God: which thing certainly Christ did not take upon him for the reprobate
world, for whom he vouchsafed no not so much as to pray unto the father, Ioh.
17. Of which place also Cyrill discoursing, Cyril. in Ioh. lib. 11. cap. 19.
plainly testifies, that Christ is the Mediator and high Priest not of the
world but of his own, and that unto them alone is attributed rightly the
benefit of the Mediator.

But see the man's wit. Huber. these. ^3.
By the word (God) is understood doubtless whatsoever is in God: therefore also
by men, ought to be meant whatsoever is borne of Adam. I deny the consequence:
they be only loose broomes, and cords made of sand, hanging no more together,
then if I should say: God has made a covenant with man of grace and eternal
life: therefore as by the word (God) is meant whatsoever belongs to God,
therefore by men also ought to be meant all men that be, or shall be every
where, and so al shall be eternally saved. By this kind of reasoning, or
rather trifling, many things most absurd may be gathered. Between God and the
seed of Abraham there was a covenant of Circumcision. Now if a man understood
it of whatsoever seed Abraham should have, because by the word God, may be
meant whatsoever belongs to God, as well women as men should have been
circumcised in Israel. What is more foolish? But what shall we say to that
which follows, 1. Tim. 2.
Who gave himself a ransom for all? The answer is plain by the things that
have been spoken before. For he truly gave himself a price of redemption
sufficient for all, none excepted at all of the whole universality of men: but
because the unbelievers do not apply redemption to themselves, the wrath of
God abides on them. Note how Christ may be said to give himself a price for
all.
Also, he gave himself the price of reconciliation for all that belong to the
universality of the elect, and to his own body. Again, for all indefinitly,
that is, for whomsoever Jews and Gentiles, high and low, masters and servants,
as it has been often already said. Unto which opinion also Theophilact
inclines.

The ^. place of the adversary examined, out of 2. Cor. 5.15, 16, 17.
Another place is 2. Cor. 5.15. If one died for all, surely all are dead: and he
died for all, that they which live, should hereafter not live to themselves,
but to him who died for them and rose again. Therefore we hereafter know no
man after the flesh. If we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now know we
him so no more. Therefore if any man be in Christ, let him be a new creature.
Old things are passed, behold all things are become new. Here it is twice said,
that Christ died for all. Well? who denies it? we say so too: but the doubt is
of the sense. Our adversary says, that Christ effectually died for all, so
that the heavenly father in very deed has received into grace all mankind,
and every one is passed from death to life, from sin to righteousness, from
oldnes to newnes: but Paul says not so: nay he manifestly impugneth the words
of Paul. For in the words following, he defines reconciliation by this, that
God does not impute sins, and, that we be made the righteousness of God in
Christ. And this is done by faith. For, that sins be not imputed, Romans 4.5.
etc.
and that faith is imputed for righteousness, Paul uses for one and the same
thing, neither will he have any other righteousness of God to be meant, but that
which is by the faith of Jesus Christ in all, Romans 3.2^.
and upon all that believe, and not upon all simply, whether they believe or
not.

What means that saying of the ministers of reconciliation in this very
chapter, does it not euince the same thing? We being ambassadors in the name of
Christ, Acts 3.29.
do pray you in his steed, that ye would be reconciled to God. Which what
other thing is it, then, repent and turn ye, that your sins may be done
away, and so ye shall in deed be partakers of the purchased reconciliation?
Further, it is new and unheard of, Huber. these. 90.
that every man is made a new creature through Christ: seeing the Apostle
writes so expresselie, If any man be in Christ, (that is, has admitted the
faith of Christ, and believes in him, as Hierome, Theophylacte, and other
ancient writers observe) he is a new creature. And Augustine says: Contr.
faust. lib. 11. cap. 8.
Therefore every new creature, that is, the renewed people by faith in Christ,
has now cause to hope in him. Therefore such as are, and remain without
Christ, neither are, nor ever were new creatures: and whereas Paul says, We
know no man hence forth after the flesh: the meaning is not, that every one is
renewed by the benefit of Christ, as the adversary wresteth the saying: but
this he means, that all not regenerate be to him, as though they were not yet
borne, that he respects or praises no carnal thing in any man, but
approves him, who is made a new creature by the faith of Christ, that he may
live henceforth to him, and not to the world. Augustine and Theophylacte
restrain that word (no man) to the believers, in sense somewhat diverse from
that we now spoke of. Hereof it is manifest, that the opinion of the universal
redemption and renewing of all, believers and unbelievers, is clean contrary
to the words of the Apostle.

Go to then, thou will say; How says he that Christ died for all? I answer,
because the benefit of Christ is sufficient of it self to save all, although
it have effect in those only, who cleave unto Christ as members unto the head
by the holy Ghost. August. Theophylact.
Augustine in the place before cited, and Theophylact in his comment.
respecting efficiencie, restrain the general term according to the custom
of the scripture unto the faithful, for even they alone are dead to sin, and
live to Christ, who died and rose for them. And Augustine brings the place,
Ephesians. 2. Confirming this opinion, where the Apostle says: When we were dead
because of sins, he has quickened us together with Christ, by whose grace ye
are saved, and has raised us, and placed us together in heaven, that he might
show in the ages to come, the exceeding riches of his grace toward us: for ye
are saved by grace through faith, and ye are the work of God created in Christ
Jesus unto good works.

The 3. place. Romans 8.31, 32.
Thirdly, the place Romans 8. is objected: If God be for us, who can be against
us? Who spared not his own son, but gave him for us all, etc. But here
nothing is proved concerning the generality of men simply, but of the
universality of the faithful and elect, seeing the general term All, is
restrained unto such; as when the same Apostle writes of Abraham, that he is
the father of us all, Romans 4. Gal. 4.
and of that high Jerusalem, that it is the mother of us all, verily he would
not have it understood of all men, but of all the faithful. The same
restraint is here, for us all: and many things concur, if we consider what
goes before, and what follows, which most plainly confirm this opinion.
Certainly these are the words of believers, and such as insult over the world,
which they overcome by faith: If God be for us, who can be against us? How
shall he not bestow upon us all things, who has not spared his own son for
us? Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? In all things we are more
then conquerors through him that loved us. Again, Who shall lay any thing to
the charge of Gods elect? August.
It is God, who justifies. Hereupon Augustine de correp, and great. cap. 7.
writes, that this is a saying concerning the kingdom of the elect: If God be
with us, who can be against us? and the rest that follow. But it is objected,
that Paul speaks to all, to whom he wrote his epistle, among whom there were
some not elected, but to be cut off with the unbelievers. That is likely to be
true, but it is meet, and right according to the nature of charity, that Paul
should judge of all the sons of the Church at Rome and elsewhere, (so long as
the contrary did not appear) as of the beloved and elect of God, as he
witnesses of himself, Phil. 1.7 and 1 Thessalonians. 1.4. The sayings even now cited
are examples thereof, Gal. 4.26. Romans 4.16. and 8.18.

Fourthly it is said, Hebr. 2.8, The 4. place of adversary. Hebr. 2.8. to 17.
9 etc. Thou have put all things in subjection under his feet. And in that he
put all things under him he omitted nothing that is not subject unto him. But
now as yet we see not all things subject unto him, but we see Jesus crowned
with glory and honor, who was made for a little while inferior to the Angels
for the suffering of death, that by the benefit of God he might taste of death
for all. For it was meet that he, (for whom are all these things, and by whom
are all things,) should by bringing many sons unto glory, consecrate the
prince of their salvation thorough afflictions. For both he that sanctifies,
and they that are sanctified, are all of one. For which cause he was not
ashamed to call them brethren: saying, I will declare thy name unto my
brethren: in the midst of the Church will I sing praise unto thee. And
again, I will trust in him. And again, Behold I and the children, whom God
has given me. Because therefore the children are partakers of flesh and blood,
he also was made partaker of the same, that by death he might abolish him who
had the power of death, that is, the devil, and might deliver as many as
thorough fear of death, were all their life subject unto bondage. For verily
he took not upon him the Angels, but the seed of Abraham. These. 168.
Out of these words Huberus frames certain arguments, which let the reader
judge and weigh with me. First thus he infers: All things are subject unto
Christ

I answer, that all things are subject unto Christ, 1. Cor. 15. ^. 26. and 55.
but not unto the communion of Salvation: otherwise the devil also with his
Angels, sin, death and hell it self should be received unto the fellowship
of salvation and grace, according to the mind of this disputer. But all things
are subject unto him, because he has rule over all, is Lord of all whether
they be believers or unbelievers; of these to death, of the other to life, as
Faber Stapulensis has well written upon this place. To that that he writes,
that the reprobates are subject unto Christ, as their Savior, that is, that
they might be saved, we will then consent, when he has taught, that al
things are subject unto Christ for salvation, even sheep and oxen and the very
devils. Truly all things are subject unto Christ the Savior; Matthew. 28.
but not as to a Savior to save them, but as to him who has received all
power in heaven and earth.

that he that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified are said to be all of
one, that is, partakers of one and the same nature: whereof he infers, that
Christ suffered (understand always effectually) for the whole nature of
mankind, and as many as are partakers of the same. But here there is no
consequence at all. And he boldly writes, that this is so clear, as nothing
can be more clear. Trifles. For the Apostle says not, that Christ
sanctifies all who are partakers with him of the same humane nature: neither
can this be gathered of his words, unless a man altogether unskillful of
Logic, should think that that affirmative, he that sanctifies and they that
are sanctified, are all of one, may simply be converted. More rightly the
writer of the calling of the Gentiles, in the last book, first chapter, says:
Nature being evil and miserable in all men before reconciliation, is not made
righteous in all, and among such as should perish there is a difference made in
some part thereof, by him who came to seek and save that which was lost.

Christ has abolished him, who had the power of death, the devil. Ergo, by
dying he has pulled all and every one out of his power. I answer, that the
devil is destroyed by the death of Christ unto the faithful, Coloss. 1.13.
unto whom all the assault of Satan is in vain and of none effect, until the
God of peace do at length utterly tread him under their feet. Romans 16. Ioh. 3.
But the wrath of God abides upon the unbelievers, and consequently the power
of Satan, who is as a certain executioner of Gods wrath to punish. In the
mean while we confess with Leo, that the death of Christ is so rich in value,
that if the universality of captives should believe in Christ, no bands of
Satan could hold them. (...).
But thus the devil shall not be abolished, while his power remains over
very many. I answer, that it is a fallacy a dicto secundu^ quid, that is, from
a saying spoken in part. For as we rightly say, that Christ does abolish and
take away sins, that is, the works of the devil, by justifying and
governing his own (albeit in the mean while sin cease not to reign in
very many): so the devil is worthily said to be abolished by the death of
Christ, Ephesians. 2.2. 2. Tim. 2.26.
although his power continues toward the children of disobedience. Let other
places be compared, wherein the Greek word is extant, as 1. Corint. 1.28.
Romans 6.6. and 2. Tim. 1.10.

Fourthly, they be the express words of the Apostle: That To this we answer:
if this saying be meant of the efficacy of Christ's death, the universal
particle does not comprehend all men and every one: but all who are sanctified,
as here and somewhat after the Apostle himself declares. For when he had made
mention of death which he tasted for all, straightwaies he annexeth a
declaration of the sons of God, as it were painting out a certain company
or army of them, before whom (being to be brought from the kingdom of that
hellish Pharao into the true land of promise, and the glory of the heavenly
kingdom) goes cheerfully that first begotten son of God, the prince and
author of their salvation, who died for them all and rose again, and being
crowned with glory and honor, carries before them his cross as it were for a
standard, and prepares and fortifieth the way for the^. And a little after:
They that are sanctified, (says he) and he that sanctifies, are all of one.
Where by those that are sanctified, he notes such as are appointed to the
salvation of their souls, and must be brought unto glory, as he had said
before. In these surely the efficacy of Christ's death is extant, and not in
those who are not sanctified: as after also in the 10. chapter he says, that
Christ by one offering has made perfect for ever them that are sanctified. And
these be they of whom Christ himself speaks, Ioh. 17. Father I sanctify,
that is, offer my self for the^, that they may be also sanctified through the
truth: to wit, they who are given to the son by the father, and are his
people, as the Apostle also says, verse. 17. of this chapter to the Hebrews:
Christ was in all things made like to his brethren, that he might be merciful,
and a faithful high Priest in the things of GOD, to satisfy for the sins of
the people.

And as for that which is mentioned of deliverance from bondage and the horror
of death by the death of Christ, we may find this effect also in the godly,
who being armed against corporal and spiritual death, Ioh. 5.24.
with the death of Christ as with a remedy against all evil, have passed from
death to life. And so Brentius himself in Expli. Catech. expresses this
saying, page 164. Christ (says he) has abolished death by his death, not,
that we should not die bodily, but that the bodily death should not be the
destruction of him who believes in Christ: for he is preserved in death to
eternal life. Albeit as touching this later member, we are to know, that the
text may be indefinitly read, as the old translation has it, and after that
Luther in the Dutch: that he might deliver them, who through fear of death
were all their life subject to bondage. For the Grecians, as Stephanus in his
Thesaurus warns, do take (...) often for (...), that is, as many, as for
who. And thus much of this kind of testimonies, which say, that Christ our
Lord died for all, with the answers also added to the reasons gathered out of
the circumstances of those testimonies. Such places follow, wherein the fruit
of Christ's death and passion seems to be extended to all without exception.

CHAP. IIII.
HEre first the words of the Apostle are objected comparing the fall of Adam
and the redemption by Christ together, Romans 5.18. where among other things he
writes, Huber. these. 48.
The first place of the adversary out of Romans 5.18. alleged to prove that
the fruit of Christ's death belongs to all.
that as by one offense guiltines came upon all men to condemnation: so by one
justification the benefit of Christ redoundeth unto all men to the
justification of life. Both there is all men, and here also all: therefore as
many as perished in Adam, are justified by Christ. Neither is it any matter,
say they, that it follows straightway, that many are made righteous by the
obedience of one: for by many is not understood some only, but all, because in
like manner it is said, that in Adam many are made sinners. I answer: The
answer twofold.
They do not plainly prove by this testimony the thing that they would, though
this were granted (as we with Augustine do willingly grant it) that those
many ought to be taken for all. For the answer is twofold. First Augustine
very often entreating of these words, August. de not. and great. cap. 40.
Augustine.
contra Iulianum lib. 6. cap. 12. De peccatorum meritis lib. 1. cap. 28. Epist.
57. In Enchir. cap. 51.

Further, in that he says, all and all, it appertains unto in Comment. and
among the Schoolmen Thomas Aquinas Exposit. ad Romanos. Hierome. Thomas Aq.
Whom if the disputers at Tubinge little regard, let them beware, least they
reprove their friend and College Heerbrand of a false exposition. For so he
Disput. de iustific. these. 148. expounding the antithesis of the first and
second Adam, says: Both have merited something for their own. All taken not
generally, but for the multitude of both sides, that is, of Adam and Christ.
Adam, sin and death for such as are borne of him. Christ, righteousness and
life for those that believe in him. And the grace of Christ has abounded above
sin, because Christ has obtained for us the forgiveness not of one sin only,
but of all together, as the words of the Apostle testify. These things he,
godly and soundly. But it is most false, and far from the mind of Paul,
that, to whomsoever sin is ascribed, to them also righteousness should be
imputed by the Apostle. For the Apostle speaks expressly not of any
righteousness, which afterward again may be made ineffectuall, and that such
as have obtained it, may nevertheless after be damned forever: but he
entreats of that righteousness, which whosoever have, shall reign for ever.
For he says: If by one offense death reigned through one, much more they, that
receive that exceeding grace and gift of righteousness, shall reign in life
through one. Whereupon also he calls it the justification of life. But not
all as many as died in Adam, shall reign in an heavenly life. Ergo, neither
all simply do receive the gift of righteousness through Christ. This Hierome
weighed, saying: When he says all are justified, he speaks not generally,
but means the multitude of each side. Otherwise if all men be found justified
in Christ, as in Adam they are condemned, there shall be none beside to be
punished.



Sin brought forth death: Grace, righteousness and life: How grace abounds
above sin.
then to quicken and save one: seeing no not all men gathered in one, could
effect this, but the other, the offense of Adam only, could bring to pass.

In Adam all of us are wrapped unto condemnation by Augustine.
says August. de peccat. merit. lib. 1. cap. 15. And how mighty is this gift,
which innumerable sins cannot withstand? And this the Apostle specially
respects, commending the abundance of grace above sin. For he says: Not as
the offense, so is also the free gift of God: for guiltines entered in upon one
offense unto condemnation, but the gift that God bestows, is given upon many
offenses to justification. And after another manner declaring the abundance of
grace, he straightway adds: For if by one offense death reigned through one,
much more they, who receive that exceeding grace and gift of righteousness, shall
reign in life by one Jesus Christ. As if he should say, if sin be so
effectual to death, how much more grace to life, nay to a kingdom in an
heavenly life? Which comparison truly is weakened, and grace is now overcome of
sin, if it be a certain thing, that they also have received that exceeding
grace and gift of righteousness, who shall be with the devils for ever
tormented. In these things therefore the largenes of the grace of Christ, and
his dominion is properly seen, and not in the comparison according to number,
of those who perish, and who are saved.

To these it may be added, that it falls out not through

The 2. place of the adversary out of 1. Cor. 15 21, 22.
A like place is brought out of 1. Corin. 15.21.22. By man came death, and by
man came the resurrection of the dead: because as in Adam all die, so in Christ
all shall be made alive. Therefore all, none excepted, are redeemed and once
saved by the death of Christ.

I answer, that this argument is easily dissolved, and has not so much as a
show of truth: because Paul does not speak of that quickening which is already
made in the cross of Christ, but of that which shall be at the last day. And
that quickening is meant, according to sound interpreters, either of the common
resurrection of some to life, and of others to condemnation: or else (which is
better liked of) of the blessedness and glory of the godly. If the first sense
be allowed, no argument can thence be drawn for the universal redemption and
salvation of all men. If the later, it is certain, that that quickening shall
not be of all men simply, but of all the elect only. August. ep. 28.
Augustine understands quickening in that place in the later sense, and
shows that therefore it is said both there all and here all, because as all
who die, die not but in Adam, so all who shall be quickened, shall not be
quickened but in Christ. Ambrose.
Ambrose in Comment. refers that word all unto the universality of the
elect. As death (says he) held all who came of Adam, so also Christ purchased
life for all, who be of his body. To whom also Hierome subscribeth in the
exposition of this place. Yea this is apparently the declaration of Paul
himself, who when he had said, that all shall be quickened in Christ,
immediately added these words: but every one in his own order: the first fruits
is Christ, then such as are Christ's at his coming. Therefore he speaks of
the quickening of all those that belong to Christ.

The 3. place of the adversary Ephesians. 1.10.
A third place is alleged out of the first chapter to the Ephesians, where it
is read: that it was the good purpose of the father to renew, or to restore all
things in Christ, both which are in heaven and which are in earth. Which very
sentence Paul repeateth and more fully urges to the Colos. chap. 1.19.20.
saying: Colos. 1.19, 20.
This was the good pleasure of the father, that in Christ all fulness should
dwell, and that he might reconcile to himself all things in heaven and earth,
making peace by that blood of his cross. And the Apostle applying that
general doctrine to the Colossians, who had now admitted the faith of Christ,
he further says: Verse. 21. to 25.
Therefore you being in times past strangers and enemies, having your minds
set on evil works, has he now reconciled in that body of his flesh, through
death, that he might present you holy and blameles and without fault before
himself: if ye continue grounded and rooted in faith and be not moved from the
hope of the Gospel, (which ye have heard) which has been preached unto every
creature under heaven: whereof I Paul am a minister, rejoicing now of those
things which I suffer for you, and fulfilling likewise the remnants of the
afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his body, which is the Church. The
adversary urges the general note, all things: because all things are
reconciled and restored, that there is nothing at all omitted among men, which
is not reconciled and restored by the death of Christ. But he cutteth his
throat with his own sword. For if we must stick to universality without
any restraint, why does he restrain the general note to mankind alone, and
expounds all things, that is, all men? Before those words of the
reconciliation of all, went that saying: All things which are in heaven and
earth were made by Christ; and all things consist in him; and that he was
before all things: and has the rule over all things. Why does he now go from
that universality of all things repeated so often in so few words, and
expounds it of the humane nature alone, that all things are said to be
reconciled by Christ? Does he confess at the length that the general particle
does now and then require a limitation according to the circumstance of the
place and matter, whereof is entreated?

But as touching the sense of this place, of the restoring and reconciliation
of all things by Christ, many men have spoken diverse things of this matter: yet
none of the old interpreters, that I know, took the words of the Apostle in
that sense, wherein they are produced by the adversary. But three expositions
of any moment are brought forth, to omit other of less account. The first is,
that the whole creature simply needed the remedy of the death of Christ: men
truly, that sin and death being destroyed, they might obtain through faith
everlasting salvation: and Angels, that by the repayring of men, and the
conjunction of earthly things with heavenly, they may fully rejoice: lastly,
the Elements and the visible creature for the delivery of it self from
destruction and corruption: Romans 8.
for the very creature it self also (as Paul witnesses) shall be freed from
the bondage of corruption, into the liberty of the glory of the sons of
God. This exposition is Theodorites in Comment. ad Ephesians. 1. Col. 1. and Heb. 2.

Other expound it of Angels and men. Hereupon August. Ench ad Laur. c. 62. In
Christ (says he) the things in heaven are restored, when the full of Angels is
recompensed out of me^. And the things in earth are repaired, when men
themselves, who were predestined unto eternal life, are renewed from their old
corruption. And in the same place expounding the words to the Colos. 1. How
(says he) are heavenly things pacified, but in us, that is, in agreeing with
us? For earthly things were separated from heavenly for the contrariety of
life, as Hierome has noted upon that place.

Thirdly, by those things which are in heaven other understand the souls of
the Saints, Heb. 12.23.
which be now in the kingdom of heaven: and by earthly things, the elect who
as yet are pilgrims in the banishment of this present life, as Anselme
expounds in so many words. Rightly truly. For Paul says not that peace was
made between heavenly and earthly things, between Angels and men: but that
God had reconciled to himself, both the things which are in heaven, and which
are in earth. And that so it ought to be construed, the Greek text does
prove, albeit others construe it with the verb that is translated, making
peace. Further, the application which is added, (Therefore us truly has he now
reconciled, who were in times past strangers and enemies) does sufficiently
declare, that the propriety of reconciliatio^ belongs to the faithful: and
that the unbelievers, as long as they be such are void of reconciliation, and
enemies of God.

But the adversary, The 4 place. Colos. 1.23.
that he may leave no stone (as they say) unmoved, would feign establish his
opinion of the universality of reconciliation by this also, These. 101.
that Paul exhorts all the Colossians to continue stable in the hope of the
Gospel, and so signifies, that they also are reconciled, who fall away or may
fall away from hope and faith. I answer: seeing we are to judge charitably of
others, such are counted and reckoned for faithful and elect, and therefore
reconciled and heirs of righteousness and eternal life, whosoever profess
with us the faith of Christ: but then they be truly that, which they are
called, if they continue in that, for which they are so called. But if they
have not perseverance, they are not truly so called, as Augustine writes de
Correp. and great. cap. 9. But of this more at large afterward in the arguments
of the second rank or order.

The adversary also warns us, to mark well in the words of the Apostle ad
Col. 1. that he not only said, that the Gospel was preached to all the
Colossians, but the hope of the Gospel. And yet it is in the text, neither be
ye moved away from the hope of the Gospel, which ye have heard. Therefore it
is a marvelous attention of the man, who bids us mark here that which is not
found at all in the text, neither if it were found, could make any thing for
the matter. Heb. 2.2. Luke 11.28. Hieron. in comment.
For the hope of the Gospel pertains not to the hearers, but to the
believers: and as Hierome says: they that live contrary to the Gospel, cannot
expect the hope of the Gospel. That thing rather ought here to be marked,
that Paul shows that the Colossians are reconciled to God no otherwise, but
as men already converted and believing. You which in times past (says he)
were strangers, has he now reconciled. For in these words there is a manifest
contrariety of their double state, to wit, of faith and infidelity. Before
being strangers and enemies, now they were reconciled in that body of the
flesh of Christ. Where then is that general reconciliation even of those that
believe not, nor ever will believe?

In the Conference at Mompelgart is also cited the place to the Romans chap. 11.
God has shut up all under unbelief, The 5. place of the adversary. Romans
11.32.
that he might have mercy upon all. But the speech there is of two people,
Jews and Gentiles, whom striving together it pleases God by course to bring
unto faith: to wit, that as the stubbornnes of the Jews gave occasion of the
conversion of the Gentiles: so the Jews afterward provoked with emulation of
the mercy bestowed upon the Gentiles, will themselves also believe in Christ,
and so all shall be partakers of Gods mercy, that is, both the people of the
Jews and Gentiles. We cannot refer this to particular persons in both
people, seeing it is without all doubt, that faith and repentance, which Paul
notes out here under the word mercy, belongs not to all and every one.

The 6. place. Ioh. 17.2.
One place of this order remains, Ioh. 17. Thou have (says Christ) given me
power over all flesh, that whatsoever thou have given me, These. 161.
I may give unto them eternal life. Hence Huberus infers, that there is
nothing more certain, then that God is reconciled to al. Nay, nothing more
uncertain. Let a syllogism be made, and the false conclusion will
straightway appear. For the mayor is false taken universally, as it ought to
be taken: that, over whomsoever Christ has power given him, they are
reconciled to God. For he has power given him over oxen, asses, and all
creatures in heaven and earth, even over the devils also. But what if we stay
only in mankind? after this sort: What men soever are given of the father to
Christ, they be therefore given, that he might give them eternal life. Now all
men are given of the father to Christ, because he has given him power over all
flesh, to wit humane: Therefore al men are therefore given unto him, that he
might give them eternal life. I deny the minor, in that sense as here and
elsewhere often that manner of speech is taken, to be given to Christ. For
proof I answer, it is another thing, that power is said to be given over al
flesh to Christ, than that al men are given to him. Which things because they
be confounded of this disputer, let us hear Augustine in Ioh. tract. 111.
Augustine.
Who are they, whom he says are given him of his father? are they not they,
of whom elsewhere it is said: No man comes unto me, unless the father who
sent me, draw him? They are then those, whom he has received of the father,
who^ he also chose out of the world, that now they may not be of the world: and
yet they are also the world, believing and knowing that Christ was sent of God
the father. For so be says, Thou have given him power over all flesh, that is
all men, that all that thou have given him, he might give unto them eternal
life. Where he shows, that he has received power over all men, to deliver
whom he will, and condemn whom he will: but that those are given unto him, to
all whom he may give eternal life. For so he says, that all that thou have
given him, he may give unto them eternal life. Therefore they are not given
unto him, to whom he will not give eternal life, although he has power over
them also, who has power given him over all flesh. These things, says he,
being the best approved of the old writers. And surely the words of the text
are so plain, that it is a manifest error and more then an error, that all are
indifferently given to Christ. For the truth says: I have made known thy name
unto the men that thou gave me out of the world. I pray for them, I pray not
for the world, Ioh. 17.
but for them whom thou have given me. Holy father, save them whom thou have
given me, that they may be one as we are. Father I will that they whom thou
have given me, may be with me where I am. Whatsoever the father gives me
shall come unto me: and this is the will of him that sent me, that whatsoever
he has given me, I should lose nothing but should raise it up at the last day.
Who, but one that is willingly blind, does not see here, that the Lord by that
speech would distinguish his own, from such as be not his, and those that
shall be saved, from such as shall be damned? Neither is that any hinderance to
this, which is objected of the son of perdition: Whom thou have given me I
have kept, and none of them is lost, but that lost son, that the Scripture
may be fulfilled. For that is rightly taken of the election unto the
Apostleship, and so also Augustine shows tract. 106. Therefore here the
phrase is taken in another sense, as there is also a third sense found, and
that most general: All things are given to the son of the father. Ioh. 3.
Matthew. 11.

CHAP. V. An examination of places wherein there is mention made of the World
in this matter.
I Proceed to testimonies wherein mention is made of the World in the
Scriptures in the matter of salvation: which likewise by the adversaries are
drawn for the confirmation of the error of the universality of grace, in
regard of particular persons in mankind. Ioh. 3. and 1. and 6. and 3. and 12.
2. Cor. 5.19.
Such as these be: So God loved the world. Behold the lamb of God that takes
away the sins of the world. The bread which I will give is my flesh, which I
will give for the life of the world. I came not to condemn the world, but that
I might save it. Ioh. 4.42. and 1. Ioh. 4. 1. Ioh. 2.2.
And, God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself. He is also called the
Savior of the world, and the propitiation for the sins of the whole world.
In these and such like places, wheresoever the world is spoken of, whereupon
God has bestowed his grace, they maintain that the word cannot otherwise be
taken, then indifferently for all men believers and unbelievers. For of many
significations of the World, they acknowledge only three chief, wherein they
say the rest may easily be included: as, that the word World is taken for the
frame and universal compass of heaven and earth: then for the common
multitude of all men good and bad: lastly, for that part of men which
comprehends the reprobates and unbelievers. Of these significations the first
and the third agree not with those places. It remains then that all those
places be taken in the second signification.

I answer, that the reckoning was insufficient in the mayor. For as the world
in the holy Scriptures is taken for the reprobates and unbelievers only: so
also it is often used for the elect and faithful dispersed throughout the
whole world. There be many plain testimonies to prove this. Ioh. 14.31. he
joins both those significations together in those words of Christ: The prince
of this world comes and has nothing in me: but that the world may know that
I love the father, and that I do as the father has commanded, rise let us go
hence. Of this world also is that, Ioh. 17.21. that the world may know that
thou have sent me. Which is that world, which shall know Christ and believe in
him, but that which is discerned from the world of reprobates? For of these
about the end of the same chapter he speaks: Righteous father, Verse. 25.
the world does not know thee, but I know thee, and these have known that thou
have sent me, and I have manifested thy name unto them, and will manifest it:
to wit, unto them of whom he had spoken, that the world may believe that I am
sent of thee. So Romans 4. the promise is said to be made to Abraham, that he
should be the heir of the world, that is, the father of all believers
circumcised and uncircumcised, as Paul himself declares. And chap. 11. he
says, that the fall of the Jews is the riches of the world, and the casting
away of them, the reconciliation of the world, that is, of the Gentiles, to
whom he says, salvation happened by the ruin of the Jews, that they might
be provoked to follow them. Where we see the word world also restrained for
them that appertain unto that fulness of the Gentiles, which is appointed to
come into the room of ye Jews. Therefore it is idle and impudent wrangling to
say: Huber. these. 143
where be we able to find and plainly show in the whole Scripture, that the
world is taken only for a certain kind of men, whom God has chosen to be
saved?

But go to, let us annexe to these the testimonies of Augustine, the very
chief of the old Divines, Augustine.
and most practiced in such questions against the Pelagians. He, tract. in Ioh.
110. upon that saying: that the world may believe, The word world attributed
sometime to the reprobates only, sometime to the elect, and faithful only.
writes after this sort: Behold he that said, I pray not for the world, does
pray for the world, that it may believe, because there is a world, whereof is
written: that we may not be condemned with the world. For this world he
prays not, for he knows whereto it is predestined. And there is a world,
whereof it is written: The son of man came not to condemn the world, but
that the world by him may be saved. Whereupon the Apostle also says: God was
in Christ reconciling the world to himself: for this world he prays, saying:
That the world may believe that thou have sent me. The same man in the next
tract says: Who are those whom he says are given him of his father? They be
those whom he received of the father, and whom he himself chose out of the
world that they might not be of the world: and yet they themselves are the
believing and knowing world, that Christ was sent of God the father, that so
the world may be delivered from the world, and that the world which is
reconciled to God, may not be damned with the world that is enemy to God. And
about the end of the same Tract upon that saying: The world does not know thee,
he says, The world surely which is predestined to damnation, by desert does
not know: but the world which he reconcileth to himself through Christ, does
know not of desert but of grace. Again, tract. 53. Evil men are called the
world, because they be scattered through the whole earth: and good men also
are called the world, because they likewise be dispersed through the whole
earth. Whereupon the Apostle says: God was in Christ reconciling the world to
himself. And in this sense in the same place he expounds the saying: Now is
the judgment of this world, to wit, the judgment not of damnation, but of
separation, whereby it shall come to pass, that far and wide sins shall be
pardoned, and thousand thousands shall be delivered through faith from the
power and rule of the devil, and reconciled unto God.

Ambrose.
Likewise Ambrose says in Psalm. 118. sermon. 12. The whole world is truly in the
Church, wherein there is not the Jew only, nor Grecian, Barbarian, Scythian,
bond or free, but we are all one in Christ Jesus. By these sayings it appears
that it is a very rotten foundation, that the word (world) wheresoever it is
expressed in the Scripture in the matter of grace, does note out an
universality of all mankind, none at all excepted.

The first place. Ioh. 3. World taken for mankind indefinitly.
Now let us consider the places by themselves severally. As touching the words,
Ioh. 3.16. So God loved the world, we say that by the name of world, mankind
indefinitly is meant, as Christ says, Ioh. 17. I pray not for the world, that
is, for the reprobates, but only for them whom the father gave unto him, and
should believe in him. Rom, 8.
Paul also to the Romans declares, that the love of God in Christ is so
great, that the beloved of God are made unconquerable, against things present,
and to come, and against all the temptations of the world: which thing
certainly cannot be spoken of all men. Therefore that love belongs not to all,
albeit generally God hates nothing of those things he has made, as we have
seen before.

But go to, let us answer the contrary reasons, whereby they endeavor to
prove, that the word world, which is very doubtful in the Scripture, is here
necessarily taken for the whole mass of mankind, altogether say they, as it
is taken Romans 5. By one man sin came into the world, and death by sin. D.
Jacob Andreas Colloq. Mompel. appealeth unto the judgment and one consent of
all writers and interpreters old and new. Great rashness certainly, which to
suppress, I will produce one of many, even Rupertus Tuitiensis, who flourished
about 400. years ago. He in Comment. in Ioh. wherein he diligently uses to
follow Augustine, thus writes upon this present place: We take the world
surely which God loved, World, for the elect and faithful, before and since
Christ.
for mankind that is, quick and dead: dead truly, who expected through faith
Christ to come: alive, who either of Jews or Gentiles should believe in him.
For so he says without difference of Jew or Gentile universally, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have eternal life. In the
judgment of Augustine this exposition is confirmed by the sentence immediately
added of Christ, when he says: for God sent not his son into the world to
condemn the world, but that the world may be saved. It is the same world
doubtless which the father loved, and which Christ came to save. And that
world for whose salvation Christ came, Tract. 110.
as Augustine witnesses (as we cited before) be the elect and believers.
Hearken Huber, and cease to be angry, if this interpretation please us also:
or else if thou can disprove it, remember that thou must contend with reasons,
and not with railings, to find out the truth. But have ye any reason? D.
Iacobus brings for a reason, that Christ adds in the same place: This is
the judgment, Coll. Momp.
that light is come into the world, and the world loved darkness more then it.
Here the word world, says he, cannot be understood of the elect only, but
specially of those who are rejected and damned. But he negligently alleged
the text: for it has, men loved darkness. There is no mention of world. These.
119.
Huberus proof is nothing sounder. Christ (says he) divides the world into
two sorts: into such as receive, and such as withstand the light, or of
believers and unbelievers. Therefore to both sorts of men did God send his
son. I answer, the Antecedent is denied. Among men truly some believe,
others do not: some love the light, others hate it: but that Christ divides
that world, whereof he had said, (So God loved the world) into two kinds, it
cannot be proved out of the text. Thus it appears that there is no argument
here out of the word world. Further, albeit it should be granted, that by
world there, is meant al men, it would not yet follow, that Christ and his
benefits do therefore belong to all, whether they believe or not, seeing they
are expressly restrained unto the universality of the believers, while it is
added: that whosoever believes, should not perish, but have eternal life.
What can be more clear?

The 2. place. Ioh. 1.
As touching the place, Ioh. 1.29. Behold the lamb of God that takes away the
sin of the world: we willingly grant, that the sacrificing of this Lamb is
sufficient for all the sins of all men: but as touching the effect, Christ
takes away sins from such as confess them, and believe, as John himself
witnesses, 1. Epist. 1. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to
forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all iniquity. Again, If we
walk in light, as he is the light, we have fellowship with him, and the blood
of Christ purges us from all sin. He calls it sin in the singular
number, for any kind of iniquity. And where he says (of the world) he
draws the efficacy of this sacrifice indifferently unto the redemption of
Gentiles and Jews, least the Jews should think that the redeemer was sent to
them alone. Hereupon the Saints in that song of the Lamb do sing, Apoc. 5 9.
Thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every tribe
and language, people and nation, and have made us to our God kings and priests,
and we shall reign upon the earth.

As touching the words of Christ, Ioh. 6.51. The 3 place. Ioh. 6.
The bread which I will g^ue is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the
world: out of that whole Sermon it is cleerer than the noone day, that not
every one is made partaker in very deed of this spiritual and eternal life,
and also of that true heavenly bread, but such as by faith come unto him, and
eating his flesh and drinking his blood, are incorporated into him, as they
be, whom the father has given to the son. For the truth says: Verily I say
unto you, unless ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood,
ye shall have no life in you. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood,
has everlasting life. For my flesh is meat in deed. As the living father
has sent me, and I live by the father: so also he that eats me does live
by me. Than which words what can be spoken more clear, for the confirmation
of our opinion, to wit, that the effect of this sacrifice, whereby Christ
offered himself to the father, as a sweet smelling favor for the life of the
world, belongs not unto all without respect of faith or unbelief, but unto
them who are incorporated into Christ to be partakers of the spirit? Tract. 26.
For participation (says Augustine) whereby we eat him, is the cause that we
live through Christ. Neither can a man live by the spirit of Christ, unless he
be of his body, as my body lives by my spirit, and thy body by thine.

How is then Christ the life of the world? 2. Objections.
for he witnesses that he gives life unto the world, and that he will give
himself My father does give you true bread from heaven, and yet many of them
afterward went away from him. Therefore that bread of life belongs to al
alike, Hub. these. 125.
to backsliders, and continuers; to the saved, and the damned.

Romans 4.
as the Apostle writes of Abraham, that by promise he was made the hear of
the world, that is, the father of all the faithful: so that much more Christ
is rightly termed the life of the world, as far forth as he bestows
eternal life upon the sons of Abraham dispersed through the world. life of
the world, taking now the world for all men, who are, have been, and shall be,
as far forth as no one man of all mortal men can have life but by him albeit
notwithstanding not all in very deed are quickened. For there is not in any
other salvation or life, Acts 4.
neither is there any other name under heaven, which is given among men,
whereby we must be saved.

The father gives you heavenly bread: I answer that it may be expounded two
ways: He gives you that is, he offers you, (for Christ was in the midst of
them) it remains that you would receive it: or rather that the word (you) be
taken concerning the body of the people indefinitly, and not of every person
among the people, after such a like phrase altogether, and opposition in the
matter it self, Matthew 3. Luke 3.
as is in the saying of John Baptist: I truly baptize you with water: but there
comes one who is stronger then I, he shall baptize with the holy Ghost and
fire. Which thing John (as Luke says) spoke unto all, even to the Pharisees
and Saduces, as it is in the other Evangelist. Yet who here, but one that is
too too ignorant and impudent, will maintain by the word (you) that all were
baptized of Christ with the spirit and fire, as many as had heard that word
from John? But he that will simply understand it, the sense is plain, to wit,
that John, as a minister of the outward work, did baptize with water: but
Christ as the Lord did give the spirit. For the force of Baptism is of God
alone, and not of the minister, says Ambrose Epist. 217. So the sense of this
place is, that it belongs not to Moses, but to God to give that true bread
from heaven: that Moses as a servant in the house of God gave them Manna,
corporal food, and the figure of that spiritual, which God gives, and not
man. Whereupon it is also called by Christ the bread of God. Augustine also
gives this sense, and the words require it, and it is confirmed with that,
which in the same chapter Christ says: Labor for the meat which abides unto
eternal life, which the son of man will give unto you, to wit, if you shall
believe in me. For seeing this meat abides unto eternal life, it appertains
not unto the damned, who shall hunger and thirst for ever.

Touching the sayings: I came not to judge the world, The 4. and 5. places out
of Ioh. 3. and 12. 2. Cor. 5.19.
but to save it. Also, God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself,
it appears plainly by the testimonies of Augustine before alleged, that
they be rightly meant of the believers through the whole world. For, that
sins may not be imputed unto us, but that we may be made the righteousness
of God in Christ (as this reconciliation of the world is described of Paul) a
true faith in Christ is required: Romans 3. and 4. Ioh. 3.
but upon the unbelievers the wrath of God abides. So of that we say: Christ
is the Savior of the world, it does not follow, that all and every one in
mankind, whether they believe or not, are therefore redeemed from all sin and
condemnation, and made partakers of salvation in Christ: Matthew. 1.
but the Lord Jesus saves his people from their sins, that is, all who hope
in him. And because they be dispersed through the world, In what sense Christ
is the life, light, and savior of the world.
for this and other causes before declared, he is worthily termed as the life
of the world, so also the Savior of the world. As also he is called the light
of the world, yet all without difference are not pulled out of darkness by him.
In the mean while, because all believers in him have the light of eternal
life, and no man can attain to any light of grace but by him, this praise
rightly belongs unto him: A comparison of the Sun.
even as the visible Sun is the light of the world, and of right is said to
lighten the world every day, albeit in the mean while so many things in the
world are still without light, either because they be not capable of it, or
because abiding in darkness, they come not to the light that they may enjoy it.

The 6. place. 1. Ioh. 2.
The words out of John 1. Epist. chap. 2.2. as yet remain. Little children, if
any man sin, we have an advocate with the father, and he is the propitiation
for our sins, and not for ours only, These. 1^1.
but also of the whole world. Here Huberus is beyond measure puffed up, that
this place is notable and unanswerable. It is so altogether, but not in that
sense, for which he so stoutly strives. And he says, that if we can bring
one place out of the Scriptures, that Christ is a propitiation for some men
only, that is, for the believers, then he will assent unto us.

But the answer is twofold. If men like to understand the place of
Sufficiency, we willingly grant, that the blood of Christ is sufficient to
appease God for the sins of all men, so that there was no need of another
expiation or sacrifice for the cleansing and salvation of all, so that all
could and would apply to themselves by faith that satisfaction. And so of the
new writers Illyricus also, whom our adversaries use greatly to advance,
declares in his gloss. What if thou may see Jacob Andree himself Coll.
Mompel. page 514 and 546. to come to that point at the length? yet beside the
matter altogether: for he was to prove, that Christ not only sufficiently, but
also effectually has satisfied for the sins of al, none at all excepted.
This when he had taken in hand to prove by this present testimony, and was at
a set in the mire, (as the proverb is) he fled unto the vulgar saying of the
Schoolmen, that Christ died for the sins of all men sufficiently, although
not efficiently. Singular dexterity of a profound disputer doubtless.

This then being granted of the sufficiency and power of this propitiation, I
say according to the propounded distinction, that in very deed notwithstanding,
the blood of Christ does profit the faithful unto the appeasing of Gods wrath,
and not the unfaithful: as it is plainly written, Romans 3.24.25. We are
justified freely by the redemption made in Christ Jesus, whom God set forth to
be a propitiation through faith in his blood. And John himself, 1. Ioh. 1. If
we walk in light (says he) we have fellowship with God, and the blood of
Christ purges us from all sin. Apoc. 5.9.
After which sort also the Church out of every tribe and tongue is described of
him, as unto which the propriety of redemption by the blood of the Lamb
slain does appertain. Do thou not see Huber, that Christ effectiuely
(whereof the question is between us) is the propitiation of the believers, and
not of unbelievers?

And the words of John do well agree unto this universality of the believers:
He is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, (to wit who now
believe) but also for the sins of the whole world, that is, of the believers
now, and of such as shall believe hereafter in his name unto the end of the
world. As also Christ the high priest of our profession, (whose words John
seems to have followed of purpose) in his last most fervent prayer, Ioh. 17.
prayed his father not only for the believers then, but also for them who
afterward should believe, Tract. 110.
whom also (as we observed before out of Augustine) he in the same place
calls the world, when he says: that the world may believe that thou have
sent me.

And of this very world of believers out of all nations and of all times, that
is, The world of believers is the Church throughout the world.
of the Church throughout the whole world, Augustine expounds this very place
of John, Tract. 1. and Epist. 48. in these words: The whole world is set in
evil, because of the tares which are through the whole world. And Christ is
the propitiation of our sins, and not only of ours, but of the whole world,
because of the wheat which is through the whole world. And more fully, Tract.
87. in Ioh. The universal Church (says he) is most commonly called by the
name of the world: even as that is, God was in Christ reconciling the world to
himself. And that, The son of man came not to judge the world, but to save
the world. And John in his Epistle says: We have an Advocate with the father
Jesus Christ the just, and he is the propitiation of our sins: and not of
ours only, but of the whole world. The whole world therefore is the Church,
and the world of perdition does hate the world of redemption. These things
Augustine.

Cyrill also upon John, lib. 11. cap. 19. reconciling the words of Christ, I
pray not for the world, with the saying of John, writes after this sort: John
seems to differ from our Savior. For our Savior refuses here to pray for
the world but John affirms, that he is a propitiation and advocate not for
our sins only, but for the whole world. But S. John, because he was a Jew,
least the Lord should seem to be an advocate with his father for the Jews
only, and not also for other Gentiles, which being called, do obey,
necessarily added (for the whole world.) But the Lord Jesus separating his own
from such as are not his, says, for them only who keep my words and receive
my yoke, do I pray. For whose Mediator and high priest he is, to them only
he attributes worthily the benefit of mediation. These things Cyrill.

In like manner the author of the calling of the Gentiles, lib. 2. cap. 1.
expounds the saying of John no otherwise but of the fulness of the faithful,
whereof there is accounted a certain special universality, that out of the
whole world, the whole world seems to be delivered, and out of al men, all
men seem to be taken: and that according to the use of the Scriptures, naming
for a part of the earth, all the earth; and for a part of the world, all the
whole world; and for a part of men, all men, as plentifully the same man
shows lib. 1. cap. 3. Further, the Church of Smyrna in the Epistle of the
life of Polycarpus (which Eusebius recites) speaking of Christ says, Eusebius.
hist. eccl. lib. 4. c. 15.
that he suffered for the salvation of the whole world of them that are to be
saved. Coll. Momp. page 546.
Hereupon again the great rashness of Jacob Andreas appears, who boldly
affirms, that this is most certain and undoubted of, among all truly godly
and sincere teachers, that the words of John ought to be understood of all men,
none excepted. By these men which I have produced, being without controversy
godly and sincere teachers of the Church, it appears that it is most false.

But John set down the universal particle, of the whole world. As though that
world of good men had not his universality. Certainly the same Apostle feared
not to say, the whole world lies in evil, that is, 1. Ioh. 5.19.
because of the tares which are through the whole world. And in the Gospel
after John the Pharisees say: Ye see that we profit nothing, John 12.19.
behold the world goes after him. Where so old an interpreter as Nonnus the
Greek Paraphrast, and Luthers Dutch translation read with the universal
particle, the whole world follows him. Shall we say, as these men do, that
all men none excepted, followed Christ? What were more foolish? So Matthew. 8.34.
The whole city went out to meet Christ. And Luke 7.29. The whole people and
publicans justified God. The Kings of the whole world were gathered by unclean
spirits to fight. Apoc. 16.14. and 13. there, The whole earth followed the
beast. This usual kind of speaking in the Scriptures, interpreters commonly
do imitate. So Augustine Tract. 4. in Ioh. writes: that the whole world is
Christian, Mark this.
and the whole world is wicked because through the whole world there be
ungodly, and through the whole world there be godly. The same man in Psalm. 22.
upon those words: In the great Church will I confess unto thee: the great
Church is the whole world, and for this whole world, that is, for the Church
dispersed every where, he says that the blood of Christ was shed, and it was
wholly redeemed, and not only Aphrica, as the Donatists did shut up the Church
in a part of Aphrica.

I omit others, and return to the examples of the Scripture, adding this unto
the former, that in Luke 2. it is read, that there went out an edict from
Augustus Caesar, that the whole world should be taxed. Seeing here diverse
nations being associated through the author tie of the only Roman Empire,
have the name of the whole world; what marvel is it, that the fulness of the
Gentiles, being called unto the unity of the faith and the body of Christ,
does obtain the account of the whole world? De vocat. gent. lib. 2. cap. 6.
For Christian grace is not contented to have those limits that Rome had, but
it has already subdued many people unto the scepter of the cross of Christ,
whom Rome by his weapons brought not under subjection. Wherefore the universal
term nothing hurts the exposition before alleged: as neither does that
prejudice it, which Huber writes, These. 135.
of an argument from the general to the special, or from the special to
indiuiduaes or singulars. Certainly from the generality of the faithful,
Mark this.
the argument proceeds to thee and to me: that if any man sins and
believes in Christ, there is an atonement purchased for him through faith in
the blood of Christ And these things thus far of the testimonies, wherein
mention is made of the world in the matter of grace.

CHAP. VI. Answers unto the sayings of the Scripture touching the universality
of the preaching of the Gospel.
THere be also other places of the Scripture cited, which teach that the
Gospel belongs to all: as, that which Paul, Romans 16. testifies: that that
mystery was kept secret from al eternity, and was declared in his time to all
nations by the decree of the eternal God. And Colos. 1. of the same mystery
hid from the world and the former ages, he says: that it was then revealed by
God to his Saints, to whom he would make known, what are the riches of this
glory among the Gentiles. Of the same sort also is that which is alleged out
of Acts. 17. The times of this ignorance God regarded not, but now it is
preached to all men every where, that they repent. And to Tit. 2. The grace of
God which brings salvation to all men has appeared. Again Luke 24. Thus it
is written, and thus ought Christ to suffer, and that repentance and remission
of sins must be preached in his name among all nations. Such places as these
are brought, not so much to prove an universal redemption of all men, as many
as come of Adam: as to hurt, and with cauils to shift off the doctrine of Gods
predestination, which in many places is taught in the word of God, and so
fortified with evident testimonies, as that it may be pressed, it cannot be
oppressed. But of predestination we have purposed to speak in another place,
we will not here indiscreetly mingle things together. Yet three things I will
briefly give admonition of.

First, as I said, because the Gospel is preached to all, Three admonitions
worthy observation.
it can Luke 11.
But in whom the word of the Gospel is not mixed with faith, hearing does not
profit them, Heb. 4.
as is fully showed in the epistle to the Hebrews, by the example of the old
people.

Secondly, I say that it is foolish and false, The 2 admonition. Hub. these.
104. and 107.
which these men Colos. 1. Romans 16. Luke 24.
that the mystery of the Gospel had been already preached in his time among
al nations, and declared to every creature under heaven Also because Christ
commanded that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his
name among all nations. In these places they would have meant (by all nations)
every one in all nations (which is a very marvelous gloss.)

I answer, that by comparing of the like phrases, (All nations) is not taken
in Scripture for every one in all nations.
and by the thing it self, the falsehood of that gloss, as too gross and
intolerable, is easily confuted. We read 1. Paral. 14. the last verse, that
the fame of David went out into all the earth, and that the fear of him was
upon all people. And Psalm. 118. he there complains, that all nations
compassed him. Also we read, that all nations were subject to Nebuchadnezzar
to serve him, Iere. 27. verse. 7. and that his dominion was in every place, and
over all men and beasts, Dan. 2.38. As also those sayings are: Ye shall be
hated of all nations, Matthew. 10. Teach ye all nations and baptize them, Matthew.
28. He suffered all nations to walk in their own ways. Act. 14. And of Paul,
Romans 1.5. that the Apostleship was given unto him for the obedience of the
faith among all nations. In like manner of the whore of Babylon, Apoc. 18.3. and
23. that all nations have drunk of the wine of her fornication, and that all
nations were seduced with her witchcraft. What monstrous absurdities will
arise, if in these and such like places by all nations, should be understood
every one in all nations?

Very many nations long after the Apostles time, and in their time, never heard
of the Gospel.
that long after the Apostles times, there were innumerable nations, among whom
the Gospel was not as yet preached: much less, that while the Apostles lived,
it was preached to every one of all nations. Augustine witnesses Epist. 80.
that there were innumerable barberous nations in Aphrica: to say nothing of so
many other nations under heaven, lately converted to the faith of Christ. But
Paul says, that the Gospel in his time was preached to all nations and to
every creature under heaven. That is true, but in that kind of speaking,
wherein the former places in the holy Scriptures are uttered, and wherein all
Judea is said to go out unto John, and was baptized of him. As also Hierome
expounds the saying of Paul, that he taught all men in all wisdom, that is,
the Jews and Gentiles. For he were mad that would think, that the Apostle
taught the doctrine of the Gospel to every one every where.

But as for that, that the grace of God which brings salvation is said to
have shined to all men: it is very well expounded of Hierome in Comment. to be
said to all men, because no condition is excepted: neither is there any
difference of bond and free, Grecian, Barbarian, circumcised, uncircumcised:
but we are all one in Christ, and all of us are called unto the kingdom of
God, to be reconciled after we have sinned, not for our merits, but through the
grace of our Savior.

God never sent the preaching of the Gospel to all and every one every where.
Reasons.
And that it may also more appear, that God does not vouchsafe all and every
one the external preaching of the Gospel, what shall we say of so many
thousand children, who daily die and have died hitherto, before they had the
use of reason, or else at the least, before they heard any thing at all of the
grace of the Gospel? What? that among men grown and of judgment and
discretion there be innumerable in all ad Euodium Epist. 99.

Further, if it were very true, that now in the time of grace, the gift of
hearing the Gospel were equally exhibited to every one among all nations: what
shall we say of the former ages, in the times of ignorance, wherein all nations
were suffered to walk in their own ways? Surely God left not himself
without witness among the Gentiles, Acts. 14.16.
by doing them good, and giving them from heaven rain and fruitful seasons,
filling men's hearts with food and gladness, which all, continually preached
the clemency of the free giver. Notwithstanding the Apostle affirms, that
the mystery, Colos. 1. Romans 16.
whereof we speak, was kept secret in the ages and generations that are past.
And of old the mercy of the Lord, which is not wanting in any generation, was
set out unto all nations by the testimonies of nature: but the doctrine of the
Law and Prophets directed none but the house of Jacob, and some few other who
labored to have part in the calling of the Gentiles, which should come at the
length.

The third thing that seems worthy of consideration here, is this, The 3.
admonition.

The word is preached alike, but all profit not thereby, and they that do,
have not the like measure of grace. Ioh. 5.


that albeit by the ministers of the word and of the grace of God, the one
truth and the same grace is preached to all, and the same exhortation is used:
yet the like fruit follows not in all. For some profit by the hearing of the
Gospel, others do not, nay they be hardened: and all that profit, attain not
to the same measure of increase. Whence comes so great unlikeness, but from
the unequal grace of the caller? No man comes unto me, (says the Lord)
unless the father draw him. Every one that has heard and learned of the father,
comes to me. And if all that have heard and learned of the father, The Lord
must be our teacher, or else we cannot learn.
come, we gather with Augustine, de praedest. sanct. cap. 8. that every one
truly who does not come, has neither heard nor learned of the father. For this
school (as the same man notably says) is far off from the senses of the
flesh, wherein the father is heard and teaches, that men may come to the
son. There is also the son himself, because he is his word, through which
he so teaches, neither deals he with the ear of the flesh, but of the heart.

1. Cor. 3. He only must give increase, or else all is in vain.
But we hear also the Apostle saying: We are Gods husbandry, and Gods
building. And, Paul planteth, Apollo waters: but neither he that planteth,
nor he that waters, is any thing, but God who gives the increase. From him
is the beginning, the progress, and the accomplishment of every good work,
Phil. 1. and 2. He must begin to build us, and he must finish the work.
as the Apostle says: He that has begun in you this good work, will make it
perfect unto the day of Christ Jesus. And again, It is God who works in you
to will and to do. And least peradventure a man should ask, why are these
special benefits of grace given to some, and denied to others: he adds in
the same place, Gods good pleasure is the cause that some have grace given
them, others have not.
that he does so of his good pleasure. To which sentence the words also Colos.
1. do manifestly give testimony, where Paul says: that the mystery kept
secret from all ages, is now revealed unto his Saints, to whom it pleased God
to make it known. As if he should say, that no not at this present is this
mystery made manifest to all and every one, but unto the Saints of God, that
is to the Apostles, and to such who by their means have believed. And least
thou should ask, why it has been, and is reueiled daily to his Saints, and
not to the rest, he adds straightwaies: to whom he pleased: as Theodorite and
Theophilact have well considered in the exposition of this place.

By all these things it is very plain, that the works and gifts of the divine
grace are never bestowed alike upon all, A threefold calling.
but differ very greatly. For we see a threefold calling. One general elect
are called, whereof it is said: Romans ^.
Whom he has predestined, them also he called, not verily with that calling,
(says Augustine, De perseu. sanct. lib. 1. cap. 16.) whereof it is said: Many
are called few are chosen: but with that, whereunto whosoever belong, they are
taught of God. Neither can any one say: I have believed, that so I may be
called, because the mercy of God preventing him, he is so called, that he
might believe: and none of these perishes. For whatsoever the father has
given me, (says the son) comes unto me, and I will lose none of them.

Of this variety of the grace and gifts of God, soundly and plenteously
entreats the author of the books of the calling of the Gentiles, whose words
among other are these, lib. 2. cap. 3. The height of the rich wisdom and
knowledge of God, (whose judgments are unsearchable, and his ways past
finding out) has always so tempered mercy and judgment, that by the most
secret will of his eternal counsel, he will not have the same and like
measure of his gifts to be in all throughout all generations, and among all
men. For he has after one manner benefited those, whom he thought meet to know
him by the testimonies of heaven and earth: and another way those, for whom he
would provide not only by the service of the elements, but also by the doctrine
of the Law, the oracles of the Prophets, the signs of miracles, and the works
of the Angels. But what should be the cause, or the reasons of these
differences under the same grace, while the Scripture is silent, who shall
speak, says he? Let men with patience and quiet minds be ignorant of a
secret so far from the thought of man, wherein the knowledge of Paul the
Apostle passes from disputing to wondering. Let a fuller handling of this
argument concerning calling (which whether it work in every man, or people,
and among men generally, is appointed from above, and greatly to be
considered) be fetched from the same author, who was a man (as the very matter
shows, and Erasmus in his preface judges) diligently exercised in the sacred
Scriptures, and of a sound and sharp wit.

CHAP. VII. Testimonies of the old Testament are examined.
LEt us proceed to the places of the old Testament. First, the promise is
cited Genesis 3. Genesis 3.
The seed of the woman shall break the serpents head. This promise is to be
taken, says this disputer, of whole mankind, and of the whole repayring of the
whole kind. These. 33.
But this disputer is far wide, extending the blessing, which is proper to
the Church, unto strangers: for the son of the virgin, The breaking of the
Serpents head by Christ is proper to his members.
Jesus Christ, is promised, who should destroy the works of the devil, and
he being conquered, should set his Christians at liberty from his power, to
reign for ever with himself, in the inheritance of the Saints. Hereupon says
Paul, Romans 16. v. 20. The God of peace shall tread Satan under your feet
shortly. Where he restrains without question the victory against Satan unto
the faithful, of whom also, Colos. 1.
Col. 1. he says, He has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of
the Saints in light, and has delivered us from the power of darkness, and
translated us into the kingdom of his dear son, to wit, through faith:
without which (says Ambrose) there is no going out of hell, Ambrose in epist.
ad Col.
or out the power of darkness, wherein we were held captive of the devil.
Moreover, that reparation and victory against Satan, as it is promised,
respects not only the merit, but also the efficacy of Christ, whereby he
maintains and preserves in the conflicts of this life, the salvation which
he purchased for us, and strengthens us against the devil, the world, and
our own flesh, with the virtue of his spirit, until at length we obtain full
victory. De pass. and cruce Domini.
For it is the work of our Savior (says Athanasius) not only to deliver us
from bondage, but to destroy the author thereof, least he growing strong, do
supplant us, and make void the conquest of the deliverer. And now experience
and Scripture teach it to be far off from all the sons of Adam, 1. These. 3.3
and 5.23.
to be after this sort victors over Satan: but that victory God bestows
upon his Saints. And also by those words in Moses, I will put enemitie between
thee and the woman, The reprobate^ are excluded from the promise.
between thy seed and her seed, the reprobates are manifestly excluded from
the promise: for they are joined to the devil, who is the head and father of
reprobates: and against this kingdom of Satan, that is, against the devil and
his members, victory is promised to the Church through Christ, for in the seed
of the woman, altogether as in the seed of Abraham, the sons of the promise
are accounted, Romans 9.8. and 4.16.

But let us see the pretty reasons of the Adversary. First, The adueraries
reasons to prove reprobates to be delivered from Satan by Christ.
he Ioh. 12. 1. Ioh. 3. Heb. 2. Colos. 2. Luke 11. Matthew. 12.
that the prince of this world is cast forth: that the son of God came to
destroy the works of the devil: that by death he has destroyed the devil:
that the devil and all his power was triumphed over. Also, that he coming
upon the palace of the strong armed man, overcame him, and took away all his
armor, and divided his spoils. From these he labors to infer, that not
any one is excepted, who has been brought under the power of the devil, whom
Christ has not delivered from him, or else to whom the head of the devil is
not broken. These words be talk, but not weighty reasons. For so Augustine
discoursing of those things very exactly says, Tract. 53. The devil is
overcome and destroyed for the faithful only, and in them.
in Ioh. The devil possessed mankind, and held them guilty of punishments by
the handwriting of sins: he bare rule in the hearts of unbelievers. But by
the faith of Christ through his blood which was shed for the remission of
sins, thousands of believers are set free from the power of the devil. This
thing he called judgment, separation, and expulsion of the devil from his
redeemed ones. The same man a little after: God foresaw what he knew, that
after his passion and glorifying, many people through out the world should
believe, in whose hearts the devil was, whom when they renounce through faith,
he is cast forth, to wit, out of the hearts of the faithful. The Master of
sentences following Augustine in like manner, expounds those places, lib. 3.
did. 19.

Therefore they are the believers, out of whom he is cast out. In these he is
abolished, overcome, and conquered, and his works are destroyed: Ephe 2.
but in the unbelievers, in whom the prince of this world as yet is effectual,
he cease not to exercise a lamentable triumph, 1. Ioh. 5. 2. Tim. 2.
until they also through faith, which is our victory, get out of the snare of
the devil, of who^ they are held captives. And this the words of John do
plainly confirm. 1. Ioh. 3.
For if he who commits sin, be of the devil; and he who is borne of God,
sins not: surely the works of the devil are in very deed destroyed in
none but in the regenerate.

1. Cor 1^.
But if Satan be abolished and conquered, he is once and for all men together
destroyed. All things are subdued under Christ and ye^ Satan (...) in the
reprobates.
Contrarily how unskillfully does Huberus except, yt al things cannot be said to
be subject unto Christ, if the greatest part of Satan's kingdom be not
overthrown by him. Yea the whole kingdom of Satan shall be destroyed by him,
specially at the last day: but for that cause there is no need, that Christ
should adopt all none excepted into his kingdom of grace and glory.
Reprobates and Satan are under his power to be damned.
In the mean while all reprobates with the devil and his angels are and shall
be for ever put under the Lords feet, and he shall take vengeance on them in
unquenchable fire, as upon subjects that are rebellious against his kingdom of
power. For they know, The kingdom of God is taken many ways.
who have read the Scriptures, and ancient interpreters of them, that the
kingdom of God is one thing, which is called the Psalm. 145.
wherein the ungodly every one with the devils are comprehended. But the
faithful be that kingdom of grace, which is here unto the end of the world,
albeit not from hence, because we are strangers in the world, and it has the
tares mingled with it unto the harvest, says Augustine tract. 115. in Ioh.

As touching the parable of the strong armed man, Luke 11.
albeit I deny not, that he may be said to be cast eue^ out of the world, as
far forth as after the passion of Christ, people through the whole world
believed, as before Augustine declared: yet he is not described as altogether
cast out of the house, that is, the world, but as bound rather therein. Neither
be al his armor, all men: but it is (...).
complete harness in Greek, out of the which Satan is so stripped by that
strong man that came upon him, that without his beck he cannot so much as move
himself. And whereas the unclean spirit is said to return into him from whom
he went out, that comes to pass, because many renounce the devil more in
tongue, then in heart, and in a true faith, and under the cloak of religion
they are secretly evil: whom it is no marvel that we see to fall again, and
that their last end is worse then their beginning. See Augustine in Psalm. 48.

There is another place, Esaias. 53. Esaias. 53.
We all as sheep have gone astray, and every one has turned aside into his
own way, and the Lord has laid the iniquities of us all upon him. Therefore
the sins of all men, whether they believe, or not believe, are satisfied and
purged in very deed by the sacrifice of Christ. Unto the antecedent is
answered, that the words of the text may be taken as the voice of the
faithful, the Prophet in his own and in the person of such as are like him
speaking, of us all: as in Paul also Abraham is called the father of us all,
Romans 4. Gal. 4.
and Jerusalem the mother of us all. Certainly Augustine de peccasorum merit.
and remiss. lib. 1. The true meaning of us all in the words of Esaias. 53.
cap. 27. writes thus: It is the voice of all the members of Christ: we all
as sheep have gone astray, and he was given for our sins. Likewise S. Peter
applies this place of the Prophet unto the faithful, saying, 1. Epist. 2. Ye
were as sheep going astray: but ye are returned unto the pastor and bishop of
your souls. And certainly that confession, We all have gone astray like
sheep, is not the property of men that persevere and abide in sins: to say
nothing, that it is spoken in the time past, we have gone astray, as of men
converted already unto the shepherd of their souls

And it is a very childish cavil, that the adversary would have the words not
to be spoken of the universality only of the faithful, because the hearers
of Esaias were not all faithful. For this was no let, but the Prophet in those
words might express the benefit of grace, which belongs unto the
universality of the faithful. What shall we say of Paul? had he only the
faithful about him, or is he heard or read at this day of the elect only? And
yet nothing fearing such captious wresting, he writes as of the faithful and
elect: the father of us all, the mother of us all.

Secondly, though we grant that the iniquities of all men were laid upon
Christ; we deny the consequence, that therefore by the sacrifice of Christ the
sins of all be in very deed cleansed, and that all are justified, and received
into grace. For to the intent that the sacrifice and merit of Christ may profit
us to righteousness and grace before God, we need application by faith. Rom ^.
Heb. 11.
For being justified by faith we have peace toward God: and without faith it
is impossible to please God. Hereupon it is added in Esaias: My righteous servant
by the knowledge of him shall justify many, and he shall bear their
iniquities. Albeit therefore he has borne the sins of all by sufficiency:
yet properly they be accounted his redeemed ones, in whom the true knowledge
or faith of Christ shines. But of this place more in the next book following.

There is objected besides, that which the Lord says, Zach. 3. I will take
away the iniquities of this earth or land in one day. But it may be
understood of Judea, that being at one with his people, he will at length
deliver them from the vexations and molestations of their enemies, which
hitherto they have endured, while God was angry with their sins. Which
exposition that restraint which is added, confirms, (of this earth) Further,
if we like better to expound it of the whole earth there will be the same
sense, which was before in the sayings of the redemption and atonement of the
world. Apoc. 13.
Certainly Apoc. 13. It is read, that the whole earth followed the beast. Yet
it cannot be thence inferred, that all and every man in the whole world have
fallen from God, and that Christ has not had his Church remaining among
mankind.

Further, Huber. th. 179. Genesis 12. and 23.
there is brought forth the promise made to Abraham, Gen 12. and 23. In thy
seed all the Nations of the earth shall be blessed. Where the adversary will
have that blessed seed to be meant of all men without exception. This that he
may wrest out, he expounds (all Nations) every one of all Nations. But
whether should we believe? Huber, or Paul the Apostle of Jesus Christ? Therefore
of faith is the inheritance (says Paul, Romans 4.) that it may be sure to the
whole seed not to that only, which is of the Law, All Nations taken for the
faithful in all Countries.
but also to that which is of the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us
all, as it is written: I have made thee a father of many nations. And Romans 9.
Not they that are the sons of the flesh, are the sons of God, but the
children of promise are counted for the seed. And the same sense he at large
repeateth, Gal. 3. The Scripture foreseeing, that God would justify the
Nations through faith, preached the Gospel before to Abraham, saying: In thee
shall all Nations be blessed. Therefore they which are of faith, are blessed
with faithful Abraham. What either ignorance then or malice is it, to gainesay
so plainly the exposition of the Apostle, and shamefullie to revile them as
enemies of that blessed seed, who (by seed) do understand with Paul the
faithful every where of all Nations and countries? Paul then is an enemy of
that seed. Fie upon that, Augustine is an enemy, tract. 1. in primam Ioh.
Ambrose in Luc. lib. 3. and the whole company of the fathers.

But (by all nations) every one of all nations do follow universally. This
gloss does not always, but most often deceive. Beside the examples above
alleged, let these also here be considered. Psalm. 22. All the ends of the
earth shall remember and turn to the Lord, and all the families of the nations
shall bow themselves before thee. And Psalm. 72. All kings shall bow to thee,
all nations shall serve thee. And Psalm. 86. All nations shall come and worship
thee O Lord, and shall glorify thy name. August and Basil. com in Psalm.
These prophesies, as Augustine and Basil interpret them, are fulfilled in
the conversion of the Gentiles, while of all Gentiles some do receive the
brightness of divine knowledge.

Esaias. 2.
So in Esaias it is foretold, that in the last days all nations shall come to the
mountain of the Lord, and that the people shall walk in his law. Where again
Basil rejecting this their filthy gloss, admonishes, (which thing the very
matter also proclaims) that it is not to be taken of the whole number in the
land of the living, or of all men, whom every nation every where comprehends.

Hence now there appears plainly an answer also to the saying, These. 181.
Psalm. 2. Ask of me and I will give thee the nations for thy inheritance, and
the ends of the earth for thy possession. Therefore (says Huber) the adoption
of all nations to be Christ's inheritance is promised. I grant, but not of al
men, whom every nation contains. For the doctrine of the Apostle, Lib. 1. de
sermon Domini in monte.
says Augustine, terms that to be adoption, whereby we are called into an
eternal inheritance, that we may be coheires with Christ: and with God being
as sons, may enjoy eternal life, being reformed through the acknowledging of
him unto the image of God. What adoption is. Aug. in Psalm. 2.
But this belongs not to all. Whereupon (as the same father expounds) the
meaning is: Ask of me, to wit, that the nations may be coupled to the name of
Christians, and so redeemed from death, and may be possessed of God: and I will
give thee the nations to be thine inheritance, whom thou may possess unto
their salvation, that they may bring forth spiritual fruits unto thee. Neither
does the holy Ghost himself otherwise expound it by the mouth of David, Psalm.
22. All the ends of the earth shall remember, and turn to the Lord, and all the
families of the nations shall bow themselves before thee. For by faith and
repentance, all nations unto the ends of the earth are made the inheritance,
and peculiar people of God, Psalm. 7^. Esaias 19.
which was the peculiar dignity of Israel in old time. In respect of which
grace it was also promised to Abraham, that he should be the heir of the
world. Notwithstanding it is true as touching dominion, that all are subject
unto Christ, not only all men, but also all things else in heaven and earth.

That which is lastly alleged of the escape goat, Leu. 16. Leuit. 16.
(that as all the sins of the children of Israel were put upon that goat, to
be carried into the wilderness: so also Christ bore all the sins of the
people and took them away) confirms our opinion, and not the adversaries.
For not the sins of all men, but of Israel only, were laid upon the goat: so
Christ has taken away the sins of Christian people, who, as the Apostle
witnesses, is the Israel of God, Gal. 6.
prefigured by that carnal Israel.

And these things of the first rank of arguments. Where now the indifferent
reader may judge, whether the reproaches stick upon us, or upon the adversary,
wherewith he would defame us: as though forsooth we must needs correct, These.
188.
amend, polish, cut away, and abuse the speech of the holy Ghost throughout
the Gospel. Trifles.

UNTO THE ARGVMENTS OF THE SECOND RANK.
CHAP. VIII. Wherein general solutions or answers are contained.
HItherto answer has been made unto general speeches. The second class or
rank follows, wherein the adversary purposes to prove peculiarly, that the
reprobates (or as he speaks in his Compend. these the unbelievers) are equally
redeemed of Christ, These. 23.
as they are, who through faith are made partakers of salvation in Christ.
Three general observations.
But before we severally weigh the places of Scripture, which in this rank are
Of particulars, an universal conclusion does not follow.
And of Particulars, when either both, or one of the propositions is such, it
is evident, that an universal conclusion does not follow, as this is of the
adversary: that all reprobates and unbelievers, no less then the elect and
truly faithful, have redemption and remission of sins in Christ. To prove
this, he had need of other arguments through this whole class.

Romans 1. Ephe. 1. Col. 1. And in the beginning of other Epistles of the Apostle.
the faithful and Saints in Christ, beloved and elect of God, because of their
external profession of faith and repentance, and the washing of sacred
Baptism which they had received. For of such the Church judges charitably,
leaving in the mean while secret things unto God the searcher of the hearts,
who knows his own, and can discern between them that are froward, and
upright in heart.

Of the false and perseverance of the elect.
For the very elect and true believers do often fall into sins against their
conscience, and greatly swerve from the right way; as David and Peter: yet they
err not finally, but are recovered, and brought back into the way before they
die, and having their iniquity pardoned them, (which was committed)
perseverance unto the end is imputed unto them: as Augustine largely teaches,
Aug de cor and great cap. 7. 2. Tim, 2.
de correptione and gratia cap. 7. For the foundation of God is sure, having
this seal: The Lord knows who are his. And as the Lord himself says in the
Gospel, Matthew. 23.
It cannot be that the elect should be deceived, to wit, finally. For if any of
these perish, God is deceived, and overcome of man's sin. But he is never
deceived, or overcome of any thing: Therefore of his elect none perishes.
Neither that only, 2 These 3. Tit. 1.
but even true believers (seeing all men have not a lively faith in Christ, but
the elect) are kept by the power of God unto salvation through faith, 1. Pet.
1. Ier. 32.39, 40.
as Peter testifies. And this is the meaning of the promises: I will give unto
them one heart, and one way, and I will make an everlasting covenant with them,
and I will put my fear in their hearts, that they may not depart from me. Also,
I will plant them in their land: Amos 9.15.
neither shall they be any more rooted out of their land, says the Lord. Who
are these but the faithful, planted in the courts of the Lord and ingrafted
into Christ by a true faith? And by the testimony of John, He that is borne of
God, sins not, because the seed of God abides in him: 1. John 3. 1. Pet. 1.
neither can he sin, because he is borne of God. For we are not borne again
of mortal, but of immortal seed by the word of the living God who abides
for ever. Hub^^ these. 29. 1. Tim. 1 and 4.


Faith for the doctrine of faith. Aduers. Anthrop. morph. cap. 9.
that some fall away from the faith, and make shipwreck of it, we must
understand, that faith is often taken for the doctrine of faith. And so many
do fall from faith, going back from the doctrine which they did profess, and
also cleaving unto doctrines of devils, while they would seem to follow
Christ, as Chrysostom and Theophylact expound those places, and Cyrill of
Alexandria also has it, that Hymeneus and Alexander made shipwreck concerning
faith, because they said, that the resurrection was past already. To this end
serves the answer, that an historical faith is one thing, Diverse
significations of faith. Credere Deo, credere Deum, credere in Deu^. Aug de
Tempore Sermon. 181.
and a justifying and saving faith is an other thing: or, that it is one thing
credere Deo, and another thing, credere Deum, and another thing credere in
Deum: that is, to believe God, to believe that he is God, and to believe in
God. To believe God, is to believe that the things be true which he speaks,
which many evil men can do. And to believe that he is God, even the devils
may. But to believe in God, they only know who love him, and who are
Christians not only in name, but also in deeds and life. For faith without
love, is the devils faith and vain: but with love, it is the faith of a
Christian. And this faith of a Christian settled in the foundation, suffers no
man to perish, as Augustine writes, which thing a certain gloss also of
Luthers upon the 7. De fide and operibus, cap. 18.
of Matthew. confirms in these words: That faith which is effectual by works,
purifieth the heart, and such virtue stands immovable against all the force
of winds, and the power of hell, because it is grounded upon the rock Christ.
Otherwise is the state of those, that have an historical, deuillish, and dead
faith only, and therefore counterfeite and not true, because it is not lively:
notwithstanding it may be called true, as touching true notions or knowledge,
and agreeable to divine revelations.

These things as touching the perseverance of the elect and truly believers,
Heerbrandus Disputatione Tubingensi de electione, plainly confirms, which I
here produce, that these new disputers (who now out of the same school sow
contrary opinions) may be less angry with us. For thus it has determined:
that those who are predestined to life, do not fall away finally: and that
such are they, who understand themselves to be ingrafted into Christ by a true
faith. And whereas many do fall away, who are in writing recorded to have had
faith, that they had only a temporary faith, without true regeneration of the
heart. These things says he, in the foresaid disputation, these. 40.45. and 47.

Of the fall of reprobates that were in the Church.
Now, as touching the other part, concerning reprobates, who for a time have a
place in the Church among the sons of God, that rule is well to be marked in
the second chapter of the first of John, verse 19. They went out from us,
Tract. 3. in epist. Io.
but they were not of us: for if they had been of us they had surely continued
with us. He speaks of them (as Augustine does notably set forth this place)
who by chance going out, return not again: who also when they are within, are
not of us, How reprobates are called believers and partakers of redemption.
Romans 1. 1. Cor. 1. Ephe. 1. Col. 1. Phil. 1.7.
nor as members are within the body of Christ, but as evil humors, since that
his body is as yet in curing, and the health of it shall not be perfect, till
the resurrection of the dead. In the mean time because such persons are not
manifest unto men, they are plainly called believers, converted, justified,
sanctified, redeemed, disciples and members of Christ, temples and the sons
of God, yea the elect of God: plainly (I say) they have these terms, whom we
see to profess with us the same faith and Christian conversation, albeit in
the mean while they be not oftentimes that in very deed, which they are
called, before him, who discerns the intents and thoughts of the heart, Hebr.
4. Ambrose.
and unto whose eyes all things are known and manifest. Ambrose lib. 1. Com.
in Luc. cap. 1. says very well: Not every one who is just before men, is just
before God. Men see one way, God sees another: men in the face, God in the
heart, even he is the judge of the mind and the fact. Therefore it is perfect
praise to be just before God. And this very thing does Augustine largely teach,
Augustine.
de correp. and great. cap. 7. and 9. and cites hither the saying of Christ: If
ye shall abide in my word, ye shall be truly my disciples. For all that give
their names to Christ, are usually called his disciples and Christians of
Christ, by reason of their profession: but they be in deed that, which they be
called, who abide in his word. As the Apostle also says, We are the house of
Christ, Hebr. 2.
if we hold that confidence and hope (whereof we rejoice) sure unto the end. And
anon, We are made partakers of Christ, if we hold sure unto the end that
beginning, whereby we are sustained: If not, we are called before men partakers
of Christ, of his household, sons and heirs of God, citizens of the Saints,
redeemed and believers, but we are not the same truly before the Lord, who
will say in time to come: I never knew you, Matthew. 7.
depart from me ye that work^ iniquity. Tertull.
Tertullian de praescrip. haeret. in the beginning says: An excellent saying.
No man is wise, no man is faithful, no man is great but a Christian, and no
man is a Christian, but he that continues unto the end. Thou as a man know
every one outwardly, thou iudgest as thou see: and thou see, as far as
thou have eyes. But the eyes of the Lord are high. Man looks into the face,
God into the heart, and therefore the Lord knows who are his, Chrysostom.
etc Chrysostom also notably in 7 Matthew. says: The rain of false doctrine
does not corrupt the Church which Christ has founded, nor the blasts of the
devil drive it away, nor the force of violent floods does move it. All that
are called christians are not such indeed. Aug. in Ps. 48.
Neither is it hereto contrary (says he) that many do fall from the Church.
For not all who are called Christians, are Christ's: but the Lord knows who
are his. For many wearing the cloak of a Christian name (as Augustine
speaks) under the cover of religion are secretly evil, having the name of
Christ in their lips, but not in their hearts, of whom it is said: This people
honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me. Luther also in
Psalm. 2. upon those words, Luther.
I have set my king upon Sion, my holy hill, puts difference between
general and special holiness. Holiness general and special.
That is general, when some Church consisting of good and bad is wont to be
called holy: but that is special, whereby the true believers truly and in
very deed are sanctified before God, through the holy Ghost, whereas the rest
are named holy, and counted Saints, only before men, by profession, and the
use of the Sacraments. And in his book de seruo arbit. cap. 61. he makes
difference between the judgment of Charity and faith. Charity and faith
judge diuerselie of a man.
The judgment, or (as he speaks) the rule of charity calls every one that
is baptized, holy; because charity believes all things, and presumes good of
our neighbors: but by the canon or rule of faith he is not holy, (says he)
unless he be declared to be such a one by a divine judgment.

CHAP. IX. Certain sayings of the Scripture are examined touching the
redemption of reprobates.
THese things thus forewarned in stead of a general answer; now let us run
in order through the testimonies of this class or rank. The first is cited
out of Heb. 6. The 1. place for the redemption of reprobates.
It can not be, that they who have been once enlightened, and have tasted of the
heavenly gift, and have been partakers of the holy Ghost, if they fall away,
that they should be renewed again unto repentance, crucifying again to
themselves the son of God, and exposing him to ignominy. They that here be
described, are partakers of redemption, and yet reprobates. A particular
conclusion follows in the third figure: Therefore some reprobates are
redeemed.

I answer. First the adversary should have proved an universal conclusion,
and not a particular, as it has bin said. Secondly unto the minor I say: they
that fall away after illumination received, A grievous fall proves not a man to
be a Reprobate.
are not forthwith to be judged reprobates, and to be excluded from grace,
with Montanus and Nouatus. For even the elect fall sometime grievously, but
they are lifted up again of the Lord. And in that the Apostle seems to take
away hope of pardon from such as fall away, omitting other expositions,
Chrysostom Theodorite, Some of the old writers understand by renewing, Heb. 6
a second baptizing.
Theophylact in their Commentaries, and Epiphanius haeret. 59. Augustine in
fine exposit. ad Romans Ambrose lib. 2. de poenit. cap. 2. and other ancient
writers with great consent, and not unfitly understand the place, that the
reiteration of Baptism, and not the medicine of repentance is taken out of the
Church: least the Jews should think, that sacred Baptism is like to the
Jewish washings, which are used much and often. But as once Christ died, and
death has no more power over him: so we are once baptized into the death of
Christ, by the lauer of regeneration, and renewing of the spirit, and it is
impossible for us, if we fall, to be by it renewed again unto repentance.
Which thing if a man attempt, he crucifieth again, and contemns Christ, as
much as lies in him.

Further, unto the mayor: Albeit I willingly grant, that the Apostle speaks
of such as be redeemed, or else as though they were redeemed, Two proofs of
the adversary for redemption of reprobates.
according to the foreshewed difference of the elect and reprobates: yet the
proofs brought in of

Redemption is forgiveness of sins.
but that sins be forgiven a man, and therefore that he is just before God,
and heir of eternal life, cannot hereof straightwaies be gathered, because he
is enlightened with the knowledge of the truth, or has received some other
gifts of the holy Ghost: The bad have many gifts common with the good.
for there be many gifts of the spirit common to good and bad. Mat. 7.22. and
1. Cor. 12.3.

Ergo, he was crucified for them already before, to wit, to their profit and
redemption.

compositionis and dictionis, and concludes more then was in the premises.
Mark this exposition of crucifying again to themselves, etc.
In the minor the word (again) must not be construed with (to themselves) but
with the word (crucify) as it is one word in Greek (...) Wherefore it only
follows, if he be crucified again, that Christ has been once already
crucified. Then, seeing men cannot at their pleasure crucify the son of GOD
indeed, it is added in stead of correction, that to themselves, that is, as
much as in them lies they crucify him again: and the sense will be impious
altogether, if a man expound that word (to themselves) that is, for their own
profit and redemption they crucify Christ again, as it is taken in the
conclusion.

Another place is Heb. 10. Seeing therefore brethren, The 2. place.
we have liberty to enter into the holy place by the blood of Jesus, let us
go with a true heart and confidence. For if we shall sin willingly after the
knowledge of the truth received, there remains no sacrifice for sins. And a
little after: Of how greater punishment, think ye, shall he be thought
worthy, who shall tread under his feet the son of God, and shall count the
blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, a profane thing, and shall
despite the spirit of grace? This place Huber simply understands of
reprobates: but they are not straightwaies to be counted for reprobates, and to
be barred of all hope of pardon with the Nouatians, who after the knowledge of
the truth, wittingly and willingly peradventure fall. And in that it is said,
that there remains unto them no sacrifice for sins, but an expectation of
judgment, of this there is diversity of opinions. I take it as most simple,
An exposition of the words: there is no more sacrifice for sin. etc.
that there be no more sacrifices for sin, as of old under the shadows of
the Law: that Christ was once offered, to take away the sins of many, and
will not come again to die for sins the second time, but to judgment; for
their salvation doubtless that look for him, but for their punishment that
sin, specially that sin willingly after they have received the knowledge of
the truth. Understand notwithstanding conditionally, to wit, unless they repent,
as Theophylact well expounds, and the use of the Scriptures requires. 1.
Corin. 6.9. Apoc. 22.15. Iere. 18.7. Certainly I easily grant, We must take
every one in the Church for a brother, and redeemed for his profession sake,
till the contrary appear.
that these of whom the Apostle entreats, are to be placed in the number of
the redeemed, upon the foundation before set down, to wit, as far forth as
they professing the same faith and conversation with us, we are bound to
account them for our brethren, for the household and heirs of God, and for
such as are sanctified by the blood of Christ, until happily they be made
known not to be of us. All these things certainly the text plainly shows to
be spoken of the Apostle, in respect of faith which a man seems to have, and
not of unbelief, much less of reprobation.

The third place is 1. Cor. 3. Ye are the temple of God, The 3. place 1. Cor. 3.
and the spirit of God dwells in you. Jf any destroy the temple of God, him
will God destroy. That he should speak here of reprobates (as Huber thinks)
it is unlikely: for he speaks of the Church, which he had called Gods
building, and now calls it Gods temple, as elsewhere this spiritual building
and habitation of the living God is at large described. Ephesians. 2.21. 1. Pet.
2.5.
As for the threatening, it belongs to the authors of schisms, who through
mere ambition, by factions distracted and profaned the Church of Corinth,
which God had consecrated to be a temple for himself. The like place comes
again, chapter 6. Know ye not that your body is the temple of the holy
Ghost, who is in you? There speaking to each believer, he calls them the
temples of the holy Ghost, as also the members of Christ, saying: Know ye not
that your bodies are the members of Christ? that thereby they might with
greater care avoid all pollutions of the flesh. True members of Christ can
never finally fall away, yet they may sin grieuouslie. Psalm 37.24. John 10.
Romans 11.29. 2 Cor. 4.9.
But hereupon it does not follow, that some being truly the members of Christ,
and the temples of the holy Ghost, shall perish forever. It comes to pass
surely, that such fearfully sometime defile themselves, but not finally. An
example hereof is the repentance of David: and the promises bear witness: If
the righteous falls, he is not cast away, because the Lord vpholdeth him with
his hand. No man shall take my sheep out of my hand. And in Paul, The gifts and
calling of God are without repentance. We are cast down, but we perish not,
What members may perish.
says Paul. But that they perish in their sins, who were accounted the members
of Christ, and the temples of God, it is no new thing: but if they had been of
the true members of the Church, they had doubtless continued with us, 1. John 3.
as John says. For there be sons of God (says Augustine) who are not as
yet such unto us: De Correp. and great. ca. 9. A notable saying.
and there be some again, who for the grace which they have received for a
time, are called of us the sons of God, but yet are not such with God. And as
the sons, so also the temples of God, and members of Christ, are to be
accounted.

The 4. place. Romans 14. 1. Cor. 8.
The same answer serves unto the sayings: Destroy not him with thy meat for
whom Christ died: neither destroy the work of God for meat sake. Also, Shall
thy weak brother perish through thy knowledge, for whom Christ died? As
touching the elect we grant, that the true believers, How a weak brother may
be said to perish and be destroyed. Romans 14.5. How Reprobates falling from the
truth and perishing, are said to be redeemed.
but weak in faith, are very often grievously shaken with offenses, yea
destroyed and lost, as touching the authors of offenses, through whom there is
no let but they should perish. Yet the Lord is able to establish them, and also
will establish them, though they be inconstant and waver. But a^ touching the
reprobates, falling away from the truth for offenses and other causes, and
utterly perishing, they are called, redeemed, and justified by the death of
Christ, as far forth as in the judgment of the Church, they obtain for a
time a place among the justified and redeemed of Christ, as I have often said
already.

In like sort is that to be understood, which 2. Pet. 2. The 5. place. 2. Pet.
2. How the Lord has bought Reprobates. 1. Pet. 1. Acts 20.
we read of false prophets that perish, that they deny the Lord who bought
them. Doubtless the Lord is said to buy them, as far forth as they are numbered
for a time among the faithful, whom he has redeemed not with silver and
gold, but with his precious blood. For out of the Church it self shall arise
ravening wolves, not sparing the flock, and speaking perverse things to draw
disciples after the^. But what says John? They went out from us, but they were
not of us: for verily they had continued with us if they had been of us.
Further, How they are said to deny him yt bought them.
this is rightly referred to the boasting of the false prophets, that him in
very deed they deny, whom they call their Lord and redeemer: and brag of
liberty, when in truth they be the servants of corruption and sin, as
Peter himself declares, and the Epistle of Jude confirms. For these
seducers secretly crept in, are thus there described, that they turn the grace
of our God into wantonness, and deny God the only Lord and our Lord Jesus
Christ. But let us also consider the words that follow: for Peter adds: 2.
Pet. 2.20, 21, 22.
If they who have escaped the filthiness of the world through the knowledge of
the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, be afterward again entangled therein, and
be overcome, their last condition is worse then the former, and it were better
for them not to have known the way of righteousness, then after the knowledge
of it to go back, as the dog to his vomit. Out of these words the
adversary indeuoureth to collect, that many endued with true faith and
conversion, and therefore by his death and blood washed, and justified, do
perish for ever. I answer as before, that here properly the question is not,
whether some endued with true faith and conversion, do so fall back, that
they perish: but this the adversary was to prove, that the reprobates
universally no less then the elect, and all unbelievers no less then the
faithful, are made partakers of redemption in Christ. Which thing cannot be
concluded out of the Apostles words, seeing he speaks not but of them, who
through the knowledge of Christ had escaped the pollutions of the world, which
Huber himself will have to be referred to their faith and conversion.

Secondly, as touching those who falling rise not again, I deny, that such
were truly washed in the death and blood of Christ, and justified, or were
endued with a true and lively faith in Christ. For the contrary has been above
showed out of the doctrine of Peter, and other servants of Christ. Neither
says Peter here, Peter's words expounded.
It had bin better for them never to have had true faith, or else to have
obtained righteousness then afterward to fall back from true faith and
righteousness: but he only says: It had been better not to have known the
way of righteousness, then after the knowledge of it to go back from the holy
doctrine taught them. Mark this touching back-sliders.
And we deny not, that many who had cast away corrupt opinions of God, and of
matters belonging to religion, and had embraced the truth, do afterward fall
away from true doctrine to old, or else new errors, and by this means slide
back from faith, that is, from the doctrine of faith. De fide and operib. ca.
25. See also in Psalm. 48
We confess also that many, who (as Augustine weighs this place) either by
fained promises, or external reformation of manners had forsaken the filthiness
of the world, to wit, adultery, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, idolatry,
witchcraft, drunkenness, bankettings, and the like, do inthrall themselves
again unto the same, and live in all filthiness, and so run into a more
grievous judgment, then if they had never known the way of righteousness. But
they who do after some sort or other avoid the filthiness of the world, are
not straightwaies to be accounted washed in the blood of Christ, and justified
before God. For so, as many as among the Heathens have lived honestly, or
forsaking the filthiness of their former life, have begun to be sober, should be
also accounted for men washed and justified in the blood of Christ.

Neither be the things which Huber infers, of any force: they had escaped
filthiness through the knowledge of Christ, and are said to have known the way
of righteousness, and the holy commandment, that is, the holy doctrine of the
Gospel is said to have been delivered unto them. Therefore they had true faith
in Christ given them. As though the faith of Christians were nothing else, than
the bare knowledge of Christ, or of the way of righteousness and of the holy
commandment. 2. Pet. 2.18.
not walking any longer in wantonness, lusts, drunkenness, surfettings,
bankettings, and abominable idolatries, or running any longer with prodigal
persons unto the same excess of riot, as Peter says, 1 Pet. 4. But not all,
in whom there is seen some reformation of manners, have purified minds through
the spirit and faith unfeigned, with love void of dissimulation from a good
conscience and a pure heart.

There be cited also the words of Peter, The 6. place 2. Pet. 1.
2. Pet. 1. where he speaks of him who professes faith, but has not works,
that he is blind, and has forgotten that he was purged from his old sins.
Therefore false christians and hypocrites, who perish at the length, were
sometime cleansed and justified from their sins, no less then they, whose
faith by good works is effectual and abides. The answer hereunto is the
same that was before: It must be understood according to the usage of the
Scriptures, The ^. exposit^ons of Peter's words, (...), is said to have been
cleansed from his old sins. Acts 2^.^6. Augustine.
which call them Saints, justified, and cleansed from sins, as many as are
baptized into Christ, and ingrafted into his Church. Because the Church ought
to take them for such, according to the judgment of charity, albeit before
God oftentimes they be not such. Further, the sense may be this, that such
have forgotten their baptism, which is a certain visible sanctification, and
purgation from sins, according to that saying: be baptized and wash away thy
sins. But as Augustine very well makes difference between visible and
invisible sanctification, Visible and invisible sanctifications.
Man by visible Sacraments through his ministry does sanctify, but the Lord
by invisible grace through the holy Ghost, wherein lies the whole fruit of
the visible Sacraments: and some men have invisible sanctification, and it does
them good without visible Sacraments: but visible sanctification which
happens by visible Sacraments, a man may have without the invisible, but it
can do him no good. For visible baptism without invisible sanctification did
nothing profit Simon Magus. These things Augustine super Leuit. lib. 3. quaest.
84. whereunto Luther also consents upon the second Psalm.

But it is too absurd and foolish, that the adversary labors to wrest to
his purpose also that notable description of the grace of God toward the
faithful in the beginning of the chapter in Peter. Peter (says he)
testifies, that they may be damned, who have already obtained faith and
salvation, and all things belonging to godliness. But what if this be denied
him, how will he prove it? Because (says he) he obiecteth unto them blindness.
The true method and sense of Peter's words. 2. Pet. ^.3 to verse 12.
But (good sir) it is plain to every one by the text, that that vpbraiding
pertains not to true believers, whose faith is effectual by love, but unto
false Christians: who hereby, that they show not their faith by works, do
sufficiently declare, that they are not endued with true faith, but are blind
and see nothing. Certainly it is plain deceit, willingly to confound together
those two most diverse sorts of men, which Peter purposely seuereth, and not to
regard what agrees fitly to either. First unto those that are truly converted,
and endued with a lively faith in Christ, belongs that setting out of grace;
that the divine power has given unto them all things belonging to life and
godliness; that they are called to glory and virtue; that they have obtained
great and precious promises, and are made partakers of the divine nature, being
escaped out of corruption in the world. These things are spoken of them, who
had obtained like precious faith with Peter and his like, which surely cannot
be spoken of them, who have only an historical and dead faith, that is, the
faith of devils and not of Christians. Secondly, by way of exhortation he
carefully seuereth a lively and a dead faith: that they who have a lively
faith, do show it by works, and by adding to faith virtue, to virtue
knowledge, to knowledge temperance, long suffering, godliness and love, are not
found idle and unfruitful in the knowledge of Jesus Christ. Contrarily he
pronounces them blind, and such as see nothing, but have forgotten their
purging from their old sins, who have not good works. Where now by
Antithesis he directs his style against hypocrites and false Christians:
James 1. and 2.
who (as James painteth them out) are hearers only of the word and not doers,
deceiving themselves, and seducing their own hearts. And albeit they seem
religious, yet their religion is mere vanity, and their faith dead. But what
is this to the true believers? are they therefore in danger of damnation,
because hypocrites perish in their vanity? Nay it is so far off, that the
Apostle should teach that the true believers are damned, that contrariwise he
witnesses, that such as be fruitful in the knowledge of the Lord, do more
and more confirm their vocation and election, and that it shall come to pass,
that they shall never fall, but have a plentiful entrance into the kingdom of
heaven.

That whcih is beside objected out of 1. Pet. 2. that the reprobates also were
laid upon the corner stone Christ, The 7. place 1. Pet. 2.
we simply deny, as being far from Peter's words, who writes of the
disobedient Jews, who were offended at Christ, that they were Ad hoc positos
esse, non dicit, impositos Christo. The 8. place Gal. 3. and 5.
ordained to this, he does not say, that they were laid upon Christ.

Out of the Epistle to the Galathians, two places also are cited: as that,
chap. 3. Paul warns the Galathians: Are ye so mad, that when ye have begun in
the spirit, ye would now end in the flesh? Have ye suffered so many things in
vain? Also chap. 5. Therefore stand in the liberty, wherewith Christ has
made us free, and be not entangled again in the yoke of bondage. Behold I Paul
say unto you, if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing: ye are
made void of Christ; as many as are justified by the law, are fallen from
grace. Of these words it seems to follow, that they may be reprobated, who
have been redeemed and set at liberty by Christ, and who were truly justified
and regenerated, and ingraffed into Christ as lively members.

Expos. epist. ad Gal.
First I answer, that it is not manifest that the Galathians fell away finally:
nay in the judgment of Augustine, they had not yet fallen, or yielded to the
seducers, but were wavering, and did not fall away. But yet not to contend
about that, whereabout I see interpreters disagree, this is certain, that if
they were already carried away with the error of the false Apostles, Cap. 5.10.
yet they erred not finally, according to the saying of the Apostle, J am
persuaded of you in the Lord, that ye will not be otherwise minded. Whereupon
also he says not flatly, ye have suffered so many things in vain, but by way
of correction adds, (which thing Huber of purpose concealeth) if yet in
vain, signifying, that he is persuaded of better things, and such as
accompany the salvation of the Galathians, although he speak very sharply to
reprove them.

ways.

They that begin in the spirit, are justified and redeemed. But some beginning
in the spirit, are reprobated, because after they have begun in the spirit,
they end in the flesh. Therefore some of the number of reprobates were justified
and redeemed,
Here the Mayor taken universally is denied, therefore the conclusion is of
pure particulars. The Mayor is true only of such as have the spirit of
justification and regeneration. But God does not suffer those who have so begun
in the spirit, to end in the flesh, Phil. 1.
but he makes perfect in them his own good work unto the day of Christ Jesus.
Notwithstanding many begin in the spirit, How many begin in the spirit.
as far forth as they profess the doctrine of the spirit, or of the Gospel,
touching free justification by Christ, or else have received also some
spiritual gifts: who, whiles they return not from their errors repugnant to
the Gospel, whereinto they fell or otherwise by their unthankfulness are
deprived of those gifts of the spirit, are said to be perfected in the flesh,
whereas they began in the spirit.

His second proof leans on the saying: Have ye suffered so many things in
vain? But the Mayor is false, universally taken, namely this: That whosoever
suffer for the Gospel in vain, they are reprobates, having once received the
grace of justification. 1. Cor. 13.
For it may be (as the Apostle witnesses) that they, who have not charity,
and therefore neither true faith and justification, may yet suffer adversity,
but all in vain.

Thirdly thus he proves it. As many as be of ye works of the that they were
ever truly redeemed from the curse. For this redemption belongs to them
only, who by true faith in Christ are the seed of Abraham, and are heirs
according to the promise, as is largely taught. Gal. 3.

The 9. place Gal. 5.
As touching the place Gal. 5. Stand ye in the liberty, wherewith Christ has
freed us, the adversary collecteth, that men once delivered by the blood and
death of Christ, may again lose that liberty, while they abide not in it, but
are entangled again with the yoke of bondage, and so make Christ unprofitable
unto them, and fall from grace.

I answer, the text has not, stand ye in the liberty wherewith Christ has
freed you, as Huber depraueth it: but wherewith he has freed us. And the
opposition of the sons of the bondwoman and of the free, of the believers and
workers, namely, who standing to set up their own righteousness, are not made
partakers of the righteousness of Christ, does manifestly show, that this
deliverance by Christ belongs not to all without exception, believers and
unbelievers: but he that believes in Christ has that liberty, and does not
lose it finally, because it is eternal. For Christian liberty (as Luther also
upon this place warns) is such a gift, Luther of Christian liberty.
whereby in stead of sin and death, we have righteousness and eternal life,
and have God for ever merciful and favorable through Christ. Many fall from
Christian liberty, but diversely.
We confess nevertheless, that many stand not in the

The same answer serves to other two places, namely concerning the Jews,
being as certain branches broken off from the Olive tree, The 10. and 11
places. Romans 11. John 15.
and concerning the Gentiles who should be cut off unless they continue in the
bountifulnes of God. And, my father takes away every branch that bears not
fruit in me: and every one that bears fruit he purges, that it may bring
forth more fruit. Except a man shall abide in me, he is cast forth and
withers, and men gather them, and cast them into the fire. Iere. 11. Esaias.
25. Matthew. 21.
The simple meaning of these words is, that not all, who by outward vocation
are among the people of God, (that green and fat olive tree and elect vine)
and so are accounted among the branches of Christ, shall be saved: many such
have been long ago cut off, and shall be cut off hereafter for unthankfulness.
Hipocrites for a time flourish as green branches, but at length are cut off.
For there are many hypocrites partakers even after a sort of grace, albeit not
unto justification: who because in show for a time they flourish and are green,
but in rendering fruit deceive the hope of the husbandman, and have faith in
their lips more then in heart, at length are cast away.

But that it happens to some of the elect and truly godly to be so cut off,
The Elect are never cut off, nor cast away, proved by three reasons.
it is not only not proved by these testimonies, but also the contrary is
therein plainly set down. First, who were the Jews whom God rejected?
unbelievers, not obeying the Gospel being ignorant of the righteousness of
God and seeking to establish their own righteousness, and to whom was given
of God the spirit of slumber, in his just judgment, and eyes that they should
not see, and ears that they should not hear, Romans 10. and 11.8.
as the Apostle describes those reprobates. But discerning the elect and godly
from them, he says: God has not cast away his people, whom he foreknew.
Again, Verse 2 and 7.
Israel attained not that which he sought for: but the elect have attained it:
the rest have been hardened. But they were rejected for unbelief: who denies
it? But by the just judgment of God they came not unto faith, because they
were not of his elect. For who will say, even the veriest fool of all (says
Augustine) that the malicious Jews, who have perished in their hatred, and who
being of that nation enemies to Christ as yet do perish, that they are elect
and beloved?

Secondly, Paul does not so much speak unto every one of the elect of the
Gentiles, as in common unto the whole body of such as were converted, among
whom many were in name only faithful and members of Christ, when he
threatens them with the example of the unbelieving Jews. Albeit though it
were granted that the Apostle directs his advise to every elect and
faithful one, yet nothing is thereupon effected, because he speaks by
supposition, that they shall be cut off, ^. John 2.^9.
unless they shall continue in the goodness of God. But the elect do continue,
and that they may continue, and may more and more answer unto their calling,
and not receive the grace of God in vain, to that very end serve those spurs
of exhortations and threatenings profitable unto them, to put away the security
of the flesh, wherewith we daily wrestle.

every branch not bearing fruit in him, shall be taken away and burned. Who are
those, but such as have faith without works, that is, A Syllogism.
a dead faith? But of the branches that bear fruit he says, that the father
will purge every branch that bears fruit, that it may bring more fruit.
Under this proposition now let us set down the assumption: But all true
believers, in whom faith is effectual by love, and florisheth by purging the
hearts and purifying the souls, are fruitful branches. Ergo, the father will
daily more and more purge them: so far off is it, that they shall be cut off.

The 12. place Matthew 13. The parable of the debtor expounded.
The parable also of the debtor, Matthew. 18. seems to confirm, that
redemption, that is, remission of sins is made void in some persons. For he
that had his debt forgiven him, was for his cruelty toward his fellow
servant, delivered to the tormenters, till he should pay the whole debt.

I answer, that so great an agreement is not granted to a similitude in
disputing, that it may be applied in every respect unto the thing, whereto it
is to be used. Otherwise a similitude were not a similitude, but the thing it
self. The mind and scope of Christ is to be considered, who meant not to
teach, whether sins once remitted, were retained or not: but he shows, it
is required that we forgive our brethren their offenses, if we would obtain
the pardon of our offenses at Gods hands. Whereupon Christ also concludes that
parable thus: So also my heavenly father shall do unto you, unless ye forgive
every one his brother from the heart their offenses: that is, as Christ
himself Matthew. 6. largely teaches: If we shall forgive men their offenses,
our heavenly father will also forgive us: but if we forgive not, neither will
the father forgive us.

But whether sins forgiven be retained, we may read the opinion of the
Schoolmen, 4. sent. did. 22. and part. 3. Thom. quaest. 88. As there we may
see, Whether sins once pardoned be again retained. Romans 8.
they dispute the matter very doubtfully and confusedly: but there be far
more plainer testimonies of the sacred Scriptures: Whom he has predestined,
them he has called: whom he called, them he has also justified: whom he has
justified, them he has also glorified. I will remember their sins no more,
says the Lord. Iere. 31. Esaias 44. and 38. Mica. 7.
That he also blotteth out as a cloud their sins, to whom he is merciful,
and casts them behind his back, yea into the bottom of the sea. These
speeches do sufficiently show, What sins God once forgiueth, he ever
forgiueth.
that when God pardons sins, he so pardons, that he for ever forgets
them, and brings them as it were into smoke, and to nothing: and therefore
what sins he forgiueth, he does forever forgive.

But Huber is twice foolish, (that I say not after his manner, These. 270.
mad) who out of the said parable would feign have it to be meant, that the
sins of all alike are pardoned and that the reprobates are as well saved by
Christ, as any other whomsoever. Does he not see the contrary in that servant?
that remission of sins belongs not to all, but to them who confess their
sins, and in humble manner crave pardon for them, being ready also from their
hearts to pardon their fellow servants?

One only place remains, 1. Ioh. 5. The 13. place 2. John 5.10.
That they who believe not God, make him a lier. Out of which saying this
champion collecteth, that the promises of grace and life in Christ do
appertain to the unbelievers and reprobates also. Contrari^^se John expressly
restrains the promise of life unto the believers, Ephesians. 2.
when he says. He that has the son, has life. But the unbelievers have
neither the father nor the son, but do live without Christ and God in the
world, being strangers from the covenants of promise, and have no hope as Paul
witnesses Is this it whereby the reprobates, and unbelievers receive life in
the son of God, as this trifler says? And the man very confident in so
gross ignorance, pleases himself, and like proud Goliath challenges all men
to show how the unbelievers as it is in John, (in whose place he sets the
reprobates) do make God a lier, if they receive not life in his son? As
though here I know not what sharpnes of wit were requisite.

They that believe not God, make him a lier,

But such as believe not the Gospel, believe not God.

Ergo, they make him a lier.

The mayor is evident. The minor is proved by the text, because the Gospel is
the testimony of God concerning his son, that believers in him may have
eternal life. They therefore who either are touched with no care of salvation,
or else seek the same without Christ, How a man makes God a liar.
or some other way, are incredulous unto the Gospel, believe not God himself,
and therefore, as much as in them lies, they make him a lier: as contrariwise
such as receive his testimony, do as it were subscribe with their hands and
seals that God is true. John 3.
These. 266. and 484.
nay they make God true in not believing, in kicking against it, and in
blaspheming it: (for so this vile spirit speaks) But unto the reprobates the
benefits of the Gospel belong not by our supposition: Therefore they are not
bound to believe. The benefits of the Gospel belong not to reprobates, as they
do en^^y them, but as they are invited to them ^y the Gospel preached.
But I distinguish the minor: Albeit the benefits of the Gospel belong not by
fruition to the reprobates and unbelievers whomsoever, as far forth as they
are such, and that through their own fault: yet they belong unto them by
inuitation, so far forth as all alike without difference of elect and
rebrobates are commanded to repent and believe the Gospel with an universal
promise: Whosoever believes shall have everlasting life. And this is enough
for this present purpose.

Very well says Luther (whom alone these fellows admire in other things, but
here do extremely contemn) in in his preface to the Romans: Luther.
Upon the only sentence of predestination depend all things: who shall receive
the word, and who not: who shall believe, and who not: who shall be delivered
from sin, and who blinded: who shall be damned, and who justified.
Notwithstanding he advises that curious persons be bridled, who before they
learn Christ and the virtue of his cross, do search into the depth of
predestination. But thou (says he) learn the knowledge of Christ wrestle
daily with thy flesh by faith, and then thou shall perceive how full
predestination is of consolation. And every where he teaches, In Genesis cap. 26.
and 43. Item des^^arbit. and in Psalm. 5
that we must judge of God and of his will and good pleasure toward us, not by
that which goes before, but by that which comes after and is the later (as
we speak): we must execute what God commands: we must behold the son
incarnate, and simply rest in his revealed word, according to that in the
third of Ecclesiasticus: Verse. 21.
Seek not thou the things that be too high for thee, nor search into them
that be above thy reach: but such things as be commanded thee of God, meditate
religiously upon them: for the eye of the body are not needful for the
understanding of secret mysteries.

UNTO THE ARGVMENTS OF THE THIRD RANK.
CHAP. X.
LEt us come now to the third Class, which contains absurdities so absurdly
heaped together, as nothing is more absurd. For if the original of these
absurdities be considered, they spring not from our doctrine, but from the
brain of a malicious person, impudently assailing the truth, and of a wicked
desire to brabble and slander, babbleth foolishlie what he pleases, according
to the rule: Accuse thou falsely with boldness, always something takes fast
hold. And the very handling is a mere Chaos, and a confused heap, breathing
out nothing but babbling and impudency. It every where flows with so many
digressions, repetitions, and cuckoo songs, and as though he had no propounded
mark: he catches at one thing after another: so that to him that reads
these things, that thing will befall, which happened long ago to a king of the
Lacedaemonians, who, when he had heard an Ambassador making an oration on a
time very long but confusedly, answered briefly and pithily: J have forgotten
the first things, Huber. in Comp. These.
I understand not the last. But it is well done, that this slanderer (who in
his book is carried with a desire to contend I know not whither) does in order
rehearse (that it maybe certain what he means) those strange absurdities,
which he says do necessarily follow of the doctrine of Calvin (as he calls
it) touching the redemption of mankind, (for hereof is the question). And
these they be:

1. That all Christian religion and faith is called into question.

2. That the face of the Scripture is such, that it is made more like to the
most lying Alcaron, then to the truth of the eternal God.

3. That the Catholic and true Church is condemned, which has believed and
always with one mouth confessed, that Christ died for all men.

4. That men are driven to desperation, when no man can have any certainty of
his salvation: for that our consolation and Divinity consists of pure
particulars.

5. That the whole preaching of the Gospel is abrogated.

6. That the Sacraments are taken away.

7. That God is accused of deceit and lying.

8. That Christ is accused as a deliverer of God and men.

9. That this also follows, specially if the doctrine of Predestination also
(as our men judge of it) be considered, that God is worthily accused (which
God forbid) of cruelty, of rejoicing at other men's evils, of injustice, and in
a word of the vilest sins.

Oh villainies most worthy to be detested of al men! Who is not astonished and
greatly abashed at such heinous false accusations? But let us hear how he
proves these his absurdities, and relying upon the truth, 3. Esra. 4.
(then which nothing is more strong) let us defend our selves against the
bitings of this Sycophant.

CHAP. XI. An Apology or answer to the first and second accusation.
FIrst therefore he lays to our charge, and accuses our opinion of
universal redemption, that thereby doubtless all Christian religion and faith
is called into question. Why so? we require of thee Huber the proof of so
great a crime, seeing that no man shall be innocent, if it be sufficient to
accuse only.

If any Article (say thou) be approved in Scripture, These. 4^8. and in the
rest following.
and be throughout every side of the leaf taught and plainly declared, it is
this truly, that Christ died for the whole world, no man excepted. Therefore to
deny this Article, is nothing else, then to charge the whole Scripture with
falsehood. For if no credit be given to these things indicted so soundly and
largely by the holy Ghost, and containing the sum of the whole Gospel, what
shall be attributed to the whole Scripture?

I answer. The antecedent is denied, to wit, The confutation of the first
accusation.
that the doctrine of universal redemption, as Huber interprets it, is the
doctrine of the holy Ghost, as though all sins were alike by the death of
Christ, forgiven to all men, believers, and unbelievers, receivers and
contemners. For as we have seen above, this cannot be plainly showed by the
heap of testimonies which are brought: but this is the testimony of all the
prophets and Apostles with one consent, and the sum of the Gospel, Acts
10.43.
that whosoever believes in Jesus of Nazareth, shall receive remission of
sins through his name. And hereafter also when we shall come to the proof of
our true opinion, we will at large make it plain, what the Scriptures teach us
of this present controversy. Wherefore it is the Gospel of men, and not of
Christ, that every one whether he do believe or not, does receive remission of
sins through his name. Therefore let those men lay aside this boasting of
Scripture, who so plainly contradict the foundation of the Scripture, and let
them take heed, least their own foot be snared in the gin they have laid.
For if they are to be said to stir up war against the Scripture, and to
ouerturne religion and Christian faith, who gainesay the sum of the whole
Gospel, what reckoning shall the Christian world make of these men?

The confutation of the second.
The second accusation ringeth of nothing but Mahumetisme, Paganism, Iudaisme,
by the same lying spirit, whereby the Jews raging against Christ, cast in his
teeth Samaritanisme, and (that I may so speak) Satanisme. Whereupon also,
seeing the servant is not above his Lord, nor the Disciple above his Master,
we nothing regard this reproach, as other innumerable. And that the vanity of
it may appear, all the color of blame lies in this: In the Alcoran God thus
speaks to the Turks, Disciples of Mahomet: If we would, we could give a good
and sure way of salvation to every nation: ^^es. 2.76.
but now our word is established, that Hell may be filled with the society of
Devils and men. Therefore it is the doctrine of Mahomet, that surely God is
able to save all people, nations, and men, but he will not: and that for this
cause, because he has from eternity and vnchangeablie decreed to declare his
justice in the damnation of devils and reprobate men. But albeit this slander
does not much pertain to this present purpose, and therefore may be omitted,
(for the controversy now is of Redemption, not of Predestination, which the
adversary every where mingleth, by that dexterity of method, whereby he
thrusts this accusation into the second class, whereas it should belong to
the third,) yet that all men may know this shameless person, I say, that it is a
mere cavil and babbling. For as in the writings of Heathens, Whatsoever the
Turks and heathens teach and hold is not therefore to be condemned as
^^lonious and wicked: for they teach many things agreeing with the truth of
Christian religion
so also in the religions of the Gentiles, Turks and others, as also of
heretics, a man may find many things agreeing with the truth of Christian
Religion. Which things are so far off from making Christian faith to be in
any part suspected, or disabled in any point; that on the contrary they
establish and strengthen the same. Otherwise all things, wherein there is found
such consent, ought to be blotted out of Christian Religion, as erroneous,
false, foolish, Turkish, and heathenish. As for example, the Turkish religion
acknowledges one God, Almighty, creator of heaven and earth: also it
teaches, that Christ the son of Marie was sent of God, whose precepts every
servant of the Gospel in judging ought to follow, and such like. Therefore let
Huber deny, that there is one God, let him deny him to be Almighty, let him
deny him to be the Creator of all, let him deny Christ to be the son of
Marie, let him deny him to be sent of God, let him deny his precepts to be
kept of Christians and such like things, least he seem to have some thing in
common with the Turks: Lastly, let him go on his head, because the Turks go
a foot. And if this be ridiculous, it is more than Turkish fury and madness,
to condemn this proposition as Turkish: A true and godly proposition, though
the Turks teach the same in effect.
That God is able surely to save all men, but he will not, because he has
otherwise from everlasting decreed. What the Alcoron teaches of this, or not
teaches, we nothing pass, who have not learned to draw the truth out of the
stinking puddles of men, but out of the clear fountains of Israel, and we do
stand only unto the judgment of the divine Scriptures. And they teach us,
that God has mercy upon whom he will, Exodus 33.
and hardens whom he will, and that he has raised up Pharao, Romans 9.
and by his example generally vessels of wrath conjoined unto destruction, and
does daily raise up, that in them he may show his power and wrath: as
contrariwise he has prepared vessels of mercy unto glory, that he might make
known the riches of his glory. What, that the Judge at the last day shall say
unto them, that shall be at his left hand: Go ye cursed into everlasting fire,
Matthew. 25.
prepared for the devil and his Angels? Do these things obscurely testify,
if we would rather follow the judgment of the spirit, than of the flesh, that
albeit God is able to save all, yet he will save some surely of the damnable
mass of mankind, and damn others, according to the eternal counsel of his
will?

A Dilemma, proving that some are saved, and others damned, and that by the
will of God.
Further, seeing it is without all doubt, that some shall be saved, and some
damned: it must needs be done, either with or against the will of God. Not
against his will, for so he should not be omnipotent: therefore with his will,
and because he wills it, therefore from everlasting he wills it: unless we
would think, that God does any thing by chance, or rashly, or else that some
new thing falls into his prescience and will. Aug. Ench^r. ad Laur. cap. 103.
Augustine confirms this reason. We are by no means to believe, (says he)
that the Almighty God would have any thing done, which is not done: because
without any alteration or change, he has done, whatsoever he would in heaven
and earth, Psalm. 115.4.
as the truth declares: and therefore certainly he would not do, whatsoever
he has not done. The same man says: De cor. and great. cap. 14.
No free will resists God, when he is willing to save; for so to will and to
be unwilling, is in the power of the willer or niller, A notable saying.
that it hinders not the divine will, nor does overcome his power. For
concerning those men, who do the things that God wills not, he himself does
what he will.

Luther.
Luther also in praefat. ad Romans plainly writes, That all things depend of
predestination, who shall believe, who not, who shall be saved, who damned. And
adds that, which I leave to be diligently observed of the adversaries: that
the sentence is stable, and the necessity immovable of predestination, that
it cannot be changed nor overthrown of any creature. But chiefly in his
book, de seruo Arbitrio, he confesses it at large; that the salvation of
some, and the damnation of others, do wholly arise from hence, that God will
have some saved, and others damned, according to that saying of Paul. He has
mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens. And as touching the
reprobates, he expressly writes, chap. 161. That God of his own mere will
forsakes, hardens, and damneth men. And adds manifestly, that this is it,
that greatly offends common sense and reason, as though God were delighted
with the pains and torments of miserable persons. Also chap. 168. he says:
that the love of God is eternal and immutable, and also the hatred of God
toward me^ everlasting, before the world was made. And many such sayings does
that book contain: as, that by his secret and fearful will, God ordains
whom and what manner of men he will have to be partakers of mercy that is
preached and offered: that the will of his majesty rejects and leaves some
of purpose, that they may perish: that such as be forsaken or hardened by that
secret will of his majesty, do not receive God willing, speaking, doing, and
offering himself; again that willingly he hardens by that unsearchable
will, etc. And that admonition of his, is very godly: In such things it is not
our parts to search out the cause of Gods will, but to reverence, love, and
adore it, restraining the rashness of reason: seeing Christ also, Matthew. 11.
brings no other cause, why the Gospel is hid from the wise, and revealed
unto little ones, than the good pleasure of the father. This doctrine of
Luther, O Huber, sauoreth more certainly of the spirit of God, than those
prophesies which thou have drawn out of him, and do wish to be fastened
unto all the doors of the Temple, and to be written in all men's hearts. Why
then do ye not admit it into all your Churches, and without contention engraue
it in your own and other men's minds? If ye shall do it, it is well: but if
ye continue to find fault with it in us, and after your wonted boldness by
your wicked style and tongue, banish it as Turkish, or else opening the door to
Turcisme, and other unspeakable mischief, I advise you, consider in time,
whether you will cast down the authority of Luther, in the aduauncing
whereof, even unto heaven you have hitherto so greatly labored.

CHAP. XII. Unto the third accusation.
FVrthermore it is an impudent speech, that the Catholic and true Church is
condemned of us, which has believed, and always with one mouth confessed,
that Christ died for all men. The Catholic Church has ever believed that
Christ died for all men that believe in him, and not otherwise. John 3. Acts
10. Heb. 11.
We also confess, that Christ died for all men. For who can deny that without
distinction, which diverse times is expressly set down in the sacred
Scriptures? But hereof is the question, whether all believers and unbelievers
together, be from all sin and condemnation, by the death of Christ, set free,
justified, and received into grace of the father, as sons and heirs? It is
most false, that the Catholic Church has believed that with one consent: yea
rather it has always believed this, and always confessed it with one mouth,
that faith is required, (without which it is impossible to please God) to the
intent we may obtain remission of sins, by the merit of Christ. But what
antiquity has thought of this present controversy, it is apparent by those
things which before we have here and there alleged out of the writings of the
ancient fathers, Testimonies of the adversary answered.
and it shall be showed most plentifully, when we shall come to the
confirmation of our opinion. Now this shall suffice, if we shall answer
briefly unto the testimonies produced by the adversary.

That the unbeliever is already judged, Hub^th 539 Cyril. in Io. lib. 2. cap.
^3.
because he, by contemning the giver of freedom from damnation, does give
sentence of damnation against himself. What is this to the matter? Or else who
denies that unbelievers refuse the author of salvation, while they believe not
in the name of the only begotten son of God, and therefore that condemnation
and the wrath of God do abide upon them?

Athanasius in Euang. de pass. and cru. Chri.
The mysteries (says he) of the Hebrews say, that the place of Caluerie is
the sepulcher of Adam. If the matter be so, I wonder at the nature and
property of that place. For it was meet that the Lord should suffer in that
place, when he minded to restore the first Adam, that his sin being put away,
he might abolish it from his whole kind. And a little before those words he
says: The Lord was sacrificed, that by the blood of his offering he might set
all at liberty. Which saying I marvel the adversary omitted, if he himself
read Athanasius. But he understood this either of sufficiency, as we shall by
and by hear that other fathers would have such sayings of theirs to be taken:
Synecdoche, is when part is understood by the whole, or the whole by part.
Prosper.
or else he spoke by the figure Synecdoche of the universality of the
faithful, who are out of al mankind converted. For according to the
declaration of Prosper, lib. 2. cap. 1. de vocat. gent. neither part, I mean
of good men and evil, of such as shall be saved and damned, is without the
name of all men: The part of such as rebel having the loss of salvation, but
the dignity of the faithful obtaining the account of fulness. And to that end
cites he the saying, 1. Ioh. 2.2. He is the propitiation for our sins: and
not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole world. And lib. 1. cap. 3.
The whole is set down for a part in the Scripture, in the phrases, All men,
the whole world, etc.
the same writer from sundry sayings of the Scripture concludes on this wise:
Therefore the people of God have their fulness: and albeit a great part of men
do either refuse, or neglect the grace of the Savior: yet in the elect and
foreknowne, and in such as are severed from the generality of all, there is a
certain special universality, so that out of the whole world, the whole world
is delivered, and out of all men, all men seem to be taken: as also when the
speech is of the ungodly, the divine style does so order his manner of speaking,
that the things which are spoken of some part, may seem to appertain to all
men. Romans 10.18. 1. John 5.19. Mar. 1.5. John. 3.32. and 8.2.
And this very thing he shows plainly in that place by sundry testimonies,
that even all the earth is named for a part of the earth, and the whole world
for a part of the world, and all men for a part of me^. And so Ambrose upon 3.
to the Romans expounds that saying: All have gone astray. For (quoth he)
because he says all, he means not the whole people altogether, but that part
of the people, wherein all evil men are contained. And he brings that which
is in Jeremy, Iere. 26.
All rose up against the Prophet of the Lord to kill him. And it follows,
that all the people would not permit them. Of which example says Ambrose thus:
Therefore by those all he means such as were evil, and by these all, the
good. For always there be two people in one multitude.

But that we may not doubt of the mind of Athanasius, in the very same oration
he describes the grace of redemption thus: That Christ was made man and died,
that we mortal men might be quickened, and may no longer endure the kingdom
of death: that therefore he was crucified that he might take upon him the
curse, and that we might possess the blessing. If this be understood of al men
without exception, there shall be none any more, ouerwhom death and hell shall
have dominion. Furthermore, Athanasius in the same place often repeateth the
said Synecdoche, as that he says: that the devil being cast out of hell, all
his captives are delivered by the power of Christ: which thing he straightwaies
expounds of the universality of the Saints, who are with Adam set free.
Likewise he says, that the devil has lost al his spoils, and is made poorer
then Irus: but he speaks of such as are converted, who in every place are
translated from the power of Satan into the kingdom of Christ. After the same
manner certainly he says, that the knowledge of God came to all men, and into
all places: that all men tread the devil under their feet: that all do under
the conduct of Christ laugh him to scorn: that all his subtle shifts are
marred, and all the wisdom of the Grecians is become foolish, because the
death of the Savior has brought the world into liberty, and has given
cause, that the Gentiles should glorify God, while the Jews continue blinded
in the knowledge of Christ. These things manifestly show, how Athanasius
judged, that Christ died to put away sin from all mankind, according to that
Ioh. 12. which he also cites: When I shall be lifted up, I will draw all
things unto me.

The 3. ^estimonie of the adversary. Chrysostom. in 1. ad Tim. hom. 7.
Besides there is cited Chrysostom, where he says, that Christ also hung upon
the cross for the Gentiles and unbelievers. I answer: He says not this only
but more also, that Christ died for all, for believers and unbelievers, Hom.
17. in Epist. ad Heb. upon that of the Apostle, he was offered that he might
take away the sins of many. But he declares himself, that such sayings are
to be taken as touching the sufficiency or greatness of the price, and not as
touching the effect: for so he teaches that the sins of many only and not
of all, to wit, of the believers, and not of unbelievers are taken away by the
oblation of Christ. His words are these: Why is he said to be offered to take
away the sins of many, and not of all? Because all believe not. He died
surely as much as lay in him, for all, that is, his death is of such moment, as
is the perdition of all. Theophylact the abridger of Chrysostom, expressed the
same distinction ad Heb. 2. and 9. and mentions that Basil also did so
distinguish. Whereupon also Chrysostom Hom. 39. in 1. ad Cor. upon that saying
of the Apostle, that all shall be quickened in Christ, plainly denies, that
that can be meant of the the righteousness of all men, as though whosoever were
made sinners in Adam, have the free gift of righteousness in Christ. Of these
things it is clear, to what opinion Chrysostom, Theophylact, Basil, and
other fathers do lean.

In alleging Augustine, The 4. testimony. Augustine.
I know not whether I may blame craftines or grossenes in the adversary.
Augustine intituleth a book, Of articles falsely laid to his charge: whereof
the first article was, that he was falsely charged, (as we are also falsely by
such as envy us at this day) as if he should teach, that our Lord Jesus Christ
suffered not for the redemption of all men. Therefore (say thou) by
Augustines judgment it is a false and profane opinion, that Christ suffered
not for the redemption of all.

But Huber by a sophistical or deceitful cunning passes by those things,
which Augustine there largely writes for the declaration of this article. For
he also using the distinction before alleged out of Chrysostom, says: Quod
ad magnitudinem and potentiam pretij, etc. that is, As touching the greatness
and power of the price, and as much as concerns the only cause of mankind,
the blood of Christ is the redemption of the whole world; and so all are
rightly said to be redeemed: but whereas they are void of redemption, who
pass through this world without the faith of Christ, and without the Sacrament
of regeneration, doubtless the propriety of redemption belongs to them, out
of whom the prince of this world is cast forth, and are now not the vessels of
the devil, but the members of Christ: whose death was not bestowed for
mankind, that they also, who were not to be regenerated, should belong unto his
redemption. For the cup of immortality, which is made of our infirmity, and
the divine virtue, has surely in it self that it can profit all: but if it
be not drunk, it does no good. These things he.

The 5. testimony. Maximus.
As for the saying of Maximus in Augustine, sermon. 128. de tempore: We read in
the Scriptures, that the salvation of whole mankind is redeemed by the blood
of the Savior, and the safety of the whole world is everlasting. Those words
may be expounded as touching the greatness and power of the price, being so
rich, that if all would believe in Christ, the chains of Satan should hold
none, but all should enjoy eternal safety. But the right meaning is, that the
author there speaks of the generality of the believers through the whole
world, which thing he shall confess, whosoever shall consider his drift and
scope. See also Ambrose in Lu. 23. de cassa prodit. poenit.
For this he means that the world is like a potters field bought with the
price of the Lords blood for strangers, that is (says he) for Christians, who
are exiles in the whole world, that they that have not possession in the world,
may possess a whole Savior. Therefore that redemption belongs nothing to the
unbelievers, being the sons and possessors of the world. And this is the
constant doctrine of the fathers, as at large shall be showed in the book
following.

The 6. testimony. Cypr. de ablut. pe^um. Aug. ser^. in mon^e. lib 1.
Chrysostom. hom. ^. and 20.
But concerning them, who after faith received return unto their vomit again,
it is little auailable, how we understand certain sayings of the fathers,
wherein they are read to attribute to such persons the grace of pardon, and
clensing from sins, adoption and such like. For this is not the state of the
controversy, whether they that have once obtained by faith remission of
sins, do chance to fall from that grace or no: but whether all, believers
and unbelievers have once received the grace of that pardon, and clensing from
sins, or no? Those very sayings of the fathers approve the negative part
which we defend, because they speak of such as are converted and baptized, and
to these only they give it, that they are set free from sins, and made the
sons of God. But how some afterward lose this grace, and return to their
vomit, we have above fully declared: to wit, that so far as they are numbered
with the Church, they be accounted, and ought to be accounted in the
judgment of charity, for reconciled and the sons of God, although with God
oftentimes they be not such, Sermon. domin. in monte lib. 1.
as Augustine very well has witnessed. Whereupon also he joins these
together: to be made partaker of the spirit of grace, whereby we are
reconciled to God, and to hold the society of the holy brotherhood: Aug. in
Leuit.
whereas in the mean while many hypocrites every where creep into that
society, having with Simon Magus visible sanctification only, and wanting the
invisible.

Furthermore, touching the new writers, The 7. testimony.
(who because of certain phrases are drawn to the defense of this error) we
are not greatly troubled, because we follow not the preiudicate opinion of this
or that Doctor, but the truth it self. Answers to the sayings of the new
writers, cited by the adversary.
Yet for their sakes that are desirous of the truth, we think it good to give
some advise.

Bullinger, Gualter, Musculus and others are cited, and the confessions of one
or two Churches in Heluetia, out of who^ these and the like kind of sayings
are diligently drawn: to wit, that Christ, as Bulling. ser. 2. de Natiuit.
Chri.
much as is in him is a Savior to all, and came to save all: The same upon 1.
John 1.
that he pleased God by sacrifice for all the sins of all times: Cat. chapter
minore Eccl. Tigur.
that his passion ought to satisfy for the sin of all men, and that the whole
world is quickened by the same: Mus^. in locis de remiss. p. q. 2.
that the grace of remission of sins is appointed for all mortal men, and
such like.

Unto these I answer, that howsoever, and in what sense soever those writers
uttered these and the like kind of speeches, it is certain that they were not
of the adversaries opinion, that effectually and in very deed all, without
exception of any one, and without any difference of believers and unbelievers,
are received into grace, and made partakers of remission of sins,
righteousness and salvation in Christ. Of which thing that we may not doubt at
al in the Miscellanies of D. Jerome Zanchie of godly memory, Zanchius.
there is the judgment extant of the Church and school of Tigur, touching
certain Theses of the said Zanchie, which at that time were hatefully pursued
of certain that moved the same mischief that Huber does.

The promises of the free mercy of God, and of sure and eternal salvation,
(says Zanchie in his 13. proposition) albeit they be propounded universally to
all, and are so to be preached, yet unto the elect only in very deed they do
belong. And straight after in 14. proposition: Wherefore when Paul says, God
will have all men to be saved: if a man restrain that word (all men) to the
elect in any order of men whatsoever they be: also if a man interpret that
saying 1. Ioh. 2. Christ is the propitiation of the whole world, for the elect
dispersed, or to be dispersed hereafter through the whole world, he does not
deprave the Scripture.

Of the universality of the promise of grace.
What do those lights of the Heluetian Church, Bullinger, Gualther, Wolfius,
Marty, Simler, Lauater and the rest say to these things? They do not only
assent that the promises touching the free mercy of God, and sure and eternal
salvation, do belong unto the elect only, but also they confirm it with this
reason: That the promises are hidden things for faith, and can no otherwise be
perceived then by faith: and therefore they belong only unto them, who are
adorned with faith by God. Certainly (say they) the promises of this kind are
to be preached unto all, because the ministers of the word know not such as are
elect according to purpose, and they have a flock consisting of reprobates and
elect: but they are made effectual by the power of Gods spirit in them only,
who are of the number of the elect.

Afterward touching the other proposition, that is, this whole controversy,
they make a pure and clear confession, publishing it with a loud voice in
these words: The universality of the elect, in the word All men, by the
opinion of new writers.
We truly are of the same judgment, and cannot reject with a good conscience
that exposition, which also we acknowledge to be agreeable to the text, and not
once alleged by Augustine, a father most worthy praise of all, for which
interpretation he was never of any man condemned of heresy.

In the same place they subscribe also to Zanchies opinion, that true faith is
given once only to the elect, The elect persevere in faith.
and that the elect once endued with true faith, and ingrafted into Christ by
the holy Ghost, cannot altogether lose faith shake off the holy Ghost, and
wholly fall from Christ, and that because of the promise of God, and the prayer
of Christ. Notwithstanding that true faith and the spirit is as it were a
sleep and languisheth in the Saints, when they fall, but is not altogether
taken away: otherwise the seed of God should not remain in them, as it is
said 1. Ioh. 3.

Behold Huber the sentence of so many worthy men (whom thou have gotten for
thy defendors) consenting against thee? Therefore there is no cause, that thou
should seek after crafty wresting of words, and make wiles to entrap men
through some phrases of theirs, whose judgment is so plainly known. Yet least
thou should chance to doubt of these things, Zuinglius.
take but the advice of Huldrich Zuinglius only, the ornament of thy Heluetia,
and the brightness of all kind of learning, Annot. in Euang. and epist. Pauli,
per Leonem Iudae editis. There be many such kind of speaking, used afterward
in like manner of his successors: Annot. ad Heb. In Ioh. 6. In Ioh. 12.
That the son of God took flesh, that he might be made a sacrifice for the
sins of the whole world: that his flesh was given for the life and redemption
of the whole world: and that he died for all, that he might quicken all by
himself, In Ioh. 17.
and by his death give life to the universal world: that Christ came to save
all, and to give eternal life to all, etc. That man surely uses thus to
speak, but in a far other sense, than thou huntest for such kind of
speakings in his scholars and successors. For expounding himself he
expressly writes: In Matthew. 15.
Whereas Christ's death is the remedy and plaster of our diseases and wounds,
yet that many feel not the efficacy thereof, In Ioh. 3.
namely such as do not acknowledge their sins. Also, that he was sent to
forgive sins to all repentant sinners, and to communicate eternal life: that
he is the life and salvation of the godly, the life of believers and such like.
In Ioh. 6. and praefat in histo. de pass. In epist. ad Romans 3. In Ioh. 12.
And yet he takes away the sins of the whole world, and gives life to all,
both because no sins in the world are forgiven, but by and for the only
reconciler Christ Jesus: and also, because he is an universal Savior, to wit,
not only of the Jews, but of the Gentiles also, that they that have the
fruition of Christ his oblation, may for ever go to God through him, and may
have by faith through Christ the blotting out of all their sins: as more at
large a man may see in the same writer, tom. 1. expostul. ad Fridolium. Attend
and weigh O Huber, and cease to abuse the testimonies of thine Heluetians.

The 8. testimony. Musculus.
The same thing I say of Musculus, whose judgment who so looks into, I know
very well he will marvel at Hubers wit, and at his desire and captious kind
of speaking to pervert all things. De remiss. pecc. q. 2. These. 586.
These are his words: That the grace of remission of sins is appointed for
all mortal men. This Huber catching at greedily, sets it in his book in
great letters: but maliciously altogether pulled away from the words following,
wherein lies the meaning of that saying: to wit, that the grace of remission
of sins is appointed for all mortal men, as far forth as the Gospel is to
be preached to every creature, and the mercy of God to be set forth to all.
And so Musculus understands the sayings: Ioh. 3. 1. Ioh. 2.
So God loved the world. Christ is the propitiation for the sins of the whole
world: not that remission of sins by the grace of God befalls to all,
without difference of believers and unbelievers: which is the opinion of the
adversary, and not of Musculus. Nay thus he testifies openly: If we consider
them, who by the grace of God obtain remission of their sins, as of the
elect: so of these also there is a small number in respect of the reprobates,
whose sins he says are for ever retained. Let the same man also be weighed,
loco de Redemp. where he says: We know that all men are not made partakers of
this redemption. Again says he: Men reprobate and desperately wicked receive
not redemption. The contrary hereof Huber with full mouth avouches, that all
by Christ are made partakers of redemption: that all receive it, but that the
reprobates having once received it do lose it again.

Nevertheless, Three reasons of Musculus, why redemption is universal.
according to the reasons assigned of Musculus, this redemption is rightly
termed universal. 1. Because it comes not to pass by the defect of grace,
that many do perish, but by the defect of faith, seeing grace is Matthew. 22.
as all things were ready for the marriage. 2. Because all are called unto it.

That which he cites out of Hemingius his Syntagma, The 9. testimony.
Hemingius.
or Treatise, has some color, to wit, that Christ came not for to redeem
only certain selected out of mankind, but that that grace is universal, as
touching the fatherly will of God. But albeit Hemingius has thus written,
because he otherwise understands the doctrine of Predestination: yet he
greatly dissenteth from the devise of the adversaries, that all, believers and
unbelievers without doubt, properly and in very deed by receiving remission
of sins, are received into the bosom of grace, justified and saved by the
death of Christ. Contrariwise Hemingius These. 28. testifies, (which These
Huber craftily hid, when he alleged the 27.) that as touching the event, the
grace of redemption belongs to a few only, because few believe, and bring
forth the fruits of repentance. For he acknowledges and often times
repeateth, that albeit the Gospel offer the benefits of Christ to all men of
what nation and condition soever they be, De promiss. reparat.
yet they are received by faith alone, and so justification and salvation are
freely given to him that believes. De Euangelio.
And clearly he says, That the condition of faith is required, that the
benefit may be applied, that is remission of sins: and the condition of
perseverance, that it may be retained, being received. For which thing these
men say, that all have once received the benefit, that the believers abide in
the same, being received, and the unbelievers do lose it again.

The 10. testimony. Catackis palatin.
I come unto that which is objected out of the Catechism of our Churches,
quest. 37. where the words of the Catechism have, that Christ sustained in
body and soul, the wrath of God against the sins of all mankind. But the
exposition is all one with the place of Athanasius before, where was the like
speech. Certainly the effect of the death of Christ is not in all, believers,
and unbelievers indifferently; but as our Catechism out of the word of God
teaches, quest. 30. They that embrace by a true faith, Jesus to be a perfect
savior, do possess all things which are requisite to salvation. Again,
quest. 20. to the demand, Whether then salvation be given by Christ to all
men, who perished in Adam? It is plainly answered: Not to all men, but to them
only, who are ingrafted into him by a true faith, and embrace his benefits. If
thou can (Huber) reconcile this with thy opinion, (which is full of error) to
wit, that all who perished in Adam are received into grace by Christ,
justified, quickened, and restored to salvation. See also in the Catechism,
quest. 53.55.60.66. etc. in all which places, no other participation of Christ
and his benefits is set down than by a true faith, hypocrites and unbelievers
being excluded. But of these things enough. Let the adversary now go, and
maintain his error by the testimonies of old and new writers, whereby he is
most manifestly confuted.

CHAP. XIII. Unto the fourth accusation.
Huber. pa. 20, ^7. 312.
THe fourth absurdity objected unto us follows: That men are driven to
desperation, and that no man can have any certainty of his salvation. This
malicious and false crime he tosseth too and fro. The sum and effect tends
to this, that all the assurance and comfort of salvation according to our
opinion leans upon mere particulars, whereof nothing follows, after this
sort: Some men are in favor with God, and shall be saved. I am a man.
Therefore I am in favor with God, and shall be saved.
As though we were so foolish and unwise, that we have not learned better out
of the word of God to comfort our selves and others. For as there is of those
which shall be damned, so there is of such as shall be for ever saved, a
certain universality in the Scriptures: neither can any man that is in his
right wits deny, that some shall be received, others refused: some shall be
saved, others shall perish in the last day: Math. 24.25.
the former rejoicing for ever in the fathers kingdom prepared for them before
the foundations of the world, and these contrariwise suffering eternal
torments in unquenchable fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.

And albeit God knows them that be ordained by him to eternal life, or else
not ordained, and all things (that I may use the words of Luther) are set down
in Predestination, Prefat. ad Romans
who shall be saved, who damned: yet we must not go unto election without the
word, and speculatiuely, In Genesis 26.
(as he speaks) least we fall headlong into desperation or contempt: but we
must judge of election, a posterity, that is by that which follows it as
they say, that is, by faith, The universality of the promise of grace.
and by other fruits of election, arising unto the very cause it self. Hence
come those most sweet promises made unto the believers, universal surely:
Come unto me all ye that labor, I will refresh you. Matthew. 11. Ioh. 3. Ioh. 6.
Whosoever believes in the son shall not perish. This is the will of the
father, that all that believe in the son, should have eternal life. Hereunto
bear all the prophets witness, that all that believe in him, receive
remission of sins through his name. Acts 10. and 13 19.
By him whosoever believes is justified. The righteousness of God by the faith
of Jesus Christ, in all, and upon all that believe. Romans 3. and 9.
Whosoever beleeeueth in him, shall not be confounded. For there is one Lord of
all, rich toward all that call upon him: for whosoever shall call upon the
name of the Lord, shall be saved.

The promise requires faith.
And often elsewhere, after this sort is the promise of salvation and eternal
life (made unto the believers) repeated. For the promise requires faith, and
in respect of the believers, it is universal, as Ambrose also well expounds
it, lib. 1. de poenit. ca. 10. Ambrose.
He that has faith, has eternal life, he is not excluded from pardon:
whosoever believes, shall not perish. When he says, whosoever, no man is
excluded, no man excepted. All, says he, that is, of what state soever, of
what fall soever, if he believes, let him not be afraid of perishing.

Now out of this universal ground, this is the argument, wherewith we overcome
the world, the devil, sin, death, and hell: A Syllogism, showing how a man
ought to apply to himself the general promise.
Whosoever shall believe in Christ, shall be saved by his grace, and not be
ashamed for ever. The faithful person assumeth; I believe Lord. The conclusion
follows: Therefore I shall be saved by the grace of God, and not be ashamed
for ever.


The mayor of the Syllogism is plain by the promises produced before. He that
believes, has in himself the proof of the minor: The believer knows
himself to have faith, and how.
for he certainly knows himself to believe, his own mind so telling him,
and his ready and unfeigned study of new obedience witnessing the same;
whereupon faith is known, as the tree by the fruits. For as John says, 1.
Epist. 2. By this we are sure we know him, if we keep his commandments. He
that says, I know him, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and the
truth is not in him. Hereupon also Augustine has left it in writing, that
every one most certainly sees his faith, if he have the same. Which saying of
his, Luther in Galat. 4. cap.
Luther also allows as right and godly. Yea the Apostle himself prescribes
this rule, 2. Cor. 13. Prove your selves, whether you be in faith, examine your
selves. Wherein he sufficiently declares, that such as be ingraffed into
Christ by a true faith, may have the knowledge thereof in themselves.

Mark this.
But if Satan, as if he is a liar and murderer from the beginning, dare deny
unto thee that thou beleeuest, yield not unto him whosoever thou art, O man,
who thoroughly perceiuest the tokens of faith in thy self, but contrariwise go
most boldly, and say unto him: Go behind me Satan, Matthew. 16. 2. Tim. 1.
for thou sauourest not the things which are of God; I know whom I have
believed, and I am persuaded, 1 Thessalonians 5.
that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him, against that
day. He is faithful who has called me, who also will effect it. A weak faith
ought not to cast a man down.
Neither is there any cause why thou should be troubled, and cast down in
mind for the imperfection of faith, and for those contrary motions, fear,
doubtings, heaviness, and manifold temptations, wherewith we daily fight, as
long as we carry about this body of death. For we know him, who has said:
Behold my servant, whom I have chosen, my beloved, Esaias. 24. Matthew 12.
he shall not break a bruised reed, and smoking flax he shall not quench,
till he bring forth judgment unto victory. Matthew. 14.31. and 16* 8.
How often has the Lord testified by notable examples in the Gospel toward
his disciples, and others greatly weak in faith, how he does not cast off, but
with great love and lenity, receive and cherish such as are weak in faith,
and daily makes them more stronger? Faith therefore although it be faint, Romans
14.3.
so long as it is true and sincere, shall not fail of his effect. Only let
him, who feels himself to doubt, exercise his faith, If thou doubt, do
this.
and wrestle against doubting: let him say with the father of the child, that
had the dumb spirit: I believe Lord, Mark. 9. Luke 17.
help mine unbelief, and let him pray with the Apostles: Lord increase our
faith.

Is this to drive men to desperation? Is this to reason from pure particulars?
And what other consolation I pray you may be brought, whereby a man may be made
certain of his salvation, to wit, that he is just before God, and heir of
eternal life? Certainly if we have no other ground of comfort, than that such
as shall be saved and damned, the elect and reprobates are all alike redeemed
by Christ, we shall fall headlong into desperation. Therefore mad and foolish
he must needs be, that thus concludes:

They that are saved and damned, The weak and woeful comfort that arises from
the redemption of all and every one without exception.
are all alike redeemed by Christ:

Ergo, it will come to pass, that I shall not perish, but have everlasting
life.

Therefore it appears, that that universality of men redeemed, no one at all
excepted, which the adversary so greatly talks of, is not the proper ground
of Christian consolation: but we must come to faith, which puts difference
between those that shall be saved and damned. For by faith we receive the
merit of Christ, and apply it to our selves, and therefore he that believes
in the son, has eternal life: but he that believes not in the son, Job.
3.
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him. And hitherto at the
length is the adversary brought, will he, nill he, to the intent he may
assign some thing certain of the certainty of salvation. We (says he, The
adversary himself confesses the truth.
These. 534.) Do know that salvation is certain, undoubted, and constant, and
we say that it pertains unto them, who by faith abide in Christ, and we say,
that they shall abide in faith, who suffer not the word of universal grace
upon all, The faithful shall continue. Luke 22. Ioh. 17.
to be taken from themselves. We also say the same thing, and further say, that
they shall persevere in the word and assurance of grace, who are once ingrafted
into Christ, by a true and lively faith, he praying for them, and giving them
this freely, that their faith shall not fail. For this foundation being once
removed of the perseverance of true believers: what certainty can any man have
of the grace of God in time to come, and therefore of his salvation? What, that
the universality of the promise, which they so greatly urge, must then needs
fall. Flat contraries.
For these are flat contrary, that all believers are saved, and that some
believers do fall away and perish. But if salvation pertain to them, (as it
does) which by faith abide in Christ, what shall we say of unbelievers: they
are excluded. Therefore let him look to it, Huber. These. 266. and sequent.
who avouches that they are alike saved by Christ, as well as any other, and
that the promises of grace and life, belong to them also.

Mark. 16.
but the enjoying of it, abides with the universality of the believers,
wherein there is no difference of Jew or Gentile, Romans 3.
master or servant, male or female, but the righteousness of God, is in all,
and upon all that believe. But they that believe not, shall not see life, Job.
3.
but the wrath of God abides on them. And this is enough, that thou may
safely, and ought to believe, that Christ dyed for thee and thy salvation
because we are commanded all to repent and believe the Gospel, having this
promise added, that he that believes and is baptized, shall be saved, he that
believes not, shall be damned.

The adversary cauilleth, Huber. these. 83.
that it is not sufficient for us to say, that we must believe, that Christ
profits all men, who believe in him: for straightwaies is asked, what shall I
believe? What is promised unto me, before I believe? What? Thou have the rule
of faith, the Apostles Creed, and do thou not know what thou ought to
believe? And as touching the promise, it is true, that unless a promise go
before, faith cannot follow, seeing faith comes by hearing the promise. I say
therefore, that the grace of God, salvation, and eternal life in Christ, are
promised to a man, not as yet believing, but conditionally, if he shall
believe. Luther.
Here Luther in Genesis 48. If thou beleeuest thou have; if thou will not believe,
thou shall have nothing. For so much thou have, as thou do believe. If thou
beleeuest, now thou can do, and possessest all things: but if thou do not
believe, thou have nothing.

CHAP. XIIII. A discussing of the fifth absurdity.
FVrthermore, the first absurdity raised up by this contentious quareller, is
this, that by the denial of universal redemption as he understands it, that
is, by the not granting of the universality of grace and salvation by Christ
in all, and upon all, without any difference of faith or unbelief, elect or
reprobates, there follows the abrogation of the whole ministry of the
Gospel, because no man can know (if we credit him) what must be preached to
any man. Is it even so? But we see Christ and his Apostles, (from whom we must
draw the pattern of sound doctrine, What must be preached, to whom, and how.
Ioh. 9 41. Luk 14 47. Act. 2.38. and 10.43.
) to follow this way of teaching, that they reprove all of sin, they exhort
all to repentance and faith, they lift up consciences afflicted with the
feeling of sin, and terrified with the fear of judgment, by the promises of
the Gospel; contrariewise they affray with the Law, secure persons, and
briefly, they open to the believers, Romans 1.2.3.
and shut to the unbelievers, the kingdom of God. These authors if we will
imitate, (and we must be thereto willing) we shall know, What is to divide
the word aright.
what, to whom, and how we must preach, and making choice between careless
persons, and them that are pricked in their hearts, we shall preach grace and
remission of sins unto them, who acknowledge themselves to have sins, and
do desire to be delivered from them: but unto them, who securely go on in
sins, we shall propound the Law, that by the curse they may be terrified,
and brought by this means unto the fear of God. This is to divide the word
of God rightly, that God may be acknowledged both merciful unto them that
confess their sins, and believe in his son, and also angry with careless
persons, and so every one may learn to fear God, and to lean upon his
mercy, which he has declared in the sending of his son. This difference not
observed, it comes to pass, that they, who were to be comforted by the
Gospel, are crucified by the Law, and they who were to be terrified by the
Law, Tom. 2. fol. 123. and tom. 4. fol. 104.
are hardened by the Gospel: as Luther does very well advise us of all these
things, in Genesis 18. and upon that saying of Matthew, chap. 9. Be of good
comfort, son, thy sins are forgiven thee. Where also among other things he
notes, that Christ offered the Gospel to the man afflicted with the palsy,
but reproved the Pharisees for blasphemers and wicked men. Why (says he)
think ye evil? He does not say to the man sick of the palsy, why do thou
think evil? Nor to the Pharisees, Be of good comfort, etc. most rightly
cutting the word of God.

Not our opinion, but our adversaries disturbeth the order of preaching aright.
Here now let it be considered, whether doctrine disturbeth this order: Ours,
whereby out of the commandment of God all are commanded to repent and
believe, and to all and every believer is preached forgiveness of their sins
from God for the merits of Christ, as often as by a true faith they embrace the
promise of the Gospel: but contrariwise to all unbelievers and hypocrites is
denounced, that the wrath of God and eternal condemnation do so long abide
upon them, as they continue to be such men? Or else the doctrine of Huber
rather, These. 60.
who being carried away in the chariot of contention through vain paradoxes,
preaches to all men, as well to secure as to the afflicted, as well to
unbelievers as to believers, that all judgment and wrath of God is in very
deed truly and properly taken away and removed? who undoubtedly avouches that
all men together are freed from all sin, These. 65.
and that whole mankind in very deed without exception of any one, is
received into the grace and bosom of the father by the death of his son. Who
also affirms, that righteousness and the work of salvation by Christ
pertains to all them that were lost in Adam: These. 46.
and defends with as great contention and impudency as his wit and style
will yield him, These. 270.
that al reprobates as well as any other whomsoever are saved by him. Wherefore
let him rather acknowledge his own fault, then so boldly blame other men.

He obiecteth: If the grace of God pertain not to all, Objection. These. 475.
and sequent.
with what mouth and with what forehead dare the minister and preacher of
reconciliation in publishing the Gospel, call all and every one to the grace
of God? Jf he inuit all promise to all, exhort all to repentance, he shall lie:
because grace belongs not to all by this supposition: and unto whom the
promise and grace do not belong, they also neither ought, nor can possibly
believe.

The commandment of faith and repentance binds all. Mar. 1.
As touching the precept of conversion and faith, that binds all men simply,
according to the saying: Repent ye and believe. Wherefore no lie shall here be
committed, if the minister of the word inuit all men to faith, exhort and
stir up all to repentance. But the promises of grace, But the promises of
grace belong to the believers only. 2 Thessalonians. 3. Acts 13.
wherein is offered mercy, peace, salvation, honor, glory, life and
immortality: these (speaking of men grown) are received no otherwise than by
faith, and faith all men have not, but whom God of his singular mercy
vouchsafes that divine gift. Further, the adversary himself, whether he will
or not, must confess (as before also we mentioned) that salvation pertains
unto them, These. 534.
who by faith abide in Christ. Therefore it does not belong to the unbelievers
and so to all: no truly, unless a man would call again the fable of Origene,
Origens fable
that all men at length shall be saved. Wherefore here the Antecedent is denied,
that the minister of the Gospel promises to all, and preaches the covenant
of reconciliation to all, as though all were comprehended alike in the
covenant. Zach 1.3. Ezech. 18.21. Esaias 1.17. Acts 2.38. and 8.22.
For to speak simply, he promises to the believers only, and to such as
repent. But to the unbelievers and hypocrites he denounces wrath, because the
wicked has no peace, says the Lord: neither is any thing promised unto them
but conditionally, to wit, if they turn, and believe with all their heart. The
promise is made unto the wicked conditionally.
And this condition God alone performs in whom it pleases him, seeing both
faith and repentance be his mere gift.

And in this sense it is rightly said, that the promises ought to be preached
and propounded unto all, believers and unbelievers: as far as the ministers
office stretches, that they should disperse the word of faith and salvation
indifferently and publicly into the ears of all, and setting forth the mercy
of God in Christ, (who is the sacrifice for the sins of the world) they
should call whomsoever, to embrace the gift of grace, and should inuit
whomsoever they find, as it were to the marriage of the king.

Matthew. 22.
And it is an ungodly speech, that all ought not to believe, because the promise
and salvation pertains not to all. Nay, because salvation is proper to the
faithful only, and death and condemnation to the unfaithful: therefore ought
all to repent and believe the Gospel, that they perish not with the world, but
may have eternal life. Neither does it any thing hinder this general
inuitation, that it is certain, that many ever have been and shall be
contemners of grace offered: seeing as the Apostle says, faith belongs not
to all: 2. These. 3. Matthew. 22. Mark this.
and as Christ witnesses; many are called, and few are chosen. For the
commandment of the king is enough and largely enough for the servants that are
the inuiters: Go ye, Luke 14. Mark. 16.
and say ye to them that are bidden, Come, for all things are ready. Call ye
unto the marriage whomsoever ye find. Again, Preach ye unto every creature.
Unto this commandment must the faithful preacher of righteousness yield
obedience, whether he be received, or rejected, or else for the same endure any
temporal adversity. As also they who be called, must without delay obey
their calling, howsoever many obey not, because they have also a commandment
greater then any shifting or refusal that they can make: Come ye believe,
repent: Psalm. 95. Heb. 3.
To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as your fathers did
in the desert.

Let Augustine be read touching this point against Cresconius Gram. lib. 1.
cap. 5. and* 6. where by diverse testimonies of Scripture he expressly
shows, The truth must be preached to men, though they will not hear it.
Matthew. 10.
that the truth ought to be preached even to them that will not hear. The
Lord says in the Gospel: When ye enter in, say, Peace be to this house: if
they be worthy that be therein, your peace shall rest upon them: if not, it
shall return to you again. Did he certify them, that they, to whom they
should preach that peace, would receive it? Yet he gave them to understand,
that peace must be preached without delay, even to such as would not admit the
same. The Apostle also charged his Timothy, 1. Tim. 4.
that he should not be slothful in preaching for men's sakes, to whom the
preaching of the truth is unpleasant: I charge thee before God, and Christ
Jesus: Preach the word, be instant in season and out of season, rebuke, exhort,
improve. Therefore a faithful workman will preach to such as are willing in
season, and to such as refuse out of season. Christ also how many things spoke
he in the face of the Jews, Pharisees, Saduces, such as not only would not
believe, but also greatly speak against him and persecute him? And he knew
surely, says Augustine, (because he knew all things) that these things would
nothing profit them to their salvation: but by his example peradventure
strengthened us, Eze. 2. and 3.
who cannot know before, the future faith or unfaithfulness of men. Beside, we
read that the Prophets were sent to men so disobedient, that God himself
foretold the Prophets whom he sent, that they to whom he sent them, would not
obey their words. So Ezechiel was sent with ye word of God, to strive with the
Jews, that would disobey, dissent, and speak against. In lik manner Jeremy,
Iere. 1.19. and 7.27.
to whom it was said: Thou shall speak all these words unto them, yet they
will not hear thee, and thou shall call them, but they will not answer thee.

Four reasons why the word is preached to reprobates, beside Gods commandment
to do it, before set down.


1. As long as men live in this world, reprobates and elect are joined
together, and cannot be discerned by the judgment of man: and therefore it is
meet, that the truth be preached indifferently to all, least because of
reprobates the elect be defrauded, who will take profit by the preaching of the
word. Hereupon also Augustine de Correp. and great. 15. and 16. Seeing we know
not who belongs to the number of them that be predestinate, and who belongs
not, we ought to be so touched with the affection of charity, that we should
be willing that all may be saved.

2. By this means is clearly showed the miserable blindness and great
corruption of lost man, and in very deed that appears true which Paul says,
1. Cor. 2.
that the natural man perceives not the things that be of the spirit of God,
that they be foolishnes unto him, and that he is not able truly to know them.

3. The godly while they behold others left in unbelief, unto whom
notwithstanding the doctrine is common, do acknowledge so much the more the
mercy of God toward themselves, whereby they turn and are saved. To this end
the Lord said: Ioh. 6.
No man comes unto me except the father draw him, as it is written in the
Prophets: They shall be all taught of God. Whosoever therefore has heard and
learned of the father comes unto me. Also, Matthew. 13.
To you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven: but not
unto them, but in them is the prophecy fulfilled, that they hearing hear not:
to wit, hearing with the sense of the body, hear not with the assent of the
heart, as Augustine expounds. But why some have ears to hear, and others
not, that is, why it is given to some of the father to come unto the son, and
to others it is not given; who knows the mind of the Lord? who has been of
his counsel? or who art thou O man, that reasonest with God? says Augustine
de bono perseuerantiae lib. 2. cap. 14.

4. The ungodly are made inexcusable in hearing the word of God, that they
cannot pretend ignorance, seeing they perform not so much as outward things,
which they be able to do, as it is said in Ezechiel: Eze. 2.
Whether they will hear, or leave off, speak thou unto them, and they shall
know, that there has been a Prophet among them. And Christ says: Ioh. 15.2^.
If I had not come and spoken, they should have no sin: but now they have no
excuse. And elsewhere he says, Matthew. 24.
that the Gospel of the kingdom must be preached in all the earth for a
witness unto all nations. As also he foretold his Apostles, Matthew. 10.
that they should be brought before rulers and kings, for a witness to them and
to the Gentiles: that is, to their reproof and condemnation, who believe not,
as Theophylact interprets both places. I will add hereunto, because of the
adversary, (who finds great fault with this use of the word) the testimonies
both of Augustine and also of Luther. Augustine tract. 81. in Ioh. says: They
that contemn or else deride and impugn the commandments of God, unto them the
words of Christ shall not be a benefit, but a testimony against them. And de
praedest. sanct. cap. 9. he writes, that the salvation of religion, from the
beginning of the increase of mankind unto the end, is preached to some for a
reward, to some for judgment. Also de Correp. and great. cap. 13. Correction is
to be used toward all as a medicine, albeit the health of the sick person be
uncertain: that if he who is corrected, pertain to the number of the
predestinate, the correction may be unto him a wholesome medicine: but if he
pertain not, it may be a penal torment.

Luther, Tom. 3. in 3. cap. Io^lis: The Gospel is preached (says he) to all
men: and though all do not greatly believe the word, yet it is preached as well
to the ungodly as to the godly: to these it is the power of God to salvation,
to the other to judgment. See also lib. 1. sentent. did. 47. about the end of
the distinction.

Hub these. 300. The first cavil of the adversary.
But let us hear Huber. First it is a lie, that is fained upon our side, that
the reprobates are called to no other end, but to be hardened, and made without
excuse: for many ends are already rendered. He cites Beza Responsione altera
ad Colloq. Mompel. fol. 149. and 95. Item 96. but the exclusive is ill fained
upon our men, and often repeated of Huber, but it is not found in Beza. These.
477.
Then (as he is practiced in cauilling) he excepteth, that to preach faith and
repentance to such as shall not believe, (as being by the just judgment of God
not predestined unto faith) is as absurd, as if a man should preach
repentance to the very devils. But there is very great unlikeness between men
reprobate, and those reprobate spirits, albeit in this they agree, that
eternal fire remains for both. For the elect and reprobates of men are in
this life mingled together, neither can we know who shall believe, who not:
beside the other things we spoke of, specially the commandment of God,
whereby the Gospel is ordained for every humane creature.

These. 478.
that they are in worse case then the devils, who from the Gospel preached
bring no such judgment upon themselves. Ephesians. 6.
whereupon by Paul they are called spiritual wickedness. In the mean while it
nothing hinders reprobate men to be in worse condition in part, that is, to
be guilty of judgment for some cause, wherein the devils are not guilty: as
for example, for the contempt of the word preached unto them, and for the
unworthy receiving of the Lords Supper: because unworthy receivers eat and
drink their own damnation. But this has no place in devils, albeit
nevertheless as enemies of all righteousness and order appointed of God, and so
also as contemners of the word and Sacraments after their manner, they shall not
escape the judgment of God.

Thirdly, he cauilleth impudently: If the matter so stand, These. ^04.
it

Be silent cruel tongue and lips that speak iniquity. What rests O
Huber, but by the like reason thou may conclude; seeing many in the Supper of
the Lord eat and drink judgment to themselves, that it shall be also better
for us to abstain from it? But that all men may understand such like
sophistry; on both sides this only follows, to wit, that it is better not
to come to the Supper of the Lord, then to come unworthily: also, not to hear
the word of God, then not to receive it being heard: or else to reject and tread
it under our feet after we have received it: but such as be blessed have
kept the mean. For because both they that knowing his will and yet do not the
same, and also they that are ignorant of it, shall be beaten (specially if it
be affected ignorance, disdaining to hear the word of God being offered:) it
is our parts both to hear and to keep the word of God, and so to prepare our
selves, Luke 11.
that we may worthily receive the Sacraments. So surely we shall best provide
for our selves, and not if we judge our selves unworthily of the kingdom of
God, by refusing his word and Sacraments.

Fourthly, that the adversary may here also prove to the reader These. 489.
that the Caluinian ministers are the hangmen of the reprobates, who draw them
unto exquisite torments that were from everlasting condemned, and do hew them
in pieces, if that be true that they hear the word of God unto condemnation.

What then? In what reckoning will he have the Prophet Esaias to be, to whom it
was said, when he saw the glory of God: Esaias 6.
Go, make fat the heart of this people, and shut their eyes. Which place
surely of the Prophet is repeated not rashly in the New Testament six times of
the blinding of the Jews. Shall we therefore with a Huberian scoff call
either the Prophet or Christ Jesus, (whose glory then Esaias saw) hangmen? Far
be this malapertnes from a Christian heart. 2. Cor. 2.
But rather, by the witness of the Apostle we are the sweet savor of Christ to
God, both in them that perish, and in those that are saved: to the one the
savor of death to death, but to the other the favor of life to life, yet
always to God the sweet savor of Christ in both respects.

Lastly it must be noted, that it makes no matter here, whether it so come to
pass either by the foreappointment, or by the foreknowledge only of God, that
the preaching of the Gospel unto the reprobates turns unto their judgment.
For both the foreknowledge and also the foreappointment of God is infallible.
Wherefore seeing the adversary cannot deny (at the least) foreknowledge in
God, for their more grievous condemnation, who will not obey the word, the
cauils already alleged must of necessity fall upon his own head. And of
these enough.

CHAP. XV. To the sixth absurdity.
I Proceed to that which was objected of the Sacraments: to wit, These. 37. The
6. absurdity, that Baptism is taken away.
That the Sacraments are taken away, unless with hand and foot (as they say)
we be of Hubers opinion touching the universality of redemption. Of Baptism
he gives this reason, that no certain grace and salvation is promised to the
baptized. His argument will be thus:

By whose opinion no certain grace and salvation is set forth unto such as are
baptized, by their opinion Baptism is taken away.

But by their opinion who think that by the death of Christ all men are
sufficiently, but not effectually redeemed, (so as al and every one have
remission of sins, and are received into the grace of God, justified and
saved, whether they believe or not) by the opinion of these I say, no certain
grace and salvation is propounded to such as are baptized.

Ergo, by their opinion Baptism is taken away. Unless the argument be thus
framed, I see not how any thing can be concluded to the purpose.

But the minor is denied. Huber surely these. 1019. sends us unto the things
which he has from his 386. these. unto the 431. but if those be looked into
and examined, it will appear, that nothing is there contained, saving an
extrauagant and idle heap of certain questions ilfauouredly tumbled together
concerning Baptism. But without such long circumstances, O Huber, this thou
should prove, that, upon the setting down of the contradictorie of thine
opinion of the generality of redemption, there would follow the overthrow of
Baptism, and that therefore, because no certain grace and salvation can then
be promised to them that be baptized. This, this show if thou can, omitting
thy manifold digressions, whereby thou use miserably to entangle thy reader,
and turn him away from the point.

Surely as for us, The principal use of Baptism.
we have learned out of the divine Scriptures, and do constantly teach, that
the use of sacred Baptism tends to this end and that principally, that it
may seal and confirm unto us the promise of grace and eternal life. For take
away the promise of grace from baptism, and thou shall take away the nature of
a Sacrament, because according to the usual definition of Augustine: Augustine
d^fition of it.
A Sacrament is a visible form of invisible grace. Hereupon are those
promises: He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, Mar. 16. And in the
words of Peter, Act. 2. Repent ye and be baptized every one of you in the name
of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of
the holy Ghost. Also, 1. Pet. 3. Baptism saves us. And Tit. 3. Of his mercy
he saved us through the lauer of regeneration, and the renewing of the holy
Ghost, and such like, which are read in the Scriptures of the virtue of
Baptism. Which things Basil in his exhortation to Baptism wittily seems to
comprehend. Baptism (says he) is the releasing of captives and debt, the
death of sin, the renewing of the mind, the shining garment, the way of
heaven, the getting of the kingdom of heaven, and the grace of adoption. For
holy Baptism is the seal of so many things to the faithful, Romans 4.
as the Apostle speaks of Circumcision, that it was given to Abraham for a
seal of the righteousness of faith, teaching, that Circumcision was not given
for righteousness, but for a seal of righteousness, which is by faith. And I
say, (to the faithful) because neither the word nor Baptism promises any
thing to, or profits the ungodly and unbelievers. For it is a word of
promise: He that believes and is baptized, Unbelievers are not partakers of ye
grace of Baptism, although they be Baptized.
shall be saved: but he that believes not shall be damned, whether he be
baptized or not. And Ephesians. 5. we read that the Church is sanctified of
Christ the bridegroom, and washed in the fountain of water in the word. Why in
the word? Because even in the water the word cleanses, and not the water it
self, as Augustine Tract. 80. upon John expounds. And the same man adds:
Whence comes so great force of water, that it touches the body, and washes
the heart, but by the word which does it? and that not because it is spoken,
but because it is believed. The same man upon the 77. Psalm, writes thus of
the Jews: Whereas the Sacraments were common to all, grace was not common,
which is the virtue of the Sacraments. So now also the lauer of regeneration is
common to all that are baptized, but grace it self, whereby the members of
Christ with their head are regenerated, is not common to all. Again, lib. 5.
cont. Donatist. cap. 24. he says* that Baptism may be without the spirit: and
that some of those that are baptized do put on Christ while they are receiving
of the Sacrament: others by continuing in holiness of life: That is common to
good and evil, and this is proper to the good and godly.

And truly it is in the schools received and allowed, Many testimonies,
proving that Baptism does profit the believer only.
that such as come without faith and fainedly, receive the Sacrament, and not
the thing, by the example of Simon Magus, of whom Augustine upon Leuiticus,
quaest. 84. witnesses that visible Baptism did him no good, because he had
not the invisible.

Hitherto let Luthers sayings be referred, Luth. in Genesis 17
that baptism is erected for a sign of righteousness to all that believe in
Christ. That the virtue of Baptism consists in the use or faith of him that
receives it. Also, De Cap. Basil. in 3. Joel.
that holy Baptism is the fountain of salvation whereof they that drink,
that is, In Genesis 48.
believe the promise added, do never thirst. And that he generally elsewhere
pronounces: that the Sacrament works not grace without faith, and he taxes
the dream of the papists, that Baptism profits thee, and justifies thee,
whether thou beleeuest or not.

Neither says Brentius otherwise, Brentius.
explicat. Catechis. de Baptis. where among other things he writes, that
Baptism is a seal, whereby Christ publicly confirms, that he delivers
and gives those special heavenly good things, that are promised in the
Gospel, to him that believes. Again, that Baptism is a royal unction, the
Sacrament confirming and publishing that thing, which a man before had received
by faith: for man is not then first received into the Lords tuition, seeing
before he was received by faith: but then his admission is first confirmed by
an external sign. And handling that promise, He that believes, etc. plainly
says thus: Baptism, as it profits much, if in faith it be redeemed, so it
does no good, if it be without faith: and he makes mention of an example out
of the tripartite History, lib. 11. cap. 14. of a certain Jew* a crafty
fellow, who would often receive Baptism, not for that he believed in Christ,
but that by this means he might get money of Christians: who albeit he was
Baptized, yet was not truly made a Christian by his Baptism. The same
Brentius upon John, fol. 119. expressly writes, that not every one that is
Baptized, is regenerated: for faith must be required, not to the perfection of
the Sacrament, but to the profit of the receiver.

Chytraeus.
Likewise David Chytreus, Tract. de bapt. printed at Wittenberge 1580. says,
That ministers do Baptize with water, pronounce the word, and give water, but
Christ Baptiseth with the holy Ghost, and regenerateth the believers. Again,
many being washed in water, and not bringing to Baptism true faith, are
Baptized not with the inspiration of the holy Ghost, but with water only, as
Simon Magus.

Ia. Andr. Col. Momp pa. 486. and these. 6^. and 30.
These things largely set down, do show to whom belongs the promise of grace
in Baptism, against the error, and more than a dream of certain men; to wit,
that regeneration is given to all in Baptism, believers, and unbelievers: and
that if an unbelieving hypocrite be Baptized, he is not only outwardly
Baptized in water, but inwardly also by the holy spirit, yea even Simon Magus
no less then others received grace in Baptism. This doubtless is to administer
Baptism, not for a Sacrament of Christ, but for Christ himself, as the
Apology of the Confession of Wittenberge casts in the papists teeth, who say
the same thing, that these men do, to wit, that remission of sins is wrought
by Baptism, by the very virtue of the Sacrament, and Gods promise, and not
only by faith. Let the papists then have the victory, and the confession of
the Duke of Wittenberge will lie in the dust, being overthrown by the very men
that ought to defend it.

Objection of infants faith.
But what shall we say of infants Baptized? Cannot Baptism save them without
faith?

I answer. Although we have some men in our time, who think that even infants
believe, and would have all men so to think: yet the contrary opinion of
Augustine, and other old writers is more sincere and safe. Augustine.
For thus Augustine upon John tract. 80. Infants cannot believe.
says, This word of faith, only is of force in the Church, that even never so
little cleanses the infant, by the Church believing, offering, blessing and
touching it, though the infant cannot believe with the heart to righteousness,
and with the mouth confess to salvation. Likewise in his fourth book of
Baptism, chapter 24. he says: Infants through want of age can neither
believe with the heart to righteousness, nor with the mouth confess to
salvation. See also his 23. epistle to Bonifacius, and Iustine Martyr, question
56. Barnard also allows the same opinion, Epist. 77. Infants because their
age hindered them, cannot have faith.

The reason is plain, And why they cannot.
for faith presupposes knowledge of those things that are to be believed. And
that little children do know divine things, who as yet understand not human,
if we would by words declare, says Saint Augustine, also Epist. 57. we must
be afraid, least we be thought to do injury to our very senses, seeing that
by speaking we endeavor to persuade a thing, where the evidence of the truth
is greater than all the strength and force of speech.

Moreover, they that maintain the faith of little children, The contrary
opinions of Brentius and Andr, touching the faith of infants,
do not a little disagree in opinions, some thinking that faith is given them
in Baptism, and others before Baptism. Of the later opinion is Brentius,
Explicat. Catechis. where he makes this argument: God acknowledges none
truly in the number of his people, unless he do believe; and makes his
assumption of infants: The infants of Gods people in old time, were part of
Gods people, even before they were circumcised, and therefore our infants now
also pertain to the people of God, even before they be Baptized, according to
the promise made to Abraham, Genesis 17. I will be thy God, and God of thy seed
after thee.

Contrariwise Jacob Andree, Brentius his successor defends the former
opinion, Colloq. Mompel. fol. 458. Before infants (says he) be Baptized, I
cannot affirm that they do believe, because faith is given unto them in
Baptism. And straight after: Infants Baptized have the grace of adoption
freely given them with faith and the holy Ghost. Likewise, Luther in 17. Genesis
(albeit in his book of praying, he seem to think otherwise) has left it
written, that the children of the Israelites had this blessing, that on the
eight day, faith was given them, and they were made the people of God: which
thing he would have in like manner understood of the Children of Christians in
their Baptism.

And this opinion surely is driven to a great straight, because of infants in
old time that dyed before the eight day, when they should be circumcised, and
depart this life daily as yet without Baptism, being deprived of it, not of
any contempt, but of necessity, whom yet they both do rather reckon in the
number of such as be saved, seeing the covenant of God is not transgressed or
made frustrate. Luth. in 17. Ge^. Col. Momp. page 496.
But after their opinion, no man, be he a child or a man grown, can be saved
without faith. It follows therefore, seeing such also are saved, that faith
is given to many infants every where, even before their Baptism: which thing
Jacob Andree denied that he could avouch. The same thing may be objected of
young girls among the Jews, who because they were the seed of Abraham; were
not excluded from the righteousness of Abraham, but obtained it by faith,
according to Luther in the forecited place, even in their infancy.

Wherefore the opinion of the faith of infants is more easily affirmed than
defended. D. Heerbrand. Defens. cont. Gottard. Canonicum.
Hereupon Doctor Heerbrand does thus mitigate Luthers opinion, that he, (when
he says that infants have faith or do believe) has not this meaning, that
they do understand, or feel the motions of faith, but that so their error is
rejected, who imagine infants Baptized to please God, and to be saved, without
any action of the holy Ghost. If this only they mean, who think that infants
believe, I fully agree with them. But because it is to be feared, how many of
them will acknowledge that interpretation, I doubt not in the mean while to
judge and speak with ancient writers, that infants do not believe. Which
simplicity of old writers has been also allowed of new writers, Musculus,
Martyr, and other most learned and painful divines, as their writings
testify.

Objection. Aug. quaest. Euang. li. 1. ca. 24.
Neither do the words of Matthew. chap. 18. hinder the same. Who so offends one
of these little ones, that believe in me: for that Augustine, Theophilact,
Hilarious and others, rather understand of the humble, and children in malice
and not in age. Why we must account in faults among the people of God.
We confess nevertheless that our infants are rightly accounted in the body of
the faithful, that is, among the people of God, both for the promise of the
covenant, and also after their baptism for the sacrament of entrance into true
religion, and of faith, as Augustine thinks in his 23. Epistle.



lib. de haeresib. proves by the Hierachites: and Barnard ad Hugonem Epist.
77. and also Hom. 66. upon the Canticles, by another sect of that time
dispersed throughout France. As touching the infants of Christians, it is
sufficient that they be comprehended in the promise of the covenant. For albeit
adoption to be the sons of God proceeds not from the carnal birth,
(according to which the children of the faithful are no less the sons of
wrath than the children of the unfaithful, conceived and borne in sin, as
others be:) yet such is the bounty of Gods grace, that infants borne of
Christian parents are reckoned in the number of Gods people, even as in old
time the infants were of Abraham's posterity, according to the promise: I will
be thy God, and of thy seed after thee. And Matthew. 19. the Lord says, Suffer
little children, and forbid them not to come unto me: Why we baptize the
infants of Christians, and not of Turks.
for to such belongs the kingdom of heaven. And for this cause in sign of
Gods covenant we baptize the children of Christians: and do not baptize the
children of Turks, unless they be already able to give an answer of their
faith. And if our infants being prevented by death cannot be baptized, we
follow the rule of Barnard ad Hugonem Epist. 77. Barnards saying of infants
dying before Baptism.
Not a depriving or want of baptism, but the contempt of it does condemn one.
Here Augustine is over rigorous: but beside that the schoolmen have commonly
somewhat misliked his rigor, placing such children in a Limbo by themselves
void of all torment: other also of great name in the midst of papistrie,
Gerson, Cardinal Caietane, Biel, and other, have approved of a more favorable
opinion touching the salvation of such. But of these I will speak no more.

The cavil of the Lords Supper answered.
The cavil concerning the Supper of the Lord is yet untouched, which the
adversary in his alike foolish babbling also complains, that it shall be
taken away, if the universality of redemption be denied, such as he
maintains. But how O Huber? Truly I find from thy These. 437. whither thou
sendest back thy reader, many things after thy manner, that is to say,
impudently and bitterly fained, and little appertaining to the proof of this
false accusation set down: saving, that at length thou seem to have a
purpose to reason after this sort: (for thou art so entangled in thy
absurdities, that here and elsewhere often it cannot easily be perceived what
thy meaning is. These. 450. and sequent.
) Only they for whom Christ effectually died, ought to come to the Supper by
our opinion, as thou say. But whether Christ died for us effectually, it is
unknown to every one. Therefore none at all shall know who ought to be the
Lords guest, and so the Supper of the Lord shall be at once taken away from all
men.



These. 450.
and the rest to keep away, as thou triflest: but this is said, that we may
celebrate the Supper of the Lord to our good and comfort: before all things it
is required, that first we prove ourselves, We must prove ourselves before we
come to the Lords Supper, and how.
every one considering with himself his sins and accursednes: and trying his
heart, whether he believe the promise of grace and remission of sins for the
merit of Christ alone, and whether by new obedience he purpose from his heart
to show himself thankful unto God. For such guests does the table of the Lord
require: as for hypocrites and such as go on still in wickedness, they must
abstain from this meat, which Christ has ordained and prepared for his
faithful, least they make their condemnation so much the more grievous.

Thirdly, the Minor of the argument is false: for he that A man may know
himself to have faith, and so to have Christ. Luke 22. Matthew. 26.
is partaker of the merits of the death and humiliation of our Lord Jesus
Christ, as he says: this is my body which is given for you: and this is my
blood, the blood of the New Testament, which is shed for you, as Luke has, or
as Matthew says: which is shed for many for remission of sins. Why says he,
for many? Because albeit the blood of Christ be shed for all as touching
sufficiency: yet it was shed for the regenerate only as touching efficiencie,
as I showed before out of Innocentius. Whereupon Basil says: All of us as many
as do believe, Exhortat. Baptis.
are redeemed from sins by the grace of God, which is through his only
begotten son our Lord Jesus Christ, who said: This is my blood, the blood of
the New Testament which is shed for many, for the remission of sins: which
exposition he twice repeateth in his Sermon following of Baptism: for many,
that is for all believers, the blood of Christ was shed.

CHAP. XVI. An answer to the residue of the Absurdities.
HVber goes on, and that he may maintain any way his opinion, he obiecteth
also other absurdities, so horrible, that a godly mind cannot but tremble in
thinking of them: as, Hubers blasphemies.
that God is accused of fraud and lying. Of fraud, in that he says one thing,
and thinks another. Of lying, in that by word he offers and commands to
receive things, which in the mean while by his irreuocable judgment he
forbids to receive. Also that Christ by his passion has mocked God and men:
and that the mighty and holy Lord of hosts is worthily accused of cruelty,
injustice, rejoicing at men's harms and of other great evils, agreeing rather
to a most cruel tyrant then to God. For such and so many words does his rude
and shameless mouth utter often, or rather roreth out. But these be the sleights
of the adversary, issuing out of the same forge, that his other lies and
slanders do, too too presumptuous truly. But because those objections and
mocks (excepting only the last save one) respect not so fitly the doctrine of
Redemption, as of Predestination, (which treatises Huber here and there without
order confounds) and are long ago largely confuted by Doctor Luther in his
book of servile freewill, I will not suffer my self in refuting them to be
carried beside the matter I have in hand. One or two places only of Luther I
will allege for their sakes, who depend upon that man's authority, that they
may understand that the doctrine of Luther is wounded through our sides. He
therefore in his answer to the place of Ezech. 18. Luther de seruo arbit. cap.
107. and seq.
J will not the death of a sinner, confirms the received distinction of a
double will in God, which truly was wont to be so distinguished for our
capacity And one will, he one while calls secret, fearful, and
unsearchable, other while the most reverend secret of Gods majesty, sometime
the hidden God: but the other will, A double will in God.
he calls one while the revealed will, other while the word preached,
sometime God preached and worshipped: How God wills and wills not the death
of a sinner. Eze. ca. 18.
and proceeds after this sort: God does many things, which he has not showed
us in his word: and he wills many things, which in his word he does not show
that he wills. So he will not the death of a sinner in his word, that is, in
his will revealed in his word: but he wills it by his unsearchable will.
Therefore it is well said: If God will not the death of a sinner, we must
impute it to our will that we perish: well, I say, if it be understood of God
preached. For he wills that all men be saved, while he comes unto all by
the word of salvation: and it is the fault of the will, which does not admit
God, as Matthew. 25. it is said, How often would I gather thy chickens, and thou
would not? But why Gods majesty takes not away this fault of our will, or
changes it in all, or why he does impute it unto man, seeing he cannot want
it, we may not inquire, and if thou would inquire, yet thou shall never
find it, as Paul Romans 9. says: Who art thou then that reasonest with God?
Again, it is sufficient, says Luther, to know that God so wills, and this
will it is meet we should reverence, love and adore, restraining the rashness
of our reason. Here Luther sufficiently shows that it pertains to his
revealed will, that God wills the conversion and salvation of all: and to his
hidden will, that he neither gives nor purposes to give conversion and
salvation to all, but to whom he will according to his mere good pleasure.
Neither are these contrary one to another, The hid and revealed will are not
contradictorie, therefore no suspicion of fraud or lying in God.
as though God spoke one thing and thought another, when we say that he
wills, that is, commands that all repent and believe the Gospel to
salvation, and yet that he will not work in all men faith and repentance. Even
children may perceive, that here is no contradiction, because of the diverse
signification of the word will.

The same man cap. 160. God is not unjust, or one that rejoices at man's
misery.
This surely offends common sense and natural reason, that God of his mere
will forsakes, hardens, and damneth men, as though he; who is said to be of
so great mercy and goodness, delighted in the great and eternal pains and
torments of miserable persons. This seems wicked, cruel, and intolerable to
imagine of God. But here the most merciful God ought to be honored and
reverenced, and we must refer freely some thing unto his divine wisdom,
that he may be believed to be just, A notable saying.
where he seems to us to be unjust. For if such were his justice, as might
be judged by man's capacity to be just, it should not be altogether divine,
and should differ nothing from humane justice. But seeing God is true, and one,
wholly incomprehensible, and inaccessible by man's reason, it is meet, yea
necessary, that his justice also be incomprehensible, etc. Therefore what
peruersenes is this, that we should destroy the justice and judgment of God?
These and many other such things has Luther against such as contend with their
maker. Esaias. 45.


Brentius in 1. Sam. 2. v. 25.
Brentius also upon those words touching Elies sons, They heard not the voice
of their father, because the Lord would slay them, subscribeth unto this
doctrine, and concludes this whole question in these words. Therefore that
they may be punished according to the worthiness of their deserts, the Lord by
his secret power brought it to pass, that they should not repent at their
fathers admonition, and should perish: God is not the author, but revenger of
sin, punishing sins with sins.
he surely working inwardly, what by word he forbids outwardly, and his
power inwardly hindering that which by his manifest will he outwardly commanded
to be done. And this is not to be the author or cause of wickedness, but it is
to inflict just punishment for the same. But how it comes to pass, that the
Lord by his secret power works inwardly, or hinders that which he forbids
or commands outwardly in his manifest word, it is a higher point then that
man's capacity can find out. These things Brentius.

Com. these. 37.
For there is a flat begging of the question in the antecedent, seeing the
adversary thus reasons: Christ himself confesses that he died not for a
few only, but for the whole world, to wit, for all mankind. Wherefore if it
was the counsel of his father, that he should die for the elect only, Christ
has mocked God first, and then men, holding them in suspense with so great
hope, as though he died for all. Where (I beseech) does the Lord confess, that
he effectually died or would die for all? or that he would that all should have
the effect of his death, to wit, reconciliation, righteousness and salvation,
none at al excepted of the whole universality of mankind, whether they embrace
by faith the Savior, or by unbelief refuse him? Christ witnesses the
contrary, Ioh. 17. I pray not for the world, but for them whom thou have given
me. It is a wonder if he has pacified the judgment and wrath of his father
for them, for whom he surely did not vouchsafe to pray. And in the same
chapter: For them I sanctify my self, that they also may be sanctified.
Therefore for whom he prayed, for them also he offered himself a sacrifice to
redeem them effectually from sin and death, and to sanctify them for ever,
and so contrariwise.

CHAP. XVII. Of this, that only unbelief condemns, and not other sins: but
whosoever is condemned, for only unbelief he is condemned.
ALL these things being made plain, Hubers opinion is now spoiled, and his
threefold rank scattered here and there, whereto he in vain trusting and
furnished more with number then with strength of arguments, has bid this
battle unto the truth. But yet before we make an end of this point, wherein we
have taken in hand the confutation of a new and erroneous doctrine of
Redemption, we must not omit what these new Sectaries teach of the cause of
damnation: to wit, how it comes to pass, that whereas they avouch that by
the passion of Christ all without exception are discharged from the judgment
and wrath of God, Mark this doctrine of the adversaries, How all are not
eternally saved, that yet were redeemed and saved by Christ's death, as they say.
and received into the favor and bosom of God, and that the reprobates as
well as the elect are saved, yet all are not saved for ever. This therefore is
the cause, say they, because some abide by faith in salvation received, others
through unbelief refuse, contemn and cast away salvation gotten for them, and
so by neglecting and despising their salvation, make themselves reprobates, and
therefore only are damned, because they despise grace, and through
incredulity do bind themselves again in the guiltines of all sins. These
things are in so many words extant in Hubers These. 19.69.155.245. And also in
his These. 187. he writes, that such as believe not, tread under foot their
redemption, and propitiation for their sins, shaking from them through
unbelief, and so their vnbe^eefe is unto them the only cause of damnation.

In like sort Jacob Andree Col. Mompel. page 548. says, that men are not
therefore damned, because they have sinned, but because they will not by faith
embrace Jesus Christ, who suffered, was crucified and died no less for the
sins of the damned, than for the sins of Peter, Paul, and all the Saints:
noting there these words in the margent: only unbelief damneth men.

What we like in the adversaries doctrine.
As touching this doctrine, it is confessed, if any man truly believe in Christ,
the sins of all the world are not able to cast him down into hell: and
contrarily, if a man have not faith, he shall be damned, albeit the
righteousness of all the world were his own. Mar. 16.
For he that believes shall be saved: he that believes not shall be damned,
says that faithful and true witness. De verb. Dom. sec. Ioh. sermon. 60. and
enar. Ps. 109.
And Augustine writes, that only the sin of unbelief shuts the door
against all other sins, that they are not released by the grace of God, as by
believing all sins are remitted.

What we mislike justly. The first fault or error against the doctrine of the
Apostles and Prophets.
Yet two things in the said opinion do justly displease us. One is, that
whereas this opinion is forced to acknowledge that the salvation of Gods
kingdom happens not but by faith, yet it dare avouch, that there is
remission of sins, freedom from the judgment and wrath of God, and power of
the devil, yea and salvation it self without faith. For it will have all
these things to come to all men indifferently by Christ's death, whether they
believe or not, otherwise than all Prophets and Apostles do testify, Acts 10.
that he that believes in Christ, through his name receives the remission of
sins, the wrath of God abiding upon the unbelievers. Ioh. 3.
This is a far other opinion, than if a man should say (as Huber does) that
all together are set free from all sin, and all judgment and wrath of God is
taken away and blotted out in all men, yea in unbelievers: only through
unbelief they be again bound with the guiltines of their sins, and do fall
again under the wrath of God. Sermon. 60.
Augustine says well in the forecited place, The medicine of all the wounds of
the soul, and the only propitiation for the sins of men, is to believe in
Christ, and by faith we are borne of God, and made the sons of God, as it is
written: to them that believe in his name, he has given power to become the
sons of God.

The other thing which is worthily reproved in the alleged opinion, is this,
The second fault or error confuted by four reasons.
that it precisely sets down the contempt or lothing of the grace of the
Gospel through unbelief, to be the cause of damnation. For first this
opinion

Secondly, the Apostle saying: They that have sinned without does not only
grant, that the Gentiles for the most part wanted the knowledge of the law
written, much more the knowledge of the promises of the grace of the Gospel
published by Moses and the Prophets: but also alleges the reason of the just
damnation of the Gentiles from the breach of the law of nature, making no
mention of the contemned grace of the Gospel.

Thirdly, what shall we say of so many millions of infants

Fourthly, the Lord in the Gospel says: Ioh. 15.
If I had not come Augustine tract. 89. Augustines judgment of this question.
advises us to understand this place not of every sin, but of the great
sin of unbelief: and moving the question, whether they unto whom Christ
comes not, nor speaks unto them, have excuse for their sin? answers;
not truly for every one of their sins, but for this sin, that they have not
believed in Christ, they have a plain excuse, and they cannot therefore avoid
damnation, according to the saying: Whosoever have sinned without the law,
shall also perish without the law: and whosoever have sinned in the law, shall
be judged by the law. And such he says are they, who when they hear contemn,
or else gainsaying resist, or with hatred pursuing them by whom they hear.
Also Epist. 99. ad Euod. speaking of such as are in hell, according to his own
and the common opinion of others, makes difference between such as here would
not believe the Gospel preached, and those that have not here contemned (says
he) that which they would not hear, and are cast into hell without any
guiltines of the contempt of the Gospel. The like he writes in his book of
nature and grace, lib. 4. If with these sayings of ancient fathers we compare
the phrases of new Sectaries, we shall see a flat contrariety. And let these
be spoken for confutation of those things, so much as the state of our purpose
seemed to require.

THE THIRD BOOK OF CHRISTIAN REDEMPTION, CONSISTING IN CONFIRMATION: Or a
demonstration of the true opinion, who be partakers of Redemption.
CHAP. I. The proposition and partition.
NOw we are come to the confirmation of true doctrine. And that is, The sum
of our opinion touching man's redemption by the death of Christ.
that albeit the death of the son of God our Lord Jesus Christ, as touching
the greatness of the price, be the redemption of whole mankind, none excepted:
yet the propriety of redemption belongs to those, who are not now the
vessels of the devils, but the members of Christ, by faith and the grace of
regeneration: the rest, who live without faith and regeneration, not belonging
to this redemption from sin and death. Tit 1.
And because faith and regeneration pertain not to all but to the elect, it is
truly also avouched that redemption belongs to them and not to the reprobates.
This opinion we purposing to prove, will use also a threefold rank or order of
proofs.

The first shall be of certain testimonies of Scripture, out of the old and
new Testament, wherein spiritual redemption purchased by Christ is restrained
to the Church: which certainly is not the universality of whole mankind, but
a certain company of mankind, chosen to eternal life out of every tribe,
language, nation and people.

In the second rank we will produce diverse arguments, drawn from the
analogy of faith, or the apostolical and catholic rule of faith, whereunto
every Ecclesiastical exposition, and decision of whatsoever controversies of
says ought to be agreeable.

Lastly, the third rank shall have testimonies of godly antiquity, whereby it
shall more clearly than the light appear, that nothing is here taught or
produced of us, that all the best and worthiest writers of old have not with
great consent taught according to the Scriptures.

CHAP. II. Certain places of the new Testament, with an admonition concerning
Hubers manner of disputation.
WE begin the more willingly our purposed confirmation from the express
testimonies of Scripture, These. 627. The admonition touching Hubers manner of
disputing.
as though we had no word of our opinion in the Scriptures, and went Ergo,
Christ died not for all. With which error afterward being carried away, and his
chariot regarding no bridle, he raises up a great dust to darken the truth of
the doctrine and by very strange expositions: but also by an error so de
repetitione principij, repetition, but petition, that is, the begging of a
thing as granted, which is the chief point in controversy. It is a part of
the same, I deny the consequent: We always deny the consequent. O miserable
disputer, as bad a Logitian as he is a Divine! He does not yet understand, that
we must never answer an Enthymeme by denying the consequent, but either by
distinguishing or denial of the antecedent, or else by denying the consequence.
For it is as foolish a thing if a man would deny the consequent in an
Enthymeme, as if one being about to answer a Syllogism, should deny the
conclusion. By which kind of solutions any thing might most easily be answered
by any one, but that Logic is against it.

But omitting these things, let us produce a few testimonies of many out of the
Scripture to declare our purpose, The state of the question.
that redemption from sins, righteousness and salvation are benefits proper
unto the Church, and not common to all, whether they believe or not, as the new
opinion would have it. This is the state of the question properly, which must
be diligently marked. For we also grant that Christ died for all: but we deny
that therefore all are made partakers of the benefits of Christ's death without
respect of faith or unbelief, or else which is all one, we deny that Christ
died for all effectually, How Christ's death may be effectual to any.
the cause of the want of that efficacy being considered not in Christ but in
men themselves. For to make the death of Christ effectual unto us for
redemption, his merit is not only needful, but also the application and
receiving of the same, which is done by an unfeigned faith.

Matthew. 1. The 1. testimony, proving redemption to be proper to the Church.
The first testimony therefore we have in Matthew in the words of the Angel to
Joseph: Thou shall call his name Jesus: for he shall save his people from their
sins. Here we see redemption peculiarly attributed to the people of Christ.
And the people of Christ be his Church of all places and ages. Therefore
redemption is peculiar to the Church, and yet universal, after that sort as we
confess the Church to be universal.

These 1059. All men be not the people of God proved by three reasons.
Huber cries out, and (such is his Divinity) says, that by the people of
Christ is meant the whole offspring of Adam, and says that al are truly called
to the kingdom of God, that they may be his people.

But the contrary is easily proved. First by the name of the people of God the
Scripture uses not to comprehend al men, but a certain company only, among
whom God is acknowledged and called upon, and whom he likewise acknowledges
for his own, and to whom belong the covenants and promises, Leuit. 26.
as the Lord says: I will walk among you, and I will be your God, Iere. 31. 2.
Cor. 6. Ose. 1. and 2.
and you shall be my people. And I will be your God, and you shall be my sons
and daughters, says the Lord almighty. As also he says in Oseah: I will call
a people my people, which was not mine, and her beloved, who was not beloved:
and it shall come to pass in the place, where it was said unto them: Ye are
not my people, there they shall be called the sons of the living God. All
which places Paul to the Romans expounds of the calling of the Gentiles:
Romans 9.
who whereas they had bin in times past alients from the common wealth of
Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and being
without God in the world; afterward obtained the adoption of grace in the
kingdom of Christ. Tit. 3.
So unto Titus we read, that Christ purged a peculiar people to himself,
zealous of good works: whom Peter also calls a people whom God claims as
his own, 1. Pet. 2.
a holy nation, a royal priesthood. What insolency then is it, to imagine
that all men be the people of God? This is nothing else than to join faithful
with unfaithful, righteousness with unrighteousness, light with darkness, Christ
with Belial, the temple of God with images, and to mingle sacred things with
profane.

Secondly if all should be the people of Christ, it should

Thirdly Theophylact upon the same place thus writes:

Luther also in Genesis 31. Luther.
at large testifies that all men are not the people of God, but such as he
likes of and accepts, and cannot be taken out of his hands. But let Huber
give care unto his Brentius especially, Brentius.
who writes thus in the exposition of his Catechism. Tell us (says he) to
whom Jesus is Jesus, that is, a savior from their sins. The Evangelist
says: He shall save his people. He saves not Aliants but his people. They be
Aliants, whosoever believe not in him, whether they be Jews or Gentiles. And
they be his whether they be Jews or Gentiles, as many as do acknowledge and
embrace him by faith. Wherefore of what nation soever thou be, if thou believe
the Gospel of Christ, thou art made by faith a member of his people, and Jesus
is in very deed made Jesus unto thee. These things he: another of whose
sayings also shall be cited hereafter in the seventh Chapter. Now let the
Tubingers see, whether they will condemn Brentius here or Huber rather of an
error.

A second testimony we have in the same Evangelist cha. 26. When he had taken
the cup, he gave it to them saying, The 2. testimony. Matt. 26.
Drink ye all of this. For this is the blood of the new Testament, which is
shed for many for remission of sins. I surely know that some of the ancient
writers respecting sufficiency do expound for many, that is, that his blood
was shed for all, seeing even all are many. But the sense rather agrees, by
keeping the usual signification of Many, (Many) distinguishes between
believers and unbelievers.
unto the difference between the believers and vnbleeuers: of whom they
receiving forgiveness of sins are redeemed by the grace of Christ, and these
are as yet void of redemption, as we before showed Basils often exposition. And
the Commentaries upon Mark which are ascribed unto Hierome, have expressly,
that the blood of the new Testament is said to be shed for many, because it
does not make clean all: or else that there be in the very Church some, whom
no sacrifice does make clean; much more then out of the Church. What that
among the new writers Brentius in his Catechism does no otherwise expound it?
Christ (says he) when he said of his blood, which is shed for you, he adds
this also for Many: to signify that it was shed not only for the Jews, but
also for the Gentiles, of whom his Church was to be gathered. And by that
place and exposition he takes here in hand to prove our very matter in hand,
to wit, that Christ by his death has made satisfaction for the sins of his,
that they may have remission of them, and may be accounted just before God, and
made the flesh and blood of Christ, and adopted into the sons and heirs of
God: and that these benefits appertain to the universal Church and not to
strangers, for the same contrariety of, Luth. de capt. Babyl.
His own and Strangers is here of force, which before was observed out of
Brentius. Further Luther waighing this very place says: for you and for many
said he, that is, who receive and believe the promise of the testator, for
faith here makes heirs.

The 3. testimony.
The third place is in Zacharias song Luke 1. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel,
for he has visited and redeemed his people, and has lifted up a horn of
salvation in the house of David his servant, as he spoke by the mouth of the
holy Prophets, that we should be saved from our enemies, and from the hand of
all that hate us; that being delivered from them, we should serve him without
fear in holiness and righteousness before him all First even here we see the
redemption of Christ peculiarly attributed to ye people of God, who be the
faithful people or the true Israelites out of every people and nation as
Theophylact witnesses. Secondly that he mentions He has put down the
mighty from their seat, and has exalted the humble, he has filled the
hungry with good things, and the rich he has sent empty away. Thirdly it is
not only the end but also a part of the redemption serve God in holiness and
true righteousness, For he says that God by oath promised to Abraham that he
would give unto us, that we should serve him without fear being delivered from
our enemies. But it it is very plain, that very many serve not God, but their
belly and the world rather. Therefore that spiritual redemption by Christ was
not promised or wrought for all indifferently. Fourthly he says: He that
proceeds from an high has visited But not every one every where is converted
from darkness to light, and their feet directed into the way of peace, that
is, of righteousness.

The fourth place is Luke 2. The 4. testimony. Luke 2.
Fear ye not says the Angel to the sheepheards: for behold I bring you
tidings of great joy, that shall be to al people, to wit that unto you is borne
this day a savior who is Christ the Lord. This was the first preaching of the
Gospel touching the birth of the Savior of the world. And the thing it self
proclaims that the incarnation of the Lord neither was nor is joyful no not
to all the Jews, much less to all other through the whole world. As Matthew
reports of Herod, that he and all Jerusalem were troubled at the enquiry of
the wise men concerning the king of the Jews that was borne. But this joy, and
therefore the matter of it, that is, Christ with his whole humiliation and
merit, is theirs who properly be the people of God, for all the Jews are not
the people of God, much less all men, but the faithful collected of all Jews
and Gentiles, as Theophylact and Zachary Chrysopolit, have observed in this
place.

The 5. testimony.
Let the fifth place be the prophecy of Simeon in the same chapter Mine eyes
have seen the salvation which thou have prepared in the eyes of all people: A
light for the revelation of the Gentiles, and for the glory of thy people
Israel. As Christ is an inlightner, so also he is a Savior of all. But it is
false that all men without exception of any be actually and in very deed
enlightened by Christ, Ioh. 11.
having the eyes of their mind opened, and receiving the knowledge of the
truth. Therefore in like manner it is false, yt all alike, not one excepted, be
truly and in very deed saved by Christ. But this is true, that the witness of
Jesus the only Savior of all went out into all lands, and has bin preached to
all people unto the ends of the world, and as yet is preached for the gathering
together and saving of the dispersed sons of God. To these things that also
agrees, which further is spoken of that child by Simeon. Behold this child is
set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel. Simeon had not spoken
this if every one should rise through his benefit from death to life, from
sin to righteousness.

The 6. testimony.
The sixte place is the terrible and plain saying of Saint John Baptist than
whom there is none that is borne of a woman greater: Ioh. 3.
He that believes in the son has eternal life, but he that believes not in
the son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him. There is an
emphasis in the word abides: He says not that all judgment and wrath of God
is in very deed taken away from all without exception, believers and
unbelievers, and that the wrath of God returns only through unbelief upon
them that believe not: but the wrath of God abides (says he) upon the
unbeliever. Augustine urges this emphasis tract. 14. in Ioh. He says not,
the wrath of God comes upon him, but abides upon him. And what is this wrath
of God? which all mortal men have with them in their birth, Ephesians. 2.
which the first Adam had, whereof the Apostle speaks we are all the sons
of wrath by nature, as well as other. As the Author also de vocat. gentium.
lib. 1. ca. 5. alleges this saying: whether he be Jew (says he) or Gentile,
before he be justified by faith, he is shut up under sin, and if he continue
in unbelief the wrath of God abides on him: even that which was brought in by
Adams sin, whereof the Apostle speaks: we were also the sons of wrath as
well as other. It is therefore false that the wrath of God is universally taken
away, and that all whether they believe or not be received into the lap of
grace: but this grace is theirs, who believe in Christ, who has brought the
grace of God and taken away his wrath.

The seventh place is the tenth of John, The 7. testimony. Ioh. 10.
where that good shepherd says: I lay down my life for my sheep: my sheep
hear my voice, and I know them and they follow me, and I give unto them
eternal life, neither shall they perish for ever, neither shall any man take
them out of mine hand. Here it appears, that howsoever Christ after a sort
dyed for all, yet specially he dyed for such as shall be saved, because he dyed
for his sheep. Hubers exception, These. 1069.
that all men are made the sheep, heritage and people of God, is easily from
the text confuted, for these are proper to Christ's sheep, Christ's sheep.
to hear and know his voice to follow him, to flee from a stranger, to obtain
eternal life, not to perish for ever, and not possibly to be plucked out of the
hand of Christ their shepherd Seeing the greatest part of men want these
marks, it is most false, that all be the sheep of Christ, and the flock of
Gods pasture. These. 1070.
And the proof is most foolish: they are acknowledged for sheep, who were
dispersed, torn and devoured of evil pastors and beasts of the field, being
seduced and destroyed, Ierem. 23. Ezech. 34. Therefore all men whosoever be
the sheep of Christ. For both Jeremy and Ezechiel speak only of the Jewish
people, who at that time were distinguished from the Gentiles, as the peculiar
flock and heritage of the Lord, The Scripture speaks two ways of Christ's
sheep, by vocation and by Predestination.
so that those places plainly prove the contrary.

And it is to be marked, that the Scripture speaks two manner of ways of
the sheep of God, according to Vocation, and according to Predestination.
According to Vocation they be called sheep, whosoever pertain outwardly to
the account of Gods people, or to the Church: but according to the
foreknowledge and predestination of God, very many are sheep that be without,
very many are wolves that be within, and very many sheep are within, and very
many wolves are without, as Augustine says. For many that now are riotous,
shall become chaste, and many that now blaspheme Christ, shall believe in him.
And contrariwise many now praise him, who will hereafter blaspheme him; and
many will be fornicators, who now are chaste. For they be not of his sheep, if
we speak of the predestinate. These things says he tract. 46. in Euang. Ioh.
And all these things are confirmed in Iere. 23. where taxing the pastors, who
had destroyed and dispersed the Lords sheep, he adds a promise of saving a
residue of the sheep. And this residue be the elect, as Paul expounds, Romans
9.27. and 11.2.5. Likewise in Ezechiel 34. the Lord promises in Christ the
pastor that true David, a sure and certain salvation unto his sheep. Yet
because many being outwardly sheep, are inwardly goats and wolves, he says,
that he will judge between sheep and sheep, between rams and goats, that
he may require the lost sheep, bring back the abject, bind up the broken,
and destroy the fat and hurtful.

The 8. testimony.
The 8 place is Ioh. 11. where, after he had rehearsed the prophecy of Caiphas
the high priest: It is expedient for us that one die for the people, and not
that the whole nation should perish; the Evangelist adds, that he said not
that of himself, but being the high priest that year he prophesied, that it
should come to pass, that Jesus should die for the nation: and not for that
nation only, but that he might also gather in one the sons of God dispersed
abroad. From hence also it is clear, that Christ specially dyed for the elect
of all nations every where, who from the East to West are gathered into the
unity of faith and the spirit, that with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob they may sit
down in the kingdom of heaven. And of these dispersed sons of God under
another similitude, yet in the same sense spoke Christ, Ioh. 10.
chap. 10. I have other sheep also which are not of this fold, them also must
I bring: for they shall hear my voice, and there shall be one fold and one
shepherd. And Augustine tract. 49. in Iohannem, admonishes that these things
are spoken according to predestination: for by vocation they were neither his
sheep nor the sons of God, who as yet had not believed, but afterward did
believe. And as the same man elsewhere writes, Sermon. 50. de verbis Domini in
Io.
they were predestinate, and not yet gathered: and he knew them who had
predestined them, he knew the^ who came by his blood to redeem them. Notably
says Tuitiensis Com. in Ioh. Jesus Christ died for the nation, and not only
for the nation of Abraham, but for all the predestinate from the beginning of
the world, being the sons of God dispersed into the four coasts of the
world, and which must now be gathered even to the last elected one out of the
lump of mankind. Let the adversaries ask the advice also of their friend
Illyricus writing upon S. John.

The 9. place is Ioh. 12. The 9. testimony. Ioh. 12.
Now is the judgment of this world come, now the prince of this world shall be
cast forth: and I, when I shall be lifted up, will draw all men unto me. This
he said, signifying what death he should dye. All unto whom the efficacy of
redemption by the lifting up of Christ upon the cross does appertain, A
Syllogism.
must needs be drawn or converted unto him, that he may be their head, and
they his members. But by drawing of grace, the universality of the elect, and
not of men, is drawn: for experience is against the universality of men: but
he says all, that is, all the predestinate unto salvation, or all sorts of
men, out of whom there is a certain special universality of the elect
accounted, as Augustine tract. 52. in Ioh. and Prosper de vocat. gent. lib. 1.
cap. 3. expound this saying. Wherefore the efficacy of redemption is proper to
the universality of the elect.

The 10. place is Ioh. 15. The 10. testimony. Ioh. 15.
No man has greater love than this, that one should lay down his life for his
friends. Ye shall be my friends, if ye do what I command you. I will call you
no more servants, because the servant knows not what his master does: but I
have called you friends, because I have made known unto you all things which I
have heard of the father. If Christ specially died for his friends, (as the
truth is) then he died not alike, and as well for the damned, as for Peter,
Paul, and other his friends: for all are not friends, but some be friends,
some servants. Unto this that is not contrary, which is said Romans 5. that
Christ died for us while we were enemies. Sermon 10. de Psalm. qui habitat, etc.
For according to Barnards distinction, Christ according to the time dyed for
wicked ones and enemies: but according to predestination for his brethren and
friends.

The 11. testimony. Ioh. 17.
The 11. place is Ioh. 17. where the Apostle and high Priest of our confession
in his solemn prayer, which a little before his death he offered to his
father, says, I pray not for the world, but for them whom thou gave me: for
they are thine. That the world is taken for the reprobates, the contrariety of
the elect does show, whom the father gave to Christ: neither could D. Iacobus
Andree deny this. Page 545. Col. Mompel.
But for whom Christ would not so much as pray, how shall we say that he died
for them according to his own purpose? or how should the death of Christ
profit them for redemption and sanctification? Surely the sacrifice of the
Mediator does profit none, These. 9.28.
but whom his intercession does also profit. Huber excepteth, that Christ
refuses not to pray for the world generally, but specially: which thing
Luthers gloss declares and confirms, I pray not for the world: that is, I
pray not that thou would approve the attempts and works of the world and
unbelievers.

I answer readily from the contrariety in the very text. As far forth as
the Lord prays for his, so far forth, and in the same respect he prays
not for that world of reprobates: but for his he prays that they may be
saved. Tract. 107. in Ioh.
Therefore so far forth he prays not for the reprobates. Let us hear what
Augustine says: I pray not for the world, but for them that thou gave me. By
the world he would have meant such as live according to the lusts of the world,
and are not in that state of grace, A double world.
that they be chosen by it out of the world. The same man, tract. 110. There
is a world of such as are to be damned, whereof it is written, Least we should
be damned with the world. For this world he does not pray: for he knows well
whereto it is predestinate. And there is a world of such as shall be saved, as
it is written: That the world may be saved by him whereof the Apostle also
speaks: God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself. For this world
he prays, that it may believe, and by faith be reconciled unto God. Thus
far Augustine.

Wherefore there is no cause that Huber should write, These 927.
that our side faineth a false interpretation of this place. He faineth that
obiecteth such things: even as this also is a mere devise, that all men
indifferently are given of the father to the son, that he may give them life.
These. 1077. and 163.
All power surely not only of humane flesh, but also of all creatures in
heaven and earth is given to the son: but it is another thing that we are
given him, that he may save us. For if all had been given to Christ, he had
prayed for all: for he prayed for all that his father had given him. But now
for certain men, whom he calls the world, he prayed not. Further, he gives
eternal life to all that were given him. For so he says: that to as many as
thou gave him, he might give eternal life. Tract. 111.
Therefore with Augustine we infer by contraposition, that they were not
given him, to whom he will not give eternal life: albeit he who has power
given him over all flesh has power given him over the^ also. In the same
place: Who are they (says he) whom he says are given him of his father? Be
they not they, of whom he says in another place, No man comes unto me,
except the father who sent me, draw him? They be they whom he received of the
father, whom he chose out of the world, that now they may not be of the world,
as he is not of the world: and yet they be even the believing world, and that
which knows that Christ was sent of God the father. Again, Tract. 107.
The world for which he prays not, he would have to be taken for those that
are not in that state of grace, that they may be chosen out of the world: but
for these whom his father gave him he says, he prays: for hereby that the
father had given them already unto him, it comes to pass, that they
pertain not unto that world for which he does not pray.

Hereupon Cyrill also says: Lib. 11. cap. 19. in Ioh.
Saint John because he was a Jew, least the Lord should seem to be an advocate
with the father for the Jews only, and not for other nations also, who being
called did obey, said of necessity, that he was a propitiation for the whole
world. But the Lord Jesus separating his own from them that are not his,
says: I pray for them only that keep my words, and have received my yoke.
For whose Mediator and high Priest he is, to them only he worthily
attributes the benefit of mediation.

So this testimony stands firm against what cauils soever, Com. upon this
place.
whereof Rupertus speaks notably: Woe to the rejoicing world, while Christ
the only begotten son of God prays for his own, that is, dies, and upon
the altar of the cross offers himself a sacrifice: because J pray for them
(says he) whom thou gave me, and not for the world. For the world is here
taken for the lovers of the world, so contrary to them for whom Christ
crucified prays, as the Egyptians were before God from the children of
Israel, who marked their posts with the sacred blood of the Lamb. Woe
therefore to such a world, because what Christ the true Lamb of God prayed,
profits them nothing, that with their king the prince of darkness the devil,
they may quickly sink into hell, while they only whom the father gave to the
son, do by his cross and blood escape.

The 12. testimony. Verse 19. of the 17. chap. of John.
Twelfthly, we add what the Lord in his prayer to his father there expresses:
for them I sanctify my self, that they may be sanctified in the truth.

They only for whom Christ sanctified, that is, offered himself a sacrifice,
are by his offering sanctified in the truth: but he sanctified himself only
for the elect, of whom significantly he speaks to discern them from the
world: For them I sanctify my self, doubtless meaning his that were given him
of his father, and for whom he prayed the father. Therefore the elect only are
in the truth sanctified by Christ's oblation. Whereupon Paul calls all
believers Saints every where, (whom charity commands to account for elect)
because they be sanctified in the blood of Christ.

CHAP. III. Testimonies out of Paul's Epistles.
FVrthermore, Paul the Apostle and teacher of the Gentiles, and a worthy
preacher of the grace of Christ, for the publishing among the Gentiles of the
unsearchable riches of Christ, and revealing unto all men, what is the
communion of the mystery that was hid from all ages: does also every where
teach, that the grace of redemption pertains not to the unbelievers, but to
the faithful, who now are not the vessels of the devil, but the members of
Jesus Christ.

That of many testimonies we may only allege a few, The 1. place. Romans 3.
he thus writes to the Romans, chap. 3. But now the righteousness of God is
made manifest without the law, having witness of the law and the Prophets, to
wit, the righteousness of God by the faith of Jesus Christ, in all and upon all
that believe. For there is no difference. For all have sinned, and are
destitute of the glory of God, and are justified freely by his grace, through
the redemption that is in Christ Jesus: whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness through
the remission of sins.

The Apostles judgment is, that all mortal men simply are under sin, and
have need of the glory of God: but he ascribes not righteousness to every one
that sins, as our adversaries opinion is. Hub. these. 45.
For he expressly defines the righteousness of God to come through faith in
Jesus Christ, and more plainly adds, that we are justified freely by the
redemption wrought by Christ, and that he is set forth unto us of the father to
be a propitiation, but through faith.

Hereupon the author of the Commentary in Hierome upon this place says:
Jerome.
Christ is in a readiness set before the eyes of men to be a propitiator, that
he that will be redeemed may come. Brentius.
Brentius also (whom I cite very often because of the adversaries) weighing
this place writes very truly, that it is manifest that Christ our redemption
and propitiation, is not received nor appropriated unto us but by faith. And
therefore that there is no other instrument beside faith, to receive the
benefits of God and of his son which we must enjoy. And seeing Christ and his
benefit are not received but by faith, it remains that we are not justified
but by faith, that is, made acceptable to God, acquitted from sins, and
reputed just before God. These things he explicatione Catechis. of
justification.

Therefore by what right or wrong is this propitiation extended to all, and be
all said to be freed from all sin and condemnation, and in very deed
received into the lap of grace, that is, justified, whether they believe or
believe not. This is not Gods righteousness, but fained by men of a reprobate
mind, to the reproach of the Gospel preached of the Apostles, and confirmed
by the witness of the Law and the Prophets.

Righteousness in all and upon all that believe.
Moreover, rejecting that fained universality, the Apostle establishes the
true universality of righteousness and grace in all and upon all that believe:
that is, as Theophylact interprets, such a righteousness, whereby God makes
us righteous, comes unto all men by faith, and all Jews as well as Gentiles
bringing faith are made righteous. For there is no difference; neither is he
the God of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles: for it is one God that
justifies circumcision of faith, and uncircumcision through faith. For there
is neither Jew nor Gentile, Gal. 3.
bond nor free, male nor female: but we are all one in Christ, all the sons
of God, and heirs according to promise through faith in Christ Jesus.

The 2. place Romans 8.
In the same Epistle to the Romans there is another notable and famous place,
chap. 8. What shall we say then? If God be for us, who can be against us? who
has not spared his own son, but given him for us all: how shall he not also
with him give us all things?

Us all taken for the church, proved by the Scripture, and by Augustine.
He says not barely for all, but for us all with limitation, as that limitation
also is elsewhere taken in the sacred Scripture, Romans 4. Abraham is the father
of us all. So Jerusalem that is above, is called the mother of us all Gal. 4.
and 1. Cor. 12. the Apostle says, that by one spirit we all be baptized into
one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, bond or free, and are all made to
drink into one spirit. Also in the forecited place to the Galathians, ye are
all one in Christ Jesus. Ad Laur. ca. 61.
Doubtless this is the voice of the Church, If God be for us, who can be against
us? This Augustine observes, saying: The Church that is among men (which he
speaks to make a difference of the Church which is among the holy Angels and
powers of God) is redeemed from all sin by the blood of the Mediator, who is
without sin, and it is the voice of the same: If God be for us, who can be
against us? The voice of the Church.
who spared not his own son, but gave him for us all. This saying elsewhere
he confirms two manner of ways from the text, Tract. 45. in Io.
by the precedents and the consequents. For there goes before, Whom he
foreknew, them he also predestined: whom he predestined, them he called
etc. Of whom also it follows: Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
elect? It is God who justifies, etc. What is then, He gave him for us all? To
which us? To the foreknowne, to the predestinate, to the justified, and
glorified. The Lord knows who be his, they be sheep. Sometime they know
not themselves, but the shepherd knows them, says Augustine in the place
alleged.

Besides, that Christ for whom he died, (according to purpose and efficacy)
for them also he is an advocate, ceasing not to make intercession, yt the grace
of the fathers reconciliation may more and more be bestowed upon them, and (to
use the words of Ambrose) he saves them being the ware that his blood has
bought. For how can he condemn him, Ambr. lib. 1. ^^ Iac. cap. 6.
whom he has redeemed from death? for whom he offered himself: whose life he
knows to be the reward of his death? Mark this.
Shall he not say, what profit is in my blood, if I damn him whom I have
saved? Wherefore the Apostle: Romans 8.
Who is he that shall condemn? It is Christ who is dead, nay who is also
raised again: who also is at the right hand of God, who also prays for us.
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall oppression? shall anguish?
shall persecution? shall famine? or nakedness? or danger, or sword? Nay in all
these we are more than conquerors, De vocat. gent. lib. 1. cap. vlt.
through him who has loved us, etc. So the love of Christ makes them
unconquerable and inseperable, that is, perseuerers unto the very end: for what
is else to persevere, then not to be overcome in tentation? Wherefore they that
persevere unto the end and be saved, be doubtless the beloved and redeemed of
God.

The 3. place Ephesians. 5.
Thirdly, we read to the Ephesians, That Christ is the head of the Church, and
the savior of the body: that he loved his Church, and exposed himself for it,
to sanctify it, clensing it in the lauer of water by the word, that he may
make it for himself glorious: that is, not having wrinckle or spot, or any
such thing, but that it may be holy and blameles.

Three proofs out of the Text for our opinion. Ephesians. ^.
Many things here come together for the proof of our opinion. head of the
Church, and that not according to creation and pre-eminence only, as he is the
head of every creature, but after a peculiar manner, as the Church is his body,
and the fulness of him who fills all in all. As therefore such as be members
of the body, and not such as are without the body, are quickened of the head:
so we who are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, draw
peculiarly from Christ spirit and life.

Savior of his body. For no man ever hated his own flesh, but nourishes and
cherishes it, as Christ also does his Church. This is rehearsed as a document
of his singular love to his Church, which thing should not so well accord, if
as touching the grace of redemption, there were no difference between the
Church and the world, between the spouse of Christ, and the spouse of the
devil: but all alike should be saved by Christ, as these new disputers hold.

Amb. these. 270.
Thirdly, it is expressly added; that Christ loved the more agree to the common
vile company of men without the Church, than glorification does.

To the Collossians also there is a very excellent place, The 4. place. Cap. 1.
cha. 1. We give thanks to the Father who has made us meet to be partakers
of the inheritance of the Saints in light, and has delivered us from the
power of darkness, and translated us into the kingdom of his beloved son,
in whom we have redemption, that is, the remission of sins. Four things
proper to the faithful.
Four things here be published, as properly belonging to the faithful. 1. The
inheritance of the Saints in light. 2. Deliverance from the power of darkness
3. Translation into the kingdom of Gods son, and 4. Redemption. If these be
proper to the faithful, as they be, (for this description of grace is wholly
applied to the faithful) the unbelievers have no part in them. Ambrose.
And thus Ambrose expounds them, whose words are these, upon the Epistle to
the Collossians. Being delivered from the state of darkness, that is plucked
out of hell, wherein we were held by the devil, as well through our own sin,
as through the sin of another, we are translated through faith into the
heavenly kingdom of Gods son. For without the faith of Christ, Hub. These.
4^. and 41.
there is no going out of hell. Therefore these new Sectaries are deceived and
do deceive, contending that there is not one excepted, who is under the power
of the devil, whom Christ has not delivered from the power of the devil, and
has not received into his kingdom.

Moreover hitherto tends that which is written in the same chapter to the
Collossians in these words: Col. 1. The 5. place
Therefore you who were in time past strangers and enemies, having your minds
set in evil works, has he now reconciled in that body of his flesh through
death, that he might make you holy and blameles before him, if ye continue
grounded and firm in faith. Here is an exposition of a double state of
unbelief and faith: and the state of unbelief by the doctrine of the Apostle
has estranging of the mind from God and enemitie with him, but the state of
faith has reconciliation and sanctification. For significantly he says: Now
surely he has reconciled, to wit, since ye believed in Christ.

The 6 place. 1. Tim. 4.
In the 1. to Timothy. chap. 4. the Apostle writes, that God is the Savior of
all men, yet especially of the faithful. Which saying being very short and of
great force, wipeth away this whole controversy, whereof we entreat, if it
be considered with a calm regard. For in saying, who is the savior of all
men, he confirms the general goodness of God upon all. For he suffers his
sun to arise upon the bad and good, Matt. 5. Act. 17.
and in him we are, we live, and are moved. This surely is a certain common
salvation to all men, yea and to beasts: as it is said in the psalm. 36. Thou
O Lord wilt save men and beasts. August tract. 34 in. Io.
For by whom men is preserved, by him also is the beasts. Neither must we be
ashamed to think this of God, yea, we must so conceive and trust so, and take
heed that we think not otherwise. He that saves us, he saves our horse,
our sheep, yea to come to the least things, our hen. But by adding
specialitie of the faithful, he shows that there is a part of mankind,
which through faith inspired from God is advanced by special benefits to high
and eternal felicity. Hereupon also in the former Psalm it is read. The sons
of men do trust in the shadow of thy wings. They shall be satisfied with the
fatnes of thy house, and thou shall give them drink out of the river of thy
delights. For with thee is the well of life, and in thy light we shall see
light. Bring forth thy mercy for them that know thee, and thy righteousness
for such as be upright in heart. Therefore they receive this special
salvation, who trust in him, they do not receive it who do despair. The just
receive it, the unjust and such as know not God receive it not.

The 7. place. Heb. 5.
In the Epistle to the Hebrews (which also of many old writers is attributed
to Paul,) we have these testimonies among other. Chapter 5. Albeit he was the
son yet by those things that he suffered, he learned obedience and being
consecrate, (to wit, by afflictions as it is said ca. 2.) he is made the
author of eternal salvation to all that obey him. Therefore this salvation
was not brought to such as be obstinate, Salvation by Christ is Eternal not
temporal and short, as the adversary seems to make it.
and refuse the grace of Christ through unbelief. And seeing that salvation
purchased by Christ is not temporary and short, as that which was wont to be
brought to men being in great danger in war, but Eternal, how shall it be
said to belong to such as shall be damned, whose portion shall be in the lake
of unquenchable fire?

So in the 9. The 8. place. cap. 9.
Chapter there is mention made of eternal redemption: By his own blood (says
the Apostle) he once entered into the holy place, and has obtained eternal
redemption. Eternal redemption.
And redemption is called eternal, both because it shall be effectual forever;
and also for that the cause of eternal good things is theirs, who be partakers
of the same. The contrary of both might be found in the greater part of men,
if redemption were common to believers and unbelievers, to such as shall be
saved, and damned.

Hitherto also let the words be referred, The 9. place.
which follow in the same place: If the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the
ashes of a young Heifer sprinckling the unclean do sanctify and purge the
flesh: how much more shall the blood of Christ, who by the eternal spirit
offered himself without spot to God, purge your consciences from dead works
to serve the living God? Redemption is described by this, Redemption described.
that it purges our consciences from dead works to serve the living God. But
that purging of consciences and serving of God is proper to the faithful. For
by faith the hearts are purified, Acts 15. Romans 6.
and being freed from sin are made servants of righteousness through the
same faith.

And a little after: The 10. place
Therefore for that cause is he the Mediator of the new covenant that through
death which came for the redemption of transgressions the Called might receive
the promise of the eternal inheritance. Who are those Called, The Called who
they be Prosper. li. cap. 3.
to who^ belong the covenant, redemption, and inheritance? He that wrote the
book of the calling of the Gentiles answers for me. Because (says he) some
are justified by faith, others are hardened in their impiety, the believers are
discerned from unbelievers by the name of the Called: and such as be void of
faith, they are showed to be without this calling, albeit they hear the
Gospel. And he cites the place 1. Cor. 1. we preach Christ crucified, to the
Jews an offense, and to the Gentiles, foolishines: but to the Called, as well
Jews as Gentiles, we preach him, the power and wisdom of God. Of these
Called not only of the Jews but also of the Gentiles, The 11. place.
see more To. 9.23. and cap. 8.28. and in the rest. Neither must we here omit
that which we read written about the end of the 9. chapter to the Hebrews.
Christ was once offered to take away the sins of many. Many. Christo. Theophy.
By these Many, he now means those Called, whereof he spoke before. And so
Chrysostom and Theophylact expound. Why said he of Mary, and not of All? Sai
valuit vt omnes seruaventur.
because all do not believe. The death of Christ was equivalent to the
perdition of all, that is, was of sufficient f^r^e and price to have saved all,
and yet it does not take away the sins of all: because such as resist him,
make his death altogether unprofitable unto them selves. Theophylact also
makes mention of Basil to be of the same mind, some of whose sayings I have
before alleged upon the place of Matthew. 26. But Aquinas of al men most
clearly upon this place writes: Aquinas.
He says to take away the sins of many and not of all because the death of
Christ, albeit it be sufficient for all yet it is not effectual but in the
respect of such as shall be saved. For all are not subject unto him through
faith and good works. Lastly what can be spoken more briefly and forceably for
the deciding of this whole controversy, The 12. place. Heb. 11.
than that of the Apostle, Hebrews 11. Hub. These. 6^. and 1001.
without faith it is impossible to praise God. Either this is not true, or else
it is false that they say often, that all alke believers and unbelievers are
freed from all sin and condemnation, and received into the favor and grace
of our heavenly father, which thing, what is it else, than that al please God
without respect of faith and infidelity.

CHAP. IIII. Testimonies out of other Scriptures of the New Testament.
The 1. place
FOr the greater confirmation of this point, we will add also certain other
sayings of other books of the New Testament. In the Acts chapter 5. Peter,
Acts 5.
and the whole College of the Apostles with one accord testify these words:
The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, and being exalted by his right hand,
made him a prince and savior to give repentance to Israel, and remission of
sins. Repentance and remission of sins be just parables, and therefore they
that have the one, have the other, and they be Israel.
Repentance and remission of sins are joined together by an in separable
knot. Wherefore it is as foolish a thing to affirm that remission of sins is
given by Christ to all men indifferently, as if a man should avouch that he
gives repentance to all. What means that, that the prerogative of both those
benefits is bestowed upon Israel? Upon what Israel? They that be called of
the Jews and Gentiles according to promise, they be the true Israel, says
Augustime, Aug. cap. 59. Gal. 6.
whereof also the Apostle speaks: And upon the Israel of God.

Secondly it is the voice of Peter, The 2. place Acts 10.
and the testimony of all Prophets agreeing together, that every one that
believes in Jesus Christ, receives remission of sins through his name. Unto
this Prophetical and Apostolical consent (which contains the sum of the
Gospel of Christ,) is the false vangelicall commentary of the adversaries
clean contrary, that all simply without respect of faith or unbelief receive
remission of sins through the name of Christ.

Further the same Apostle 1. Epistle. 1. The 3. place 1. Pet. 1.
when he speaks of redemption by the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb
undefiled and without spot, he says that he was foreordained before the
foundations of the world were laid, Christ was foreordained and exhibited to
the world for the believers sake.
and was made manifest for the believers sake. Expressly he declares, that
Christ was exhibited to the world a Savior for the believers. Therefore for
the same persons in like manner he properly died, and rose again: not because
they believed already, but that they might believe, John 20.
and believing might have eternal life through his name.

John also 1. Epistle 1. consents hereto. The 4. place 1. Ioh. 1. Three
things to be observed in Saint John's words.
If we walk in light, as God is light, we have communion with him, and the
blood of Jesus Christ purges us from all sin. If we say, we have no sin, we
deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. If we confess our sins, he
is just and faithful to forgive us our sins, 1. Communion with God belongs not
to all. Therefore neither the grace of God: for where the grace of God is,
there is also the communion of

The 5. place Apoc. 1.
I come to the Revelation of John, in whose very entrance we read that
redemption is declared and consecrated with these golden words: Jesus Christ
that faithful witness, and first begotten of the dead, has loved us and
washed us from our sins through his blood, and has made us kings and priests
to God and his father. They that be redeemed are kings and priests to God, and
such only the faithful be.
To whom redemption belongs, they are kings and priest to God the father: but
it belongs to the believers, and not to the unbelievers, witness Peter 1. Pet.
2. Ye are a chosen stock, a royal Priesthood, a holy nation, a people whom
God has purchased to himself as his own, that ye might show forth his
virtues, who has called you out of darkness into his marvelous light.
Therefore the unbelievers are void of redemption.

Lib. 1. coment. in Apoc.
Rupertus Tuitiensis says very well. Therefore he has washed us, that is, all
his Church, from our sins. For he has not only washed them, who now were
believers, or had bin, but also who should believe: and these surely he washed
not them actually, but in power: because they could not be washed who were not
yet borne, or else had not yet believed, but he gave them power to be washed.

The 6. place Apoc. 5.
The like place meets us Apoc. 5. where the 24. Elders, and the four beasts
sing a new song unto the Lamb, saying: Thou art worthy to receive the book,
and to open the seals thereof: because thou wast slain, and have redeemed us
to God by thy blood, The Catholic Church, meant by the 24. Elders, and four
beasts in the Apoc.
out of every tribe, language, people and nation, and have made us kings and
priests to our God, and we shall reign upon the earth. Here by the 24. Elders
and 4. beasts is meant the universal Church of men, called Catholic, as
partly we may see by the words, out of every tribe, language, people and
nation, and partly by the scope of the whole chapter. For a threefold company
or army is in that chapter brought in to bless and praise the Lamb. The
first company is the whole Church of men represented as I said, by the Elders
and beasts. The second is the blessed Angels. The third is the creatures
besides in heaven, upon the earth and under the earth. Mark this reason.
Hereupon thus I reason: This new song, Thou wast slain and have redeemed us,
is proper to the Church, which is gathered out of all mankind: (for in the two
testimonies which follow, of the multitude of Angels and of every creature,
that form is of purpose not observed) therefore the only Church of men is
redeemed by the blood of Christ. This is Ruperts argument upon this very place.

Other things also concur with this, as that the redeemed by the blood of
Christ are made to their God kings and priests, whereof we spoke a little
before. Also that they shall reign upon the earth, that is, the land of the
living, as of old, when the Canaanites and Amorites were cast out for their
sins, the Israelites reigned in the land of promise. But this reign in the
true land of promise, we know all shall not have, but the elect only, to whom
the son of man will say, when he comes in his glory: Come ye blessed,
Matthew. 25.
possess the kingdom prepared for you before the foundations of the world.

CHAP. V. Testimonies out of the Law and Prophets.
NOw also the books of the old Testament are full of testimonies concerning
the grace of our Savior proper to the believers, and so far forth
universal, as he has his own, who fear him and work righteousness in every
nation and Tribe.

Hitherto first of all tends the promise made to Abraham and his seed, The
1. place Gen 12. and 22,
Genesis 12. and 22. In thy seed all nations of the earth, shall be blessed.

A Syllogism.
It is certain, that they be counted strangers from the blessing of Abraham,
who are not the seed of Abraham. But many among mankind, and namely the
unbelievers, are not the seed of Abraham: Therefore they are strangers from the
blessing of Abraham.


The Minor Paul very often proves. For manifestly To. 9. he teaches, that all the posterity of Abraham are not accounted in this seed, much less all the
whole offspring of Adam, but only the sons of promise. Romans 4.
And in the fourth chapter of the same Epistle, he refers this whole seed
to the believers of the Jews and Gentiles. His words are: Therefore is the
inheritance by faith, that it may be sure to the whole seed. that is, not
only to that which is of the law, but also to that which is of the faith of
Abraham, who is the father of us all: to wit, the father of all the believers
being uncircumcised, and the father of Circumcision, that is, to them who are
not only circumcised, but who also walk in the steps of the faith of our
father Abraham, Gal. 3.
which he had being uncircumcised. Likewise Gal. 3. he declares, that they who
are of faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham: because the Scripture
foreseeing, that God would justify the Gentiles through faith, preached before
hand the Gospel to Abraham, saying: In thee shall all nations be blessed.
Whereupon also in that place he says to the faithful: All ye are one in
Christ Jesus: and if ye be be Christ's, Verse. 14.
then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to promise. See also the 14.
verse of the same chapter.

Esaias 53. The 2. place.
Among the Prophets, Esaias chap. 53. (wherein he so evidently sets out not
only the use of the Lords passion, but the history also, that he seems
rather to be an Evangelist than a Prophet) confirms the same thing saying: Us
all in the Prophet, taken for the faithful only, proved by the text.
We all like sheep have erred, every one has declined after his own way: and
the Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all. It is spoken with
limitation, as concerning the universality of the faithful, after that kind
of phrase, wherein Abraham is called the father of us all, and Jerusalem which
is above, the mother of us all, that is, of the believers. And that we may
nothing doubt at all, the Prophet adds: he was smitten for the transgression
of my people. Again, My righteous servant shall by the knowledge of himself
justify many, and he shall bear their sins. And above: he has borne the
sins of many. He expressly testifies that the fruit of the Lords passion,
to wit, righteousness and redemption, belongs not to all indifferently, but to
many, that is to the believers. Pet. Gal. de arcan. Ca^^^l. ^erit. lib. 8. ca.
^4.
Even as also Petrus Galatinus has very well written upon those words of Esaias:
Albeit (says he) the passion of Christ ought to be sufficient to blot out the
sins of all, yet it will not blot out all men's sins, but theirs only who
should believe in him, and repent. For that cause he says: And he shall bear
the sins of many. Luther also upon that saying: Luther. in Is. 53.
My righteous servant by the knowledge of himself, etc. defines Christian
righteousness to be nothing else, than to know Christ, and this only to be the
way of our deliverance from death and sins: and that this knowledge does free
us, and that there is no other comfort. Therefore it is an error, to claim for all men simply freedom from sin and death.

The same thing plainly appears by the form of the new covenant, Ier. 31.
and Heb. 8. Behold the days shall come, The 3. place Ierem. 31.
says the Lord, when I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and
with the house of Judah, not according to the covenant that I made with their
fathers when I brought them out of the land of Egypt: but this is the covenant
which I will strike with the house of Israel after those days, says the Lord:
I will put my laws in their mind, and in their heart will I write them, and I
will be their God, and they shall be my people. Neither shall every one teach
his neighbor, saying: know the Lord: for all shall know me from the least to the
greatest among them, and I will be merciful to their iniquities, and will
remember their sins no more.

Hence we see, that remission of sins which is wrought by the death of the
Mediator, is the benefit of the new covenant. Whereupon it follows, The
benefits of the covenant belong to the sons of the covenant.
that it appertains to the sons only of the covenant. But how that all are
not the sons of the covenant, first from hence it is plain, that these
promises: I will put my laws in their minds: I will be their God, and they
shall be my people: they shall all know me; agree not simply unto all men. Then
because it is flatly said, that this covenant is made with the house of Israel,
and with the house of Judah: which thing must be understood of the Church of the
Jews and Gentiles, that true Judah and Israel, whereof the Apostle also
speaks, Gal. 3.
Ye are all one in Christ Jesus: and because ye are Christ's, ye are Abraham's
seed, and heirs by promise.

Ier. 23. and 33. The 4. place.
The like promise we have Iere. 23. and 33. Behold the days shall come, says
the Lord, that I will raise up to David a righteous branch, and a king shall
reign, in whose days Israel shall be saved, and Judah shall dwell boldly. We
see here also the redemption of the Messiah peculiarly attributed to his
people: because, Luke 1.
as the Angel Gabriel testifies, he reigns over the house of Jacob, that
is, the Church, and of his reign and his peace there shall be no end.

Every where also in the Prophets, when they foretell of the coming of the
Redeemer, and of salvation to be wrought by him, the word of promise is
peculiarly directed unto the Church under the name of Sion, Zach. 2. The 5.
place.
as Zachar. 2. Rejoice and be glad O daughter Sion: for I will come and dwell
in the midst of thee, says the Lord: and many nations shall be gathered
together in that day, and they shall be my people, and I will dwell in the
midst of thee: and the Lord shall possess Judah his portion in the holy land,
and shall choose as yet Jerusalem. That this must be understood of the Church
collected from every place, the things that we read 2. Cor. 6. ver. 16. and
Apoc. 21. verse. 2. will not suffer us to doubt at all.

Zach. 6. The 6. place.
And in the 9. chapter of the same Prophet it is said: Rejoice greatly O
daughter Sion, shout for joy O daughter Jerusalem: Behold thy king comes unto
thee, who is just, a Savior poor, ^iding upon an ass, and he shall speak
peace to the Gentiles, and his dominion shall be from sea to sea, and from the
flood to the ends of the earth. Ephesians. 2.
For the Catholic Church of Christ is dispersed through the whole world: which
Christ, as Paul witnesses, is our peace, and has made both (Jews and
Gentiles) one, abolishing enmity through his flesh, that he might make one man
of two in himself, and has reconciled both in one body unto God by his
cross, slaying enmity by it, and coming, has preached peace both to them
that were far off, and to them that were near.

Agreeable to this is the word of promise, Esaias. 62. Esaias 62.
Behold the Lord proclaims unto the utmost parts of the earth: Tell ye the
daughter of Sion, Behold thy salvation shall come, behold his reward is with
him, and his work is before him, and they shall call them a holy people, the
redeemed of the Lord: and thou shall be called a city sought for, and not
forsaken. What was this city but the high Jerusalem, which is the mother of us
all? for it is written: Rejoice thou barren that bear not: Gal 4.
break forth and cry thou that trauellest not for the desolate woman has
more children, than she that has an husband. After which sort also the city
of God, the spiritual Sion and Jerusalem with her sons dispersed among all
nations, is gloriously described in the 87. Psalm. And these be they of whom
speaks this prophetical word here: They shall call them a holy people, the
redeemed of the Lord. Wherefore seeing the prerogative of so great dignity is
proper to the sons of the Church, and the household of God, it is injuriously
extended to those that are without.

But that we may not go far, it is certain, Acts 10.
as Peter shows, that all the Prophets do witness, that whosoever believes
in him, receives remission of sins through his name. And as Paul affirms:
the righteousness of God is approved by the testimony of the Law and the
Prophets, Romans 3.
the righteousness of God I say in all, and upon all that believe. Col. 1.
Now the righteousness of God, and remission of sins, is redemption it
self, Colos. 1. Wherefore by the one consent of all the Prophets, redemption
is proper to the believers, and nothing at all belongs to the unbelievers.

CHAP. VI. The same thing is proved by some types of the old Testament.
I Will only annexe certain typical or shadowed things of the old Testament,
wherein now long ago the very same thing has been declared. The redemption of
Israel out of Egypt and Babel.
And first it is manifest enough, that the redemption of the people of Israel
out of Egypt, and after out of the captivity of Babel, were as certain
shadows and figures of this true redemption and grace gotten by Christ, as
here and there we may see in the Prophets. Tuitiens. has this similitude upon
Ioh. 17.
Therefore look how much difference there is between the Egyptians perishing
with their prince, and the children of Israel marking their door posts with
the sacred blood of the Lamb and so escaping: so much differs the world of
the unbelievers from the world or people of the faithful: that with their king
the prince of darkness the devil, they may sooner be drowned in the bottom of
hell, than that the redemption by Christ that true Lamb of God, should do them
any good at all. Esaias 43.3.
Also as the redeemer of Israel took his servant Jacob, and the seed of
Abraham, and brought them out of Babel into the land of the forefathers, giving
the Egyptians, the Ethiopians and other wicked people as it were the price for
the redemption of the people of God: Ier. 30. v. 11.23
so the Lord is with his Church to save it, while the storm abides still upon
the head of the ungodly.

The brazen serpent. Number 21.
Again, in the desert the brazen Serpent lifted up by Moses at the commandment
of God, was the only remedy against the fiery serpents that whosoever should
look upon it should not die but live: and that not for the thing seen, but
for God the savior of all, whose word did heal, as the Wiseman says. Sap.
16.7.
As therefore they that were stung of Serpents then, did not live, unless they
looked upon the sign of health: so the cross of Christ is redemption and life
to such as believe in him, but not to unbelievers. And this is it that Christ
avouches of himself, Ioh. 3. As Moses lift up the Serpent in the wilderness,
so must the son of man be lift up, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have eternal life.

Moreover, Exodus ^1. The (...) in the year of Jubilee.
among the Jews there was a general freedom of all servants in the year of
Iubilee, as far forth as the law of liberty gave leave to all Hebrews. But
as then, they that willingly continued in bondage felt not the force of offered
liberty: so they feel not the efficacy of Christ's redemption, who abide
addicted unto the world. Lib. 1. Ep. 1.
Ambrose rehearsing this figure, says excellently: He that is a true freeman,
a true Hebrew, is wholly Gods all that he has is liberty: he has nothing of
his, who refuses liberty, saying: I love my master, his wife and children, I
will not be free.

Hitherto tends the escape goat, The escape goat. Leuit. 16.
upon whose head the high Priest every year used to lay the curse of all the
iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their sins and trespasses, and
so sent him out into the wilderness, and he bore all the sins of the people of
Israel.

If this was a figure of Christ to come, and of the atonement that he should
make, (as truly it was) we must needs confess, that Christ properly makes
satisfaction for the sins of his people, as the goat was properly appointed
for the people of God, the children of Israel to make an atonement for all
their iniquities. For this cause also Heb. 2. Heb. 2.
he is called merciful and a faithful high priest to appease Gods wrath for
the sins of the people. And in the 13. chapter, Cap. 13.
the Apostle respecting the whole legal sacrifice, says: And Jesus suffered
without the gate, to sanctify the people by his blood: so that we that are his
people, may boldly say: he has borne our sins in his body upon the tree, and
with his stripes we are healed. 1. Pet. 2.

Concluding therefore the first rank of our arguments, The sum of all that
has been said, and it is worthy to be observed.
we affirm, believe and confess, that the Savior promised to the world, the
Christ of God, preached always in the Church by the mouth of all the holy
Prophets and Apostles, is appointed by the father to be a propitiation through
faith in his blood, in all and upon all that believe: and that this benefit of
the restoring and redemption of mankind, albeit it be proper and peculiar to
the Church, as touching the efficacy of it, yet it is universal, altogether
in that sense, wherein we believe and confess the holy Church of Christ to
be universal.

CHAP. VII. Of the second order of proofs.
The first reason drawn from the definition of redemption.
IN this rank we will use reasons drawn from the analogy of faith: and first
I reason from the definition:

Justification belongs to the believers, and not to vnbeleeues.

But Redemption is the same that Justification is.

Therefore Redemption belongs to believers, and not to unbelievers.

The Assumption is proved out of Paul, Ephesians 1. Col. 1. where he defines
redemption to be remission of sins. In another place, to wit, Romans 4. he will
have the justification of a man before God to consist in the forgiveness of
sins, alleging that of the Psalm. Psalm 32.
Blessed are they, whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered.
The Mayor or first proposition, is the doctrine of the Apostle largely handled
and proved Romans 3, 4, and 5. chapters, and Gal. 2. and 3. chapters, to wit,
that man is justified by faith in Christ Jesus. To which doctrine nothing is
more contrary, than to imagine justification to be so general and largely
spreading, as condemnation is general in all and upon all men simply.
Thouching the words To. 5. we have answered before least any should think that
they may be objected to maintain so general a justification, Ambroses
exposition of (all men) Romans 5.
which also Ambrose upon that place openly rejects, and expounds, that
grace abounds upon all men to the justification of life, as touching the
believers, of whom there is a certain proper universality subject to Christ,
and partaker of his grace no less than the universality of mankind draws
from Adam sin and death.

The second argument. The 2. reason.
There is no remission of sins out of the Church.

Therefore neither redemption, which Paul (as I said,) defines to be remission
of sins.

The Antecedent Augustine proves saying: In 1. Epist. Io. tract. vlt.
Where there is remission of sins, there is the Church. And from thence in
the same place he gathers against the Donatists, who shut up the Church in a
part of Africa: that the Church of Christ is scattered through the whole world,
because remission of sins in the new Testament is despersed through all
nations, beginning at Jerusalem. What is the Catholic Church.
For this is the Catholic Church, that is, the people of God throughout all
nations, accounting and reckening all the saints withal, that were before the
birth of Christ, who yet were knit to the same body, whereof he is the head,
while they believed in him, who was preached of before; Cap. 3. de cate.
Ru^i^bus.
as the same Augustine writes in another place.

Here the same illation is of force: If redemption be so universal, that (as
our adversaries suppose) all are truly and undoubtedly delivered from all
sin and condemnation, all then of necessity are, or have been sometime the
Church. Than which thing what is more absurd? Hub. these. 65. John 15. John 4.
Ephesians. 2. Matt. 16. John 10.
For such as be selected out of the world are the Church, being borne of God,
and built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, and upon the rock:
and being the sheep of Christ hear his voice. Therefore the world, and the
Church in the world do differ: as Brentius does well advise us in his
Catechism, expounding the Article: I believe the holy Church. There are some
(says he) that think, that the whole world, or all men in the world be the
people of God, The whole world is not the Church, yet among all men in the
world God has his people.
and the Lords Church: but this Article of our faith does teach us, that the
whole world is not the Church, nor all me^ the elect people of God, but that
among al men in the world God has his people, scattered abroad in respect of
their outward conversation, but gathered together by the same Gospel in one
faith. And as the whole world is not the Church of God: so neither is any whole
city or town, but in cities and towns God has his Church. These. 1001.1059.
etc. and 4^. etc.
These things says he, with whom how well Huber agrees, (otherwise a follower
of Brentius his opinion,) let him look unto it. For he is little or nothing at
all from auouching all men to be Gods elect, his people and kingdom, and
therefore his Church. For in this life the kingdom of Christ and the kingdom
of heaven is the Church, Aug. li. 20. cap. 9. de ciuit. Dei.
as Augustine largely teaches.

The 3. reason
The third argument: The redeemed are known, and do please God, at the least
in respect of the time and state of redemption. But to those that shall be damned
the Lord openly professes, saying Mat. 7. I never knew you, depart from me,
all ye that work iniquity. Chrysostom. in Matt.
He says plainly, Never. But we must understand (as Christome advises us)
that the Lord knows not such, not that he is altogether ignorant of them, who
knows all me^, but that he knows them not to be his, nor loves them, as
the Lord is said to know, that is, to love and approve the way of the
righteous. Psalm 2. Therefore such as shall be damned are not of the number of
them that Christ has redeemed.

The 4. reason
The fourth argument is agreeable to the former: They that have not the spirit
of Christ are none of his. To. 8. But most have not the spirit of Christ. For
if all men should have the spirit of God dwelling in them, the bodies of all
mortal men should also be quickened by the same spirit, that raised up Christ
from the dead. Besides this, as Christ says in the Gospel, the world cannot
receive that spirit of truth, because it knows him not, nor sees him.
Hereupon it follows, that most men are not Christ, and by consequence,
neither Christ nor his benefits are theirs.

The 5. reason
The fifth argument, from the adiunct of redemption, or the thing that is
nearly knit unto it whose advocate Christ is, their only propitiation is he;
But he is not the advocate of the unbelievers and reprobates, but of the
faithful and elect; therefore also he is not to them a propitiation, but to
the faithful and elect.

The reason of the Mayor is, because it is the office of one and the same high
Priest both to pray and to sacrifice for the people: The office of the high
Priest.
and both are required to obtain for us the favor and grace of God. Whereupon
also John 1. Epistle 2. joining these together makes him our propitiator, whom
he calls our advocate. As also a man may see them joined together, To. 8, 34
And that Christ is only for them an advocate, who believe or shall believe,
and in a word for his elect, he himself has not dissembled it. John 17. I
pray not for the world: but for them whom thou have given me. Which place we
have before largely expounded. And if he did not then pray for the world, he
does not pray for it now, but only for the elect. The same thing is very
clear. Romans 8. Who shall accuse the elect of God? It is God who iust^fieth,
Who shall condemn? It is Christ who died, and rose again and sits at the
right hand of the father, and makes intercession for us: that is for the elect
of whom only he speaks in that text. Neither does John speak of any other
1. Epistle 2. Little children if any man sin, we have an advocate with the
father Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation of our sins.
And the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews chapter 7. Because he has an
everlasting Priesthood he is able altogether to save those, that come unto God
by him, he seeing ever lives to make intercession for them, to wit, for those
that come unto God by him. In like sort the author of the 62. sermon in
Ambrose upon the saying of Saint John observes, that Christ is an advocate
unto Christians, and a judge altogether to Jews and other infidels. Origene
also upon Leuiticus. For them only does the high Priest Christ our advocate
and propitiator pray, that be the Lords inheritance, that wait for him
without, that depart not from the temple, but give themselves to fasting and
prayer.

The sixth argument from the things that follow redemption, as are, the adoption
and inheritance. The 6. reason


Where redemption is, there is adoption and inheritance: Adoption and
inheritance, follow redemption.
But all are not sons and heirs to wit, the heirs of God and coheires with
Christ.

Therefore neither are all redeemed.

The Minor is proved out of Paul, who accounts them the sons of God, that
are led by the spirit of God, and do mortify the actions of the body by the
spirit: to say nothing now of so many places of Scripture, that attribute
adoption as proper to the believers. John 1 As many as received him, to them
be gave this power or dignity to be the sons of God, Ambro. in 5. Romans
even to them that believe in his name. See also 1. John 3.1. Hereupon Ambrose
also writes upon the 5. to the Romans. Such of us as believe Christ to be the
son of God, are adopted of God for sons. For he could not bestow any more
upon the believers, than that they might be called the sons of God, while the
unbelievers are forsaken. For we are called the sons of God, but they not
worthy to be called servants. And Epistle 74. He closes up his whole argument
very briefly saying: Where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty: where
is no liberty, there no grace, where no grace, there no adoption: where no
adoption; there is no succession. But where faith is, there is liberty,
adoption, and inheritance.

The 7. reason The Mayor.
The seventh argument from another consequent, that is, from sanctification and
conversion. Whosoever are redeemed, are also sanctified converted and
regenerated, according to the promise: A deliverer shall come out of Sion, and
shall turn away iniquities from Jacob: and this is my covenant with them,
Sanctification and conversion necessarily follow redemption.
when I shall take away their sins says the Lord. Which place out of the 59.
of Isaie, Paul Romans 11. applies to the conversion of Israel, and from thence
shows that conversion is joined with deliverance or redemption. Whereto also
pertains the saying of John 1. Epistle 3. He that commits sin is of the
devil: but for this cause was the son of God revealed, that he might destroy
the works of the devil. Whosoever is borne of God sins not. He speaks of
practicing righteousness, as whereby the sons of God were discerned from the
sons of the devil: such as sin are of the devil: such as do righteousness
are of God through Christ, who destroyeh in us the works of the devil, not
only by forgiving sins, but also by renewing our corrupt nature to do the
works of righteousness. The circumstance of the words and the scope do teach
this exposition, and Augustine confirms it in Hypognostic^ lib. 3. where
withal he alleges that which is written Heb. 9. that the blood of Christ, who
by his eternal spirit offered himself to God, does purge our consciences from
dead works to serve the living God. See also in Zacharies song Luke 1. verse.
74. Tit. 2. verse. 14. 1. Cor. 1. verse. 30. Ephesians. 5.26. Act. 5. ver. 31.74. Tit.
2. verse. 14. 1. Cor. 1. verse. 30. Ephesians. 5.26. Act. 5. ver. 31. in Peter's words,
and in his 1. Epistle. 2. ver. 24. but most plentifully of all Romans 6. and 7.
chapters. All which places without gainsaying do witness, that the
sanctification or renouation of a man to practice righteousness and good works,
are necessarily joined with the gift of redemption.

Here now let us set down the assumption, The Minor,
which the holy Scripture and experience do plainly and sufficiently convince,
that not all men be endued with the spirit of sanctification for their
conversion, and renewing of their life. It is proved. Because this
sanctification is not without the free giving of the holy spirit: but the world
cannot receive that spirit, Ioh. 14. Further, this gift consists herein, 1.
Pet. 2. Romans 8. and 7. Luke 1.
that being dead to sins we should live to righteousness, and should serve
God in his sight with holiness and righteousness all the days of our life. And
is this given to all men? nay it properly belongs to the sons of promise,
and of the new covenant, as the Lord says: I will put my laws in their minds,
and in their hearts will I write them, and all shall know me: Iere. 31. Heb. 8.
and I will be merciful to their sins, and their iniquities will I remember
no more. Also, I will give you a new heart and a new spirit within you: and I
will take away your stony heart, Eze. 36.
and will give you a fleshy heart, and I will make you to walk in my precepts,
and to keep my judgments: and ye shall be my people, and I will be your God.

Which things seeing they be thus, we conclude also, The conclusion.
that redemption belongs not to all men, but to the children of the promise
only.

Now the adversary two manner of ways runs a ground about this argument:
Hub. these. 1089
first in that be labors to wrest sanctification indifferently unto the
whole progeny of men, and yet alleges no fit testimony of Scripture to
prove it, which as we have seen plainly declares the contrary. These. 1096.
Secondly, in that he either craftily depraueth the force of the argument, or
else does not understand it, to wit, as though from the coherence of the double
benefit of redemption and sanctification we reasoned thus: God requires
sanctification of his redeemed ones: therefore the greatest part is not
redeemed, because it does not practice godliness. But our reasoning is not
drawn from our duty, but from Gods benefit, promising that he will give to
the redeemed a new heart, and a new spirit, and so will cause them to walk in
his ways, by putting and writing them in their minds; not with ink, but with
the spirit of the living God; not in stony tables, but in the tables of the
heart.

The 8. reason.
The 8. Argument nearly agrees with the seventh: In the redeemed ones the will
also is redeemed by Jesus Christ, The will is redeemed and set free in all those
that be redeemed.
otherwise the best thing in man was not redeemed. Therefore by granting the
redemption of all, faithful and Infidels, it should follow that the will also
in all is redeemed and healed: and so free will should be established in all
whomsoever: whereas yet they that are ignorant of Christ, and believe not in
him, do serve sin, and are not able to will, or go about any thing that is
good: as Luther has notably proved in his book de seruo arbitrio.

The 9. reason.
The 9. Argument from another consequent, which is blessedness and eternal life.

Eternal life E^^^^^lessed^^s to low ^^ose that be redeemed effectually.
Whosoever are effectually redeemed, shall not perish, but shall have eternal
life.

But the unbelievers do perish: for he that believes not shall be damned.

Therefore the unbelievers are not effectually redeemed.

The Mayor is fully proved by these sayings: Being justified by his blood, we
shall now much more be saved from wrath by him. For if when we were enemies,
we were reconciled to God by the death of his son, much more now shall we be
saved by his life. Romans 5. And chap. 8. Whom he justifies, them also he
glorifieth. Again, If God be for us, who is against us? even he that has not
spared his own son, but given him for us all, how shall he not with him give
us all things? Who shall accuse the elect of God? It is God that justifies.
Who shall condemn? It is Christ who is dead: yea rather who is also risen
again, and makes intercession for us.

Paul is manifestly of this judgment, that they shall never be damned, for
whom Christ dyed, rose again, and makes intercession.

Notably says Ambrose: Ambr. de Jacob and vita beata. lib. 1. cap 6.
He that has given us the author of all, excepteth nothing. There is nothing
then that we may fear can possibly be denied us; there is nothing wherein we
ought to be doubtful of the continuance of Gods bountifulnes, whose plenty
has been of so long continuance, An excellent saying, and of great comfort to
a penitent heart, if it be often remembered.
and always ready, so yt first he would predestinate, then he would call, and
whom he would call, them he would justify and glorify. Can he possibly
forsake them whom he has pursued with his so many and great benefits? But
there is fear, least the Judge be too severe. Consider what judge thou have,
to wit, Christ. Can he condemn thee whom he has redeemed from death, for whom
he has offered himself, whose life he knows is the reward of his death?
Will he not say: Aug. de Trinit. lib. 13. cap. 16.
What profit is in my blood, if I condemn him whom I my self have saved? See
also if ye please, Augustine confirming this very argument.

Hereupon it rises, that some under pretense of universal redemption have
thought that all at length shall be saved. Of which mad error Calvin upon 1.
Ioh 2. Bucer in the Acts of the Conference had at Argentine with Melchior
Hofman, A book published in the dutch tongue at Argent. 1553.
do make mention, and also Wolfgange Musculus in the place concerning the
redemption of mankind, warning us to take heed, least understanding amiss
the universality of redemption, we say with frantike men, that no man is
damned, and perishes for ever. These our men with whom we deal deny that
thing truly: but what avails it to deny it, seeing nevertheless they stiffly
maintain that principle, from whence that error springs?

They except, that the redeemed do not perish, unless they cast away, and tread
under foot redemption once received. But contrariwise the testimonies of
Scripture even now alleged, do teach, that such as are effectually redeemed,
and already justified by the gift of God, shall certainly have life and
heavenly glory, and cannot possibly by any means be plucked away from the love
of God toward them in Christ Jesus. And as for some examples and places to the
contrary, they have been sufficiently answered in the second book before.

If all sinner be blotted out and sati^fied, then vnbe^iefe is blotted, and it
shall not condemn us.
Furthermore, how agree these things together, that all the sins of all men
are satisfied for, and in very deed blotted out, and yet that the greater part
of men are damned for unbelief? For if all sins are forgiven all men, then
unbelief also is forgiven. How then shall it damn any man? Thus it ever
abides immovable, that all at length shall be saved, if all men together be
effectually made partakers of redemption.

The 10. reason.
The tenth argument is drawn from the causes of redemption, two whereof are the
principal efficient causes: one farther off, The causes of redemption.
to wit, the grace of God giving his son unto us: the other most near us:
the son himself, finishing the work of redemption in the nature of man
which he took upon him. The material cause is the passion and death of the
righteous for the unrighteous. The isntrumental efficient cause We have all
sinned but we are justified freely by his grace through the redemption made in
Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in
his blood to declare his righteousness. Where we see among other causes of
redemption, faith required, as the instrument wherewith we may apply unto us
redemption gotten for us by his blood, and may become partakers thereof to the
blotting out of our sins. Therefore the unbelievers have nothing to do with
redemption and propitiation. And that the necessity of faith may the more
appear in every matter of salvation, Faith, how necessary to salvation.
the Apostle Heb. 11. expressly testifies, that it is impossible without
faith to please God, producing for this point most notable examples of
antiquity, who are showed to please God through faith, and to have obtained
righteousness, which is according to faith.

Notably says Augustine in Euang. Ioh. sermon. 60. The medicine for all wounds,
The great necessity and profit of faith.
and the only atonement for the sins of men, is to believe in Christ.
Neither can any man at all be cleansed either from original sin, or the
sins which he has done, unless by faith he be united, and joined to his
body. For they that believe in him are the sons of God: because they are
borne of God by the grace of adoption, which is in the faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ: for in believing we are made the sons of God, as it is written: He has
given them prerogative to be made the sons of God, while they believe in him.
And sermon. 181. de temp Faith is the ground of all good things, Aug. de temp.
ser. 181.
and the beginning of man's salvation: without this none can be of the number
of Gods sons, and without it in this world neither does man attain the grace
of justification, nor hereafter shall possess eternal life: and whosoever walks
not by faith shall not come to see God.

In these testimonies of the Scriptures, and our Elders according to the
Scriptures, if we mean to stand, (and we ought to rest therein) away with
the devise of the righteousness of all men, and the operation of salvation in
all, Hub. these. 49. and 65.
and the receiving of all men into grace, and their purging from sins, whether
they believe or not.

The adversaries do except, that they think not that the merit of Christ is
applied without faith, or that any man without it can be made partaker of the
fatherly will of God. These. 72. and 1112
I answer, therefore they be manifestly contrary to themselves, that say such
things, The adversaries contrary to themselves. These. 65.270.168.
and yet stiffly maintain that all men none excepted, faithful and unfaithful
before and after Christ's birth, are set free by the blood of Christ truly and
undoubtedly from all sin and condemnation, and are received into the grace
and favor of God: that all alike are saved, justified and quickened: that all
pertain to the communion of salvation, and the kingdom of grace, and such
like. For if no man can be partaker of the grace of God, righteousness, life and
salvation in Christ, unless he apply those good things to himself, and the
application cannot be but by faith, how belong those things to all unfaithful
as well as faithful?

The 11. reason The Mayor.
The 11. Argument from another consequent. Redemption is such a benefit, whereby
of servants of sin we are made the sons of God; of children of wrath, the
children of grace; of strangers and unknown, we are made a royal and priestly
stock, as it is written Apoc. 1. and 5. He has loved us, and redeemed us to
God by his blood, and has made us to our God kings and priests, and we shall
reign upon the earth.

The Minor.
But unto the Church properly belongs this dignity, to be a chosen stock, a
royal priesthood, a holy nation, witness Peter, 1. Epist. 2. which also the
words out of the Revelation chap. 5 now cited do confirm, where the voice and
confession of the Church is, Thou have made us to our God kings and priests.

The conclusion.
Therefore it follows, that the propriety of redemption is in the possession
of the Church.

The 12. reason. From the use of the Sacraments.
The 12. argument from the use of the Sacraments. Unto whom nothing is sealed in
he use of the Sacraments, unto them the promise of grace in the word belongs
not. For the nature of the promise is all one both in the audible and visible
word.

But in the Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords Supper, nothing is sealed to
such as be aliants from Gods covenant, and unbelievers. Therefore neither does
the promise of grace in the word belong unto them. For the proof of the
assumption, let the things be considered, that we have of that matter spoken
before in the Confutation.

The 13. reason
The 13. and last argument. If all men wholly be received into the grace and
favor of God by the death and grace of the Savior, Hub. These. 157. and 536.
so that no man shall ever perish now after his redemption, unless he despise
the grace of God, Hub. these. 157. and 136. Mark this reason against the
adversary.
and through unbelief shake off and forsake his redemption: It will follow,
that all the children of al Thalmudists, Mahumetists, Turks, Tartarians, and
such as feed on men's flesh called Anthropophagi and such like, as long as they
want the use of reason, and therefore actual sin, and be not yet subject to
the contempt of grace, are in the state of salvation, and dying in that age of
what nation soever they be, in the Church or out of it, are eternally saved:
which thing is manifestly and Anabaptisticall dotage of those men (I say) that
follow the pauilions of Mennon, Mennon. Theod Phil. Hofman.
and Theodorike Philip up and down the Low Countries, which they have drawn
unto them from the sink as it seems of Melchior Hofman. For Theodore
Phillippi is of this opinion, and plainly writes, Lib. de baptismo.
Because Christ the Lamb of God has taken away the sins of the world by his
death and blood, that no man can be damned for the sin of Adam: and therefore
that the kingdom of heaven belongs to all children indifferently, and that
al are innocents and reputed without sin before God, seeing no sin beside
Adams can be imputed unto them: and that the same is satisfied and taken away
universally by the death of Christ, so that infantes for Adams transgression
cannot be judged or condemned. And the Pelagians also (as Augustine witnesses)
labored to bring some such thing in, to wit, August. lib. 2. de nuptijs and
concup. cap. 33.
that little children are innocent, and without all guiltines, after that Christ
had died for them.

But the Scripture teaches us to put here a difference between the infants of
Gods people, Infants of the faithful differ from others.
and the infants of ungodly nations, and rejected of God. And the infantes
truly of Gods people, Genesis 17. 1. cor. 7. Math. 19.
(albeit as the rest by their carnal nativity they be borne under sin and
wrath.) have a promise that they belong to the number of Gods people, and of
the Saints, and so to the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven. More arguments
I will not here allege, A doubt: when redemption begins in us.
for by those which have been brought, our purpose I trust is more than
sufficiently declared. Only one doubt remains: If the believers only are to
be accounted for the redeemed of Christ, does therefore their redemption
begin, when they begin to believe? Tit. 1. 1. Tim. 1.
First in respect of Gods purpose and predestination, according to which grace
is given us in Christ Jesus before the world. Four ways redemption is to be
considered. Comment in Apoc. 1.
when upon the altar of the cross he took away enmities and reconciled the
whole Church of Jews and Gentiles to God in one body through the cross, as
Paul testifies Ephesians 2. Then surely as Rupertus writes, he redeemed and
washed in his blood from their sins, not only these men that now are
believers, or had believed, but also those that should believe in time to come
as far forth as he gave them power to be washed. For he washed them not
then actually but in power. For they could not in very deed be washed, who were
not yet borne, or else as yet had not believed.

THE THIRD RANK OF PROOFS, CONTAINING THE TESTIMOnies of Antiquity.
CHAP. VIII.
TO these things hitherto alleged out of the Scripture, (whereunto as to the
anchor and prop of our faith we must fly in all things, At^^^s. in Synopsi.
that we may be in safety) the testimonies of antiquity seem now needful to
be brought in, to this end that the truth may more and more clearly appear
by that consent, and the mouths of the adversaries may be stopped, who
reasoning and debating I know not what ungodly novelties, endeavor to reprove
us, as though we spoke some new thing, Tom. 10. de verb. apost. ser. 14.
as Augustine of old complained of his and the Churches adversaries. For a man
may see them grow to such craking, if not ignorance, that they boldly complain
that our opinion of this controversy was never heard in any time among that
people, Hub. these. 18.
where the name of Christ has been preached: that what they avouch, leans
upon the consent of all Christianity, forsooth: These. 19.
for that the Catholic and true Church has always believed, and with one
mouth ever confessed, that Christ died for all men, understand effectually,
Compend. these. 27.
(whereof the question is between us and our adversaries.) As touching this
new opinion, These. 503. and 1097 and lib. germ. fol. 8.
unheard of before in the ears of Christians, (if it be lawful to believe it)
it brake forth about six years a go, namely in a Conference held at
Mompelgard, in the year of our Lord 1586.

O miserable ignorance of antiquity, joined with marvelous licentiousnes and
malice! and very true is that which is commonly said, Ignorance is rash and
bold.

First, with what face does he accuse of novelty a doctrine so grounded in the
Prophetical and Apostolical Scriptures, that is, in the canon of the truth,
that whosoever rusheth against this oak, against this invincible wall, he is
broken all to pieces himself. We say nothing but such things which the
Prophets and Moses, Act. 10.23. and 26.18.
Evangelists and Apostles have testified with one accord, to wit, that every
one that believes in the name of Christ, and not the unbelievers, receives
remission of sins, and inheritance among them that are sanctified. If this
doctrine be slandered of novelty by them, that be themselves the authors and
favorers of new opinions, we must bear it with Paul, Act. 17.
whose doctrine also we read in the Acts seemed new to the Athenians, that
were ignorant of the truth, and drowned in Idolatry. The consent of all
antiquity on our side.
Further, that the vanity of this fable may more appear, go too indifferent
readers, bring hither your eyes and ears, and weigh with me the agreeing
consent of antiquity.

Testimonies:
These be the words of the Church of Smyrna, in the epistle The church of Smyrna.
which is recited of Eusebius Hist. Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 15. Christ suffered
for the salvation of the whole world of them that shall be saved: therefore he
must be worshipped and adored as the son of God: but the martyrs must as
disciples and followers of the Lord be worthily loved for their inseparable
good will toward their king and master, and not be worshipped. To what purpose
is it that the world of them that shall be saved, is specially expressed, if
as touching effect, Christ suffered alike for all the damned, and those that
shall be damned, as for Peter, Paul, and all them that are saved, or shall be
saved?

Iustine martyr.
and in the same heat of persecution crowned with martyrdom by M. Aurel.
Antoninus, and Lucius Commodus Ver. Emper. in the book of the truth of
Christian religion, says: Christ is made an oblation for all sinners, that are
willing to turn and repent. And in the same book, beyond the midst: Our
Christ suffered and was crucified, he lay not under the curse of the law, but
showed clearly, that he only would deliver them that would not fall away from
his land: that is, all the faithful. And as the blood of the Passover
delivered them that were saved in Egypt so the blood of Christ shall deliver
them that believe from death. And in this sense in the same place anon he
adds: that salvation happened to mankind by the blood of Christ, to wit, as
far forth as all believers throughout the world are freed from death by him:
but not as though all men without difference of faithful and unfaithful were
translated from sin to righteousness, from death to life and salvation by him,
as our adversaries dream.

The same man about the end of the same book, denies that sins are forgiven
to impenitent, unclean, foolish and desperate persons, alleging the example
of David, whose sin was then forgiven when he repented. Again, in the
beginning of the book almost, he witnesses that such as repent are cleansed
through the blood of Christ by faith, who died for the same cause.

Ireneus says, The word of God incarnate was hanged on the Ireneus. lib. 5.
(says he) when I shall be lifted up from the earth, will draw all things, or
all men unto me. This he said signifying what death he should dye. Christ in
his passion hanging on the cross, alone saves all men, that do not depart
from the land of promise, that is, the faithful continuing in grace to the
end. The same writer, lib. 4. cap. 37. says: We are saved, as Rahab the harlot
by the faith of the scarlet sign, (that is, by the passion and blood of Christ
through faith.) They that make no account of this sign of scarlet, like
Pharisees have no part in the kingdom of heaven. And lib. 2. cap. 39. he
says: Christ came to save all men by himself: all I say, that by him are
borne again in God, infants, children, boys, young men and old men.

Origene upon Leuit. The high Priest and advocate Christ Origene.
who wait for him without, who depart not from the temple, where they give
themselves to fasting and prayer.

Again, Ireneus lib. 4. cap. 24. Christ has brought liberty to them, that
lawfully, readily, and heartily serve him: and brought eternal perdition to
such as contemn and rebel against God, cutting them off from life.

Ambrose de fide ad Gratianum Augustum lib. 4. cap. 1. Ambrose.
If thou beleeuest not, Christ came not down for thee, he suffered not for
thee. The same man upon 1. Cor. 15. As Adam sinning found death, and all that
come of him die: so Christ not sinning, and hereby ouercomming death, has
purchased life for all that are of his body. The same restraint he uses upon
the saying Romans 5. that the righteousness of one redoundeth upon all men to the
justification of life: The righteousness (says he) of Christ only justifies
all believers, and by his obedience many, and not all are made righteous.
Neither says he this only, but also he expressly rejects the devise of the
adversaries of so general a justification, as condemnation is general.

Hub. these. 49.
The same writer upon the 8. of Luke says: Albeit Christ died for all, yet for
us specially he suffered, because he suffered for his Church. How specially for
the Church and yet for all? but because the fruits of his passion,
reconciliation, liberty, adoption, inheritance pertain properly to the Church.

Hereupon Epist. 20. the same father says: Christ is good meat for all, faith
is good meat, mercy is sweet meat, grace is pleasant meat, the spirit of
God is good meat, forgiveness of sins is good meat. But the people of the
Church eat these meats.

And more clearly in 73. Epist. After that the fulness of time came, and Christ
is come, we are not now servants but freemen if we believe in Christ. Where
faith is, there is liberty. For the servant is under fear, but a freeman is
of faith: where liberty is, there is grace, there is the inheritance. But
where is no liberty, there is no grace; where no grace, no adoption; where no
adoption, there is no succession.

Also in his first Epistle, when he had said before that Christ came down to
be the redeemer of al, to take away the sins of all, and had abased himself
to bring liberty to all, and had taken flesh upon him, to purchase by his death
resurrection for all, he adds these words: He that is (says he) a true
freeman, a true Hebrew, is wholly Gods, whatsoever he has is liberty, he has
nothing of his, that for the love of the world refuses liberty.

So elsewhere he teaches, that Lib. 2. C^p. ^. de Cain and Abel.
redemption belongs to them that repent, and cleave unto Gods commandments:
that Apol. David.
remission of sin is through faith: De Sal. ca. vit.
and that by the grace of faith washing from offenses is obtained: Sermon. 15. in
118. Psalm.
that the cross of the Lord is life to believers, and destruction to
unbelievers. And in another place: The Sermon. 21. ibid.
cross (says he) is shame to him that is unfaithful: but to the faithful
person it is grace, to the faithful it is redemption, to the faithful it is
resurrection.

And all these things he sets out in another place by a notable similitude
of light. A similitude of the light.
For Christ is the light of the world, sufficient truly to inlighten and
convert all men, yet not actually and in very deed driving away all darkness:
but as he says himself, I am the light of the world, that no man that comes
unto me, may abide in darkness.

Ambrose his words are these: Sermon. 19. in 118. Psalm.
Although he that was borne of the Virgin for all both good and bad, have a
large power in all and upon all, as he makes his Sun to rise upon the good
and evil: yet he favors him that comes near unto him. For as he that
shuts the windows, excludes from himself the brightness of the Sun: so
he that is turned from the Sun of righteousness, cannot behold the brightness
thereof. He walks in darkness, and in the light of all men he is the cause of
blindness to himself. Open therefore thine eyes to see the Sun of
righteousness arising unto thee. If a man shut the doors of his house, is the
fault in the Sun that it does not shine into his house?

Out of Augustine, the chief of the soundest writers, among Tom. 7. Augustine.
ad articul. falso impos. Unto the first article, which was, that Christ
suffered not for the redemption of all men, he gives his judgment of the
whole controversy, distinguishing after this sort: As touching the greatness
and weight of the price, and as touching the only cause of mankind, the blood
of Christ is the redemption of the whole world. But they that pass through
this life without the faith of Christ, and without the sacrament of
regeneration, are void of redemption. Seeing therefore by reason of the one
nature and cause of all men, which the Lord took upon himself in truth, all
may be rightly called redeemed: yet seeing all are not plucked out of
captivity, the propriety of redemption doubtless is theirs, out of whom the
prince of this world is cast, and they be now not the wasse ^s of the devil,
but the members of Jesus Christ. Whose death was not so bestowed for mankind,
that they who shall not be borne again, should belong to the redemption
thereof: but so, that what was done by one example for all, might by one
sacrament be celebrated in every one. Augustines simile of the cup.
For the cup of immortality, which was made of our infirmity, and the divine
power (meaning Christ's death) has truly in it self to profit all men: but if
it be not drunk, it does not profit.

Against Faustus the Manichean, lib. 11. cap. 7. Of those men for whom Christ
died and rose again, and who now live not to themselves but to him, that is,
the people that be renewed by faith, that he may have in the mean while in
hope, what may be accomplished afterward in very deed: none of those men
(says he) he knew any more after the flesh. Here he takes them that are
renewed by faith and shall be saved, to be all one with those for whom Christ
died and rose again.

Lib. 13. cap. 15.
In his book of the Trinity, he denies that any of them whom Christ redeemed
by his bloodshed, be drawn of the devil (as men entangled in the snares of
sin) unto the destruction of the second and eternal death: and affirms
that such die the death of the flesh only, and not of the spirit. And most
plainly remoueth from redemption such as shall be damned and adds
straightwaies in express words: that such as were foreknowne, predestinate and
elected before the foundation of the world, pertain to the grace of Christ,
and that Christ died for them.

The same man upon 21. Psalm, writes: That Christ suffered for the Church,
and that the great Church is the whole world, for which he shed his blood. And
by and by confuting the Donatists including the Church within Africa, he says:
What say thou to me O Heretic? Is he not the price of all the world? Was
only Africa redeemed? Thou dare not say, A notable saying of August.
the whole world was redeemed, but it is perished. What inuader has Christ
suffered to destroy his goods? Behold Christ died, his blood was shed: behold
our redeemer, behold our price. What has he bought? All the ends of the earth
shall be converted to the Lord, and all nations shall worship before him.
Behold the Church which I show: behold what Christ has bought: behold what he
has redeemed: behold for whom he gave his blood.

So in his Enchiridion to Laurentius chap. 61. he says, that the Church which
is among men, is redeemed from all sin, by the blood of the Mediator, that is
without sin: and it is the voice thereof: If God be for us, who is against
us? Who also spared not his own son, but gave him for us all. And in the
next chapter: The Apostle says that all things in heaven and earth, are
epaired in Christ, for in him are restored the things that be in heaven, when
that that was decayed in the angels from thence, was recompensed of men: But
things in earth are repaired, when men themselves who are predestinate to
eternal life are renewed from the oldnesse of corruption. The same man chapter
30 witnesses, that God promised freedom and the kingdom of heaven to a part
of mankind, that is, to the elect. Again, in his 13. Book of the Trinity
chapter 12. and the rest, when he had said, that by the remission of sins
men are plucked away from the devil through the gracious reconciliation of
God: straightway he shows at large, that not all men are set free from the
power of the devil, but all the faithful and the predestinate: that all men
being carnally borne of Adam, are through him alone held under the power of
the devil, yet through Christ alone, none but they all are set free, that be
regenerated by spiritual grace. In the same book chapter 18. he says, The
Christian kind.
That he that overcame the first Adam, and held mankind captive, was overcome
of the second Adam, and lost the Christian kind which was out of Mankind set
free from the sin of man through him who had no sin, though he was of our
kind. The same in his 53. treatise upon Saint John says: The devil therefore
possessed mankind, and held them guilty of punishment through the hand
writing of sins: But by the faith of Christ, which was ratified by his death
and resurrection, through his blood, which was shed for the remission of
sins, thousands of believers are delivered from the devil, An argument.
and are coupled to the body of Christ. In all these places there is this or
the like argument.

What kind of freedom redemption is.
Redemption is a freedom from the power of the devil, and such a freedom, as
whereby it comes to pass, that the devil cannot draw any of these with him
to the destruction of eternal death through the snares of sins, whom Christ
has redeemed with his blood.

But all men have not freedom from the power of the devil.

Therefore almen are not redeemed: but as freedom so redemption is proper to
the believers and predestinate, according to Augustine and the truth of this
point.

The world that is precestinate to life, Christ came to save, but not the world
predestinate to damnation.
Hitherto belongs that which in the fore mentioned treatise, as also in the
110. and 111. Treatises, the same writer constantly expounds the world, that
Christ came to save and reconcile to God, of the good, and such as be
predestinate to eternal life, being dispersed throughout the whole world: that
this world of an enemy is made a friend: but that the world that is
predestinate to damnation abides an enemy: neither of this world must it be
understood, that God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself. So in the
48. Treatise upon the saying, ye believe not, for ye are not of my sheep, he
says, This he spoke because he saw them predestinate to eternal destruction,
and not prepared by the price of his blood to eternal life. And a little after,
he is assured of the number of his sheep, because he knows what he gave
for them. And elsewhere. Whom God redeemed by the blood of the Mediator, he
makes for ever after good. De corrept. and gra. cap. 11.
But these be testimonies enough out of Augustine. For who can rehearse every
thing he writes of this matter?

Hieromie.
Furthermore the Commentaries upon Mark ascribed to Hieromie, expressly say,
that the blood of the new Testament is said to be shed for Many, because it
does not cleanse all: that there is even in the Church some whom no sacrifice
cleanses. As Remigius also (as Thomas cites him Cate. aurea) upon this very
place warns us to observe, that he says not for few, or for all, but for
Many, my blood shall be shed, because he came not to redeem our nation only,
but Many of all Nations.

Hilarious in Matthew cap. 7. Hilarie
The salvation of the Gentiles is wholly of faith, and in the Lords
commandments is the life of all men. He says not the reprobates and
unbelievers are as well saved by Christ as any other, as these new sectaries
think good to speak.

Chrysostom homil 39. upon 1. Chrisost.
Cor. expounding the Hub. these. 49. and 53.
which yet our adversaries would have. The same manner homil. 17. upon the
Hebrews confirms the distinction, that Christ died for all as touching
Sufficiency, and not for all as touching Efficiencie. His words are these: Why
is he said to be offered to take away the sins of Many and not of all
because all believe not. He died for all, as much as in him lay, that his death
is of that weight, as is the perdition of all, and it is of force enough that
no man might perish.

His arbidger Theophylact uses the same distinction in ad Heb. and upon the
saying, John 6. Theophylact
the bread which I give, is my flesh: which I will give for the life of the
world: where he writes, albeit all have not received sanctification and a
spiritual life: yet Christ may be understood to die for the satisfaction of
all, as touching the virtue of his death.

Of the same opinion is Basil, as Theophylact shows in ad Heb. for thus he
writes: All of us that believe, Basil Exhort. ad baptis.
how many soever we be, are redeemed by the grace of God from sins through his
only son: who said, this is my blood, even the blood of the new Testament,
which is shed for many for the remission of sins. The exposition is also
twice repeated in the next sermon of Baptism: for Many, that is the believers,
was the blood of Christ shed. Notwithstanding in respect of the sufficiency of
his merit, it is true that elsewhere he says in Psalm 48. For all men wholly
was there one only worthy price found, even the blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which he shed for us al.

Cyrill.
Cyrill in Io. li. 11. ca. 19. reconciling that show of repugnancie that is
between the words of Christ, I pray not for the world, and the words of John:
He is the propitiation of the whole world, consents to our opinion after this
sort. Saint John (says he,) because he was a Jew, least the Lord should seem
to be with his father an advocate for the Jews only, cessarily has added
that he is the propitiation of the whole world, that is, says he, for all who
are called, and through faith attain to righteousness and sanctification. But
the Lord Jesus separating his own from such as be none of his, for them says
he, only do I pray, who keep my words and receive my yoke. For whose
mediator and high Priest he is, to them only not without cause does he
attribute the benefit of meditation. 2. Cor. 5.
In the same place he does allege for that matter the saying of Paul: God was
in Christ, reconciling the world to himself, that is, says he, Christ as the
Mediator, receiving all that come to God by faith, and offering himself to the
father, reconcileth the world to God.

Prosper. chap. 9.
plainly approves this phrase or manner of speaking: that Christ died only
for them that shall be saved: which our adversaries slander as blasphemous and
Saracenicall. His words are these: Therefore although our Savior be rightly
said to be crucified for the redemption of the whole world, because he truly
took man's nature upon him, Mark, Augustine before meant this (by the common
cause.
and because of the common perdition in the first man: yet he may be said to be
crucified for them only, whom his death did profit: for the Evangelist John
says, cap. 11. that Jesus should die for the nation, and not only that
nation, but also to gather in one the sons of God. The same writer, or
whosoever he was that wrote the Book Of the Calling of the Gentiles, denies
that the saying of the Apostle Ephe. 1. Lib. 1. cap. 3.
Of the reconciliation of all in Christ, is thus to be understood, as though
none ought to be thought to be not reconciled. And a little after he sets
down a rule, which like to the North star in all their controversy is to
be regarded, to wit, that in the elect, and foreknowen, A rule well to be
marked.
and in those that be separated from the generality of all men, there is to be
considered a certain special universality, and fullness of the people of
God, so that out of the whole world the whole world seems to be set free, and
out of all men, all men may seem to be taken. For most often in the
Scriptures, all the earth is named for a part of the earth, the whole world for
a part of the world, Lib. 2. cap. ^.
and al men for a part of men. Unto which rule afterward he squareth the words
of John: He is the propitiation for the sins of the whole world, and he
expounds them of the fullness of the faithful, and not of the generality of
al men, as our adversaries do.

Furthermore Primasius Comment. ad Heb. 2. upon the saying, he tasted death for
all, compriseth the whole matter. His for all, Primasius.
some Doctors take the sense thus absolutely that it said for all, for whom he
tasted, that is for the elect predestined to eternal life. Behold a restraint
unto the universality of the elect. But he goes on: But some take it so
generally, that he is said to die for all, albeit all are not saved. For albeit
not all believe, yet he did that which was his part to do. And he alleges
Prospers similitude, which Augustine also uses before Prosper, of the cup of
immortality, which finally has in it self, that it can profit all, although
it profits none in very deed, but those that drink thereof. So also Christ
(says he) as much as was in him, died for all, although his passion profits
none, but those only who believe in him.

Worthy also to be remembered here is that that is set down, lib. 1. cap. vlt.
de vocat. gent. The same nature in all men being evil, in all being miserable
before reconciliation, is not made righteous in all, and it is discerned in
some part thereof from them that perish, by him that came to seek and to save
that which was lost.

Pope Leo Sermon. 7. mensis, writes: Pope Lee.
The shedding of the blood of the just for the unjust was so mighty a
privilege, so rich a price, that if the whole number of captives should
believe in the redeemer, no tyrannous bands could detain them.

Hom. 2. in Ezechiel: For the life of the elect, Gregory.
the Lord of life gave himself even to death.

Beda.
Beda upon that in the Gospel, The son of man came to give his life a
redemption for many: He says not for all, but for many: that is, those that
will believe. So Origene and Hierome Com. in Matthew. expound the same things.

Bernard.
Moreover, Bernard Sermon. 10. of the 9. verse of the Psalm, He that dwells,
etc. Christ (says he) according to the time surely died for the ungodly: but
according to predestination he died for his brethren and friends. Of this
number they that shall be damned are not, to whom it shall be said: I never
knew you.

Rupert. lib. 12. comment in Io.
To these may be added those sayings, which unto the places of Apoc. 1. and 5.
we before have produced out of Rupertus Tuitiensis, who lived in Bernards
time: whose saying also this is; Woe to the rejoicing world, when Christ the
only begotten son of God prays for his, that is, dies, and offers
himself a sacrifice upon the altar of the cross, because I pray for them whom
thou gave me, and not for the world. By the world are the lovers of the world
here meant, so diverse from them, for whom Christ crucified prays, as the
Egyptians were before God from the children of Israel, who marked their posts
with the sacred blood of the Lamb. Woe therefore to such a world, because what
Christ the true Lamb of God prays for, does them no good at all, they only
escaping by his cross and blood, whom the father gave to the son. These
things he.

Of all which sayings now it is more clear then the light, that the opinion
which we maintain, is not new and unheard of: but received in all ages among
the people of God, and plentifully proved by the testimonies, judgments and
expositions of the best writers. Wherefore let the adversaries learn to deal
more modestly, and not straightwaies condemn as unheard of among the people of
God, and Saracenicall, what they see disagree perchance from their opinion: or
else, if they go on as they have begun, all shall know with what understanding
and conscience these kind of disputers too too confident and censorious, are
occupied in reading of the fathers.

I am not ignorant, that sometime it is read in the fathers, that Christ came
for the redemption of all: that he descended for all, to forgive all their
sins, and to give liberty to all, and such like. Such speeches as these they
understand, Mark this well.
as we may see by their own interpretations already alleged, not as
touching the effect of the Lords incarnation and passion in all men. But first
as touching the sufficiency, greatness and dignity by all men they will have
to be usually all sorts of men. Hereupon Ambrose Sermon. 55. says: The Lord did
hang upon the cross, that he might deliver all kind of men from the
shipwreck of the world. And Sermon. 53. When he had said that Christ by rising
again obtained resurrection for all, by and by he expounds himself of all
Christians, and such as be the members of Christ. So de fuga seculi cap. 3.
Christ (says he) does infuse himself into all men by his spirit and the
fulness of his Godhead. For we all have received of his fulness, that we might
know his most excellent love. Which all? Not all Christians? And elsewhere de
his qui initiantur cap. 4. In the poole of Jerusalem one was cured every year,
now all are healed, or certainly one Christian people alone. Infinite such
sayings are in the writings of the fathers, and in the common speech of men.

CHAP. IX. Testimonies of the Schoolmen, and other new Divines.
But that we may thoroughly bring to an end the report of our witnesses, let us
proceed to the Schoolme^, as they call them, who also have spread abroad the
doctrine which in this point they received from their forefathers.

Pet. Lomb lib. 3 distinct. 18.
Peter Lombard called the Master of Sentences, speaks of his own and others
opinion, that Christ merited for his members redemption from the devil and
sin, and the opening of the kingdom of heaven, that his fiery sword being
taken away, they may boldly enter thereinto. In the same distinction about the
end: He deserved for us by the suffering of death and passion the entrance into
Paradise, and redemption from sin and the devil. For he by dying was made
the sacrifice of our delivery. But restraining this whole benefit of
redemption unto those that be Christ's, a little after he adds: If Adams pride
was the ruin of all, much more was the humility of Christ, whereby he tasted
of death, able to open the gate of the kingdom of heaven for all his own,
after he had fulfilled the decree of God. The same man in his next distinction:
We are said to be justified by the death of Christ, because we are justified by
faith in his death: and as in old time such as looked upon the brazen Serpent
lifted up upon the pole, were healed of the bitings of Serpents: so if we look
upon him by a true faith, who did hang upon the cross for us, we are loosed
from the bands of the devil, that is, from sins. And in other words at large
in the same place he teaches, that deliverance from the devil belongs to them
that believe in Christ.

Innocent 3 lib. 2. de offic. missae. cap. 41.
Innocentius 3. makes this distinction^ that the blood of Christ was shed for
the predestinate only, as touching efficiencie, but for all men as touching
sufficiency: and he brings the words of Leo before by us recited. And there
is nothing more common among the Schoolmen then this distinction. Hereupon
Thomas in 1. Tim. 2. says: Thomas.
Christ is the propitiation for our sins: for some effectually, but for all
sufficiently, because the price of his blood is sufficient to save all, but it
has not effect but in the elect, because of an impediment. And more clearly
upon 5. Apoc. he says: We speak of the Lords passion two manner of ways.
Either according to sufficiency, and so his passion redeemed all: for it is
sufficient to redeem and save all, although there were more worlds, as Anselme
says, lib. 2. Cur Deus etc. homo. cap. 14. Or according to efficiencie, and so
not all are redeemed by his passion, because all cleave not to the redeemer,
and therefore not all have the efficacy of redemption. The same man says:
Idem sum. de veritate materia 26. quaest. 7.
The merit of Christ as touching sufficiency is alike to all, but not as
touching efficiencie: which happens partly through freewill, partly through
Gods election, by the which the effect of Christ's merits is bestowed upon some
of mercy, but it is withdrawn from others by the just judgment of God.

Against the Gentiles, lib. 4. cap. 55. he alleges this cause of the foresaid
distinction between sufficiency and efficiencie. The death of Christ (says
he) is as a certain universal cause of salvation, as the sin of the first
man was as it were the universal cause of damnation. But the universal cause
must be applied to every one particularly, that he may receive the effect of
the universal cause. The effect of the sin of our first parents comes to
every one by our fleshly birth. But the effect of the death of Christ comes
to every one by spiritual regeneration, whereby man is after a sort joined unto
Christ, and incorporated unto him. Other testimonies of this author we have
before alleged.

Petrus Galatinus a most learned man, Pet. Galatin. de arcam. Cath. verit. lib.
8. cap. 14.
following the same distinction writes after this sort: Albeit the passion of
Christ ought to be sufficient to blot out the sins of all men: yet it will
not blot out the sins of all, but theirs only who shall believe in him, and
repent. Therefore says the Prophet; he bare the sins of many.

Also Stapulensis: Stapul. in 5. To.
Christ has truly in himself the redemption of all, sufficient not only for
us, but to redeem innumerable worlds beside: but not al are partakers thereof
because of their own perverseness: as the light of it self is able to drive
away the darkness of all men, albeit not all men's eyes be enlightened.

Among our Divines Martyr, Calvin, Zanchie, and others, admit and follow the
same distinction, as we have largely noted in the 1. book chap. 11. Likewise
in the 2. book cha. 12. we have proved I think sufficiently that the most
famous and best learned Divines of Heluetia, Zuinglius, Musculus, Bullinger,
Gualther, Wolfius, Simlerus, Lauaterus and others, are in very deed of the
same opinion that we defend touching the universality of grace.

Luther. tom. 3. in Isa. 53.
To these also let us adioyne Luther. So great (says he) is the righteousness
of Christ, that it is able to justify infinite worlds: and Christ offers his
righteousness to all men, but all that believe in him do obtain it,
according to that, He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved. Others
abide under sin and wrath. And in the same place: Christian righteousness
(says he) is not received, unless Christ be known before. Again, Christian
righteousness touching the substance is nothing else, then the knowledge of
Christ, that is, faith wherewith Christ is apprehended in the heart, that he
has given himself a ransom for us and for our sins, as Paul says, 1: Tim.
2. The word surely offers and preaches Christ to all, as the sacrifice for
our sins: but unless the holy Ghost inlighten the hearts, no man can give
assent unto this word. And we assent, when we apprehend the promise, that in
Christ is the blessing of Nations, and this is the glory of a Christian to
know, that it is his righteousness to believe in Christ. The same man (as we
have seen above) expounds those sayings far otherwise then our adversaries
do, to wit, God will have all men to be saved: I will not the death of a
sinner, whereupon being naughtily understood leans the opinion of our
adversaries: he understands them of God will revealed in his word, which he
discerns from that hidden will whereat man must trembl, whereupon alone (he
says) all things do depend, namely who shall receive the word, and who not:
who shall be delivered from sin, and who shall be blinded: who shall be
damned, and who shall be justified.

Neither does Brentius teach otherwise of the universality of Christian
redemption: Brentius exp. Catech. Ar^^. de rem. pecc. quaest. quam late paceat.
namely that all sins are pardoned all men for Christ's sake, whosoever they
be, Jews or Gentiles, kings or private men, free men or bond, so that they
come to the Church of Christ, and believe in him. For whosoever (says he)
believes in Christ and is baptized in his name, receives remission of sins,
and the right into the heavenly inheritance. And by name he often says, that
this benefit is not received but by faith, etc. Briefly, by this man's
judgment, forgiveness of sins, receiving into favor, and into the number of
the saints, adoption also, and the right of the heavenly inheritance, (in all
which points we understand that redemption consists, are the proper gifts of
the Church of the saints, and of true believers, and stretches far and wide as
the Church of Christ does: and they are nevertheless rightly said to belong to
all, as far forth as no man of what degree or condition soever, is hindered from
them, so that he do believe.

Whereunto belongs also that exposition, whereof we before made mention in
Matthew. 1. To whom is Jesus a Jesus, that is a Savior from their sins? the
Euanglist says, he shall save his people. He does not save strangers, but his
own people. They be strangers, as many as believe not in him: and they are his
own, as many as acknowledge and embrace him by faith, be they Jews or
Gentiles etc. Let the disputers of Tubinge if they can, make these things agree
with the devise of their brain, that all wholly, whether they come to Christ
by faith, or no, are freed from all sin and condemnation, received into
grace, justified, quickened, Huber. these. 1059.
and accounted in the number of Saints: and that all, no one excepted, are that
people of Christ, whereof it is said: he shall save his people from their
sins.

But let them hear another of their friends also openly pronouncing, that
Christ died for all men, Ilirie. in Io. 12. ver. 52. in ver. 31.
because by him not only the Jews, but also the elect of God whersoeuer ought
to be saved, who from the East and West are gathered to Abraham their father.
Again, the merit of Christ, says he, is found to surmount exceedingly in the
judgment of God the sins of the whole world, and so Christ, and all his
members (not the members and vessels of Satan) are pronounced righteous. And he
adds, that therefore chiefly Christ's victory against Satan was referred to
the time of his death, because then by the merit of his death, was that
treasure of victories obtained, which otherwise is distributed to the believers
in all times. And by and by: here is the difference between the power and the
act, or the purchase and the application, or the right and the possession. In
the Merit, and purchase of the right, or in power, Satan was at that time of
his passion cast out of all men, and so out of the whole world: but in
application, or act, only of the believers is he cast out at all times.

Let that distinction of power and act, or of sufficiency and efficiencie be
well observed, as this author does fully explain himself, when upon the
words of John 1. Epistle 2. he writes the chief point of the cause of the
adversaries in these words: when he says, for our sins, he means the
believers, whom the passion of Christ does in very deed profit. In that he
adds, of the whole world, he understands it of the power, because the
benefits and merit of Christ lie open for all, and all may be saved fully by
his satisfaction, (so excellent, sufficient and precious is his merit,) if
they vouchsafe to lay hold upon it by faith.

It would be very long to reckon up every thing: yet it may not be let pass,
The Synod held at Argertine against (...) Hofman an Anabaptist, and Pelagian
Heritike.
that I mean to say now, concerning the Synod held at Argentine. Anno D.
1533. There a disputation being appointed with one Melchior Hofman an
Anabaptisticall and Palagian deceauer, among other his errors, this also was
condemned, that he maintained, that all be elected, and all redeemed by Christ,
altogether as Huber will have not only redemption, and the merit of Christ,
but also election in him, to be indifferently common to all men after the
fall. But contrariwise that Synod out of the word of God pronounced: that God
after he had foreknowen from everlasting, that mankind by the fall of our
first parents, would he subject to eternal death, of mere mercy, before the
world was made, chose, foreknew and predestined unto himself to eternal
life some out of mankind, letting pass the rest: and that the death of Christ
was for the sins of these men a propitiation. Therefore that neither election,
nor redemption of Christ is common to al men, as Hofman dreamed to entangle
wretched consciences and to corrupt sound doctrine. But that therefore the
merit of Christ is said and preached to be common to the whole world because
after Christ's glorification, not only the Jews, but all other nations must
be made partakers thereof, to wit, as many of them as be elected. And in this
sense the said Synod does expound the testimonies of Scripture objected by
Hofman: Genesis 12. 1. cor. 15. Io. 12. 1. Tim. 2. 1. Io. 2. Io. 1.
In thy seed all nations shall be blessed: As in Adam all dye, so in Christ
all are quickened: When I shall be lifted up, I will draw all unto me: God will
have al men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth. Also,
Jesus Christ is the atonement for the sins of the whole world: The Lamb
taking away the sins of the world, and such like. For we must not think,
that where these words be, all men, all the world, the whole world, that there
straightwaies all men, no one excepted, must be understood: for such phrases
have not every where one and the same signification.

He that desires to know these things more thoroughly, let him read Hieronymus
Zanchius of godly memory, my reverend teacher, whom for honor and reverence
sake which I owe him, I name, lib. 3. miscell page 79. and specially the Acts of
the disputation of Hofman by Martin Bucer, which he published in his own, and
his associates name, printed at Argentine by Matthias Appiarius, Anno 1533. And
this whole doctrine, which M. Bucer defends in disputation against Hofman,
the whole Senate of Argentine approved as sound, and would have it faithfully
taught and preached in that city, suffering no man to speak any thing against
that doctrine, or to sla^der it, either openly or in corners, much less to
withdraw others from it, as the little book testifies, which is entitled,
Ordinatio and ceremonia pro ministris Ecclesiae Argentinensis etc. A. ij. page
ij.

Which things seeing they stand thus, with what forehead, with what shame, dare
the adversary openly write, that our opinion of Redemption was never heard of
among the people of God, until the time of the Conference at Mompelgard? O
whorish audacitie of falsely accusing, and witness of extreme ignorance, if
not of malice!

CHAP. X. Wherein the original and predecessors of our adversaries opinion are
laid open.
But truly he that speaks what he will, shall hear what he would not, as the
old proverb is. Seeing therefore hitherto it has been showed, that the
opinion which we maintain, is plentifully taught in the word of God, and has
been received in the Church in all times, and faithfully even unto our days
continued, I neither can, nor ought I to ouerpasse and leave out here on the
contrary part the discovery of the original of our adversaries opinion. The
Pelagian heresy is the father of the adversaries doctrine. Tom. 7. apud.
August.
I avouch therefore and profess, that it has not the spirit of God, or the
worthy sayings thereof, understood in their natural sense: but the spirit of
Pelagian impiety to be the father of the birth and beginning of it. Which
thing that I seem not to utter without mine author, Prosper of Aquitane, in
his Epistle to Augustine, of the relics of the Pelagian heresy, among other
errors of that naughtines, The doctrine of the Pelagians.
concerning grace, freewill and predestination, assigns this also, namely,
that they would affirm, that our Lord Christ died for whole mankind, and that
no man at all is excepted from the redemption of his blood, although he should
lead his whole life in all impiety, (that is, although he continue in
infidelity, and be damned) because the sacrament of Gods mercy belongs to
all men, (that is, the promise of grace as now men speak.) Therefore in respect
of God, that life eternal is prepared for all: but in respect of freewill,
that it is laid hold on by them, that shall willingly and of their own accord
believe in God. And he adds: That they are fallen to the extolling of such
grace, because they would avoid to confess, that God according to the purpose
and counsel of his own will, in his secret judgment, but in his manifest
work makes one vessel to honor, and another to dishonor: neither would give
their assent, that the predestinate number of the elect can neither be
increased, nor diminished.

These things he; evidently surely and in lively colors not so much setting
out the relics of Pelagian heresy in that age, as painting Pelagianisme in
our adversaries in this our time. Hofman.
Now that wretch Hofman in the memory of our fathers, (of whom lately I spoke)
what was he, but a monster of Pelagian filthy dregs, and of other heresies?
And him does Huber so resemble, in respect of our matter in hand, as one egg
is not more like to another. For he avouched that all be elected, all redeemed
by Christ, without exception of any one. Both which Huber these. 1001. pleases
to set down thus: That all men after Adams fall were in Christ elected, and
received into grace because of the blessed seed, in whom the sins of all men
were to be satisfied. And not so only, but also that he may follow him
thoroughly, he comes forth furnished with the same places of Scripture, and
testimonies naughtily wrested, as Hofman did cloak his error withal, as we
have before briefly showed.

Moreover, Pacuuius.
in this our age one Parcuuius manifestly professing Pelagian impiety, not
only maintains, that Christ is alike as the creator, so the redeemer of all
and every one, and that all are borne in the state of salvation and grace, and
therefore happy, so that they do not bring unto themselves destruction
through unbelief: that election also and grace is general, etc. but also he
plainly professes and boasts, that the Divines of Wittenberge, the
successors of Luther, (but greatly reuolting from Luthers doctrine in this
point) do consent with him in the substance of the matter. But let them take
to themselves all Pacuuians, and Hofmans, and Pelagians old and new: we have
the Prophets and Apostles of the Lord for our authors, and the one agreeing
consent of the best approved writers whosoever in all ages.

This is (Christian reader) the true, simple and sound, and modest exposition
without bitterness and railing, of the doctrine of the redemption of mankind by
Christ, who is set forth unto us of the father, to be a propitiator and
advocate through faith, for the pardon of our sins in his blood: which the
Prophets have so delivered, the Apostles have preached, and the holy men of God
have confirmed. Let us therefore hold it also, and abide therein constantly,
omitting oppositions of knowledge falsely so called, and strife of words,
whereupon arises envy, strife, evil speaking, naughty surmisings, wicked
practices of men of corrupt minds, and void of truth who count gain to be
godliness. And specially seeing without faith it is impossible to please God,
let us labor to go to the throne of grace with a true heart and persuasion of
faith, that we may obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of need:
and also by the light of a true faith in Christ Jesus, let us so frame our whole
life, always every one of us doing and meditating this, that we may be found
acceptable to our common redeemer, (to whose glory we ought wholly to be
consecrated) with holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our
life. To him be honor, and glory, and blessing, for ever and ever, Amen.

A BOOK OF GODS PREDESTINATION.
CHAP. I. The preface and division of the doctrine in hand.
THE disputation of Predestination is of it self weighty and difficult, and
by reason of the curiosity and boldness of man's wit, it is besides not a little
intricate and very dangerous, while man's reason thrusting it self into the
secrets of Gods judgments and wisdom, either seeks into things forbidden,
or contemns and scorneth those things he understands not, yea cannot surely
perceive: because they be foolishnes unto him, and are (as the Apostle says)
spiritually discerned. 1. Cor. 1.
For who has known the mind of the Lord, that he might instruct him? But we
have the mind of Christ, who being in the bosom of his eternal father, has
graciously revealed unto us in his word, all the counsel of God, as much as
concerns us to know in this point, as in other things to our salvation.

Therefore following this rule of truth and righteousness, and nothing fearing
the ill report of detractors, through the help of God, Wisd. 7.16.
in whose hand both we and also our words are, we will consider of
Predestination:

1. What is predestination.

2. What be the causes of it,

3. What the effects.

4. Whether it be infallible and unchangeable.

5. Whether and how we may be certain of our predestination to eternal life.

6. And lastly we will speak somewhat of the use of this doctrine, against
those men, who think, that albeit the things were true that we teach, yet they
ought not to be disclosed, but buried in silence, as being against
edification. And the consideration of all these things, shall be profitable
both for other uses, which shall be showed in their places, and also for the
greater certainty of those things, that hitherto we have declared concerning
the universality of grace and redemption. For the remnants of the Pelagians of
old, as also at this day, affirming none at al to be excepted from the
redemption of Christ's blood, and in respect of God, maintaining eternal life
to be prepared for all, are therefore fallen to the extolling of such grace;
because they would avoid to confess, that God according to the purpose and
counsel of his own will, in his secret judgment, but manifest work, makes
one vessel to honor, another to dishonor; nor would assent hereto, that the
number of them that be predestinate, can neither be increased, nor diminished.

CHAP. II. What is predestination: where are showed sundry definitions of the
name and the thing, and a comparison of certain words used in this matter, and
being almost of one and the same signification.
FIrst of all, the Latin word that signifies to predestinate, from whence
comes predestination, Acts 4.28. Romans 8.29. Ephe. 5.
the Grecians call (...), from hence comes (...). And (...) is to determine,
to decree, to ordain a thing before a man do it. For (...) notes a term and
end, and beside, the manner and rule, and as it were, the prescript whereby
actions are moderated in order: and (...) also is taken of the Grecians for to
ordain and destinate. So destinare with the Latins signifies to design,
decree, appoint, as in Caesar: the things being not done, which he had
destinated (that is decreed) to do. And Cicero in his Offices of Damon and
Pythias Pythagoreans: when Dionysius had destinated to one of them the day of
his death, and he that was appointed to die, had required etc. And lib. 1. de
diuinat. he says: The Gods are beneficial to mankind, and know what things
are ordained and appointed by them, that is, destinated, (...), as Bude
witnesses, page 710. But because the things that God has appointed and
designed with himself, Acts 15.
he has appointed and ordained from everlasting, (for all his works are
known unto him from eternity) that word (...), when it is spoken of God,
(...).
signifies nothing else then to appoint from before the foundations of the
world, or before the world. As also the Apostle expressly says, 1. Cor. 2. We
speak that hidden wisdom, (...), that is, which God has from eternity
decreed, or destinated to reveal to our glory.

Therefore if the Grammatical signification of the word be considered, The 1.
signification and use of the word predestination.
this word predestination may be extended generally to all things, that are,
and are done in the world, and it has this definition, to be the eternal
decree of God, touching the government of all things, which we use to call the
divine providence. For nothing comes to pass rashly or by chance, but all
things fall out by the fatherly counsel and will of God: so that not so much
as a little sparrow surely can light on the ground without him. Mat. 10.
Hereupon says Daniel, he does according to his own will in the host of
heaven, Dan. 4.
and in the inhabitants of the earth, neither is there any man that may say
unto him, what do thou? And Wisdom says, Wisd. 12.
There is no other God beside thee, who take care of all things, and seeing
thou art just, thou do justly govern all things. And out of al doubt,
seeing al things are ruled after the will of God, he does all things according
to the eternal purpose of his will. For whatsoever he wills, he wills
from everlasting.

So of predestination most generally writes Damascene, and Anselme also. Dan
lib. 2. Orthodox ^. fi^. cap. 30. Ansel. lib. de conc. praesci. and praedest.
The author also of the little work concerning Gods predestination in
Augustine page 1296. following the same generality of the word, fears not to
say, that God has predestined, that the heaven should turn round about, but
the earth should in stead of the center be immovable, while the heaven runs
round about it: and that the Sun and Moon should rule the day and night, and
that the night and day should succeed each the other in certain times. The
like is the saying of Ambrose, that the day of judgment shall be in a time
predestined. Among the late writers Philip Melanchthon spoke after the same
manner of predestination in the former places: Lastly (says he) the divine
predestination takes away liberty from man: for all things come to pass
according to Gods predestination, both external works and also internal
thoughts, in all creatures. There is one place only in the holy Scriptures
Act. 4. which seems may be after a sort applied to that signification: Herod
and Pontius Pilate with the Gentiles and people of Israel, assembled together
against thy holy child Jesus, to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel has
(...).
predestined to be done. Wherefore omitting also this most general
signification, writers commonly more strictly do speak and judge of
predestination.

The 2. sigfication.
Secondly therefore predestination is wont to be considered of some men, as
far forth as in general it respects reasonable creatures, that are to be
saved or damned, to wit, Angels and men. For it is manifest that some Angels
be elect, some reprobates. 1. Tim. 5.21. and Matthew. 25.41. where eternal fire
is said to be prepared for the devil and his angels, to wit, reprobate
spirits, even from the foundations of the world, as is expressly spoken in the
same place of the kingdom prepared for the elect. And predestination after
this sort is nothing else, than the foreordaining of a reasonable creature,
either to salvation or to destruction eternal. To be predestined, Thom. Aqui.
writes Thomas part. 1. quaest. 23. art. 1. as well agrees to angels as to
men, albeit they were never miserable. For it is not material in respect of
predestination, whether one be predestined unto eternal life from the state
of misery or no: as it mattereth not in respect of making one white, whether
he that is whited, were black pale, or red.

Thirdly, in speaking of the predestination of men only, The 3. signification
and the use of the word.
there has been also a double use of that word. For one while the word
predestination, is applied unto both, elect and reprobates, and as well these as
the other are called predestinate: but these, that they may be vessels of
wrath prepared for destruction: the other, that they may be vessels of mercy
prepared by God to glory.

So Augustine manifestly uses the word predestination, August. Enchir ad Laur.
cap. 100.
when he says, That God as highly good, does well use even the wicked to their
damnation, whom he has justly predestined to punishment: and to their
salvation, whom mercifully he has predestined to grace. The same man, tract.
110. in Ioh. There is a world of those that shall be damned, whereof it is
written; Least we should be condemned with the world. For this world Christ
prays not: for he is not ignorant, whether it is predestined, to wit, to
suffer eternal torments with the devil, as the same man writes elsewhere.

But especially Fulgentius to Monimus lib. 1. Aug. de Ciuit. dei. lib. 15. cap.
3
at large entreats of a double predestination, one of the good to glory, the
other of the wicked to pain. Fulgent.
Whereupon in the beginning of the second book, he thus defines
predestination: Gods predestination (says he) is nothing else, than the
preparation of his works, which in his eternal disposition, he foreknew to
do either in mercy or in justice: that is, predestination is the eternal
decree of God whereby he has purposed to save some out of mankind of mere
grace through Christ, and to reject others from the same grace in his righteous
judgment, and for their sins to damn them for ever. Thus predestination
shall comprehend both election and reprobation.

But sometime the name of predestination is used for election only, whereunto
on the contrary, The 4. signifition and use of the word.
reprobation is opposed. And thus the Scripture every where almost speaks of
predestination. Whom he foreknew, says the Apostle, To. 8. the same he
predestined: whom he predestined, them he called: and whom he has called,
them he has justified: whom he has justified, them has he glorified. And he
adds, Who shall lay any crime to the charge of Gods elect? Where he
expressly names them elect, whom he had called predestinate. The same
Apostle Ephesians. 1. He has chosen us in him, before the foundations of the world
were laid, and has predestined us, that he might adopt us to be his sons
by Christ Jesus in himself.

De predest. Sanct. cap. 10.
Augustine also for the most part speaks of predestination in this sense,
taking it for the eternal and free election of God, which sometime for
difference sake he calls predestination which is in good, and the
predestination of Saints. But most often and every where almost, when he
speaks of election and the elect, he mentions simply the predestinate and
predestination. And in the school Divines also, (albeit under the same name of
predestination, they entreat both of election of the saved, and also of the
reprobation of the damned) yet scarce may a man find the words,
predestination, and predestinate otherwise used than for election and the
elect. And taking the word after this manner (which is most usual, as I have
said) we will with Augustine define predestination to be a preparation of
grace. De predest. Sanct. cap. 10. Predestination of the Saints what it is.
For, this (says he) is the only difference between grace and
predestination, that predestination is the preparation of grace: but grace is
now the gift it self. Wherefore also de fide ad Pet. Diacon. cap. 35. he
defines predestination to be the preparation of a free gift. And by grace he
understands as well future glory, as all the benefits of God in this present
life, whereby as by means, the predestinate or elect are directed and lead
unto that end. Hereupon cap. 14. de bono persevere. he thus defines it:
Predestination of the Saints is nothing else, than the prescience, and
preparation of Gods benefits, whereby as many as are delivered, are most
certainly delivered, the rest being left in the mass of perdition by the just
judgment of God. To the same end is it, that elsewhere he interprets
predestination to be a purpose of showing mercy: according to the saying, I
will have mercy, on whom I will have mercy: and I will have compassion, E^xod
3^ Romans 9.
on whom I will have compassion.

Moreover, this predestination of the Saints, is in the Scriptures of God for
the most part called Election. Election diversely taken in Scripture,
Many are called, but few are elect, says the Lord, Matthew. 20. And Paul, Ephe.
1. testifies of the election of the faithful in Christ before the foundations
of the world were laid. Yet we must not be ignorant, that there be diverse
elections of God, whereof the sacred Scriptures make mention. For some are for
the Number. 17.5. Deuteronomy. 21.5.
So his posterity who had the Priesthood in Israel, are called the elect of
the Lord. Likewise Saul in respect of the kingdom is called the elect of the
Lord. Besides, 1. Sam. 10, 24, 2. Sam. 21.6. 1. Sam. 16.
of the sons of Isai none but David was elect of the Lord to the kingdom. We
read also in the Gospel, that it was said of the Apostles: Io. 6.
Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil? Whereof also see
Luke 6.13. Act. 1.2.

Further, Gods election is taken for election to salvation, Ye are not of the
world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you.
De praedest. sanct. cap. 17*
Of this double election thus says Augustine: We are elected before the
creation of the world by predestination, wherein God foreknew his future
works: but we are elected out of the world by vocation, whereby God fulfilleth
that that he has predestined.

There is beside, this use also of the word, that they are called namely to be
a holy people, and peculiar to the Lord their God, out of all people in the
whole world. As also in Peter they are called elect, whosoever are called to
the body of the Church, and are counted faithful. And 1. Cor. 1. says the
Apostle Paul: Ye see your calling brethren, that not many wise men after the
flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called but God has chosen the
foolish and base things in the world. Where we see, that they that be called to
the society of the Church, and the chosen or elect are taken for one and the
same. For as Augustine, de correp. and great. cap. 7. and 9. says: Who will
deny them to be elect, that believe and are baptized? They are plainly
called elect, but of them that know not what they shall be, and not of God, who
knows them. For there be sons of God, who are not yet such to us, and are
already to God: and again, there be some, that are called of us the sons of
God, for some temporal grace received, and yet are not to God such, of whom
John speaks: they went out from us, but they were not of us. For if they had
been of us, verily they had continued with us. The same thing Ambrose also
confirms upon the 8. chapter to the Romans, and the Apostle himself, while
in the 11. chapter of that epistle, he makes difference between the people
of God so in general called, in respect of vocation, and profession: and
between the remnant in the common assembly, and as it were body of that
people, which remnant is saved according to the election of grace, and the rest
do perish.

And of that election of such as shall be saved, and have been predestinate
unto eternal life from all eternity, do we now entreat. And it is in very
deed all one with the predestination of Saints, as I have said, but that in
some respect it differs. How predestination and election differ.
For Predestination notes an eternal and firm purpose in God, of bestowing
grace and glory upon whom he will: but Election adds something, namely, as
far forth as he wills eternal life to some before others, seeing he
reprobateth some, Thom. 1. quest. 23. art. 4.
as Thomas very well, and after him other school men have observed. It is also
called Love, according to that Romans 9. Jacob I have loved, but Esau have I
hated. God surely loves all men. For he loves all things that be, Election
is called Love.
and abhors nothing that he has made, and has mercy upon all, and spares
all, as it is in the 11. of Wisdom. Degrees of love.
But there be degrees of love. For he loves some, as his creatures, others, as
members of his son, as Augustine at large shows. Tra. 110. in Ioh. And very
fitly Thomas in the foresaid place, Art. 3. God loves all men yea all
creatures, as far forth as he wills any good to all. Yet he wills not
every good thing to all. How he is (...) to have.
Therefore in as much as to some men he wills not this good thing, which is
eternal life, he is said to hate and reprobate them. How Gods election and
love di^^^er.
And Art 4. he assigns a difference between the election, and the love of
God, which differ only in reason, and in God are really one and the same. The
predestination of some to eternal salvation, (says he) presupposes, that God
wills their salvation, and thereunto appertains election and love: Love
truly in respect that he wills unto them this benefit of eternal
salvation. For to love is to will some good to one. But election in respect
that be wills this good to same above others, seeing he reprobateth some.
These things says he, in that place and repeateth the same distinction upon
the 9. to the Romans upon the saying, Jacob have I loved. Therefore if he would
save all, it should be called Purpose, and Predestination and Love, but not
Election.

But this also we must mark with Augustine, De bono per. s^uer. cap. 18.
that election or predestination which is in good, is sometime signified also
by the name of prescience, or foreknowledge, as says the Apostle. Rom 8. Whom
he foreknewe, Prescience.
the same he has predestined, that they should be made conformable to the
image of his son, and chap. 11. God has not cast away his people whom he
foreknewe, that is, whom he predestined, which thing the circumstance of the
text shows: for he speaks of the remnants of the Jews, which were saved
according to the election of grace, the rest perishing. Of whom also in the
same place he adds, that Israel obtained not the thing he sought for, but the
elect have obtained it, and the rest were hardened. After the same sort, the
old fathers also seem to have taken prescience for predestination, as
Augustine there witnesses. Whereof he brings this reason, because this word
may both be more easily understood, and also it is not repugnant, yea it is
consonant unto the truth, that is taught of the predestination of grace. Yet
as much as concerns the propriety of these words, to foreknowe, is more
general than to predestinate: How foreknowledge and predestination differ.
for predestination cannot be without foreknowledge: but foreknowledge may be
without predestination; for by predestination God foreknew the things that he
would do: but he may foreknow the things that he does not, as all sins
whatsoever. For albeit there be some things, that are so sins, as that they be
also punishments of sins, whereupon it is said: he gave them up into a
reprobate sense, Romans 1.28.
to do those things that are not convenient: yet there it is not sin in God,
but his judgment, as Augustine largely teaches these things in his book of
the predestination of Saints, the tenth chapter. Origene, (expounding that
saying of Paul, whom he foreknew, them he also predestined to be made
conformable to the image of his son, says not amiss, that prescience cannot
be taken for naked and simple knowledge, seeing God comprehends the ungodly
also in his prescience, whom yet he does not predestinate to be made
conformable to the image of his son. He says therefore, that that knowledge
signifies affection and love, wherewith God embraces some, 2. Tim. 2.
as Paul says to Timothy, The Lord knows who be his.

Foreknowne.
And whereas in school divinity by the foreknowne, the reprobates commonly are
meant, it is an abuse of the word against the use of the Scriptures, which is
wont to call the elect, (as it has been said) predestinate and foreknowne, and
not reprobates, that are near the curse, like the ground that brings forth
thorns and thistles.

Reprobation.
And reprobation, as the schoolmen define it, is the foreknowledge of the
iniquity of some, and the preparation of their damnation: Lib. 1. did. 4.
that is, reprobation is an eternal will in God, in his just judgment not to
have mercy upon some of mankind, after that with others they should fall into
sin and damnation, but to reject them from the communion of salvation in
Christ, and to cast them into the punishments that are due for sin.

That this definition may be more easily understood, Aug. al Simplice. lib.
1.^.2. De con^e^^ and gr. ca 7. ^pist. item 105. Con^^d as epist. Pelag. lib 2
cap. 7. and passim alibi.
we must consider, that all of us are wrapped in one and the same mass of
damnation and offense, and all belong to one mixture of sinners and ungodly, if
the grace of God be set a side. From that mass of perdition, whom God
separateth by his grace and predestination, they be elect, and such as shall be
saved according to the purpose of God. But whom he leaves by his just
judgment in that damnable mass, they be they whom we call reprobates and to
be damned. And unto the damned is rendered their deserved punishment; but upon
such as are set at liberty, is bestowed an undeserved grace, that neither these
should complain that they are unworthy, nor these should boast themselves to
be worthy: but that he that is set free should learn of him that is not
freed, that he should also be punished, but that grace has relieved him.

CHAP. III. A confirmation of the former things, to wit, that some are elected,
some reprobated of God from everlasting, against the error of certain men that
say, that all men are elected in Christ.
IT cannot be denied, The 1. argument.
that God does all things with a determined and certain counsel, and that
from everlasting: because there is nothing temporal in God: otherwise he
should be mutable, as the author of the calling of the Gentiles, lib. 2. cap
10. has truly written. In God there is no accident, motion, or new will, or
temporal counsel: neither is his mind altered with the inequality of
mutable things, but he comprehends all times and temporal things together,
with an everlasting and steadfast regard. Therefore because God, and that
willingly, saves some men, and damneth others, (for nothing can be done if he
be simply unwilling, and against it) we must of necessity confess, that
both are done according to Gods eternal purpose. And this is nothing else, than
that God has chosen some, and rejected others from everlasting.

The 2. argument.
Augustines argument drawn from grace to predestination, is not unlike:

To whom God gives his gifts freely, I mean, faith, good works,
perseverance in faith and love, and such like, he foreknew also that he would
give them freely, and in his foreknowledge he has disposed them from all
eternity.

But those gifts freely given, are bestowed by him upon some, and are not
bestowed upon others.

Therefore he foreknew from eternity, and in his prescience disposed also to
bestow them upon some, and not to bestow them upon others. And this is the
very point that we defend: namely, that God has predestined some unto grace
before others. De bono persevere. cap. 19.
These be Augustines words: They (says he) that so know, that God gives
faith, confession, obedience, perseverance, Cap. 17.
etc. that they are not ignorant, that he foreknew, that he would give, and
could not be ignorant to whom he would give, doubtless they know
predestination: for to dispose his future works in his foreknowledge, which
cannot be deceived and changed, is no other thing at all but predestination.
And anon, speaking of the grace of faith and perseverance unto the end, against
certain Semipelagians of those times, says: Do they say, that happily
neither those things are predestined? Therefore they are not given of God, or
else he knew not that he would give them. But if they be given, and he
foreknew, that he would give them, doubtless he did predestinate them. In the
same place, chap. 2. The Church prays, that the unbelievers may believe, and
believing may persevere. God then conuerteth to faith, and he gives
perseverance unto the end. This God foreknew should come to pass. This is the
predestination of Saints, whom he elected in Christ, before the creation of the
world, that they should be holy and without spot, etc.

The 3. argument.
Thirdly, there is a strong argument from the word Election; either that there
is no election, or else, if there be any election to eternal life, it
belongs to some only, and not to all. For if eternal life were prepared, or
destinated for all, in respect of God, it should surely be termed his purpose,
predestination and love, but not election, according to the difference of these
words before set down.

Furthermore consider I pray thee, christian reader, The 4. argument. These.
1127.
to what end the contrary opinion tends. Huber says, that all are elected,
and alike beloved of the father in Christ, and appointed to eternal life. Yet
seeing it is certain, that not all are saved, These. 735.
he annexeth another special election to this general, which is special, not
in respect of God, (as though he took peculiar counsel for some men) but in
respect of men themselves, who should apply universal grace to themselves,
These. 7^6.
for that God did elect with the condition of faith, that they that believe in
Christ, should be saved, and such as believed not, should be damned. Mark
here to what end this opinion tends.
What other thing must we hence collect, than that God determined nothing at
all with himself, to give faith to some, and not to give it to others, neither
that he gives it to some peculiarly: but that he has left it in men's power to
believe the Gospel or not to believe? For if he give faith to some, surely he
took peculiar counsel concerning them, and let the rest pass. But if he give
not faith peculiarly to some, the grace of God whereby we are saved, is
overthrown, and let the Pelagians carry away the victory. Further, they that
imagine so of election, as has been said, (confessing in word, Gods election)
do in very deed, take away all election: for if it were so, God should not
choose us, but we him, by receiving his offered grace, and we should be as it
were the potters and formers of Gods election. Also, we should be so elected,
because we believe, Mark this well. Epist. 105. Testimonies of the new
Testament proving election and reprobation.
whereas on ye contrary, we are elected that we might believe. For election
surely does not find, but make men faithful, as Augustine testifies.

But least we should seem to lean only upon reasons, we have many, and those
very notable testimonies in the sacred Scriptures, to prove both the election
and reprobation of some men: as God from everlasting would either have mercy,
or not have mercy upon them. Christ, Matthew. 11. I thank thee O father, that
thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them to
babes: Even so father, because it so pleased thee, Matthew. 13. To you it is
given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven: but to them it is not
given: but the prophecy of Esaias is fulfilled in them: ye shall hear with your
ears, and not understand, and in seeing ye shall see, and not perceive, Matthew.
20. To sit on my right hand, and on my left, shall be given to them, for whom
it is prepared of my father. And chap. 22. Many are called, but few are chosen.
Therefore all are not elect, to whom the Gospel is preached: much less, to
whom it is not preached, of whom there is at this day an infinite number, Acts
14.
and has been, especially in old time, When all the Gentiles were suffered to
walk in their own ways. Matthew. 24. Except those days should be shortened,
all flesh should perish, but for the elect sake they shall be shortered. In the
same place: False Christ's, and false prophets shall rise, and shall do signs
and miracles, so that they should deceive, if it were possible, even the elect.
If all men therefore were elected, no man could be seduced or perish, against
which thing in the same place it is said, of two in the field, that the one
should be received, the other forsaken, Matthew. 25. The son of man shall place
his sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left, and shall say to them
on the right hand: Come ye blessed of my father, possess the kingdom prepared
for you, before the foundations of the world were laid: But to them that shall
be on the left hand, he shall say: Depart ye cursed into the fire, that is
prepared for the devil and his angels: John 10. The Lord said unto the Jews,
continuing in their obstinacy: Ye believe not, for ye are not of my sheep.
My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me, and I give unto
them eternal life, neither shall they perish for ever, and no man shall take
them out of my hand, John 17. The Lord separating his own from such (...) be
not his, says: I pray not for the world, O father, but for them whom thou have
given me: and these he says are lou^d of his father, and that he does manifest
his name unto them, and that they are sanctified and kept unto eternal life.
None of which things belongs to that world for which he does not pray.
Therefore there is a plain difference set down between the elect and
reprobates. Hereupon Augustine, tract. 107. He would have the world, for which
he prays not, to be taken for them, that be not in that ^^^^e of grace, that
they may he chosen out of the world* But he prays for them whom his father
gave him. For hereby, in that his father gave them unto him, it came to pass,
that they pertained not to that world: for which he prays not, to wit the
world of such as shall be damned, as the same man testifies, tract. 110. For
which (he says) he prays not, because he is not ignorant, whereunto it is
predestinate. In the same 17. chapter of John, Judas is said to perish, as the
son of perdition; the rest continued with Christ in his temptations, and
perished not, as being elect, and given him of the father, that he might give
them eternal life. In what sense Judas is said ^o b^ given Christ of his
father.
And whereas Judas also is reckoned among them, whom the father had given to
the son: either it is spoken according to the opinion of men, as some think:
or else it is to be taken, in respect only of the Apostleship, as Augustine
expounds it, Tract. 106. Further, whereas Luke writes, Acts 13. That as many
as were ordained to eternal life, believed: he leaves no place for doubting,
but some men are, others are not foreordained or predestined unto life.

But what does Paul, a chosen instrument, Paul's epistle.
that was wrapped up into paradise, and heard words that could not be uttered?
How often does he inculcate the truth of predestination? Romans 8. he says:
whom he foreknew, them he also predestined to be made like to the image of
his son. And whom he predestined them he also called, and whom he called,
them he justified, and whom he justified, them he also glorified. Further what
contain the 9, 10, 11. chapters following, but a most clear exposition of
this present doctrine of the election of some, and the reprobation of others,
according to the eternal purpose of God? That we may take a few things only
out of the Apostles disputation, chapter 9. concerning the twins, Jacob and
Esaias, conceived both at one time, he says, while the children were yet
unborn, when they had done neither good nor evil, that the purpose of God
might stand, which is according to his election not of works, but of the
caller, it was said to Rebecca: the elder shall serve the younger. And he cites
the place of Malachie: Jacob have I loved, Esaias have I hated. And by and by,
alleging a testimony, and the example of Pharao out of Moses, he concludes
in these words: Therefore, he has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he
hardens. Again, Has not the potter power over the cla^e, to make of the same
lump one vessel to honor, another to dishonor? And straight way adds,
concerning vessels of wrath prepared unto destruction, and concerning vessels
^f mercy, which he says are prepared of God unto glory. In the 11 chapter he
testifies that God has always in the multitude of them that perish, some
remnants of such as shall be saved according to election of grace: of whom also
he says: The elect have obtained, the rest were hardened, as it is written:
God has given them the spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, and
ears that they should not hear.

Notable also is the place, Ephesians. 1. Blessed be God, who has blessed us with
every spiritual blessing in heaven, in Christ Jesus: as he elected us in him,
before the foundations of the world were laid, that we should be holy, and
blameles before him through love: predestinating us to be his adopted sons
through Christ Jesus in himself, according to the good pleasure of his will to
the praise of his glorious grace, etc. To the Philippians. 2. It is God that
works in us to will and to perform according to his good pleasure, his
verily, and not thine, as we saw even now in the words to the Ephesians. In the
latter to the These. 2. To them that perish, and are punished with the
efficacy of deceit, that they might believe lies, the Apostle opposes the
beloved and elect of God, who of his grace (for which he gives there thanks
to God) are called by the Gospel, to obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Of this same vocation and election he speaks 2. to Tim. 1. God has
called us with a holy calling, not for our works, but of his purpose and
grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before all worlds: and is made
manifest now through the appearing of Jesus Christ. And chap. 2. of the same
epistle he says: The foundation of God is sure, having this seal: The Lord
knows who are his. But in a great house, there are not only vessels of gold,
and silver, but also of wood and earth, and some to honor, some to dishonor.

Apoc. 13. and 17. it is said of the beast, that all the inhabitants of the
earth, whose names are not written in the books of life from the foundations of
the world, should worship, and have it in high estimation. The reprobates and
such as perish are expressed in many words, against whom the elect are
opposed, whose names are written in the book of life before the creation of
the world, and whom Gods mercy does so defend, that they cannot be seduced, at
the least, finally. Jude also in his epistle testifies, that seducers were of
old ordained or forewritten to this condemnation: which the Gloss and Aquinas
(least any man should blame our men to be the makers of such Glosses) do
expound, that they were from everlasting in the fore knowledge of God foreseen
for this judgment of present reprobation, that they should wax vile
themselves, and cast others into uncleanness.

In the books of the old Testament we read the same doctrine to be taught, for
the Lord says to Moses, Testimonies of the old Testament.
Exodus 33. I will have mercy, on whom I will have mercy, and I will have
compassion, on whom I will have compassion. And of Pharao the Scripture says,
Exodus 9. for this cause have I raised thee up, to show in thee my power, and
that my name might be declared in all the earth. Other such testimonies are
mentioned in the disputation of Paul's epistle to the Romans. Whereunto add
that which is Proverbs 16. God made all things for his own sake, even the
ungodly against the evil day. And 1. Sam. 2. it is said of Elies sons, that
they would not hear the voice of their father, because the Lord would slaie
them. Again, 2. Chron. 25 verse. 16. the prophet says to king Amasia: I know
that God has purposed to destroy thee, because thou have not obeyed my word.

By these and the like sentences of the sacred scriptures all men perceive,
that love the truth more than contention, that election comprehends not whole
mankind, but that some among them are elected to salvation, others are rejected
from the same according to the eternal counsel and good pleasure of God. The
same men also understand, that the definition of predestination, which is
brought of some men, is insufficient, as though predestination of the Saints,
or election were nothing else than the decree of God, touching the manner of
obtaining salvation through Christ: and reprobation were no other thing, than
his decree of the da^ning of vnbeeleuers, and such as abide without Christ.
There is no doubt, but God has so decreed and keeps these things: but the
proofs and testimonies alleged do further strongly prove, that God has also
decreed, to whom he will give, or not give faith, whereby we are ingrafted
into Christ for salvation, in him and through him.

CHAP. IIII. A confutation of certain objections.
But what say the adversaries to these things? God, say they, would have all
men to be saved, 1. Tim. 2. (...) objection.
and to come to the knowledge of the truth. Therefore on Gods part eternal
life is prepared for all men, neither does any perish, because God will not
bestow any grace upon him, but because he has refused grace received. In this
opinion were those remnants of Pelagians in Prosper, of whom he writes in his
epistle to Augustine.

How God would have all men to be saved.
and the knowledge of the truth: and also by approving of the conversion of
all. But he will not effectually work in all and every one, that they may
believe and be saved. For if he willed this, his will should be altogether
fulfilled, and no man should be damned. But now he has mercy on whom he will,
and whom he will, he hardens, and in his counsel has appointed whom and
what manner of men he will have to be partakers of mercy preached and offered
unto them, as in these very same words, Cap. 107.
Luther in ser. arbit. beats into our heads: where this and the like places,
I will not the death of a sinner: Jerusalem how often would I gather, Enchir.
a^^dur. cap. 103.
etc. expounds after the same manner. Augustine also teaches that the saying
of the Apostle is rightly so to be understood: he wills that all men be
saved, that is, all kind of men, howsoever differing, kings, princes, rich,
poor, base, etc. Cap. 117.
The same man elsewhere expounds; he wills all men to be saved, that all
the predestinate be meant, because all kind of men be in them. But of this
place we have more largely dealt above in the second book and third chapter.

The Lord is not slack of his promises, as some count slacknes: but he is
patient toward us, not willing that any should perish, but that al should come
to repentance. If he wills none to perish, it is false, that in his eternal
counsel he has decreed, and therefore wills, that some, yea very many
should perish. Again, if he wills all to repent, it shall be false that God
will not, that all by repentance should be brought to Christ, and live.

In these Huber wonderfully delights himself, Hub. these. 94. and sequent.
but all in vain, so long as that of the Psalmist stands, Our God is in
heaven, he does whatsoever he will: and that of the Apostle, on whom he will he
has mercy, and whom he will he hardens.

But least we should seem to set one Scripture against an other, to reconcile
them we must know, The meaning of Peter's words
that the saying of Peter is not without cause expounded by learned men of the
universality of the elect, not only because the like restraint is very often
in the like phrases of the sacred Scriptures, but also because the matter it
self seems here to require it. For what? is the end of the world deferred
for the reprobates sake, and not rather for Gods elect sake? In 1. Tim. 2.
When they shall believe (says Ambrose) that are predestinate unto eternal
life, the resurrection shall come. Which thing how truly it is spoken, the
answer testifies in the Apocalypse, chap. 6. verse. 11. Yet if we stand in the
generality of all men, the sense will be that, Thom. Com. in hunc locum, and
aed Romans 2.
which Thomas and others do assign, that he wills not that any should
perish by his signified will, (as they speak) as far forth as he inuiteth
all men to repentance by precepts, threatenings, rewards, and also by his
patience and long sufferance, as it is written: Do thou despise the riches
of his mercy and long sufferance? Do thou not know, that the bountifulnes
of God draws thee to repentance? But this is the question, whether faith and
repentance be not the gifts of God, which he gives to some, and not to
others, and that according to the unsearchable counsel of his own will? This
certainly is more clear, than that it can be denied of any one that is not a
Pelagian. How God wills all to repent.
Therefore it is well said, That God wills all men to repent, that is, he
calls and inuiteth all to repentance: but he effects it not in all, neither
does he will it surely because he has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will
he hardens.

Luth. de ser. arb. Cap. 109. A distinction of Gods will.
After this sort Luther also distinguishes: He will not the death of a sinner,
to wit, in his word: for in the word of salvation he comes to all: but he
wills it in his unsearchable will. And at large there shows the difference
between the secret and published will of God: not that properly there is a
diverse will in God, but the speech of his will is diverse, because this name
is diversely taken. The published or revealed will of God is, whatsoever from
the beginning of the world, either by God himself immediately, or by his
ministers, has been offered to men by precepts, exhortations, menacings, and
benefits. But his hidden will is that secret will in God concerning the event
of things: that is, whom, and what men endued with faith by special grace, he
will have to be partakers of mercy when it is preached and offered.

Brentius.
Brentius also followed this same distinction in 1. Sam. 2. discussing the place
of the sons of Eli: and expli. Catechis. upon the petition, Thy will be done.

This let the indifferent reader observe against the outcries of some, who,
though they would be heard as the right issue of Luther and Brentius, yet by
cauils and sophistications they labor to make odious this distinction
received, and grounded in the word of God. For as it is written, 2. Tim. 2. 2.
Pet. 3. 1 Thessalonians. 5. Matthew. 23.
that he will that all men be saved: and, that he is patient toward us, being
unwilling that any should perish, but to come to repentance: and that our
sanctification is the will of God. Also, how often would I gather thy children,
and thou would not? Esaias 46.10. Psalm. 115.3. Rom 9.18, 19.
So we have heard and read in the divine Scriptures: My counsel shall stand,
says the Lord, and I will fulfill my will. Whatsoever the Lord would, that he
did. He has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens. Also, Who
shall resist his will?

In which places and the like, there will be great contrariety, unless a
distinction be used, according to which, Mark this distinction.
we may understand that something is done against the will of God, that is,
against his commandment and prohibition, which yet is not done beside, and
contrary to that will, which is he himself. For great are the works of the
Lord, and his will is perfect toward all, so that it is not done beside his
will, that yet is done contrary to his will: because it could not be done, if
he would not suffer it, and truly he does not suffer it against his will but
willingly, neither being good himself would he suffer evil to be done, unless
being almighty he were able out of evil to make that which is good, as
August. says ad Laur. ca. 100. See also lib. 1. Sentent. did. 45. and in the
other that follow, Voluntas beneplaciti, and signi.
where the Master largely speaks of the double will of God, his good
pleasure, and revealed will, as the Schoolmen call them. If any think good,
let him also peruse Chrysostom, Hom. 18. ad Heb.

Secondly it is objected, The 2. Objection.
that the promise of grace is universal, and therefore that none is rejected
from grace, or reprobated in respect of God.

The first way how the promises of grace be universal.
the promise of grace is universal in respect of the believers, as far forth
doubtless, as no man of what nation or condition soever is excluded from
salvation, so that he believe truly in Christ. Contrariwise, unbelievers of
what nation or condition soever, are expressly shut out from the fruit of the
promises, according to the sayings: Mark. 16.
He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved, etc. Every one that
believes in the son, Ioh. 3. Ioh 6. Acts 13. Romans 3.
shall not perish. This is the will of the father, that whosoever believes in
the son, should have eternal life. In him whosoever believes is justified.
The righteousness of God in all and upon all that believe, for there is no
difference. And oftentimes after this sort is repeated the promise of life and
salvation made to every believer, the unbelievers on the contrary being
excluded. For the promise requires faith, which because it belongs not to
all, but to the elect, as Paul witnesses, therefore the efficacy of the
promises remains doubtless with the elect, as the Apostle also teaches to the
Romans: Romans 9.
That the promises of God pertain to the true Israelites, to the spiritual
seed, that is elected of God, not of works, but through the grace of the
caller. Yet here we are to be admonished, Note this well.
that, albeit the promise be proper to the believers and the elect, as
touching efficacy, yet it must be preached indifferently in the ears of all,
faithful, and Infidels, elect and reprobates.

The 2. way.
And in this sense also we grant, that the promises are universal, to wit, in
respect of external preaching, because the minister of the word cannot or
ought not to discern the elect from reprobates. Romans 11.
In the mean while not all attain unto the grace that is preached and offered
to all, but the elect obtain it, and the rest do not, and so (to use Luthers
words) all things depend upon predestination, etc.

The third objection.
The third objection. Whosoever appertain to the Church, are called elect. But
to the Church pertain as well the bad as the good. Hub. these. 751. 752.
Ergo, the bad as well as the good are elected, none at all omitted.



of the Church and of the elect, there be as well evil as good (in the sense
aforesaid:) Therefore all men are elected. This is all one as if a man should
say: In the Church of Christ there be good and evil: also, in this or that
city, namely Heidelberge, Tubing, or any other, there be good and evil:
Therefore the Christian Church, or this or that city comprehends all men,
none excepted. A fine consequence, as though indefinitly good men and evil,
and all men were equivalent and of like force, one as the other.

The fourth objection: The fourth objection.
It appertains to justice distributive, that unequal things be not given to
such as be equal: Therefore God, seeing he is most just, does not choose one,
and refuse another, out of the mass or lump of perdition, wherein all of us
being considered, are alike and equal.

I answer: The antecedent has place in those things, that are distributed of
desert, and not in those things that a man distributeth of his own accord and
freely, where, as he will, and to whom he will, he may give more or less
without injustice, so long as he withdraws from no man his due. A Simile.
As for example, if thou have two debtors, and do forgive the debt to one,
and not to the other, to that man thou truly art merciful, and yet to this man
thou art not unjust.

Augustine using this very similitude, says notably: De praedest. and gra.
cap. 3.
Whereas God freely bestows undeserved mercy on some that are converted by a
free vocation, it must not be referred to the injustice of the dispenser, but
to the most merciful goodness of the giver. Dare the debtor charge his
creditor with unjust dealing, if he shall require his debt of him, while he
forgiueth another? If therefore it be so in the bargains of men, who may
break out into so great madness of a profane speech, to charge God of
injustice, if he shall give freely to one undeserved grace, and to render to
another deserved punishment?

This is the same objection in words only changed. Another like objection.
Who so gives unequal things to them that are equal, is an accepter of
persons: Therefore seeing in the lump of perdition all of us being considered
are equal, unless God equally and after one and the same manner deal toward
all, he shall be an accepter of persons. Acception of persons, and election
differ.
But acception of persons is one thing, and exception or election of men with
God is another thing. For what? those manifold differences of men, that some
are seen to be princes, other subjects; some noble, other base; some rich,
other poor; some are borne witty, other slow of heart and foolish: and lasty,
that some men excel others in so many and great things, whence arise they, but
from the Lord? Ecclesiast. 33.
Hear the Wiseman: Why does one day pass another, seeing all the light of the
days of the year proceeds from the Sun? By the Lords judgment they be
distinguished, and he has disposed the alteration of times and solemn feasts.
He has extolled and sanctified some days, and others he has put for work
days. In like manner all men are of the ground, and Adam was made of the earth,
but the Lord has distinguished them by great knowledge, and made their ways
diverse. Some of them he blesses and exalts, and makes near to himself:
but other he holds accursed, and abaseth them. Behold how God manifold ways
prefers some before others among mankind. For, says the Wiseman, as the
clay is in the potters hand, to order it at his pleasure: so men are in the
hand of God their creator, to whom severally he rendereth as it likes him
best. ^^^ther de seruo arbit. cap. 143.
Therefore acception of persons, as that which is not incident unto God, wholly
differs from election, or the choice of some before others, which specially
agrees to God, and so agrees, that if we spoil him of the power and wisdom
of choosing, we shall transform him into the Idol of fortune, by whose power
all things should at all adventures be done.

Acception of persons what it is.
But acception of persons, as the ancient writers learnedlie expound, is there
rightly said to be, where he that judges, leaving the desert of the cause,
whereof he gives judgment, favors one against another, finding something
in the person that is worthy of honor or mercy. Aug. cont. dua^ epistolas.
P^lag. lib. 20. cap. 7. Primasius in 9. ad Romans
But if a man have two debtors, and would forgive one his debt, and require it
of the other: he gives freely to whom he will, but he defraudeth no man,
neither can it be called acception of persons, because there is no injustice.
Otherwise to them that are of small understanding, it will seem to be
acception of persons, where the Lord of the vineyard made his laborers equal
in wages, among whom there was so much difference in labor. But what did he
answer concerning this (as it were) acception of persons to such as murmured?
Friend, Matthew. 20
I do thee no wrong. Take that is thine and depart: I will give even to this
last, as unto thee. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own?
Is thine eye evil, because I am good? Doubtless here is all justice: this is my
will, to thee (says he) I have paid thy reward, to this man I have freely
given, I have not taken any thing from thee to give to him, neither have
diminished or denied that which I did owe. As therefore here there is no
acception of persons, because one man is so freely honored, that another is
not defrauded of his due: so when one man according to Gods purpose is called,
and another is not called, to him that is called a free benefit is given, and
to him that is not called, his deserved punishment is rendered, because all are
guilty through one man.

Fifthly, the adversaries cavil, The fifth objection.
that by our position God shall be said to create the greater part of mankind
for eternal destruction. This was also objected to Augustine, as we may see
Tom. 7. ad Art. sibi falso impos. art. 3.

Augustine.
That God surely is the creator of all men, but that no man is therefore
created that he should perish, because there is one cause of our birth, and
another of perishing. For that men be borne, it is a benefit, but that they
perish, it is the fault of him that transgressed. For in Adam, in whom the
nature of all men was first formed, all men sinned, and are bound in the same
sentence wherein he was. He is therefore too ungodly and unlearned (says he)
that discerns not the fault of nature from the author of nature, from whom it
is altogether far off, whatsoever is to be condemned in every one. For he
creates them to be men, and withdraws not his work from multiplying the
successions of generations: purposing according to the counsel of his own
good pleasure to frame again in many, what he himself has made, and to punish
in many, what he has not made. Whereunto also that tends, that he writes,
Epist. 105. ad Sixth. presbyt. Albeit God make vessels of wrath unto perdition,
to declare his wrath, and to manifest his power, whereby he well uses the
evil: and to make known the riches of his glory toward the vessels of
mercy, which he makes to honor: yet he himself knew how to condemn, and
not to make iniquity in the same vessels of wrath, (made for the merit of the
lamp unto deserved shame) that is, in men created for the benefit surely of
nature, but destinate to punishment because of their sins. These things
Augustine.

Reprobates are created for the good of nature and appointed to be punished for
sin, to Gods glory, and the salvation of the Elect. De praedest. and gra. c.
6.
Therefore they that shall be damned, are created for the good of nature, and
are appointed to punishment, and damned for sins, and that not as though it
were to this last end, that is, that they might be for ever tormented, but
both for the salvation of the elect, and also especially for the glory of God,
according to the threefold manner briefly assigned of Augustine in the words of
the Apostle. Of which matter elsewhere also he has left it written, that God
uses the perdition of some to the salvation of others, and would have the
destruction of such as shall perish, to be an argument of salvation to the^
that he has predestinate to be vessels of mercy. Also, Why is not grace given
to all? De bono persevere. cap. 8.
I answer, because God is a righteous Judge, therefore both freely grace is
given of him, and also by his just judgment against others, it is declared,
that grace helps them to whom it is given, and so God commends more freely
his grace in the vessels of mercy.

How God could elect, or reprobate men from everlasting, seeing then they were
not.
Lastly, if it trouble any man, how God from everlasting has elected or
reprobated them that as yet were not; let him consider, that to God all things
are present, for he comprehends with an eternal and stedfull view all times
and temporary things together. Therefore before he would make us, he foreknew
us, and in his foreknowledge, when as yet he had not made us, he chose us
before the creation of the world. Within the world we were made, and before the
world we were elected: for he foreknew us in his prescience unchangeably
abiding, whom he in his time would create after his image and likeness, and
whom falling through his permission from that dignity into the pit of sin
and death, he would either deliver through the undeserved bounty of his
mercy, or else condemn through deserved and true judgment.

CHAP. V. Of the causes of predestination.
ANd these things of the first question. Let us come to the second, The
material cause, be men, and the things that God has decreed for them.
wherein the causes of predestination are demanded. And the material cause
surely men themselves are, and those things that God decreed to do for the
predestinate: as are, grace, faith, good works, and perseverance in goodness,
etc. in this present life, and glory in respect of the elect; and punishment
in respect of the reprobates in the life to come. Further, the definitions
before alleged do show the form. The final cause.
The final cause also both of election and reprobation is of Paul not
obscurely declared, when Romans 9. he testifies, that God would show his wrath,
and make known his power in the vessels of wrath formed to destruction: but in
the vessels prepared for mercy, he would make known the riches of his glory.
Whereunto tends that also of Pharao: To this end have I stirred thee up, that
I might declare my power, and that my name may be known in all the earth. And
of the elect Ephesians. 1. he says: He has predestined us to be adopted for
sons, to the praise of his glorious grace.

Briefly, the last end of election and reprobation is the glory of God, as the
Wiseman teaches, Prou. 16. He has made all things for himself, even the
wicked against the evil day. But he would make manifest specially his mercy
in the salvation of the elect, De bono persevere. cap. 12.
and his wrath in the punishment of the rest: and yet his goodness and justice
in all. Because as Augustine witnesses, It is good when due debt is rendered,
and it is just, The chief question is of the impulsive cause of election and
reprobation.
when debt is without any man's hinderance freely forgiven.

But the question chiefly in controversy is of the impulsive cause of election
and reprobation, (which is referred to the kind of efficient causes:) whether
any cause can be assigned, which might move God to choose and refuse? To the
understanding of which question we must distinguish. For the question may be
taken either generally, Two questions. The first general, why he eelected
some, and rejected others?
why he has elected some, and rejected others? or particularly, of the
election and reprobation of every one, why he has elected these men and
reprobated those? As for example why he has elected Jacob before Esau, Moses
before Pharao, Peter before Judas? And of the first question, we must render a
reason from the things, that before have been spoken of the end of
predestination. For the end, either is considered, as it is in the things
themselves, and as it follows the action, and so it is properly called an
end: or else as being comprehended in the mind and desire, it moves the doer,
and so it is counted the impulsive cause. Therefore seeing in them that shall
be saved God has set down the manifestation of his mercy to be the last
cause, The manifestatio^ of Gods mercy and justice is the impulsive cause.
and in the^ that shall be damned, ye manifestation of his justice: and the end,
as far forth as it moves to doing, is to be taken for the efficient cause,
therefore this manifestation both of mercy and justice, that is of the goodness
and glory of God, is after a sort the efficient cause both of election and
reprobatio^ of some.

The second particular, why this man before that? No reason but the only will
of God, can be given, why this man is elected, and that man is reprobated,
showed by two similitudes.
But why he has elected these men, and reprobated those, we can allege no
other reason thereof than the mere, most free, and most gracious will and good
pleasure of God. As surely in the universality of things, there may be a
reason assigned why God in the beginning created one part of the first matter
(being in it self wholly of one form) under the form of fire, another part
under the form of earth, namely, that so there might be a diversity of kinds
in things natural: But why this part has this form, and that has another
form, it must necessarily depend doubtless upon the simple will of the creator.
So also, (to use another similitude from artificial things,) if a man should
gather many like and equal stones together, and purpose to build with them, a
reason may easily be rendered in respect of the end, why he sets some stones
in the top and some in the bottom. To wit, because it is requisite to the
perfection of the house, that there be both a foundation having stones below,
and a top or ridge of the wall, having stones above. But why among equal
stones he lays these in the top, and those in the bottom, there is no
other reason, but because it so pleases the workman. So we must confess
also that the case is here alike, and the Apostle expressly teaches; He has
mercy on whom he will and whom be will he hardens. And to the Ephesians. says, Cap.
1.
that we are predestined of him, according to the good pleasure of his will.
Notably also the son of Sirach says chap. 33. (whom I mentioned before:) Why
does one day excel another, seeing all the light of days proceeds from the
sun? By the Lords judgment they be distinguished, and he has disposed the
alteration of times, and feasts. He has advanced and consecrated some days,
and other he has put in the common order. Likewise all men come of the earth,
and Adam was created of it, but the Lord has put a difference among them
through his manifold knowledge, and made their ways diverse. He has
prospered, advanced, blessed some, and made them near unto him; but others he
holds accursed, and pulls them down. As claie is in the potters hand, so
men are in the hand of God their creator, to whom severally he renders
according to his own judgment.

These things are plain and evident. Yet because the matter is hard, and
handled to and fro in sundry disputations of sound divines and heretics, we
must entreat of it more at large.

CHAP. 6. Diverse opinions are brought touching the cause of election and
reprobation.
ANd first of all Origene, Origenes, his error of the forebeing of souls, and
of the cause of predestination.
in his books (...) that are full of errors, following the fables of the
heathen philosophers, Plato, and Pythagoras dreamed, that God in the beginning
created only spiritual creatures, and those all equal: and that afterward
there followed a diversity and inequality of creatures, according to the
diversity of merits. For that some of these spiritual creatures through love
did cleave to God more or less and according hereunto, that there be distinct
orders of Angels: but that other some turned from God, and sinned more or less
and according hereunto obtained diverse states and sunk down into noble, or
unnoble bodies, as be the heavenly bodies, and the bodies of devils and men
etc. The first opinion.
So he fained, that God before the creation of the world chose some to be
adopted in Christ, and appointed others to perpetual pains, according to the
good or evil works of the souls that were created together, and were in the
heavenly Jerusalem even before the making of the world.

Hier. in 1. ca. ad ^ob. and q. 10. ad Hedib. Aug. ^ont. 2. epist. Pelag. lib.
2. c. 6.
Jerome, Augustine, Aquinas and others make mention of this fable. But this
foolish and ungodly dotage is now long ago worthily hissed out of doors,
because whatsoever it bableth of the forebeing of souls, and of their merits
before the bodies, and of the diversity that followed, is contary to the
Apostles saying concerning Jacob and Esau: That, when the children were not yet
borne, it was said, The elder shall serve the younger, that the purpose of God
which is according to election, not of works, but of the caller, might remain
steadfast. Whereunto also pertains that, Job. 38 4.7.
that is read in Job. Where wast thou, when I founded the earth, when the
bright stars praised me, and all the sons of God shouted for joy? If
Origenes tale were true, Job might have answered: I was rejoicing among those
sons of God. Further (as Hierome also urges) he that says, that the souls
were elected for their holiness, contradicts the Apostle, testifying that we
are elected hereunto, that we should be holy and without fault before God and
not because we were such Thomas, Ephesians. 1.
against the Gentiles, Lib. 2. cap. 44. largely confuteth that error.

The errors of the Pelagians.
The Pelagians followed, who sprung up in the days of Augustine, when now he
was a Bishop. These men contended, that men by the strength of nature, or free
will alone, was able to keep and fulfill the commandments of the Lord, even
without grace, yet more hardly, than if the help of grace should come. And not
that only, but also heaping up one impiety upon another and raging against
grace, did auoch that the grace of God was given according to men's merits. By
which unthankful speech against God, and altogether injurious unto his free
benefits, (whereby we are delivered) they did in very deed take away grace:
because if of merits, it is not now of grace.

But as for the cause of election and reprobation, The 2. opinion, that works
foreseen are the cause of predestination, confuted. Romans 11.
they referred it to good or evil works foreseen: that every one was
predestined of God, either to life or to death, as he had foreknowne, that
he would live either well or ill. But contrarily Paul testifies, that
election is of grace. If it be of grace, now not of works, otherwise grace
were not grace. But if of works, now not of grace, otherwise works were not
works.

Moreover it sufficiently appears that good works themselves are the effect
of election, therefore they cannot be the cause of it: because one and the same
thing cannot be the cause and the effect of it self. For as the Apostle
teaches, we were chosen not because we were, but hereunto, that we should be
holy, and without fault before God through love. Good works be effects of
grace. Ephe 1. Phil. 2.
And it is he that works in us to will, and to perform, according to his
good pleasure. Grace therefore belongs to the caller, but good works
belgoneth consequently to him that receives grace, not that they should bring
forth grace, but by grace, should be brought forth. A similitude of a wheel.
For the wheel does not therefore run well, that it may be round, but
because it is round. So no man therefore works well, that he may receive
grace but because he receives it: therefore God did not foresee the good
works of any man, but such as he already determined with himself to give him.

But the Catholic faith being long ago defended against the Pelagians, Epist.
eius. ad Aug. tom. 7. The errors of the Semipelagians. The 3. opinion, of
foreseen faith. See Hilaries said Epistle, and Prospers also to Aug. Tom. 7.
and their error being overthrown by the sound Bishops, specially by
Augustine, a notable defender of the faith, (as he is worthily praised of
Hilarie) certain other sprung up worthy and famous men in all study of
virtues, saving that the spirit of Pelagian impiety deceived them, and
therefore called Semipelagians. These men's declaration and profession was, that
all men sinned in Adams sin, and that none are saved by their works, but by
the grace of God through regeneration: yet notwithstanding that every man has
so much of natural grace left, that he may attain unto that saving grace by
the help of the first grace, if he will. Therefore in respect of God, that
eternal life is prepared for all, but in respect of free will, that it is
apprehended of them, that shall believe in God, willingly as of themselves, and
shall receive the help of grace by the merit of faith. Or else to speak more
plainly: They did defend against the Pelagians, that a man is not able of
himself to rise again, and to work well, yet they supposed that every one had
in him a will to rise again, which seeks only after the physician, but can do
nothing of it self: and they said that no man's nature was so extinguished or
depraved, that it ought not, or was not able to be willing to be healed: and
therefore that they obtained both increase of faith, and also the whole effect
of their holiness, by that merit whereby they have been willing, and have
believed that they may be healed of their disease, when the occasion of
obtaining salvation is preached to them that are cast down, and can never rise
up again in their own strength. Nevertheless they consented herein, that no
man had sufficient power of himself, even to begin a work, much less to bring
it to perfection. For they distinguished between works and faith, whereof they
would have, if not the increase, yet the beginning albeit slender to consist in
the power of man, that the beginning of salvation may be believed to arise
from him that is saved and not from him that saves, and that the will of a man
should be thought to procure for it self the help of Gods grace, and not
that grace should be thought to subject the will unto it. And this position
being laid, Mark these errors of the Semipelagians.
that all men have a will in them, whereby they may either contemn or embrace
salvation offered, they thought that the reason of such as are elected or
rejected is soon given to wit, that God before the creation of the world
foreknew who would believe, or who would abide or not abide in that faith, that
after should be helped by his grace: and according to this prescience that he
either chose such as would believe, or else reprobated such as would not
believe, or at the least whom he foreknewe that they would not persevere.
Predestination defined by the Semipelagian at first.
Whereupon predestination was no other thing with these men, than Gods purpose
of electing such as would believe in time to come.

This was the opinion of the Semipelagians of these weighty articles, namely,
of free will, of grace, and predestination. And Augustine himself was of the
same opinion in the beginning before he was a Bishop, as it appears in his
book of expositions upon the epistle to the Romans, and in Hilaries epistle to
Augustine. His words are, Augustine was a Semipelagian at first.
(which also those remnants of the Pelagian prauitie, objected to be their
opinion) that God in his foreknowledge did elect them that would believe, and
condemn unbelievers, neither choosing the one for their works, nor damning the
other for their works, but granting to their faith to do well, and hardening
the impiety of others to do evil. And again, God surely in his prescience
chooses not any man's works, which he freely gives: but yet he chooses faith
in his prescience, that whom he foreknew would believe, him he has chosen,
etc. These things said Augustine at that time.

In like manner many other learned me^ erred, being not acquainted with the
Pelagian heresy, that was not as yet sprung up, and being careless without an
enemy, De doctr. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 33.
as else where Augustine speaks of Ticonius. Hereupon also the Commentaries
upon the Romans, that are read in the Tomes of Hierome have it written, that
Jacob and Esau before they were borne, were separated before God, by the merit
of faith. Also, I will have mercy upon him, So was Jerome, Chrysostom, and
Erasmus. Dial. 3. infint.
whom I foreknew was able to deserve mercy. And Hierome himself to Hedibia,
quaest. 10. seems to incline thereto, saying, that not men themselves, but
their wills were elected. Albeit Hierome was of a better judgment in his
writings against the Pelagians, wherein he speaks very honorably of
Augustine, and testifies that he rests himself in his disputations against
the Pelagians. But Chrysostom in his exposition upon the ninth to the Romans,
plainly writes, that God, as he foresaw every one to be worthy or unworthy
of his grace, so either elected, or rejected them.

In D^^tribe, and Hyperaspiste.
Among the new writers Erasmus maintains the same opinion. Neither do they
seem to be far from the same, who write in these many words, that faith is
the cause of election, and yet they will not be Pelagians. Coll. ^omp. fol. 5^8.
Let them be then Semipelagians. Such also is that, that another of the same
stamp writes, Huber. these. 786. and sequen.
That God foreknowing from everlasting, who would receive grace and continue,
and who not, put this supposition or condition under his election, that
whosoever believe in Christ, should be saved. What I pray, differs this
opinion from the definition of the Semipelagians, saying, that Predestination
or election is the purpose of electing those that would believe? Or else, Note.
if they think that herein they are far from them, because they acknowledge
that faith is the work not of nature, but of the holy Ghost, do they not
perceive, that they tie the knot faster, and not loose it? For this is the
question, why a lively and constant faith to salvation is from God inspired
into some, and not into others? But to the point. Whether the foreknowledge of
works or of faith be set down to be the cause of election, it is an error
insufferable. For evidently we are taught in the sacred Scriptures, that not
only good works, Grace alone is the cause of faith and good works.
but also faith it self, (from whence all righteousness begins) and even the
beginning of faith, and the will or desire to believe, are of mere grace, and
not as of us. As it is written, What have thou that thou have not received? If
thou have received, why do thou boast, as though thou had not received?
Again Without may can do nothing, says the truth. 1. Cor. 4. Ioh. 15.
Phil. 1.
And plainly Paul to the Philip. To you (says he) it is given not only to
believe in Christ, but also to suffer for his sake.

How Augustine recanted his former error.
By these and the like testimonies of divine Scripture Augustine being
convicted, freely acknowledged his error in this point, and retracted it, de
praedest. sanct cap. 3 and passimeo libro. Ad Simplicianum, Sancti Ambrosij
successorem apud Mediol. lib. 1. quaest. 2. contra 2. Epist. Pelag. lib. 2.
cap. 8. Retract lib. 1. Aug. de bono perseu. cap. 12.
cap. 23. and lib. 2. cap. 1. For it is incident to man to fall, and to err,
but wittingly and willingly to continue in error, is deuillish: neither ought
any man to be so unjust or envious, that either he will not profit himself,
or else hinder others that are desirous to profit.

Fourthly, The fourth opinion, that the foreseen abuse of free will to
infidelity and other evil works is the cause of reprobation, confuted by
Augustine.
other confess that the cause of election to eternal life, is in God alone,
namely, his grace and good pleasure: but they suppose no less than the former
writers, that the cause of reprobation is in men themselves, to wit, the
foreseen abuse of freewill to infidelity and other evil works. For they be
afraid, least any iniquity should be with God, if some be said to be
rejected of him without all respect of works. Therefore that they may
maintain his justice forsooth, they write that as many as be reprobated, are
reprobated for final sin foreseen. Among the Schoolmen, Scotus and his
disciples follow this opinion. Scotus.
Hereupon some of that same leaven have defined reprobation to be the eternal
foreknowledge of the evil use of freewill, Thomas Argentinus, his definition
of reprobation. Lib. 1. q. 2.
by reason whereof God has decreed to deprive some man of his grace in this
present life, and to punish him in the life to come with everlasting pain. But
as Augustine ad Simpl. rightly judges, If we should grant that reprobation
depends of evil works foreseen, it should altogether follow on the
contrary, that election also arises of good works foreseen. Which if it be
true, it is false that it is not of works.

Fifthly therefore, and that is the true opinion, The fifth opinion, soundest and
best.
as foreseen works or faith of such as shall be saved, are not the cause of
their election: so neither is the unbelief or other sins foreseen of them
that shall be damned, the cause of their reprobation: but that they are in
Christ of mere mercy elected, and these are justly from the same mercy
rejected, according to the purpose of Gods will, which as it is most free, so
most just, and the very rule of all equity and justice.

CHAP. VII. A demonstration of election freely arising often h^ mere good
pleasure of God.
FOr the defense of this truth and the larger confutation of the contrary
opinions, there be sundry arguments and testimonies of the Scriptures, and
those most clear and evident, from whence we will only produce some.

The 1. reason.
1. The cause is not later than the effect.

But works and faith in us, and the very will and desire to believe, and what
good use soever of freewill in us, be later than election. For all these
things are temporal, whereas election is eternal, according to the sayings:
He elected us before the creation of the world. Ephe. 1. Matthew. 25. 2. Tim. 1.
Come ye blessed of my father, possess the kingdom prepared for you, before
the foundations of the world were laid. He has called us with an holy calling
according to his purpose and grace, which is given us in Christ Jesus before the
world. We are his work created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has
prepared, that we should walk in them. And chap. 1. of the same Epistle: He
has chosen us before the foundations of the world, that we should be holy,
and without blame before him. From whence we understand, seeing in that we are
predestinate of God to life, it comes to pass, that we do good works and
believe: so even the foreknowledge of future faith in us, and of those good
things which we shall do, is later then election, at the least in order.

as at large after shall be showed. Therefore neither as done, neither as to be
done, and foreseen of God, can these things be considered, as the causes of
election. For nothing can be both the cause and effect, in respect of the same
thing. Ad Simpl. lib. 1.
Works (says Augustine) do not beget grace, but are begotten of grace. Two
fine similitudes.
The fire warmeth not that it may be hot, but because it is hot. Neither does
the wheel therefore run well, that it may be round, but because it is
round. So no man therefore works well, that he may receive grace, but because
he has received it.

3. The 3. reason.
If our foreseen good works were the cause of predestination to eternal
salvation, they should be the cause also of our calling and justification. The
later is false. Therefore also the first.

The Mayor is proved by the rule: That which is the cause of a cause, is also
the cause of the thing caused (as they speak) that is, of the effect. But
predestination is the cause of vocation and justification, as the Apostle
says: Romans 8.
Whom he predestined them he called: whom he called, them he justified: whom
he justified them also he glorified.

The Minor also is most easily proved, 2. Tim. 1.
seeing the holy Ghost expressly testifies that we are saved of God, and
called with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his
purpose and grace given us in Christ Jesus before the world. Likewise Paul in
his Epistles to the Romans and Galathians most largely discourses of
justification every way freely bestowed. He requires faith surely as the
mean, whereby we apply righteousness and salvation offered to us in the
Gospel: but not as of our selves, for it is the gift of God. And therefore if
even the foreknowledge of faith, Ephesians. 2.8.
as from us, be set down to be the cause of election, it will follow, that
neither justification is every way free. Otherwise it stands firm, that we
are justified by faith, as by a mean, yet faith is not on the other side the
cause of predestination. For as Aquinas teaches well, In summo and expos. ad
Romans
if the effects of predestination be compared among themselves, there is no
let, but one may be the cause of another: that is, the precedent of the
consequent. So vocation by the word, Romans 10.
is the cause of faith, because faith is by hearing: faith is the cause of
justification: justification of good works, and of glory in a heavenly life.
Yet notwithstanding the same effects of predestination considered, neither
severally nor jointly, can be the beginning of predestination, seeing the same
thing cannot be the cause and the effect.

The 4. reason.
4. In the whole work of salvation this especially is regarded, that all humane
boasting be excluded, that as it is written: Let him that rejoices, rejoice
in the Lord. For who separateth thee from other? What have thou that thou have
not received? and if thou have received, why do thou boast as though thou
had not received? Which saying S. Cyprian used to follow, saying: We must
glory in nothing, because nothing is ours.

But not all humane boasting should be excluded, unless election, which is
the beginning and foundation of salvation, should depend upon the free goodwill
and purpose of God, without respect of any one quality. As for example, if God
should be said to offer like grace unto all, Mark this well.
and to call al, and it should be believed to consist in the will of man to
obey his calling: then surely the obedient person seuereth himself from the
disobedient, and the faithful man from the ungodly, neither can it be said
unto him, Why do thou boast? who has separated thee? what have thou that
thou have not received? For a proud person may say against another, my faith,
my righteousness, the good using of my freewill, or any other thing.

The 5. reason.
5. Election should be weak and very uncertain, and therefore our salvation,
if it should depend on the purpose of our will. For the unstable will of man
bends hither and thither, like a reed shaken with the wind. On the
contrary, election stands firm and immovable in the good pleasure, purpose,
and gracious will of God toward us in Christ Jesus, as the Apostle at large
shows, Romans 8. saying: Unto them that love God, all things work together for
good, that is, to them that are called of his purpose. For whom he foreknew,
them he predestined, to be made conformable to the image of his son. And
whom he predestined, them he also called, justified, and glorified. And
anon: Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall oppression? or
anguish? or persecution? or famine? or nakedness? or the sword? Yea in all these
things we are more then conquerors, through him that loved us. I am persuaded,
that neither death, nor life, nor any other creature, is able to separate us
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus. Therefore seeing we are men, let
us not lean upon our infirmity, but let us commit our faith, hope, life and
salvation to the stronger, rather than to the weaker; to God, rather than our
selves, professing (as the truth is) that all things depend upon his purpose.

6. Hitherto is to be referred even the example of our Mediator himself, and
our head Jesus, The 6. reason.
which Augustine cannot sufficiently commend. De predest. sanct. cap. 15. and
de bon. perseu. cap. 24.
1. He was conceived of the holy Ghost, borne of the virgin Mary, by a
singular conception and generation, and without all sin. 2. His humane, that
is, our nature in Christ was united with the Divine in the unity of person:
the word, as Augustine speaks, singularly assuming it, and extolling it into
the only son of God, so that he that assumed, and the thing he assumed, is
one person in Trinity. Which advancing of man's nature is so great and so high,
that he could not advance it higher, as the deity it self could not abase it
self lower for our sakes, than in that it received the nature of man with his
infirmity unto the very death of the cross.

But all these things man's nature in Christ singularly received, that is, our
nature through none of our merits, but of the only grace of God. Therefore we
also are predestined unto eternal life, not through our works, but through
the purpose and grace of God predestinating us. For there is one and the same
reason of the head and the members: but this is the difference, that he alone
is predestinate to be our head, we being many are predestinate to be his
members. And therefore in the head is the fountain of grace, and from thence
according to the measure of every one he spreads abroad himself throughout
all his members.

The 7. reason from infants dying.
7. All this way whereby we defend free predestination from the purpose of God,
is greatly confirmed by the example of children: by which alone all the force
of gainsayers, and of those that maintain man's merits, of necessity is
overthrown. The argument is this. Our little children dying even in their
infancy, have the promise of the kingdom of heaven. Therefore they are
predestinate unto the kingdom, and that either of works, or of grace: not of
works, because in so young years works have no place, nor any foreknowledge
surely of works. For the things that neither be, nor shall be, cannot be said
to be foreknowne, unless it be, that they shall not be: Therefore of grace,
and by consequence the predestination of others also is the like, as of the
purpose of God, and not of works.

The shift of the Semipelagians.
The Pelagians held within these straites, knew not how, or on what side to
escape. Yet afterward the Semipelagians devising a hole to get out, by a new
kind of absurdity contended, that infants were predestinate to life or to
death for the merits they would do if they had lived. This devise not so
crafty, as rash and foolish, Augustine diligently and very well confuteth,
both elsewhere, and also lib. de bono persevere. cap. 12. and 13. Among other
things he opposes the saying of the Apostle, Romans 14. We shall all stand
before the tribunal seat of Christ, that every one may render an account,
according to the things he has done in his body, whether good or evil: that
is, according to the things he has done, in the time that he was in the body.
For otherwise the soul alone does many things, and not by the body, or any
member of the body, pertaining nevertheless to punishment or reward. And he
said, has done, he added not, or else shall do. Whereupon also Sap. 4. we
read of the just man, that is by untimely death withdrawn from the
uncertainty of temptations: He was taken away, least malice should change his
understanding. Thus the argument stands sure, from the example of infants,
that what we cannot deny in them touching the predestination of grace, we
ought to confess and maintain it in men of ripe years also: for there is one
and the same manner of the predestination of all men.

CHAP. VIII. The same point is proved by testimonies of the sacred Scriptures.
But let us come to more manifest proofs. Deuteronomy. 7.6 7, 8. The only grace of
God, is the cause of Election.
Moses says to the children of Israel: Thou art a holy people to the Lord thy
God: the Lord thy God has elected thee to be unto him a peculiar people of all
people, that are upon the face of the earth. We hear the election of Israel,
of the cause whereof he straightway adds: Not because you were more then all
people, did the Lord love you, and choose you, for you were fewer then any
people: but because the Lord loved you, and would keep the oath that he made to
your fathers, he has brought you out with a mighty hand. Behold the free
purpose of God is the cause of this election. The same man, Deuteronomy. 8.17.
chap. 8. Beware least thou say in thy heart, my strength, and the power of my
hand has got me these riches, but remember the Lord thy God because he gives
thee power, that he may confirm the covenant he swear to thy fathers. Chap. 9.
And chap. 9.4.5. Say not in thine heart, when the Lord has cast out these
nations before thee: for my righteousness, the Lord has brought me in to
possess this land, and for the impiety of these nations the Lord has thrust
them out before thee: Not for thy righteousness and the vprightnes of thy
heart, do thou go in to possess their land, albeit for the unrighteousness
of these nations the Lord thy God will expel them before thee: but that the
Lord may confirm his word promised to thy fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
Neither is it sufficient with Moses to say, that the inheritance of that land
was granted to the people of Israel not for their merits, unless he should
add; Know thou, that the Lord not for thy righteousness gives thee that good
land to possess for an inheritance, because thou art a people of a hard neck.
Whereby he declared them unworthy of every good thing.

Behold therefore the most ancient doctrine of grace, and election according to
grace, confirmed by the voice of the holy Ghost in the very beginnings of the
people of Israel. For clearly in one and the same place of Scripture does the
Prophet show the goodness and severity of God, saying: Not for the righteousness
of this people, but through the grace only of God taking pity on them, is the
inheritance of the Land given unto them: but the nations are driven out of the
same Land for their unrighteousness. Yet because unrighteousness belongs as
well to the Israelites, as to the Cananites, and Amorites, it appears so much
the more plainly, that God saw no goodness in them, why he should advance that
nation above all other nations. Eze. 16.
And Ezechiel excellently describes, that the Lord of mere mercy had a
respect to that people from the beginning, as unto a young maid naked, defiled,
and polluted in every part. And how often I pray, did they tempt the Lord in
the desert? Psalm. 95. 1. Cor. 10. Acts 7.
how often did he save them from his mercy, and his covenant sake? when did
they not resist the holy Ghost? Therefore it is manifest, that God chose whom
he would of mere grace.



Temporal election includes eternal.
albeit not as touching the whole body of that people, yet as touching some in
that body. For in the assembly of them that be called, always there be some
elect, that From the type to the truth, the consequence is good.
Romans 11. Secondly, from the deliverance out of Egypt, and the bringing into
the Land of Canaan, the consequence is good, as from the types unto the thing
signified, that God does give freely and of mere love redemption also from sin
and eternal life, to whom he will, and would from everlasting.

If we cannot merit temporal things, much less eternal.
If these external things depended upon no merits of the Israelites, but on
the only purpose of God showing mercy, much more on the same does the
election unto the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven depend. That place also
in Ecclesiasticus 33. is not to be contemned, (although that book is not of
like authority with the canonical Scriptures: Of this book Aug. ad. Simpl.
lib. 1. q.
) As one day excelles another by the judgment of the Lord, so by his
manifold knowledge men are distinguished, and advanced, or cast down. Because
as claie is in the hand of the potter, which he handles at his pleasure, so
men are in the hand of God their creator, to every one of whom he renders as
pleases him. As good is contrary to evil, and life to death so is the godly
man opposite to the sinner, and be sinner to the godly. So in all the works of
the most highest thou may see, two things, whereof one is contrary to the
other.

1. We are here admonished, that all men are equal and alike by nature and
beginning: as by nature the days are alike: also the vessels are like one
another, being made of the same claie, as touching their matter and original.
We also all of us are of the same claie, or of one and the same lump: for we
all do draw our beginning from the earth. Thereof came Adam, the first that was
created, and of Adam we all. Neither have all mortal men the same original
only, but also the same condition of birth; because all of us are in sin borne
of Adam, seeing he fell a way from his first creation.

2. We are taught in the foresaid words, that whatsoever and what manner soever
differences there be among me^, they come from God, who aduaunceth some, and
abaseth others, blessing some, and cursing others.

3. There is no other cause of this difference alleged, but the disposition,
will, wisdom, and judgment of the most lightest: who seeing he is the
creator of all things, he obtayneth the chiefest and uncontrollable
soueraignetie over all his own works, much more than the potter, that makes
of the same claie, whatsoever pleases him.

I proceed unto Paul, who as a learned scribe in the kingdom of heaven
brings out of his treasure new things and old to the confirmation of this
doctrine. He in the 9. chapter to the Romans willing to take away the offense
arising of the unbelief of the Jews, The scope of the ninth chapter to the
Romans.
wherewith in that age the minds of many me^ were greatly tempted, as though
Gods word either should fail, and the promise be made frustrate, or else Jesus
of Nazareth should not be the Savior promised of God, (for one of these twain
seemed to follow because the covenants, service of God, and promises belonged
to the Israelites) at large shows, that the elect only, to wit, the sons
of the promise, and not of the flesh indifferently from among the Jews and
Gentiles, are the true seed of Abraham, and the true Israelites, to whom the
promised blessing and salvation in Christ do appertain. And so the Apostle
enters into the ample and profound doctrine of predestination: wherein, (that
we may speak of the matter now in hand, omitting other thing) he plainly
teaches, as touching the cause of predestination, that God considering that he
is most free, electeth whom he will of mere grace, and reprobateth whom he
will, in the just, albeit secret counsel of his own will.

Jacob 8. Esau.
1. He teaches this by the example of Jacob and Esau, of whom the one was
prefered before the other, by the mere favor of God: because when as they
were both equal in all things, being conceived of one copulation, ye children
as yet unborn, when they had done neither good nor evil, an oracle was given
unto their mother Rebecca: The elder shall serve the younger. Therefore election
is not of works, but of grace. And in vain shall a man flee here, unto the
cavil of foreseeing of some good in Jacob: because Paul would remove all
difference from those two brethren, that we might thoroughly understand them
to be alike in respect of themselves.

2. The Apostle expresselie brings back the cause of the difference between
Jacob and Esau, and by their example in general between the elect and
reprobates, unto the purpose and good pleasure of God, whereby surely he
elected, and rejected whom he would, and because he so would. Romans 9.11.
For this purpose of God is according to his election.

3. The Apostle to make it more plain adds: Not of works but of the caller.
Which words some conster with that that goes before, that it may be a
description of election free and not of works; other refer them to the verb
following. (...), it was said: which reading Augustine follows ad Laur. cap.
98. whatsoever it be, it appears that election and vocation, which is the
effect thereof is of grace, and ^ot of works. And simply he remooueth
whatsoever respect of works, so that without any merits of good or evil
works, God loves one and hates the other. For if he would that the future
either good works of the one, or the evil works of the other, which God
foresaw, should be meant, he would not say, not of works: but he would say of
future works, and thus he would have answered that question: as Augustine
notes Enchir. ad Laur. cap. 98. and ad Simplic. lib. 1. quaest. ^.

4. That prophetical speech te^deth hereunto; Jacob I have loved and Esau I
have hated. Therefore Gods election discerns between the elect and
reprobates. And that consists herein, says John, not that we loved him, but
that he loved us. 1. Ioh. 4.
Neither is this any obstacle, that we know, that God loves all his works
and hates not any thing that he has made: because, as it is said also
before, there be degrees of the love of God: and because he wills not to all
men this benefit which is eternal life, therefore it is said, that he loves
some, Wisd 11.
and hates some.

5. The same thing appears by his prevention: Is there unrighteousness then
with God? For this question should have no place at all, unless it were the
Apostles meaning, that election surely is not of any works done, or to be
done, but of the alone good pleasure of God. Aug. ad ^aw^ cap. 38.
For if any man be elected or reprobated of God as he foresa^, that a man
would use well^ or ill his free will, human reason it self will confess, that
this is most equal. But because it hears where all things be alike, that yet
God according to his own will chooses one, and refuses another, and so to
them that are equal, gives unequal things, from hence arises that raging of
man's reason, against the righteousness of God.

6. Unless it were thus, the Apostle answering the objection alleged, would not
reject it with indignation, saying, God forbid, but thus he would or might
answer the question, that God destinating every one to punishment or reward,
according to his merits, at the least foreseen, cannot be thought unjust.
This had been a most plain and easy defense of Gods justice.

7. He uses a far other answer, whereby he seems not so much to
dissolve, as to bind fast and confirm the question, when he says; He said to
Moses, I will have mercy, on whom I will have mercy, and I will have
compassion, on whom I will have compassion. By which sentence we are taught,
that God, (albeit in a general speech he withdraws his mercy from none) yet
according to a certain manner of mercy, he has appointed to have mercy upon
some, and not upon others, and that therefore, because it so pleases him: for
so, when we would signify a certain free power, we are wont to say, I will
do, that I will do.

8. From whence also the Apostle thus out of that oracle infers: Therefore
it is not in him that runs, nor in him that wills, but in God that shows
mercy. But if the beginning of salvation were of ourselves, as they imagine,
that avouch that election comes of our good works, or good will foreseen,
then surely it were in him that wills, and in him that runs, contrary to
the Apostles saying. Neither is it any thing worth, that some Semipelagian may
say, that grace helps, the will being weak, to accomplish that which is
good, yet prone thereunto, and therefore it is said, It is not in the willer,
nor runner, but in God showing mercy, as though it were said: The only will
of man is not sufficient, if there be not also the mercy of God: for we
answer with Augustine, if, Enchir. ad Laur. cap. 32. and ad Simpl. lib. 1.
because the only will of man does not accomplish salvation, it is well said,
It is not in man that wills, but in God showing mercy: even on the other
side, (if the mercy of God alone does not accomplish it) it should be well
said, It is not in God showing mercy, but in man that wills: which godly
ears cannot abide. It remains then, that for this cause it is said, it is
not in man that wills and runs, An excellent saying.
that the whole may be given to God, who both prepares man's good will that is
to be helped, and does help it being prepared. For as it is written: His
mercy preuenteth us, and his mercy follows us. It preuenteth us being
unwilling, that we may be willing, it follows us being willing, that we may
not will in vain.

9. The Apostle concluding upon both, that is, upon mercy and judgment,
says: Aug. ad Laur. cap. 99.
Therefore he has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens. He
has mercy doubtless of his great goodness, and he hardens through no
injustice: because on whom there is no mercy showed to him, there is no
injustice, but judgment done. But why both, (mercy and judgment I mean) does
deliver, or not deliver this man, rather than another, it is attributed to Gods
will, which alone separateth such as shall be delivered, from them that shall
not be delivered, seeing the common cause does wrap all men in the lump of
perdition.

10. It makes for our cause, what the Apostle brings of the potter, and the
diversity of vessels: The Potter.
for the potter not considering the deserte of the clay, at his own pleasure
only, of the same clay, forms vessels of all sorts to honor and dishonor.
Therefore much more, God is to be said to follow not the merits of men, but his
own will only, in choosing and reprobating, and yet with the safety of his
justice, whereof hereafter. Notably says the Wiseman: Ecclesiastic. 33.
As clay is in the hand of the potter, which he handles at his pleasure; so
men be in the hand of God their creator, to every one of whom he rendereth
according to his own judgment or will. In like manner the Apostle: Has not
the potter power over the clay, to make of the same lump one vessel to honor,
and another to dishonor? And he annexeth concerning both vessels, of wrath and
mercy: that those are made for destruction, these are prepared of God for
glory. But if God, when he electeth or rejects should respect works, that
power were nothing, and any potter could do more then God.

Vessels of wrath.
And although in the contrariety of the vessels of two sorts it be not in
express words set down, by whom the vessels of wrath are said to be made unto
destruction: yet the similitude of the Apostle easily takes away that doubt.
For the potter of the same clay makes at his pleasure vessels to honor and
dishonor. Wherefore either this similitude of the potter will not aptly serve,
or else we shall frankly confess, that both vessels are prepared of God, and
appointed to their uses, Lib. 2. de nupt* and concup. ad Vuler. cap 16.
according to his purpose. Hereupon Augustine plainly says: Are not the
vessels of wrath under the devil? but because they are under the devil, does
any other make them, than he, that makes the vessels of mercy, or else does
he make them of some other, The vessels of wrath are under the devil, yet God
made them for himself and he does use them to good purpose.
and not of the same lump. Neither yet does God make vessels for the devil,
but for himself, as he that knows to use them to his righteous and good
works, even as he himself uses the devil. The same man, Ad Simpl. lib. 1.
q. 2. Of the number of the ungodly, whom God does not justify, he makes
vessels to dishonor, neither does God hate in them that he himself made, in
his creation or ordinance, to wit, as they are men, and as they are vessels:
but yet in that he makes them vessels of perdition, he makes them to some
use, that the vessels which are made to honor, may profit by their ordained
punishments. What it is to be a vessel of wrath. Epistle 105.
And in the same place adds, that it is the work of the divine ordinance,
that of the conspersion of the ungodly are made vessels of perdition for to be
a vessel of wrath, (as elsewhere he expounds) is for a man to be for his
sins appointed to punishment, who was created for the God of nature. Therefore
who may doubt that it pertains to Gods ordination? Ad Mo^^num. Mark this
whereunto ^e^se^s of wrath are made,
So Fulgentius says: Whereunto God predestined the vessels of wrath,
thereunto he made them, that is, says he, to destruction and not to sins.
Let those whom this speech offends, mark these things concerning the vessels
of wrath prepared of God for destruction. But therefore it offends them,
because they understand it amiss, as though it were concerning sin it self
and not as touching the punishment for sin. In which sense we also confess
that God does not make vessels of wrath but find them rather.

CHAP. IX. Answers to certain exceptions.
THese things might suffice for this place for the defense of Gods free
election, whereby out of mankind freely, and according to his own power, he
chooses some to eternal life, and passes by others without any respect,
either of worthiness or unworthiness of works in the men themselves. But because
a deceitful mind, that flies the truth and yet cannot avoid it, seeks
many crafty shifts, and ways to escape, we must answer to certain
exceptions, before we proceed to other proofs out of other places of the
Scriptures.

Erasmus in his book that he made of freewill, The exceptions of Erasmus
against the former doctrine, by perverting the places of Genesis 25. and Mal.
touching Jacob and Esau.
(against which Luther sharply opposed himself) seeing the disputation of the
Apostle concerning Jacob and Esau to stand against him, excepted, that the
Oracle of God Gensis 25. The elder shall seure the younger, pertains not unto
the salvation of a man, but unto a temporary thing: and that God is able of
his own free will to appoint, that a man should become a servant, and poor,
will he, nill he, and yet be not rejected from eternal salvation. And with the
same purpose he wresteth that place of Malachie, that Paul alleged, Jacob I
have loved, and Esau I have hated: that the Prophet does not seem to speak
of that hatred, whereby a man is damned for ever, but of a temporary affliction
only of Esau his posterity, that their country should be wasted, without hope
of repairing. But hereto tend these exceptions, as though Paul unfaithfully
(which God forbid) cited the scriptures, or else produced those things for
testimonies, that could make little to his purpose. As Erasmus was not ashamed
to refer to this place that, A^^ll speech of Hierome.
which Hieronyme elsewhere too proudly surely, and unchristianly, yea,
profanely writes, that in Paul those things disagree, which are not repugnant
in their places. Which thing if it be true, the Apostle abused the simplicity
of the unskillful, as wicked Prophyrie reprocheth him.

The elder shall s^rue the younger.
yet that could nothing at all hurt Paul's purpose or ours. For the weight of
the argument lies herein, that Jacob through the only grace of the caller
attained to that place, whither Esau did not attain, neither came it to pass
by the merits of the one or the other, that the one should be preferred before
the other, and should be deputed to Lordship or servitude, to love or hatred.

Here it makes no great matter whether we understand the words of the oracle
concerning spiritual Lordship and servitude, or corporal. Which thing in like
manner is of force touching love and hatred. If we please to understand the
saying concerning temporal Lordship and servitude, as far forth as the
Idumeans, who were to come of Esau, were in subjection in the time of David and
Solomon: albeit that sense and meaning be very slender, yet the argument will
be strong from the lesser after this sort: Argumentum a ^inori.
If it came to pass not for the merits of the one or other: that the
posterity of Jacob had dominion over the posterity of Esau, but because it so
pleased God: how much more ought we esteem the calling of some before others
unto true Lordship, and a heavenly kingdom by the only grace of the caller,
and not by works?

Secondly it is evidently proved out of the very text, that the Prophet in
that saying: The elder shall serve the younger, speaks not of temporal things
only. For thus stands the Oracle Genesis 25. Two people shall be divided out of
thy womb, and one people shall overcome the other, and the elder shall serve
the younger. Here manifestly two people are discerned: ye one is received into
the grace of God, although it be the younger, that it may be Gods people, as it
was proved by the event it self: the other is repelled from that grace. But
to be taken for the people of God, or not to be taken, pertains not to
temporal good or evil things only, but to all things. For our God is not
only the God of temporal things, but of all things: Psalm. 144. The true
meaning of the prophecy of Jacob and Esau.
whereupon the Psalmographe praises that people to be happy, to whom the Lord
is God. And that is the meaning of the prophecy, that the posterity of Jacob,
and not of Esau was chosen of the Lord, wherein his Church should be, and the
true worship of God his word, blessing, promise of Christ, his spirit, and
eternal kingdom: which thing also the Scripture afterward more largely
confirms, where it describes how Jacob is blessed, The blessing of Jacob.
and that he receives both the promises and the kingdom: for hitherto tends
Isaaks blessing pronounced upon Jacob, Gen 27. not that the holy Patriarche
would include the hope of his son in the world, which he himself
contemning, waited for a better country, to wit, a heavenly: but that he
might testify toward him the favor of God in all things, and might make him
that prince, and head over a holy and an elect people.

All which things Paul briefly declares, sending us to Moses that handles
these things more fully: so that we may say, that the testimonies which Paul
cites, do disagree more strongly in their places, than in Paul.

To the same end pertains the saying of Malachie, which Paul joining with the
former, sufficiently testifies that one meaning is to be sought for in both.
He says therefore: Jacob I have loved, but Esau I have hated. Wherein is
signified, Jacob I have loved.
that God of his free love has so severed Jacob from Esau, that in his
posterity the Church should be conserved and continued: and that God also made
known his love toward the Israelites, by giving them that good land, and by
the restoring of the people into the same out of the captivity of Babylon,
when no such thing happened to Esaus posterity. Let those things be compared
with these, which Moses Deuteronomy. 7.6. inculcateth of the election and love of
Israel. And whereas we say that Jacobs seed was chosen to be the Church, the
Idumeans and other nations rejected from that dignity; it must be understood
for the time of the old Testament, and that indefinitely definitely as of the
body of ye people, and not of every one that should come of Esaus posterity or
of other nations. These. 644. and sequent.
Which thing while Huber observes not, he faulteth here foully in wresting
certain sayings of Beza, as though no man, but one carnally coming of Jacob,
could be saved in old time, or as yet may. What shameful dealing is this?
what pleasure of falsely accusing a man? Why does he not feign the same thing in
Paul? Acts 14.16. Ephesians. 2.
For he says, that the Gentiles were strangers from the covenants of promise,
having no hope, and being without God and Christ. But both these answers
already brought are Luthers confuting Erasmus, so that it is marvel that any
Lutherans should be found, who rather than they would yield to the truth, would
seek after Erasmus his shifts and means to escape, and would not rest
themselves in Luthers sound answers for the truth. He surely, whom we
mentioned even now heates himself and labors, how he migh show that Jacobs
dominion, love, and blessing pertain to corporal and temporal things, and
not to spiritual and eternal, which thing by Luthers judgment is not true.

Hubers exceptions.
The same person urges this also, (to the intent we may seem not only to
match but to surpass the industry of Erasmus in seeking shifts to escape,)
that Jacob and Esau are not opposed as two singular persons, but that the
posterity of these twain collectiue are noted. Neither that only, but also
by the name of Esau he comprehends all nations, and thus expounds: These. 6
35. and (...).
I have hated Esau, that is, the Gentiles, I have loved Jacob, that is, the
Jews: that the sense may be, that free and just will of God the Israelites in
old time were beloved and chosen to be the people of God, the Gentiles being
ouerpassed and left out: as on the contrary, in the time of the new Testament
the Gentiles were elected to this end and the Jews rejected. Whereof he
labors to infer, that Paul does not entreat of precise election or
reprobation to life or death eternal.

that there was no need for the adversary almost in 50. propositions to set
himself on work about this, that is not in question. But granting that, we
deny the consequence. For this is the Apostles meaning, and hitherto he aymeth,
that for all the unbelief and abiection of the greater part of the Jews, God
does not cast away his people, whom he foreknew, but saves them according to
the election of grace, as chap. 11. Romans in plain words that distinction is
expressed. A double election of Israel.
So he considers a double election of Israel: one general and external,
whereby the whole carnal Israel being separated from other people, General.
was consecrated to be the peculiar people of God: of which election we read
Deuteronomy. 7. and elsewhere often. For he vouchsafed all the Israelites alike the
same testimonies of his grace, to wit, his word and Sacraments. The other a
special and secret election, included in the general: Special.
when God of his mere grace according to the hidden counsel of his will
chooses for himself, and reserueth to salvation whom pleases him, out of the
number of the children of Israel, that was as the sand of the sea. These things
are plain by the order of Paul's discourse, and by the distinction set down in
the beginning, to wit, of the children of the flesh, and of the promise. For
all (says he) that be of our father Israel, are not Israelites, neither are
all therefore sons, because they are the seed of Abraham, but in Isaac shall
thy seed be called: that is, they that are the children of the flesh, are not
the children of God: but they that are the sons of promise, are counted for
the seed. He calls them the children of the flesh, The sons of the flesh.
that come of Abraham according to the succession of the flesh, who had already
an excellent prerogative above other people and tribes for the grace of the
covenant among that people. Children of promise.
But he calls them the children of promise, who were freely given to Abraham
by promise and faith, in whom a far more excellent dignity and grace of God
did reign and flourish. And such truly are of the Jews and Gentiles: but now
we speak peculiarly of the Jews.

general reiection of the Ismaelites, Idumeans, and other nations.

Esau had not the mercy, Ad Simpl. lib. 1.
through which Jacob was made good, that he also by it might be good. And by
and by: This mercy was withdrawn from Esau, (says he) that he should not so
be called, that he should be inspired with faith in his calling, and
believing might work well. What? does not the author to the Hebrews very
confidently seem to censure Esau? But it is nothing material scrupulously to
search out whether he were saved or perished, seeing the truth of
predestination even without this may be defended.

CHAP. X. Other proofs of free election.
THese things being thus set down to avoid the subtle arguing of the
adversaries, let us proceed to other testimonies of the Scriptures, wherein is
proved the free election of such as shall be saved according to the most free
will of the chuser.

Romans 11. there is a most manifest place. The Apostle says: The 1. place, Romans
11.
That God did not cast away his people, whom he foreknew: that is,
predestined: for difference sake from the carnal Israel, which also was the
people of God by outward calling. For that absurdity seemed to follow, if the
Jews should be cast away for unbelief, that God seemed to renounce his own
people. Here Paul distinguishes between the people of God called, A
foreknowne people.
and elected (or as he himself calls them) foreknowne: meaning the knowledge
which is joined with approbation, according to which they are called
foreknowne, whom God receives, and whom he has separated as his own to be
saved from other multitudes of men. Otherwise if the phrase should be meant of
bare knowledge, that restraint were in vain, seeing even such as shall be
damned cannot avoid the knowledge of God. And that he might show whom he
calls foreknowne, he added, by the example of the times of Elias, that among
the unbelieving and obstinate people there was a reservation made according to
election. And by and by he says: Israel obtained not that which he sought
for: but the election obtained it, and the rest were hardened. Therefore in
this election and in that reservation, which is made by the election of grace,
he would have a people to be meant, whom therefore God had not cast away,
because he foreknew them, De bono persevere. cap. 18.
as Augustine at large expounds. But what says he further of that election?
what cause thereof does he assign, beside the mere grace of the chuser? For
he says: So at this time also there is a reservation made according to the
election of grace, that is, free election, after the Hebrew phrase. And if it
be of grace, it is not now of works: else grace is no grace: if of works, it is
not now of grace, else work were no work. Nothing could be spoken more
roundly to exclude all respect of works in men.

There follows now a notable place to the Ephe. 1. Blessed be God the father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, The 2. place. Ephesians. 1.
who has blessed us with every blessing in the heavens in Christ, as he chose
us in him before the foundations of the world were laid, that we should be
holy and without fault before him through love. Who has predestined us to be
adopted for sons through Christ Jesus in himself, according to the good
pleasure of his will to the praise of his glorious grace, whereby he has
freely accepted us in that his beloved.



are elected in Christ. They that are chosen in Christ, are chosen doubtless not
of their works, or for any respect of their worthiness properly. For so they
should be said to be elected in themselves, and not in Christ.



It is not grace any way, A fine saying.
if it be not freely bestowed every way.

Fifthly, Paul expressly assigns the cause of our predestination, when he
says: He has predestined us according to his good pleasure: he does not
say, according to ye purpose of our will, as though God did respect our future
good works, or the consent of our will unto his offered grace, or else the good
use of our freewill, or such like thing in ourselves. The Greek words are very
significant, Why God chooses this man, and not that*
(...). Wherefore to such as ask the question, why has God chosen these men,
and not those, the answer is most true and good: because it so pleased him. As
Christ alleges no other cause of the Gospel hid from the wise, and revealed
to babes, but the good pleasure of the father. And surely if we diligently
consider in the Scriptures, what things are taught of the cause of
predestination, we shall see them come for the most part to these heads:
namely, To the good pleasure and will of God, which two words are joined
together, Ephesians. 1. To his purpose, that is, according to election, To. 9. To his
power also, as the Apostle says, Has not the potter power? Lastly, unto the
mercy and love of God: when he says, It is not in him that wills, nor in
him that runs, but in God showing mercy. And, Jacob I have loved, but Esau
I have hated. But concerning works done, or to be done, the Scripture
speaks not a word in this matter, but always to exclude them, as from
vocation and justification, so also from election.

Furthermore, hitherto tends that which the Lord says, The 3. place. Ioh. 15.
Ioh. 15. Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you. And we had chosen him,
if according to our faith, or good will, election had bin. If we should be
chosen of God, says Augustine, De praedest. sanct. cap. ^3.
because he foresaw that we would believe, and not that he himself would make
us faithful, doubtless we our selves should first choose him by believing in
him, that we might deserve to be chosen of him. He takes away this
altogether, who says: Ye have not chosen me, but I you.

CHAP. XI. Of the cause of reprobation.
IT sufficiently then appears by so many proofs alleged, that God elected
his Saints in Christ unto eternal life, not for any works, or through
foreseeing of their faith: but according to the purpose of his own will, of
mere grace, which does not find, Aug. hom. in Io. 38 and epist. 106
but make them to be elected, as the ancient saying is. And albeit we seem
with the same labor not obscurely to have touched, what must be held
concerning the cause of reprobation: yet to make the matter more clear, we
think good severally to declare, The cause of reprobation, is the will and
good pleasure of God, and not foreseen unbelief, or sins.
that the cause of reprobation consists not in the future unbelief of the
reprobates, or other sins, which God foresaw, but in the will of God
himself, choosing whom he pleases, and reprobating whom he pleases, by his
will, which is surely remote from our senses, yet most right, and to be adored
rather than curiously searched into.

The 1. reason. Romans 8. Ephesians. 2.
For if sins were the cause of reprobation, we had all been reprobates:
seeing all of us are under sin, the children of wrath and eternal death,
that such election should adopt, as abdication does refuse. And albeit the
grace of the Mediator be offered us in the Gospel, yet it is Gods gift, that
we begin to have faith, and do hold it unto the end. For what have thou that
thou have not received? 1. Cor. 4.
Why then is this mercy withdrawn from the reprobates, Mark this. Aug. ad
Simpl. lib. 1.
that faith is not inspired into them? Is it, because they will not? No. For so
on the contrary the elect should therefore believe, because they are willing:
and so God should not give them faith but they by being willing should bestow
it on themselves, and should have some thing that they had not received.

The 2. reason.
Further, if we should consider reprobation to slow from unbelief, or from
malice foreseen, it will necessarily follow, that election depends on faith
or works foreseen. This reason is Augustines, but that he speaks
particularly of Jacob and Esau: If (says he) we grant, Aug. ad Simpl. lib. 1.
that Esau was not hated but for the desert of unrighteousness, it follows
that Jacob was loved for the merit of righteousness. Again, If because God
foresaw the future evil works of Esau, therefore he predestined him to
serve his younger brother: even God predestined Jacob therefore, that his
elder brother should serve him, because he foresaw his future good works.

Paul does alike speak of both: The 3. reason.
While the children were yet unborn, when they had done neither good nor
evil, that the purpose of God might stand sure according to election, not of
works but of the caller it was said: The elder shall serve the younger. These
words Augustine weighing, expressly writes in the foresaid place: that Esau
was rejected for no desert because both he was unborn, and also had done
nothing, no not in the foreknowledge of his future evil will: because so Jacob
also had been approved by the foreknowledge of his future good will, and in
vain it should be said, Not of works. The same things he writes ad Laur.
cap. 98.

The objection that the Apostle moves: The 4. reason. Romans 9.
Is there therefore unrighteousness with God? and the answer to that objection,
and also the parable of the potter, of his own power and will making vessels
to honor, and vessels to dishonor, fully confirm our opinion: that as we
can assign no other reason of the election of the one, so of the reiection of
the other, but because it so pleases God, for the manifestation of his mercy
or judgment.

Hereunto may be added the case of innumerable children without the Church, who
are prevented with death, The 5. reason.
before they have the judgment of reason, and cannot be justly reproved for
the neglect of helping grace. If such as dissent from us be asked concerning
these, whether they think that none of them do perish, they dare not I
suppose deny: If they perish, they are reckoned among those whom God has
rejected: yet he could foresee in them no contempt of grace, seeing they should
not have it, yea he foreknew rather that they should not contemn grace.

Neither does that device any thing help them, that God saw what they would
do if they had recovered. For God in punishing and pardoning respects not
what any man would do, but what good or evil he has done in his body. Thus
it is manifest, that the reprobation of the ungodly, no less than the election
of the Saints depends upon the only will of God, and not upon the foreseen
good or evil wills of men.

Neither is it material, that some persons defame this doctrine by this or
that name, and endeavor to make it odious. It is the doctrine of the
Scriptures, and defended by Augustine constantly as we see, Augustine and many
other writers, avouch and maintain this doctrine of reprobatio^.
according to the Scriptures. As also by Hilarie, Prosper, Primasius, and
others, who long ago well perceived the naughtines of the Pelagian spirit.
Prospers words out of his epistle to Augustine of the remnants of Pelagian
heresy, are: That according to Gods purpose before the world, there was made a
difference between them that were to be elected, and rejected, and that some
were created vessels of honor, and others vessels of dishonor, according to the
good pleasure of the creator. And again he says: that God according to the
purpose and counsel of his own will, in his secret judgment, but yet in a
manifest work, made one vessel to honor, another to dishonor: whereas no
man is justified but by grace, and no man is borne but in sin. And this
(says he) they of necessity grant that confess that all good merits are
prevented by grace, and by it have this free gift, that they might be.

Lib. 1. did. 4^. Thom. part. 1. q. 23. and in 9. ad Romans
Neither is the doctrine any other of the Master of Sentences, as they call him:
for he says, He chose whom it pleased him, of his free mercy, not because
they would be faithful, but that they might be faithful. So also he
reprobated whom he would, not for future merits, which he foresaw, yet in most
upright truth, and beyond our understanding. The same opinion Thomas Aquinas,
and other Schoolmen of no obscure account do follow, and do confirm it with
strong reasons.

Look also Luthers judgment in his book of servile will, where, upon the
place of Malachie he boldly writes these words: Eternal and unchangeable
is the love of God, Luther. de seruo arbis.
eternal is the hatred of God toward men, before the world was made, not
only before the merit and work of frewill. And he manifestly rejects it as
a fained thing, that God should be said to hate them while they were yet
unborn because he foreknewe, that they would commit things worthy of hatred.
Romans 11.
Neither is this any hindrance, says he, because we read that the Jews for
the merits of their unbelief were cut off from the olive tree, and that the
Gentiles were graffed in by faith. We know that men by faith are ingraffed,
and by infidelity cut off, and that they are to be exhorted to beleene leaest
they be cut off. The very point of the controversy of predestination.
But we dispute not what follows believers or unbelievers, but by what
merit, by what help do men attain to faith, whereby they are ingraffed, or
to unbelief whereby they are cut off. This merit Paul describing unto us
teaches, that by no work of ours, but by the only love and hatred of God it
comes to pass. All these words are Luthers.

The same man afterward upon the similitude of the potter and claie, answering
the cavil, that this potter (as Erasmus in his Diatribe did interperet) makes
a vessel, to dishonor through precedent merits, as he rejected the Jews for
unbelief, and received the Gentiles for their faith: If God (says he,) do
thus, why murmr they, and find themselves grieved? why say they, wherefore
does he complain? who shall resist his will? Mark this well
what need had Paul to repress them? further, where is the power that the
potter has to do what he will, if being subject to merits and laws, he is
not suffered to do what he will? for the respect of merits fights with the
power and liberty to do what he will, etc.

Therefore what unreasonable dealing is it? and what envy against the truth,
to cast in our teeth Caluinisme, because we avouch, that neither the
righteousness nor maliciousnes of men, but the secret will of God is the cause
why grace plucketh some out of the common destruction, whereunto we are all
subject by nature, and does not pluck others? If this be Caluinisme, what
shall be done to Luther, to say nothing of the ancient writers?

Yet it is to be observed, that we do not maintain, as our adversaries
spitefully do imagine of us: The slanders of Hub. these. 350. Zanch de not.
De^fol 669. Visi. admon. Neost. page 113. Bez. resp. 2. ad Col. Momp. fol. 223.
That no man is condemned for sins or unbelief as the foregoing cause. We
teach the contrary, and our men with one consent have always taught, that God
takes punishment of none, and no man shall be damned of him, but for sin. For
punishment has no place but in respect of sin.

Moreover this is also true: That as God damneth not any but sinners, and such
as deserve damnation for sins, so also he has not decreed to damn any but
for sin. For whatsoever God does in his time, also he determined from
everlasting to do after the very same way, as it is done. Therefore because he
damneth the reprobates, and will damn them for sins, doubtless he also decreed
from everlasting to damn them for sins. And from hence again the deprauing of
our doctrine by the adversaries appears, when they feign that we teach, that
God without respect of sin, Note. God decreed to condemn none but for sin.
of his sole and absolute will, has appointed some men to damnation. Yea Gods
decree is of the condemnation of sinners only, and that for sins.

But seeing we be all sinners, and worthy of damnation, why God has
predestined these men to bestow upon them freely glory, and has
predestined others to be punished in his just judgment for sins, hereof we
have no cause to allege, beside the alone, and that free and just will of God.
The very thing is meant by the distinction that some make, The decree of
predestination, and the execution of that decree.
between the decree of predestination, whereof there is no cause but the will
of God, and the execution of the decree, the cause whereof be the sins of such
as shall be damned. From the meaning of which distinction, that which Thomas
writes, does not disagree: Expos in 9. ad Romans
That the prescience of sins may be called some reason of reprobation in
respect of the punishment, which is prepared for the reprobates, to wit in as
much as God purposes to punish the wicked for sins, which they have of
th^selues and not of God. Ec^^us in Chrysopass.
And according to Richard, (as Eckius reports.) The merits of men are the
reason of reprobation, in Quantum ad connotatum.
respect of that which is notorious, which is temporal bardening, and future
damnation: but (says he) there is no reason, to wit, in man, of the
preordination unto that damnation.

Calvin respecting the same thing, Comment in ^. ad Romans
grants that the next cause of reprobation is, that we are all accursed in
Adam, by native corruption, which is dispersed throughout all mankind, which is
sufficient unto damnation. As Esau (says he,) was worthily rejected, because
naturally he was the child of wrath: yet Paul avouches that without respect
of any fault or vice, his condition was worse than his brothers, that we may
learn to rest in the naked and simple good pleasure of God. What need many
words? whom God has reprobated, therefore he has reprobated because he
would. But he has reprobated, that is, foreordained to inflict just punishment
for sin. As Augustine also is rightly understood when he says, Cont. duas
epist. Pela. li. 1. c. 20.
that God makes some vessels of wrath according to merit, (for naturally we
are all the children of wrath) and others vessels of mercy according to grace.

CHAP. XII. A confutation of certain objections against the expounded doctrine
of the cause of Election and Reprobation.
But the greatness of the question which we handle, troubles the senses of men
that too proudly reason of the will of God: whereby it comes to pass, that
many object many things against this height of the divine mercy and judgment,
whereby, when there is no diversity nor difference of merits among men
themselves, one is predestined, that he might be severed and chosen out of
the mass of perdition, and be made a vessel for honor, and another is
reprobated, to be a vessel for dishonor.

First the very name of Election seems to be against it. For profitable.
Therefore it seems that we must say, that God also respected something in the
elect, for which cause he preferred them before others. Esaias 55.
Election and love in God, is fair otherwise than in men.
but election and love are far otherwise in God than in men. For the will of
man is moved to love by beholding of some good in the thing loved and in
respect of some good (as it is said) true, or else in appearance, it prefereth
ye thing it chooses before another, and counts it dear. But the will of God
is the cause of al goodness in the creature: and therefore God loves man not
for any good thing that he can choose in him, What it is to love.
but rather because he loves him, therefore in choosing he prefers him before
others: to wit, by willing that good to him, which he wills not to another.
For to love is to will good to a man.

In a great house there be not only vessels of gold and silver, but also of
wood and earth: and some surely to honor, others to dishonor. If therefore a
man shall purge himself from these things he hall be a vessel for honor,
sanctified and fit for the Lords use etc. Therefore that we may be vessels for
honor or dishonor, elect or reprobates, it depends on our selves,

which is a sincere and constant confession of Gods name, The true sense of the
Apostles words before.
and a study of righteousness: For the Apostle preuenteth the offense that
might arise of the Apostasy of Hymeneus, and Philetus, men of great worth as
they had been esteemed, and shows to the comfort of the faithful, that the
elect cannot perish, but that they be known to God, and not to us, unless it
be by the effects, and by that that follows, (as we speak) according to the
rule; Let every one that calls upon the name of the Lord depart from
iniquity. Therefore it is our part to persevere in a true confession, to
embrace righteousness, and not to join with the teachers of errors, and other
wicked men, that we may be, that is, in very deed may testify, that we are
the vessels of honor.

We are commanded, 2. Peter 1. The 3. objection.
to make our calling and election sure to wit, by good works, as some Greek
and Latin copies have it added, and the sense of it self requires it. The
argument will be such as this is:

That is the cause of election, whereby it is made strong and sure. But
election is made sure by good works. Therefore good works are the cause of
Election.
2. Tim. 2. Romans 9.
because as the Apostle witnesses, the foundation of God stands sure, and
his purpose according to election abides not of works, but of the caller. But
in respect of us, election is made sure by good works, as by the effects. For,
because we be elected, that we may be holy and blameless, not without cause is
holiness of life accounted the trial and declaration of election.

And this is the meaning of Peter's words. From whence an answer is apparent
unto the first proposition of the argument by a distinction: By what thing
election is made sure, to wit, in respect of God, that thing is the cause of
election. But by our good works election is made sure not in respect of God
but of us, as by the effect and the sign, as it is said. So faith, so
justification, so the inheritance of eternal life are made sure unto us, by the
ready and unfeigned study of good works. Neither yet are good works therefore
the cause of faith, and justification, but the effects of them, and a sign of
eternal life freely to be given by and for Christ. And generally, whatsoever
confirms another thing, ought not forthwith to be counted the cause of it.

to be elected according to the foreknowledge of God the father. 1. Peter 1.
Acts 15.
when as yet we were not, chose us according to his foreknowledge, whereby he
knows all his future works, and has disposed them from eternity.

We are elected in Christ, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 1. Therefore we are not
elected by any absolute decree, or mercy of God, but limited and described in
Christ. absolute. The decree of election how far absolute or not.
The decree and mercy of God, according to which he chooses some out of
mankind that shall certainly be delivered, may be called absolute, as touching
the cause, as far forth as nothing inherent in the elect themselves, can be
the cause of either the decree or mercy: (against which the opinion of the
Pelagians and Semipelagians, did set the foreseeing of works, or of faith
also, or unbelief:) but in the respect of the means, whereby he appointed to
save the elect in mercy, that mercy is wholly limited in Christ the Mediator,
by whom God decreed to save, whosoever are saved. To be chosen in Christ, what
it is.
Therefore the meaning is: He has chosen us in Christ, not as being in him, or
would be afterward as of ourselves, but that we might be in him, and by him
might be saved. And so Paul himself expounds: He has predestined us, that
he might adopt us for sons through Christ Jesus, and that according to the good
pleasure of his will. And this very thing is also in force concerning
reprobation: that God neither destroys nor has purposed to destroy the
reprobates by absolute justice, to wit, without their desert: but whom he
destroys, he destroys, and has purposed from everlasting to destroy for
sins.

The sixth objection.
That which is the cause of justification, the same is of Election: and that
which is the cause of damnation, is of reprobation: But the cause of
justification is faith concurring with the mercy of God and apprehending it:
and the cause of damnation is unbelief despising the grace of God offered in
Christ, and other sins, Therefore etc. Mayor. They that be justified be
elected surely, so that we may in judging by that which is later, determine,
that doubtless they are elected, who by faith lay hold upon the mercy
promised for Christ's sake, and do not cast away that confidence unto the end.
But it neither ought nor can be granted that the next cause of justification
and election is one and the same (such as faith is in the matter of
justification.) For justification is the effect of election, as even says it
self, whereby we are justified, according to the saying: Whom he has
predestined, them he has called, Romans 8. Acts 13.
whom he has called, them also he justified. Again, As many as were
foreordained to eternal life, believed. And now it is manifest, that the cause
of the cause, that is, election, is also the cause of the effect, or the thing
caused, (as they do say,) to wit, of justification, but not contrariwise:
because one and the same thing should be the cause of it self. Wherefore the
very effects of election may be so ordered, that one is the cause of another,
as faith of justification, justification of glorification: but no effect of
election can be considered as the cause thereof; and by consequent faith,
seeing it is the effect of election, cannot be thought to be the cause of it as
well as of justification. The effect of Reprobation is Gods forsaking after
which follow unbelief and other sins. The 7. objection.
The same we may judge of unbelief and other sins which albeit properly
they are not to be called the effects of reprobation, yet the effect thereof is
Gods forsaking, after which unbelief and other sins do follow.

This whole answer is confirmed by those things, which before in the 11.
chapter are recited out of Luther concerning the Jews, that were through
unbelief cut from the Olive tree, and the Gentiles grafted in the same by
faith.

The seventh objection is like unto this. We must judge of Predestination
neither by reason, nor by the law, but by the Gospel: But the Gospel witnesses
that the believers are received in to grace, and saved, and thereby are elect:
and on the contrary, that unbelievers and such as continue in sins are
damned, and thereby reprobates. Election therefore and reprobation depend on
faith or unbelief of men. Minor affirms nothing of the cause of
predestination, but shows only this, that by the mark of faith or final
unbelief, the elect or reprobates are discerned. Whereupon this only
follows, that we must judge also according to this testimony of the Gospel,
who be elected, who rejected. In the mean while the Gospel does not deny,
but manifestly affirms, that faith, obedience, perseverance, are the free
gifts of God, and are given, or not given of him, to whom it pleases God
according to his good pleasure: Mat. 11. verse. 25 and 13.11. John 6. verse.
44.45. and 65. and 10 verse. 26. Ephe. 1.8.15. and the rest. 2. Tim. 1.9. Heb.
8.10. Ier. 31. etc. Hence in judging according to the Gospel, A Syllogism
proving by the Gospel, that God has decreed to save some and forsake others,
only of his good pleasure and will.
we shall gather (as the Gospel teaches a) man to be saved or not saved: so
God has appointed from everlasting to save or not to save him. But the Gospel
not only teaches that a man is saved by faith, and does perish through
unbelief, but also teaches that even faith and other benefits, by which as
by means man comes to salvation, are given to some and not given to others
of God, even as pleases him. Therefore even faith and such kind of benefits
unto salvation, God has decreed from everlasting to give to some men, and not
to give to others, even as it pleased him.


CHAP. XIII. A wicked eye without cause suspecteth God of injustice.
The reasons of the objection.
and refuse another of his mere will, for it seems unjust in distributions,
if we distribute unequally to them that be equal. But men, if we set aside
the difference of merits, are equal. Therefore if without difference of
merits, God does unequally distribute, choosing one, and refusing another, it
seems that there is unrighteousness with him. Further how shall we defend the
righteousness of God, if of his mere will he has predestined so many
thousands of men, not moved with any merit or work of theirs, unto eternal
torments. This seems unjust, cruel, and intolerable to judge of God, and
herewith so many and great men in so many ages have been offended, and who
would not be offended, says Luther, De ser. arbit. Answer to the first reason
of the objection.
when he had largely answered this very objection. Concerning inequality,
already before I have answered, that it appertains to justice, in those
things that be distributed of duty, that unequal things be not distributed to
them that be equal: but not in those things, which a man of his own accord
and of favor distributeth without any injury of another. As that householder
reproved them that murmured: Friend, I do thee no wrong, take that thine is,
and go thy way. I will give to this last, as unto thee. May I not do what I
will with mine own? Is thine eye evil because I am good? Let them therefore
learn to restrain that wicked eye, who murmur against God as unjust, and an
acceptor of persons.

August. epist. 105.
Therefore Let us (as Augustine godly advises us) give thanks to our Savior,
seeing that we see not that rendered unto us, that we know, in the damnation of
the^ that are like us, to have bin also due unto us. Neither let us be
unthankful, De bono persevere. cap. 8.
that our merciful God (according to his good pleasure, to the praise of his
glorious grace) has freed so many from so deserved destruction, that if he
should deliver none from thence yet he should not be unjust.

For on whom there is no mercy showed, Enchirid. ad Laur. cap. 99.
them God judges, he deals not unjustly with them. And as undeserved grace
is given to such as are freed: so no other but due punishment is rendered to
them that are damned, that neither they can boast themselves to be worthy,
nor these complain that they are unworthy. Epist. 105.
For because the whole lump is worthily condemned, justice rendereth due
dishonor, and grace bestows due honor, not through the prerogative of
desert, nor by necessity of destiny, nor by rash fortune, but through the
depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God. De bono perseu. cap.
8. epist. 106.
If therefore Gods goodness be understood in forgiving debt, and his equity in
requiring it, there is no way iniquity found in God. He commends mercy that
is set free, and he that is punished blames not judgment.

Do praedest. and great. cap. vlt.
I will say somewhat more with Augustine. If mankind, that at the first was
created of nothing, should be borne without the due original of death and
sin, and yet the omnipotent creator would for ever condemn some of them to
destruction: who could say to the Almighty Creator, why have thou done thus?
For he that freely gave them their being, when they were not, had power to
appoint to what end they should be. Neither could the rest say, why should Gods
will vary, all men's merits being alike? because the potter has power of the
clay. But now seeing just punishment is rendered to such as shall be damned,
and undeserved grace is bestowed upon such as be saved; what man forgetting
man's condition, may discuss the secrets of Gods mind?

Ad Simpl. lib. 1. q. 2.
or forgiueth the debt. Hereupon Augustine: In Adam we all die, and we are one
lump of sin, owing punishment to the divine and high justice, which whether it
be exacted or pardoned, there is no unrighteousness. And it is an arrogant
part in debtors to judge, of whom it is to be required, and to whom it is to
be remitted. It belongs to God to require it of whom it pleases him, and to
forgive it to whom it pleases him, who does not require that which is not due,
neither forgiueth that which is none of his. The same writer elsewhere: Epist.
105.
Why God does thus to one man, and otherwise to another, his ways are
unsearchable, and his judgments past finding out: the great depth whereof we
ought rather to reverence, than curiously to search out, that we may escape a
dangerous downfall.

Therefore repressing the impudency of this question, let us say with the
Apostle: Romans 11.
O the depth of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his
judgments, How the mouths of wicked men must be stopped about this doctrine.
and his ways past finding out? Also: O man, who art thou that reasonest with
God? Does the pot say to the potter, why have thou made me thus? Has not the
potter power over the clay? Neither let it grieve us thus to stop the mouths
of exclaimers. For if they be not ashamed to gainsay not us, but Paul; why
should it irke us to tell them this again and again, that the Apostle has
said? De verbis Apost. sermon. 20.
Augustine notably following the Apostle says: Thou man, expectest from me an
answer, and I am a man. Therefore let us both hear him that says: O man who
art thou? Better is faithful ignorance, than indiscreet knowledge. Seek for
deserts, thou shall find nothing but punishment. O height. Peter denies the
thief believes. Mark this notable saying.
O the depth. Seek thou a reason? I will be abashed at the depth. Reason
thou, I will marvel. Dispute thou, I will believe. I see the depth, I cannot
reach to the bottom. Paul rested because he found a thing to marvel at. He
calls them judgments unsearchable and art thou come to seek them out?
Again, Sermon. 254. de Temp.
I confess the counsel of God as a man, I cannot declare it. For with the
Apostle Paul I know how to be astonished: O the depth of his wisdom and
knowledge. To us belong consideration admiration trembling and exclamation,
because we cannot pearce into them: but unto him what? glory for ever and ever,
whether it be concerning the vessels for honor, or vessels for dishonor.

And in this place we must be admonished, that in the things that have been
spoken, Ad ^an^. ca. 99.
there is great reason rendered against certain foolish men (whom the
forenamed author often nippeth) who think, that the Apostle failed in his
answer, and through want of rendering a reason repressed the boldness of the
gainsaier. For we are called back to the consideration of our capacity, in
brief words surely, but such as bring great weight by aggravating of names,
when he says: O man, who art thou that reasonest with God? man is opposed to
God, and the clay to the potter. Likewise in that with trembling he cries out:
O the depth, how unsearchable are the judgments of God, he sufficiently
declares, that these works of God may be secret, but cannot be unjust:
because they be his judgments, who is just, and judges the world, and whose
will is so the chiefest rule of justice, Gods justice unlike to man's
that what thing soever he wills, and does, must therefore be counted just,
because he does it. For it is not lawful to dispute of the divine justice
according to man's justice, or rather man's pride, that has the name of justice.
De seruo arbit. circa finem.
For as Luther notably proves: If Gods justice were such, as could be judged
to be just by man's capacity, it were not divine, and it should nothing differ
from man's justice. Further, seeing God is wholly incomprehensible, and
inaccessable by man's reason, (for what is man compared to God? what is our
power, knowledge, substance, and all that we have to God?) it is meet, yea
necessary, that his justice also be incomprehensible.

De praedest. and gra. cap. 2.
Wherefore Augustine not without cause says: Who is so mad, or rather, who is
such a blasphemer to say that we must dispute of the justice of God by the
rule of man's justice? which doubtless is an enemy to Gods justice, We must
judge soberly and reverently of the works of God.
and is unjust. It is manifest, that every thing that is howsoever just,
flows from him who is most just. Who then shall he be, that hangs the
wisdom of God (that abides unchangeable, creates governs, and preserves
all things that be) upon the pleasure of man's wisdom? We must not therefore
reason as vain man thinks best, of that majesty of the divine wisdom. God
must be adored, Lib. 2. contra Marc.
and not judged, says Tertullian, sharply reproving the controllers of the
Deity: saying, Thus God ought not to be used, and so rather he ought to be.
But the foolish things of God are wiser than men. And then especially is he
great, when to man he is small: and most just, when to man he is unjust, says
he.

But say they, all these things are true, and sufficient to defend the justice
of Gods election and reprobation, The adversaries defend Gods justice in
election and reprobation by presupposing of man's fall.
if we consider how God deals with us by presupposing the fall of mankind.
For whereas we were all inthralled to eternal damnation, he can be charged
with no injustice for delivering some from thence mercifully, and punishing
others justly, as pleases him, because he may have mercy on whom he will, and
at his pleasure punish whom he will. How the flesh concludes thereof to excuse
it self.
But without the will of God we had not fallen into that corruption, wherinto
Adam carried all his posterity headlong with himself. Why then is he yet
angry? why does he lay to men's fault, and punish in them those things, that he
has necessarily imposed upon them by his own ordinance? For who may resist
his will? Thus flesh concludes, to excuse itself, and to lay the fault in
God. And it is no marvel, for when Adam was corrupted, after whose image we
are borne, he did the same thing in Paradise. But faith and the spirit judge
far otherwise.

1. We may here retort again that of the Apostle: O man, The judgment of
faith and the spirit,
who art thou that reasonest with God? Does the pot say to the potter, why have
thou made me thus?

2. All Christians confess, that for the fall of our first parents in
Paradise, sin and death not only temporal, but also much more eternal, have
justly run over all men. And against the prophanenes of the wicked, the Lord
himself will maintain sufficiently his own justice by making them to
condemn themselves. Romans 9.
Why contend we then of his injustice, seeing his justice is confessed?

3. Man doubtless fell through his own fault, and not Gods. The distinction of
will and permission.
Which thing some going about to expound, fly unto the distinction of will and
permission: as though mankind fell in Adam, God barely only permitting it,
and not after any sort also willing it, without whose will yet, not so much as
a sparrow falls upon the ground. The very word of permission I do not
reject, which the Scripture also uses: Matthew. 10.
but I find fault with the expounding of it: because God permits not
unwilling but willing, whatsoever he permits. After another manner therefore,
and that true and sound, does Augustine show, De Correp. and gra. cap. 11.
how man fell through his own fault, and not Gods: to wit, God, who made all
things very good, had given man a good will, How Adam fell through his own
fault, and not Gods.
wherein he had made him righteous, and after his own image: he had given him
also a help, whereby he might continue in that image, if he would. And that
he might be willing or unwilling hereto, he left it in his own power.
Therefore the cause was in man himself, and in the devil, that he was made
worse. In the devil, because he persuaded: in man, because he with a free will
consented, and so through freewill forsaking God, he found the just judgment
of God, that with his whole posterity, which as yet being in his loins wholly
had sinned, he should be damned.

Why God suffered Adam to fall. Enchir. cap. 37. De Correp, and gra. cap. 18.
And whereas it was not given unto him, to continue in that upright and faultles
state, doubtless therefore it was not given, because God would not: judging it
to be a better thing to do good out of evil, than to permit no evil to be,
as Augustine says. Which thing in another place notably expounding, he
writes: We profitably confess, what we rightly believe, that God, and the
Lord of all things, who created all things exceeding good, and foreknew that
evil would arise out of good, and knew that it more appertained to his
almighty goodness, even out of evil to do good, than not to suffer evil to
be; had so ordained the life of Angels and men, that therein he would show
first, what their freewill was able to do, and then what the benefit of his
grace, and the judgment of his justice could bring to pass. Of this thing see
also Tertullian lib. 2. contra Marcio. and 2. Sent. distinct. 23. why God
suffered man to be tempted, knowing that he would fall. And lib. 1. did. 45.
it is learnedly declared, how and how far forth Gods permission must be
referred to his will, according to that of Augustine: Enchir. cap. 95. M^^ke
how God wills good and evil things,
Nothing is done, unless the Almighty would have it to be done, either by
suffering it to be done, or by doing it himself. Where he includes all good
and evil things that are done, but with this difference, that he be
understood to will evil, by suffering it to be done: and to will good, by
doing it himself. For he suffers doubtless not unwilling, but willing, as the
same Augustine says. And de praedest. and gra. cap. 15. Enchir. ad (...). cap.
100.
he says, that all things are either done, the Lord assisting, or else
permitted, the Lord forsaking them, that yet we may know, Nothing is done
against the Lords will, and why.
that nothing at all is done against the Lords will. Certainly if any thing be
done, that God simply and every way will not have done, or else if that be not
done, that he wills to be done, the very beginning of our faith is in hazard,
wherein we confess that we believe in God almighty, and some God is brought
in out of Epicurus his school. Psalm. 105
For our God does in heaven and earth whatsoever pleases him.

Luther of this whole matter speaks thus: Lib. de ser. arbit. cap. 152.
To them that inquire why he permitted Adam to fall, when he was able to save
him, it is said; It is God, of whose will there is no cause nor reason. See how
he includes permission under his will. Whereupon also chap. 197. he writes:
Whether God suffer, or else incline a man, that suffering or inclining comes
not to pass, but by Gods will because the will of man cannot avoid the work
of almighty God.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the effects of Election.
HEreafter now we must entreat of the effects both of election and also of
reprobation. And because the predestination of Saints, which we call election,
Election what it is.
is a preparation of grace, that is, of glory hereafter, and of benefits in
this world, whereby as by means the elect are lead to the glory appointed for
them: both, the end, and the means, The effects of it be the end and means.
The end double. Rom 9.23. Ephesians. 1.7. The means be al benefits, and they be
of two sorts.
be effects of election. By the end we mean salvation and the glory of the
elect. For in respect of them, that is the end of election, albeit in respect
of God there is another, and higher, to wit, the demonstration of his rich
grace in the vessels of mercy to his glory. As for the means that be
subordinate to this end, they be all benefits whatsoever, whereby whosoever are
delivered, are most certainly set at liberty, as Augustine says, de bono
perseu. cap. 14. And these be of two sorts altogether: some are necessary to
the common salvation of all, Some necessary to the common salvation of all men
and infants. Some peculiar to men only.
men grown and infants: as for example, the merit of Christ, justification,
and regeneration by the holy Ghost. Some do follow men grown only, through
the want of discretion of good and evil in children, as is the knowledge of
Christ, a true confidence in him, the study of good works, perseverance in
temptations, and such like.

Four principal effects of election.
And although there be many and sundry effects of election: yet such as be
more special whereunto other commonly are reduced be four: to wit, Christ as
the Mediator with the whole work of his humiliation vocation effectual unto
Christ justification glorification. Hereof comes that truly golden chain of
the Apostle, Romans 8.
that whom God has predestined, them he calls: and whom he calls
(understand that calling that is according to Gods purpose) them also he
justifies: and whom he justifies, them he also glorifieth. And of Christ
without whom no man can be saved he straightway adds: What then shall we say
to these things? If God be for us, who can be against us* who has not spared
his own son, but given him for us all. Who shall lay any thing to the charge
of Gods elect? Who is he that can condemn? It is Christ, who is dead yea who
is risen again; who is at the right hand of God, who makes also requests for
us.

The 1. effect of election, Christ.
That we may therefore speak something of these beginning at the Mediator and
head of the elect, our Lord Jesus Christ: he surely is the only foundation of
our conjunction with God, and therefore of all our blessedness: for we had not
been capable of so great glory, whereunto we are elected, unless our heavenly
father turning his eyes from our unworthiness upon Christ, had made us
acceptable unto himself in that his beloved. Therefore Paul witnesses, that
we were elected in Christ before the foundations of the world were laid:
Ephesians. 1.
that is, (as himself interprets) that we were predestinate to be adopted
for sons, and to obtain other heavenly good things by and for Christ. In
which sense also he writes to Timothy: 2. Tim. 1.
that grace was given us in Christ Jesus before the worlds: ^s if he should say,
that God from eternity decreed to give us grace, whereby we are saved, but in
Christ, the fountain of grace.

Thus then let us determine and judge of a certainty, that God (when he
minded to have mercy upon some, that he might make known the riches of his
glory toward the vessels of mercy, and had need also of a fit Mediator
hereunto, who might by his death and satisfaction pacify the wrath of God, and
procure for them righteousness and life that was lost, and might defend and
maintain salvation obtained) ordained by his eternal and very fatherly
counsel, that his son (of like substance and eternity with the father) in
the fulness of time assuming truly man's nature, should dye for our sins, and
rising again from the dead, should reign at the right hand of God, and make
intercession for us. So Christ, as he is the Mediator, is the first and
principal effect of Gods predestination, 1. Pet. 1.
from whom all other things flow: as Peter also testifies of that immaculate
and undefiled Lamb, (by whose precious blood we are redeemed) that he was made
manifest in the last times for the faithful sake, being fore ordained before
the foundations of the world were laid. Notably Augustine: De praedest. sanct.
cap. 15.
He being one was predestined to be our head: we being many, were
predestinate to be his members.

Hereby also appears, The proper cause of Christ's sending and suffering, was
the salvation of the elect only.
that ye proper cause of the sending and suffering of the son of God, was the
salvation of the elect, and therefore as touching the purpose of God, and the
effect of the sending and suffering of Christ, that he was properly sent, and
suffered only for the elect. For unless he had been ordained a Mediator for
the elect, there was no cause why he should come in the flesh, much less, why
he should expose himself to the most shameful death of all.

An other effect of election as we said is vocation, Vocation, the second
effect of election. Romans 8. 2. Tim. 1.
whereby the predestination of a man now begins to be fulfilled and made
manifest. For whom he has predestined, he calls, says Paul. And
elsewhere: He has called us with an holy calling, not according to our works,
but according to his own purpose and grace, Vocation twofolde.
which was given us in Christ before the world. Where he plainly sets down
vocation to be the effect of the giving of grace from everlasting, that is, of
predestination. But that it may be understood, what and what manner of calling
that is, we must distinguish between external and internal calling. External
vocation twofold Natural. Psalm. 19.
Again the external is there natural or else supernatural. That is to be
understood of the former, which the Psalmist sings: The heavens declare the
glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy work. There is neither
speech nor language, Romans 2.
where their voice is not heard. And Paul writes to the Romans: that the
invisible things of God, to wit, both his eternal power, and also deity, are
perceived by the creation of the world, Acts 14.
to this end that men may be made without excuse. And elsewhere: he left not
himself without witness, by doing good, and giving from heaven fruitful
seasons.

This testimony of nature never cease to declare the goodness and power of
the Lord, but by perpetual preaching shows the majesty of the maker of it.
Supernatural.
Yet because our ears are deaf at the voice of nature, so that we do not
hear profitablie the things we be admonished of; ^he doctrine of the law and
the Gospel has been added, and ministers of the word and grace have been
instituted, by whom in season and out of season faith and repentance are
preached (as it falls out,) to all, elect and reprobates: seeing they are
mingled one with another, and cannot, nor ought to be severed by the judgment
of men: Matthew 22.
The Lord speaks of this calling, that many are called, but few are chosen.
For all obey not the Gospel, Esaias 53. and 65. Romans 10. The inward calling.
that hear it. For Esaias says: Lord who has beleeed our word? all the day
long I have stretched forth my hands to a rebellious and gain saying people.
Therefore the inward and effectual calling unto Christ, remains, which is
proper to the elect, To whom it belongs. Romans 8.
which Paul terms a calling according to the purpose of God. We know, (says
he) that to such as love God, all things work for the best even to such, as be
called according to And this calling is nothing else than a certain divine
inspiration of grace, What it is.
whereby a man is moved to assent unto, and obey the Gospel, that is, to
believe and repent. And this vocation is made partly by the word, How it is done
partly and principally When men are thus called. Matthew. ^0. August. de
praedest. sanc. cap. 3.
some at the eleventh hour of the day, as it pleases God to dispense in them
his grace. The description propounded, Augustine confirms, where he largely
handles this matter. That vocation (says he) according to the purpose of God,
belongs not to all that be called, Cap. 16.
but to the elect only. These God calls, to make them members of his son,
not by that calling, whereby they were called, that refused to come to the
marriage, but by that calling whereby a believer is made. Unto which calling who
so appertain, Cap. ^.
they be all taught of God, and none of them can say: I have believed, that I
might be thus called: for the mercy of God has prevented him, whereby he is
so called, that he might believe. For all that be taught of God, come to the
son, because they have heard and learned of the father. This school is far
removed from the understanding of the flesh, wherein the father is heard, and
teaches, that men may come to the son: neither deals he with the care of
the flesh, but of the heart.

Hereupon surely, when the Gospel is preached, Ibid. Aug. Mark this.
some believe not, yea gainesay it. For they that believe the preacher outwadly
speaking, within hear of the father and learn: but they that believe not,
outwardly hear, but within do not hear nor learn, that is, it is given to
them to believe, Ioh. 6.
and is not given to the other: because no man (says he) comes unto me
unless the father, that sent me, draw him. Which thing afterward is spoken
more plainly. No man comes unto me, To be drawn what it is.
except it be given him of the father. Therefore to be drawn of the father to
Christ, as also to hear and learn of the father, that a man may come to
Christ, is nothing else than to receive a gift of the father, whereby he may
believe in Christ. These are the words of Augustine the chief of the soundest
fathers.

But here we must beware of a fouresould error: Four errors. The first of the
Pelagians.
first of the Pelagians, whereby they aduauncing themselves against grace, and
setting their face against heaven, said: that a man has such strength, that as
of himself he is able to believe, and to work well so that the will of God be
preached, Aug. ad Quod vuli Deum, haer. 88. Faith and repentance are wrought in
men by God. Ioh. 6.
and hereto only he is helped of God by the law and the doctrine of the Gospel,
that he may learn what things he ought to do and hope for. So according to
their opinion, that should only be the calling of God, which is outwardly made
by the word. As though he did discern such as hear the Gospel from such as
bear not, and not rather the believers from such as believe not, who said: No
man comes unto me, unless it be given him of the father. And in many places
the Scripture teaches, that faith and conversion, and what good work soever
we have, flow from God. Lament. 5.
Turn us unto thee O Lord and we shall be turned, says Jeremy. Ierem. 31.
Eze. 36.
And it is promised in the Prophets, that the time shall come, when God will
write his law in their hearts, and give them a new heart, a fleshy heart and
take away their stony: that he will put a new spirit and the fear of him in
their hearts, and make us to walk in his precepts. In the Gospel also the
Lord speaking of the fruit of righteousness, testifies, that we be able to do
nothing without him. Ioh. 15.
Again, ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you and I have appointed you
to bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain. 1. Cor. 4.
And Paul says: what have thou* that thou have not received? If thou have
received, why do thou boast, as though thou had not received? And
expressly the same man affirms that repentance is the gift of God. 2. Tim.
2. Gal. 5. Ephesians 5.
As he also reckons faith, and all good works to be the fruits of the
spirit. He testifies also that we are created in Christ Jesus unto good
works, which God has prepared that we should be exercised in them. Ephesians. 1.
And to take away all doubt, he plainly writes, that we are elected before
the foundations of the world were laid, that we should be holy and blameles.
Therefore also the Church prays, both for Infidels and such as resist the
doctrine of the Gospel, that they may be converted unto God: and also for the
faithful, that they may grow in says, and persevere therein. For the things
that he has commanded to be done, would not be requested of God, except it
were his free gift, that they were done.

The 2. error of the Semipelagians.
Other men, albeit they confess that good works and faith also, according to
the growth of it, be of God, yet they will have the beginning of faith to come
of us: as if faith were not given us of God, but only increased of him in us,
by the merit of our belief, or of our good will: and so the good will of a man
should be the cause of Gods grace, and not grace the cause of our will.

This opinion Prosper and Hilarie attribute to the Semipelagians, Epist. ad
Aug. Tom. 7.
or the relics (as they call them) of the Pelagian heresy. And Augustine
himself was sometime in this error, as when he says: I hat we believe, it is
ours; but that we do good, Expos. ad Romans
it is his, who gives to the faithful the holy Ghost. And a little after. To
believe, and to be willing is ours, but to give to the believers, and willers
power to work well by the holy Ghost, that is Gods. But he acknowledged
afterward this error, Lib. 1. cap. 23. and passim lib. de praedest. sanct.
and amended it in his retractions, and elsewhere, where he shows at large,
that not only faith increased, but also begun in us, is Gods gift, the grace
of the caller preventing our will, that we may be willing, according to the
sayings: who first gave to him, and he shall recompense him? because of him,
Romans 1^. Paul 1.
and through him, and in him are all things. To you it is given not only to
believe in him, but also to suffer for his sake. He says simply: to believe,
and not more perfectly to believe. Romans 12.
Like as yt is to the To. God has distributed to every one a measure of faith.
Also to the Ephe. Ye are saved by grace through faith, Ephesians. 2.
and this is not of your selves, it is the gift of God: that is eue^ that which
I said through faith, is not of our selves, but is the gift of God. The same
Apostle says: we are not fit to think any thing, 2. Cor. 3.
as of our selves, then not so much as to believe, because to believe is
nothing else, than to think with assente. To believe what it is,
Also chap. 4. of the 1. Epistle: What have thou that thou have not received?
and if thou have received, why do thou brag, Phil. 2.
as though thou had not received? Expressly also it is said of the will*
that God works in us, both to will and to perform of his good will his
doubtless, and not ours. Therefore it remains firm, that the will is
prevented of God, and that from him it is in ^^^led into us, that we do
believe.

brings faith, at the least the beginning of it, that he may be capable of
grace and the gifts of God. Mayor is particular, seeing God gives some things
even to them that pray not, as the beginning of faith: other things, no
otherwise than by prayer. And thus Augustine answers this doubt, chap. 16. de
bono perseu. and alijs locis.

The 2. error, of the Papists works of preparation.
Thirdly, there be invented of certain men, works I know not what, morally
good, whereby a man before faith and repentance prepares himself to grace,
yea, deserves grace de congruo of conueniencie, as they speak. And that would
they prove by the example of Cornelius, who was endued with the knowledge of
Christ, while the Lord respected his prayers and alms. By these men's opinion
that wicked sentence is maintained, Aug. de praedest. sanct. cap 2. and con. 2.
ep. Pelag. lib. 1. cap. 19.
which Pelagius himself in his episcopal judgment in Palestine condemned,
albeit with an hypocritical heart, to wit, that the grace of God is given
according to our deserts. Beside, when the Apostle says: who has severed
thee? What have thou that thou have not received? by these men's opinion I may
say: my work does sever me, my endeavor, Ephe 2. Heb. 11.
and merit. What? that the scripture teaches that we are all dead in offenses
and sins before faith, and that without this it is impossible that we or our
works should please God. Tell me I pray, what good will had Paul, and not
rather a great wicked will, that breathing forth slaughter, went forward
destroying Christians in the horrible blindness of his mind? By what merits
of his will, by what preparation of works did God convert him from these evils
to faith? In like manner how many enemies of Christ daily are drawn of a
sudden by the secert grace of God to Christ? Lastly the Apostle cries: Tit.
3.
Not through the works of righteousness, which we have done, but according to
his mercy he has saved us. Wherefore away with such preparations, whereby men
are supposed to dispose themselves for grace, that they may be ingrafted into
Christ. De praede. sanct. cap. 6.
Augustine plainly recites this error, reproving the common talk of men,
saying, This or that man therefore deserved to believe, because he was good,
before he believed. As for the example of Cornelius he there answers, that
he was not wholly void of faith. The faith of Cornelius.
For how should he call upon him, in whom he did not believe? How were his
prayers and alms without faith acceptable before God? yet afterward by Peter's
ministry he believed in Christ that now he might know the son of God
incarnate, and might receive the sacrament of regeneration.

The last error about vocation, whereof we speak, The 4. error, making
effectual calling to be in man's power and will.
is the error of certain men that extenuate the effecacie of it, as though the
effect thereof were in the power of a man, that if he will not, God should call
in vain. Yea if a man will not, and goes on to resist grace that is offered
him, it is most certain, that he is not as yet partaker of this calling. Ioh.
6.
For Christ witnesses that this calling is most effectual: Every one that has
heard and learned of the father, comes unto me. De praedest. sanct. cap. 8.
They that hear and learn of God, do come, but they that come not when they
are called, have neither heard nor learned of God.
Which words Augustine considering, says, If every one that has heard of the
father, and has learned, comes, truly every one, that does not come, has
neither heard nor learned. For if he had heard and learned, he would come. For
not any one has heard and learned that comes not: but every one (as says
the truth) who has heard and learned, comes. This grace therefore which of
the divine bountifulnes is secretly given to the hearts of men, is refused of
no hard heart: For therefore it is given that the hardness of the heart might
first of all be taken away, according to the saying: I will take from you a
stony heart, and give you a fleshly. Look upon the same Augustine ad Simpl.
li. 1. quaest. 2. The effect of Gods mercy (says he) cannot be in man's power
that he should in vain show mercy if man will not: Man's will cannot resist
Gods call, nor make his mercy in vain.
because if he please to have mercy on the^ that resist him, he is able so to
call them, as they may most fitly be moved and may understand, and so follow
him. For albeit he calls many, yet he has mercy on them, whom he so calls,
as it is fittest for the^ to be called, that they may follow, neither has he
mercy on any in vain. Therefore they are elected, who are so called, that
they refuse not him that calls them: the rest, are not elected, because they
do not follow, although they be called. The same doctrine of the efficacy of
this calling Luther notably confirms lib. de sermon. arbit. cap. 45.

Some obey their calling because God makes them willing. Aug cant. dua^ epist.
Pelag. cap. 19.
No man surely can believe, but he is willing thereto; for how should a man
believe against his will? But he makes him willing of an vnwiller, who when
he dra^eth us, we come to Christ. Therefore the elect are sundri ways drawn
to be willing, by him who knows inwardly to work in the very hearts of men
not that men should believe against their will (which cannot be, but that of
unwilling persons they might be made willing.

Aug. de praedest. sa^nct. cap. 8. and 9.
But why does he not so draw all? Therefore be unwilling to judge of this
thing, if thou will not err, says Augustine in a place upon Saint John.

CHAP. XV. Other effects of election, i. Justification and glofication: where
also is entreated of the perseverance of the Elect.
The 3. effect of election. Justification.
But of vocation enough. I come to the third principal effect of election, to
wit, Justification. For by the testimony of Paul, Whom he calls, them he
also justifies. And how necessary this benefit is to the elect for the
obtaining of their appointed end of life and heavenly glory, it is manifest to
every one. For seeing we are all under sin, and for sin are guilty of
wrath, and eternal damnation; we cannot see the kingdom of heaven, unless we
be absolved from sins, What it is to be justified.
and accounted just before God, by the free forgiveness of them. And this is
nothing else, than to be justified as the word is here taken. So Paul Romans 4.
defines justification, by the imputation of righteonsnesse: And this he
teaches to consist in the forgiveness of sins, alleging hereunto the
testimony of David, Psalm 32. Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven,
and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man, to whom the Lord imputes not
sin. Justification diversely taken in Scripture.
Otherwise diversely the word Justification is taken in the scriptures. For one
while it signifies the acknowledging and declaring of one as that God is said
to be justified in his sayings: Psalm. 58. Luke 6. verse. 29. and 39.
And Luke shows that the people, when they heard Christ, justified God. And
Christ says, that wisdom is justified of her children. Another while it
signifies to be endued with inherent righteousness, by the infusion of new
qualities, and by good works. As Apoc. 22. it is written: He that hurts, let
him hurt as yet, and he that is just, let him be justified as yet. Thirdly, by
the propriety of the Hebrewe tongue, the judicial signification as I may say
of the word is most usual in the sacred Scriptures, namely, that to be
justified, is to be absolved from guiltines, the word being taken relatiuely,
and not noting any quality. So it is used Proverb 17. verse. 15. Isa. 5.23* And
this signification agrees with our business in hand, seeing the question is
of the justification of a sinful man before God. Certainly therefore are we
justified of him, when we, that are in our selves guilty of hell before the
judgment seat of God, are nevertheless by his grace discharged from all
guiltines, so that the adversary cannot any more condemn: seeing he reputeth
us freely just through redemption in Christ Jesus, by faith in his blood, and
not of works.

To him that is justified, the holy Ghost is given to renew his heart, and to
stir him up to good works
And albeit in the justification of a wicked man, the holy Ghost is withal
freely given, to renew the heart, and to infuse new qualities, whereby we are
stirred up to the study of good works: yet by this newnes, the guiltines of
former sins is not blotted out, neither are we accepted then for our works;
but it is needful, that first we be accepted, that our works being imperfect
and defiled, may be able to please him. But to handle these things more
specially, it is not now material. Furthermore this must be observed, that
the Apostle teaches, Justification proper to the elect.
that this gift of free justification arises of predestination, and he makes
it proper to the elect, after they have bin partakers of a divine vocation. For
he says: Whom he has predestinate, he has called: and whom he has called,
them he has also justified. He says not (as the spirit of error imagines)
that all, reprobates as well as elect, called, and not called, how many soever
are of Adam borne sinners, are justified also in Christ, and received into
grace, being freed from all sin, and the judgment of God. And that no doubt
may remain, explaining himself, Paul adds: What shall we say then to these
things? If God be for us, who can be against us? who spared not his own son,
but gave him for us all. Who shall accuse the elect of God? It is God that
justifies, who shall condemn? to wit, Gods elect. It is Christ who is dead,
yea who is also risen again. We hear of the elect, that justification is
theirs: that Christ for all them was delivered to death. Their opinion also is
withal re^elled, that say, that some even of the number of the reprobates are
justified, but that reconciliation is in them made frustrate. Augustine better
agrees with the meaning of the Apostles saying: Contra Julian. lib. 5. cap. 3.
Those that are not in the number of the predestinate, God brings none of them
to saving and spiritual repentance, whereby a man is reconciled to God in
Christ. The like words are in the same author in Soliloquijs, cap. 28.

The fourth effect of election, glorification.
The fourth effect of predestination of the elect follows, to wit,
glorification. For whom he calls and justifies, them he also glorifieth,
says the Apostle. For he uses verbes of the preter tense for the present
tense, according to the Hebrews manner of speaking. And glorification
signifies the kingdom of the Saints in the heavenly life and withal
comprehends or presupposes the gift of perseverance unto the end, whereof it
is said: He that continues to the end, shall be saved. Matthew. 10.
Like hereto are the promises, Ioh. 6. Whatsoever the father gives me, comes
unto me: and him that comes unto me, I will not cast forth. And straightway:
This is the will of him that sent me; that whatsoever he has given me, thereof
I should lose nothing, but that I should raise it up in the last day. Again,
No man comes unto me, except the father draw him. And I will raise him up at
the last day. The demonstration is plain:

Whosoever by the drawing of the father comes unto Christ, he shall be raised
up by him unto the resurrection of life.

But all come, who are given to Christ, that is, are predestinate in him.

Therefore all they shall be raised up by him unto the resurrection of life,
that is, they shall be glorified.

And this perseverance, which I mentioned, is, Perseverance of the Saints what
it is. Romans 8.35.
not to be overcome with temptations, and (as Paul describes it at large)
neither by oppression, nor anguish, nor any other creature to be separated
from the love of God, but in all things to be more than a conqueror, through
him that has loved us. And this is to be noted in this place concerning that
great benefit of perseverance, both that all the elect have it: and also that
they have it not of themselves, but from another, to wit, from the bountifulnes
of Gods grace. As for the former, the testimonies are plain. Matthew. 24.24.
Romans 8.35. Also 2. Tim. 2. The elect have it. Matthew. 10.
The foundation of God stands sure. Furthermore, when the holy Ghost
testifies that salvation is laid up for such as persevere, and the crown of
life for them that overcome: Apoc. 2. 2. Tim. 4.8.1^. Ioh. 17. Luke 22. Aug. de
Cor. and gra. cap. 8.
they necessarily persevere, that are elected to reign with Christ. Thirdly,
Christ universally prayed for his elect, and was heard, no less than it is
read that he prayed for Peter, that his faith should not fail. Wherein what
did he else pray for, but that he might have in faith a most free, strong,
unconquerable, and perseuering will? Seeing therefore Christ prays for the
elect, that their faith fail not, it shall continue doubtless unto the end,
neither shall the end of this life find it otherwise than abiding: Aug. de
Cor. and gr. cap. 11. and 12 It is Gods gift, proved by three reasons.
as by Peter's example Augustine gathers.

And now that perseverance is Gods gift, both the feeling

Aug. de bono pers. cap. 2.
Secondly, the testimonies hereof are most evident in the writings of the
Prophets and Evangelists. Ierem. 32. says the Lord, I will put my fear in
their hearts, that they may not depart from me. Which thing what is it else,
than, such and so great the fear of me shall be, that I will put in their
hearts, that they shall cleave unto me continually? Hos. 2. I will marry thee
unto my self for ever in righteousness and faith etc. And he has married
all the true believers unto himself. Ioh. 10. I give to my sheep eternal
life, neither shall they perish for ever, and no man shall take them out of my
hand. My father who gave them me, is greater than all. Phil. 1. He that has
begun in you a good work, will accomplish it unto the end.

Thirdly, all the Saints ask perseverance of God in prayer, and in the whole
Lords prayer almost, when the Saints use it, no other thing welneere is
understood to be requested than perseverance, specially when we say, Lead us
not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. And perseverance should be in
vain desired of God, if he gave it not. For it is a mere mockery, to ask
that of God that thou think he does not give, but that it is without his
gift in the power of man. This is Augustines reason, de bono perseu. cap. 2.

Against perseverance, the first objection. 2. Tim. 1. and 4.
many fall away from the faith and make shipwreck thereof. Thus they reason:
All believers are elect, because as Paul says, faith is proper to the elect.
But some believers do fall away. Therefore some elect do fall away. What
believers fall away.
the first proposition is only true of a justifying and saving faith. And that
being settled on the foundation, suffers no man to perish. But many fall away
from an historical and temporary faith, as we call it: while that after they
have embraced the Gospel, they fall away again, and clean to the doctrines
of devils under the pretense of Christian profession. Thus Chrysostom and
Theophylact do expound the testimonies of Paul.



This instance is answered by observing the doubtful signification of the
word, whereof I gave warning at the first: to wit, Elect taken two ways.
that by elect sometime strictly are meant such as be foreordained to eternal
life: sometime generally, whosoever belong by outward calling to the people of
God. For who can deny them to be elect, whom we see profess with us the same
faith and christian conversion? They be plainly called and counted elect in
the judgment of charity, De Cor. and gr. cap 7.
of those that know not what they shall be, says Augustine, and not of him
that knows them to be without perseverance, which leads the elect to a
blessed life. Hereupon John one of the number of the predestinate, who had
sucked this secret out of the Lords breast, pronounces of such: 1. Ioh. 2.
They went out from us, but they were not of us: for if they had been of us,
they had surely continued. What is this I pray you, they were not of us? were
not both created of God? both borne of Adam? were not both called, and become
members of the Church by receiving of the Sacraments? These things are true,
and in respect of all these, they were of us. De bono pers. cap. 3. Why some
fall away.
Yet in respect of another difference they were not of us, because they were
not called according to the purpose of God: they were not in Christ elected
before the creation of the world: they had not obtained an inheritance in him:
Why backsliders are among the godly,
they were not predestinate according to the purpose of him who works all
things. For if they had bin in this state, they had bin of them, and without
doubt had continued with them. But therefore God mixeth in the number of his
Saints some that be not true Saints, nor shall continue, ^ Cor. 10.
least we should be secure. For security is not expedient in the temptation of
this life for the elect: but he that seems to stand let him beware lest he
fall.

Further, unto the assumption of the reason we answer, that even the true
believers and godly, The faithful and elect fall sometime grievously, but they
^^^e again.
and consequently the elect grievously sometime fall from their profession and
Christian life. But partly their faith in their change i^ rather in a deep
sleep, than quenched wholly by such falls: partly it is repaired before they
die, and the sin which they had committed being forgiven, perseverance unto the
end is imputed unto them, as the examples of David and Peter declare. And this
is it that the Psalmist sings: Psalm 37.
The righteous if he fall, shall not be beaten down, because the Lord
vpholdeth his hand.

Apoc. 3. 1. Cor. 10.
Hold that thou have, least another take thy crown. He that seems to stand,
let him take heed least he fall. Romans 11.
Art thou ingrafted into the people of God? fear, for if thou continue not,
thou shall also be cut off. These and such like seem to leave doubtfully the
perseverance of them, to who^ they be spoken. And they be spoken to all, even
to the elect and godly.

Two causes why ye church is to take heed least it fall.
I answer, that such exhortations are usual in the sacred Scriptures, both

CHAP. XVI. Of the effects of Reprobation.
But as the effect of election is not only that grace, whereby we are here
justified, and furthered to live well and continue in goodness, but also whereby
we shall be hereafter glorified: So also the effect of Gods reprobation,
whereby from everlasting he by not electing has reprobated some, Two effects
of reprobation, forsaking or hardening to this life, and damnation in the ^^^e
to come. Lib. 1. ad Moni^^um, cir^a. f^^^m.
is considered in two respects: the first, what cleaves unto the reprobates in
this life: the other, what shall follow and overtake them in the world to come.
And these are, eternal damnation and forsaking, which is also called
hardening, and blinding, where with the just God reuengeth the unjust. Hereupon
says Pulgentius: Destruction is well rendered of God unto evil men, who now
are justly forsaken, and hereafter shall be justly tormented. For in such men
God begins his judgment by desertion or forsaking them, and perfectly
ends it by tormenting them.

But let us hear what the Scriptures witness of them. Matthew. 25. is
manifestly showed, Matthew. 25
that God has not only prepared a kingdom, where the good shall rejoice, but
also eternal fire, where the evil shall be tormented. For he will say to the
good, Come ye blessed of my father possess the kingdom prepared for you from
everlasting: and to the wicked, Go ye cursed into eternal fire, which is
prepared for the devil and his angels. And chap. 10. of Matthew. Chap. 10.
Fear not them that kill the body, but cannot kill the soul: but rather
fear him, who is able to destroy the body and soul in hell. 2. Pet. 2. 2.
Pet. 2.
The Lord knows to deliver the godly out of temptation, and to reserve the
unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished. If therefore the damnation of
hell be the work of God, he has also foreknowne, that is predestined from
everlasting them, Fulgent. lib. 1. and 2. ad Mo^^^.
upon whom he will inflict the same. For his predestination is the preparation
of his works, which in his eternal decree he did foreknow that he would
either in mercy or justice bring to pass.

Apoc. 20. Apoc. 20.
The books were opened and judgment was given of every one according to their
works, and he that was not found written in the book of life, was cast into
the lake of fire. What, that the reprobates are called vessels of wrath and
prepared for destruction? For to be a vessel of wrath, as Augustine
expounds, is, Epist. 10^.
for a man to be appointed to be punished for sins, What a vessel of wrath
is.
who was created for the benefit of nature. And Fulgentius says: Hereunto God
formed the vessels of wrath, whereunto he predestined them, that is, not to
sin, but to destruction for sin. Therefore the destruction of them that
perish, is the work of God reprobating them, and therefore it is the effect of
reprobation.

Thy perdition is of thy self O Israel, but only in me is thy help.

The reward of sin is death: but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Those sayings also are wont to be objected: God made not death. Wisd 1. and.
2. Eze. 18.
Through the envy of the devil death came into the world. Again, I will not
the death of him that dies, etc.

But here with a deaf ear we must not forget, what elsewhere we read,
Eccles. 11. Wisd 16. Deuteronomy. 32.
that death and life, good and evil come of God. Which show of contrariety to
take away, we must understand, that death as well as life may be understood
not two only, but also three manner of ways. For in the first man God created
both the soul and flesh also immortal. But while man sinned, Three deaths, of
the soul, body, and hell.
the soul dyed, and that death of the soul, to wit sin, is the beginning
and cause of another double death, corporal and infernal. The sacred
Scriptures call it the first and second death. Therefore God made not the death
of the soul, because he made not sin: but the devil is the author of it by
suggesting of sin: and by consequence he is the author also of the other
kinds of death, which arise from sin, to wit, in respect of the vehement
stirring up of it, and not that he has power to punish as God has. Augustine
distinctly says: Cont. Julian. lib. 7. cap. 7.
The devil, the deceiuer of man is the cause of death, which God inflicted,
not as the first author, but as the punisher of sin.

Some understand the place of the Prophet Ezechiel of that death of the soul,
as Fulgentius: I will not the death of a sinner.
others refer it to the punishment of sin, using the distinction of the
will of God, hidden and revealed. So Luther de ser. arbit. cap. 109. He will
not the death of a sinner, to wit, by his word, while by the word of salvation
he comes to all, and so he will have all men to be saved. But he wills the
same by his unsearchable will Which will (says he in the same book chap.
107.) is not to be searched into, but with reverence to be a^ored, as the
highest secret of Gods majesty. Again, He will not the death of him that
dies simply, and as it brings destruction, but as it is a punishment: for
the Lord delights not in the perdition of the living, Wis^. 1.13.
as it is written. But he is the punisher of sinners.

Now as touching the matter of forsaking, blinding, Of forsaking, hardening,
and blinding. Romans 9. and 11.
and hardening, I will produce a few testimonies of many. We read in the
sacred Scriptures: He has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he
hardens. The elect have obtained it, but the rest were hardened, as it is
written: God has given them the spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not
see, and cares that they should not hear. See the prophecy of Esaias 29. verse.
10. and chap. 6. Go and say to the children of Israel: In hearing ye shall
hear, and shall not understand: and seeing ye shall see and shall not
perceive: harden the hearts of this people, and make their heirs heavy, and
smeere over their eyes, least they should see with their eyes, and hear with
their ears, and understand with their hearts, and so be converted, and I
should heal them. Which prophecy S. John alleging, affirms, Ioh. 12.
that the Jews believed not in the Lord, albeit they had seen many signs,
neither that they could believe, because he had blinded their eyes, and
hardened their hearts. To the same unbelieving Jews the Lord said: Ioh 10.
Ye do not believe, for ye are not of my sheep. My sheep hear my voice, and
I know them, and they follow me. Again to his disciples: Matthew. 13.
To you (says he) it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven:
but to others it is not given: therefore in parables I speak unto them.

Neither came it to pass without cause, that in so many hundred years before
the coming of Christ, Acts 14.
no light of saving doctrine was revealed to the Gentiles: but as Paul
witnesses, the living God that made heaven and earth, passing over the former
ages, suffered all nations to walk in their own ways, until the coming of
the time of grace he was found of them, that sought him not. And in Israel that
was fulfilled that the Prophet says: Esaias 65.
All the day long I have stretched out my hands unto a rebellious and
gainsaying people.

By these things it is evident, that they that were not ordained to life, are
also rejected from the grace of faith and conversion, and are left in their
own obstinacy: while they either be deprived of the means to hear the
word, or else if they do hear it, are not so called, as that they are become
fit to follow it. We speak now of total blinding (as I may so call it) which
has joined with it final impenitencie: and not of every particular one, which
happens to the predestinate also, whom God now and then before and after
their conversion suffers to fall into sins, yet so, as all things work unto
their salvation.

The use of these things is, that we may understand what great thanks are to
be given to God for his mercy, Aug. ad Simpl. lib. 1. q. 2. The use of all.
who shows in the punishment of some, what he freely bestows upon others.

CHAP. XVII. How God is said to harden and blind.
IT remains now that we consider, how blinding and hardening of the ungodly
is attributed unto God. For unless this be rightly understood, God shall seem
to be accused of injustice, and contrariwise sinners excused, according to the
saying: Why is he yet angry? for who shall resist his will? Some, to avoid
these rocks, do expound, Diverse opinions of Gods hardening a man.
that God hardens by permitting only, and all seem not to take this
permission after one sort: some refer it to the long suffering, and lenity
of God, so that he is said to harden when he does not forthwith chasten
sinners: and to have mercy, when by and by he inuiteth them to repentance by
afflictions. Others say, that permission here is the privation of grace, so
that to harden is all one with, not to soften by grace.

The former exposition is referred of Erasmus to Origene and Hierome. Collat.
de lib. arbit. De ser. arbit. ca. 139. and seq.
But it is confuted by Luther by most strong reasons. For that overmuch
liberty of interpreting, tends to confound all things by a new and unheard
of Grammar: as when God says, I will hard the heart of Pharao, The first
opinion confuted as false.
changeing the persons, a man should take it, Pharao hardens him self by my
lenity. God hardens our heart, that is, we harden our selves, while God
deferreth punishment. So, that God shows mercy, does not signify, to give
grace, to forgive sins, to justify, or to deliver from evils: but contrarily
it signifies to punish, and to chastise. This is nothing else than of mercy
to make wrath, of wrath mercy, by an altogether cross kind of speech. And if
then God be said to harden, when he does good, and forbeareth; and to have
mercy, when he afflicts and chastises, then God shall not be said to have
hardened Pharao, but contrariwise to have had mercy on him. For what omitted
he in afflicting, chastening, and calling Pharao to repentance? These and many
other things, says Luther in that place.

Augustine also reproves Julian the Pelagian of an error for this, Lib. 5.
cap. 3.
that he thought that hardening pertained only unto Gods patience, and not to
his power, as God did not harden, but by showing his patient goodness, when
evils be done. What is it (says he) that we daily say: Lead us not into
tempration? but that we be not delivered over unto our lusts? Do we happily
ask this of God, that his goodness be not patient toward us? What man in his
right wits so means? Because so we should not call for his mercy, but
rather provoke his anger.

The second opinion better, but imperfect.
Their judgment is somewhat fuller, who albeit they also make mention of
permission in this matter, yet they take hardening for the withdrawing and
depriving of grace. And this is it that is read in Augustine: De pr^^l. and
gra^ca. 4. Epist. 1^5. Lib. 1. cap 2.
God is said to harden, to blind, to turn away him whom he will not
soften, inlighten, and call. Neither does God harden, by bestowing malice, but
in not bestowing mercy. Also to Simplician, Gods hardening is, that he is
unwitting to show mercy, so that he gives not any thing to a man to make him
worse, but only gives him nothing to make him better. And by and by; he
bestows not upon some sinners his mercy to justify them, and therefore he
is said to harden some sinners, because he has not mercy on them and not
because he compels them to sin. In this sense Lombard also and Aquinas
speak of induration o^ hardening. Lom. lib. 1. did. 4. c. 4. q. ^. 2. q. 29.
God moves men's hearts to good and evil, but diversely, yet always justly.


Albeit this exposition be tolerable, yet the same Aquinas in his exposition
upon the 9. to the Romans upon the saying, he hardens whom he well: freely
confesses, that something more must be understood herein: and he adds, that
men are moved of God to good or evil by a certain inward motion, but
diuersely. For a man is stirred up to good of God, directly, and of him self,
as of the author of goodness: but unto evil by occasion. Here with may those
things be compared, that Luther has in his book of servile free will cap.
150. and 154. and Brentius upon 1. Sa. 2. of Elies sons writes thus:
Brentius.
To the intent they might be punished worthily according to their deserts, the
Lord by his secret power brought it to pass, that they should not repent at
their fathers admonition, and should perish: to wit, inwardly working what
outwardly he forbids by his word. And this is not to be the author or cause
of maliciousnes, but it is to inflict just punishment for the same. These
things he.

De gra. and lib. ar^. cap. 1.
But especially Augustine at large proves and declares, that God works as
pleases him even in the hearts of wicked men, by rendering unto them according
to their deserts. So God (says he) wrought in the heart of Amasia, 2. King 14.
(with whom doubtless God was justly angry for his Idolatry) that he should
not hear good counsel, but contemning it, should go to war, where with his
whole army he might be destroyed. And in the Psalms it is said of the
Egiptians, what God did unto them. Psalm. 105.
He turned their hearts, that they hated his people, and dealt deceitefully
with his servants.

Of these and such like places of the holy Scripture he afterward concludes,
God works in m^ns hearts, to bow their wills to good or evil.
that God works in the hearts of men to bow their wills, whither soever it
pleases him, either to good of his mercy, or to evil according to their
deserts, in his judgment doubtless, sometime manifest, sometime hidden, but
always just. In like manner against Julian: Lib. 5 cap. 3.
Many things (says he) we could rehearse, whereby it might plainly appear,
that by the secret judgment of God the heart is made perverse, God punishes
sin with sin.
that a man hears not the truth, and thereupon sins for a punishment of
some former sin. And among other things these he mentions: Romans 1. Therefore,
(that is for a recompense of their error) God gave them up into shameful
affections, and into a rebate mind, to do the things that were not convenient,
being full of all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, coueteousnes, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 2. Because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be
saved, God sent unto them a strong force of error that they might believe a
lie. Isa. 19. God has cast among them the spirit of error, and they have
seduced Egypt. And chapter. 63. why have thou made us O Lord to err from thy
ways? have thou hardened our hearts, that we should not fear thee? 1. King.
22. By Gods commandment, and in his judgment a lying spirit went forth to
seduce Achab by the false Prophets. He does these things after a wonderful and
unspeakable manner, Augustine.
(says Augustine) who knows how to work his just judgments, not only in
the bodies, but also in the hearts of men: who makes not evil wills, but uses
them, as he will, seeing he cannot will any thing unjustly. Cypr ser. de ^rat.
dom. in 5 petit.
Cyprian also upon the petition. Lead us not into temptation, or as he reads:
Suffer us not to be lead etc. writes, that the adversary can do nothing
against us, unless God before has permitted him, The devil has power against
us in two respects.
and thence is power given him: and that that evil one has power against us
in two respects: either to punishment, when we have sinned, or else to glory,
when we are tried. Which thing in so many words welneere our Augustine
expresses: De sermon. Dom. in monte lib. 2.
Temptations (says he) are made by Satan, not by his authority, but by Gods
sufferance, either to punish men for their sins, or else to prove and exercise
them of Gods mercy.

Therefore by all these proofs a man may after a sort perceive, Gods
hardening is not only permission, but also the operation of his wrath.
that hardening, when in the Scriptures it is attributed to God, signifies not
only permission, but also the operation of Gods wrath: for, (that I may say
nothing of outward things, which make to the induration of reprobates,) the
devil himself, who works mightily in the children of disobedience, is so in
the power of God, that he does nothing but at his commandment. God is the
revenger, and not the author of sin.
And this is diligently to be marked, that, whether by forsaking, or by any
other way that man can show or not show, God, who is most highly good, and
unspeakably just, does exercise such kind of judgments, he is not the author,
but the revenger of crimes, while he punishes one sin with another. For we
seek for the merit of mercy (says Augustine) and we find it not, Ad Sixtum.
Epist. 105.
because there is none; least grace should be made of none effect, if it be
not given freely, but rendered for deserts. But we seek for the merit of
hardening, and we find it. For, for good cause the whole lump of sin is
condemned from the first beginning of it: Romans 5.
and as age increases, so wickedness thereupon grows through a man's own
will, and thereupon also damnation. Therefore the Scriptures rehearse
delivering up into evil lusts, and efficacy of error and such like, as the
scourges of Gods wrath, and the just recompense of reward.

But God works (thou say) hardness of heart. But hardness of heart is sin:
for what is it else, than to resist the commandment of God as Stephen cast the
Jews in the teeth? Therefore God works sin.

Contra Iul. pel. lib. 5. cap. 3.
in the Minor there is a fallacy of the accident. For (as Aug. teaches,) the
hardness of heart, as many other things, may be considered three manner of
ways: to wit, as it is sin: as it is the punishment of former sins: Hardness
of heart taken three ways.
and as it is the cause of sins following, namely, when through the error of
a blind heart some evil is committed. And these diverse respects concur
accidentally in one and the same work. Therefore as far forth as hardness
(whereof we speak) is a sin, it is the work of man and the devil: and it is
Gods work no otherwise than as it is apunishment. For he is the author of
every punishment of sin whatsoever it be: because every punishment of sin, as
it is such, is good, because it is just. But God is not the author of sin,
because it is evil. And God is exceeding good and just, and cannot be the
author of an evil and unjust thing, as it is written: Thou art a God that have
no pleasure in wickedness. Psalm. 5. Lib. 5. Stromat.
And Clemens Alexandrinus cites out of the Poet: Jupiter who reigns over the
Gods, and beholds all things, is not the cause of evils to mortal men.

Hereupon depends an answer to an other objection also: That if God hardens
men, they that sin, They that be hardened, have no defense for it, and that for
two causes.
seem to be made excusable. For who may resist his will? that God hardened
him, Exodus 8. Wisd. 2.
but also that he hardened his own heart. And the wiseman witnesses, that the
wicked err, because their own malice blinds them. For through malice they
shut their own eyes, least they should see, and stop their ears, least they
should hear, like the deaf adder that stops her ear, Psalm. 58.
least she should hear the voice of the charmer.

CHAP. XVIII. Whether God has predestined the infidelity of the reprobates,
and sins in general.
ANd these things of the effects of reprobation. But here further the question
was wont to be asked, i. Whethetr reprobates, as they are said to be
predestined to suffer damnation for sins, so also be predestined to sins
themselves, infidelity and others, whereby they draw damnation upon
themselves, or no? And generally, whether God predestined any man to sin?
Some men surely fear not to avouch it, as not repugnant unto the truth,
Anselme. lib. de Concord. gra. and lib. ^ib.
nor inconvenient. Of which opinion is Anselme, Bishop of Canterbury, who was
famous in the year 1060. for he boldly affirms, that there is a
predestination not only of good things, but may be said also to be of evil
things after a sort because evil things are not done, unless God do permit
them. Whereupon (says he) after this sort it is not inconvenient, that God
has predestined evil things, while he corrects not evil men, and their
evil works: but he is said more specially to foreknowe and predestinate good
things, because he makes them both to be, and to be good: but in evil things
he causes only that they essentially be, and not that they be evil.

Fulgent. lib. 1. ad Mon.
Contrariwise, Fulgentius in his first book to Monimus, (where plentifully, and
of purpose he handles this question) defines, Sins are foreknowne, but not
predestinate to be done, yet punishment for ^^^e, is predestinate of God.
that the good and righteous God foreknew surely the sins of men, (because
nothing that was to come, could be hid from him) yet that he predestined no
man to sin. This opinion he confirms by the definition of predestination,
which in his judgment is nothing else, than the preparation of the works of
God: or the merciful and just disposition of a divine work that should come
to pass. Seeing therefore that iniquity pertains not to the work of God,
which he knows how to punish, and not to commit; it will follow of the
definition already brought, that a man is not predestined of God to commit
sins. He brings also his reason: That sinners should be unjustly punished
of God, if by his will they should sin, as being predestined of him to
sin. Aug. de pred. san^^. cap. 10. How pred^stination and foreknowledge
differ.
Further, he cites Augustine and Prosper to be of the same mind. For
Augustine in that notable work, that he wrote of the predestination of
Saints, chap. 10. distinguishing between Gods foreknowledge and
Predestination, says: Predestination cannot be without foreknowledge: but
foreknowledge may be without predestination. How predestination and
foreknowledge differ.
For by predestination God foreknew the things that he would do: but he was
able to foreknow even the things that he does not, as all sins. For albeit
some things are so sins, that they be also punishments of sins: yet here
sin belongs not to God, but judgment. The same man unto the Articles
falsely laid to his charge, Art. 7.8 9. and quibusdam. seq.
(when the Pelagians spitefully traduced the doctrine of predestination) as
though he would make God the author of sins: refuting that detestable and
abominable blasphemy at large, thus writes: The Lords predestination is never
without goodness, never without justice for all the ways of the Lord are mercy
and truth. And the holy deity liked not to prepare the adulteries of
matrones, and the deflouring of maidens, but to condemn them, nor to appoint
them, but to punish them. And in the same place: Gods predestination has not
stirred up, moved, or caused the falls of them that perish, nor the malice of
wicked men, nor the iniquities of sinners, but he has altogether predestined
his judgment, whereby he will render to every one as he has done, be it good
or evil: which judgment should not be, if men should sin by the will of
God. Also, There is no predestination of God for the transgression of the law,
and the committing of any kind of sin. It is sufficient to know that the
standing of things be of him, and that the ruins of things be not of him:
neither does it follow, (as they that object such things, suppose) that God
has taken away repentance from them, to whom he has not given it: and that he
has thrown them down, whom he has not lifted up: seeing it is one thing to
make guilty an innocent person, (which is far from God) another thing not to
have pardoned a wicked man, which belongs to the desert of a sinner. Again,
Aug. Hypognost. 6.
The rule of this matter in question must surely be maintained, (which is
clear by divine testimonies) that sinners in their own evils are foreknowne
only: Ad 14. object. Gallorum. Why infidelity comes not of predestination.
but punishment is predestined for them. Hereunto Prosper a learned and godly
man consents: The infidelity of such as believe not the Gospel is not bred
of Gods predestination. For God is the author of good things, and not of evil.
And in his answer to the 15. objection: God only foreknew, and did not also
predestinate those things, which should not have from him the cause of their
working. To the same purpose did the Council of Araus. determine in their last
canon.

And as for Anselme he disagreeth not so much in sense, as in words from the
things, which these fathers write and judge: seeing he used the word
predestination in a more general signification, for preordination: making it
all one to predestinate, and to decree that a thing should be. And now, there
is nothing at all done, Mark this.
that the Lord is unwilling with all: yet so that we know, that good things are
done by his assistance and working, evil things are permitted, he giving them
over, and ordaining and directing them to such good ends, as it pleases him.
And this is it that Fulgentius also writes, that God surely is not the author
of evil thoughts, Lib. 1. ad Mon.
yet that he is the ordainer of evil wills, and that he does not cease to work
some good of the evil work of every evil man.



Thom. in 9. ad Romans lect. 1.
but they differ, that election imports the preparation of faith and good
works, whereby a man comes to glory: How election and reprobation agree and
differ.
but reprobation does not import a preparation of sins, whereby a man comes
to punishment. Wherefore this only follows, seeing the elect are
predestined to faith and repentance, that they may be holy and blameles
before God, that the reprobates are not predestined to the same grace.



fair forth pertains to Gods predestination, because it is not far from
the working of it. For those things that be so sins, that withal they be
also punishments of sins, in them not sin, but Gods judgment pertains to
Gods predestination, as I have showed out of Augustine.

CHAP. XIX. That predestination is steadfast and immovable.
THe fourth part of this whole treatise, The necessity of predestination is
immovable.
according to the division set down in the beginning, is of the
unchangeableness of predestination. Where we must consider, that election and
reprobation, namely, the decree of God concerning the either saving of men in
mercy, or the punishing of them in justice, cannot be changed, so that of the
number of the elect any one perishes: or contrarily any of the reprobates be
saved: but as well the one be infallibly saved, as the other be infallibly
damned.

This opinion may be confirmed by many testimonies of the sacred Scriptures.
Ioh. 6. the Lord says: The elect cannot perish, not the reprobates be sau^d;
because Gods decree is unchangeable toward both, proved by many places.
every one that the father gives me, shall come unto me, and all that comes
unto me, I will not cast forth. And chap. 10. My sheep hear my voice, and I
know them, and I give unto them eternal life, neither shall they perish for
ever, and no man shall pluck them out of my hand. My father who gave them me,
is greater then all, neither can any man pull them out of my fathers hand. 1.
Ioh. 2. They went of from us, but they were not of us. For if they had been,
they had surely continued with us. 2. Tim. 2. The foundation of God stands
sure, having this seal: God knows who are his. As also Apoc. 7. there is
mention made of the seal of the living God, and of the certain number of them
that are sealed in their foreheads: to wit, of the servants of God, whom his
grace preserves harmeles, and untouched among the midst of the storms of
calamities upon sea and land. So afterward in the same book, chapter 13. and
17. power is given to the Dragon and beast to seduce the whole earth: yet the
elect are excepted, whose names are written in the book of life, from the
foundation of the world. Therefore the elect cannot be deceived, at the least
finally. As also Mat. 24. False Christ's and Prophets shall arise, and shall
work great signs and miracles, to seduce, if it might be, the very elect.
What means that saying of Paul, Romans 8. We know that all things work for
good to them that love God, that is, that are called of purpose. In Soliloq. c.
28.
All things he says, even evil things, yea sins themselves, as Augustine
witnesses. And most plainly the Apostle confirming the same, adds: For whom
he foreknew, them he predestined also to be made conformable to the image
of his son. Whom he predestined, them he has justified, and glorified
also. What shall we say then to these things? If God be for us, who can be
against us? even he who spared not his own son, but gave him for us all, how
shall he not with him give us all things also? Who shall accuse the elect of
God? who shall condemn? who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Neither
death nor life, etc. And in the 9. chapter of the same Epistle: It cannot be
that the word of God should fail. On whom he will he has mercy, and whom he
will he hardens. Who shall resist his will? And chap. 11. God has not cast
away his people whom he foreknew: which thing he there shows by the example
of Elias times, and of the Jews of his time: among whom albeit far
degenerate, and enemies to the Gospel, yet God reserved to himself a remnant
according to the election of grace. And he annexeth a saying worthy to be
remembered: Israel obtained not that he sought for: but the elect attained it,
and the rest were hardened. And a little after: Therefore as touching the
Gospel they are enemies for your sakes, but in respect of election they are
loved for their fathers sakes. For the gifts and calling of God are without
repentance: that is, surely fixed without changing, as Augustine expounds,
who also warns us to understand this saying, not of that calling whereof it
is said: Many are called, etc. but of that, whereby the elect are called.

Predestination is unchangeable. The 1. reason.
the propounded sentence leans on most effectual reasons. For what things
God from eternity foreknoweth, they must needs certainly and infallibly come
to pass, as they be foreknowne of him. For foreknowledge is the knowledge of a
thing that shall be. And that which shall come to pass, must needs be done.
And it is confessed already, that God foreknoweth who shall be saved, and who
shall be damned. Ergo, etc.

Further, the decrees of God are unchangeable. The 2. reason.
But election and reprobation (as it is said) be the decrees of God, of saving
whom he will in mercy, and condemning whom he will in justice. Therefore it
cannot be, but both election and also reprobation is firm and immutable, so
that neither the elect can perish, nor the reprobates be saved. For of the
immutabilitie of Gods secrets it is said: 1. Sam. 15.2^. Numb. 23.23.
The strength of Israel will not lie, nor repent. For he is not a man, that he
should repent. Also, God is not as a man, that he should lie, nor as the son
of man, that he should be changed. He has said, and shall he not do? he has
spoken, and shall he not accomplish? And in Esaias: The Lord of hosts has
decreed, and who can break it? Esaias 14.^4 27.
The hand of the Lord is stretched out, and who shall turn it away? And, My
counsel shall stand, and I will do all my will. Cap. 46.10.


But in that God now and then denounces and threatens some things, which yet
afterward he does not, A doubt.
by the example of the Ninevites, and of Ezechias: we must understand, that
therein the Scripture speaks according to the nature of second causes, or else
with the condition secretly understood of repentance, and prayer, as Iere. 18.
such like sayings are expounded: and not in respect of Gods simple and absolute
decree. In which sense it is well said of Gregory: The Lord knows how to
change his saying, but never knows how to change his counsel. And of
Augustine: God knows how to change his saying, if we would change our life.

Thirdly, The 3. reason.
examples manifestly prove the infalliblenes of predestination. Pharao, Sehon,
and the kings of the Canaanites with their subjects were appointed to
destruction. What was done? their hearts were hardened, that they might fight
against Israel and perish for their sins. And it is expressly written: Exodus
4. Deuteronomy 2. ^s. 11. 1. Sam. 2. 2. King. 12.
It came of the Lord to harden their hearts to fight with Israel, that he might
destroy them. So Elies sons hearkened not to the voice of their father,
because the Lord had appointed to destroy them. Roboam heard not the people,
because it pleased the Lord by that means to rent the kingdom, 2. Sam. 7.
and to pull it away from Salomons race. Absalom and every man of Israel
despised the good counsel of Achitophel, and heard Husai: because the Lord
minded to destroy Achitophels counsel, to punish Absalom. Likewise nothing of
the word of the Lord against Ahabs house fell to the ground, 2. King. 10.
but the Lord accomplished as he had spoken by his servant Elias.

Genesis 37.39.41.50.
On the other side, how wonderfully was Joseph, when his brethren went about to
kill him, sent into Egypt, and advanced to the government of the kingdom, that
the counsel of the Lord might be fulfilled? What was of less hope in the eyes
of men, than David's reign? Yet he rose to the dignity of the kingdom out of
all his persecutions, and governed the people by the knowledge of his hands;
that the Lords counsel might stand, when all the devises and counsels of the
people were scattered. These things are plain and clear.

Acts 2. and 4.
But that is more notable that we read of Christ himself. Herod and Pontius
Pilate with the Gentiles and people of Israel were gathered together against
him, to do whatsoever the hand and counsel of the Lord had before determined
to be done. Chap. 13.
And when by the determinate counsel and providence of God they had taken him,
being yielded unto them, with wicked hands they crucified and slew him, and
fulfilled all things that the Prophets had written of him, albeit all the while
they went about another thing. What shall we say of the Apostle, and teacher of
the Gentiles? 1. Tim. 1.
who first was a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and an oppressor, how mightily
and miraculously was he called to the Gospel, Gal. 1.
when it pleased God, who had separated him from his mothers womb? R^^. 9 and
10. Esa. ^^.
And to use not so much examples of persons, as of nations: the Gentiles, who
sought not after righteousness, attained unto it, and the Lord was found of
them who sought him not, and made manifest to them that did not enquire after
him: But Israel did gainsay, Romans 11
and seeking his own righteousness, was not subject to the righteousness of
God. For the elect obtained it, the rest were hardened, as it is written: He
gave them the spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, and ears that
they should not hear.

Fourthly, The 4. reason.
the same doctrine of the unchangeableness of Gods predestination, is in sundry
places mentioned of Augustine, as cap. 7. de correp. and great. If any of the
elect perishes, God is deceived, and is overcome by man's sin: but none of
them perishes, because God is not deceived, nor overcome by any thing. But he
speaks of such as be elected to reign with Christ, and not in that sense as
Judas was elected to the work whereto he served. And in his answer to the
Articles falsely laid to his charge: The predestination of God, albeit it be
uncertain with us, yet with him, who made the things that shall come to pass,
it abides unchangeable: neither does he darken the things that he
inlighteneth, nor destroys what he does build nor plucketh up what he has
planted. For the gifts and calling of God are without repentance, and the
foundation of God stands sure, having this seal: The Lord knows who are
his. And most notably, in Soliloq. cap. 28. All of us are as a menstruous
cloth, coming out of a corrupt and filthy lump: but thou that only art
clean, do purify them in whom it pleases thee to dwell, whom without
their merits thou have predestined before the world, and chosen for thy self
to be a holy temple, whose names and number thou know, and who cannot
perish, to whom all things work for the best, The Lord knows from
everlasting the names and number of elect and reprobates.
yea even their very sins. For when they fall, they shall not fall down,
because thou put under thine hand, keeping all their bones, that none of
them be broken. But yet the death of sinners is most miserable, (those I
mean) whom (before thou made heaven and earth) according to the great depth
of thy judgments, being secret, yet always just, thou did foreknow for
eternal death, whose names and merits are numbered with thee, who have numbered
the sand of the sea, and fadomed the bottom of the depth: All things work for
the worst to reprobates, yea, even their prayers.
whom thou have left in their uncleanness, to whom all things work for evil,
yea their very prayer is turned into sin, that if they should ascend into
heaven, and make their neast among the stars, they might as dunge perish, and
not in the end.

Likewise the Author of the calling of the Gentiles, lib. 2. cap. 10. says: All
the sons of adoption not only are elect at the time of their calling here in
this life, but also before the world was made: in which election, what man
soever was not in Christ foreknowne, shall by no means be made partaker of
him. And by and by. The foreknowledge of God loses nothing of the fulness of
the members of Christ's body, and the whole sum forknowne, and in Christ
before the world forechosen, cannot be by any hurt diminished. No man can
doubt that this is Luthers very doctrine, Cap. 148.
that reads his book of servile will, where he often mentions, that the
elect are builded up by the word, Cap. 40.
and made better, and that the reprobates are offended, and become worse: that
they amend their life by the holy Ghost, and that the other perish without
amendment: Cap. 59.
and if the elect be in an error, yet that before their death they do come
into the right way: Cap. 152.
that this is necessary, and that they cannot finally be offended. And
praefat. ad Romans he writes, that the decree is stable, and the necessity
immovable of Gods predestination: and he says, that this necessity is very
necessary for our salvation and consolation: because we be so weak in our
selves, that if salvation stood in us, very few or none should be saved: for
the devil would conquer all. But now seeing this sure and most certain decree
of God cannot be changed, nor abolished, by any creature, we have hope that
at length we shall overcome sin, To say that the elect may be increased or
diminished, is Pelagi^nisme. Epist his ad ^^^st.
albeit now it rage in our flesh. These things in that place says Luther. But
as it is a point of sound doctrine, to hold, that ye predestinate number of the
chosen can neither be increased nor diminished: so not to rest therein is
Pelagianisme, as Prosper testifies. Which Hilarie also confirms, reporting
that the remnants of the Pelagians took it hardly, that such as were of sound
faith, preached that men were so predestined both to the one and the other
state, that none could go from one to the other.

By these things then it is manifest, The elect cannot perish.
that such as be predestinate Their number is certain.
and numbereth the sand de Correp. and gra. cap. 13. The number of them that be
predestined to the kingdom of God is so certain, that nothing may be added
to them, nor taken from them. Again ad Laur. cap. 29. The number of the
blessed, whether it be that which is, or that which shall be, is in the eye of
that workman, that calls things that be not, as though they were, and
disposes all things in number, weight and measure. And whereas some think
that the number of

CHAP. XX. Answers to such objections, as are wont to be made against the
vnchaungeablenes of Predestination.
But some object unto us in this place, The sum of the objections of both
kinds.
that a window is opened to impiety, by making as it were sides, whereto
neither must anything be added, nor any thing detracted: and fatal necessity
is brought in: the free will of man denied: the ministry of the word and
prayers taken away: sinners are excused; and (which God forbid) God is accused
as the author of sin: and men are provoked to despair, and such other like,
whereby subtle detractors openly vaunt themselves, as the Pelagians did in old
time, by the report of Prosper and Hilarie. Further beside these consequences
of man's reason naughtily wrested, there be some places of Scripture objected,
but in vain as we shall see.

therefore they cavil, that a window is opened to heinous offenses, because
men thus think: It must needs be done that God has predestined: Therefore
whether I do well or ill, if I be predestined to Gods kingdom, I shall be
saved: if I be not, I shall be damned.

Romans 3.
whose judgment is just, says Paul. But that must not be imputed to the
doctrine, but to the abuse of it. For So Luther represseth those wicked
speeches, on the 26, of Genesis, and elsewhere. For it is all one, as if a man
said: what God has appointed must be; therefore all care of our souls, and
all our labor is uncertain, and to no purpose.

Predestination not only appoints the end, but the means to the end. Romans
8. Ephesians. 1.
whom he has predestined, them also he has called, justified, and
glorified. Also, He has chosen us in him that we should be holy, and
without blame before him. Wherefore, it is a platting of a contradiction that
he who is predestined, can will and do evil finally. Yea rather, as Augstine
writes, they that be of the number of the chosen and predestinate, albeit they
lead a bad life for a time, Contra. I^l lib. 6. cap 3.
yet through the goodness of God they are brought to repentance, and are not
taken out of this life in their sins: for predestination is the preparation of
Gods benefits whereby as many as be delivered, are most certainly delivered.
Therefore that vain and idle reason (as it is called) does not trouble us,
which if we should obey, it is to no purpose whatsoever we do in our life.

But let the objection be turned upon them, that so bring in predestination,
that they separate the means from the end. In old time such was the heresy of
the Predestinati, who, The heresy o^ the predestinati.
(as Sigebert witnesses in Chron) sprung up under Honorius the Emperor, and
Pope Zosimus, were so called of the doctrine, they held: because naughtily
understanding predestination and grace, they avouched, that neither the study
of good works profited them that lived well, if they were predestined of God
to death, nor that the ungodly were hurt by wicked living, if they were
predestined of God to life. By which assertion they withdrew good men from
good things, and stirred up evil men to wickedness.

Another objection was of destiny, The second objection of fate or desteny.
that it was brought in if all things depend on the stable and immutable decree
of Predestination; as for example, who shall receive the word, who not: who
shall believe, who shall not, and thereby who shall be saved, who damned.

I answer. We preach not destiny but the depth of Gods grace, whereby the
difference is made of the elect from the lump of perdition, the rest in the
same lump being forsaken by the just judgment of God. And whereas the order
of Gods grace, and his judgment is immovable, that makes nothing for fate or
destiny: unless peradventure we should take fatum to be derived of fando,
which is of speaking. For we cannot deny, that God once spoke, that is,
immovably and unchangeably decreed, what things he would do, as he knew
unchangeably all things that should be, in which respect (as Augustine
writteth) we may say, De C^uit. Dei lib. 5. cap. 9. The Mathematical fate.
fatum has his name of fando. But this name was wont to be understood in
another matter. For in the common use of speaking, by fate men understand the
force of the position of the stars and planets, as it falls out, when a man
is borne, or conceived, or newly formed, Natural and poetical fate.
and this is the Mathematical fate. Also those things are of many writers
called fatal, which happen beside the will of God, and men, by the necessity
of a certain order, as that verse shows: What once prepared is to be,
Surmounteth Jove his high degree.


And in Homer (the prince of Poets) Jupiter lamenteth, that he could not
deliver from death his dear son Sarpedon, whom fate compelled to die:
Likewise Neptune mourns because he could not hinder the return of Ulysses
into his country, that he might revenge Cyclops his son; for the sates had
decreed that Ulysses should return into Ithaca. And in Ovid the same Jupiter
says: Think thou alone (O daughter dear) from thee
to put away unconquerable fate?
And afterward: The fates that stable be, and do abide for aye,
fear neither planets thunderbolts nor any great decay.


The stoicall sat. De Ciuit. Dei. lib. 5. cap. 5.
Also this opinion is commonly attributed to the Stoicke philosophers, albeit
Augustine does mitigate their opinion) because they said that the knitting
together of things by fate does depend upon Jupiter, whom they supposed to be
the sovereign God. For in Aulus Gellius li. 6. cap. 2. there is Chrysippus his
definition of fate or destiny: What fate is.
that it is the natural and unchangeable conjunction and order of all things
from everlasting. Cicero de fato.
As Cicero also notes the opinion of such me^ as say, that all things are
brought to pass by a natural binding and coupling together without
interruption. These dotings not only the Church, but also sounder phylosophie
rejects and condemns: both because they take from God his liberty and
omnipotency, and also because they abolish the order and manner of working
ordained by Gods wisdom in second causes. For some second causes be ordained
of God to certain and determined effects, other be not, but of their own
nature are indifferent to bring forth this or that effect.

Fate for Gods providence Lib. epist. 18.
Other men do term the connection and order of all causes hanging on the will of
God by the name of fate, which we use to call Gods providence. So Anneus
Seneca: (The fates lead him that is willing, and draw him that is unwilling,)
most evidently called that fate, which in the same place he had called the
will of the highest father. And Apuleius says, In dogma^e Platonis.
that fate is a divine Law, whereby the inevitable purposes and entreprises of
God are brought to pass. De cause lib 4.
After the same manner Boethius spoke many things of fate. For he will have a
fatal order to depend upon the simplicity of the divine providence: How Gods
providence and fate do dister by Boethius.
so that providence is a divine way disposing all things, but fate is a
disposition inherent in moveable things, that is, the execution of that
eternal providence in God. And seeing fate proceeds from the beginning of an
immovable providence, he writes, that hence it comes to pass, that it also
is immutable.

With such men as these be, if we credit Augustine, De Ciuit. lib. 5. cap. 7.
we must not greatly contend about the word, seeing they attribute the very
order of causes, whereby every thing is done that comes to pass, to the will
and power of the Soueragne God, whom most truly we believe, both that he
knows all things before they be done, and also leaves nothing undisposed:
and all powers are from him, Evil wills are not from God.
albeit not all wills proceed from him. For evil wills are not from him, because
they are against nature, which comes from him. Christians must not have the
word fate or destiny in their mouths.
Yet because we must speak of divine things according to the rule of piety,
it is beter to abstain from the word fate or destiny, as Augustine in the
same place notably advises us chapter 1. Humane kingdoms are altogether
appointed by the divine providence, which if a man therefore attribute to fate,
because he understands thereby the very will and power of God, let him hold
his judgment still but let him reform his tongue.

But it is an ungodly and sacrilegious thing, Mark this well.
that some endeavor to find fault with yt order of causes which are coupled
together, which order is certain with God foreknowing and disposing it: such
men must at length needs fall to this point, that they will both deny Gods
foreknoweldge, and also all prophecy, that is clearer then the light, (as
Cicero did, de diuinat. 2. For if all future things be foreknowne, that they
shall in that order come to pass, as they are foreknowne that they shall be.
And if they shall come to pass by this order, the order of things is certain
with God foreknowing them. And if the order of things be certain, the order of
causes also is certain. For not any thing can be done, before which there went
not some efficient cause.

Of freewill.
But in this order of causes that are joined one with another, is there any
liberty of our free will? Does the chain of predestination constrain the
very motions also of men's minds?

Liberty threefold.
I answer, there is a threefold liberty according to the common distinction:
liberty from coaction, from sin, and Of these three, liberty from coaction
or compulsion is the property of the will, that cannot be lost, as Bernard
says, that is, that whatsoever it wills, whether it be that which is good,
by the grace of God: or that which is evil of it one nature, it always
wills it freely, that is, with a voluntary motion, and not by compulsion. We
do surely many things against our will, and compelled: yet the will it self
can desire or choose nothing unwillingly and forced: because if it should will by
constraint, it should unwillingly will, which implies a contradiction. Euchir.
cap 30.
Otherwise as it is in Augustine, man naughtily using freewill, lost both
himself and it, and hereby, he that is the servant of sin, is at liberty
to sin, but to do right cously he is not free, unless being delivered from
sin, he begin to be the servant of righteousness. Moreover, if free be mea^t
that, which is subject to none, nor depends upon any other thing, Liberty
from subjection the will has not.
or is limited, in that sense we must not doubt, that there can be no liberty
of man's will, but that all things are done of necessity, as God has
foreknowne, and works by his infallible counsel, Cap. 16^.
and power, as Luther often mentions in many places in his book of servile
will. For as other things, so the elections of the wills of angels and men, are
subject to Gods providence, Acts 17.
in whom we live, be, and are moved, and who inclyneth the heart of a king,
whither souer he will. ^
Gregory Nyssene in his book that he wrote of man, says: providence is of
such things as be not in us, And Damascene lib. 2. orth. fid. writes,
Damascene.
that God foreknoweth only the things that are in us, and does not foreordaine
them.

But these are dangerous speeches, and ought not or cannot be admitted but
very warily; as Thomas advises us: Tho. cont. gent. lib. 2. cap. 90. Aug. de
Ciuit. Dei. lib 5 cap ^.
And Augustine much better: All wills are subject to the will of God, even all
wills, because they have no power but what he grants them.

But thou will say, What is determined of God, necessarily so comes to pass,
as it is determined. But all actions and motions of the minds of men are
determined of God. Therefore necessarily they so come to pass: and by the
force of the consequent, there is in them no liberty of our will.
necessity of coaction, Necessities twofold.
and immutability. That moves violently through an external beginning only*
but this imposes surely a necessity upon the second causes, that they effect
this or that thing, and thereby also upon the effects, that they so come to
pass: Things in respect of God necessarily come to pass, but in respect of
second causes most things are contingent, and casual.
yet it takes not away the natures of things, but rather confirms them.
Therefore albeit in respect of God, who foreseeth all things infallibly, and
vnchaungeably foreordayneth them, necessarily, that is, infallibly and
vnchaungeably all things come to pass: yet in respect of the second causes,
(them I mean, that are not in their own nature limited to certain effects,
as be all the wills of Angels and men,) many things are done contingently, and
by choice. And it is to be marked, that, seeing effects have their names of
their next causes, such effects are rightly called contingent: even as they,
that arise of second causes necessarily working, (as the motions of heaven, the
heat of fire,) are, and are called necessary: albeit notwithstanding in
respect of God, altering the order of nature, as often as pleases him,
contingencie or chance has also place in such. Examples confirm this
answer. Examples hereof.
As for example Christ must suffer and be slain, yet he suffered and dyed
willingly, as it is written: I lay down my life, Luke 24.
that I may take it again. No man takes it from me. John 1^.
I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. Also, All
things must be fulfilled, which were written of him: yet what was more
casual, considering the natures of second causes, than that the soldiers cast
lots for Christ's coat? that they brake not a bone of him? and such like. In
the Angels also and perfect spirits in heaven, so mighty is the kingdom of
grace, that necessarily they do not sin: shall we therefore deprive them of
the liberty of their will? What shall we say of God himself, who is
unchangeably good, who must needs always live, and foreknow all things? Yet
God forbid that we should put the life and foreknowledge of God under
necessity: as neither is his power diminished, when he is said, that he cannot
dye, De Ciuit. Dei. lib. 5. cap. 10.
or be deceived. Which example Augustine also uses: where he answers in
like manner the foresaid question by that distinction of a twofold necessity.
And chapter 9. he writes, that it does not follow, that if there be with God
a certain order of causes, therefore nothing is in our will seeing in the very
order of causes even our wills are accounted. Anselme writes at large of this
matter, concerning the agreement of Gods foreknowledge and predestination with
freewill.

CHAP. XXI. Answers to the other objections.
Whether the ministry of the word be overthrown by predestination.
But they say, that by the doctrine of Gods unchangeable predestination the
ministry of the word is overthrown, and clean taken away: to wit, all
instructions, exhortations, reproves, consolations, and lastly all doctrine
both publicly and privately. For what things are unchangeably predestined of
God to be done, in vain are means used in them: And such is the salvation of
men: Therefore such means are used in vain.

means, which even he himself pleases to use for the ends appointed of him,
and has also commanded us to use them. And such are those means that are
mentioned in the objection. For it is written: 1. Tim. 4.
Give heed to exhortation and reading: practice these, continue therein: take
heed to thy self and to doctrine. For if thou do this, thou shall save thy
self, and those that hear thee. Also, Be instant in the word, in season, 2.
Tim. 4.
out of season, rebuke, reprove, exhort with all truth and doctrine, watch in
all things. And the Lord himself says: Matthew. 18.
If thy brother sin against thee, go and tell him his fault, etc. if he
hear thee, thou have won thy brother. Iam. 5.19. Iud. verse. 21.
And every where we are commanded to stir up the slothful, to reprove
those that sin that they may repent.

Further it is certain, Predestination comprehends both the end and the
means to the end.
that predestination belongs not only to the end, namely the salvation of
such as be predestinate, but to the means also leading to that end: the word
of God and experience bearing witness, that it is given to very few to receive
the doctrine of salvation by the Lord himself or by Angels, Aug. de bono pers.
cap. 19.
without the preaching ministry of man: and that it is given to many to
believe in God by men. For God observes this order commonly toward his elect,
that whom he has severed from damnation by the bountifulnes of his grace, for
them he procures his Gospel to be heard, and when they hear, moves them to
believe, Aug. de Cor. and great. cap. 7.
and to continue unto the end in says, which works by love, and to repent
upon admonition, if at any time they go astray. Yea and some also he brings
back into the way which they had forsaken, without the reproof of men.

But in the children of perdition it comes to pass that is written, that
they hearing hear not, that is, De bono perse^, cap. 14.
hearing by the sense of the body, they hear not with the assent of the heart.
De Correp. and great. cap. 15.
In the mean while, seeing we know not who belong to the number of the
predestinate, who not, we must be so affected with love, that we wish al to be
saved, warning and reproving all and every one as occasion is offered, with
meekenes, waiting if at one time or other God will give them to acknowledge 2.
Tim. 2.
the truth, and escaping out of the snare of the devil, (of whom they are
held captives) to receive a sounder mind. Therefore let us do our duty,
applying brotherly correction to all men, that they perish not, or destroy
others: but it belongs to God to make the same profitable unto them, We must
do our duty, in ^^rouing o^^^ (...) we do not profit them, and why (...)
who^ he himself has foreknowne, and predestined to be conformable to the
image of his son. And albeit he make it not profitable to all, (for many are
the children of perdition) yet it is sufficient for us, that we do deliver our
own souls, while they perish not through our fault. As the Lord says to
Ezechiel: Cap. 3.
When I shall say to the wicked, thou shall surely die: and thou have not
warned him, nor spoken to him to return from his wicked way, that he might
live: that wicked man shall die, but I will require his blood at thy hand. But
if thou have warned him, and he has not repented of his wickedness, he shall
die in his iniquity, but thou have delivered thine own soul. And Paul
witnesses, 2. Cor. 2.
that we are the sweet savor of Christ to God in them that are saved, and in
them that perish. The ungodly also are made without excuse in hearing what they
ought to do, least they should say: If I had known it, I would have done it:
therefore I did it not, because I knew it not.

Whither praying be in vain, if Gods purpose be unchangeable.
as some naughtily suppose. For albeit by prayers Gods predestination is never
changed, yet by them we are helped as by certain means hereunto ordained of
God, both to attain unto many effects, and also to the very end of
predestination, according to the promise: Every one that calls on the name of
the Lord, shall be saved. Luke 11.
And in the Gospel: Ask and it shall be given you. For whosoever asks
receives. And anon: how much more will your heavenly father give the holy
Ghost to them that ask of of him?

But here it must be marked, that what things the Saints obtain by praying,
they were so predestined, that by prayers they should be obtained, as
Gregory well said. To which purpose Augustine also says, Dial lib. 1. Ang. de
Ciuit. Dei. l. 5. c. 10.
that prayers much avail to obtain those things, which God foreknew that he
would grant to them that pray.

Thus a double error is excluded. One is of certain superstitious A double
error confuted.
as though the decree of God made concerning some man, (put the case of
condemning him) might be altered by sacrifices and prayers: The tale of Traiane.
as the tale is of Traiane the Emperor, that when he was in hell, (the place
of reprobates) he was from thence delivered by the prayers of Gregory. The
other error on the contrary faulteth, as though a thing so wholesome the only
intercourse between man and God, as Boethius says) should seem to have no
force, because God has constantly appointed whom he will save, and whom he
will damn: the one pertaining to his mercy, the other to his judgment.

And we must not hear, nor tolerate wicked men being Snners are not excused.
who when they do amiss, and securely delight in sins, fly to the
necessity of predestination, as to a certain sanctuary, and what things they
wickedly commit, they say must be attributed to predestination. Whereby they
would seem to be blameles, and put all the fault in God, as the author of
sins, as Romans 9. such men say: Why is he yet angry? For who shall resist his
will? But James rightly reproves those men that go about to excuse themselves
from God. Let no man when he is tempted, Iam. 1.13.
say, that he is tempted of God: but every one is tempted, when he is drawn
away by his own concupiscence. Then lust, after it has conceived, brings
forth sin. And the book of Ecclesiasticus confuteth a double impiety with
one and the same answer, chapter 15. Say not thou, the Lord has caused me to
sin: for thou ought not to do the things that he hates. Say not thou, he
has lead me into error, for he has no need of the wicked man. The Lord
hates all abomination, and they that fear him, love it not. He made man from
the beginning, and left him in the will of his own counsel. If thou will,
thou shall observe the commandments.

Doubtless these are the fountains of sins, properly belonging to sinners,
lust, and their freewill: for man is not compelled to commit evils, but he does
them of his own accord, and greatly likes and allows them, as these sayings
of Scriptures testify. He would not understand to do well. And, they would
not receive instruction, and many more like in the books of Scriptures. But
Gods predestination ought not to be accounted the fountain of sins. For by
the help thereof (as Augustine notably has left in writing) we know that
many are held back from falling, Ad ^rti^. falls. impos.
but none caused to fall, and hereby predestination is the cause that many
stand, and that no man falls. Therefore (says he) it is a detestable
opinion, that supposes God to be the author of any evil will, or evil
action. And when men sin, they serve their own lusts and desires: but when
they avoid evil, and do good, the ways of men are guided by the Lord to
delight in his way. And elsewhere. Hypognost. 6.
They that are without the grace of predestination, that is strangers from the
purpose of God, and abide in evil works, we do not say, as you think, that
they are so ordained of God the creator of all that they should perish, as
though he made them to live wickedly, and cast them headlong into every deadly
work. Far be that from the purpose of God. Neither say we, as you imagine;
albeit they be willing to believe, and to give themselves to good works, yet
that God will not bestow these upon them seeing such willingness is the gift of
God etc. These things that father opposed to that blasphemous spirit, that
railed on the truth by the Pelagians. Huber. these 292
But the same spirit abides even at this day in the adversaries, who imagine
otherwise than we judge, as though God forced the reprobates to sin, casts
them down, carries them away, and violently trampleth upon them, their cause
unheard. O blasphemy!

An instance of (...) aduer^^tie.
But they except against us, that sinners seem blameles, that they obey not the
truth because obedience it self in his gift. This (say they) we receive not,
why then are we reproved a^ though we could give it to ourselves, and by our
will will not give it? The argument is such as this is:

They that receive not faith and conversion of God, seem excusable: because
we cannot have faith and conversion, unless God give it us.

But such are all those that repent not.

Ergo.

Here the Mayor is false, albeit it seem goodly to humane reason: because God
made man upright from the beginning, and created him after his own image: but
man through his own malice, and the devil the prouoker, falling from his
vprightnes, wherein he was first made, became wicked. Is God a debtor unto us
to restore us, because we lost grace received? Or shall it not therefore be
lawful for him to require again of us, that which is his own? He has power
to exact it, and has power also to remit it. But of whom it must be exacted,
and to whom it must be remitted, it belongs to the Lord to judge, and not to
the debtors.

But (say they) the reprobates, while God forsakes and hardens them, cannot
avoid sins. And it seems unjust, if God should punish a man for those
things that he cannot avoid.



He that foreseeth sin, and does not hinder it when he may, is not without
fault. God foreseeth sins, and does not hinder them, when he might most easily.
Therefore, etc.

of God after the rule of man's righteousness. The first proposition takes place
concerning men, and not concerning God. For men both by the society of nature,
and Gods law are bound one to another, that one should procure the welfare of
another, and hinder the destruction. But God is bound to none, and he may do
with his creature what he

Which things seeing they stand thus, let no man in his heart accuse God, who
will render to every one according to his works: Psalm. 102.
but let every one blame himself when he sins, and let him say, when he is
damned: Thou art just O Lord in all that thou do unto us, and all thy
judgments are true. And whosoever is set free let him say: Psalm. 144.
The Lord is merciful and full of compassion, he has not recompensed us
according to our sins.

Predestination is (...) ground of our comfort, and no cause of despe^ation.
it is also a mere slander. Nay it is the most true ground of all our comfort
and salvation, that we know that God has chosen his own in Christ before the
foundation of the world, who believe in him, and has predestined them unto
adoption, according to the good pleasure of his own will: and that this
purpose of free election, and predestination is so firm, that neither it can
be changed of any creature, neither does God ever repent him of his gifts and
calling. This thing the places of Scripture every where confirm, which speak
of predestination: as what the Apostle says: ^ Tim. 2.
The foundation of God stands sure, having this seal; The Lord knows who
are his. Doubtless the Scripture speaks this to our consolation, least we
should be troubled for the revolt of some men from the Gospel, and for other
offenses. And more fully Romans 8. We know that all things work for the best to
them that love God, that is, to them who are called of purpose. For whom he
foreknew, them he predestined also to be made conformable to his image, etc.
And thus concludes; I am persuaded that neither death nor life, nor Angels,
nor any creature can separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus.
We see how the Apostle armeth us against all temptations of this world with
this persuasion, that election is sure and stable, whereby we are chosen in
Christ unto eternal life freely and of his mere love: as the Lord also in the
Gospel comfort us therewith: Matthew. ^3. Ioh. 10. Luke 10 and 11.
that the elect cannot be seduced: that he suffers not his sheep to be
pluck^ out of his hand: that our names are written in heaven. Also, fear not
little flock, for it pleases your father to give you a kingdom. And in John,
Ioh. 6.
least the faithful should be offended through the obstinacy of the
unbelievers: what soever the father gives me (says he) comes unto me, and
he that comes unto me, I will not cast him forth: because I came down from
heaven, to do his will that sent me. Therefore by the view of these sayings of
Scripture it appears, that the doctrine of the firmenes of Gods election is
revealed unto us for this cause, that it might be the foundation of all
certainty, against all kind of temptations, which arise either in respect of
our infirmity among so many dangers of the godly, or of the unbelief or
apostacy of others from the faith, or in respect of other thing.

Hereof says Luther notably, when he had avouched, Praefat. ad Romans
that the decree of predestination is sure and immovable, adds moreover,
that this necessity is most necessary unto salvation and consolation. He
assigns the reason, because we be so w^^ke in our selves that if our
salvation consisted in our own strength, very few or none should be saved: for
the devil would overcome all men. But now, says he, seeing Gods decree is
sure and most certain, and cannot be altered by any creature we have hope to
over come sin at the length. Luth. de ser. arb. cap. 144.
He teaches the same thing at large, and amplifieth it by the consideration
of so many perils, and devils daily assaulting us. A^^de praed^st. sanct. cap.
^.
And surely it is a wonder, among so many streites, wherewith our life is
beset, that any man had rather betake himself to his own infirmity, than to
the certainety of Gods promise and grace.

I am uncertain of my election, which makes me sad.
But thou will say, the will of God concerning my self, is uncertain unto me.
And this is it, that makes me sad and sorrowful, that seeing there is a
certain and sealed number of them that be predestinate, which cannot be
increased nor diminished, I am uncertain, whether I belong to that number: if
I knew this, I would rest my self in that sure foundation.

De praedest. sanct. cap. 9.
He that seems to stand, let him take heed least he fall. Therefore seeing
both Gods will and thine own, that is, thine endeavor and perseverance as from
thy self, as uncertain: why does not man commit his faith, hope, and charity
unto the stronger rather than to the weaker? And let these things be spoken
against the objections of the first sort, that is, the consequences of humane
reason.

CHAP. XXII. Answers to some places of scripture, usually objected against the
certainety of Predestination.
But they that make the grace of election common to all, and will have it made
frustrate of many afterward, through unthankfulness, for the most part object
these places out of the sacred Scriptures. First, The Pharisees and lawyers are
sated to reject the counsel of God against themselves: The first place
objected, is Luke 7. ver. 30. Hub. these. 784.
therefore they made frustrate unto themselves election, which was common to
them and others.

I answer. By the counsel of God in that place is not meant election, or the
ordination of the Pharisees to eternal life. For if they had been ordained
thereto, doubtless they had believed. Acts 13.48.
But the will of God revealed by the ministry of John Baptist is noted, that
such as desire to be saved, and to flee from the wrath to come, should be
baptized with the baptism of repentance, and believe in him, that was to come
after him, that is, in Christ Jesus. Therefore this the Evangelist means, that
the people and the Publicanes obeyed the doctrine of John to salvation: and
that the Pharisees and Scribes did not obey to their great harm, indeuoring to
establish their own righteousness. Acts 20.
After this manner Paul to express his faithfulness in his ministry, which he
had received to testify the Gospel of the grace of God, says, that he
eschewed nothing, to the intent he might declare to the Ephesians all the
counsel of God, that is, faith and conversion, as the text there shows.

They, to whom some of the epistles of the Apostles were written, were Saints,
and elect: yet in them many 1 Thessalonians. 1. 1. Pet. 1.
fell away from the faith, and perished. Therefore some elect do perish.

Elect, is not used after one sort in the Scriptures. Beside the special
signification, whereby such as before ordained to eternal life, are called
Elect, there is also this use of the word, that generally, (speaking after the
rule of charity, and not of faith) they are called Elect, whosoever by outward
calling are numbered with the people of God, whether in deed they be already
faithful, and sanctified, and elect before God, or not: and according to this
general signification we grant the whole argument.

Psalm. 69. Exodus 32.
when David says: Let them be blotted out of the book of the living, and not
be written with the just. As also Moses entreating for the people, prayed.
Either forgive their sins, or if not, blot me I pray thee out of the book
that thou have written. The book of life.
To whom the Lord answered: Him that sins against me, will I blot out of
the book of life. Therefore some written in the book of life, may be thence
blotted out, and consequently, some predestinate to life, do perish, because
the predestination of Saints and the book of life, are all one; at the least
in substance, How predestination and the book of life differ.
albeit they somewhat differ in reason. For predestination is the very
ordination of the Saints to eternal life. But the book of life
metaphorically is nothing else, than the knowledge in the mind of God of them
that be predestinate, as Tho. in 4 cap. ad Phillip. and others expound.

How a man is blotted out of the book of life.
but blotting out pertayneth to them only, that not in very deed, but only
in their own, and other men's opinions are written therein: and that such are
said to be blotted out, when it is manifest in this world, or that which is to
come, that they were not in the number of the predestinate. Some men make a
distinction thus, The book of life taken two ways.
that the book of life is taken two manner of ways: either for the catalogue
of the elect unto eternal life, or else for the catalogue of them, that
profess the says of Christ, and are counted among the members of the Church,
whereof many doubtless are blotted out. So Ezechiel 13. it is said of the false
prophets: They shall not be in the assembly of my people, and shall not be
written in the writing, that is, in the book of the house of Israel. He
means, that, albeit false prophets would seem to be the people and Church
of God, yea the pillar thereof, they should be so far from being reckoned in
that degree, as that they should be accounted altogether strangers from Gods
people. The matter comes all to one point. Augustine confirms the said
exposition, partly by that that follows in the words of David: and let them
not he written with the righteous: from whence he gathers, that such men, as
touching Gods judgment, were not yet written in the book of the living:
partly by other places of Scripture concerning the book of life, as that which
the spirit of God says in the Apocal. Apoc. 13. and 20. verse. 15. and 21.27.
Act. 1.
That they all shall worship the beast, whose names are not written in the
book of life. Therefore says Augustine, they shall not worship, that are
written. Further David's prophecy is wholly directed against Judas the traitor,
and other obstinate enemies of Christ, strangers from the grace of election,
reprobates, and children of perdition, as it is plain by the interpretation of
Paul. For thus he says: Israel obtained not that which he sought for, Romans 11.
but the elect have obtained it, and the rest were hardened, as it is written:
let their table be their snare: let their eyes be darkened, etc. These be
David's very words out of this very Psalm: which seeing the spirit of God
expounds of the reprobate Jews, such as pertain not to election, it
appears that their writing in the book of life cannot otherwise be taken,
than as far forth as they gloried for a while in the title of the Church,
till they were blotted out, that is, were declared to be cast awaies, and no
way pertainnig to the body of the Church.

But Moses was one of the predistinate sons of God, An instance.
and truly written in the book of the living. Therefore some truly written in
the book of life are blotted out of it, or may be blotted out.

answered of the judge of the world: He that sins against me, I will blot
him out of the book that I have written. So David prayed: 2. Sam. 18.
Who will grant me, that I might die for thee, son Absalom? Whereas yet it
could not be, that he should die for Absalom. Christ also knew well enough,
that he must drink of the cup, yet he said: Father if it be possible, let this
cup pass from me. And to use a most like example, Paul wished to be accursed
from Christ, Romans 9.
for his brethren the Israelites; that is, for the love of Christ he was
ready, if it were possible to lose the kingdom* of heaven, and to go to hell;
De compun^t. ^ora. lib. 1. sermon. de nulla regni spe.
as often Chrysostom expounds that place. But as touching the Lords answer
to Moses, when he says, That he will blot him out of his book, that has
sinned against him: the answer is all one, with that that we made before to
the place of the Psalm, which Ambrose also upon the ninth to the Romans,
plainly approves by his judgment, and among the later writers, Doctor
Heerbrand subscribeth unto him. Heerb. disp. de elect. and praed. these 115. Hub
these 771. Equiuocos doctores.
Therefore let Huber rather consult with them, than scorn the truth and the
lovers of it, and tauntingly term them doubtful Doctors, when as he himself
plaieth more truly, the doubtful disputer, dallying with the doubtful
significations of words to deceive others.

Heb. 12.
Ye are come to mount Sion, the city of the living God, the heavenly
Jerusalem, and to thousands of Angels, and to the company of the first borne,
etc. Take heed that ye despise not him that speaks, for if they escaped
not, that despised him that spoke in Gods name in the earth: much more we, if
we abhor him, who is from heaven. Some of these, of whom this speech is,
do fall away, and perish for ever: because he terrifieth them with eternal
punishments, if they resist the word. But these that are spoken of, are
written in heaven: therefore some of such do pertsh.

Certainly the Minor is only particular: because it is spoken of those first
begotten, that are written in heaven, and not of other whomsoever, that
pertain to their society and the Churches: among whom it is not to be
doubted, that many are hypocrites, that shall in their time be judged of the
Lord. But (say they) it is written: keep that thou have, that no man Apoc.
3.11.
let him take heed lest he fall. If God spared not the natural branches, take
heed, 1. Cor. 11. Rom 11. Phil. 2.
that he spare not thee also. In fear and trembling work your salvation.
These and the like exhortations and threatening pertain to all, even to Gods
elect. Therefore the elect are not without peril of losing salvation.



But what shall we say to that of the Apostle, I beat down 1. Cor. 9.
when I have preached to others, my self became a reprobate. Paul doubtless
was elected, yet he labored that he might not be a reprobate.

some of the elect do fall away from grace Nay therefore they do not fall
away because they carefully shun falls, and use the means unto salvation.

WHETHER AND HOW WE MAY BE CERTAIN AND SVRE OF OUR Election in Christ.
CHAP. XXIII. Of the certainety of salvation, and therefore of Election,
against the Papists.
THe elect of God (as we have seen) have an excellent prerogative, and
dignity, whom no creature can separate from his love in Christ Jesus, in whom
before the world they were unchangeably predestined to eternal glory, But
that we may be partakers of this consolation, we must consider, Whether and 2.
how we may be certain of our election in Where also we will touch, 3. what we
must judge in this point of our brethren in Christ; and of our neighbor in
general. The first of these three questions was wont to be in controversy
between us and the Papists. The Papists say that election is certain in it
self, but uncertain to us.
For albeit they maintain as well as we, the firmenes and certainty of Gods
election in it self: yet they would have it to be uncertain to us, as long
as we live in this mortal life, whether we be in the number of the elect, and
those that shall be saved: yea, whether in this life we be in favor with God:
neither suppose they that it ca^ possibly be known without especial revelation,
such as they attribute to Paul and some few other. Council Trid. sesse 6. cap.
12.
Hereupon the Council of Trent held under Pope Paul the third, decreed in this
sort: No man in this life ought so to presume of the secret mystery of Gods
predestination, that he should certainly make account, that he himself is in
the number of them that be predestined, as though it were true, that he that
is justified, either could not sin any more, or if he has sinned, ought to
promise himself certain repentance. For without special revelation it cannot
be known, whom God has chosen to himself. Can. 15.
And in the same Session among the Canons, wherein the Trent fathers establish
doubting of ye forgiveness of our sins, and of the grace of God, He is
pronounced accursed whosoever shall say, that a man regenerate and justified,
is bound by faith to believe, that he is certainly of the number of the
predestinate.

This is the doctrine of popery, and no marvel, seeing they are not subject
to the righteousness of God, but go about to set up their own righteousness of
worthiness and human merits. For seeing they rest not in the mercy of God,
by and for Christ's sake forgiving sins to every one that believes, but
respect also their own disposition, worthiness, satisfactions, and merits to
justify the^, they do less yet than becomes the^ that they so much doubt
of their receiving into grace, or of their justification. For Paul without al
doubting plainly pronou^ceth, that he knows nothing by himself, yet hereby he
is not justified. 1. Cor. 4. Gal. 5. Gal. 3.
And to the Gal. Behold I Paul say unto you, ye are made void of Christ, as
many as are justified by the Law, and ye are fallen from grace. For as many as
are of the works of the Law are under the curse.

And truly this doctrine of doubting of the grace of God in this life, or the
life to come, Reasons against doubting of Gods grace.
greatly swarueth from the scope of the divine Scriptures. For the Apostle
says, What things are written, are written for our instruction, that by
patience and consolation we might have hope. Lib. 3. Sent. did. 26. What hope
is.
But hope excludes doubting: because hope even by the confession and
definition of the papists themselves, is a virtue, whereby spiritual and
eternal things are confidently expected: or, (which is all one,) Hope is a
certain expectation of future blessedness proceeding from the grace and truth
of God: They add, and from precedent merits because to hope for any thing
without merits, is not to be called hope put presumption. As though it were
not presumption rather, to advance merits against grace. For if of works,
then not of grace, says the Apostle: Romans 11.
but if of grace, then not of works.

Secondly a most strong argument against popish doubting, is taken from this,
that in the scriptures we are commanded to believe the remission of sins, and
eternal life, and that not only historically, and generally, but also with
the application of the promise of grace unto us; as also every where the holy
Scriptures require us to believe in Christ, who died for our sins, that he
might restore unto us Gods grace that was lost righteousness and eternal
life. To believe and to doubt are contrary.
Now to believe, and to doubt, are manifestly contrary one to the other, as we
may see in James, cha. 1. If any of you want wisdom, let him ask of God but
with confidence, (...).
nothing doubting, or wavering hither and thither, like the waves of the sea,
that are carried of the wind. And the words used in the sacred Scriptures to
express the force and nature of faith, confirm the same thing: as that to
faith is attributed, (...), a sure persuasion, substance, demonstration,
confidence, boldness, which surely signify not a doubting of the mind, but a
sure and certain assurance. Whereto then tends the doctrine, and shop of
doubting with the papists, but to overthrow faith altogether, and to turn
vpside down the use of the Scripture unto us, which was therefore delivered of
the holy men of God, that we should believe that Jesus Christ, and that in
believing we might have life through his name.

Hitherto serve the express sayings of Scripture: Matthew. 8. Be of good cheer
my son, thy sins are forgiven thee. Luke 7. Woman thy sins are forgiven
thee. Thy faith has saved thee, go in peace. The papists flee here to some
special revelation: but as we do not deny the same, so we say that those
special revelations depend upon the general foundation, that is, the promise
of grace made to believers in the Gospel: Mark. 16.
He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved: he that believes not,
shall be damned.

2. Tim. 1.
This also is manfest by the testimonies of Paul, I know whom I have believed,
and I am persuaded, that he is able to keep my pledge against that day, Chap.
4.
Again, I have fought a good fight, I have kept the faith, hereafter there is
laid up for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge
will give me in that day, and not to me only, but to all that love his
coming. Also, I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, Romans 5.
nor Angels, nor principalities, nor any other creature is able to separate me
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus toward us. In vain do they
here except, that Paul in those places speaks only of his own assurance,
that he had by a singular revelation. For he speaks in the plural number of
himself and others, that are ingrafted into Christ by a true faith, and love
his coming. So elsewhere the Apostle generally testifies: Romans 5.
Being justified by faith we have peace toward God, and we rejoice in the
hope of the glory of God through our Lord Jesus Christ. For being now
justified through his blood, we shall much more be saved from wrath by him. And
to the Ephesians: After ye believed, Ephesians. 1.
ye were sealed with the holy spirit of promise, who is the earnest of our
inheritance, against the day of redemption. John also hereto agrees: 1. Ioh.
3. and 4.
We know that we are translated from death to life. And hereby we know that we
dwell in him, and he in us, that he has given us of his spirit. These and such
like testimonies plainly prove, that a faithful man may and ought to make
certain account, that he has, and shall have God gracious unto him to
eternal life.

This God has promised, says Augustine, Aug. Psalm. 88.
this God has said: and if that be but little, God has sworn it. Therefore
because the promise is sure, not according to our merits, but according to his
mercies, no man ought to publish that with fear, whereof he cannot doubt. And
that is well to be marked against the Papists, who because they will have
justification to depend upon their works, if not wholly, yet at least in part
(as it has been said before, Alsons. de Castro. in voce gratia. Bern. sermon.
68. sup. Cant. Sermon. 3. de 7. fragm.
and they themselves do not dissemble it) they can never judge of this
certainty of grace. But as Bernard said excellently well: Why is the Church
careful for merits, seeing there is surer and safer matter of rejoicing in the
purpose, and mercy of God. And elsewhere, I consider three things, wherein
rests my whole hope: the love of adoption, the truth of promise, and the
power of rendering. Now let my foolish thought murmr, as much as it will,
saying: who art thou^ or how great is that glory? An excellent saying, and
worthy rememberance.
or by what merits think thou to obtain it? I confidently answer, I know
whom I have believed, and I am certain, because in great love he has adopted
me, because he is true in his promise, because he is able to perform it. This
is a threefold cord that is hardly broken, sent us from our heavenly country
into this prison, let us firmly keep and hold it.

Ambrose also agrees hereto in Luke 1. Not every one that is just before men,
is just before God. He is surely blessed that is just in Gods sight. He is
blessed, of who^ the Lord vouchsafes to say; Behold a true Israelite. A true
Israelite sees God, and knows himself to be seen of God, and gives to him
the secrets of his heart.

Places objected by the Pap^sts for doubting.
Against these things the adversaries, who bid our consciences stand in doubt,
whether we receive remission of sins, object some places of Scripture
concerning the imperfection of good works in this world, yea in the most holy
men, whose confession is this: Psalm. 19. 1. Cor. 4.
Who understands his faults? Cleanse me Lord from my secret sins. Also, I
know nothing by my self,

But these places are wrongfully alleged against us: who make account that
we are justified before God, not for our own worthiness and works, but
through the death and satisfaction of Christ alone. For to him give all the
Prophets and Apostles witness, Acts 10.
that whosoever believes in him, receives

Eccles. 9.
But nothing is more common for the opinion of the Papists, than that of Solomon
in Ecclesiastes: A man knows not whether he be worthy of love or hatred,
but all things to come are uncertain as the old translation has: which
according to the Hebrew verity is, even love and hatred a man knows not: all
things alike befall to all men, there is one and the same event to the just and
unjust person, etc.

But this fortress is made of fig leaves. For what? is it obscure in the
doctrine of the Church, whether they that are in Christ, and live according to
the spirit, do please God? and contrariwise whether thieves, fornicators,
adulterers, drunkards, Idolaters, and such like do displease him, 1 Cor 6.
Gal. 5.
of whom the Apostle so evidently pronounces, that such shall not possess the
kingdom of God? But as for the saying of Solomon, Aben-Ezra, one of the Hebrew
writers refers actiuely love and hatred unto men, that there is no man that
knows the things that men love or hate, that is, the prosperity or
adversity that shall come unto them. Yet the sense is more plain, that
Olympiodorus also upon Ecclesiastes gives, The true sense of Salomons works.
that by the outward events of this life it cannot be known, whether a man be
in love or hatred with God. Which meaning that which follows in stead of a
reason, plainly confirms, that all things happen alike to all, righteous and
ungodly, to him that serves God, and to him that despises him. This Alphonsus
considering, freely confesses, that this testimony, Contra Haeres^^ vt supra.
that had seemed before most manifest to him, as to many other in Popery, does
little or nothing prove this point.

It is objected also out of Joel. 2. that the Prophet exhorting Joel 2.
says: who knows if the Lord will turn, and forgive, Ion. 3.
and leave behind him a blessing? As also the king of Niniuie persuading the
people to repentance, said: Amos 5.
who knows if he will turn, and repent him, that we perish not? And in Amos
we read: Hate evil, love good, peradventure the Lord of hosts will be
merciful to the remnant of Joseph. Such also is that that Peter said to Simon
Magus: Repent, and pray to God, Acts 8.
if peradventure the thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee. All these
things seem to be against the certainty of grace.

But the Papists deal very unadvisedly alleging such places, unless they
would deny that God does forgive them their sins, that with all their hearts
repent, which thing is easily proved by six hundred places of Scripture: yea
the very sayings, from whence that show of doubting arises manifestly prove
the same thing, when the Lord says in Amos: seek me, and ye shall live, and
the Lord your God shall be with you. As Joel also testifies, if they repent,
it shall come to pass, that the Lord in great zeal will spare his people: for
he is loving gracious, and of much mercy.

To what purpose then does the spirit of God speak doubtfully sometimes by the
Prophets and Apostles, touching the hope of pardon?

2. Sam. 12
but that the punishment to such as repent, is turned into a fatherly
chastisement.



A fine similie.
So the Physician will not straightwaies assuage the grief, but will see what
may be more expedient, peradventure he will more increase the grief, because
he sees a sharp purgation to be more necessary.

Lib. de poenicent. cap. 5.
teaches by many examples, that that is the custom of the Scripture, even
boldly to use through a certain simplicity of utterance, such kinds of
speaking, wherein there is some show of doubting.

that the certainty of grace, if men could be sure of it, would be an occasion
and cause of great licentiousnes, and Epicurish security, it is a mere
ignorance and slander. For it cannot be, but the feeling of the love of God
toward us, whereby the multitude of our sins is graciously covered, should
beget more and more in our hearts toward him again, the love of new
obedience: as it is written, Psalm. 13. and 18.
With thee is mercy, that thou may be feared. Also, I will love thee O Lord
my strength, my tower, and the horn of my salvation. What if the adversaries
themselves confess, that a special revelation is granted to some of the
certainty of their salvation? It will follow then by their own opinion that
God does cast such men into the danger of prophanenes, and Epicurish security.

Neither does it any whit hinder the certainty of salvation, Prou. 18.
that we are commanded to be fearful in avoiding falls, not to be puffed up,
nor to be over wise, but to fear, Romans 11. 1. Cor. 10. Mark this.
that he that seems to stand, fall not. For by these and such like, the
security of the flesh, and not faith is condemned, and the use of the means
subordinate to salvation is required. So Paul, albeit he was certified by an
Angel of his own safety and of theirs that failed with him, and believing
God that so it should come to pass, as he had told him, yet he suffered not
the mariners to fly out of the ship, but said, unless these men abide in the
ship, ye cannot be saved. Acts 27.
Thus the confidence of salvation, and a godly care to use the means, and not
to tempt the Lord, do very well agree together.

They use also to charge our doctrine with presumption, Beucer de Concor. a^t.
great.
but in vain. For we believe God that promises. Wherefore our confidence and
certainty rests not upon our own presumption, but upon his promise, as
Augustine well distinguishes, tract. 22. in Ioh.

Finally, they wrest for their purpose, what our writers plainly Whosoever (say
they) doubts of his salvation, is not sure of it: but all men doubt,
therefore no man is sure of it. But this snare we easily avoid by this
caution, or distinction. He that doubts, is not sure, to wit, for that time
that he doubts, and in speaking of some Idea.
pattern of certainty. But now doubting oftentimes arises, but not always
in the minds of the godly, because of the infirmity and battle of the flesh
against the spirit, and they get with much ado the upper hand again by this
virtue and power, to whom they cry with tears; I believe Lord, Mark 9.
help my unbelief. And albeit this be a sufficient impediment, that we can
not attribute unto the godly the Ideam.
manner or form of the certainty of faith, whereby all doubting and trembling
is excluded: yet there is not sufficient cause to deprive them of all
certainty of grace and salvation, unless a man would by the like reason avouch,
Ierem. 12. Abac. 1. Psalm. 73.
that even the holy men of God, Jeremy, Abacuc, Asaph and others, were
uncertain of the providence of God, and his righteous government of all
things, because of some doubtings that were in them concerning that matter.

Therefore let it stand as a certain thing, that while we live in this
mortality, and banishment as it were of this world, we be not without the way,
and mean, whereby to our comfort we may be made sure of our salvation. And
while this stands fast, it necessarily follows, that we may know, and be
assured of the election also of us to eternal life. For seeing salvation
belongs to the elect only, doubtless the certainty of it cannot stand
without the certainty of Gods election, which is the fountain, beginning, and
ground of salvation.

CHAP. XXIIII. How and by what means we are made certain of the election of
us in Christ.
Revelation is needful.
Moreover, the mean whereby a man may be made sure of the election of himself
unto eternal life, depends upon the revelation not of flesh and blood, but
of God himself the chuser. Romans 11. 1. Cor. ^.
For who has known the mind of the Lord, or who is of his counsel? Or what
man knows the things that belong to a man, but the spirit of a man that is in
him? So no man knows the things of God, but the spirit of God. And we (says
the Apostle) have not received the spirit of the world, but the spirit that is
of God, that we may know what things God has bestowed upon us. Seeing therefore
the counsels of God cannot be known without divine manifestation, what
marvel is it, if so great a secret, I mean the predestination of us to
adoption, and to eternal life, cannot otherwise be seen into of us? And if
we assay speculatiuely, or as they speak, a priore, to search into the
eternal counsel of God concerning our salvation, the great depth of it will
swallow us up, and he that searches out Gods majesty, Prou. 25.27.
shall be overwhelmed with the glory of it.

But there is for the most part a threefold revelation of election: first, by
the most certain effects of election it self: Revelation is threefolde.
secondly, by the word of promise: and thirdly, by the seal of the holy Ghost.

The first way therefore (as I said) is by the effects of election, such as
these are, a true and lively says in Christ, The first way whereby a man may
know himself to be elected. The effects of election.
ingrafting into Christ by faith, justification, and the regeneration of the
spirit, showing it self more and more by newnes of life, and the study of
righteousness and good works. By these a posteriore we judge of election, as
the proper cause of them. For strong reasons are drawn as from the cause to
the effect, so again from the effect to the cause, as it is known by the
rules of Logike.

The Minor of this argument, to wit, that faith, justification, conversion,
etc. proceed from election, as the proper cause, we have confirmed before at
large, when we entreated of the effects of predestination: here only let
certain sayings of Scripture be viewed. Act. 13. As many as were ordained to
eternal life believed. Romans 8 Whom he foreknew, them he predestined to be
made conformable to the image of his son. And whom he predestined, them he
called: whom he called them he justified: whom he justified, them he glorified.
Romans 11. The election has obtained it, the rest were hardened. Ephesians. 1. He
chose us in him before the world, that we might be holy and blameles before
him through love, and has predestined us to adopt us for sons through
Christ Jesus, etc. In the same Epistle, chap. 2. We are his work created in
Christ Jesus to good works, which God has prepared that we should be exercised
in them. To which end tends also, 2. These. 3. Tit. 1.
that faith (as the Apostle says) belongs not to all, but to the elect of God.
But understand a true faith, and effectual by love, the faith not of the
devil, but of a Christian man, which being placed on the foundation, suffers
no man to perish, as Augustine says. De fide and oper. cap. 18.
Ioh. 6. Whatsoever the father gives me comes unto me, and him that comes
unto me I cast not forth. No man comes to me, unless my father draw him, who
sent me, and I will raise him up in the last day. It is written in the
Prophets; And they shall be all taught of God, that is says Augustine. Tract.
26.
All the men of that kingdom. Whosoever therefore has heard of the father,
and learned comes unto me. Ioh. 10. you believe not: for you are not of my
sheep, as I said unto you; my sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they
follow me, and I give them eternal life, and they shall not perish.

By these places we are taught, that a true faith and conversion be gifts
peculiar to the elect, and do flow from the eternal decree of God touching
his elect, so that for just cause we turn our eyes hither, when we seek for
the certainety of our election. Whereupon Saint Peter also advises us to make
our calling and election sure by good works, 2. Pet. 1.
by adding to says virtue, to virtue knowledge, to knowledge temperance, long
suffering, godliness, love to the brethren etc. So it shall come to pass, that
an entrance shall abundantly be ministered us into the eternal kingdom of our
Lord Jesus Christ. In the same sense Paul to Timoth. when he had testified of
the surenes of election in it self, that the foundation of God stands sure,
Two seals of the ^ur^es of our election, one God, the other outs.
having this seal: God knows who are his: forthwith adds another seal, in
respect of us; Let every one that calls on the name of the Lord, depart from
iniquity. And he adds: If a man therefore purge himself from these things
he shallbe a vessel for honor. By all which words he means, that the
study of holiness is the best way to know our election. Further, the same Paul
judging of the election of the Thesialonians and other faithful considered it
no other way, Phil 1. 1 Thessalonians 1.
than by the faith, love, hope, and other fruits of their calling to Christ,
and fellowship in the Gospel.

But the end doubtless deceived, or overcame this hope, and judgment of Paul in
some men, therefore faith, hope and charity etc. are not sure signs of
election to eternal life. Mark this.
but this is not the cause of the error, that faith and charity be not sure
marks of election in them selves, but because we cannot be sure of the
unfeigned faith of our neighbor, and of his charity out of a pure heart, as well
as we are of our own. Of which difference we will more fully speak
hereafter, when we have finished this point.

The second way therefore, The second way, whereby a man may know himself to
be elected.
whereby a man may be certain of the predestination of himself to life, is
the word of promise. For albeit by a singular or several promise, God says
not to thee, or me: Thou art elected, and shall be kept to eternal life: yet
there is a general promise in the word, and that faithful, and worthy by all
means to be embraced of us: that whosoever shall believe in the son of God,
Mark this very well, and remember it.
has eternal life, and shall not come into condemnation, but shall be raised
up to the glory of the kingdom of heaven, and therefore was elected unto that
kingdom: because this kingdom of the father shall not be given, but to whom
it was prepared before the foundation of the world. Under this universal
promise, whosoever is partaker of the gift of God, let him assume to himself
in his heart; I am faithful: and moreover let him conclude, therefore I shall
be saved, and by consequence, I am elected.

For the confirmation of this argument we must know, that the Mayor speaks
only of a saving or justifying faith, and such a one as works by love; for
this faith suffers no man to perish: but not of an historical or temporary
faith, as is the faith of many men, who receive the word with joy, (for they
are glad of some taste and understanding of the truth against errors, wherein
they had been drowned) but when oppression and persecution arise for the words
sake, straight ways they fall away, because they have no root in themselves,
but endure for a time.

And if it may help a weak mind, Matthew. 13.
whether he that believes, may be sure that he is endued with a true faith in
Christ? let the Apostle be considered. ^^w I may be sure. I have a true faith.
2 Cor. 13. Prove your selves, whether you be in faith, examine your selves.
Know ye not your selves that Jesus Christ is in you? And surely one of the
twain is necessary, that either the believer knows himself to believe, or
else if he know it not, he is uncertain also of his justification, seeing
justification is by faith. We say therefore with Augustine, Epist. 112. and de
Trin. lib. 13. cap. 2.
that every man sees and knows his own faith in himself, specially seeing
it is not the natural disposition of faith, to lie hid, as it were buried; but
more and more daiely to declare it self by newenes of life, and the fruits of
good works.

I find in my self great weakness of faith, many grievous doubtings, wherewith
my faith his shaken. Romans 14.
he does not cast away, but receive to himself a man that is weak in the
faith, neither does he quench smoking flax, Matthew. 12. 2. Cor. 12.
or break the bruised reed. And as he answered Paul; His power is perfected
through weakness. Only bewail thy infirmity, and crave daily the grace of the
holy Ghost.

Matthew. 10. Heb. ^0.
But I am in doubt of my continuance to the end. For he that believes, to wit
continually to the end, he shall be saved; But if any man withdraw himself,
my heart does not approve him, says the Lord. Him that comes unto me (and
the believers come) I will not cast forth. Ioh. 6. Gods promises of present
grace, the final perseverance.
Also, This is the will of him that sent me, that every one, that sees the
son, and believes in him, has everlasting life. And I will raise him up at
the last day. Again Ioh. 10. I know my sheep, and they shall not perish for
ever, neither shall any take them out of my hand. And Christ's sheep be such
as hear his voice, that is, do truly believe. Again, Ioh. 14. I will pray
to the father, and he will give you another comforter, that he may abide with
you for ever. Luke 22.
And, I have prayed for thee, Simon Peter, that thy faith fail not. And he
prayed for all, both for such as then believed, and also for those that should
believe afterward. Romans 8.
And Paul says, To them that love God, all things work for the best. In all
things we are more than conquerors through him that loved us. God is faithful,
1. Cor. 10.
who does not suffer you to be tempted above your strength, but will grant
with the temptation, an issue, that ye may be able to bear it. I am persuaded,
Phil. 2.
that he that has begun in you this good work, will perform it even to the
day of Jesus Christ. What place is here (to speak as Cyprian does) of anguish,
and careful thought? who is fearful and full of grief considering these
sayings, but he that lacks faith and hope? If thou be righteous, and live by
faith, if thou truly beleeuest in God, why do thou not securely embrace the
promise of the Lord? God has promised thee perseverance, and do thou doubt,
and waver?

Whereas certain places of Scripture, and examples of backsliders, that are
mentioned to have had faith, are wont to be alleged to the contrary, we have
answered elsewhere unto them, least we should do one thing twice.

The third way remains, Three ways whereby a man may know his election. The
seal of the spirit in our hearts.
whereby God reuealeth unto his Saints his election of them, to wit, by the
seal of the holy Ghost in our hearts: according unto the saying, Ephesians 1.
After ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy spirit of promise, which is
the earnest of our inheritance, until we be restored to liberty etc. And
chapter 4. Grieve not the spirit, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of
redemption. 2. Cor. 1. It is God, who has sealed us, and given us the earnest
of the spirit in our hearts. Behold the spirit of God who is given to all the
faithful of Christ, (for who so has not the spirit of Christ, Romans 8.
the same man is not his) in steed of Gods seal, and certain earnest penny,
and who makes us sure of our inheritance in heaven: and consequently, that our
names also are written in heaven in the book of life. To this end those most
sweet sentences belong, whereby these metaphores are elsewhere expounded, 1.
Ioh. 4. Hereby we know that we dwell in God, and he in us, that he has given
us of his spirit, 1. Cor. 2. We have received from God the spirit, that we may
know what things are freely given us of God, Romans 8. If his spirit that
raised Jesus from the dead, dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the
dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies, by his spirit dwelling in you.
And there follows in that Chapter a right golden place, and very diligently
to be weighed in this whole matter. If ye mortify the deeds of the body by
the spirit ye shall live, says he. For as many as are lead by the spirit of
God, they are the sons of God. For he have not received the spirit of bondage
to fear again, but the spirit of adoption, by whom we cry, Abba, father;
which spirit bears witness together with our spirit, that we are the sons
of God: and if sons, then heirs also, even the heirs of God, and coheires
with Christ. The Apostles demonstration is in this sort.

Whosoever are the sons of God, shall obtain the inheritance of the kingdom
of heaven. For if we be sons, we be heirs also. But whosoever are guided by
the holy spirit, are the sons of God. Therefore whosoever are guided by the
holy spirit, shall obtain the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven.
by whom we cry, Abba, Father: he proves the same thing by the confession of
the godly, who call upon God, as their father, as also we are taught of the
Lord in the beginning of that Christian prayer: Our Father which art in heaven.
This the godly say, and cry, not so much in sound of voice, as in the intention
of the heart, which arises of that confidence, that agrees with the sons of
God. Matt. 3.
) but in the heart of man: because elsewhereas the Apostle writes, the love of
God is spread abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost, Romans 5. Za. 12. The
witness of the spirit is most sure, and why. 1. Cor. 2. Ioh. 16. Ephe. 2.
who is given unto us. Whereupon he was called of the Prophet the spirit of
grace, because he bears witness of the grace and mercy of God in our minds:
And there is nothing surer than this testimony of the spirit. For the spirit
of God is not deceived, Who searches all things, even the deep secrets of
God: neither does he deceive, because he is true, and leads into all truth.
These things concerning the revealing of election are gathered out of the word
of God, and are evident. Hub. these. 11^6.
Therefore we are falsely accused of some, as though we coueted to approach unto
election without the word of God.

Against this slander we openly profess, that laying aside all curiosity, By
Gods word only we must seek to find cut our election, and so Calvin and
Luther teach us. Call. li. 3. Just. cap. 24. sect. 3.
and dangerous questions of the secret counsels of God, we enquire not, but by
the express word of God, of his gracious will and love toward us, whereby he
has chosen us in Christ before the world.

And that thou may not doubt, Christian reader, behold the testimonies of
two notable writers of this point, I mean Calvin, and Luther, who have most
diligently taught the doctrine of predestination. Thus then Calvin says: That
we may be made sure of our salvation, we must begin at the word of God, and
therewith we must be content for our assurance, that we may call God father.
For some men preposterously, that they may be certain of the counsel of God,
(which is near us in our mouth, and in our hearts) desire to flee above the
clouds. That rashness must be bridled by the sobriety of faith, that God who
is the witness of his secret grace, may content us in his external word. And
in the next Sectio^: We shall observe the best order, if in seeking out the
certainty of our election, we rest our selves in those latter signs, which are
the certain witnesses thereof, and do not inquire after our election without
the way. By inquiring without the way I mean, when wretched man goes about to
pearce into the hidden secrets of Gods wisdom, to understand, It is very
dangerous to seek for our election without the word.
what is determined of him before Gods judgment seat. But as they plunge
themselves into a deadly gulf, that search into the eternal counsel of God
without his word, to be certified of their election: so they that seek for it
rightly and orderly, as it is showed in the word, receive from thence great
fruit of consolation. In Genesis 16.


And Luther entreating of this matter, writes after this sort: Such thoughts
as search out any high mystery above, and without the revelation of God, are
altogether deuillish, whereby no other good comes than our headlong
destruction, because they lay before us an unsearchable object, that is, God
unrevealed. And at large in that place he reproves that horrible disease (as
they call it) whereby men go on to search out God speculatiuely, and rush at
length into desperation and contempt. Contrariwise Luther teaches, Try thy
faith and the fruits of it, if thou will know thy election.
that this examination, Whether thou be predestined or no, depends on
faith in Christ, and the fruits of a true faith: saying, If thou hear the
son, and be baptized in his name, and love his word, then surely thou art
predestined, and certain of thy salvation. Also, If thou beleeuest in God
revealed, and receiuest his word, thou shall by little and little know God
also, who is secret, yea, even now thou know him. And interlasing a few
words, he says: Thou ought certainly and without doubting to make account of
God, that he is merciful unto thee for Christ's sake, that thou art redeemed
and sanctified through the precious blood of the son of God: and so thou
shall be sure of thy predestination, without all curious and dangerous
questions of the secret counsels of God. Behold thou have the son: he that
believes, and is baptized, is written in the book of life, etc.

Our election must be found a posteriore.
And this way of finding out our election, a posteriore, that is, by that which
comes after he elega^tly compares with the vision of Moses, to whom when he
desired to see Gods face, the Lord answered: I will show thee my back parts,
but thou can not see my face: Exodus 33.
as though God should say to every one of us, by Luthers exposition: I will
show thee plainly my foreknowledge and predestination, but not by way of
natural searching, and carnal wisdom: being God unrevealed, I will be
revealed, and yet I will abide the same God still. I will send my son, hear
thou him, behold him, what he does, and what he says: if thou hear him,
thou art certainly predestined. Concerning this vision of the Lord we may
use that saying of Bernard: O place of true rest, this vision does not terrify
but comfort: it does not stir up restles curiosity, but does alay it:
neither does it weary a man, but give him ease: here is true quietness, a
peaceable God calmeth all things, and to behold him peaceable, is to be at rest
and quiet.

Further, this caveat also must not be omitted, that, A needful admonition.
if any man find not as yet in himself these later signs, (whereof we have
spoken) he ought not therefore despair of the predestination of himself to
life. For there be twelve hours of the day, and he that is not called in the
morning, or about the third hour, may be called of God at the sixth, or ninth,
peradventure even at the eleventh hour. Albeit we ought not in the mean
while to defer repentance, as it is written: Put not off from day to day to
turn to the Lord, Eccles. 5.
neither make any delay: for his wrath will come suddenly, and in the time of
vengeance he will destroy thee. And in the Psalm, Psalm. 95.
To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts.

CHAP. XXV. What is meet for us to judge of the election of other men.
FVrthermore, by the grounds that hitherto have been laid open concerning the
certainty of our election, it is no hard thing to judge, what we are to think
being Christians, of the election of others in Christ, according to the rule of
Christ, that is, Charity: to wit, we ought not only to be sure of the
predestination of our selves in Christ, but also to judge the same thing of our
brethren in Christ: and not to despair of others before their death.

We here make a difference between brethren, that profess with us the same
faith, and those that are without, who are unbelievers as yet, and strangers
from the society of a holy brotherhood.

As touching our brethren, albeit a faithful man cannot judge so certainly of
others as of himself, ye the ought to account and acknowledge them for elect,
In whom we see faith and repentance, we must count them for elect.
so long as the contrary does not appear. The reason is, because faith and
conversion be signs of election. Therefore whom we judge to be partakers of
faith and conversion, those also must we needs comprehend in election. And of
this judgment we have the Apostles of the Lord for authors. 1. Pet. 1. Ephesians. 1.
and 1. These. 1. where Paul says, We know brethren beloved, that ye are chosen
of God, because our Gospel was among you not in word only, but in power, in
the holy Ghost, and in much assurance. And 2. These. 2. We thank God, brethren,
beloved of the Lord, because God has chosen you unto salvation from the
beginning through the sanctification of the spirit, and faith in the truth.



Phil. 1.7. 1. Cor. 2.
I answer. That is no matter, because this judgment of others is not so much
of certainty, as of charity. For no man is so known to another, as a man is
known to himself. For who knows the things of man, but the spirit of man
that is in him? 1. Sam. 16.
Man only beholds what things are before his eyes, but God looks into the
heart. Aug. de Tim. li. 13 cap. 2.
Hereupon Augustine says: Every one sees his own faith in himself: but in
another he believes it to be, he sees it not: and the more surely he
believes it, as he more knows the fruits thereof, which faith uses to
work by love.

Therefore because charity believes all things, hops all things, from hence
surely it comes to pass, that albeit many be called, and few chosen: yet
through charity they are plainly called believers, converted, justified,
redeemed, sanctified disciples and members of Christ, Aug. de Cor. and gra.
cap. 7. and 9.
temples, and children of God, yea the elect of God, who profess with us the
same faith, and Christian conversation, howsoever before God, Luth. de seru.
Arhit. cap. 61.
who discerns the thoughts and intents of the heart, they oftentimes be not
that they be called.

But as for those that be without, seeing Saul suddenly became a Paul, no man's
conversion must be thought desperate, and therefore neither their salvation
and election. How many daily are converted? How many are predestinate, although
not yet gathered together? Sermon. 50. de verbis Domini. in Ioh.
But he knows them who has predestined them: he knows who came to
redeem them by his blood, says Augustine. Wherefore we (as the same man
writes, de Correp. and great. cap. 15.) not knowing who belongs to the number
of the predestinate, who not, must so charitably be affected, that we should
wish that all were saved, praying for Infidels, and teaching and exhorting
every one, as occasion is offered. And these things of the certainty of Gods
election as much as concerns us.

THE LAST PART, NAMELY THE USE of the doctrine of predestination, against those
men that think, we must abstain from the preaching of it, as not only not
profitable, but also dangerous, and contrary to edification.
CHAP. XXVI. The foresaid error is rehearsed and confuted.
What, and of what sort the doctrine of predestination is, has bin declared.
But because some men are afraid to make mention of it, specially among the
common people, as being an enemy to the profit of edification: this opinion
also must be abated. By which labor the use also of this doctrine is
disclosed, and how it ought to be preached, to the intent it may bring profit
to the hearers.

Prospers Epistle concerning the relics of the Pelagian heresy, testifies
surely, that many servants of Christ in the city of Massilia, and those famous
in the study of all virtues, but that they suffered themselves to be
delivered with the spirit of Pelagian impiety, after that certain books of
Augustine were published against the Pelagians, wherein he inserted many things
of predestination, to defend thereby, that the grace of God is given not
according to our merits, but according to the purpose of Gods will: were so
offended, that they concluded, that the faith of Augustine, and others, that
rightly judged of this matter, was contrary to edification, and therefore said,
that albeit it were true, yet it was not to be taught, but to be buried in
silence rather. The same thing Hilarie (not Bishop of Pictauia, but of Atls)
reports in his Epistle to Augustine, not only of the Massilians, but also of
other brethren in France.

Reasons objected against God grace, and predestination, by the Semipelagians.
in his secret judgment but manifest work, making one vessel to honor, and
another to dishonor, seems to put away all industry in men. For when they
think that all things depend on predestination, (who shall believe, who not,
who shall be saved, who damned) and the same doubtless unchangeable, that
neither he that is rejected can by any endeavor enter in, nor he yt is elected,
can possibly by any negligence fall away, men are become sluggish and dull: so
that being prone to slide from labor to lust, they follow their own
concupiscences.

He has mercy on whom he will: and whom he will he hardens. Why is he yet
angry? who can resist his will? Hitherto belong the former objections, (which
have been answered) of the author of sin, of fatal necessity, and
whatsoever beside, overthwart reason, that knows not God, has devised of
envy against the truth. For these things therefore, and such like, in old
time those brethren throughout France, even such as durst not find fault with
the opinion of the soundest writers touching grace and predestination, thought
it would be to the profit of the Church, if this doctrine so hard to the
flesh, for the weaker sort that could not conceive it, should be omitted: and
they added the example of other fathers before Augustine, whom they said
defended the Catholic faith no less profitably many years without this
declaration, both against others, and especially against the Pelagians.
Therefore that there was no need that the hearts of so many that wanted
understanding, The doctrine of the Semipelagians.
should be troubled with the uncertainty of such kind of reasoning; that this
declaration and profession is sufficient, that every man has sinned in Adams
Vide epist. Prosper. and Hilar.
so that they that will, are made the sons of God, and they are inexcusable,
who will not be faithful: because Gods justice consists herein, that he
should perish that will not believe: and his goodness is herein seen, if
indifferently he will have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of
the truth, eternal life in respect of him being prepared for all men, albeit
in respect of freewill, some receive it by faith, other refuse through
unbelief: further, that God foreknew before the

But this opinion, which has his favorers even at this day, (of whom some
only will not have all mention of predenation buried: and others grant, that
in schools and among learned men it may be handled, but deny, Predestination
taught by Christ and his Apostles to all.
that it ought to be taught to the common people in sermons) may easily be
confuted. For it becomes us not to be wiser than Christ himself, his holy
Apostles and Prophets, who all have freely witnessed to learned and unlearned
the true doctrine of predestination, how hard soever it may seem to the flesh.
As for example: Christ said, Many are called, and few chosen. And again, All that the father gives me, comes unto me. My sheep hear my voice: but you
believe not, because ye are not of my sheep. Paul certainly not in a corner,
but publicly, and before the whole world says: It is not in the willer, nor
in the runner, but in God that shows mercy, etc. And again, God willing to
make known his goodness, etc. All these things forsooth are such, if we
believe these moderators, as nothing can be spoken more unprofitably.

Mark this speech if the ^^^ti^o^ well.
But say I; If God will have such things spoken, and published abroad, and that
it is not to be respected what may follow, or what carnal wisdom shall
infer thereupon: who art thou O man, that do forbid them? As who say, thy
creator shall learn of thee his creature, what is profitable, what is
unprofitable to be preached? Or what shall seem tolerable in the judgment of
men, unskillful surely, I will not say, commonly most ungodly, that only shall
be profitable: and what is contrariwise, that shall straight be reputed
unprofitable, and pernicious? What is more foolish, than to make Gods word so
subject to the pleasure of men? Let rather the whole earth be silent before
the Lord, and let all the inhabitants of the earth reverence the words of his
mouth.

CHAP. XXVII. That the doctrine of predestination is profitable and necessary,
with the answers to such objections, as have been made against it.


^. Cor. 1.
and cannot do any thing foolishly and rashly, whatsoever the flesh supposes.
For the foolishnes of God is wiser than men: and likewise the unrighteousness of
God is more righteous than men. With this answer the godly are content. Yet
for the greater confusion of this error already overthrown, Predestination is
profitable and necessary to be taught. The 1. reason.
and that we may be the more instructed in the truth, I will briefly show it
not only to be profitable, but also necessary, that the doctrine of
predestination be taught, and preserved among Christian people.

And first it is profitable and necessary for this cause, that the true God
may be rightly known, as he reuealeth himself in his word: that is to say, how
that he has mercy on whom he will, and hardens whom he will: and of the
same lump makes one vessel to honor, and another to dishonor: that is, he
has decreed to bestow undeserved grace upon vessels of mercy prepared of
himself, by whom, being severed from the corrupt and damnable lump of
mankind, they might be saved, while the rest in the same mass of perdition
are forsaken, and shall be condemned for sin: whereof the one belongs to his
mercy, the other to his justice, whose judgment and mercy the Church often
sings. Psalm. 101. Dan. 4.32. Rom 9. Matthew. 20. De ser. arbit. cap. 143.
And who is he that may say unto him, why do thou so? Shall the pot say to
the potter, why do thou make me thus? Has not the pottter power over the
clay? Is thine eye evil because the Lord is good? Such a God does the sacred
Scripture declare unto us. But God being spoiled (as Luther avouches) of power
and wisdom to choose, what shall he be but an Idol of fortune, by whose power
all things should come to pass at all adventures? And at length it will come
to this, that men are saved, and damned, God not knowing it, as one that has
not appointed by a sure election such as shall be saved, and shall be damned,
but offering to all his general goodness and mercy, has left it at men's
pleasures, whether they will be saved, or damned, while he in the mean space
perchance goes to the Ethiopians banquet, as Homer speaks of his Jupiter.

The doctrine of predestination is profitable and necessary to be preached, to
know the grace of God against the ^elagians, The 2. reason.
and Semipelagians, and so to humble us, that he that glories, may glory in
the Lord. Augustine saw this, when he said: Either predestination must so be
preached as the sacred Scripture evidently speaks of it, De bono perseu. cap.
16.
that the gifts and calling of God in them that be predestinate may be without
repentance: or else it must be confessed, that the grace of God is given
according to our merits, which sauoureth of Pelagianisme. And in the next
chapter: Exhortations are not hindered, if faith and perseverance, and good
works themselves, be said to be Gods gifts and that foreknowne, that is
predestined to be freely given: but rather that dangerous error is hindered,
and subverted by the preaching of predestination, when the grace of God is said
to be given according to our merits, that he that glories, may glory not in
the Lord, but in himself. Hereupon the same father chapter 20. of the same
book, testifies, that he was urged of necessity to write largely of
predestination because of the Pelagians, who said, that the grace of God was
given according to our merits: which thing (says he) is nothing else, than a
flat denial of grace.

The opinion of the Pelagians.
The Pelagians imagined, that grace was offered indifferently to all men, and
that in respect of God eternal life was prepared for all: but that it was in
the power of men to refuse, or receive grace and salvation offered. And that
some are saved, because they embrace grace as of themselves, and through their
own free will: And that others be damned, because when they may, yet they will
not receive grace when it is offered. What other thing is this, than to make
war both against grace and predestination?

The doctrine of the Semipelagians.
Now such among them as would seem more moderate, and did not so much make a
show of Pelagianisme, as secretly and a far off only follow it, as those
relics of the Pelagians, of whom Prosper and Hilarie write: did confess
surely, that no man is sufficiently able of himself, even to begin any good
work, much less to perform it, (the nature of man is so overthrown) but
they would have yet some endeavor and will, which only may seek after the
Physician, and is not able of it self to do any thing, to remain in man
corrupted: thinking that no nature is so depraved, or extinguished, that it
ought not, or cannot will it self to be healed. And upon this ground, to wit,
that such a will remained in all men, whereby a man was able either to
contemn, or to obey they supposed that a reason is soon rendered of the elect
and reprobates Gods foreknowledge choosing such as would believe, and condemning
unbelievers.

Unto which error that is not unlike, which some in our time go about to
maintain, that every one has such strength in him, that he is able to
believe, saving that they say, that this strength comes not from any remnants
of our corrupt nature, but of renouation: which they by a new error affirm to
be common to all, none excepted. As though God gave us only ability to
believe, and not rather faith it self, whereby believers are separated and
discerned from unbelievers.

But not to stand now upon this point, this is certain, Mark this well.
so long as we say, that there is somewhat in us, whether the beginning of
faith, or the good use of freewill, or of that common grace also, or whatsoever
it be, whereby we are discerned from the rest, beside the only grace of God,
the Pelagians always will conclude, that grace is given according to our
merits: and that saying of Cyprian will fail, that we must glory in nothing,
because nothing is ours: And that of the Apostle, who does put thee apart from
others? or what have thou, 1. Cor. 4.
that thou have not received? For are some men discerned from others by these
gifts, which whether of nature, or by grace, are common to all?

And that grace may be grace, The orthodexall says.
we must needs confess as the truth is, laying aside all respect of our own
worthynes and disposition, that it is only Gods gift, and that free
altogether, not only that grace is offered us, but also much more that we
assent by faith to grace offered, and refused of others, and in faith persevere
unto the end to salvation: as the Apostle claymeth this wholly for God, Phil.
1. and 2.
both that he has begun in us a good work, and also that he finisheth it
against the day of Christ Jesus, and works in us to will and to do of his good
pleasure. And the Lords saying is most plain, Ioh. 15.
without me ye can do nothing.

And if al these things depend of ye grace of the giver, he also foreknew from
al eternity, to whom he would give them, to whom not, and disposed, that is
predestined the^ in his foreknowledge, which cannot be deceived, nor changed.
For (as it has bin said before) that grace and the predestination of the
Saints, differ only herein, Aug. de praedest sanct. cap. 10.
that predestination is the preparation of grace, whereby they are most
certainly freed, whosoever shall be freed: but grace is now the gift it self,
and effect of predestination. Whereupon the Apostle also annexing
predestination to grace says: ye are saved by grace through faith and that not
of your selves, it is the gift of God, and not of ^orks, least any man should
b^ast. For we are his work, created in Christ Jesus to good works, which God
has prepared, that we should be exercised in them. 2. Tim. 1.
Again to Tim. he has saved us and called us with an holy calling, not
through our works, but of his purpose and grace, which is given us in Christ
Jesus before the world. Therefore to gainesaie predestination, and to wish it
were suppressed, is a sign of too much contention, if we do confess
sincerely, as is meet, the grace of God, whereby alone we are put a part from
such as perish, that he that glories may glory in the Lord.

The 3. reason.
Thirdly, this also is the use of the doctrine of predestination, that it
instructs us to patience, and armeth us with a true and lively faith in
afflictions, and whatsoever temptations of this wretched life. Hereupon the
Apostle, we know that all things work for good to such as love God, even to
such as are called according to purpose. For whom he foreknew, he predestined
them he predestined, he called, etc. If therefore God be for us, who can be
against us? who shall separate us from the love of God? shall persecution, or
danger? And in many places to this very end does the Scripture inculcate
predestination, that we might have a sure hope in God, and even in the maddest
of oppressions, may rejoice under the hope of the glory of God: as at large
before has been showed against slaunderers, as though this doctrine contained
more matter of desperation than consolation.

The 4. reason.
Fourthly, it serves to stir up in us the love of God, and the study of good
works. For why should we not with all our ha^t love God, who first has loved
us, and passing by very many others, with whom we had alike deserved damnation,
he has chosen us freely before the foundations of the world were laid, in
Christ his beloved son? And he has spread abroad in our hearts, by the holy
Ghost, the feeling both of his love, and also election. Further, it cannot be,
but we should be stirred up to the study of good works, when we consider that
we were predestined not only to the end, but also to the means, such as
these be, faith, and good works, which (as Paul testifies) God has prepared,
Ephesians. 2.
that we should walk in them. And what is more effectual to move the
faithful to lead their life aright, as becomes them, than if they daily
remember, that they are the sons and heirs of the most high? and that they
were predestined to so high and great a glory, before they were borne? and
called, when they were strangers? justified, when they were condemned?
quickened, when they were dead in offenses and sins? and that for no merit of
theirs forebeeing, or foreseen, but of the only grace of the caller. Who
would not think himself bound to GOD for so great benefits to be thankful
in all duties? Thus let it be sufficient, to have touched these things
concerning the vtility and necessity of this doctrine. If any man desire to
know more, let him read Bucer in 1. cap. ad Ephesians. Zanchie li. 3. Miscell. cap.
5. and Luthers book de ser. arbit. cap. 38. and so in order. Where against
Erasmus he largely defends, that the doctrine of servile will, and
predestination must not be concealed, but publicly and freely preached,
notwithstanding the judgment of man's reason to the contrary.

For in that ungodly reason tells us, The objections of Reason.
that this doctrine is against the profit of preaching, as though it
maintained slothfulnes, and the lusts of the flesh, blunted the edge of
exhortations, provoked men to despair, excused sins, and (which God forbid)
lays injustice to the Lords charge, besides making him the author of sin, and
establishes a fatal necessity: these and such like are mere false
accusations, and have been fully before confuted in their places.

Whither this doctrine must be concealed, because it offends some.
touching those that shall be saved, and damned, which we term Predestination:
yet for their sakes who are offended, this doctrine, albeit true, ought to be
concealed, rather than taught and propounded. The reason is this: The truth
ought often to be concealed for their sakes, that cannot comprehend it, by the
example of Christ: I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear
them away now: and of the Apostle, I could not speak unto you as spiritual,
but as unto carnal, even as to babes in Christ. I have given you milk, and
not strong meat: for ye were not yet able for it, neither as yet ye be. A
Syllogism.
But it is confessed, that many cannot comprehend the doctrine of
predestination. Therefore for their sakes it ought to be concealed, namely
least we should make them worse, who do not understand it, while we would make
them better learned, that do understand it.


De bono perseu. cap. 16.
Unto this argument, long ago often used of the Semipelagians; does our
Augustine answer. And he answers to the Mayor, which is only particular,
and then is of force, when a man runs into danger by speaking only the
truth, and not also by concealing it. I will set it down in Augustines words:
When the truth may be concealed.
It were tedious to seek out or allege all the causes of concealing the
truth: yet this is one, least we make them worse that understand it not, while
we desire to make them better learned, that do understand it, who though we
should conceal such a thing, are neither the better learned, nor worse. But
when a truth stands thus, that he that cannot understand it, is made worse by
our speaking of it, and he that can, is made worse by our concealing of it:
When the truth must be taught, and not concealed.
ought not the truth rather to be spoken, that he that is able to understand
it, may understand it, than to be concealed, that not only both may not
comprehend it, but also that he that is of a better understanding, may become
worse: who if he should understand it, more men by him might learn? Let the
truth therefore be spoken, specially where some doubt forces us to speak it,
and let them understand it that are able: least peradventure when it is
concealed for their sakes that cannot understand it, such as are able, are not
only defrauded of the truth, but also entangled in falsehood. Luthers answer,
albeit in other words is all one with this, de seruo arbit. cap. 40.

And this difference is most easily confirmed. Are not many at this day
offended, The Apostles taught the truth, though many were offended at it, Romans
3. and 6.
and long ago were offended at the doctrine of grace and justification by only
faith in Christ Jesus, yt they spoke evil of the very Apostles, and falsely
reported the^ to say: Let us do evil, that good may come thereof: let us sin,
that grace may abound? And yet for that cause ought not the true doctrine of
grace, and the justification of a man be suppressed with one silence, neither
must we be an occasion of any man's perishing, that is deluded with a false
persuasion of his works and merits. So, 1. Cor. 1.
(as Paul testifies) Christ crucified was a stumbling block to the Jews, and
foolishness to the Grecians. Did Paul therefore slack any whit of his wonted
diligence in preaching the word of the cross? yea, because by foolish
preaching it pleased God to save such as believe, he determined to know nothing
but Christ Jesus crucified. Farewell then that preprosterous warynes of those
men, that suppose that the doctrine of predestination ought to be buried in
silence, because it agrees not with the judgment of the flesh. We on the
contrary, stand to the judgment of the spirit, and say, that reason must be
commanded, both every where else in causes of faith, and also especially in
this. So it shall come to pass that the mysteries of heavenly doctrine may be
laid open, and made sweet unto us.

And whereas it was alleged besides, that the more ancient fathers before
Augustine had defended the Catholic faith for so many years, even without
this defining of predestination: hereunto it is answered, to the objection
concerning the fathers before Augustine.
that the ancient fathers were not altogether silent in this matter. For even
they preached the true grace of God, as it ought to be preached, that is,
before which do go no merits of man. De bono perseu. cap. 19.
Which thing Augustine shows plainly by the testimonies of Cyprian, Ambrose
and others. That is an excellent saying of Cyprian: We must glory in nothing,
seeing nothing is ours. But Ambrose said, Our heart and thoughts are not in our
own power. Also, Amb. in Luc. in expos. proamij.
the will of men is prepared of God, and whatsoever is honorable in the
saints, the same is of his grace. The same writer upon Luke, entreating of the
Samaritans that would not receive Christ; withal learn (says he) that he
would not receive hollow hearted conuerts; for if he would, he would have made
them devout that had no devotion in them. For whom he vouchsafes, he calls,
Greg. Naz.
and whom he will, he makes religious. Gregory Nazianzene also is cited of
Augustine who witnesses, that both gifts come from God, both to believe in
God, and also to confess what we believe. Besides it is the consent of the
whole Church, which never wanted this thing in her prayers. For when did not
the Church pray for unbelievers, and for her enemies, that they might believe?
and for the faithful, that they might grow from faith to faith, and continue
therein to the end? Neither do the faithful ask any other thing in the
Lords prayer, specially when they say: lead us not into temptation, but that
they may through the gift of God continue in a holy obedience. As therefore the
Church was borne, has grown, and now increases in these prayers: so also in
this faith, to believe, that the grace of God is given not according to the
merits of them that receive it: seeing the Church would not pray, that faith
might be given to unbelievers, and perseverance in faith to the faithful,
unless she had always believed of a certainety, that they be the gifts of
God.

And who will say, yt those fathers and the universal Church did so confess the
grace of God, that they durst deny his foreknowledge, which not only the
learned, but also the unlearned confess? Futher if they so knew that God gave
these things, as that they were not ignorant of his foreknowledge that he would
give, and to whom he would give: out of doubt they knew the predestination of
the Saints. For this is nothing else, than the prescience, and preparation of
Gods benefits, whereby they are most certainly delivered, as many as be
delivered: the rest being left by the just judgment of God in the lump of
pedition.

All this is Augustines answer cap. 14.19.24 and p^ssi. de bonpers. yet here we
must know, that before the Pelagian heresy sprung up, (which happened when
Augustine was now Bishop) the Fathers briefly only in some places of their
writings show their judgment of the grace of God: standing in the mean while
upon other things, which they handled against other enemies of the Church, and
upon exhortations to all virtues, wherein men must serve God. But the state of
time was otherwise, after that Pelagius had vomited forth his poison: then very
necessity compelled the sound Fathers more full and more exactly to defend the
places of the Scripture, wherein predestination, and grace that is given
thereupon, is set forth. De bon. perseu. cap. 23.
For (as Augustine witnesses) each several heresy brought in their peculiar
questions, and of necessity caused men to search into, and to defend the
divine Scriptures more diligently, than they would have done, if no such
necessity had urged them.

CHAP. XXVIII. Or last. That Predestination must soberly and discreetly be
preached.
Therefore it is made manifest, yt the doctrine of predestination is profitably
retained in the Church, and also to good purpose preached unto the people when
occasion requires. But how, and with what speech it may be preached,
Predestination must be preached soberly.
is a matter of great edifycation. For we have hereunto need of christian
sobriety, and discretion. For if ever elsewhere, surely here that which the
Apostle says, ought to be observed, (...), that is, we must be wise to
sobriety: Romans 12.
doubtless we must judge, and speak of predestination, according to those
things only, that are taught in the scriptures. For in them is contained what
is sufficient, and what is sure and sound: which if they do not satisfy any
man, let him not hope to find the knowledge of the truth elsewhere. Therefore
let ungodly and male part reason be bridled, which while it dare withstand the
word of God, breeds all difficulty in this matter, and enters into a
Labyrinth, from whence afterward it finds no passage out. Let also curiosity
in general be restrained, that it go no further to search out the things, that
God will have to be hidden in himself, than it may safely, and than our
infirmity does permit. Ecclesiasticus 3.21, 22, 24
Because the power of God is great, says the wiseman, and it gets glory of
the humble. Seek not out the things that are too high for thee, and above thy
reach: but religiously meditate on those things which God has commanded thee.
For it is not needful for thee, to see with thine eyes the things that are
secert, seeing already more things are revealed, than man's capacity can
comprehend. Whereupon it is well said of Augustine, that there is a certain
learned ignorance, and that is to be preferred before rash knowledge.

But as it it a point of odious curiosity to search out secret things: so it
is a sign of intolerable unthankfulness, to neglect the things that God will
have revealed. Aug lib. 5. de Genesis ad lit.
But the mean is Christian sobriety, to follow the Scripture, which we may
safely do, which as with a motherly pace goes fair and softly, least it
should forsake our infirmity.

It must also be taught discreetely ^o the hearers.
But discretion also must be joined to sobriety, which will be careful to
propound this doctrine, to the capacity of the hearers, and to their
edification, by showing the true use of it, and avoiding offense of words. For
it is the property of a deceitful, Augustines comparison.
or unskillful physician, so to bring forth even a wholesome medicine, that it
helps not, but hurts. And touching the capacity of the hearers, the same
admonition serves well in this place, which is elsewhere mentioned, to make
difference between such as have need of milk, as children in Christ, and
such as need stronger meat, as men of perfect age. Of which thing Luther
writes passing well. Babes in Christ (says he) must needs first grow,
Praesa. ad Romans
before they drink this pure wine. For here there is even a certain
childehoode, that needs milk until it be accustomed to eat strong meat.
Therefore he shortly reproves curious heads, that search out the bottom of
predestination, before they have learned Christ, and the power of his cross,
whereas, according to the order of the Apostle to the Romans, the knowledge of
Christ must first be learned, and the mortification of the old man, and from
hence we must proceed unto the cross and tribulations. And then (says he)
this necessity of predestination will wax sweet, and we shall perceive how
full it is of consolation.

Further, touching the use of predestination, The hearers must be admonished of
the use of i^, and that they abuse it not.
the hearers must also be admonished, when any thing is spoken of it, that they
abuse it not to the liberty of the flesh, or unto desperation, hatred and
blaspheming of God: but that they use it rather to the glory of God, and to
stir up in them love and care of good works, and to uphold their faith with
all long suffering and consolation in all afflictions, by making certain
account, that there is nothing that can separate us from the love of God
toward us in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Lastly, as touching the manner and form of teaching it, The manner of teaching
it, must be in apt and fit words.
we must take heed, that the things, which are spoken truly, be also aptly
spoken, to avoid, as much as we may, the offense of the hearers. For it is
greatly material, how, and after what manner of teaching anything is
propounded. As for example, if any man speaking of predestination unto the
Church, should say, whether ye run, or sleep, ye shall be that, that he,
who cannot be deceived, has predestined you unto; predestination it self,
seems to be after a sort disproued by that preaching of it among the
unskillful; as also the foreknowledge of God (which surely no man can deny)
seems to be blamed, if it should be said to men, whether ye run, or
sleep, ye shall be that, for which he, who cannot be deceived, has foreknowne
you. More fitly to this purpose it is said: So run ye, that ye may obtain,
and by your course know your selves to be foreknowne, and to belong to the
predestination of Gods grace. So it is too hard a saying, if a man should
speak to the Christian people after this sort: That some of you believe,
others believe not, it therefore comes to pass, because some of you have
received the help of grace, pitying your misery, others have not received it
as yet. But if ye be elected, albeit not yet called, ye shall receive the same
grace. What need is there of this speech: Some of you? For if we speak to
the Church of God, if we speak to the believers, why say we that some of
them have received grace, and so are supposed to do wrong to the rest? It may
thus more fitly be said: thus the predestination of Gods will stands, that
ye receiving grace, are come from unbelief to faith, and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God, least any man should boast. But if any of you
walk as yet in your sins, repent ye, awake, and rise up from the dead.
Also, if any as yet be not called, let us pray for them, that they may be
called: for peradventure they be so elected, that they shall be granted to our
requests, and receive with us the same grace. Is not thus the same thing both
more truly, and more fitly spoken? Of this matter our Augustine (whom I have
often cited) without controversy a great divine, learned, De bono perseuerant.
cap. 14.
sincere, and sound, and a notable patron of the Catholic faith, (as Hilarie
praises him) has written more at large. To him therefore let them resort,
that desire to know these things more exactly. And these things thus far of
the eternal predestination of God, who only is wise, merciful, and just. To
him be honor and blessing for ever and ever: Amen.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL MATTERS MENTIONED IN THESE BOOKS.
A.
Abraham's bosom. 21 Absurdities of our doctrine as the adversary thinks.
130 Acception of persons what. 266 Adam fell through his own fault. 316 Adams
fall why permitted. 316 Adoption what it is. 106 Adoption and inheritance
follow redemption. 211 Ambrose his sayings. 193. 215. 224 Anabaptists dotage of
the salvation of Infants. 219 Angels elect and reprobate. 2^6 Adversaries
opinion of Christ's death for all. 36 His threefold rank of reasons. 47
Adversaries contrary to themselves. 216 Their opinion Anabaptisticall. 219 All
things for all men by the adversary. 67 Augustine recanteth an error. 216
Augustine his excellent sayings. 227 Augustine his phrase of the only cause of
all men. pa 225. is expounded. 230 All men for all that be Christ's. 39 For the
elect only. 40. 187. 231 For all sorts of men. 45 For the wicked only. 41 For
the multitude of both sides. 64 208 Cannot be taken for every one. 46. 2^9
All be not Christ's people. 180 All and every one had never the Gospel. 97 All
nations for the faithful. 105. 206 Not for every one in all nations. 95. 106
B.
Baptism the principal use. 161 Bap. of some without regeneration. 164 by
Baptism we are not first taken into Gods protection. 163 Baptism of Infants.
165. 166 Baptism a seal of grace to the faithful. 164 Baptizing of Simon
Magus. 164 Backesliders. 333 Beginning of the error of the redemption of every
one. 221 Begin in the spirit how many do. 123 Believer knows himself to
believe. 148. 169 Benefits of two sorts. 317 Benefits of the Gospel how they
belong to reprobates. 129 to Believe what. 323 Blinding. 335 Blotting out what.
168 Book of life what. 368 Brazen serpent. 206 Breaking of the serpents head
for whom. 100 to Believe and to doubt are contrary. 374
C.
Calling threefold. 320. 98 Caluerie Adams Sepulcher. 136 Called who they be.
197 Catholic Church what. 209 Catholic Church meant by the 24. Elders. 2^0
Catholic faith of Redemption. 1. 136 Certainty of grace and election. 384
Causes of redemption. 23. 216 Of predestinati. 269 Of Christ's coming. 319. 23.
Christ their sacrifice whose advocate he is. 211. 188 Foreordained for the
believers. 199 He m^cked not God nor men by rede^^ing the elect. 172 He
justifies all how. 43 He is the life of the world. 78. 79 A^ an inlightener so
a Savior. 184 Died for all how. 56. 125 Not effectually for all. 179 The only
Redeemer. 4. 13 Came for all in what sense by the old writers. 233
Christians in name only. 112 Christians must not use the word destiny. 355
Christian kind. 227 Christian liberty many fall from. 124 Church only
redeemed. 201 Church judges them faithful, etc. that profess says. 108. 120
to be Chosen in Christ what. 308 Conference and not contention becomes Gods
servants. 31 Commandment of faith and repentance hindeth all. 153 Contempt of
the Gospel not the only cause of damnation. 175 Cornelius his says. 325
Church must take heed of falling and why. 332
D.
the Damned created for the good of nature. 268 Damned some by Gods will. 134
the Damneds destruction profits the elect. 268 Death threefold. 334 Decree of
God unchangeable. 347 Deliverance from Egypt typical. 206 Devil overcome for
the faithful. 10^ Difference between power and act. 238 Differences among men
by God. 310 a Dilemma. 134 to Divide the word aright what. 152 Degrees of love.
251 Divine his duty. 31 to be Drawn of God what it is. 321 Diverse opinions
of the causes of election and reprobation. 272 the Devil has power against us
how. 339 Doubting of Gods grace. 373
E.
Election what. 317 Election taken diversely. 249. 331 It is of some only. 256.
etc. How we must judge of it. ^47 It is free. 297. 278 The effects of it. 318
The cause of it. 283
Election of Israel double. 295 Elect and reprobates severed by Gods pleasure.
98 Elect called effectually. 315. 351 The number certain. 349 Their fall and
perseverance never cut off finally. 109. 329
Election and love in God. 306 Error of Marcion. 17 Error of Papists. 324 Every
one is to be taken for a brother for his profession sake. 115
F.
Faith and repentance of God. 322 Faith how necessary to salvation. 217 Faith
foreseen no cause of election. 373. 2^8 Historical and infusing. 110 For the
doctrine of faith. 109 It cures the soul. 175
a Fall grievous proves not a man to be a reprobate. 113 Fate taken diversely.
354 Faithful their perseverance and falls. 109. 332 Fathers of the old
Testament redeemed. 18 Four things proper to the faithful. 195 Foreknowne
with the Schoolmen. 252 Future things foreknowne. 355 Freewill. 277. 356
Freedom of servants. 207
G.
Gifts common to good and bad. 114 Glorification the effect of election. 328
Good works effects of grace. 273 Gods permission. 316 How he loves and hates
us. 25 He must teach us, else we cannot learn. 98 He inwardly works what he
outwardly commands, and that without sin. 172. 338
Gospel is properly theirs that obey it. 95 God punishes sin with sin.
339 God is the revenger of sin. 340 Grace and predestination agree and
differ. 248 Grace never bestowed upon all. 99 It abounds above sin. 65
Universal how. 201. 150. 154 It is promised to an unbeliever, but
conditionally. 151. 154
God decreed to condemn none but for sin. 304
H.
Hardening. 340. 335. 337 Hardness of heart taken three ways. 341 Hels four.
21 Heresy of predestination. 353 Heresies denying Christ's manhood. 11
Hypocrites at length are cut off. 125 They receive the sign, but not the thing
in the Sacrament. 292
Holiness general and special. 112 How we may resist Satan telling us that we
have no faith. 149 How a receiver of the Sacrament must prove himself. 169 How
we may be certain of election. 372 How God wills the death of a sinner, and
not. 170 How Christ's death is effectual to us. 79 How men's mouths must be
stopped 313 How Christ washes away a man's sins not yet borne. 200. 220 How
the Lord knows not the wicked. 210 How God would have all to be saved. 260
Hofmans dotages. 238 Hubers reproaches. 31 His manner of disputing. 178 His
blasphemies. 170 His false doctrine of election. 255
I.
Jacob and Esau. 286. 293 Indulgences. 12 Infants believe not. 165 How saved.
167
Infants of the faithful part of Gods people. 219 Dying before Baptism. 168
Of Heathens why we baptize not. 167
Justification and faith effects of election not the cause. 327 Wherein it
consists. 327
It is proper to the elect. 328 It is diversely taken. 327 to be Justified what
it is. 327 the Justice of Gods predestination. 311 Justice of God unlike to
man's. 171. 314 Judas given to Christ how. 257 Judge soberly of Gods works. 314
Judgment of the flesh and spirit. 315
K.
Kingdom of God threefold. 103
L.
Life eternal they have that be effectually redeemed. 214. 215 Liberty
threefold. 356 Christian. 124
Limbus Patrum. 19. 20 Pucrorum. 21
to Love what it is. 306 Luthers doctrine of predestination. 303 Luther of the
cause of reprobation. 303
M.
Many distinguishes believers from unbelievers. 182. 198. 229 Mahomets
doctrine. 132 Man makes God a liar how. 128 Mass of Perdition. 253 Means of
the certainty of election. 380 the Ministry of the Gospel has his effect
from God, not hurt by predestination. 359 Manner of right preaching. 152 Merits
of Papists against Christ. 12 Members of Christ cannot finally fall. 116 what
Members may fall away. 116
N.
Necessity twofold. 357 New cre^t^^e. 57 New writers of the universality of
grace. 142. 236 They allow the distinction of sufficiency and efficiencie. 35.
236
Nothing done against Gods will. 317
O.
Our opinion of Christ's death for all. 38. 177 Our opinion hinders not
preaching aright. 153 Origene his fable. 154. 271 Opinion of the Schoolmen of
the redemption of all. 219
P.
Pelagianisme. 272. 397 Pelagian error of redemption. 321 And of the cause of
election. 273
People of God who be. 180 People foreknowne. 297 Perseverance of the Saints
what. 329 It is Gods gift. 330
Preachers must inuit all, and all must obey. 155 Preaching aright. 153
Predestination a hard doctrine. 243 The chief questions of it. 243 The diverse
significations. 245 Upon it all things depend. 129. 134. 136 It differs from
election. 236
Predestination put for election. 248 Predestination and foreknowledge differ.
342 Predestination of Saints what. 248 Predestination of grace showed in
Christ. 281 How far absolute. 308 Unchangeable 345. 147 No cause of
desperation. 364
Prescience of God eternal put for predestination. 251 Price of Christ's death
how great. 139. 125. 232 Prophecy of Jacob and Esau. 293 Propitiation and
intercession inseparable. 211 Promise of grace universal. 263. 147 It belongs
to the faithful. 154. 264 It requires faith. 148 It must be preached to all.
153. 155 How a man may apply it to himself. 148
Providence and fate differ. 355 Prayer not vain, though Gods purpose be
unchangeable. 360
R.
Reasons of the adversary, that reprobates are delivered from the devil. 101
And redeemed. 114
Reason must be subject to Gods word. 394 Reasons why the word must be
preached to all. 156 Reconciliation what. 57 Redemption described. 114. 197.
208 When it brings in a man. 219 It is a freedom. 228 It is spiritual. 3
Eternal. 197 The dignity of it. 3 The manner of it. 5 The time of it. 14 The
ends of it. 27 It is double. 6 Thereto Christ's death and our faith are
necessary. 179. 180 How it belongs to all. 273 It is diversely considered 220 It
is universal, and why. 43. 180. 145
Redemption of every one is not of the holy Ghost. 131 It is proper to the
believers. 180
Redemption of every one brings weak comfort. 149 the Redeemed are kings and
priests. 200 They perish not. 214
Redeemed and elect some are to us and not to God. 111. 116. 141 Remission of
sins presupposes confession. 200 Repentance and remission inseparable. 199
Reprobation what. 252 The effects of it. 309. 333 The cause. 300
Reprobation created for the good of nature. 268 Reprobates excluded from the
promise. 101 For a time in the Church. 111 How falling away they be said to be
redeemed. 117 How they deny the Lord that bought them. 117
a Rule of charity and faith. 112 a Rule in Logike. 41
S.
Sacr. seal nothing to the unbelievers 218 Saints not to be worshipped. 222
Sanctification visible and invisible. 128 Sanctification and redemption
inseparable. 212 Saints sufferings not meritorious. 12. 13 Sanctification
belongs not to all. 213 Satan destroyed for the faithful. 101 Escape goat.
107. 207 the Schoolemens of the souls of the old fathers. 21 Scripture abused
for Popish pardons. 12 Satan reigns over the reprobates, yet they be subject
to Christ. 102 Seed of Abraham. 201 Semipelagianisme. 273. 274. 397. 322
Semipelagians their shift. 282 Sheep of Christ considered two ways. 185
Sins are foreknowne only. 342 Sins once forgiven are ever forgiven. 127 a
Similitude of the light. 225. 236 Of a cup. 226 Of the debtor. 265 Of fire and
a wheel. 279 Of the potter. 289. 303 Of the Physician. 378
a Similitude fails. 126 Stapulensis. 235 State of the controversy. 32. 179
And of the question of predestination. 303
Sufficiency and efficiencie. 33. 235 the Sum of our confession of
redemption. 207 Synecdo^he common in scripture. 46 Synod of Argentine. 238
T.
Testimonies of the old Fathers on our side. 222 Three general observations.
108 Things necessary and contingent. 357 Turks and heathens hold many things
agreeable to Christian religion. 133 a Turkish proposition true. 133 Truth
must be preached. 155 Tale of Traiane. 361
V
Vessels of wrath. 290. 334 Unbelief is blotted out if other sins be
forgiven. 226 Unbelief does not condemn such as never heard of Christ. 176
Unbelief only damneth some that were once saved, says Huber. 173 Unbelievers
baptized have not the grace of Baptism. 162 Unclean spirit cast out how he is
said to return. 103 Universal conclusion does not follow of particulars. 108
Universality threefold. 40 Universality special. 231 Vocation what it is.
320 Us all signifies the faithful only. 104 And the Church. 192. 202
Use of Christ's death. 11 Of predestination. 394 Of Gods love. 24 Of the ends
of redemption. 29

W.
Weak brother may perish how. 117 Weakness of faith ought not to cast a man
down. 149 Whether reprobates contemning the word be in worse case then the
devils. 158 Whether it be better never to hear it if it turn to their greater
judgment. 159 What, to whom, and how a man must preach. 152 Why Christ must
redeem us with a price and not by force. 7 Why his death is a sufficient
price. 7. 8 Why God chose this man before that. 270. 299 Why he must die to
redeem. 9. 10 Why he elected some and rejected others. 270 Why he came in
the old age of the world. 15. 16 Why God punishes me and not him. 3^2 What
we like or mislike in the adversaries doctrine. 174 Whole set down for a part
in these phrases, All men, All nations, etc. 137. 138 Whole world for the good
only. 228 And for the wicked only. 93 It cannot be taken for every one good and
bad. 93
Whole world christian, and the whole world wicked. 93 Whole world of the
saved. 222 Works foreseen no cause of election. 279 World in three senses
only by the adversary. 72 World for the elect only, and for the reprobates
only. 73. 188. 232 World of believers is the Church. 91 World of perdition and
redemption of the damned and saved. 92. 188 Word of God preached alike to all,
but some only profit. 97 the Word of God inuiteth all. 153 We must be guided
by it. 387 Will of God double. 170. 262 It rules all things, even the wills of
men. 134 Hardens men. 135 The cause thereof we must not search. 135
the Will of man is redeemed in all that be redeemed. 214 Will and permission.
315 Will of man cannot resist Gods. 325. 326
Y
Year of freedom. 207
FINIS.
Faults escaped in the print, are thus to be corrected.
Page 34. lin. 30. for distiction read distinction. p 40. l. 17. for doubt
read double. p. 63. l. 31. for College read College. p 67. l 4. blot out he.
p. 131. l. 1. read deluder. p. 136 l. last save one, for mysteries read
masters. p. 147. l. 26. read posteriore. p. 163. l. 30. read received. p.
159. l. 30. r. unworthy. p. 174. l. 5. r. shaking it. p. 176. l. 17. for would
r. could. p. 182 l. 16. for here r. there. p 187 l. 23. r. by this p. 196. l.
11. for is twice. r. are. p. 198 l. 24 r. please p. 199 l. 7. in the margent,
r. inseparable. p. 211. l. 22 r. seeing he. p. 218. l 22. r. the p. 285. in the
margent r. look p. 229. l. 16. r. man. and l. 24. r. abridger. p. 230. l. 11.
read necessarily. p. 231. l. 26. r. surely. p. 258. l. 1. r. Esau. and after
l. 6. p. 273. l. 20. read belongs p. 290. l. 32. r. good. 291. r. serve. p.
294. l. 20 r. he and l. ^8. r. by the free. p 304. l. 11. r. he also. p. 310.
l. 11. blot out the parenthesis. p. 313. l. 19. r. unjust p. 338. l. 8. r.
unwilling. p. 391. l. 26. r. deluded p. 401. l 6. r. our. In the table, letter
F. r. justifying, in letter H. r predestinati.


