AN EPISTLE ^ENT TO DIVERSE ^^pistles in England, proving (...) Pope to be the
Beast in the (...) 3. of the Revelations, and to be the man exalted in the
Temple of God, as God. These. 2.2.

Whereby the true Church of God, and the good profession of the Gospel, is
known from the evil.

^^^y hereby have been converted of late. by F.K.

(...) ^^^igence to make thy election sure. (...). 1. (...) ^n eternal life,
whereunto thou are called. (...) 6. ^RINTED AT LONDON by Henry Marsh.

158^

TO THE MOST Reverend father in God, John, bishop of London, long health and
felicity in Jesus Christ.
BEing stirred up, (most Reverend father in God) with the sweet exhortation
of Paul, who says, in spiritual things I would not have you ignorant, but
covet spiritual gifts, and most chiefly for to prophecy, which does edefie,
exhort and comfort: I thought it good, seeing the church of God tossed with
storms, through the depenes of Satan, who roreth like a devouring Lion, and
works the spirit of error in men's hearts, and sows tares among the wheat of
the Lord, to labor in the vineyard of spiritual understanding, by the
goodness of the unspotted Lamb, who opens the book with the seven seals,
wherein the whole state of his Church is revealed, in what case it shall stand,
from his assention, till his coming in glory. Touching which Revelations, with
all the mysteries of the Scripture, I having written a book at large, called
the golden closet, and Key that vnlocketh heavenly misteryes, and another
called the glorious garland of man's glorification, thought it good, in the
mean time, having sent this epistle and others to diverse Papists in England
(touching whom a good work by the grace of God is wrought) to dedicate this
same under your protection, hopyng that as it has done good to others by
writing, so by Print it may do much more, if it shall please you of your good
favor and Heavenly gifts, wherewith you are known to be fruitful among
men, to the glory of God, and consolation of Souls, and to the reward of your
Heavenly calling in Jesus Christ: to accept it. Thus I do commend your Lorship
in my daily prayers to the keeping of the Almighty.

Your Lordships most humble to commau^d. Francis Kett.

An exposition who is the Beast in the 13. of the Revel. Jesus speed us, lead
us, and feed us. etc.
MY desired to the truth of the Gospel. When I considered how great a wish
Paul does insinuate toward him self, as to be Anathemy touching his body, in
respect to win his brethren: I am, or else I ought to be, so much thereby
stirred up, upon the tenderness of love, as to offer some portion to you and
others, of that good gift, and tallent, which the Lord has gieuen me: If by
the grace of God, it may please you to accept it sincerely and meekely, that by
that means the spirit of adoption standing at the door of your heart, may
enter into your inward man, and work more redely, that sweet motion in you as
not to harden your heart, when tha^ you hear the voice of Gods holy truth I
write not to molest your conscience an^ mind, but to walk with you in the way
of persuasion, trusting by the powered Gods word (which is sharper then a tw^
edged sword, Heb. 4.
and parts the bone from the marrow, and the spirit from the soule^ to
persuade you, by the intercession o^ him, (being a true mediator for ever who
sits in heaven, on the right han^ of the Father, before whom we must appear
in Judgment to make an accomp^ at the great and fearful day of the Lord that
you will be so much contented, b^ the will of God, as to deliberate with beter
aduisement, touching that sentence of S. Paul, Philip. 2.
who says, work out thy salvation with fear and trembling. And also touching
the sentence of Peter, Pet. 2.
which says: Use all diligence to make thy election sure. Wherein we are
sufficiently counseled, how much it stands every man in hand, to look to
the saving health of his soul, which is so sweet and preciouse; considering
that there is a way to salvation, and a way to perdition. Timoth. 2.2.
Therefore we ought deeply to consider of that sentence of Paul, which says,
that if a man strive for a maistry, he is not crowned, except he strive
lawefully. For which cause I am moved in the tender kindness, which my soul
bears toward all souls, to desire you, in the springling of Christ his
blood, that you will look so carefully into your self, as that you may be
sure (by grace) so to strive and ron, as that you may win the crown of
eternal life. Cor. 1.10.
For S. Paul wills us to be most vigilant, when he says, you that seem to
stand take heed you fall not. So that let not presumption or stifnes stop your
ears from the truth, and carry you away to unknown ceremonies, but first
proceed with sincerity of hea^e and pure prayers offered up to god, entreating
him to geeue you his wisdom, according to S. James. James. 1.
If any man lack wisdom let him ask it of God, and he gives it: ask in
faith and waver not etc. And with this order, in heart examine your self, for
God knows the secret motions of all men's hearts, and then ponder what I
write to you, and I am persuaded in my faith, that you shall presently feel
the spirit of adoption to move your spirit, and to lead you into all truth;
always prouidyng, in the examining of your own conscience, against the flesh,
the world, and the devil, which strive against man, to hold him back in the
dungeon of darkness, by contrary resistance of mind, through the spirit of
error, which is busy in all men's thoughts. Whereupon it stands you and all
us the more in hand, to look to the foundation of our Salvation, Cor. 1.3.
lest that we buyld upon a strange foundation or else do buyld timber and
straw upon the foundation which the Apostles ^aue laid, and so indiscreetly
ron with Nadab and Abihu, Leu. 10.
bringing strange fire before the Lord, and so be in danger of ^he Lords
consuming fire. Wherefore ^et me persuade with you, to use no other ^yne, then
the golden rod of the Gospel to measure your religion with all, ^est that
you leaning to much to traditions, do decline from the measure of the Gospel,
when as God said straightly to Moses, Heb. 8.
(buildyng the tabernacle) see that thou do all things according to the
pattern which was given thee. And therefore, Christian wisdom does move us in
the fear of the Lord, to follow the very pattern of the Gospel, if we mind
to walk as children of the day, professing the good and true profession. In
consideration whereof, I hope that you will accept this my writing as a sweet
motion, with examining the deepenes thereof to your consolation, in a confirmed
verity of a better profession then as yet you hold. And now to proceed the
ground of the matter. Whereas o^ heavenly Savior and high Melch^^dech, being
ascended up to heaven, (...) upon his abounda^t love show unto Io^^ how much he
did tender his church, (...) beloved congregation, when as by mystery of
revelation, he did signify ho^ and by whom his church and tem^^^ should be
from time to time, even to (...) worlds end, afflicted and trodden down It is
then that we consider how all thing are written for our learning (accordi^^ to
Saint Paul) and that either by hist^ry, precept, doctrine, figure, parable^
mystery. So that we ought to be caref^^^ wise, and vigilant in understanding
(...) revelations. Reu. 1.
For Saint John says, the happy is he that keeps the words this profecie.
For which cause, I co^^ now to the mark, to show by euide^^ scripture (by the
holy will of God) (...) is that great Beast in the 13. of the Reuel^tion, Reu.
13.
and who is that sinful man that ^^^teth in the temple of God, as God:
according to the These. Epist. 2. Cap. 2. These. 2.2.
and which City is the whoare of Babylon with whom the nations of the earth
have committed spiritual fornication, Reu. 18.
according to the 18. of the Revelation. To the confirmation whereof that the
truth may be truly extracted, I wyshe that all men's hearts were opened: First
by prayer, and then to consider the deepenes of these reasons which ensue. Of
the which, first and principally, I thus declare and prove by introduction, The
Turk
that the Turk is not that Beast nor sinful man, for the Turk has been an
enemy, from his first vprising, manifested to all Christians, whereby it
appears plainly, that he is not the sinful man exalted in the Temple of
God. For S. Paul. says that the sinful man must be opened at this time,
These. 2.^
who comes by the delusion of Satan: But the Turk has been always an open
adversary, and therefore can not be said to be opened. For what soever is
manifest, can not be say^ to be opened; but he which is a close, privy, secret
and coulored adversary is say^ to be opened, so that the Turk is not the
sinful man, and Beast named in the 13 of the Revel. but he is the very
imitate^ of Antiochus, who did always show him self an open tyrant to the
Israelites. Presbiter John.
Next to this, Presbiter John of the South of Africa, can no way be say^ to
be the Beast in the 13. of the Revelation, or exalted man in the Temple, for
as he does dwell beyond the middle Sea^ so he has little or no conference in
religion with other kingdoms, but is known to meddle little with Europe or
Asi^ and besides the state of his Kingdom (...) such, that neither Asia,
Europe, nor East India, do much acquainte them selves (...) the doings of
Presbiter John, who ha^^ no such seat, nor no such City with whom the Nations
of the Earth ha^^ committed spiritual fornication, according to the 18. of the
Revelation. Also tha^ Beast and sinful man, or Whore of Babylon, Great Cham.
can not be applied to great Cham and his Cittyes in the North East of India,
for he was never known to pass beyond his Mountains, neither any way that
the succession of the Monarchy of Babylon did descend into his Country, or
Presbiter John's Country of the South: and therefore neither of them can be
any way accounted the Beast in the 13. Reu. 13.
of the Revelation, and sinful man exalted in the Temple of God as God, These.
2.2
or any of their Cittyes to be the Whore of Babylon in the 18. of the
Revelation. Next, Reu. 18.
it can not be the Emperors, Emperor.
for they were also open persecutors of the truth, and therefore being manifest
adversaries, could not be said (according to S. Paul) to be opened. These. 2.2.
Neither is it the high King of Persia, or any temporal King of the Earth. For
Christ to discide this whole controversy, and to make the truth hereof to be
known to his congregation, does manifest to John by Revelation, that he is a
Star fallen to the Earth, that has the Keys of the bottomless pit, according
to the.9. Reu. 9.
of the Revelation, and that he burns like a blasing lamp, and not like a
pure candell to be set upon a Candelsticke, Reu. 8.
according to the.8. of the Revelation. etc. Whereby it being evident, by all
the places of the Scriptures, that a Star does represent a prelate and
spiritual pastoure of the Church, as in Daniel. 12. and Revelations. 1. And
this being apparent, that there is no Prelate in the World, that does so much
exalt him self as the Pope does; therefore by true consequence I affirm the
Pope to be this Beast in the.13. of the Revelations, These. 2.2.
the sinful man in the Thessa. and his seat and City the whore of Babylon
in the.18. of the Revelations, with whom all nations have committed spiritual
fornication. These. 2.2.
And now that the mystery of the Revelations and the prophecy of Paul, do
agree with the beginning, proceeding, opening, and darkening of the Popes
auctority, and his seat* and also that his City by succession and inheritance
triumphant is the only heir of the first Babylon, inioying the fourth
Monarchy, whereupon, the beginning, proceeding, opening, and darkening, of the
seat of the Pope, Reu. 16.
aunswering to the pouring out of the vialles, and to the measuring of the
Temple (by John) with his golden rod, Reu. 11.
do evidently to any spiritual mind, show it self to be a case most
plain, that the Pope is the foresaid Beast: and further to proceed
effectually to prove this matter, that you may be rooted in the truth, you
shall understand, Reu. 6.
that first after the ascension of Christ into Heaven, that then his Church
proceeded pure, his word sincerely preached, by his Apostles, and so proceeded
under the color of a white Horse, Reu. 6.
according to the opening of the first seal. After their time it proceeded in
the color of a red Horse, representing bloody persecutions, as in the
Emperors days, as in the second seal ope^ning. And after the division of
time it proceeded in the color of a black Horse, being contrary to the first
white Horse, which was pure religion, for then did arise the ceremonies of the
Romise Church, and the exaltation of the Pope and his seat. Whereupon, his
vprising being in the five hundred year after Christ, is aunswering rightly to
the thir^ seal opening of the black Horse. etc. And to the mystery of John
measuring the Temple, Reu. 11.
where he is commanded to ca^^ out the quire or outward court, which by
computation comes to four hundred cubits, which represent years meaning
thereby, that whereas the Gentyles and unbelieving Emperors have persecuted
the Church openly for fow^ hundred years after Christ, that h^^ should not
measure that, because it manifest, but measure the Temple and the Altar, and
them that worshipp^ therein, meaning that secret treading down of the Temple
and truth of Gods word, that as the measure of the Temple and Altar does
contain a thousand two hundred and threescore Cubits, (which represent
years) that so long shall the Pope (being the foresaid Beast and sinful man,
evidently showed and proved) tread down the verity of Gods truth, which number
of years does prick fast to his end. And therefore seeing that the
introduction of the seats of Kingdoms, the event of the cause, and the
mystery of the Revelations, does show the Pope to be that Beast in the.13.
These. 2.2. Reu. 11.
of the Revelations, and does show his seat to be of great antiquity, and his
continuance to be till Christ come in the Clouds: it is then an heavy and
wretched brag, to boast of his antiquity, or to cleave to his traditions. For
the Revelations do show clearly, that he, Reu. 16.
and his, began with a noisome botch, proceeded Reu. 16.
(...) Dragon, and false Prophet, to gather (...) Kings of the Earth to
battle agay^^^ the great day of the lord, which is smo^^ fire, and brimstone,
even the spirit error, envy, and hypocresy: and acc^^ding Reu. 14.
proceeding, and ending, is v^lamentable. For the Angel says, t^^ whosoever
take the mark of the Bea^^ and will not come away from that who^^ of Babylon,
shall be punished with f^^ and brimstone. And therefore I grau^ you that he
has continued a thousand year and odd, and shall continue to (...) end of
the World, Reu. 11.
according as the m^stery of the Revelations does plain declare: and I grant
you that he shall the end of the World have the upper hand of the witnesses of
the truth: and I grant you that the Pope is wounded (according to the 13. of
the Revelation) at this age, and that his wound shall be healed again, but
how, even by this last loosing of Satan, who shall in the end of the World
bring forth that two horned Beast like a Lamb being that great false Prophet,
that shall do such Miracles that if it were possible the elect should be
deceived; but alas to their great woo. For S. Paul says, Reu. 13.
because they believed not the truth, but had pleasure in lies and
unrighteousness, therefore God has gieuen them over that they might be
dampened, because they received not the truth. These. 2.2.
And that sinful man that so exalts him self in the Temple of God as God,
shall be destroyed even with the very appearau^ce of God. Wherefore, I am to
beseech you, and all of your profession, to way deeply this that I do write in
short, which in an other work I have comprehended at large, for it is the very
truth of Gods word and his Revelations. Wherein if occasion seru^ upon your
parts, to have me in conference, I doubt not but that you will yel^ to the
spirit of God, which will work it you an effectual work of grace, touching
which, I pray God that so it may be.

And now touching the supremacy consider that you deceive not your selves, for
her Majesty, is an Anoynte Prince, Cron. 2.
and has the Scepter of Judah i^ her hand, as well in every respect as kin^
David, Solomon, Asa, Ezekiah, and Io^ah: For did not Salamon a temperol kin^
build the Tempell? Did not Josiah an^ the rest of the good Kings, correct an^
order that in their Realm that was t^ the glory of God, and abolish that which
was to the contrary? The very like pow^^ does her majesty take upon her, as h^
majesty may lawfully and truly. An^ therefore take heed of that colored
^^^sure of the Popes presumptuous authority, for it is not of God, but of the
Dragon. Thus praying that your hearts may be opened unto all truth, I commend
you to Mount Sion, there to search with prayer, that you may make your election
sure, and become to profess a good profession. Fare you well, and Christ feed
you, lead you, and speed you.

I am yours to do you good in the behalf of the Gospel, as to my self.
Francis Kett. D.

A copy of a letter sent from a gentleman and his brethren lately converted.
AS the light is pleasant unto him that has (...) clear sight, but offensive
to them that are purr^ blind, so it may be^ thought between professors of
religion, which have the clear sight, o^ which be purre blind, before the
pleasant light of Gods truth. Wherein a partly with your writing, so much
mo^^ by your conference, I have my spiri^^ revived to a greater confidence
toward your Religion, then heretofor^ I have had. And therefore these are (...)
request you, that you will send me, my brother, a copy of your golden closet
that vnlocketh heavenly misterie^ and that I may have your company (...)
Trinity week to be at my house, to confer both in Divinity, and also in
causes of sickness; for I am much troubled with the Hipocondriacal passion. And
as you have done me good, so I will be yours or in no part mine own, even
till death separate us from this World, and conioyne us again, with Christ in
glory.

Dij

A copy of an answer to the foresaid letter, by the Author.
I Rejoice in that you have granted in writing, as otherwise by consent in
conference, to be so careful in making your election sure, as not to condemn,
nor to contemn the spiritual gifts, which God has given me, and the
writings, admonitions, and instructions, which I have sent you. For whereas
you did not conceive the mystery of the Revelations, touching the antiquity of
the Romish Church and the Beast in the 13. of the Revelations, so you did
little regard the difference of the priesthod of Melchisedech, Heb. 7.
which is everlasting, according to endless life. The want of the deep
understanding thereof, did hold you in error, and does cause multitudes to ron
still after beggarly ceremonies and Romish traditions. And besides the want of
understanding the mysteries of the Revelations, and of Daniel, has withheld
many in bon^age of papisme, whereas the truth her of being lively described (as
I trust have performed it, through the grace of God) will strengthen you in a
grounded faith to renounce the Pope and is traditions. Thus intending to
satisfy you with word of mouth, at ^he day of your expectation, I will declare
to you the deepenes of all the Revelations, in such ample manner and with such
fortitude of reasons (by Gods grace) as that I hope I shall ^e yours, and you
shall be mine, and ^e shall be both one in Christ.

A dehortation.
ANd now whereas Dan^ prophesing of the extre^ abomination, says, the the
time shall come the the great Prince, Mich^^^ which stands on the peoples
side, sh^^ arise up: for there shall come a time trouble, such as never was,
since there ^^gan to be people, unto the same tyr^^^ Which Christ does also
affirm in 24. of Matthew, saying, that then th^^ shall be great tribulation,
such as was from the beginning of the World to (...) time, that except those
days should (...) shortened, there should no flesh bee^ued, but for the
chosen sake those da^^ shall be shortened. Touching the wh^^ Christ declares
the occasion and rea^^ of such tempestuous days of daunge^ that there shall be
such false Christ's (...) false prophets, that shall do such m^^^cles and
wonders, that if it were poss^ the very elect should be deceived. So (...) it
appears plainly, that before the end of the world, shall great storms of
troubles universally happen, answering rightly to the 6. of the Revelation, that
when ^he two Prophets or witnesses of God have ended their testimony, which is
the preaching of his glad tidinges of his testamentes throughout all the world
(according to the 24. of Matthew, that then the time is come, that the Beast in
the 13 of the Revelations, shall arise to heal his wound by making war
against the gospellers: for by that great means of tribulation spoken by
Daniel and by our Savior Christ shall his wound which he has received by the
preachers of the Gospel) be healed up again, and that through the means of
that two horned Beast like a lamb, whom Satan will and shall raise up at this
his last loosing before the end of the World, to do such magi^all miracles,
that if it were possible the ^lect should be deceived. For then comes it,
that Daniel says, he shall be grimmer then all his fellows etc. For then is
the time come, that he shall mo^^ highly exalt him self in the Temple (...)
God as God, according to the These. ^ and 2. whom the Lord shall destroy wi^^
his own appearau^ce, when he comme^^ in the Clouds, and this answer to the
13. of the Revelations, that there shall b^ an Image made unto the Beast, by
t^^ means of that two horned Beast like lamb, that is the great false Prophet
that shall make fire come down from Heaven, in the sight of the Beast and t^^
people, and then shall the days be dangerous and cruel, that whosoeue^
rich or poor, high or low, that do (...) take the mark of the Beast, can
not b^ suffered to live. By which means it is ^uident, that if the Lord should
not sh^^ ten such days of tyrany and darken^^^ it would go hard with all
flesh, in the they shall be enforced either to hold w^^^ the Beast, or else to
die for the Gospe^ So that then is that performed of Dan^^^ that many shall be
purified, cleansed, and tried; but the wicked shall not regard it, Daniel. 12.
and then happy are they that shall fight the good fight, and so put on the
shield of faith, as to wait until a thousand thirty and fife days, for the
Lord will give them Eagles wings to fly into the wilderness, there to be fed
with his holy word, as Elias was. And now when this tribulation shall begin,
shall three foul spirittes like frogs come out of the mouth of the Beast,
Reu. 1^.
the Dragon and false Prophet, being error, envy, and hipocresie. Reu. 16.
Whereby that flowing Euphrates of the preaching of Christ's Gospel shall be
dried up, by the cruel hurly burly of Gog and Magog, Reu. 20.
being the two last heads of Esdras Eagle received to the end, who^ Satan
shall raise up to compass the holy ^entes of the Saints, and then is that
^ast abomination of desolation come to pass, spoken of by Daniel the Prophet:
and this is it, that Paul says; in the last ^ayes shall be perilous times,
men that shall resist the truth (as Iannes and Iambres) withstoode Moses, and
therefore shall prevail no longer: Math. 10.
whereby it is evident that Jacob shall be turned into Esau, in that the fathers
shall then deliue^ their sons to death; the brother, the brother; and the
children arise against fathers and mothers, and put them to death* For then is
it that the truth shallbe laid in prison, equity grown aside, righteousness
stand far off, conscience fallen down in the mire, pity shut out, and
love frosen to dead. Whereupon it stands every man in hand to watch and pray,
that he may holdout to the en^ when he shall be crowned with the crown of
life; for the Angel says, tha^ who so ever take the mark of the Bea^^ and
commit spiritual fornication wi^ that Whore of Babylon, being Rome (...)
succession of the fourth Monarchi, sh^^^ be punished with fire and brimston.
A^^ therefore seeing it is told us before, in t^^ 21. of the Revelations, that
the Beast against the end of the world, shall have his wou^d healed, Reu. 13.
and that his seat being darkened, shall be established again, by the two
horned Beast and false prophet, Antechrist
as in the 13. of the Revelations, and that he shall overcome the true
professors of Gods word, and rejoice over them, as in the 16. of the
Revelations, and that the^ in the great security after this rejoicing of the
victory got over the two witnesses of God, the Lord shall come, even as a
thief in the night; when they shall say peace and no danger, then comes on
them sudden destruction, as traueling upon a woman with child, and they shall
not escape: Therefore we ought to be careful to work out our salvation with
fear and trembling, considering what te^pestes do hang over us. And now
consider what a lamentable expectation this is, to look for change of
Religion, and what a woeful wrechednes it is to believe in the Popes traditions,
who is that Beast, that ere the end of the World shall work such tyrany and
tribulation against the Gospel, as that the people shall be, by this means,
Math. 24.
in such perplexity, that they can not tell which way to turn them. Wherefore
to comprehend in short that which I mind to discourse unto you at length by
word of mouth, I exhort you to renounce clearly the Pope and all his
traditions, and labor to make your election sure, by holding the faith of the
Gospel even unto death that your Souls may go unto them that are under the
golden altar, Reu. 6.
who suffered before for the testimony of the truth. Hold fast, for the time is
at hand. Yours, in the same profession of the Gospel, even till Christ come in
his glory, to cloth us with our heavenly mansion.

F. K.
June 3. 1585.
The righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance, he will not be afraid
for any evil tidinges, for his heart stands fast and believes in the Lord.
Psalm. 112.
The copy of an Epistle sent to English pilgrems and papists. 1584. By F. K.
I Am moved by the royal law of God, which is to love our neighbor as our
selus, and to do good to our enemies; to write to entreat you, (my desired to
the truth ^f the Gospel) to hear and read the words ^f exhortation, under
your duty in the fear ^f God, and reverence to his Gospel, hoping that the
sweet motion, and tenderness of your ^ules health, will move you hereu^to.
Wherein, ^^rst I beseech you to measure the breadth, ^^^ength, and deapth of
your inward man, and ^he path of your salvation, by the ballaunce of ^he pure
Scriptures, and not by traditions ^^d decrees, seeing that the Scriptures are
a^^e to make you wise to salvation, Tim. 2.3.
through ^ith in Christ Jesus. Therefore seeing that ^^w is the accepted time,
yea now be the days (...) health, in which Christ, Reu. 3.
according to John ^^th set the door of his Gospel open, it is high time that
you wake out of sleep, and enter with the bridegroom while the door is op^^
lest you fall into strong delusion, and stum^^^ at noone day, and look for
light when (...) darkness. For which cause, say clearly am^^^ your selfs, Up
let us go to our dear count^^ of England, and walk in the light of (...)
Lord, and become true citizens (with all fa^^^full alleigance) to her beloved
Majesty, (...) so undoubtedly and sincerely has linked (...) scepter to the
scepter of Judah. For if thou d^ desire Ezechias to reign over England (...)
diligently walked in the law of the Lord, 2. Cron. 29.
^^^ged his Realm of Idolatry, set up again (...) true worship of God, and
exhorted all his su^iects to follow the law of the Lord God: t^ behold blessed
ELIZABETH, the ^noynted of the Lord, abounding in all (...) gifts of virtue,
governing her Realm ^^cording to the purity of Gods word and tre^^^* And if
thou desire Josias that most go^^ King, 2. Cron. 34.
which walked so purely in the waye^ (...) the Lord, that he declined neither
on the (...) hand, nor on the right, who when the book (...) the law was
delivered unto him, did not on^y cause the book to be red before him, but ^e
him self red it, and all Idolatyr destroyed, restored the true religion to his
Kingdom. Or if thou would have Iosophat that walked in the commandments
of the Lord, 2. Cron. 27.
and ^oued Gods word so entirely, that he sent his Princes, Levites, and
Priests, to teach in all parts of Judah, which had the books of Gods law
with them, and went about in all the Ci^^es of Judah, and taught the people:
then consider in the dexterity of conscience, our worthy gouernesse Queen
ELIZABETH, how that her Majesty is not inferior to any of them, in amplifying
the glory of God, and spreading abroad of his word. For whereas Esdras, red
the law of the Lord, plainly, and distinctly, to the people, and they gave
very earnest and diligent attendance to the hearing of it, so our imperial
Princess, 2. Es^l. 8.
and virtuous Queen, has caused the word of God to be plainly red, and
preached through all her Realm, by many a faithful Esdras, that every man may
plainly hear it, and read it them selfs, to their souls consolation. Wh^^
is it then that you seek for beyond the Sea^ Has not God promised that his
Gospel sh^^^ be preached to all nations, and to every peop^^ in their proper
Lands? Math. 24.
What then have th^^ to do, being an Israelite, to walk again (...) the
streates of Egypt, or to wander in the way to Assiria? Behold says the Lord,
wh^ have thou now to do in the streate of Aegyp^ to drink foul water?
Jeremy. 2.
or what make thou (...) the way to Assiria, to drink water of t^^ flood?
Thy own wickedness shall reprove the^ and thy turning away, condemn thee. A^^
so ye English pilgrems, what make ye in t^ streates of Rome, or in the way to
Italy? (...) fear that your own thoughts condemn y^^ and your turning away,
will bring you to he^uy destruction, unless ye repent. O therefore come away,
and turn to the treuth, a^^ be not thereof ashamed, for the Lord kno^eth your
secret thoughts, with whom you m^^^ not dissemble and halt between two
opi^^ons, but be faithful unto your Soueraig^ Queen, and let King David be
your exa^p^^ who would by no means lay blouddy hands upon King Saul his
enemy, being the Lords anointed. Wherefore ye English Romans, examine your
selves, try out the deapth of your conscience, remember the dreadful day of
Judgment, and be no longer deceived, for lo how wreched your state is, to
fly the light of the Gospel, to separate your selves from your alleiga^ce, to
hope for a day by mischief. Esaias. 30.
Know ye not, that it is a woe, to forsake the counsel of God, to seek and
stick to the counsel of men? and know ye not that the (Lord says) woe be
those shrinken children, which take a web in hand, but not after my will. Then
see what web is this of youres, to trust in pardons and indulgences, to commit
supplications to Saints, to hope to be reskewed out of the pains of feigned
purgatory, by a mass, to build true godliness upon outward ceremonies and
solemnities, and to hold the word of God in an unknown language; Ephesians. 5.
know ye not that Paul says, that, whatsoever is manifest, is light? how
can you then hold in true conscience that such kind^ of religion is the light,
when as they are not manifest by the scriptu^es. Wherefore Paul exhorts you
not to walk in the vanitye of mind, Ephesians. 4
blinded in understanding: and Christ counsels thee to buy of him pure gold,
Reu. 3.
and to anoint thine eyes with eye salve that thou may see. How then can the
Latyne Service be to thee an eye-salue to see the truth of Gods word, when
as thou can neither read it nor understand it? Is it not an uncertain
sound to an ignorant ear which can carry no truth of edifying, when it is
propounded unto us, that all things should be done to edifye? Then no doubt
but that it is Gods holy will that the scriptures should be in our mother
language, as a precious eye-salu^ in our house, that we may be established
(...) Gods holy truth, and not be deceived. Harke^ therefore dear Countrymen,
and be carefully advised, and learn to be wise to that which is good, and
innocent to that is evil, and favor not the precepts and ordinances of me^
more then the institutions of God; For says Paul, he that studieth to please
men, is no the servant of God: Galath. 1.
and the Gospel (says he) which I preach, I received it not of men. Therefore
take heed how ye look after the traditions of men and follow superstitions,
seeing the word of your salvation comes not from men, but from God. And now ye
seminaryes and Jesuits, you enter into men's houses like smokie firebrarnds,
you take in hand to enforce the people after your ways, that were escaped
bondage Do ye not respect the danger which is toward them that seek to
devour souls, and put stumbling blocks, like Balam, before the people? It
stands you upon to examine the scripturs what foundation you do lay, lest if
you recant not, you prove yourselues the Locustes which come out of the
bottomless pit. Reu. 9.
Do ye still join the order of Aron and the order of Melchisedec jointly as
in one religion, when Christ has translated away the priesthood of Aron with
all his ceremonies? then it can not be that your doctrine and religion can be
good, seeing ye maintain that which Christ has abolished. For which cause I
beseech you all to search the difference of these two Pristhods, and separate
them as they ought to be, and I am assured, that Gods grace will enter into
you, to see presently how far you decline from the purity of Christ his
Gospel, that you man be reformed to your souls consolation. Wher^fore (dear
Contrymen) dearly bough^ with the blood of Jesus Christ, I pray to God that
such may be the fruits of this our age that the eyes of the blind may be
lightened and the ears of the deaf opened, that in the wilderness Wells may
spring, Esaias. 35.
and dry ground turn to rivers: for a woe is prescribed to the^ that call
darkness light, and light darkness and to them that are wise in their own
sigh^ and think themselves to have understanding For which cause it behooves
us, Esaias. 5.
to try out the truth by the fire of Gods holy word, lest tha^ we facion our
selves to be servants of the bond woman, Gal. 4.
and not children of the free w^ man. Wherefore I refer your secret though^ to
the goodness of God, hoping that you w^ consider deeply of your religion, and
take ^xample of the children of Israel returned a^^er the destruction of
Jerusalem into Aegipt, ^aying thereby what a dangerous thing it is (...)
renounce the truth and cleave to customs, ^ntiquities, and the acts of the
forefathers, ^eing not grounded upon the pure word of God: For they answered
Jeremy saying, as for thy words which thou have spoken unto us in the name of
the Lord, Iere. 44.
we will not hear them; but whatsoever goes out of our own mouth, that will we
do: we will offer sacrifice to the Queen of heaven, as our forefathers did:
for then we had plenteousnes of victuales, then were we in prosperity, and no
harm happened unto us: but since we left to offer, many storms of troubles
and evils have grieved us: The^ answered Jeremy, saying forasmuch as your
sins were so great in such sacrifices, the Lord could no longer suffer you,
and so this is the cause of your misery, because you forsake the truth. The
like wound has the Lord given to you and your whole kingdom of Papisty,
because of your superstitious offerings to Saints, and pilgrimages, when you
say that you had all plenteousnes. But now the days are not so agreeable in
cheapenes. (...) therefore beware that you being forewa^^ of the truth of the
Gospel, by many a true remie, do not harden your selves, and say, will do as
our fathers did, we will pray to S^^tes, and go on pilgrimage to such a Saint
go offer at such a m^sse, for then we ha^ things cheap; lest that you so
cutting off truth from you, do perish with them of ^gipt. And furthermore,
whereas you (...) sent among us many of your small writing^ gloses, like sugared
pills, which having an^ ward feeling of sweetness, are notwithsta^^ in the full
taste thereof as bitter worm^ in that you turn the word of the Gospel law to
wormwood, by inducing reasons o^ the ceremonial law of Aron. to prove (...)
superstition which is abolished by Christ^ therefore search the scriptures more
the^ ^^^ditions, that you may gyrd your selves with verity, and not hurt by
your writings and amples the tender sheep of Christ. But e^ deeply into the
bottom of your heart, and c^^sider that you ought not to bring strange (...)
upon the altar, as Abihu and Nadab did: no ^ore ought ye to make other worship
then the ^ospell does command you, contrary to the which, your traditions and
superstitions be ^any; from which wash you and make you ^leane, Esaias. 1.
and then your sins though they were (...) redd as skarlet, shall be made
whiter then ^owe. Wherefore measure not the pure reli^^^n and truth of the
Gospel, by looking to the ^ife and sin of the people: but try the truth by ^he
very Word it self: For wickedness will ^rowe up among the true professors, in
that ^athan does there bear greatest spite, to ^rawe the^ into sin.
Therefore thou people of England, make thee ready to mete thy God, and let not
thy houses be full of voluptuousnes, and thy Cities full of wickedness: Ezech.
30.
For Eze^hiel says that God will power out his indig^ation upon sin.
Therefore, O England, ^uffer not wilfulnes to wax green, malitious^es to grow
up, ungodliness to take deep ^oote, unmercifulness to increase: For says God by
the Prophet Amos, Amos. 1.
For three or four ^ickednesses I will not spare Judah, and Israel, Damascus
and Tire, Moab and Amm^ For which cause, hate the evil, and love (...) good:
and then shall we still enjoy the ble^ days of king Asa, who said; Because
(...) have followed the laws and truth of God has given us peace round about:
And God preserve our blessed Queen long to reign over us, and send us peace
in Christ. Amen.

God save the Queen

