A SERMON AT Paul's Cross, ON BEHALF OF PAVLES CHVRCH, MARCH 26. 1620.

By the B. of London.

Both preached and published by his Majesty's commandment.

LONDON Printed by EDWARD GRIFFIN for ELIZABETH ADAMS. 1620.

PSALM. 102. verse. 13, 14. 13. Thou shall arise, and have mercy upon Sion, for
the time to favor her, yea the set time is come.

14. For thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and favor the dust thereof.


THE Verses are two, so are my parts; the one belongs to God, Thou shall
arise etc. The other to man; For thy servants take pleasure etc. Both these
rivers of mercy, the waters that be above the firmament, and the waters
beneath, Mercy from heaven, and mercy from earth, run into Sion; there is
Collectio aquarum, the subject and sea of misery, and therefore the fitter
vessel to receive mercy.

Mercy does well to all sorts of men, but especially to the household of Faith,
Galat. 6. therefore to Sion above all the parts of the earth: And mercy comes
amiss at no time; but how fair is mercy in a time of need? Vt nubes pluviae
tempore siccitatis, 35. Ecclis. as a clowd of rain in the time of drought,
therefore, when the time, the set time to have mercy is come. And mercy is a
graceful ornament in all sorts of men, especially in those, that are the
children of God, Be ye merciful, as your heavenly Father is merciful. Luc.
6. therefore the servants take pleasure etc. But when we have all said or
done, the mercy of God is above all his works, and therefore above the mercies
of all men and Angels, O let me fall into the hands of God, for his mercy is
exceeding great, but let me not fall into the hands of men. 2 Samuel 24.
therefore Tu exurgens, Thou shall arise and have mercy upon Sion.

All these parcells of my text, when I consider them aright (me thinks) they
walk together, as the beasts and birds that went into the Arc, all by couples.

First, here is God and his mercy, Tu misereberis; but not without an accent.
Tu exurgens, thou shall arise, and have mercy: that is, it is not a wishing and
woulding mercy, but a prevailing, speeding, releeuing mercy.

Secondly, here is Sion, and her misery; for miserable she must needs be,
that stands in need of mercy; but not without an accent. When it is come to
that extremity, that the (...) of Sion is brought to an (...), her composition
to resolution, even unto the stones and dust of it.

Thirdly, here is time, and times opportunity, but not without an accent, of
the utmost exigent, pressure and hazard of time, that can be imagined; for it
is time, and with an (...), echo, resound, again time, and with an (...), the
very set and appointed time is come.

Lastly, here are the servants of God, and their charity; but not without an
accent. For it is such a charity, as brings affliction, disquiet, pity into
their souls, (which is affectio maerens, a mournful affection) for the
misery of Sion. Put them all together. To undergo this work of restoration,
Act. 3.
(...), you have the powerfullest agent, Tu Exurgens
Thou: and his readiest propension, preparation to it, shall arise: with his
sweetest action, and have mercy: Misereb*
the dearest object, not an vnica, a soul, Sion.
a saint, but Sion, a Church, a Communion of Saints: in the vrgent'st time,
when time, Tempus etc.
yea time, the appointed time is come: not only in the wisdom of God, but in
the opinion of men: for the servants of God, Serui tui
out of their tenderest and softest affections of love and compassion, diligunt
lap:
to the extremest desolation and dissolution of Sion, miserentur pulueris.
even in materiam primam, to the very stones and dust of it, call for comfort.

Thou shall arise and have mercy upon Sion, for the time etc. I begin with the
first part, 1. Part.
which is Gods part, and belongs unto him, Wherein you have his person, Tu,
his position, exurgens, his disposition, misereberis, his patient, Sion, the
persuasion, quia tempus, and the pressure of that persuasion, statutum tempus.

Tu. Tu. 1.
His person. We begin well, in Dei nomine: My text, and the work of my text,
have a blessed beginning. Quod foelix faustumque fit. We begin with God,
Christo duce and auspice Christo: and God must begin the work. Ad prima^ voce^
timidas aduertimus aures. I crave your religious attention for the first words
sake. In the beginning God made heaven and earth: and God must begin to new
make Sion, or it will never be. Nisi Dominus aedificauerit, unless the Lord
build the house, their labor is but lost that build it. We see the disioynted
stones of Sion, like the dismembered parts of Medeas children, and her honor
laid in the dust: Out of such weak and beggarly elements, who can repair her
again, but he that of the dust of the ground (which is the term of my text)
made man, and of the rib of the man, as it were one rafter of the house, built
the woman (we are speaking of building) and of the stones by the rivers
banks, raises up children to Abraham? Son of man (God to his Prophet, 37.
Ezech.) shall these bones live? Lord thou know. Erant sicca vehementer, they
were very dry. Yet prophecy: and he prophcied, and the spirit of life entered
into them, and they came together bone to his bone. Shall these disiected and
deplored stones ever come together again, and shall the dust arise and give
thanks to thee, and serve in thy Sanctuary? (they ask the question in scorn
Nehem. 4. Nunquid aedificari poterunt lapides ex aceruis pulueris? Shall these
stones be built out of the heaps of dust?) Yes, for Tu exurgens misereberis,
Thou shall arise and have mercy upon Sion. It is plainly expressed Zach. 4. Non
in exercitu etc. not by an army, nor by strength, but by my spirit, says the
Lord: and they shall bring forth the principal stone, with showting and
crying, Grace, Grace unto it. We have begun happily, bonis auspicijs, (...),
with the good speed of God. Other foundation can no man lay. And having found
out (...), a wise Master Builder of the work, let us seek out the work it
self. To this he comes addressed and prepared. Exurgens. 2.
Exurgens, thou shall arise, as a Bridegroom (says the Prophet of the Sun)
that comes out of his bride-chamber, or like a strong man to run his race,
Psalm. 19. or as one that awaketh out of sleep, or as a Giant refresht with
wine. Psalm. 78. After long expectation, till their eyes fail in their heads,
and strong exclamation, till their tongues cleave to the roofes of their
mouths, up Lord, why sleep thou? and proud insultation of the enemy, where
is now their God? Exurgam, ait Dominus, I will up, says the Lord, and help
the distressed.

Thou shall arise. And we must arise in our thoughts, and not have so gross
and earthly a conceit of God, as if he arose indeed, who never sits, or
lies down, or gives any rest to the temples of his head, or as if he
returned to his work, which he never intermitteth, Semper agens, semper
quietus, says S. Austin. It were a phrase of speech fitter to be used to
Samson sitting in the lap of Delilah, Tu exurge, Up Samson, the Philistines are
upon thee; or to Jonas sleeping in the bottom of the ship, Quid tu soporate?
Up sleeper, call upon thy God; or in scoff and subsannation of some Idoll-god,
1 Reg. 18.
as Elias of Baal, perhaps he sleeps, But viuens vidensque, that everliving
and all-seeing God, whose eyes are never closed up, He neither slumbreth, nor
sleeps, that keeps Israel, and whose seven eyes go through the earth, Zach.
4. Nunquam minus otiosus, quam cum otiosus, never doing more, then when he
seems to do nothing at all, cannot in propriety of speech, thus be
entreated: But, as himself speaks, Hos. 12. (after the Latin) Assimilatus
sum in manibus Prophetarum, it has ever been the manner of Prophets, and the
Penmen of the Holy Ghost, to make resemblances and expressions of God, from
the fashions of man; who, when he is weary and gives over his work, sits
upon a stool, as old Eli, or languidus in cubitum, leans upon his arm, or
stretches himself upon a couch: But, when he intends his business to
purpose, then he stands upon his feet, explicateth and displayeth his
limbs, and sets his whole body in a readiness.

And thus in a parable and some sort does God; His cessation and pawsing to
usward for the time from outward and apparent help, carries some show of
indisposition and otiation in God, as if he were gone to rest, and minded us
not. But do we hear of his rising up? We may assure our selves, the Lord will
neglect us no longer, but the work of his providence and care, which has bin
thrown aside for the time, will in hand again. To be short, that, that we
gain by Exurgens, is this; that the mercy which God intends to Sion, is not
a mental mercy alone, we wish you good luck; nor only a verbal mercy, Go
in peace, help your selves, Iam: 2. it is a real and effectual mercy, in
that God does arise, that is, advance and exalt himself, and gather his forces
about him to exhibit this mercy. And so from his person, Thou, and his
position, or provision, shall arise, we are come to the third, his disposition;
which in man is affection and passion, but in God, action. Thou shall have
mercy. Misereb.


Misereberis. We never came at the kernel and marrow of my text till now. This
is the (...), the word of comfort: Sion had no hope of recovery, till she
heard of the sweet name of mercy. Cruelty pulled her down, exinanite,
exinanite, down with her, down with her, even to the ground, and drew the
line of vanity over her, Mercy must set her up again. Tu misereberis, is a
large theme to preach upon; and I have but my time, yea my set and appointed
time, and therefore must march like Iehu.

The heavens are within a span, the earth within a circle, the waters within
the fist, the mountains upon the balance, the Sun within tropicks, but what
number, or measure, or bounders shall I set to the mercies of God? He that had
wisdom as a flood, the Preacher of Preachers, and preached upon that sad
text, woeful and disgraceful to the sons of men, Vanity of vanities, all is
vanity, how justly and everlastingly might he have preached upon this text,
Mercy upon mercy, all is mercy? O mercy, the lady and empress of all the
glorious attributes of God, what shall I say of thee? Heaven and earth are full
of thy glory: The glorious company of the Prophets praise thee, the goodly
fellowship of the Apostles praise thee, the noble army of Martyrs praise thee,
the holy Church throughout all the world does acknowledge thee. Of all those
infinite treasures and riches, which that immensitie of the Godhead abounds
with, what is there to us, worms of the earth, which lie low at his
footstool, that we dare approach and claspe in the arms of our souls, and
love as our eyes, but mercy alone? His Majesty astonisheth us, his glory
beats us down, his greatness strikes us dead, we adore his omnipotency,
admire his wisdom, stand in awe of his justice, fly from his vengeance; in
mercy, mercy alone, we taste how gracious and amiable the Lord is. Out of that
strong, is this sweet, out of that lion this honycombe, out of that greatness,
this goodness, that is so much sought and pursued by us. I could live and dye in
the contemplation of mercy. Blessed be her womb that bare us, and her paps
that gave us suck, we live and move and have our being by her. She grew up
with us from our youth, and forsakes us not, when we are gray headed, she
gives us, our daily bread, and hourly breath; continues us in life,
comfort us in death, and crowns us with life in the world to come.

Two things there are, which, without betraying my text, I may not let pass:
Thou Lord abidest for ever, whereupon my text ensues) and the yea and amen of
his faithful promises, that in a case of greatest extremity, as this was, she
stands not upon terms of uncertainty, si forte, it may be God will have
mercy, at this time makes not so much as entreaty, Tu miserere, Do thou have
mercy; but out of a strong (...), confident, abundant persuasion, that God can
no more deny to be merciful to her, then deny himself, she lays hand
fast upon God, and by anticipation before hand, makes a promise, and says to
herself, Tu miserebere, Thou shall: as the Sunamite to the Prophet, catching
hold on his feet, though Gehezi thrust her away, Viuit Dominus, as the Lord
lives and as thy soul lives, I will not let thee go: And, as Jacob to the
Angel, when he had wrestled the whole night with him, Non dimittam, I will
not let thee loose, till I have a blessing from thee.

The other, the modesty and humility Psalm. 68.
Why hop you so, you high hills? this is the Lords hill. If any other may seem
to be confident in the flesh, that is, in earthly prerogatives (may Sion say,
as the Apostle, 3. Philip.) much more I. I shall say no more at the present,
but as the Psalm says; Psalm. 48.
Go about Sion, number her turrets, mark well her bulwarks; Go about the
Scripture, number the praises, mark well the privileges of Sion: 2 Cor. 12.
yet will not Sion rejoice, sue in her infirmities: and the plea of Gods
Servants, on behalf of Sion, is not, Turetribues, thou shall requite Sion;
quia dignus est, vt hoc illi praestes, Luc. 7. Sion is worthy of favor from
thee; but in the language of Canaan, the true Church of God abandoning all
merit, and worth in Sion, Tu misereberis, Thou shall have mercy.

Their speech bewrays them (as they said to Peter) to be of Asdod or Egypt,
that bring into the Church of Christ, the name of merit. Genesis 11.
That, as those of the old world, to get them a name upon earth, make brick of
their own devising, and build them a Babel, a Tower that reaches up to
Heaven; and when they had all done, they had but brick for stone (the
Scripture notes) and slime for mortar, and the end was confusion: So these, to
get them a name and opinion, of being more holy then other men, (touch me not,
I am of purer mold then thou art) make brick of their own pure naturals, and
inherent righteousness, to build up a Babel of merit, that shall gain them the
Kingdom of Heaven, and when they have all done, it is but the brick and slime
of mortal corruption, and they can prognosticate to themselves no fairer end,
then Babels was. I marvel what region of the world, they can rake into, Psalm.
136.
to find out merit? for, By his wisdom, he made the Heavens, because his mercy
endures for ever: And laid out the earth above the waters, because his mercy
endures for ever. Give me a thousand, and million more of the actions of God,
the amaebaeum and burden to them all must be, because his mercy endures for
ever. And I have read of a Mercy-seat, in the Temple of God; but I never heard
of a Stool of merit, but in the Chapel of Antichrist.

Sion is the object of mercy; Sion, a Sion.
by nature and art together, a Fort; by misprision and error, for the time, a
Fort of the Iebusites, enemies of God; by conquest and purchase (Mons dextra
Dei acquisitus) the Fort of David; by accession and improuement of honor,
first the Palace, and afterward the City of the great King; by grace, the
Habitation and Mansion of God (God is well known in her palaces;) by type, the
figure of the Church, both militant in this world, and triumphant in the world
to come. And well might it; for there was tabernaculum, the tabernacle for the
Arc of Gods strength, and the seat of Gods worship, and there the Coenaculum,
Conclaue of the Apostles of Christ, where they received the first Sacrament of
his Body and Blood, were inspired by the Holy Ghost, had the keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven delivered unto them, chose Matthias to the Apostleship, gave
Orders of Deaconship to S. Stephen and others, and formed the first infancy of
the Gospel of Christ; So that Sion, by birthright and eldership, carries the
honor of the Gospel, from all the parts of the earth. Lex e Sione. And it
were no Soloecisme in Divinity, nor any violent strain to the book of God,
to say that the Temple of Jerusalem stood upon Sion. For, though it was seated
upon Moriah, a lower hill; yet, was that Moriah, a part of the daughter of
Sion, the issue, as it were, of her womb; because, in dependence and
continuance, it grew out of Sion. Sion and Jerusalem (join them both together;
for, by an easy coalition in Scripture, they may stand for one, (they differ
but as mother and daughter, the upper and nether City, Es: 31.
Mons Sion and collis eius, a mount and an hillock) for salubritie of air,
fertility of ground, munition of place, beauty of building, populousnes of
inhabitants, (sown with the seed of man and beasts) commodiousnes of
situation, placed (as they write) in the vmbilike and center of the earth, the
miracle of the world, the Metropolis of that land, the Metropolis (says
Hesychius) of all the miracles of God: Gloriosa de te dicuntur Ciuitas Dei:
this City, Sanctuary, jewel, dearling of God, princess and paragon of all
the places under heaven, became (as the name of Sion imports) specula and
speculum, and such like, the watch tower, beacon, mirror, looking-glass,
terror, spectacle, parable, hissing to all the nations in the world, of more
stupendous misery, and consequently, (when the light of Gods countenance
shone upon it again) of more insignious mercy, then the whole earth besides.
They are harder then stones and rocks, and viler then the dust, that the
accursed serpent licketh up, that hear of the stones and dust of Sion, and are
not grieved at them. The bowels of Scythians and Massagetes would be turned
within them. A City so sanctified and dignified, possessed (I grant) at the
first by the Iebusites, and under the name of Iebus well near 500. years; but
afterward recovered and held by David, and his line, almost 500. more, the
strongest and stateliest pile of building that ever the eyes of the Sun
looked upon, more, then the Egyptian spires, or all the Mausolaeas in the
world; and then ouer-turned, ouer-turned, ouer-turned, as a man turns a
platter vpside down, by the proud Assyrian Monarch; and after the dead winter
of that desolation, recovering a fresh spring, at the end of 500 years more,
sacked and demolished by the Roman Conqueror; and (to lengthen the story a
little farther) after all this, Saeuitum in vulnera, Cypr.
that they spared not the very ruins and fragments, but brake them down to
the ground, and sowed the whole land with salt. And (to bear the rest company)
that glorious Temple of Solomon, one of the goodliest limbs of that beautiful
body, made for the eyes of God, and Angels, and Men, to contemplate upon,
worthy enough to denominate the whole City, as if Hierosolyma had the name of
(...); that, in honor whereof they exalted their tongues like trumpets, the
temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, this is the temple of the Lord: and
(to say no more of it, then God by his Prophet, Ezech. 24.) Superbia imperij
vestri, desiderabile oculorum vestrorum, super quo pauet, anima vestra, the
pride of your power, desire of your eyes, and fear of your souls; this temple
(I say) in one thousand years, the same month, the same day, twice burnt
down to the ground; and after the Mount Moriah, whereon it was built, euened
with the plain, and the earth of it thrown down into the valley of
Iehosaphat, and brook of Kedron; so that sooner or later, foxes ran over the
Sanctuary, says Jeremy, Lam: 5. but Jerome goes farther, there ran not a
beast, neither flew there a Foul over the whole coast of Jerusalem, it was so
dismal and desolate. And now lastly, abused to be the cage of all unclean
birds, Satyrs and Schrichowles to dwell in the parlors of it, I mean Saracens
and Infidels: he that can hear or read these things, without moan and
compassion, I shall say his bowels are harder then the anuile the Smith smites
upon: therefore there was reason enough to cry, Tu misereb: Sion, Thou shall
have mercy upon Sion.

The rather for the reasons sake that follows, quia tempus miserendi eius,
because it is time to have mercy upon her.

Time yields a strong persuasion; quia tempus.
perijt spes nostra, our hope is gone. (...); (say they to the Ruler of the
Synagogue, 5. Mar.) Thy daughter is dead: the time past. Master, if thou had
been here, my brother had not died (Martha, 11. Ioh.) now he is dead and
buried: the time past. Nos sperabamus, we hoped it had been he that should
have redeemed Israel, he is now dead three days sithence (the two Disciples
Luc. 24.) the time past. I say it is a strong persuasion that flows from
time: and it is as strongly enforced in my text, nail after nail, driven home
to the head. Time and (by apposition) time again, Tempus, tempus statutum
venit.
and (at the period and full point) appointed time, and time come: that is to
say, time and season of time, and season of season: or time, and opportunity,
and necessity of opportunity, and extremity of necessity, and the very dregs
and settling of extremety: the punctum, the nunc, the moment and indiuisibility
of time. Tempus faciendi Domino, now or not at all.

When I see the Spirit of God in the mouths of these suppliants, pressing so
strictly and punctually, I say not the circumstance, but the instance, which
indeed is the substance of time, instanter, instantius, instantissime, again
and again, and never often enough; time treading upon the heel of time and
incandescit eundo, it gathers strength by going; but that the sickle of time,
which cutteth all things, threatens to clip the wings of my speech, how would
I urge unto you in all your weighty affairs, the presentest prensation and
pursuit of the very forelock of time? Will you show mercy to Sion, give help
to the helpless? Mark not the wind, you shall never sow then, observe not
the clouds, you shall never reap. Say to your selves, It is time, yea time, the
appointed time is come. Momenti transitus, anni transitus, aeui transitus est:
Once lost, and ever lost. Will you show mercy to your souls, by repenting your
sins? Defer not from day to day; Deterior posterior dies, the longer, the
worse. Say to your selves, It is time, yea time, the appointed time is come.
(...), good is not good, mercy is not mercy, that comes not in time. But, as
a mess of meat set upon a grave, where the dead is no whit the better for it.

It is thought, by many learned Scribes, that this Psalm was fitted for the
mouths of the Jews, in the captivity of Babylon. When the seventy years,
mentioned Ier. 29. were near their expiration. This time they calculated, and
pitched upon exactly, out of the Ephemerides, and Book of God, that could not
deceive them: and therefore, by warrant from him, they pinch thus closely upon
the time: Tempus miserendi, tempus etc. They may boldly and safely do it, when
God himself has prefined a time. Otherwise, let no man presume to appoint his
times, quae posuit in potestate sua, (they are a part of his royal
prerogative, who can cause the Sun to stand still, and double the day, to
bring his work to an end) nor tie him to canonical hours, and atoms, and
puntilio's of time, tempus, tempus, statutum tempus. It is a sinful
temptation. Judge 8.
Vos qui estis? Who are you, that tempt the Lord? (when they fixed him a time
of five days, to relieve the City of Bethulia, else to deliver it up to the
enemy) Bind not the counsel of the Lord, he is not as men, that he should be
threatened, with much to the like effect. O tarry the Lords leisure, be strong,
comfort your hearts, possess your souls in patience, if the vision stay, stay
with it, hope even against hope: Nullu^ tempus occurrit Regi, is the privilege
of an earthly King, much more of the King of Kings; who, when he is pleased to
help, can do it in ictu oculi, in the twinkling of an eye, and sub ictu
gladij, under the dint of the sword, as in the case of Isaac, when manubrium e
manu, God so forced the heft of the knife, in the hand of Abraham, that he
could not smite.

I have done with my former part, Gods part; the latter, which belongs to
man, 2 Part.
follows. Quoniam placuerunt. For thy Servants take pleasure in her stones,
etc. It is but a second reason added to the former; that in effect was this:
Thou shall have mercy upon Sion, because the time requires it. This latter
imports, but thus much: Thou shall have mercy upon Sion, because thy Servants
desire it. It is both subsequent and subordinate to the other; for, the mercy
of God in the former, is both the exemplary, and efficient cause of man's mercy
in the latter. That is to say, God does both lead the way, and give grace to
man, to extend his mercy. Therefore, where the usual reading is, Tu exurgens,
thou shall arise, and have mercy; Jerome, out of the Hebrew, reads
transitiuely, Tu suscitans, thou shall raise up others. He that brought water
out of the rock, and honey out of the stone, can wring mercy out of the heart
of an enemy. He made all them that led them away captive, to pity them. Man
would grow wild, and degenerate from nature, forget that he is a man, become a
wolf, a Devil to man; but that God keeps him in tune.

Amongst these Servants of God, Thy Servants.
they rank in the first place, Cyrus and Darius, Lords over men, but servants
to God, and (as a servant is defined by Aristotle) his living Instruments, to
do their Masters will. Thus God speaks to Cyrus, Esa. 44. Thou art my
shepherd, and he shall do my desire. He shall say to Jerusalem, Thou shall be
built, and to the Temple, thy foundation shall be surely laid. The story is
very strange, in the book of Esdras, the first and sixth Chapters especially,
and shall be opened amongst other books, at the day of the Lord, against many
believers: that a pair of outlandish, and heathen Kings, should not only give
leave to the Jews, to return to their Country, and build both their City and
Temple, and restore them their vessels and jewels, that had been taken from
them; but allow the expense of their building, out of their own revenues, and
supply them beside, for sacrifice and sweet odours, with a check to all their
adversaries, be ye far from thence, and a peremptory decree, that whosoever
should alter that sentence, the wood should be pulled down from his house,
and he hanged thereupon, and his house made a draught-house. And lastly, a
direful imprecation against all Kings and people, that should put their hands
to alter, and destroy the house of God in Jerusalem. Esa. 49.
Erunt Reges nutritij tui, was Gods promise, Kings shall be thy nursing
fathers: here is much more, Nudauerunt lamiae mammam, Even Dragons draw out
their breasts, Lam. 4. when the people and house of God, such milk out of the
breasts of Gentiles.

Others fall lower a degree, to Nehemias and the rest, that were the Princes of
the people, and had the chief charge of the work.

We may knit up the sheet at the four corners, and include in the name of
servants, without difference, high and low: there being no soul in the world,
that has given his name unto God, and subscribed with his hand, Ego Domini,
Esa. 44. whose spark of religion and piety, is not quite put out; but the
dilapidation of any of Gods Oratories and Sacraries, his Heavens upon earth,
goes to his heart like swords; nor, can he behold with dry eyes, the
destruction, or despite done to his sacred Inheritance. They that can brook it
with patience, God shall one day say unto them, by the words of Obadiah, Tu
quasi vnus ex eis, thou art one of them.

The short is: Psalm. 74.
thine adversaries rore in the midst of thy Congregation, and set up their
banners for tokens, and break down the carved work, with axes and hammers.
The Atheist accounts the houses of God, common and prohane, like other
houses, makes lay-stals and dung-hils, where their site was, and turns them
into stables for horses: (the stories of the Church are full, and England is
not empty of them) but Serui tui, the poorest servant in the house of God, that
heweth wood, and draws water to the Camp, is better affected.

Placuerunt seruis tuis lapides, Are pleased.
what hear I? take they pleasure in the stones of Sion, are they delighted
with it, there, there, thus would we have it? No; but every the least
remembrance, representation, remnant of Sion, Relliquiae Danaum atque immitis
Achillei, That comes into their eye, does them good; as when Dorcas was dead,
Acts 9. they showed the garment and coats, that she had made, to move
affection: the sight of the very crumbs, that fell from the temple of Jerusalem,
is a kind of refreshing, and gives contentment unto them. A man is pleased
with the picture of a dead friend, since he has no better, sic vultus, sic ora
ferebat, thus he looked. Their affection lives not* dies not with the
fortune of Sion, They loved her in prosperity, they love her even in misery, We
wept, when we remembered thee, o Sion: and, if I forget Jerusalem, let my right
hand forget her cunning. And so did the Ancients, that had lived to see the
beauty of the former temple, and saw the unlike foundation of the new --
simulataque magnis Pergama, Weep in remembrance of it. Esdr. 3.


They take not pleasure in the stones, for what they are, but for what they
have been, sometimes the chosen materials, and now the disiected and
dislocated members of those glorious edifices quorum pars vna, whereof they had
been a part in their younger and flourishing days. And to speak plainly,
they delight more in the stones and sheards, the very shadow and ghost of Sion
(if I may so say) then in the standing houses, stateliest palaces, and whole
body of Babylon. Her dust is better unto them, then their gold, and every the
meanest stone, that was but a dore-keeper in the house of the Lord, lay but
under the threshold of it, is (...) to them, a precious stone, far beyond the
Saphyrs and Diamonds of Babylon. Thus did that great Constantine kiss the eye
of Paphnutius, Eusebius.
which the tyrant had caused to be dug out. He took not pleasure in the
wound and deformity of it cui lumen ademptum, but because it had been the orb
and circle of that eye, which stood in the head of so glorious a Confessor, as
Paphnutius was. The later word of my text makes all clear. Pity.
Miserentur pulueris, they so take pleasure in the stones, that they pity the
dust of Sion: and where there is pity, which makes miserum cor, a woeful
heart; there can be no pleasure. Complacentia in the first part, but
displicentia in the last.

Some read placuerunt lapides, take pleasure; some diligunt, love: both comes
to one; for Amor is complacentia, Love is a contentment. It is affectus
vnionis, desires union; as the hearts of Jonathan and David were knit
together: Currit per desi derium, requiescit per gaudium, says S. Austin.
Desire makes it run, and delight makes it rest. Thus far is Complacentia, all
is well. Soror amoris dulcedo. Love and delight go together. But is there any
danger of losing what I love? I fear; do I lose it indeed? I grieve; does any
hinder me? There is anger: is any a corriuall? There is jealousy: does any
violate or wrong it? There is revenge: does any mishap or miscariage betide it?
There is pity: In amore haec insunt omnia: and then it comes to pass, that
cor meum sicut cera liquescens, mine heart in the midst of me is like melting
wax. Saluianus in Epist.
Saluianus rightly fitteth me; Amor, quid te appellem nescio: bonum an malum,
dulce an asperum, suaue an injucundum? Ita enim vtroque plenus es, vt vtrumque
esse videaris. Love I know not how to term thee, good or evil, sweet or
sour, pleasant or unpleasant. For thou art so full of both, that thou seem
to be both of them.

In sum, where there is love, there, upon any misfortune, will be pity; and
where there is pity, plus quam afficit, facit, it puleth not in the bosom
alone, and spends it self in affection, but breaks forth into action, and
will lend an helping hand. I have done with my text: Thou shall arise and have
mercy upon Sion: for the time to favor her etc.

I come not on a common message unto you; Application.
nor is my Sermon a Sermon of course. I may say, as Act. 15. Moses has them
that preach him in your City of old time (...), every Sabbath day, out of this
chair: Moses or Christ, Law or Gospel without fail. You may see there is
more then so, by discerning the face of the sky. When ever did your Sun,
since his first arising amongst you, stand still in your Gibeon? the person (I
mean) of your King, vouchsafe to be a part of your auditorie in this place,
(with that glorious star that follows the Sun, and the whole host of our
heavenly firmament about him; with so many thousands of souls besides, seeking
the face of their Ruler, as I say not but in a triumph or show where they come
to gaze, or along the streets in trsine and succession, there have been more,
but in a garland and ring of an auditorie coucht together, never have more
been seen) till this day? A part of your auditorie, did I say? Yea, and a
principal part of my simple oratorie, such as it is: He laid my foundation for
me, and set me my pattern (as God did Moses in the Mount) to work by.

The truth is, my text was not taken but given me, though not by a voice from
heaven, as that of S. Austins, Toll lege, toll lege; yet by a voice from
earth, that is next to heaven. So that with allusion to the place, and some
easy alteration, I may say, as Christ unto Peter, Ioh. vlt. When thou were
young, thou wentst at thy pleasure, and girdedst thy self, but now thou art
old, an other shall gird thee: So had my manner ever been aforetime, to open
the volume of this Book, and go through the fields of the old and new
Testament, plucking and rubbing such ears of corn therein as I best liked,
making choice (I mean) of my text, and buckling my self to my task, at mine
own discretion; but now I am girt and tied to a Scripture by him, who as he
has most right to command, so best skill to direct and appoint the best
service I can.

It is not a twelue-moneth since (it wants but a fortnight of it) that in
the greatest assembly and confluence, for number and state (since that of that
euer-admired 88, when the honor was done to this Land, that the Lord sold Iabin
and his strength into the hands of a woman, and that woman, then whom mayor non
surrexit, a greater never arose (to us) amongst all our daughters of men,
called up her self and her people to a solemn and public thanksgiving,
Judge. 5.
Up Deborah, arise and sing, I my self will sing, (She did it at the Church
door, as also did our gracious Sovereign) up Barak: and they offered their
joint sacrifice of praise to God, upon this the most eminent and conspicuous
Altar of the Kingdom) I say, not a twelue-moneth since, that I recommended
unto you, and we both unto God, the case of our absent and sick Sovereign,
the incense of our prayers and praises, like a sweet perfume, ascending and
preasing thick into heaven for his recovery at that time.

Then was the subject of my speech a Sion, a mount, excelsis excelsior, a fort,
the fortress and bulwark of this Island, a temple, but of an other kind,
(destroy this temple, said Christ, he meant it of his body, and) I mean the
body of the King, a building not made with hands, but shaped of flesh and
blood; nor so mortally sunk and fallen down to the stones and dust, as this
Sion was, but with the long siege and strong impression and assault of as
furious, tyrannous, and predominating a sickness, as ever was, that merciless
Monarke against Sion, which had amassed together the forces of many diseases
into one, so battered and shaken, that it was high time to cry to him, that
has the keys of life and death, Tempus miserendi eius, it is time to have
mercy upon him, yea the appointed time is come. We cried, tanquam anima vna, as
if there had been but one soul amongst us all, and God heard us from heaven,
and I trust that Sion, of whom I speak, who is now come to pay his vows in
the midst of his people, will never forget it.

I am now to speak unto you, from Him, and in His name, of an other Sion,
(nearer by far then that in Iudaea, we are under the bower of it) a literal
and artificial Sion, a Temple without life and motion, yet of a sickly and
crazie constitution, sick of age it self, and with many aches in her joints,
together with a lingering consumption, that has long lien in her bowels, the
timber in the beams whereof cries, I perish, and the stone in the walls
answers no less, and part is already moultered away to stones, part to dust:
and (that which is more) symbolizing with that other Sion, not only in her
fates and casualties, but in the very returns and revolutions of those fates.
After her first building (which was 600 after Christ) about 500 years, salted
with fire, sacrificed to the anger of God, with no small part of the City; and
being raised as a Phoenix out of those first ashes, betwixt 4 and 500 more
(twice in a thousand years) touched with a (...), from an invisible hand, a
Cole from the Altar of God, that was never blown, which wholly consumed the
crest and vertical point, the top and top-gallant of it, and so scorched and
defaced the rest, that ever since that day, it has remained valetudinary and
infirm, rather peeced out with an ordinary kind of physic of but needful
reparation, then restored to the sound plight it had before time.

For this Sion is my coming; to which I ran not of my self, I durst not
presume so far; but was sent, as the Baptist before the face of his Master, the
voice of a Crier, only to prepare the way, the marrow of persuasion is behind.
Or, as Gehezi, the servant of Eliah, 2 Reg. 4.
who was sent before, with the staff of the Prophet, to lay upon the dead
child, but could not recover life in him; it is not the staff, the reed in
my hand, the strength of my tongue, that can put life into this dead body. But,
when my Master himself shall come, and stretch his body upon the body, afford
his own bodily presence, and set himself to the work, lay his eyes upon the
eyes, view the lantern and windows, and his hands upon the hands, mark the
pillars and pinnacles, and make it his princely care, that every several
decayed part, may receive some comfort: and lastly, apply his eyes to your
eyes, and (that which is more) his mouth to your ears, which cannot resist the
power of his wise and religious charmings, then if the Child neese not, if the
Church go not up, there is little hope.

I would to God you would look with your own eyes, they are the truest
witnesses. The eye that beholds these ruins, and adiureth not the heart, to
yield some help, what metal is it made of? (...); See you all these? What
stones, what buildings? mark them well; They were, at the first, in the
Heptarchy of this Land, the work of a King of Kent. (That other at the
Westend? and this, (...), much about a time.) And, after their first combustion
(I told you) founded anew, and brought forwards amain, for twenty years
space, by Mauritius Bishop of London; in that amplitude and dimension, wherein
you now see them, (for he was immodicus animi, of a large heart, and therefore
intended a large work) and twenty years more continued by Beaumor, that next
succeeded him. That, as they of their Temple, forty and six years was this
temple in building. Io. 2. So may we say of this, it was in building forty
years, during the sitting of two Bishops, yet far from finishing. Diverse
Bishops of this See (that indeed had a sea to our ditch) in process of time,
some enlarged it with building, some enriched it with revenue, some with
treasure and stocks of money, some with privileges, some with one thing, some
with another: and it was not the least good of him, that bought in the houses
round about, and laid out this (Campus Martius, shall I say?) Campus pacificus,
wherein you have so large and commodious a room, to hear the tidings of peace.
Now, I ask again, Do you see all these? What stones, what buildings now?
Lapides clamant, the very stones cry out after you; out of the mouths, of
these infant and speechless creatures, has God ordained strength; there can
be no stronger eloquence, to affect the mind, then what flows into the eye,
from the fissures and maimnes, which every corner of the Church yields. When
the body of slaughtered Asahel, 2 Samuel 2.
was left in the highway side, there was not a man, which came by, but stayed.
When Jacob had the sight of the bloody coat of Joseph, Genesis 37.
he mourned, and would go down into the grave after him, would not be
comforted. The showing of Caesar's bloody robe in the marketplace, set them all
in a tumult. I show you the outward weeds, and, as it were, the tattered rags
and relics of a wounded, bleeding, dying Church, falling so fast to a plain
anatomy, and (...), that if to the malice of time, which deuoureth his
children, I mean, all temporal things, and that viui comburium, burning of it
in the life and liuely-hood thereof, which has set so many brands of disgrace
upon the whole face of it, you add the neglect of a few years more, even Saul
amongst the Prophets, every one of meanest capacity and foresight, may be
able to divine, Non relinquetur lapis super lapidem, not a stone shall be left
standing upon a stone; but all will down: which that Deus tutelaris,
Protector and Patron of this noble City of yours, forbid. You might then
change the name of your City, and call it, as the wife of Phineas called her
son, 1 Samuel 4.
when the Arc was taken, where is the glory? It is a fire in my bones, and I
cannot suppress it, to speak a little of the honor and happiness of this
Island, whether for nature or grace. They called Sicily the barn of Rome; and
Egypt, for the fatness of Nylus, the barn of the world. Is there a barn, a
Canaan in Europe, if this Island be not? I know how proudly they write of Italy
(for there, if any where, is the chair of pride, and throne of Satan
himself) Quod far conferam Campano? quod triticum Appulo? quod vinum Falerno?
quod oleum Venafro? nonne arboribus consita, vt tota pomarium videatur? What
corn, or wheat, or wine, or oil, like to that in Italy? does it not all
thorowout, look like an Orchard? They may do well to match it with Eden, the
Garden of the Lord, -- Non equidem invideo. I dare not be proud of our Country
(I am sure it is too good for us.) There is a worm at the root of the gourd,
sin at the doors, that can mar all in an instant. But standing and stated,
as it is, for all the most natural and necessary commodities, of raiment and
nourishment (and habentes alimenta and quibus tegamur, 1 Timothy 6.
says the Apostle, let us be content) I may term it (within hirselfe) the
very Signet and Benjamin of Gods right hand, no Country beyond it. And what we
want from abroad, God has made us a way in the sea, and a path in the mighty
waters, to bring it in, Esa. 43. And yet after all this, may she say, Dedisti
laetitiam in cord meo. Thou have put more gladness in my heart, then their
corn and wine can possibly give them. For we have a golden candlestick, a
glorious Church, wherein the light of the Gospel shines (which is the true
Nylus of all our happiness, and they want it abroad) and she, as a Sanctuary
and City of refuge, opens her lap, to receive foreign Churches. Neither have
we a King, like that new King in Egypt, that knew not Joseph; but one that
walks in the steps of her beautiful feet that trod before him, and is a
Nutritious, a tender Nursing-Father to the Church; not only our own, but those
that sojourne amongst us. These things laid together, was there ever Island in
the world (as Herodotus tells us) that had (...) to name, by reason of the
fairness and goodness of it? Let her resign, and bow to ours.

You may think it a digression; but to this end I speak it. If England be
the ring of Europe, your City is the gemme. If England the body, your City the
eye; if England the eye, your City the apple of it. Here is the Synopsis, and
Sum of the whole Kingdom. Here the distillation, and spirits of all the
goodness it has. Here the Chamber of our British Empire. Here the Emporium,
principal Mart of all foreign commodities, and Staple of homebred. Here the
Garrison, and Strength of the Land, the Magazine and Storehouse of the best of
Gods blessings. Here (if in any place) are the wooden walls, and gates of iron.
With you is the Tagus and Pactolus, the river that runs with gold. You have
the body of the King, the morning and midday influence of that glorious Sun;
others parts have but the evening. His houses of mansion and station are round
about you. You, of all others, are nearest the heart, for care and protection
Here has the Lord ordained a lantern for his Anointed. Here are the thrones
of David, for judgment; and the chair of Moses, for instruction. O fortunati
nimium: You have the finest flower of the wheat, and purest blood of the grape,
that is, the choice of his blessed Word, has God given unto you, and great is
the company of the Preachers. And what shall I say more? Dies deficeret. The
day would forsake me, to speak of all. Does any City on the earth bear her
head high, for any one singular felicity? -- Tendimus in Latium. I am once more
in Italy. Dites Venetiae (say they) ingens Mediolanum, superba Genoa, nobilis
Neapolis, rich Venice, great Millaine, proud Genoa, noble Naples, and -- Roma
caput mundi; Rome the head of the world. -- Contingat mea Roma mihi, say I,
give me London in England, which is as a Load-star to lead all the rest.

And yet for a warning in my way, that revelations puff ye not up, be not high
minded, but fear. Art thou better then No? 3. Nahum. that was situate in many
waters, and had her rampart and wall from the Sea Aethiopia and Egypt were her
helpers, and it was infinite. etc. and yet she was carried away captive.
Remember Sion. The pillars of Sion fallen down, are monuments unto us to
beware by her falling, Quia in alto posita, in sublime cecidit; she stood
high, and fell low. Qui stat, videat ne cadat, is S. Ieromes admonition upon
these words. Your silver is not so pure, but it is mixed with dross: your best
not so good, but it has much bad with it. But I leese my way. When I come to
reprove sin, I shall sow no pillowes. I am now to present before your eyes
the glass of your honors. Your City has been anciently styled Augusta.
Caesar had to name Augustus, (says the story) quia natura hominis amplior,
because he was more then the nature of man. It may be your City was more then
other Cities. I am sure it had not that amplitude and majesty it now has.

Not to weary mine eyes with wandering and rouing after private, but to fix
upon public alone, when I behold that forest of masts upon your river for
traffic, and that more then miraculous bridge, which is the communis
terminus, to join the two banks of that river; your Royal Exchange for
Merchants, your Halls for Companies, your gates for defense, your markets for
victual, your aquaeducts for water, your granaries for provision, your
Hospitalls for the poor, your Bridewells for the idle, your Chamber for
Orphans, and your Churches for holy Assemblies; I cannot deny them to be
magnificent works, and your City to deserve the name of an Augustious and
majesticall City; to cast into the reckoning those of later edition, the
beautifying of your fields without, and pitching your Smithfield within, new
Gates, new Water-workes, and the like, which have been consecrated by you to
the days of his Majesty's happy reign: and I hope the cleansing of the River,
which is the vena porta to your City, will follow in good time. But after all
these, as Christ to the young man in the Gospel, which had done all and more,
Matthew. 19.
Vnum tibi deest, si vis perfectus esse, vade, vende: so may I say to you.
There is yet one thing wanting unto you, if you will be perfect, perfect this
Church: not by parting from all, but somewhat, not to the poor, but to God
himself. This Church is your Sion indeed, other are but Synagogues, this your
Jerusalem the mother to them all, other but daughters brought up at her knees;
this the Cathedral, other but Parochial Churches; this the Bethel for the
daily and constant service of God, other have their intermissions, this the
common to you all, and to this do your Tribes ascend in their greatest
solemnities; others appropriated to several Congregations, this the standart
in the high rode of gaze, others are more retired, this the mirror and mark
of strangers, other have but their side looks; finally, this unto you, as S
Peter's in the Vatican at Rome, S. Marks at Venice, and that of Diana at
Ephesus, and this at Jerusalem of the Jews; or if there be any other of glory
and fame in the Christian world, which they most joy in.

You have opened your hands, and filled with your blessing (a blessing of this
kind (...), 1. Cor. 16.
they are both the Apostles words, 2. Cor. 9.
1. and 2. Corinthians.) many Churches both at home and abroad. S. Albans, and a
number besides, look with a chearefuller countenance through the oil of your
goodness. Your English Colonie in Virginia (I named her the little sister that
had no breasts) has drawn from the breasts of this City and Dioecesse a
thousand pounds toward her Church. The Churches of Prague and Franckendale,
though of an other blood, nothing of kin to you, (the latter, I confess, the
maiden and prime suite of Her, that in all respects of grace and accomplishment
is the prime Lady of Europe, the other a mere stranger at that time, the
present condition of things not then suspected nor dreamt of) have both had an
offering of a fair eye from this honorable City. Genesis 27.
Now (as Esau to his father when Jacob had been before him, Nunquid non
reseruasti, Number vnam tantum?) have you not kept one blessing in store? or had
you but one blessing? or have you forgotten the old rule, Charitas a domo sua,
that Charity begins at her own house? or will you be marked with those the
Apostle speaks of, which provide not for their own? 1. Tim. 5.
Or will you begin at your own houses indeed, and there build like Xerxes
togati, seele your chambers with Cedar, and paint them with Synoper, 22 Ierem.
that when you have done, you may walk in the tarras of them, and say, Is not
this great Babel, which I have built, for the honor of my name? But as for the
house of the Lord, with those 1. Agg: Nondum tempus, the time is not yet come.
Nunquid tempus vobis est? read forward, it is a fearful place, and stingeth
like Scorpions. Ponite corda vestra super vias vestras. Consider it wisely: you
eat and are not satisfied, etc. What is the reason? quia domus mea deserta, and
vnus quisque festinat in domum suam, because mine house lies desert, and every
one makes haste to build his own house. Or is no man smitten at the heart, as
David was, 2. Sam. 7. Behold I dwell in an house of Cedar, but as for the Ark of the Lord, it remains in medio pellium, in the midst of curtains: Or these
houses of clay, which we bear about us, and are in medio pellium indeed, in
the midst of skins, shall we garnish and trim on the outside, like painted
sepulchers, whited walls, gilded potsheards, Egyptian temples, that scarce
have an Arc, a good soul within them, but some Monkey or Cat or Crocodile, or
the like; and that in so garish and strange a fashion, that that which was
opprobrious in former days, is prodigious in ours, -- Iuvenes vt foemina
compti, a man trickt like a woman; a shame then, -- Iuvenes and foemina tonsi,
a woman trimmed like a man, a grace now: Quid androgynus? (says Tully) what is
a man-woman, woman-man? nonne fatale monstrum? Shall all this be done, I say,
and shall this house of the Lord, the place where his honor dwells, drop
down by pieces, and leave a memorial against us of senseless indevotion to
succeeding ages? O ye the living stones, and reasonable Temples of the Holy
Ghost, breath upon the chill faces of these dead and disfigured ones, even for
kindred sake, the spirit of life and refreshing, renew their youth as the
Eagles, take off their filthy garments, as they from Iehosuah, Zach. 3. and
give them a change of raiment; and (as God spoke to his people, Malach. 3.
Bring in, that there may be meat in my house, and prove me) bring in, that the
house of the Lord may but subsist and stand, and prove him, if he will not open
the windows of heaven, and power down his blessings upon you. Go up to the
mountains, Agg: 1. bring wood etc. do but begin the work, lay but a stone of
it: shall I ever distrust the providence of that God, that is (...) and (...),
the beginner and finisher of every good work, that gives both to will and to
do, whose Spirit blows where it pleases? who when he gave order for the
building of his Tabernacle, the charge was no more but this, Every one that is
willing, Exodus 35.
whose heart eucourageth him; and they brought in so fast, men and women, that
the workmen came from their work, and told Moses, there was too much, and a
proclamation was made in the Camp to bring no more, Exodus 36. And when stuff
was to be provided for building the Temple, David left it at large, Who so is
willing to fill his hand, 1. Chron. 29. and both King, Princes, and people
offered abundantly and willingly; in so much that David, for himself and them,
gives thanks to the Lord in this form, Who am I, and what is my people, that
we should offer thus willingly? and when Josias repaired the Temple, 2. Reg.
22. the money is delivered into the hands of the workmen, and no account must
be taken of them: why? because they did the work faithfully. And when Julian,
that broken bow, and graceless Apostata, to elude and falsify the word of our
Savior, Non relinquetur lapis etc. gave them money from his own coffers to
build their Temple again, they were so zealous to the work, that they made
them mattocks and spades of silver, and the women bestowed their jewels toward
the charge, and bare out the rubbell and earth in their bosoms? There is not a
soul that fears God, but the zeal of Gods house will even eat it up. Many a
true-hearted Areunah will offer his land to build the Altar upon, and his oxen
for sacrifice, and his plough-timber for fire. The rich, of his superfluity
will give the more; the poor, will give a mite even out of his penury. The
living will send their goodness into heaven before them; the dying will be
careful to take it along with them: and (I persuade my self) there will not
be a Will made, but God shall have a legacy, Christ a childs part in it. Even
Judas himself that has well thriuen by the worst means, will out of remorse
of conscience, Math. 27.
(...), cast down his silver in the Temple for the Priests to dispose of.

For this great and glorious work does your great and gracious Master come to
speak. I have drawn with my cole before him, the colors of life and grace
are in his lips, where sceptrum and plectrum, authority and eloquence will
kiss each other, and the tongue of a King, like the harp of Amphion, draw
stones to the building. It has ever been the care of religious Princes to
build and beautify Churches. Great Constantine, the Noah and father of the new
Christian world, after that flood of bloody persecution, in founding the
Lateran (then the Constantinian) Church, bare 12 baskets of earth upon his own
shoulders: I spare the rest, stories are fraught with them. I received it in a
message (amongst other enlargements and persuasions of his Royal spirit) from
our religious Constantine, that he would be contented to do a penance, and to
fast with bread and water, so this Church might be built. The request is not
harsh, cannot be grievous to any, 2. Reg. 5.
but (as the servants to Naaman their master, If the Prophet had commanded thee
a great thing, should thou not have done it? how much more when he says,
wash and be clean?) so when the King shall request no more, but build and
repair the Church, and your honor together?

I say, when the King shall request it. You remember what Paul wrote to
Philemon, though I have great authority to command thee that, that is meet,
yet out of love I rather entreat, (...), being such as I am, I Paul the aged,
etc. He that has the ball in his hand, and commands far and wide, yet
lays down (as it were) his Crown, and stoopeth to entreaty, Caetera
imperaui vobis, Q. Curt.
hoc vnum debiturus (as Alexander to his soldiers) commanding in other
matters, beholding in this. And (...) being such as he is. One that has kept
the fire upon your Altar yet burning, (I trust ever shall) I mean, that has
nourished the Gospel of peace, and government of peace, and liberty, plenty,
prosperity the daughter of peace, amongst you to this day. One that has filled
you with such hope at home, -- Quantus in ore pater radiat? What a Father, what
a Son? and such honor abroad, I wish I were worthy to blason it.

(...), such a King entreats, that as these seventeen years of his reign,
have been honored and privileged with more exemplary and spectable works, in
your City and Suburbs (I named not the Charter House) in Country and
Universities, where Libraries, Schools, and Lectures, provoke all Christendom
to emulation, and some Colleges have been newly founded, every College
almost has cast his old skin with the Serpent, and gotten a new coat, then in
so many years twice told (pick them where you will) of any his Predecessors;
So the re-building of Paul's, may be the Coronis and Vp-shot, the Glory,
Garland, and Masterpiece to all the rest.

I am full as the Moon, and must speak to take breath, from the abundance of
the heart, my mouth speaks. A great door and effectual is opened unto me. I
never spoke in such an Auditory, never shall again. But if ever I were in the
Spirit (I trust Gods Spirit is in me, and affects me thus to speak) I
mean, transported beyond my self, now it is, to have so many thousands of
souls within mine eye, so faithful and firm (I persuade my self) to God,
his Anointed, the Church, the State, as with their means and assistance,
alliance and friends, are able and ready (to build a Church, shall I say? yea,
and) to maintain, and fight for the Church, to defeat all adversaries it has,
and debell proud Antichrist himself. Deum in voco testem in animam meam, I
speak as I think, I see a cluster and bunch of the grapes of Canaan, the very
first and best of the fruits, throughout the whole Kingdom. Now, you on the
other side, Behold your King. Ecce Rex vester. Hosanna, Hosanna, save Lord,
bless Lord; blessed is he that is come unto you, in the name of the Lord; and
blessed, blessed again, that comes in the name of the Lord, and with the Lords
errand. Set it, as a seal upon your hearts, that your King is so come unto
you. Such commings are not often; but like Ludi Saeculares in Rome, once in an
age, once in a Princes reign, Queen Elizabeth once, and now your Sovereign
once. I hope I shall not sin, in wishing that such commings were more often,
-- Ex visu fit amor. Such a people, in view of their King, and such a King in
view of his people, banding their eyes to and fro, the one from the other,
would be as the flowing and falling of waters, a reciprocal and
enterchangeable motion of love betwixt them. I know not what others think; but
to me, it seems worthy, to add a Rubricke more to your Almanacke, and make
a new Holy Day amongst you. The Pope makes Jubilees at his pleasure, why not
this a Iubilee, a year of extraordinary joy to your City?

I doubt not; but our Chronicles will make report of this, to future ages. Some
will be so happy, to take the pencill in hand (none but Apelles should do it)
and describe the honor of this day. But will it almost be believed, that a
King should come from his Court to this Cross, where Princes seldom or never
come; and that coming to be in state, with a kind of sacred pomp and
procession; accompanied with all the fair Flowers of his Field, and the
fairest Rose of his own Garden; an holy Congregation to be called; his
desires sanctified before hand, with prayer and preaching; and in the hearing
of a world of people, to make a request to his Subjects, not for his private,
but for the public; not for himself, but for God; not out of reason of state
and policy, but of religion and piety; no less fruit of honor and favor,
with God and man, accruing thereby to his people, then to his sacred Majesty?
You that see it at the present, and can value and prize it, with all due
circumstance and merit, have cause to admire it.

I cannot conclude in a better time, nor can I make a better conclusion, then a
little beneath my Text, from the 18. verse Scribentur haec, (there is your
reward) these things (if you do them) shall be written for the generations to
come, and the children unborn shall praise the Lord.

Now the God of peace, Hebr. 13.
make you perfect in every good work, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

FINIS.

