Loves Load-starre. LIVELY DECIphered in a History no less commendable than
comfortable, for all those that in their lovely affections, have by the enmity
of their friends, been molested with the menacing meteors of crossing
misfortunes. Leading also all kind and true Lovers, that in their choyces are
frownd at by froward Parents, unto the portfull Paradise of pleasurde Patience,
and patient Pleasures.

By Robert Kittowe, student.

Ignauis nulla corona datur. LONDON Printed by Th. Creed dwelling in the Old
Change, at the sign of the Eagle and Child, near Old Fish-streete. 1600.

The Author to both the captious and the courteous Reader, health.
Reader reuolue not rashly any work,
On which thy curious eye does chance to look;
Better not read, then (when thou readst) to lurk
Even Critique-like, to braide an Authors book,
Regard with Soldiers toil, the Students pain:
That little good has; often this, less gain.
Know, that the finest Lawne, has checquered strakes,
In purest Wines, some hoarie dregs are seen;
The squamie rust, verdure from Iron takes;
The fairest Rose, with prickles plucked has been:
One shaft, what Archer may not shoot amiss?
What work so well, that no where faulty is?
Farewell. Rob. Kittowe.

TO ALL GENErous Gentlemen, that favor the springing Flowers of Arts bodily
health, and eternal happiness.
GEntles, I have (with your favors) deciphered a Load-starre, in whose gleames
shine good will, and whose glory is made splendent with loyal loves only
grace. Sometime when Eagles have tried their young Birds with the Sunbeams,
they will direct their vndazeled eyes to gaze at the bright gleames of Poets, a
less star; whose twinkeling sparkelings may increase their disports. And
(generous hearts) if your eyes that have viewd the glorious Sunshine of Arts
graces, deigne (after the natures of those mighty and magnanimous byrds) to
behold the dim twinckeling of this imperfect Load-starre; you shall not only
hereafter give life to my labors, but by your gentle acceptance, make me bold
to adventure the archtecture of some worthier work. The subject, which serves
for the Zodiac to this wandering Star (which co^tinues the yearly course of
the Day Star, through the twelve Astronomicall signs) is but mean; and
therefore deserves no costly colors to make it seem splendent: If the^ it
please any, so much (I account it the better) reckon it you estimable, by how
much it can displease none. It may be some Zoylist will bark (as do Wolves
against the Moon) following against it the humorous phrase of the base
backbiter (all whose birds seeming to himself Swannes, and other winged
fowls but night Crows) vomits forth to his own shame, what he supposes
should disgrace others credits: and wanting teeth (as does the infectious
Serpent Porphyrius) not being able to bite, is by his suscepted envious conceit
(engendered of the supposition of his own singularity (himself mostly
martyred. And what maisterdome is it to nip blossoms in their first spring?
Can young birds fly till they prove and try to plie their wings? Better
kill Flies with a flap, than be idle; greater credit, to play small game with
his own charge, than great sums at a cast, to others cost; and more
commendable, to accomplish plain labors, than to be reckoned among his
acquaintance and friends for a sluggish loyterer. These weak reasons
(Gentlemen) builded on a good ground, may not be denide to go for current,
toward the free pass of this my pilgrim-like Star, through the clymate of
your acceptable eyes: whose wandering course when you behold, if you like it,
love it; if dislike it, I pray, leave it; It has taken arising by Astronomicall
computation, at the first beginning of the gay Springtide, the 9. of March last
past, in the 1599. year of the worlds redemption (noted by the virtue of an
Eastern Star to three Sages) and from the worlds first creation, and the
days of old Adam, 5562. when the Sun took his direct entrance (following
his accustomed progress) toward the first minute of Aries: which sign
Astronomers about that tide term Equinoctial, because then (when the Sun
enters therein) the days which in length were before shorter than the nights,
become with them checke-mate in equal Longitude. The natural heat and
moisture of which pleasant time, makes every creature (as well unreasonable as
reasonable) to receive comfort; and in their kind, to increase and multiply.
When the chaunting birds echo in the woods and fields, many a delectable
kerelie; when the earth araide in her pride, and decked with diverse colors,
yields admiration to those, that co^template on natures ornaments; which far
surpass the reach of heauen-searching Art: And when, what pleasure may be
obtained in Gardens (dyapred with sundry sorts of flourishing Roses and
Flowers) or what solace, to see the springing meades and pastoral Countries;
and what health may be had by following Physic rules; is both sought and
practiced. The worst is, that the conjunction then of Jupiter and Saturn
(noting a corruptnesse of the air) may be coniectured that many shall be
tormented with a chollericke and melancholy frenzy; which disease if it
chance to breed enmity among the friends of mutual Lovers, may hap to
increase their grievous sorrows. Thus much I thought most convenient to have
noted, as a Preludium to the original and first arising of this Load-starre,
whose lustres (Gentles) I doubt not, but your kind aspects beholding, will
endeavor to make it seem resplendent and rarely bountiful.

Yours well-wishing, Rob. Kittowe.

Loves Load-starre.
AT what time (as the Historical Records of ancient Anualls make mention) the
King of Tunis, through the attempting brauados of some insulting Rebels, held
the hold of his royal seat in hazard, as daily awaiting his downe-fall,
drawn through civil wars, and warlike mutinies: There lived in Palermo, the
chief City of Scicilia, two most renowned Families, by whose speedy helps
and strong supportes, both for men and Munition, provided and sent forth both
by sea and land, the distressed Kings enemies were mightily discomfited, and
far discarded from his territories of Tunis, and he himself quietly
repossessed his right: to the no small comfort of the rebellious foe.

For the Scicilian suffrages were so copious, and so correspondent to the Kings
petition, wholly passionate for want of peace, as that the Rebels being
convinced and utterly subjected, were so scattered here and there with the
sudden assault of fly, fly, as that some ran to the matchless
mountains, and there wrought on themselves ruthful massacres: Others sought
out shelters in the wild Forests, and there for want off^^de, and surprised
with fear of wild beasts, remained in the jaws of dreadful death: Others as
extrauagant vagabo^ds exiled themselves from their native homes into foreign
lands: and fearing their own Country would prove too hot for their rebellious
hearts: Others became Gally-slaues, Rouers and Pirates at sea, ventering the
mean of their best lives, twixt Scilla and ravenous Charibdis: few submitting
to their Liege, for fear of the penalty of law: yet few or none through the
just decree of the dooming heavens escaping punishment.

This inestimable benefit by the two Scicilian Nobles bestowed on this
peace-minding King, wrought no small league of friendship and friendly amity,
both twixt Tunis and Scicilia: so far forth, that whatsoever enemy seemed
repugnant to the one, was accounted rebellious to the other: both esteeming
themselves most fortunate, that ever the tantaras of wars so reigned, as to
make their perdurable and plighted peace on both parties so worthily royaliz'd
among other nations, and their neighbor Countries.

The two famous, honorable and renowned Scicilian Families, that were with all
prosperities so maiestically fortified, were Seigniour Iacomin Pierro, and Don
Alexander Bartolo; whom Nature and Fortune seeking to enrich in the highest
measure with prodigal gifts, straind themselves so far, as that Fortune could
bestow no more wealth, for they raignd haile-copemates with kings; nor Nature
any more worth, for that two sweet ofsprings brought to both parties more
pleasure, than do the massy heaps of golden wealth comfort unto the covetous.

Seignior Pierra had a son, and Don Bartolo a daughter, the one as lively, as
the other was lovely; both adornd and beautified with all exquisite perfections
both of body and mind.

And here (Gentles) would I will you to have some worthy Pharus erected, for
the better direction of your longing spirits, to view the variable motion of
this wandering Loade-starre: eying whose course, your eyes will be carried beyond
ken of some credulity: your ears be replenished with the diverse sounds of
material variety; and your hearts (I hope) be procurde to yield such material
collusions some part of grateful applauditie.

On a winters night, when the Sun had trauerst in the clymate of the West,
and was instantly entering into Aquarius; when brumall frosts and boystrous
showers were most predominant, and men use to expel the congealing cold with
comfortable fires; About that season of the year, both these Families
according to their high degrees, with diverse other Gentlemen and gallant dames
of Palermo in their companies, attended on likewise by the cunningest
Musicians, went to one Don Andrea Alizandras house to revel: Where after their
Maskes and Mummeries were showed, their measures with commendation traced, and
the worthy Reuellers were revealed, they fell to banquettings, and heauing
Bacchus bowls. None seeming melancholy, but all merry, the Musicians to grace
their mirth the more, to the concordance of diverse s^ymphonying Instruments,
sounded with harmonying voices this Sonnet.

The Axioms of Art
Have framed a Summum Bonum,
To reign abundantly on Earth:
But wise men (for their part)
Approve a Summum Malum,
Oppositely reigning without dearth.
And why?
Say I,
The contrary?
For where that Virtue holds some store,
Vile Vice has always ten times more.
We joy, we sport, we play,
We eat, we drink, we merry make:
We sing all care away,
In wealth we chiefest pleasure take.
Yet see the Fee
Of this folly;
When that Death
Stopps our breath,
We must leave all behind:
When we go
Our riches fro,
In them small solace we shall find.
What Is then Arts gloss, that makes
A Summum Bonum so
To reign on Earth imperfectly?
But even a Net, that takes
Fondlings all in gripes of woe;
For following Error wilfully.
And then,
Let men
With reason ken
What it is to trust to worldly wealth?
Which is soon lost through Fortunes stealth?
What Is Beauty, but a Flower?
Whom sickness or decrepit Age
Do soon bereave of power?
It Is but lend cheerful youth in gage.
And they, like May,
Both fresh and gay,
Hold a grace
In their face.
Till Nature takes away
(as it is true)
Her own due;
Then look they like to clodds of clay.
Vita, bulla.
The Musicians having sung this Morrall Sonnet concerning mortality, were
commended of the most part, dispraised by none, how soever contrary it seemde
to their pleasant disposes: For it served for sauce, among their Cates that
pampred their bodies, to sharpen their minds. So that Don Andrea Alizandra
chearing his honorable guests, thus began soberly to expostulate.

Not without good cause now I perceive did the Thracians accustom in their
banquettings, to serve forth at the Table dead men's Sculles, to restrain their
guests from gluttonous appetites: For since all worldly commodities are so
momentary; all pleasures so changeable, all estates so inconstant, what more
excellent mean to attain perfection can mortal men use, than to meditate on
their end, and to remember death, as the Vltima linea rerum? No doubt
(answered Signior Pierro) but that the remembrance of our latest home, is a
most heavenly and Angelical contemplation: For the renowned Philip of famous
Macedonia, would every morning be admonished by his Page before his vprising,
of his mortality. And Plato (surnamed the Divine) would always sleep holding a
Ball of Brass in his hand, directly over a Basin, to the intent that with the
fall thereof, he might be recald from ^^uggishnesse and drowsy sloth: used
argumentall propositions, concerning the chief perficies of Summum Bonum or
the chiefest good.

Some, (as that first of all I may remember our present pastimes) said down
many grounds, touching pleasure, feastings, carowses, and such like, and
therein to be containde a Summum Bonum: For what greater felicity (according
to man's carnal reason) may be enjoyed on earth, than to live merrily void of
care, and free from perturbations? We read, that there were diverse festiualls
celebrated and seriously observed, with the common consent of whole Countries,
by the Bacchinalls: Diverse games accustomed, as some ordained by Apollo, after
the downfall of the huge Serpent Pithon, which were titled Pithonia; And far
have the games of Olimpus bin bruted, where all comers spent the time in
mirth, iollitie, and abundant cheer. All which considered, it moved the Sect
of the Epicures to advance worldly pleasure unto the height of Summum Bonum.

Whilst Pierro thus reasoned, there came a sudden messenger, that informed,
how his son young lacomin was taken in a sudden trance, and had lost both
his speech and sense, even ready to yield up the ghoast.

No sooner was that message done, but that news was brought to Bartolo, that
if he would ever behold his daughter Katherina living, he should hasten horn,
for that she was fallen into a sudden consumption, and even worn to skin and
bone, as if she had been ouer-looked by some outrageous monster.

These sorrowful tidings so amazed these Parents, that (as impatient as old
Priam, that saw his children all lie gasping, and the City on fire) they
began on both sides to be even through outrage at their wits end: Lifting
cries up to the heavens, tearing their hairs, and raging against the Destenies,
that had so cruelly concluded the period of all their future hopes in so short
a circuit: cutting off those branches, by whose fruits they expected to live
after their old barks were withered. Don Andrea comforted them, the whole
assembly entreated them, naught auailed; for their hearts burned with fire, and
their minds with fear, until their longing eyes visited their distressed
ofsprings: And so with paces as swift as their distempered feet could support,
they hasted both to their several homes.

Don Andrea Alizandra considering this unexpected change, through so
unfortunate a chance, set down his censure as a principle that Omnia humana
mutabilia. But what (says he) should I, that from my infancy have been
attendant on the buckelings of courageous Mars, now seem to muster in
sentences under the correction of grave Minerua? Victa est fortuna ferendo. I
have indurde, and so have overcome: They are but Fortunes nouices, that cannot
with patience oppugn any inconvenience; A death is due to nature, and the
sooner that we die, the sooner are our debtt's satisfied.

Men may not be mortal, then would the creature advance him beyond the
Creator: As Prometheus would, attempting to steal the fire of eternal life
from heaven: for which cause Jupiter adjudged him to be tied at cold Caucasus,
and there eternally to have his limbs devoured by a Uulture. Contentus sua
sort, beatior Policrate. I, I, a contented mind is all in all. Did we not
sometime taste the sour, we should not well perceive the sweet: were we not
now and then crossed with misfortunes, we could not know what it were to be
fortunate.

Peace is the mother of security, and security the nurse of poverty, and
poverty the author of infamy: for, nil habet infoelix, paupertas durius in
se, quam quod ridiculos homines facit. And yet must we gratefully welcome all,
that the supernall Gods do send to work our trial: and happy, yea thrice
happy is that man that so may be purified. Having thus contemplated with
himself on the foresaid accidents, to drive off that increasing melancholy
passion, he took in hand his Lute, and thereon recorded this Dittie.

Men against Gods once did war,
Which should have pre-eminence:
But the end of their jar,
Bred man's fall for his offense.
Men ought not to fall at odds,
In any case with the immortal Gods.
Aspiring mind, brought Phaeton.
To all extremes of wretchedness:
The like endured Bullerophon,
Through his audacious venterousnes.
The one would govern Phoebus carres;
The other mount up to the stars.
Rest content in your estates,
Be they high, or be they low;
Shun you shall then debates,
That on minds distempered grow.
Still take heed by others fall,
A mind content, surpasses all.
Contentus esto, and esto foelix.
By this time were Pierro and Bartolo come home, and made eyewitnesses of
their former supposed mishappes: Iaconim saw his son shiuering as it were,
surprised with a quartane fever: Bartolo beheld his daughter shaking and
quaking, as though she were set on by the falling sickness: Both of these
patients made shows, gave signs and tokens, to the amazement of all that were
present in their bed-chambers: and so much the more, because they spoke no
word, but were always silent. Some said, this miraculous malady of these
yoonglings, was bred by ill sight; some said, they were Plane^ strooken: some
again said, they were straungely bewitched: Scinditur incertum studia in
contraria vulgus, etc. every one uttered diversely what their minds gave them
to excogitate. But the woeful parents (having on both sides visited and
reuisited these miserable Orphans) had the skilfullest Doctors sent for with
all speed possible: all preservatives provided, that had virtue cureable;
leaving nothing unsought, nor means unmade, that might be devised available.
Yet naught released them of their extreme traunces, nor mitigated their
perilous maladies: Which increased the sharper sorrows of the parents, the
grief of their noble kindred, the vexatio^ of their friends, and the
discomfort of all the people of Palermo; Sic variat Fortuna vices.

You that have seen a Merchant standing on the hateful shore, beholding the
Uessell which on the seas remains fraught with his whole venture, in hazard
of sincking; and lifting his eyes to the heavens, cries out, O Gods! I am
undone, ^tterly undone; In the like passion, or a more vehement, may you
suppose all present to remain, for these two distressed and diseased members.
For if men take heavily common contrary casualties, as the husbandman receiving
an unfruitful harvest; the craftsman deceived of his substance by beguilefull
debtors: the shepherd having his flocks pestered, though the infection of some
scabiosum pecus; and such like disparaging inconveniences: how may it happen
otherwise, but that fathers take ten times more grievously the loss of their
only children? unless they had the incomprehensible Faith of the ancient
Patriarch; that obeying his makers command, was content to sacrifice his only
son, of whom (he had tryple promise from his God) there should proceed so
many renowned Tribes, and nations, multiplied in such number, as
incomparabilitie should equal the innumerable stars of the resplendent heavens.

Now generous Readers must my pen show the cunning of a Painters Pencil; as
this, with shadows and colors of variety, so that, with some proper
deciphering speeches to portraie a reviving novelty.

The Destenies had not yet cancelled the date of those Lovers days, nor
Atropos knife was yet preparde, to cut the twist, whereon hung the tenurs of
their lives* The scars which both of their breasts had received (as ^mpression
of wanton Cupids shafts) stuck so near their tender hearts, as for a while
(till the stintie sting and pricking wound thereof was delaied) their whole
bodies in every joint continued distemperate, and their hearts panting, and
disconsolate. For the evening before that nights regiment, when both their
Parents (as is before rehearsed) were feasting with Don Andrea Alizandra, these
two prittie peates meeting each other at their Fathers door (for the two
dwelling places, the beauteous building of that flourishing City, were ioynde
hard the one with the other) attended on both sides with hansome hand-maides
and propper Paces (for their years had not yet brought them to the state of
man and woman, for he was then but a youth, and she but a girl, both of some
twice five years of age, as fair a couple, as were the two beauties of the
Gods Sapho and Phao,) where after gentle salutations imparted, according to
their kind dispositions (bestowed on them by bountiful Nature at their
births) they accorded (taking with them so many of their young followers as
they thought convenient) to walk into a groaue, which stood on the Western
side of the City: accounting such sheltring valleys far more pleasant in
the winters season, than are the plain fields. What parley they had (walking
on the way) it were tedious to recite: only thus much would I wish you to
note, that every step of theirs, traced now toward that company, whose
presence they in manner rejected, because as unbidden guests they came into
their company disexpected. As they were walking by the groaues side, listening
to the murmurings of a bubling brook, Katherina espied a Uermin, that with
greedy gaping mouth was pursuing his pray: which she showing to Iacomin, (for
her name was Katherina; also he was calde Iacomin after his Father and he
perceiving it to has^en the bo^^t the swifter to lake his footing (as the
common manner is) cried, So, ho, ho: which was answered by the calling Echo,
(as if in presence and despite of Katherina, she minded to court young
Iacomin, as she had heretofore that scornful yon^er Narcissus with an other
So, ho ho* which Katherina hearing, moue^ with sudden mirth, brake out into a
loud ha, ha, ha and the Echo as if were with the same semblance of laughture,
replied again with Ha, ha, ha: Iacomin hearing Katherinas voice so merrily
doubled, rauishe with pleasant conceit to hear such a prat^^ng, ^ad come
hither: come hither said the Echo. Which sp^^ch in^using into Katherinas mind
an amorous motion, calde with high voice, Away, away: which was in like manner
so shrilly resounded by the Echo. Having soon wearied their winde-pipes with
hard hallowings, they past forward to enter the groan, where presently Aboron
and his fair Aurelia, has their troops of Fa^^ies and Syluane Satyrs,
(having taken Cupid captive, for that he counterfeyted a Fa^erie, to win the
beauteous P^^ches) were dancing in ringed rounds, and some with low voices
warbled this Roundelaie.

Venus eied
Adonis flower,
And espied
Cupids Bower:
^ower sweet,
^ower fair,
Venus feet
Then tracst there.
And there saw Psiches walking,
Then with her fell a talking,
Nymph (said she)
Of sweet hue,
Tell you me,
Tell me true:
Why in wyldie
Woods, that grow*
Do accompan^e
Buck^ and D^e?
If thou be of Dianas train,
Why alone here do remain?
Psi^^es sad,
Began to say,
How she had
A Lover gay,
Cupid fine,
Cupid fair,
That as mine
Did repaires
But (which most did me spite)
I beheld him nere with sight.
Kiss I did
Prittie lip^,
That were hid
In eclips^
Feel I might
Dainty face,
Which my sight
Nere would grace.
But when I would him see,
In the night, fled from me.
Telst me so?
Venus said
And frownd tho)
Thou Art the maid,
On whose shrine
Arcadia
(Scouting) (...)
And (...)
Have oblations offered*
And us wrongs have proffred.
And yet (dame)
Not content
To win fame,
Through event,
But ^^st wedde
Venus son,
To thy bed?
As thou have done:
Yet not pleased (void of grace)
Must presume to see his face*
Venus wrath
Psiches moved,
(Fearing s^ath
Which she proved)
Venus frets,
And with brea^^
Thundered threat^
Of hard Death:
Psiches kneeles, pardon asks,
Venus binds her to do taskes.
First she bring^
Many gra^nes,
And the (...)
On ^he plain^^:
Bids her then
Well to wind^
Every grain
With his kind.
Cupid tendering Psiches (...),
Sent two Doves to help her tho.
Venus sends
To Lethe Lake,
And intends
The fiery Drake
Should her slay,
Should her spill:
As that day
Was Venus will.
But the Dragon sleeping soft,
Psiches scopte, and water brought.
Mothers rage
Against his Love,
To asswadge
Does Cupid prove:
But Cytherea
Psiches sends
To Proserpina,
Among the Fiends:
Thence to bring a Box of Beauty,
This must needs be done in duty:
Psiches wept,
Cupid moved,
To her stepped,
(Whom he loved)
Less (quoth he)
Never doubt,
Thou with glee
Shall bring't about,
Hold that Coin, pay the Ferrie,
That Soppe for the Porter carry.
Psiches past
Charo^s Boat,
(Not aghast)
To Hell go^e:
There the Curre
Had a soppe,
And from her
Well did cloppe
Of Hells Queen and Bo^e she had,
And returned passing glad.
Cupid smilde*
Venus wrath*
Waxing mild
Did not loath
Psiches state,
State divine:
Thus did hate
Love combine.
But Loves joy breeds our hate,
Cupid lives in captives state.
Virtutem sequitur comes Inuidia.
In midst of these Faieries sportings, Iacomin and Katherina came among tha^,
not perceiving them, and hearing melody as it were made by the Antipodes under
ground, were surprised even with an e^tasie of admiration: supposing that some
of Dianas darlings frequented about these places, where none ever to their
knowledge or hearing did abide. So were they Inchaunted with these invisible
Musicians cantazons, their watchful sen^es wart sleeep^^,) and being orecom^
with drowsinesse (as was that many eyed Heardsman of the Goddess Juno, by the
melody of bewitching Mercury) lay them down all one by one, on a green bank
of fragrant grass: which yielded so sweet a savor to their smelles, as the
unmanured plots of the all-fruitfull garden of the Hesperide^. How wanton the
waggish Faieries we^e to behold these sluggards, especially the two Palermonian
Scitilians, Iacomin and Katherina, who embraced one another with enclosed
arms, (as did the beauteous Venus, hugging ye gallant Adonis) I leave to your
singular censures. Yet by the way, I would have you consider, that Cupid amazed
with this novelty, thinking Katherina had bin his beloved Psiches, (for whose
sake the amorous wagge had endured so many and sundry mishaps) stretching his
settred legs forward with all his power, even unawares let fly a golden
headed arrow at Iacomins breast, wherewith he being wounded, gave midst his
slumbers grievous groans: whereby Cupid moved with pity and compassion of his
so rash a deed (procured through sonde suspicion) sent an other at Katherinas
stomach: mighty work the same effect in the one, as the former should in the
other. And for amends of his folly, to mix their corasi^es with some prittie
caveat: commanding his attendant Sylu^^^s to tune their Pipes, he recorded
this pithie Madrigale.

Cupids Madrigale.
After the deluge,
In virtuous Dencalions ventrous days,
Apollo fortunate in his assaies,
Slew the Serpent huge,
With bow and shaf^:
And therefore had*
To make him glad,
Great praises as he ought.
Then the Laurel Baie
On brows of Conquerours was never ^^t.
For no such Tree e're growing was as yet:
(So learned Poets say)
But the Iuie bow,
Or Oken branch
(That harm can stanch)
Did serve (I trow)
Guarded with a quiver
Of sharp shafts that Love bred passionate,
Phoebus met me, mustring by the City gate:
(And as a scorne^
Deriding much my deity)
With words reuiling
Then called me fondling,
And thus I made reply.
Though against Pythou (Phoebus)
Thou have gotten pre-eminence,
Yet may de^^ly chance to abide this offense:
M^rke what I do discuss,
And there with from bow
I did let fly
A shaft fiercely,
That bred Apollos woe.
In the woods wandering
Paeneas lovely daughter he espide,
And entreating her (to be his bride)
Daphne ran forth flying,
He followed with swift course,
Against wind and rain:
(Unto his pain)
She showed no remorse.
As the fearful Hare
From the speedy senting hunting Hound,
So fled Daphne Apoll^ in that stound:
Mark this my compare.
The One for fear fled fast,
The Other hasted
And no time wasted
To follow not aghast.
Daphne panting sore.
Running eagerly through tearing brakes
Even subdewde: Phoebus breath her hai^e through-takes;
Fainting more and more.
Then she mainly praide,
O Paenea^ streams,
Fence me from his claims,
Send a Virgin aid.
Phoebus had ore-tane her,
(Hoping to enjoy what he desirde)
But the sacred Deity conspirde,
Safely to preserve her:
For her hair became
Branches of fair Baie,
(That did flourish aie)
And her corpse were even the ^aine.
So when he supposde,
To Have imbract' his lovely Daphnes body,
With a bark (that Laurel bows bare gently)
It was all inclosde,
And offering it to kiss,
His branched love
Did from him move,
In whom he plac'st his bliss.
Well (quoth Phoebus) since
I may not now enjoy thee, as my dear;
Yet in tryumphs will I thy bows wear:
Thus love did him convince,
And he numbd at the heart:
Then sickly said
He was dismaide
By my deep wounding dart.
Tantum male-sanus Amor obest.
Cupid having thus recorded his powerful Deity, and imprinted (as it were
with pressing stampes) his mightiness in the stomachs of these Nouices, with
she wings stole from the frolic Faieries: who^e unexpected flight, moved A
boron and his Aurelia, to an infinite admiration. For Cupid inspecting the
falsehood of his bowerfull Love (intending to see if all with her were well) in
rural sort counterfaited the shape of Coridon, and in plain Country speech
nea^e his own bower thus bluntly courted her. Uaire Nymph (quoth he) zawst any
Lambs grazing on these plains? I have mist a Yewe (ywis) and her young one;
and it may be that some giddie Priapus (prying about my vieldes) has droaue my
vlocke from the vaire plains, that (wandering by the by-waies of the woods and
Fountains here about) live vnsheerde, vngrazde, vncoated, without littering
straw, and voode to chawe, both within and without? Good friend (answered
Psiches) no such Cattle have mine eyes beheld wandering on these plains, and
yet they might hap to pass for me as unseen: But have thou chancst to see
any Faieries upon yonder Mountains, leading a fair and beautiful youth (a
God indeed) like a captiued prisoner? Whom in spite they have made a bond
slave among them, moved through disdainful and merciless envy. For whose
sake I spend the night in woe, and the day in lamentations. Cupid hearing his
Love inquiring after himself (as did Mercury understand himself, bewraied
unto himself by a covetous Swain) took compassion on her passions, and showed
him unto her eyes apparently: saying, Divine and approved Goddess, (whom with
glory, omnipotent Jupiter with all the powers celestial have deified, and the
rusticke Semiegods and Satyrs, for virtue and worthiness, with Hymns and
commendable Roundelaies have glorified, as well for this sacred beauty, as for
thy admired fortunes) Behold, thou have sound him, whom thy wamenting words
have sought: behold, thine eyes see him for whom thy self have made enquiry,
therefore be cheerful, enter my solemn bower: there are others grieved with
our disease. And after such speeches uttered, he entered the Cabinet, comforted
her, and kissed her: and unfolded his exployt performed toward the two tender
Scicilians. In the mean time, the Faieries missing Cupid, (whose speedy flight
had bid the^ adieu) being enraged, that he was so secretly escaped their
fingers without any entreaty: with pace as swift as runs the light-footed Roe,
forsook that place, and trauerst too and fro, endeavoring to enquire him out.
Thus they resting uncomfortable, le^t the drowsy Scicilians comfortless: who
not long after awaked of their slumbers, were as faint, as the faintest: as
sick, as the sickest: and for the time, as ill apaide, as he that ( sanus
credict) plaide for fear of arresting, least in sight: That scarce able to
find footing, or like young children to tappe and go, were by their
attendants (with much adoo) conducted and carried home to Palermo: where their
Parents, kindred and friends (not knowing what chance had happened them)
bewailed their sudden sickness with multiplicitie of sorrowful tears:
endeavoring (as is before rehearsed) by all means invented, to have their
maladies cured.

But when all medicines performed for remedies, served in small sort or in no
value and efficacy at all to work their ease, their worthy Parents were
counseled by the Scicilian Soothsayers, to send some, to ask the Oracles of
Apollo at Delphos: both concerning their unsearchable disease, as also, how
long the Destenies had decreed they should breath on earth: For these Oracles
did not only unfold things present, and things past, but also could express
things to come, though evermore mystically. And this was their censure to the
demand of the Inquirers.

The verdict of the Oracles.
These grieved ones, whose bodies you suppose subjected to disease,
As are the corpse of common men (through many thousand ways)
Shall be again to health restorde: and eke behold with eyes
Their Parents houses changd from love to hate, in wondrous wise.
Whose hard dissentions shall their minds so mightily annoy,
That whilst it lasts, their poor hearts shall scarce have earthly joy.
Great perrils are they to sustain, even at the dint of death,
And yet at length recure their joys before they loose their breath.
Nay more, their only love shall cause their Parents (being old)
Again to join new leagues of friendly love: So rest resolved.
Which verdict pronounced by the Oracle, gave them hope of their recoueries
(the rest being not understood, concerning what chaunges of their friendship in
future time should fall through unexpected chances) and the woeful Parents
thereby received comforts; which soon after, even in the April of their
consolations, were scorched with blasts of boisterous confusions. All which
(that my pen may sufficiently portraie) for the augmentation of your more
wished pleasures, I will unfold first their general agreements, and would
especially have you consider that, that their civil mutinies grown on
sudden, may (with the frowns of froward Fortune against those approved
Lovers) show them more apparent. For our Load-starre must continue a course
for Decorams sake, in this proportioned Zodiac: It has now pest Aries and
Taurus, (signs fit for those, whose foreheads are forked) as (it may be) was
petie Aborons among his Fairries: Or (as it is manifest) Vulcans brows have
been (by the wantonness of his Venus) and now is it entering lovely Gemini, and
descending toward crabbed Cancer, is even enforced to turn his progress an
other way; showing us long days of sorrow to vex Lovers proceedings; but
short nights of quiet, to drive off melancholies. So that when it shall return
home to the original Horizon, his course will seem to procure causes of no
small admiration.

What frolic feastings on furnished Tables do swarm in Palermo, when the well
willing Commons knew of the recovered healths of these Nob^e branches before
diseased, are to be extold and equallizde with those costly Cates and curious
carowses, that Mark Anthony received of loue-sicke Cleopatra for a welcome:
What reuellings were made, may seem comparable to the games and gamboldes
exploited by Meleager and his gallant companions, after the downfall of the
feared and dangerous Boar of Calidon. And the better to maintain their
sportings, great sums of moneys were most freely bestowed, by both these
commanding Potentates: who thought themselves wholly indebted to the assisting
gods, for their childrens welfares. So that both Families feasted together in
one place, and kept holiday: as do Commanders with their Captains and
martial Officers, in time of plighted peace together in pitched Pauilions. Yet
was not all ye world made pleasant with these their pleasures, nor pleased
with their pastimes: For the earth is Empress Fortune, (whose wavering hands
is always turning the wheel of restless chance) pretended to play such a
pranke, to sour their sweets, as should set all Scicilia even on fire, and put
Palermo to the overthrow by the flames.

Yet ere you hear how she wrought this warfare, I would will you to ponderate
in mind, the lovely sparks of inspired affections, that fed on the fuel of
young Iacomins and Katherinas hearts: whose stomachs in all these banqueting
times, were not fed so much with the diverse dishes, as were their eyes
delighted with mutual glaunces.

Many a time, would they walk in Orchard Allies, hand in hand: many a time
tread garden knots, following one an other among banks of sauorie herbs and
flowers: many a time, to their noble Parents contentations, would they tread
pacing measures, and dance nimble Galliers, directing their ^ootings with the
set time of the Musicians: to the beholders eyes (that were somewhat dazeled
with their beauties and braueries) like two resplendent stars: That had Juno
seen Katherina, she would even have been beside her self, through jealousy
of her suspected Jupiter, as she was against Inactius daughter Io. And wanton
Mars would be far dismayed, as fearing least his Venus would fancy Iacomin,
for an other Adonis. What should I seem tedious? they were lovely, and loved
lively: and as their youthful days were by Times prescription multiplied, so
were their beauties together with their affections, made most perfect: and
their hearts (both united and settled in one sympathy) expected but Hymen's
rightes to be performed, with the enjoying of their generous Parents
halfe-accomplisht and willing consents.

But Lady Fortune, that squint-eyed Goddess, that on the Stage of this world
loves Comicke merriments should be mixed with Tragic matter, bred
dissentions twixt these two honorable and renowned Families, (first procured
by some controversies twixt their servants) which by little and little grew so
hot, that Enuies sparks holding a furnace in their breasts, burst forth in
fiery flames with such fury, as all the outcries of the Citizens for Clubbes,
Clubbes, could not diminish: nor the moystning waters of the Commons entreaties
pacify the outrageous wraths of those angry inkindled parties. They that
before friendly feasted together, now are daring to field one an other: They
that before with invented merriments sought to cheer themselves, now fretting
with chasing melancholy, do discontentedly disease themselves: both parties,
in steed of banquetings, follow bucklings: and reuiling all conuersing
peacemakers, pronounce their angrye commotions with Si non nobiscum, sis contra
nos: neither respecting the good of the Common weal, to their government
committed: nor the welfare, either of themselves, their friends, or kinsfolk.
Now all degenerous Cauelairos and swash-bucklers (that in time of concord durst
not show their seditious countenances, nor open their mutinous mouths that
commonly bred despightfull iarres) flockt in troops to be partakers of these
alarmes. The Communaltie was divided, adjoining to what party best their mind
regarded: and Palermo was made even a Pharsalian Tent: for martial Mauors with
bowls of blood, and banquets of dismal massacres to be made frolic. Such
brauing, such bandying, such buckeling was every day on both sides with brawles
and broils bestowed, that I may well say with the illustrious Poet, Fit via vi,
etc.

How should I compare Palermo, (whose streets are now guarded with crackling
armours) but to the Roman Synod, at such time as Catilines rebellious troops
harnised throughout with coats of male, vncald and unwelcome, came to destroy
the Senates Council? Or unto that murmuring assembly that were present, when
Brutus and Cassius treacherously stabd conquering Caesar, clad in his
Parliament Robes, with murdering Bodkins?

He that above all others was no medler in these hurly-burlies, was that
valiant and ever virtuous minded man, Don Andrea Alizandra: who one day
beholding Signior Iacomin Pierro, and Don Alexander Bartolo, bearding and
bandying other, laughed (with the Philosopher) at their outrage: and said within
himself, that needs must the inferior members (meaning the vulgar sort) fall
at iarres, since the heads (minding them) cannot govern them, but are become
giddie. And thereupon providing all convenient necessaries, left dissentious
Palermo, and went to dwell in a goodly Farm of his own in the country: and
before he departed, gave Palermo the like adieu, as did the wise Bias
Boristhenes, toward sacked Priennium, viz. Now stand or fall, burn or quench,
I care not: for Omnia mea mecum porto.

But what grief were these deadly controversies, to the concordant minds of
our hearty Lovers? what annoyance was it for them to behold their Parents
brows eclipst and clouded with gloomy menaces of revenge? and themselves with
fear so seruilely subjected, as they durst not look one another in the face?
and yet could not this separation of body (though they were ouerlookt with
Argus eyes, by their hate-stomaking Syres) separate the zealous conjunction of
their loving minds. First when these broils began, would they converse and
parley (such Lynces eyes has Love) through a creuise twixt two walls; and so
by talk euacuate the corasiues that oppressed their tender stomachs, by
uttering forth their mutual sorrows. Which being at length understood by
Bartolo, who on a time unespied, listened a while to their conference, and not
enduring it, taking Katherina by the gowne-sleeue from her stand (where she
beholding her Father, shiuered as if in an agony) he leading her in, thus began
to rebuke her sharply.

And art thou (Girl) so led with fond affection, as to use conference with thy
Fathers enemy? who not only by raising civil iarres, and dreadful slaughters of
our wel-willers and friends, seek our overthrow? but also by all envious
means, seek in policy to procure our disgrace? D^o not thy eyes behold
(fondling as thou art) how Palermo murmureth on our behalf, to behold these
mischeeuous hurly-burlies? Does not all Scicilia admire at their hautie hatred
taken against us, raised by maintaining a sottish crewe of proud peacockes?
Has folly dazeled thine eyes, that void of confiderate regard, thou seem so
Beetle-blinde? Huswife, I charge thee, not only refrain the company, but take
heed (on my heavy displeasure) use no conference with that impious brat, whose
flattery tends to no other end, but to work thine infamy: Let not fair words
(you weak fool) make you feign to follow his fancy, least it breed cause of
repentance. Thy fresh wit cannot pry into men's wily policies, and therefore
take direction of thy Parents: For if thou have not the whirrie to perceive
thine own good, and discern thy loss and disparagement, and yet will seem
so headie, as a friend, to make choice of thy Fathers foe: Receive counsel
(thou were best) and be advised better hereafter: else in running the race of a
stubborn fondling, (without regard, not ruled by reason, nor taught by
experience) thou may chance tread on thorns, and being deeply pricked, cry
woe: when none shall pity thy distress. Thou know my mind, amend this
amiss, or run headlong to mischief, and have no help. Go to thy mother,
go; vile Girl. And so he left her.

This sharp che^ke surprizde poor Katherinas passionate soul, with such
vehement supposes, that half distracted of her senses, scarce able with her
trembling feet to ascend the stairs craved her Closet, where when she entered,
fetched deep and heartie-shiuering sighs, faintly drawing breath; fell into a
sudden sown; and having again recured her memory, she uttered to her self
this sorrowful complaint.

Ah Love, (quoth she) the only Lamp and Load-starre of life; how peruersly
art thou burdened with Atlas load? Ah life, the greatest light of the world;
how art thou clowded with the counterfeit of death? Ah death, the only
physician to cure a grieved heart: Why withdrawest thou (merciless as thou
remainest) thy piercing dart to cut off my woeful days, lengthned too long by
the spiteful Destenies? Ah Destenies, the continual consumers of mortal life;
cut, ah cut off the twist of my days: for I abhor all my living days
prolonged by the lingering slacknesse of doting Time. Ah Time, the deuourer of
all earthly things; suffer this hateful breath of mine to forsake my wretched
breasts habitation, that my poor soul with the wings of a Dove may mount
unto the glorious heavens. Ah heavens, the predominant governors of mortal
bodies, and blessed receptacles of deified souls; deliver a wretched soul
from a distressed bodies poison, to have some comfortable content with your
sacred selves, amongst the glorious Seraphins. Heavens, Destenies, Time and
Death, accord in one, to the end my miserable life, and with my life, my
inspired, and yet discomfortable love.

Then she staide: from her woeful heart shooting footh volleys of sad sighs,
and pouring from the conduicts of her Crystal eyes, streams of tears, that
trilled down her Lilly did cheeks: and having by these means a little
lightened her burdened stomach, she thus again began to ruminate.

And shall my Fathers brows furrowed with frowns, or his words, as sharp as
the blastes sent forth by Boreas, turn or drive away my Love, that ought to
me his dearest life? No (by the Gods) no: whilst I live, if his heart remain
loyal (as though his heart too, would remain otherwise, that thus thou
pleadest with If^) oh! whilst I live (I say) will I love my Iacomin. But (and
then she shoot forth ^alt tears) our Fathers, our froward and furious
Fathers (ah! that Parents should seem crosses to the godly proceedings of
their children) our Fathers, that should be our best helps, are our most
hinderers* our Fathers who (in furthering our choice) should chiefly pleasure
us, do chiefly displeasure us: their enmity, confuseth our amity: their
contentions, infrindge our contenta^i^ns: their armours, our amors: their
aggreuates, our agreements: their frowns, our affections: their hardy
speeches, our hearty sportings.

Ah hard, hard, hard hap: Go to thy mother, vile Girl (quoth he) and so
^lung from his only child in anger. Should I tell my mother, what would she
reply? I know what; I must not love his offspring, that Serpent-like intends my
Parents downfall. As though the fault of the Father, were rightly to be
reputed to the son, who wishes peace if it were possible: requires quiet,
if it might be granted requisite: commends concord, thereby to have all
reconciled: And yet is he (ah! he, my joy and comfort, my Iacomin) he is had as
an Agent in these hurly-burlies. Therefore Katherina, wretched and miserable
Katherina, since thine eyes are debarred from beholding the light of thy
universal consolation, let thy Closette become a sollitarie Cell: which
mantled all about with black sorrow, may seem (to thy best content) even the
shades of Cymmeria: for what more may excruciate a macerated soul (whose eyes
abhor the light) than to behold the lightsome day?

Having thus said, abounding passions stopped the organons of her voice, and
feeling her self faint, laid her feeble limbs on her woe-acceptable bed:
there neither permitting her outward eyes, nor yet her inward mind to enjoy
any rest.

Now turn we on the other side to young Iacomin, whose ears having heard in
some part how she was ratled and rated at by Bartolo, stealing sadly to his
Chamber, with eyes fu^l of tears, breast swollen with sobbes, and heart burdened
with passion, he burst forth into these disconsolate clamours.

O hapless, helpless, and hopeless Caitiue: Hapless, because void of all
good hap, and therefore unfortunate: Helpless, for that thou (wretched thou)
wantst all comfortable help, and therefore accursed: And hopeless, in that all
hope of comfort has fled thy company, and therefore desperate. And since thou
art so unfortunate, so accursed and desperate, banne Fortune, curse the Fates,
and so despair and die: for only death may bring thee some hap to win
help, or some help to enjoy hope of future comfort, where now thou remainest
wholly comfortless. Then he pawsed a space, and with milder mood thus went
forward. And yet ( Iacomin) remember thy self, be not driven to despair
through distrust: As thou have lost thy joys, so may thy joys again chance
to be found. Policrates had a precious Jewel in the belly of a fish served at
his board, which he let fall into the sea. This only chance, has made this
change.

Thou had (not long since) liberty and leave, not only to behold, but also
to embrace thy Love in thy Parents presence. But that liberty is lost, that
leave is out of date, that freedom is past, and thou art made the bond-slaue
of all misery. And yet the caurse of time may restore them all: but when? And
with that he stood as though he had beheld Medusas head, ^ill after a while
coming to himself, he proceeded with these exclaimes. O unhappy estate of
Princes: whose dignities placed on the whirling wheel of unconstant Fortune,
stand in such uncertainty, as when they mount to the highest degree and
loftiest altitude of honor and prosperity, even at an instant, they ar^
lopsie turuie ouerturnd and tumbled down to the low touch of the ground, with
disgrace and beggary. Percutiunt fulmi^a montes, non valles i^fimos. Would I
had been of baser Parentage, so might I have obtained more patience, to endure
misfortunes: I, patience, perfect patience is a salve, to heal all the
smartful scourages of Fortune. But yet it is a virtue for cowards and crauens,
not for valiant and venterous youth, whose minds (courageous minds) dare with
the Giants again in the Phlaegraean fields, Bellare cum dijs. to threaten and
pronounce wars against great love, and all the other Gods: climbing up the
heavens, as did brave Belleropho^ on winged Pegasus: and breaking the infernal
gates of hell, bind trypl^-headed Cerberus in chains, as did Hercules in his
labors of wonders, to appease the wrath of angry Juno.

But why ( Iacomin) overcome with rage, like to blind bayards do thou
obraid ye glorious Sun? or with the witless Wolves seem to bark against the
Moon? hope well, and have well: entreat the gods ( Quid enim nisi vota super
sunt?) with prayers, to pacify those Parents, whose blondie broils breed
your disaster disparagements: that in joys (for Olim meminisse muabit)
abounding, your former penances in future memory may support your pleasures
with greater delights. But thine eyes, thy longing eyes may not view her
beauteous eyes; nay, thine ears, thy wretched ears, now henceforth never
shall again receive the melodious sound of her sweet voice: Ah wretch* ah
wretch, of all others most miserable, confused, and accursed.

Having so said, as he would have given more scope to his complaint, he was by
a servant called to converse with his Father: which made him suspect some ^arther
mishap: either fearing the check, or at least the reproof for awaiting
counterbuffes for his loue-sicke sweats.

But it was otherwise, for his Father Pierro (having not seen him many hours
before) welcomming certain friends of his, newly come to Palermo: caused young
Iacomin to come in presence (who then for the absence of one, hated the
presence of all) to keep them conference, and bear them company.

Who (after imparted salutations) as from a mind oue^-cloide with cares,
uttered laconicall answers to all their vain questioning Items, with no, and
I; without any other circumstances. So that these new-come strangers could
find by supposes, that this fair yong-lings tender mind was benumbed by some
agonizing malady.

Thus did these civil iarres, not only ruinate the Scicilian state, and
authority of the Peers (all which were left now to roaue at random like a
maisterlesse ship without a Marryner, among the swallowing surges, either to
sincke or swim) but also shake the healths and well-fares, both of these
illusterous Families and their children.

Whereby may seem as apparent as in a Christ all glass, what dangerous
discommodities accompany civil wars, like daily seruitors. For these broils
in these Countries, made such a strange metamorphosis, as that where Scicilia
before was had in chief regard of her neighbor Countries, for polliticke and
peaceful government, now ruled by common Democracie, it was had in as great
disgrace, and contemptible and dishonorable.

The crabbed claws of Cancer, has long detainde the course of our
Load-starre, which now by the prescript rule of time, is entering Leo: which
courageous sign, bringes our Lovers some encouragement, to encounter Fortune
face to face: and in despite of her power to work their joys, by fearing no
colors of disaster mishaps.

They on both wings expected their safeguardes, to proceed through sounding a
retreat to their Parents controversies: but their envious hatred was grown so
rank, that their malign minds would entertain no persuasions to peace,
but wholly employed their humors how best to work revenge. Which young Iacomin
pondring and considering with himself, thus began to expostulate.

And will it be no otherwise (quoth he) can Eagles thirst be pacified by
nothing else but blood? Can men always like Lions, skirmish, possess with the
heat and warmth of raging and furious wrath? I see that old ages angers,
represent Torches flames; which the longer they burn, the fiercer waxes their
fire. Is it meet for youth to be shut up in a continual Labyrinth of
displeasant crosses, daily indaungered by the monitaure despair?

If Palermo (that was once accounted the glorius Scicilian Metropolis, shining
in his ornaments like an illusterous Mycrocosmus) now being metamorphosed from
the Palace of peace, to the Lent of tumultuous war; can yield no quiet, yet,
yet what? (And there having pawsde, replide) yet may thy abiding in other
Countries, afford such a sweet habitation, as never is likely to be enjoyed
in thy native home. Skilful Dedalus remaining in bondage under domynering
Minus, by Art framed wings to fly from servitude; and so got freedom. And
shall not Love lend me Eagles wings to claspe (as did Jove's Armor-bearer, the
beauteous Nymph Ganimede) my dear Katherina; and bear her a matchless pitch,
free from the frowns of her froward Sire and mine? Calum non animum mutant
quitrans mare currunt: If she will consent, we will trudge, and see Don Lorenzo,
and the rest of our good friends in Spain. And in this hasty resolve, with
ynkie Pen on paper wrote as follows to his lovely Katherina.

Iacomins perswasiue Letter unto his inthralled Love.
ALthough our eyes through disjunction of place, may not behold one another
countenance; yet does the conjunction of my immovable mind, cause me to
contemplate on our general welfare. And though we dare not on pain of parents
frowns, displeasures and rebukes (already even incurred) be once seen
talkatiue, but always toong-tied, yet has Love taught me a slight, with you to
have in secrecy some desired conference. Know then (my dearest Katherina) that
my heart burdened with heaviness, my mind ore-borne with melancholy, and my
breast subued with passion, for our disquiets and life-sticking subiections: to
avoid such slavish ^eruilitie, have all within me accorded to escape
imprisonment: although they fly into strange Countries, so that by the way
they may enjoy your company. Iacomin will to Spain (Katherina) if your sweet
self would be copartner in his travails: and there, with his friends and
yours, remain, until he understand that reconciled peace has made a period to
these common controversies. I know (dear Love) what sorrows you sustain for
my sake, what heavy cares for my cause, to cure the which, you must practice
with me to depart from Palermo: for sweeter are the hony-sopps of content, than
all the courtly iunckets and dainty ca^es, sauced with doubtful and double
cares. This if your loyal heart can fancy, no doubt but our happiness in the
end will be multiplied, and all our former mishaps abolished. Herein then
delaie not, for nothing may so much breed our danger: Else if you like not
this motion for fear of after-claps, I will not seem to constrain your
cowardice to the combat. No farewell Katherina, till death destroy my life, so
I exspect a speedy answer.

Yours, or not his own: young Iacomin.


Having written these few lines: he stood studying how to have them delivered.
He would not adventure to trust any of his Fathers family, for fear to have
his secrets revealed: what should he do? It were but madness for him to cast
it over the wall; for her Father sooner than his Katherina, might hap to take
it up.

Standing a while in a maze, having twice or thrice walked too and fro in his
Chamber, heard at the staire foot a poor woman begging an alms: to whom he
went, and questioning with her of her parentage, understood that Fortune had
played an adverse part, and bereft her, not only of her friends, but bereaved
her of all her earthly substance. The circumstance of whose case, were too
troublesome to be rehearsed, and too tedious to be heard.

But her he thought the fittest bearer of his counsels that the earth could
yield: Wherefore giving her Gold to make her gladsome; Woman (quoth he) thy
distress has bredde my good will thus much toward thee, in that thy griefs
have made me compassionate; hie thee now to the next Gate, and there crave
their benevolence, and watch a time when conveniently thou can present this
Paper closely to a young Gentlewoman there, whose votion toward the poor is
never wanting: Tell her, I commend me heartily unto her, and do entreat her
to receive on my behalf this plain Pasport, and thereto to return a speedy
answer, by thee my unsuspected messenger. Be advised in this enterprise, and
thou shall not depart unrewarded.

The aged woman (whose silver hairs were tokens of experience taught by time,
perceiving a little which way the wind blew, hoping it would turn to her
advantage) with a low curchie received the writ, (he telling her, how the
message she went in, was to fair Katherina) promising she would be circumspect
in every respect to accomplish his desires. Do so good woman (quoth he) and if
her answer breed me any pleasure, thou shall not remain without profit. And
so she past toward Bartolos door: where she had not long used her accustomed
ceremonies, but that Katherina's presence presented it self before the woman's
eyes: of whom, she begged an alms, being by her demanded whence she came, and
what benefits her earnest prayers had procured her: she mildly in humble manner
answered. Uertuous and fair mistress (quoth she) amongst the commons my
pains have been recompensed with slender profit: but the liberal hand of the
gallant young Gentleman (your next neighbor) has far beyond any deserts of
mine, made me prosperous wi^h his bounty. Has he so? (quoth Katherina) and
for neighbourhoods amity, thou shall not be sent hence comfortless. And then
being about to open her purse, the woman reached her Iacomins Letter, with these
words.

Good mistress, my silly self has by him been made so happy, as to be
trusted with delivering this message, before many of my betters; and I hope
your gentle nature will with patience conceal my rude nurture. I promised, and
in that I promised, I will perform my duty what so ere befide. For I trust
(and in that trust am thoroughly persuaded) that his noble heart herein toward
you imparteth no harm. But how (replied the Princess) could thou tell
whether my self were the party to whom he minded this message? I hope
(mistress) it is your self (said she) for my aged eyes observe in you the
phistognominate tokens that the Gentleman willed me to consider. And thou have
hit the mark (good woman answered the Princess. And yet not got the game
(good mistress) quoth the woman again, until you vouchsafe to return an
answer. That shall not be awanting (said Katherina) because (I know) it will
be best welcome. Stay a while and I will in some sort perform the Gentleman's
pleasure. With that she entered her closet: where having ouerread the Letter;
after a short study, she returned in writing, this answering Appeal.

Katherina appealing to her Love.
THe wandering Knight forsaking the Carthaginian coast, was cause of Carthages
fair Queens decay. Her^ threw her self headlong into Hellespont for Leanders
love, whom she beheld dead, lying by the Rivers side. Iphis hanged her self,
Procris slew her self, because they were forsaken of their dearest and best
beloved friends. Then wend not away (my dear Iacomin) and leave me in the
jaws of despair; least that on my self I work the like massacre with mere
disparagement. Medea having by powerful spells, gotten Jason free liberty to
gain the Colchian golden fleece, being by him contemned, sought revenge by
his children and fathers murdering. And Scilla (renowned Nisus daughter)
presenting to Minos her fathers purple hair, (which she had cut off as her
father slumbred) on possession whereof, did fatally consist the safeguard of
his Crown and Kingdom; being by Minos for love, repaide with hate, grew
frantic and desperate. Then if you love me, do not leave me^^ah, do not leave
me: for I will rather then be left behind thee, take warfare with thee. And
because we will freely pass watch and all vnesp^ed: I will provide me such
apparel as did Minerua, when like an aged woman, she would persuade Arachne
from presumption. I am thine (sweet heart) or not mine own: whose only life
is maintained by thy love: whose health is strengthened by thy happiness: and
estate consisting on all thy fortune. If the lan^ have thy sweet self in
hold, it also shall have me: if the seas be thy habitation, the seas likewise
shall serve for my home: if you live, I enjoy life: and if you die, my heart
dies also. Therefore I will not say farewell (though from the fair well of
thy welfare, does flow all poor Katherinas happiness) till death end my
life-dayes, and leaving to live, must leave mortally to love.

If not yours, no bodies. Katherina.


Having framed this Appeal to her Love, she folded it closely up: and coming
to the old woman (who was busied in saying her Creed) told her she had framed
an answer to the Gentleman; and (said she) for thy trustiness, there
(anointing her hand with the precious oil of Angels) is somewhat for to help
thy want: and take good heed safely to redeliuer back this Letter. The poor
woman humbly thanked her for her bounty, and stirring her aged stumps back
again toward Signeor Iacomins Pierro's door, met gentle Iacomin: who
awaighted her return. To whom she imparted Katherinas courtesy extended
toward her, delivering him her answerable Letter: whose superscription when he
had beheld: ravished with admirable conceit, he slung the poor woman some more
crowns, and so she merrily departed: blessing the hour, time, and place of her
so lucky arrival thither, happy for her own behoof, advanced by the
liberal gifts of these yoonglings.

Iacomin reading Katherinas exampled propositions, admiring at her fervent
love, and famous learning: (for she was as much addicted to the one, as adioynd
in mind to the other) after some silent meditation, breathed sorth these
speeches.

Fire tries gold, and I see that adversity can make best trial of friends. I
am thine (says she) and not mine own; (Oh words of a loving heart!) and
therefore if you love me do not leave me. No (Katherina) thy Iacomin list not
leave thee, till life leave him: for if he would, he need not to incur (only
for thy sweet sake) all other his friends displeasures: which likewise thy
lovely self for his sake have sustaind. Ah sacred Deities, the maintainers of
Loves destiny: whose essence is immortal, and accidence fatal; be now
propitious to our proceedings, aid our enterprise, and support us against
perils: then shall your Altars be covered all over with our grateful
offerings: and the sweetest perfumes of Myrrh and Frankencense shall purify
your temples. Ah sacred Juno, with thy power protect our pretenses: and Hymen,
lighten those lamps of thine, to consecrate our lives to Loves obeisance. Is
not Love the hand maid of the immortal soul? the purified superficies of
celestial motion, secretly inspired into the Cordials, the eyes prospectatiue
contemplation of beauties Idaea? whereby the Creator is made to admire at the
obiectiue creature? Is it not a virtue metaphisicall, containing the perfect
substance, both of Art and nature? O divine love! and therefore divine, because
sent from above. O immortal beauty! and therefore immortal, because therein
is insetled the summarie glory of the heavens. Damned then be their raylings,
and condemned their forgeries, that bark at Love, calling it lustful and
intemperate: and title it vain, wavering, and windy.

Can a celestial virtue have incontinencie? then what incontinencie is
contained in Love, whose virtue is celestial? Can that effect prove inconstant
that is decreed by the Deities? Then how can Love become light and inconstant,
which is the immutable and unchangeable decree of the immortal Deities? I
speak not of fained love, whose impression is not made perfect in the inmost
rooms of the heart; but standing without such entering, is seated for a while
on the outward eyelids: whose society is wary with a look, and lost with a
wink: whose appendix is lust, and index lewdness. No, no, (quoth he) such,
all such do I defy, not deifie: such does my breast abhor, and not uphold;
yea, such does my very soul loathe, and never love: because it is no love. For
even as Ixion instead of Juno embraced a cloud, of which he begat monsters; So
they that follow that shadow of love, in seat thereof (for want of infusoe
substance from above) persist with lustful sin: whose contagion is shames
nurse, and confusion the offspring. Here he breathed a while, and then thus
proceeded. But whither away ( Iacomin) that thou runnest so swift a pace in thy
discourse? Thru can sooner number the stars, then reckon the diversities of
love. Some are Saturnists, and love solitary conceits: Some are Martialists,
and admire at the Tantaras of wars: Some Bacchinalls, and are wholly addicted
to pamper their stomachs: Some Midas mates, that will have all they touch to
turn to Gold: Some are like Mineruas Owl, that delight to praise themselves,
and disdain others. And let them (said he) so wallow through and through in
their humourous loves, guided only by their sensual appetites. Persevere thou
in that heavenly affect, which through infused loyalty thou have delighted:
continue that course, which is through inspiration in thee begun: whose
perfection, not all the power of the earth can make imperfect: whose
perdurance, no battle are of violent passion can infrindge, nor the wide world
by any mean disioyne the band thereof, nor diminish the virtue.

Having made a stop to his speech, he used endeavor for their departure: and
having provided a Bark, and Mariners to conduct the vessel through Oceanus
watery regiment: giving a watchword at a time well appointed by the parties,
for their conueyance aboorde, fardling such necessaries up as were thought
requisite, Katherina and himself at once were shipped: and the Mariners launcht
forth into the deep.

I should have given you (kind Gentles) to understand, that at the very
instant, that the poor woman (as is before recited) was their unsuspected
messenger, Virgo was predominant: whose virtue containd betwixt these Lovers
such authority, as that neither thought of perilous dangers to come, nor the
plagues (if their drifts had been espied) then present, could confront them, or
revoke them from their enterprise. So were their thoughts connected in chaste
resolve, and their breasts coupled in firm fortitude.

Now are you to consider, how Libra took his reign, as they entered the
balanced bark: and was to them during the time that they remained under his
dominion) both luckie and gladsome.

For now the sails were spread in quiet: whilst a pleasant calm made the
billows still mild, and gentle: the Seasurges were deprest, not once striving
to beat against the opposite vessel: Neptune was banqueting with Amphitrite
and Trytons trumpe summond the water-Nimphes, the Syrenes, and Doris, and her
darlings, and all the Ocean Deities, to appear under their Commmaunders tryple
Scepter: to revel, and ride on Dolphins, accompanying him at his royal Court,
whose arrival was there awaighted by the demie Gods of the lakes and rivers.
The heavens were clear, and the sky as brightsome to behold, as the
peerless shells on the Libian shore. So that the Marryners past ken of the
land, crying aloft boon fortune, and bidding Iacomin and Catherina be of good
cheer; roundly rung out this Rowly by.

The Marryners Song.
Brave lus^ie laddes, hoyse up the Sails,
A gallant gale blows at the Poope:
Nere fear you storms till Anchor fails,
And winds and waves even force us loope.
Now East, North-east: from Helm nere stir a,
Good cheer my hearts: why there a (boy) there a.
Bright shines the Sun, clear are the skies,
Fair is the weather, calm the wind:
No swallowing waves do surge or rise,
Our mast and tacklings stand in bind.
By East, North-east: from Helm nere stir a:
Be blithe my hearts; why there a (boy) there a.
Then masters come, and masters mate,
Make merry with good Biske and Beer:
And who so does his licquor hare,
Shall rue the roast whilst he rests here.
Keep East, etc.
Let every man a Caroll sing,
In Eolus and Neptunes praise:
The one, to caves does tempests swing,
The other does the floods appease.
Hold East, etc.
Sit on the Deck, and view the Seas;
See how the Sea-nimphes swiftly swim;
Look where the Fishes sport with ease;
And Maire-maides their fair traces kimme.
Go East, etc.
As loud as Tritons Trumpe does sound,
(Whose voice is heard by waters all,
And by grim Pluto neath the ground)
Row well ye Mariners, now call.
So, East, North-east; from helm nere stir a;
Good cheer my hearts; why, there a (boy) there a.
-- Dum vela secundat, --
Parat Fortuna procellas.
Thus they made merrily for Spain, crossed with no misfortune; till Scorpio
(stretching forth his fiery clees) seemed to stop the peaceable course of
our Lead-starre: enforcing it to take his abode in the other Equinoctial
point, quite opposite to that pleasant place, where it was resplendant at the
beginning of the Spring. And hating to behold it in beauty, seems violently
to drive it thence, farther forth unto Sagitarie; as if the monster meant by
some meteor or eclipticke cloud to have it terrified, or at the least
shadowed. Threatening it to have winter-like weather, (in stead of a fair
harvest season) and to be molested in some respects with foggy enclosures, and
bitter cold, mixed with very cold and windy moistures. What need I use
ambages? the sequel of our Lovers events will show, how there was some sign
of chaungeable weather.

For they had not sailed three days from Palermo, but that some Galleys
appertaining to certain Pirates, that were whilome competitors in the
conspiracy and rebellion (before in the beginning mentioned) against the King
of Tunise, had espied them scowting: and being led with hope of getting some
purchase or petty prize, made hastily toward them. Whom when the Barksmen had
descried, not able (by reason of the calm) to make away from them, mistrusting
they should be set on, provided their shotin readiness, as resolved to use
their best endeavors to save their own. Soon had the Galleys ouer^ane them, and
fiercely chased them: that the Bark at last was fetched up, and by them being
boorded, yet valiantly resisted with hardy fight. Especially Iacomin, who
(even desperate, careless whether he lived or died, so that his Katherina
might be saved harmless) fought against the enemy with hearty courage, and
valiantly (defending the distressed vessel) laid on load round about him:
till that he was sore wounded, through encountering so many at their first
entrances. At last through much bleeding he became faint: and then the pirates
(driving the wearied and maimed Mariners to corners) rifeled the Bark: And
having found Katherina in the cabin (as they were searching for wealth) even
all amort and woe begone, for this extreme misfortune; having neither remorse
of her laments, nor respect of her vows, nor pity of her plaints, nor any
compassion of her prayers, plucked her forth the cabin, carrying her perforce,
conveyed her into their Galleys: And thus having taken all that was worth
bearing away, turned toward Tunise.

Iacomin with woeful eyes (scarce able through faintness to lift up his head)
beholding his Katherina violently taken from him, vexed so much in mind, as did
Piramus (when he saw a part of Thisbes kertle, torn by the gripes of a
greedia Bear) determined at that present (had he not been prevented) with
mortal blade to end his miseries. But using patience perforce, through the
Mariners helping means, as the wind and tide would afford, made after their
enemies: hoping that way, sooner then on any other coast, to come a shore, and
obtain succor.

Was not this a shaking tempest (trow ye) to breed anew their torments? It
was Scorpio that incensed these Rouers to fierceness, but Sagitarius that made
them so mighty and magnificent in their attempts. Which now having gotten the
spoils, wend with as great triumph toward Tunise (though they had been
rebels) with beauteous Katherina; as did Paris with the Grecian Dame, toward
Troy. For these Pirates hopes were laid (as you shall hear) on this foundation.

The lusty Tunisian Prince, being made frolic (ever sithence the time that
the two Scicilian families wrought means to beat down his enemies) by
continued peace, was become as wanton and effeminate, as Sardanapalus: placing
all his felicity in gallant women's beauty. And because he would not lack
what his lustful mind best liked: at one end of the City (where he held his
royal Court had he built a stately Castle: where whose walls were of
perducable brick, and couerings brass, very fairly flourisht with carved
Images on the outmost lymites. But the artificial divisions and partitions,
with glorious Galleries, and decked Chambers within, were by the skill of a
cunning hand, made superexcellent. All the walls were garnished with cloth of
Arras, curiously wrought with rich knots of Gold, and spangled over with
Carbuncles, Rubies, and precious Pearls: glezed in and out with singular
shadows and pictures, passing curiously proportioned. There also had Art with
needle-worke portraied the Histories of the Gods: Jupiter counterf^iting the
shape of Amphitrio, to gain the love of Al^mena; like a Swan, to win Laeda;
like a golden Shower, to gain Danae; and like a Bull, bearing on his back
Pasyphae. There was portrayed Apollo, pursuing with speedy pace the Nymph
Daphne: Luna shooting forth her horns, to embrace Endimion drowsily slumbring:
Diana and her spotless darlings bathing in the brook, holding in their hands
Cypress boughs, to shadow their beauties from the Sunbeams, ouer-pried by
the gazing Forrester Actaeon, whom she changed by (let flying at him a shaft)
into a horned Heart. There might you have seen a woman wooing a man (viz.)
Venus courting Adonis: Echo following Narcissus: and Narcissus seeming to
follow his own shadow in the brook. There was horned Pan portraied,
entreating Sirinx: whom at once he beheld metamorphosed into an Daten Reed.
There was starr-eyed Poliphemus, passionate through love of the Nymph Galathea.
There was Orpheus seen playing (on his Tree-and-stone-mouing Harp) at the
gates of Limbo, to bring back his lost Euricide. There Pluto, riding on a
Coach of Ebonie, lying in ambush to steal away Proserpina gathering flowers,
was with his black Lords fitly deciphered. And not only these of the Gods,
but also an infinite number of amorous counterfeits of loue-sicke men. There was
imblazoned the City of Troy, and the glorious Palaces of king Pryam: with all
his valiant sons and daughters. There was Paris portraid, marching in pomp,
with a troop of gallants attending, through Troy, leading toward Ihum, the
peerlesse Dame of Greece, hand in hand: whilst the princely Prophetess
Cassandra, with hands raisde to heaven, and hair hanging down over her
shoulders, cried out, Graia iuuenco venit, etc.

Such as these seemed common in that bowerly Paradise: for every Chamber seemed
a myrrour of delight. But that glorious edifice, which exceeded all the rest,
was a Garret, which the king himself commonly at his pleasure would make his
resting Pauilion. The side walls were ouerlaide with rich cloth of golo,
ouer-diapred with admirable bright Margarites, and glorious Pirops: that in the
night lightened with splendour the whole Chamber over with such clear shine, as
in continuance it seemed, the burnisht Sun never was fallen in the ocdent. The
vaulted covering was shadowed with a gorgious Canapie, branched about with
Angelical features and glistering flowers.

In the midst (directly under the Canapie) was placed a Chair, imbost with
silk, and costly knobbes of gold, so highly lifted as a stately Throne. Over
the head thereof, araied in lively colors, was a Parliament of the Gods
depainted, with gorgious roabes: Above all the troop of which glorious Synod,
was portrayed a beauteous seat, whereon sat Cupid and his Love ouerlooking
them all, and treading on great love and Iunos Dyadems. Cupid held in his hand
a fair Scepter, wherewith (it seemed) he beckened to all the rest, as if he
commanded them: and his Loves brows were garnisht with a tryple Crown,
whereon Fortune lay figured bound in Fetters, and her wheel shiuered in
pieces: On his Scepter was drawn in golden Letters this Poesy, Amor imperat
astris: On her Crown was this Motto, Sicforma, Diuos, fairly engraven. The
frames of the fair windows made all with Adamantine stone and Crystal,
beautified throughout with blazures of honorable Arms, would oppose Apelles
pencyll to portraie, much more my pen: for all was as admirable, as the Palace
of the radiant Sun: describing the which, as Ovid did conclude the one, so
may I likewise end the other (leaving the rest to your conjectures) and say,
Artificem superabat opus.

This so glorious Castle, supplied the place of an Academy for beauteous dames:
for therein were enclosed the choice dainties of the Country, for the kings
only taste. They had all ease enough, but little liberty: fed and feasted
sumptuously, but were never suffered to walk without doors: every one had a
several Chamber for her own commodity, but could welcome none but the king
their Lover: many wished (it may be) to have change of meats beyond commons:
yet scarce any durst on deaths penalty let enter other dishe, than such as
with allowance came from their Liege. So that, these sweetes were crossed, with
some sowres: these dainties were constrainds from change of delicates, and all
remained mewed for one man's diet. So that their happiness seemed not much more
pleasant, than do their pleasures, that are imprisoned in courtly Towers, or
mannacled with golden Fetters, or drink Cyrce^ drugges in a guilted Cup, etc.

This while (courteous Reader) had our Load-starre escaped with much adoo the
fierce Sagitarie, (though somewhat to the annoyance of his suscepted course)
and had entered in the nineteen degree of Capricornus, which sign is very
predominant over al those horned heads that simply sing Cuckoe. At whose
shaggie form, it half seemd afraid, though his mild (which with him was not
usual) aspect now, did import, that for a season he had shaken off his natural
quality, as unaccustomed to any patience. For from his Goatish beard, in his
rage would he shake, not only extreme winterly showers; but also heart-cutting
frosts and tempests; as that Sol himself is enforced for auoydance of his
boisterous stormings, to forsake that house with haste (standing on his
farthest limit in the South) and to draw for his better quiet, near unto our
clymate: yet notwithstanding he now seemed mild and vnwilde, like comfortable
Zephirus. Whether it were (also) for pretense of some mishap to happen to our
Load-starre, or whether to show sign of a prosperous voyage, (it is farther
to be doubted) but his moystned hoarie hair now distild fair dropping deawes:
(as the Crocadile sheads tears) and it may be, it was sign of some lamentable
waylings. But to have all resolved, I will search through the whole progress of
our Load-starre, and what I find happening, shall be unfolded accordingly.

Now had the Pirates (setting their Galleys to ride safely by casting Anchor
within the harbor) brought Katherina on shore: and intending to present her
to the king, thereby to get pardon for their misdemeanors forepast, spoke her
fairly, willing her to be frolic. And to depresse her sorrows made merry
at an Inn, taking wholesome carowses both of Beer and Wine, in quaffing
bowls: yet could not their li^our of life engender any solace in subjected
Katherina. Yet at last was she brought to the court, and presented before the
wanto^ Prince: whose heart was straight set on fire by the lustres (though now
dimd with watery deawes) that sparkeled from her eyes: that the Pirates were not
only forgiven* their amiss, but also were recompensed with royal rewards. So
that they accounted the time and hour most lucky and ^ortunate, when their
eyes held in ken, and their hands began to encounter with those that had the
carriage of such a worthy prize.

The king had great compassion on the discomfort of his new Saint, unto whose
shrine he offered his perswasiue Orison.

Beauteous (quoth he) clowdie looks (the messengers of careful minds) are for
rusticke Clownes of the Country, not companions for the looks of courtly
Dames. Be blithe (beauteous) be blithe: bannish melancholy from thy delicate
breast: let mirth hold holiday in thy cheeks, and let pinching melancholy be
driven unto extreme exile: Be thy mind iocund, thine heart frolic, and thy
thoughts light. Where as before thou were Chances bondslaue, now shall thou
reign in the happy favor of a King: whose smiles shall support thee, whose
looks shall comfort thee, and sweet words delight thee. Thou shall have
pleasure, without penance: thou shall rejoice, without any annoyance: and in
thine own hands hold sweet content, void of all crossing and discontenting
greeuances.

Whilst thine years are tender, thy self youthful, and thy face flourishing
with fragrant feature, follow the joys, that belong unto thy years: seek the
pleasures, that Nature has allowed thine youth to possess: and be partaker of
these delights, as are comparable to thy springing beauty. Let the ancient
(whose hairs old age has made frostie, in whose brows time has painted
furrows, and whose backs the waightes of many cold winters have bowde) seem
chollericke, because they are crustie: and disconsolate, because their bloods
are become cold, their limbs weak and chillie. Be bliue and wanton (Girl)
for seven years longer lives a merry mind, than a heavy heart. Let thine
Alabaster breast be a Bower, for Venus Doves, that Cupid attending them, may
with disport rent thine Aperne-strings.

What sweeter conceyt, what fi^ter humor, what prittier dispose, than for
youth to be lusty, and lively to entertain and welcome love? Then clear
(sweet beauty) the Crystal couerture of thy eclipsed eyes; and thou shall be
brought into a bower, which to thy sight shall seem no less pleasant, than
portly: where thou shall behold seats, that even exceed Jove's silver
foote-stoole; and tread in walks, that in compare blemish not a little the
milke-white way.

There shall diverse brave Dames and fair Damzels (whose features dashe with
disgrace the beauteous Goddesses that str^ue before Paris for the golden Ball)
shall bid thee welcome with kind salutes. The Girls, that shall awayt on
thee (attendant both at beck and call) shall for gracious aspect, drive coy
Campaspe out of countenance. The meat which thou shall taste, shall far
surpass the dainties that were served before Damocles: or set before the cruel
Belides, or presented even to the very lips of hungry Tantalus. Thy drink
shall be sweeter than the juice of those precious Apples that grow in the
Gardens of the Hesperides: and rest more licorice in the receptacles, than the
life-lengthning Nectar and Ambrosia. The mirth, which the curious and well
strooken Instruments shall yield forth to glad thy pensive mind, shall be as
delightsome as the soundes of Apollos Lute, or as the tunes of the Heliconides.
The bed whereon thou at thine own pleasure shall take rest, shall be more
soft then Down, and more glorious than that Cubile where angry Vulcan
ensnared amorous Mars, and his amiable Venus: the whole Synod of the Gods to
their shame beholding both the lovely captives.

All this receive as truth (fair creature) for thine eyes and ears, and all
thine other endued senses, shall witness it for truth. Only would I wish thee,
be merry; cast away all actoying care; look lively and lovely; and thou shall
be as fortunate as Pirrha, Deucalions Pheere: and live as ancient as Sibilla,
Apollos Love.

There he made a period to his oblatiue Antheme, the whole sum whereof,
seemed as acceptable to woeful Katherinas ears, as the talk of Will Summers,
to a mind malcontent: or the Tales of Mother Redde-cappe, to an heart-sicke
Patient: or Scoggins Ieasts related to one meditating on the seven Sobbes of a
sorrowful Soul.

This Oblation being offered, he calls for a silver Bowl of Muscadine: which
being brought him, he uttered this Saluie.

Now (beauteous) bannish these deadly dumpes, the king himself deignes to
salute thee with the pure liquor of the Grape: here is a health to thee (and
therewithal drank a hearty draught) to drive off thy agonies: Hold, take; I
have taken half, and therefore (...) me right, and drink up the remnant.

Katherina wiping her wayling eyes, as having taken some small heart* agrace,
framed modestly this reply. Although (egregious Prince) it fits not Fortunes
meacocks, to seem courtly with kings; nor Captives, to cry checkmate with their
keepers: yet since your highness is so graciously bent toward the welfare of
me worthless and unworthy wretch, I will not deny to pledge your highness.
And having so said, took a good wholesome draught of the Wine.

The king then (pleasantly conceyted) asked her what bedfellow she would desire
to have? And she answered, she desired such a one, as would for dishonor (like
Lybidinous Tereus) seek neither to defile her, nor like a lewd Priapus to
defame her: For it is better be killed than live with cracked credit.

Whose so chaste answer, gave a memorandum to the wanton demaunders meaning:
and yet because he would not seem to be rubd on the gall, bolted forth this
insinuation.

But yet (beauteous) quoth he, if a lovely wight would bear you company in
bed, I deem you not so disdainful, as to depel him with denial? Why, and it
please your royalty (said she) unbidden guests are never best welcome at a
banquet; neither unto a woman is acceptable any unknown bedfellowe.

Which dry buffet made him even dumb; for shame would not suffer him to
reveal his own lavishness, and therefore with the Lapwing, he thus cried
far from his neast.

Well (pretty peate) quoth he, thy mind as yet disagreeth within it self,
because it is not partaker of any pleasant good. To change which appalling and
oppressing property, thou shall be conducted to that place of pleasure, whence
does remain exilde all melancholy passions. I cannot imagine thee greater
good, neither will I do thee a less commodity. And so provided attendants to
conduct Katherina to the Castle.

As the glorious Sun began to drench his fire-breathing Steeds in the cold
Ocean, and the gladsome daylight was shadowe^ by the nights gloomy clouds:
Iacomin (almost made deaths Captive through weakness) with his other sickly
Companions, had gotten land, even on the shore of this same City, where
Katherina was brought for a present to the Prince. And having obtained lodging
for himself and the rest of his heartlesse followers, was taken in cure by a
cunning Surgian: all the company at the Inn (where he lay) bewayling the
heartilesse downefal and distress of so fair a person.

Katherina in the mean time being come to the Castle, beholding it without,
somewhat wondered: but when she beheld within the gresses and steps guiding
them unto several Enclosures (whose imblazures were no less resplendent, than
the glorious Jasper, or a multitude of goodly Emeraldes) she was overcome with
incredible admiration. Some salutes being imparted toward her by many of the
Dames there resident: she was placed by those of the Kings Guard (according to
his Majesty's command) in a most pretty Closette, all about garnished with
flowers so lively portrayed, as that Art seemed to go beyond Nature in her
works: For there were Roses so depaynted and framed, as if they were but then
plucked and brought from the Garden: bearing so varnished a die, as did Zeuxes
Artificial Grapes, which the Birds beguilde, did often prick at with
reaching beakes.

There was a square Table, by the nimble Seruitors straight covered over with
delicious dainties: To eat whereof Katherina was invited, both by some
Damzels, that at poynt-deuise awaited on her: and entreated by the other Dames,
that welcomed her, as best allowed for that purpose.

Little was it, that Katherina tasted; less, that her passionate stomach
digested: and least of all, that her grieved mind delighted. Only her wandering
eyes even fed on diverse sightes, so far forth, that they seemed never
satisfied sufficiently.

As she satte at meat, she held in ken, portrayed with a most perfect
plotforme in cloth of Arras, the proportion of the famous City Athens: to
have pre-eminence whereof, Minerua accompanied with all the Muses (whose
fourmes were rarely pollisht, holding in their hands diverse Instruments, but
Minerua bearing a Book) held a controversy with Neptune (who held in her
hand a threefolde Mace) and all his Demi^ Gods.

In the midst of which contention, there seemed to appear unto them an
admirable water* Nymph, even fair Thetis: whose admyrable looks (like the
Suns austers) so piercest Neptunes cordyalls, that to win favor, he
granted to yield up the dominion of all his lande-Citties unto the hands of
the contending Goddess.

Taking hold on whose promise, Minerua for him won the Nymph, and gaind the
free government of Athens. Underneath that Portrayture was set this Poesy:
Arma quae violant, vinciunt amores.

What Table-talke the wanton Wagtailes (that were her copesmates) to increase
merriment, and decrease melancholy, for recreation their minds then used, it
skilles not to repeat: and therefore shall be omitted, to avoid troublesome
prolixitie.

For no man is so dunsticall, that cannot conjecture folly in the smiles, and
vanity in the speeches, of such vile Huswiues.

The Table taken up, they walked a while to behold the variety of Arts
ornaments, spread round about this metropolitan house.

And when Katherina had thoroughly viewde and reviewde all, she set down her
censure for a Principle, that Omnia vanitas.

When time gave Morpheus liberty, with his inchaunting noates, to bedull men's
vigilant senses, summoning all humane bodies to recreating rest: (the sky
being maskt with a duskie veil, and only made brightsome by the glimmering
appearaunce of some set Stars) Katherina, by the company being brought
again unto her setteled Chamber, (the place that was appointed her to solace
in) all bidding her good night, and the Keeper locking fast the Chamber door
(as he commonly used and was accustomed every Night, to shut, lock, and bolte
fast the rest) in place of slumbering, she waxed again sorrowful: in stead
(on that sumptuous bed) to take quiet, she stood at the window with ^yes most
careful: in place of sweet content, entertaining within her breast sharp
discontent: reckoning all proffered pleasure, as peril: all dilicates, but
dregs: all courting, but counterfeit: and all the pleasant Uyands, but plain
vanity. And from the abundance of striving thoughts, her voice (the minds
enterpreter) uttered this Homily.

Is it worthy the title of beauty, or blemish, to have the body purpled, and
the soul polluted? The Serpent (that in Paradise beguilde Eua) knew not how to
entice her to eat the forbidden Apple, but by bidding her behold the beauty
thereof, (for the rind seemed sweet, and the taste to see the coare, bred a
sour infection) whose wittiness ouerwinning their wits to agree unto that
pleasure, procured an vnrecitable punishment. The King ( Katherina) has placed
thee in a semblable delightsome Eden, promising thee pleasure, without pain:
mirth, without moan: joy, without annoy: solace without sorrow: and all
delight, without any dolours: whose allurements, if thou reject not: whose
blandishments, if thou banne not: and templations, if thou temperate not: thy
mind will be blemished, thy conscience stained, thy thoughts polluted, and thy
heart infected.

What is it to view the glorious architecture of this depainted house? but (as
it were) to look on the Apple with Eua? And what will it be to taste the
pleasures that this place presents, but even to swallowe morsells of procuring
penalty with Eua? So that as that on the one side, so this on the other,
imparts a map of horred misery.

But more literately to define, what is this pollished place, but (like a
painted Sepulcher) an habitation for rotten bones? What are these pretty
couerings, but representments of shadowed evils? what are these drawn^
flowers, but species of follies? these pictures, but the genus of vices? these
golden spangling knobs, but the accident of il happes? to conclude, what is the
cloth of Arras and all, but even the proprium of all perils, the subject of
all pollutions, and the continent of all calamities?

Some Humerists in their Similies, compare women to Sirens: their faces to the
favor of Medusa: their speeches to the laughtures of Hyena: and their wailings
to Crocadiles tears. Al which slanderous compares, are to be objected to
their Authors envy, not to women's deserts: that (poor souls, being weaker
vessels) are borne by the prouocations of men, unto a thousand mischiefs.
Though Medea were a sorceresse, yet could not her drugs (though mighty to
work miraculous metamorphoses) constrain men to keep their affections within
the lists of continency. For in fierceness, they exceed the angry Tiger: in
wiliness, equalliz^ the subtle For: in wantonness, accompany the toyish Ape:
in lust and lewdness, surpass the libidynous Goat: in cruelty, go beyond
the ravenous Wolf: and in anger, wax more wrathful than the roaring Lion: and
only through them, are women brought to wretchedness.

Now does the prospectiue of this contemplation present before my thoughts, a
double genus contained among men ( viz.) a good and bad. On the one side
stands (and then shaking her head, she fetched a grievous sigh) my dear, ah!
(and then groand) my dearest love and life, estraunged Iacomin. On the other
side sits the wanton King (ah! that these should seem to protect and govern
others, that cannot direct nor guide themselves) who seeks the spoil of my
chastity. The one have the unjust Deities thrown down to distress, the
other have they extold with partial dignity. The one was always the Disciple
of Virtue: the other remains a seruitor unto vice. The one directed and
obedient to divine love, the other subjected and attendant on devilish lust.
And yet are they both men: and yet the one lives orderly like a reasonable
creature: and the other without good order, even like a brutum quoddam.

Ah! now I see that the blind Goddess (whom men commonly call Fortune)
holds highest dominion on the earth (whose partial hand (through her
buzzardly blindness) deals gifts to the undeserved, and bestows small
benefits on good deserts) else am I surely persuaded, the virtuous should
never be so continually crossed, and the vicious so pleasantly and maiestically
supported.

Shall the faithful and honest wight be thrust on thorns of tribulations? and
shall dishonest and leaud veneri^^s tread on Roses? Shall the good eat
Cole-worts with the Cynicke? and the badde feed on dainties with the Courtier?
Are the one constrained to drink the Worme-wood water, and the other suffered
freely to carowse bowls of Wine? Ah heavens! Ah Deities!

What is the earth then, but the vpholder of iniquity, and destroyer of
justice? And how may that be, when the Gods thereon have constituted mortal
members, (till they are by death all called thence) with uprightness to
remain? and spend their mortallitie with such Angelical integrity, as that
when their lives leave the earth, they may be immortalized in the glorious
heavens? Ah how blind is the earth, that can be content to be mapt with the
veil of vanity? Virtue bandieth daily against Uice, but Uice is had in such
regard, as though the mightiness of those vile multitudes (that Champion-like
brave it, mangre Uertues worthy martialists, whose honors have been achieved
by sheading and sustaining the loss of their lively blood) that seem to
saueguard that deceitful Strumpet: the world is led captive, to be
obseruant to all most wretched and villainous misdemeanors.

And therefore, by how much the company of Uertues Soldiers are the scarcer,
by so much more worthy are their famous Uictories to be registered in the
Records of eternal Remembrance.

The renowned Virginius of Rome, rather respected his daughters virgin-like
martyring death, than to save her life, to live in lewdness with dishonor.

Chaste Lucrece grieuing at her violent rape, to eschew the disgrace of her
enforced offense, would by no means be persuaded to live, but cut off her
days (to avoid discredit) with a deadly knife. Daphne the Nymph, to save her
honesty, wished rather to remain for ever in the Bark of a Bay tree: than
for lewdness to be made a Bear, as was the Trull that afterward being in
danger (whilst she wandered in the woods with Lycaon, Actaeon, Priapus, and
such leaudones, like a beast) to be stain by the shaft of her own son: was
by Jupiter taken up in a cloud, and made the Star Vrsa Mayor, and her son,
Vrsa Minor. Biblis lamenting her misdemeanour with continual and incessant
tears, never remitted her heart from sighs, and her breast from swelling
sobbes, nor her mind from woeful thoughts, until she became even a watrie
Fountain.

Have thou read all these ( Katherina) or at leastwise heard these and many
more? and yet do thou refrain to follow any of their famous examples? Will thou be content to a be Kings Concubine, and spot thy soul with sins (that
is new as white as the driven Snow) as black and ugly as pitch? Be mindful
(vile caitiffe) at thy birth: the sincerity of thy parents, and virtues of thy
friends: and will thou then become the only blemish of thy kindred through vile
folly?

Then she raged, and thus abandoned her ill haps. Auaunt (quoth she) you
infernal Furies, and hellish hagges, that tempt a woeful Soul after the
sufferance of disanulling miseries, to taste of sugared mischiefs. Why seek
you co ensuare me with your poisoning baits, on gilded hooks? I am not yet
provided for the draught of your perditions nets. My good Genius guide me in
these extremes, and help to unloose me from their entangling snares: for if I
rightly consider mine own cause, I was never in such dangerous case. I am
shut up in a glorious prison, to serve sin like a Iaile* whelpe: and there is
no man that friends me so much, as in my behalf to set in bail, to free me
from this servitude. But my noble mind (that took life from the loins of
Princes) will never (I hope) debase it self so low, as to yield it self a
servile bondslaue to the greatest Monarch in the world, to serve his lust.

How are all comforts exilde ( Katherina) from this Cabine? The spangled
imblazures glister like Silkwormes in the dark, as if they meant to sport
thine eyes with sparklings, as full of fairness, as the purple-coloured
Topace. But by these art thou driven to behold thine own ruth: look on the
Stars, and contemplate with the Moone-shine, (both which shut forth their
rays against the Glasse-windowes) and in their glory see thine own grief: in
their feature, thy deformity: in their speculation, the respect of thy
estimation, which not long sithence seemed as glorious, as their radiant
graces. Better had it been, thou had with the setting Sun, been drenched in
the Ocean deepe^, than follow this course to thy confusion. Worthier of
renown might than have been reckoned, by the merciless blades of the
butcherly Pirates to have lost thy life, than thus to lose the liberty of thy
chaste li^ing. Better to have endured the outrageous rebukes of thine angry
Parents at Palermo, then here to be banqueted in a strange land, with
infecting and sinne-saluing blandishments. O times! O days! O intemperable
manners! O times, of vicious living! O days, of virtuous abolishing! O
intemperate manners, of abominations engendring! The first to be hated, the
other to be rejected: and the third to be annihilated.

Ah wretched Katherina! distressed Katherina! molested and amazed Katherina!
Thou escapest all the Monsters on Seas, and yet were made a spoil unto men:
and by them, art made a pray for a cursed humane monster: as mighty as the
Dragon that was to devour Andromeda, whom stout Theseus rescued: but there is
no Theseus to rescue thee from expected scath. Could thou frame such a web
for resistance as did the constant Dame of Ithica, the good Penelope; or invent
such a clewe to bring thee out of this Laborinth, as did Ariadne; then, ah!
then, could thou hope to avoid this danger, and be requited of all damage.

And yet despair not ( Katherina) in these extremes: Daienera found a shert,
to wreake her wrongs on Hercules: Medea a Garland of poisoning flowers, to
revenge her quietly on faithless Jason: and the Gods may grace thee with the
gift of some drift invented, to stop the lustful pretense of this leacherous
Tunisian.

Do no endure (O sacred Juno) a modest maiden (that has vowed unto her Pheere
the observance of nuptial rights) to be defilde; rather give her courage to
cut her breast (like the Carthaginian Dido) and end her life with chaste
desire, than live to be polluted, by the embracings of beastly lust.

Which having said, she fell flat on the floor, with her face toward the
ground: and with hearty compunction of a passionate soul, prayed and called
on all the blessed and deified powers of the Olympicke Regions, to be
propitious unto her plaints, and by on^ good mean or other, in some good time
to end her woes.

With these disquiet motions (oh that any modest maiden should have such cause
of disquiet) spent she the long and weari^ winters night, till Aurora opened
her purple doors in the East, strewing the places (there about her dwelling)
with fair colored Roses, and sweet Uiolets. About which time, her eyes
dulled with heaviness, began to enclose, as if then they would not seem to
behold. the glorious artsing of Phoebus rays: nor see his horses breathe from
their nosthrills flakes and fierce flames on the hugie mountains: for the
Chamber windows lay directly by South-East; on which climate, the Sun in
winter season appears commonly twelve minutes after the eight hour in the
fore noone. And then it seemed she fell into a slumber, and in her sleep
beheld a Uision, which I shall plainly versitie in this manner.

Katherina's Vision.
Juno with Phoebe (who no great whiles gone,
Had kissed the cheeks of slow Endimion)
Walked hand in hand: them followed Morpheus,
Playing on golden Lute, like Orpheus.
After him, Aboron and his Faierie Dame,
With troops of iocond Faieries dancing came.
Then did appear the crew of Phoebes train,
All clad in white array (like flower Dumaine.)
And in their feitures fair (as Summers Queen)
At girdle bare quiuers of arrows keen.
Following them (off a pretty measurd space)
A troop of Satyrs entered into place:
Leading Dame Fortune, fettred fast in chains,
(So Fates decreed, for breeding Lovers pains)
All these looked pleasant; none were seen to lowre,
Save Fortune, that in thraldom had small power.
They near the place where Katherina lay:
Thus then began Juno to fair Phoebe say.
Long time (too long) this wight endu'd with graces
Through Fortunes spite (that thwarteth with disgraces
All virtuous creatures, that on earth remain:
Extolling Vices crew in Court to reign)
Having endurde great grieuances and crosses,
Is robbed of friends, that should redress her losses.
Now time requires she have some comfort given,
For wounding woes her soul have ouergrieuen.
No Nymph of all my train (then Phoebe said)
Has lived more chaste and virtuous than this maid:
And for that cause ( Jove's Queen) none more than I,
With helping hand would guard her chastity.
Thus then spoke Aboron with haughty voice;
The Faierie King (dread Beauties) does rejoice
That Morpheus summond has this Parliament,
T'enact a fit concluding consequent.
When waggish Cupid chauncst to wound her heart,
At first unawares with golden pointed Dart.
(As Fortune now lives) lived then seruilely
To please his mother, in my custody.
Wherefore my mind is willing, forward pressed,
To have her woes and miseries redrest.
My nimble Faieries shall direct her make,
That near these walls he shall his passage take.
And stirred by loyal Love, shall give consent
That night to lie with her, through due event.
And from their breasts I Will drive all fear and care,
( Morpheus replide whilst they together are.
And she (quoth Phoebe) mean while shall not lack
My help, to bring her envious foes to wrack.
Then Juno said (whilste Fortune to her self)
Auowde to thwart them, and the Faierie Elfe,)
After it is known they both are man and wife,
I Will grant them happiness all days of life.
Happy, happy, happy (then did they call)
Shall these true Lovers live: And vanished all.
By that time that the Sun was mounted near (by ^he carriage of his swift
flying horses) unto the Meridian, had Katherina cact off slumbring; and with
received comfort, began to consider on her (foresaid) Dream, and to
contemplate on the Uision.

And may it be (said she) that the just Deities will deigne a wretch such
favor, as propitiously to rescue her in midst of hard extremes! Then (poor
soul) prostrate thy self, and power forth grateful prayers, to their divine
powers.

Then she uttered a thankful Hymn of praises and grateful thanks, led
with good hope that her joys should again be replenished: which fell out
indifferently, as I will specify by these accidents, and first concerning our
Load-starre.

Our Load-starre continuing incessantly his course, will appear this evening
in Vespers place, at his appearance, somewhat beautiful, till Aquarius seem
to dash him out of countenance, with enclosures of mystie clouds, and watrie
showers: which for a time shall reign in multitudes.

Iacomin had not long soiournied at the Inn, (having kept his bed a day or
two, more to get ease in mind, than for trouble of any dangerous disease in
body: marry his wounds were somewhat green) but that his hurts were cured,
and his body current; yet in his mind continued such a corasiue, as made his
color change, his complexion alter, and his strong composition extenuate. And
all these disparagements wore engendered by dispairing thoughts for Katherina,
his dearest love and delight: whom he accounted utterly lost. With vacant
steps he treads through and through the streets of the City, enquiring of
many (whom in his walks he met) for a woman lately taken on the Seas by
certain Galleys, but could neither be informed of the one, nor hear of the
other. Which made him in mind so outrageous, as the furious Palatine, when he
suspected, Medor had played false with his Angelica, abandoned all laws of
reasonable consideration, and cried out, woe, woe, woe, accursed caytiffe. I
will (quoth he) walk henceforth poorly (as fits my fortunes) in Pilgrimage:
and will with hearty devotions offer oblations of peace, and Orysons to
possess quiet at the shrines of all Saints, as my wandering steps shall
conduct me to their Tombs and Temples. And when I chance to look on any
Lovers mishaps, I will adioyne as a note marginal, Sic Iacomin cum Katherina. In
which impenitrable resolution, discharging and discarding his followers,
acquiting their costs, and contenting his Hostess, having paid all dues to
all (saving to Nature) with fardle at his back (like a Trauayler) poasted out
of Town, and kept his course that way, where his Katherina was enclosed.
Pacing by the Castle (at which he wondered, it seemed in show so flourishing)
he stayed his steps a little, gazing at the engraven and carved Images with
earnest looks, imagining it to be some worthy Monastery. Having sufficiently
satisfied his sight, as he began in his way to foot it forward, Katherina
(having before espied him) eying him from a Casement of the wide window, calde
Iacomin by name, twice or thrice aloud: unto the which voice, after that a
while he had listened, inquired, who calls Iacomin? And therewithal lifting
his eyes aloft at the windows, saw her face, whom his heart so highly
honored. What Catherina (quoth he?) I, I, thy Katherina (my dears Iacomin)
said she: And then for exceeding joy both even remained surprised with a
sowning trance, having their senses even engaged by an ecstasy: But remembering
themselves, Iacomin began to enquire how she happened into that hold, and to
whom the house that held her so severely was belonging? She repeated the whole
sum and substance briefly unto him: which Iacomin having heard, And pity
it is, I trow (said he) that so fair a place, should serve for so foul a
purpose. But what remedy (sweet heart) replied Katherina: here stands mine
honor in hazard, and my credit in suspense: every hour awayt I, when he will
offer (shameless tyrant as he is) to give an assault to crack my chastity:
all which yet remain sound and perfect, wholly dedicated and devoted unto thee,
as unto their worthiest possessor and only Patron. Protect them then (dear
Iacomin) and enjoy them: whilst thou live leave them not, in the hands of
others, if thou love them: For as the Bird Atagen, is said never to sing after
she is taken: no more can a modest maid rejoice, if once she chance by lusts
insnarings to be overtaken. Then as we love one another, so let us live
together: or if the date of our days hasten toward an end, let us end our
hues at once together. Return til soon at night (good Love) from whence you
came, and when you behold the night begins to cover the Eastern clymate with
pitchie clouds: repair again to this place, and bring with thee some strong
cords, by whose help thou may having once climbed that ^raunched Tree (for
a troop of Cedars, as lofty as those of Liba^us, flood prying with their
stately toppe-boughes near the wintowes) by my help winding thee up, may
come into this open Casement. Or if thou fear to adventure thy self to
ascend so high, for fear thou should miss both thy footing and holdfast,
and so sustain a fall (which the heavens forebid, that thou in Katherinas
sight should suffer) yet will thy countenance comfort me, whilst I remain
comforted by thy reclaiming conference.

Then answered Iacomin (his heart dancing the while within his reconciled
breast) unto her motion mentioned with these fervent speeches.

By the immortal Gods (fair and faithful Love) said he, who with my good
Angel have governed my feet directly to find this place (by following with
prosperous pace a happy path) I solemnly here in the sight of heaven, and
aspect of the heavenly powers, avow, even anon in the twilight, to return
hither again with all speed convenient: At which time ( Katherina) see that
thou set the Casement wide open, in sign thou do expect my coming.

By that love which loyally I owe thee, (said Katherina) I promise it: And
perform it too, I trust (quoth Iacomin:) I, and I live (said she) til that
appointed time: as sure as I kiss this hand in stead of your delicious lips,
I will.

And (quoth he) as certainly as I busse this fist, wishing I might as easily
touch your fair cheeks, for requital of your tried friendship, I will not
fail to be here at that present.

Which speeches by both parties, with many more protestations being breathed
forth, and sundry beckenings made, after that they were silent, Iacomin
repaired again to his former Lodging.

His honest Host and Hostess were exceeding glad to behold their Guest, and
so were the rest, for that they perceived his outrage was now quelled by
reason. He told them, he had been comforted by a Friend, and that he would
not trouble them to make any provision for his Supper, because he was in a
manner fore-syed, because fore-bidden to feast that night abroad. But yet will
I drink (quoth he) a cup of Canarie in my Chamber, if you please. With a
very good will said his Host. And so the one went to his Chamber, and the
other went til the Wine.

After that Katherina had lost the sight of her Love, thinking every minute a
month, and every hour a year, til he should return: her mind being moved
with exceedyng admyration, she ^eely lycenced her tongue thus to be talkatiue
as follows.

What glory, is comparable to gracious good will? or what life, equal to
love? Courtly pomp decays through pestiferous dissentions, as can my Parents
broils make manifest in Palermo: And life is always in hazard to be lost:
witness the miseries of the maimed, and mishappes of the mightiest: and the
fall of these Kings and Emperors, can testify, certify and certificate thus
commonly specified.

Hector, Hanna, Hanniball dead; and Pompey, Pirrhus spild, Scipio, Cyrus,
Caesar slain; and Alexander killed. And yet good will (quoth she) continues
after death; else had not Achilles so cruelly revenged the fall of his dear
friend (slain by Hectors Lance) again on valiant Hector. Nor Hercules with
his Clubbe on shoulder, and cladde in his Lions Case, would have so striued to
revoke his dear Pirethous from the shades of Limbo: Oh, the surpassing virtue
of friendly good will, (which conioynes a Pelides with Orestes, and a Damon in
firm league with Pitheas) is continual, perdurable, and eternal.

And as for love, more delicious, than ye sweet kernel of ye Nut; more
comfortable, than the sugared juice of the Grape; more sauory, than the wholesome
smell of Myrrh: indureth long, long after life is ended; else would not Orph^us
stirred on through the essence of love, have sought by sounding music to
pacify the angry powers of Hell: and so require of black Pluto, the
restoring to life again of his lost Love, lately made his Bride. O the
admirable and vnrehearseable polver of good will O the glorious and gracious
virtue of sovereign love! Without the which, light, is but like darkness:
life, but death: gold, but dross: health, but sickness: might, but misery:
joy, but annoyance: ease, but disease: and in fine, the whole Earth, but a
confused Chaos.

If all the precepts of the Sages, all the principles of Philosophers, and all the praises that have took proceedings from Poets brains, were settled on this
subject: yet could not the foresight of the one, the wisdom of that, nor the
wit of the other, comprise a period, the efficacy, essence, and virtue thereof.
Then much less may thou Katherina express the summarie effect, of so
exquisite a quintescence: or show but the representing shadow, of such a rare
superficies: Thy tongue faulters, though thy thoughts fail not: feeding on
such an excellent substance, whose fullness seems to satisfy thee, and yet in
no respect remains lessened.

Having so said, she waxt silent, and had her mind exercised with muses: which
ravished her senses with such supernal conceits, as that her heart even reckoned
it self deified.

Iacomin in the mean time at his lodging rested careful, bearing an eye to the
maine chance, and the days change: that now was even overtaken by the fresh
Horses of the night. High time was it now for him, to hasten, and love so
suffered him not to be slack, that he was at the Castle, had climbde the Tree,
and nimbly by agilitie, ascended and entered the Casement (which his Love had
set wide open) before that Katherina thought him half toward her. For he
minded not to call unto her, until he had past the danger of climbing, least
that his downful (if so it chanced) should breed her dolor.

When she beheld her Love creeping in at the Casement (driven with his sudden
presence from her momento) she ran and received him in her arms with an
hearty Saluie. And when they had imparted mutual congies, (their eyes courting
each other with amorous glances and steadie looks) they tell to lovely
imbracings: and thus questioned Iacomin whilst he held her about the middle
with folding arms.

Katherina (said he) fervent love has made me light, to gain thy company: and
now sudden doubt gives the onset against my breast, and suspect of afterclaps
assaults my heart with hard battery, to make me yield unto despair. But the
heavens and all the celestial Godheads know, the undaunted fortitude of my
zealous affections, and the constant motion of my loue-hallowing mind. For
though seuen-mouthed Nilus should wax dry, and that I should endure the
thirst of Tantalus; or if my bread should turn to stones, and I abide more
toil than Sisiphus: If the earth should he turned to steel, the sea be set a
fire, and the stars forsake the sky and become bars of brass to affright
me, to the intent I should change the motion of my life, or forsake love; yet
would I rather endure ten thousand deaths, than he found for my minds
mutation, faithless, faultring fickle and so faulty. And therefore (sweet
Katherina) I conjure thee by the divine essence of that love, wherewith through
the infusion of heavenly graces thou art inspired, toward me, tell me if the
lewd king has appointed any time to visit thee? By heavens innumerable joys
(said she) possessed by all the blessed Senate there, (dear Love) I avow, thy
Katherina never gave consent that at any time the kings presence should repair
hither; neither have I heard by any, that he minds to visit me. Have all
bidden thee good night then (quoth Iacomin) and has the keeper fast locked the
doors, or is not yet departed the Castle? Long since (said she) and therefore
you need not doubt (I hope) of any danger: For no thief on earth I protest
whist I have breath, shall rob you of your right and interest.

These Lamps had not long possessed the oil of their parley, to lighten their
thoughts, but that (after they had both together made them unready, and were
laid in bed) dim sleep drowsily eclipsed their eye beams, with clowdie
slumbers. So that their minds, ere while the mappes of cares, and entertainers
of watchful woes, were now ( Endimion-like) grown careless; respecting
neither fearful Cautions, nor doubtful Caueats.

This while was the King with his Guard come to the Castle, to court with
lovely Rhetoric his new-come Goddess, deeming, that now her moodie mind,
was by the pleasure of the place, become mirthfull; and her heart, erst harned
with sorrow, to be now softened with solace. And causing the keeper to unlock
the gates, ascended the grosses, and came to Katherinas Chamber door, willing
him to open it: wherein when he entered, and beheld other lying there in bed,
embracing his Venus; not able to endure that sight, he flung forth the chamber,
giving them straight charge and command, that when these sleepers should awake,
they should both be bound back to back to a stake, and end their lives (as
traitors ought) in flames of fire: and having pronounced that wrathful doom,
with rage departed.

Here (Gentles) should I tell you, how Juno being incensed with anger for this
accident, committed through Fortunes spite, (descending down from Olympus in
her glorious Chariot, drawn by her byrds, whose starr-^ied prauncing plumes
present before their mistress eyes, so many pretty colors, as does the
Rainbow in the heavens) checked her presumption with an Egregiam vero laudem;
and blamed the Faieries and Satyrs for their slacknesse; bidding them to bind
fast her hands straighter, that she might not turn so thwartfully her
maligning wheel. But that must I needs cut off to avoid tediousness: yet will
I give you to know, that after she had rung a peale of scolding at Fortune
(on the one side) and had gently (on the other side) chastised the negligence
of her leaders; she entreated Morphens to observe his part yet in any case:
avowing by all her Deity, rather then this fair couple should endure any
wrack, she would her self at the instance brandish forth with Majesty, to
withstand all those that should perform their executions.

Flames? (said she) shall scorching flames consume my worthy subjects? No, I Will
send Boreas, both with winds and showers to quench the fires: Whilst with
Hymenaeus help, I Will hide them, as erst I did Aeneas and Dido, in some vaultie
Cave.

And so commanded her glorious Fowls (whose wings and taile-plumes stood
proudly spread) in haste to carry her unto the highest heavens, from whence
she entered to behold the consequent: minding wholly to conserve them both in
safety, although she should see them bound at stake, and stand in extremest
peril of kindeling flames.

Soundly yet rested these slumberings friends (little thinking what sour sauce
the King had ordained, minding it should be mingled among their sweetes) til
the trauayling Sun was gone well onwarde in the East: All which time did the
Kings Guard attend them. As Soon as their eyes awaking opened, they were
informed of the Kings being there, and of his bloody sentence, pronounced
against them. Whereat first they mourned, but afterward well resolved to endure
their menaced death, made themselves ready to take the end of their lives on
earth.

Now (my Love) quoth Katherina, shall the world behold in us, a spectacle,
presenting fidelity. In thee, love; in me, loyalty; in thee, constancy: in
me, chastity: in both, firm affection and sure confidence.

As she would proceed, the Executioners came, and bound their arms, which
both endured with admired patience: the punishers pitying their distress with
some kind remorse, and would have spared them, had not they all been bound on
pain of death, to do the Kings command.

This while were some busied in putting up the stake, some providing Faggots,
Pitch ^ales, Straw, and all other Fuel: Which breeding a rumor with sudden
admiration, in vulgar ears, multitudes came in heaps unto the place of
execution, expecting the performance of a woeful stratagem.

Forth at last were brought these woeful Lovers, guarded on each side with
Bills and Holbards, like rebellious Traitors: and bound they were to the
stake, back to back, contrary to their minds: who earnestly entreated the
araigners, to suffer them end their lives face to face. But the cruel King had
otherwise given in charge, and that bred their greatest grief. Yet patience
prevailed with them in this their too severe handling.

What, my dear, (quoth Iacomin) they may by this separation rob us, of
comfortable countenance in this frail and transitory life: but their cruelty
cannot bereave us of sight in the glorious Sphere on hie, when our immortal
ghoastes going toward Ioue^ Palace, shall meet in the milke-white way. Which
words (uttered with ghastly voice) moved at the beholders to bewail the
downfall (with deawie tears) of so fair a couple.

Then were remorslesse brandes of fire brought to enkindle the Fuel: and Juno
had in readiness placed watrie Iris directly over that clymate to shoot forth
showers: When, lo (as pleased the just pooming Deities, that at their good
pleasures can preserve the virtuous from unjust persecutions, and undeserved
punishments) the Lord high Admyrall (drawn in a costly Coache of Ebonie) code
by, and of the people inquired what the prisoners were: but was not resolved by
any, but was told by all, they were strangers that were to die.

His honor therefore standing on his saddle-cloth, questioned (coming near
unto the stake) their names? He answered, Iacomin mine: and mine Katherina said
she.

Of what Country (replied the Admiral) are ye? Of Scicilia (said they). Of
what place in Scicilia? (quoth the Admiral) Both of Palermo answered Iacomin.

Of what Parents in Palermo are you sprung? (said he) I am the hapless son
of Signior Iacomin Pierro, (answered the one.) And I the daughter of Don
Alexander Bartolo (said the other.) Does the King, who has condemned ye
(quoth he then hastily) know either of you?

Neither of us, and it shall please you, (answered they) neither skils it much
that our extreme fortunes and perils endured should be known to his majesty:
for these flames shall end our lives, and with our wretched lives, our
extreme miseries. Yet be not driven to despair (replied the Admiral) I will
to the Court, and confer with the King concerning you: And then giving in
charge on pain of death that they should defer a while (til they had word
again from him) to kindle the fires, he caused his Coachman to yerke onwarde
his light-hoofed Iennets to the Court: where when he was arrived, and dismissed
from his Coache, was come into the Kings presence: after some salute, he thus
with bold stomach breathed forth speeches.

Can they (quoth he) that place Kings, pull down Kings? then look thou once
again to be beaten out of Tunise: For Scicilia, once our chief aid, will
become our cruellest enemy: and thou be enforced to seek a new Kingdom.

The King having heard these cracking thunders, strooken with fear of some
scorching lightnings to follow, mildly answered the Admiral with these words.

Why, what is the cause my good Lord (said he) of these sudden threatenings? how
have I given occasion to make our friends foes? or Scicilia our enemies?

Thou seek (replied the Admiral) to burn the flourishing branches of
those fruitful stocks, which in thy greatest extremes stood as strongest
supporters to hold thy feet from falling under Rebels yoke. Do thou not
remember how scarce thrice seven years since, Seigneor Iacomin Pierro, and
Don Alexander Bartolo, the two egregious Uiceroyes of Scicilia (did by sending
thee assistant Forces) seat thee (subduing valiantly thy insulting foes)
safely in thy Kingdom? and now for requital, do thou seem to burn the
only issue of them both? for that the two faithful Lovers seek the fruition
of their loves? why, the young Gentleman that is yonder (like a Traitor) at
the stake, is the son of Iacomin: and she, the daughter off Bartolo; both
even destroyed through thy unknown ignorance.

Oh heavens! (quoth the King, breaking off this Dreery tale ere it was ended) I
would not for my Crown and Kingdom have proved so tyrannous.

So tyrannous? (replied the Admiral) I well know not, whether they are not yet
tortured and turned to ashes or no: the executioners were by thee so straightly
charged, to hasten on their torments, and inkindle the fires.

By Jupiter (then enraged said he) I am then undone, utterly undone, undone for
ever. Ho whose there, ho? come hither one. Gallope to the stake yonder on a
Courser, that can outrunne Pegasus in swift set race: and see if the prisoners
there standing, do yet breathe alive: what not there yet? Oh how my heart
houers for heaviness in my breast, as though it would get forth, and run
thither before my posting servant? had I ouer-carowst my self, and
ouerdrenched my brains with wine, as would the great golbing Alexander? that
so drunkenly I condemned these strangers, enquiring neither what they were,
whence they came, nor whither they would? Oh unfortunate chance! Oh synister
change! By the Gods, if they survive, I will excommunicate from my breast this
ill humor of lustful venerie (engendered in me through wanton sloth) and will
banish from my hosome all those Curtezan-like Danies: whose blandishments and
insnaring flatteries have so lively vpheld my youths leaud lust: For now, and
never till now, did I conceive what was true Love: with which improper title,
my subtle Concubines (queanish and whorish drabs as they are) have mantled my
unbridled lust. And so long, as that my behavior has been more brutish than
the unreasonable beasts.

I now see the vanity thereof, for hereby was I led to work this
unmerciful mischief on the lives of these two constant Lovers, whose settled
minds may be made subject to no exchange.

My amendment shall be my best repentance, for now I remember that, which long
since I read, Optima paenitentia, vita noua; and yet do I repent my frantic
follies with hoartie grief, and by the propitious helps of the Gods, my
modest living hereafter, shall wipe clean away the blemishes of my former
life, so viciously and vily led.

By this time were the two Lovers (to the admirable applause of all the
beholders) redeemed from fiery death, walking (Magna comitante caterua) with
great iollitie toward the Court.

News was brought to the woeful King, that they were alive, by some of the
Guard, that posted apace before the res^ for that purpose. And having heard
that they were near arrived, the Admiral went forth, and fairly saluted them
at the Gates, conducting them unto the King* who kindly received them (they
both imparting (...) unto his grace) with these conforming speeches.

Fair Princes (said he) I doubt not but the Deities have determined the long
lengthening of your dated days; and well may your lives endure with
happiness. For by the lusters of your wel-willing and wel-liuing, do I behold
the lewdness of mine ill led life: by your virtues, my vices: by your love,
my lust: by your constancies, my incontinencies.

And joy I do with incredible gladness, that by the bright beams of (now
praised be Gods) your lively looks, I am put to wit of both your royal
Parents: And therefore (Princes) now freely be frolic: for we will feast away
all perils forepast. And what pleasures I can wish or your selves will, do but
(in token that you forgive my intended injuries unwittingly minded against you)
deigne to require or request: and command, rather than demand: and I will
perform it to the uttermost Ace.

Then replied Iacomin, saying: Dread Prince, our very souls abhor the
sparks of vnhumaine revenge: and our minds (always debonaire toward our
friends) endure not to think on intended or inacted injuries.

All the recompense that we would have, is the hope, that our agreements shall
amend all amisses: and our love, exile all looseness, (as you have plighted by
promise) for ever hereafter from your royal person: which will not only lift
your honor (loft) unto the highest altitude: but drive all into an admiration
by so luckie a change.

Which being said, the King taking his seat, willing also the rest so to take
their ease: holding Iacomin by the hand (who then was placed next to his
person) thus replied as follows.

Uertuous Scicilian, mine own motion for my amendment was much, but thy
Princely words have incensed me ten times more. For proof therefore that I
am perfectly moved with penitent compunction, behold what my mind wi^ls me in
your presence, and before all these my honorable Lords to have performed,
though it portray mine highly deserved shame.

Then calling forth the Keeper of his Castle, he commanded him, to bring
before him, all these impudent dames, whose dishonesties had so mightily
disgraced his honors and dignities.

And whilst the Keeper went to accomplish his highness pleasure, he thus
progressed in his speech.

My Castle, where you, most chaste and modest Katherina (said he, turning
toward the place where she sat) were enclosed, contains in hold a hundred
lavish and licentious Dames, whose wanton dispositions, have (like pitch)
defiled the glory of my youth. These will I bannish far from my Court,
willing them to recall themselves: for (they say commonly) take away the cause,
and the effect will die. I have heard that Isreal's King, who before in the name
of Iehoua his God, slew with a stone (which he sent from a sling) the huge
Giant Goliath, consenting afterward to wanton sin (that assaulted him whilst
in a Gallerie he subjected him to idle sloth) wrought the murder of one of
his dearest Lords: thereby inkindling against him, both the wrath of his God,
and incurring dishonor unto his name. The like had I (vile wretch) offensiuely
against you almost committed: but that some good Angel guided our Admiral, to
withstand such a mischief. Since therefore so viciously to follow wantonness,
is vily to be a bond slave to all villainies: to shun the deadly servitude of
the one, I will undo the devilish instigation of the other.

And with that entered the virgins into place: wherefore he commanded his
Treasuror, to bestow on them severally an hundred marks: and so to convey
them from the Court, to lead the remnant of their lives in their native homes.

Whose liberality bestowed toward them for their mainteinance, was by all
there present much commended. And then the King to drive away melancholy from
all (that seemed to marvel at the looks of his halfe-discontent darlings, and
choice minions) caused Tables and dice to be brought forth, to breed disporte:
and Cards in packs to be thrown on board, to pass away the time, till the
Cook and Cator were provided to serve in dinner. Himself at the Chesse-boord
stood as a Chalenger; and young Iacomin to show himself a champion,
undertook the combat at that witty weapon: always with caution (after he had
to try, entered the lists) keeping him free from annoying check. And when
their gaming was ended, they feasted, and were frolic.

After this manner past these nobles the time together, for the space of some
three or four days: in which time, the king had provided a gallant Fleet to
guide these Scicilians safely home to Palermo. And the Admiral made him ready
to bear them company in that conduct.

Now has our Load-starre (Gentlemen) past Aquarius, and paceth like Athlantas
Coursers, toward the exaltation of Pisces: whose scales showing and shining
bright and clear, gave him liberty now at last freely to prognosticate happy
success. And therefore with the prosperous running of this wandering Stars
race, am I in brief to shut up the Catostrophe of all the Scenes.

Our young Scicilians, giving the Tunisian King abundant thanks for their
gracious entertainments; with the Lord Admiral, departed from Tunise; and
manned with a fair Fleet, shipped themselves, and crossed the Seas; cutting
through the Ocean, till peaceably they attained the Port of Palermo.

Fame resounding through common ears report of their safe arrival, moved the
dissentious Peers, Pierro and Battolo, with several ioies, and yet could they
not mittigate their rancord enuies, nor assuage their minds, from seeking
mutual revenge: in so much that they scarce deigned to bid welcome their own
children.

Which being noised in the ears of Don Andrea Alizandra (then dwelling in the
country) in regard of his countries weal, and Scicilians welfare, with all
convenient speed repaired to Palermo; and informing the Tunisian Admiral how
disorderly every thing stood in hap-hazard; caused him by sound of Trumpet to
summon the Citizens to the Parliament house. Whereupon the Aldermen and Elders
presented themselves peaceably before the Admiral and Alizandra. Whilst they
were employed there in consultation, came Pierro with his troop: and a little
after, Bartolo with a great train. Who then at each other most wilfully shoot
darts of sharp reuilings, and with bitter raylings, make repetitions of their
wrongs mutually sustained by other: not content to rest satisfied till they
were revenged; so that had they not by policy been prevented, there would
have been wrought a bloody massacre on both parties. But the Admiral and
Alizandra causing silence, among all the assembly to be proclaimed by sound of
Trumpet, on pain of death, to every common man; and present imprisonment to
every noble man: whilst they were all silent, the wise Admiral thus used his
Oration.

I^ it possible (ye Scicilians) that men should be so possessed with brutish
rancour, as that their minds may be directed by no regard of human reason?
May not the daily sheading of blood, the murdering of the Commons, the
damages of your native country, continually proffered, procure your hearts to
agreements, and persuade your thoughts from hammering on furious revenge? Shall
the suckling wail, the child weep, the innocent lament, the maiden moan, and
the oppressed widow mourn, to behold these deadly discentious? Nay, shall the
murdered Ghoasts, of those, that by these intestine hurliburlies have
traitorously been brought to untimely deaths, with outcries provoke the
dooming heavens, to power down plaguie vengeance on your seditious heads?
Behold, the Gods in mercy have wrought myraculous means to unite your
discentious Families again together, and to settle them in one concordant
sympathy. See your honorable issues, (even driven through your discords into
deadly despair to have any happy day, for condeigning of their loves) are
beyond hope safely returned home to amend your tyrannous lives. May not you joy
at the virtuous amity of your children (whose indissoluble league is concluded
both by the powers of heaven and earth) and abashed with shame, blush at your
brutishness? Has Tunise King, your friendly wel-wisher; and I, your present
wel-willer, manned them hither with a gallant navy, to have this welcome? What
shall we say, but as it is bruted of you in other countries? that your two
peace-freezing heads, seem to enforce the quiet of all the members of
Scicilia, through cold choler to congeale? Is it not dishonor to hold such
discord? is it not reproach to be accounted so rash? is it not infamous,
without sufficient cause to persist so envious? then for shame change your
outrageous angers, and entertain chearefully these courageous Lovers: I mean
not one without the other, (for they both are one) but both in one, and one in
both. Then shall your ruinous estate be corroborated, your honors standing (in
hazard) remain fortified; and your countries commodities decaying, abundantly
multiplied.

As he would have said farther, the whole multitude gave loud shoutes, and
admirable shrill applaudities: wherewith the minds of these powerful Peers on
both sides were so moved, that forgiving and forgetting all evils forepast,
reconciled themselves with mutual imbracings, and welcomed both their
children, and the worthy Admiral with hearty gratulation: to their no small
joys, and general contentments of the whole Commons: that for seven days
space they continually rung bells, and made bonefires, whilst the Nobles of the
Land, banqueted and made holy day: with Iacomin and Katherina, celebrating a
universal festival over the whole Realm: that now seemed to compare this
their peace (as the Oracles had foretold) so happily again renewed, to the
ancient Aureo seculo.

FINIS.
THus (courteous Gentles) has our Load-starre run his appointed race: and
following their order, who treading cunningly an artificial Maze, after diverse
intricate turnings and by-pathes, make their regresse where first they had
their progress: is come near again unto Aries: as having directly attained
the very point of that Horizon, where at first it took original in the
Springtide. In the Spring therefore of their pleasures (all winterly storms
of perils being past) will I leave constant Iacomin and Katherina: wishing all
true and loyal Loners, like lively joys. If you like well the course of this
Load-starre, I will with your favor presume to promise surely, to present you
shortly with the Poem of Virginities Verdure. But in the mean while, to
lighten your expectations, I could wish you, to look on Lusts Lost Liberty,
performed by proud tyrannous Tarquine (a lusty ladde, that of late I have
trained to the Stage) sheading blood both by polliticke means, and publicque
massacres. And when you have been sufficiently satisfied, I hope (non inuita
Minerua) to inuit you unto some modest moral Banquet. Farewell.

Voluisse, sat sit. FINIS.

