A SERMON PREACHED At St. PAVLS March 27. 1640.

BEING THE ANNIVERSARY OF HIS MAJESTY'S HAPPY INAUGURATION TO HIS CROWN.

By HENRY KING, Deane of Rochester, and Residentiary of St. Paul's: One of His
Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by Edward Griffin. 1640.




JEREM. 1.10. Behold I have this day set thee over the Nations, and over the
Kingdoms; to Root out, and to pull down, to destroy and throw down, to build
and to plant.
DId not the solemn coming up of your Tribes to this Place, and the public
preparation loudly speak that Festival we meet to celebrate; the very reading
of this Text, were Trumpet enough to proclaim the cause of your address and
my appearing here.

I may begin my Sermon as David his Psalm: I speak of the things which I have
made touching the King: Psalm. 45.1.
and the Hodie in the Text applies my speech to the season. That God who This
Day set Him over us warrants the occasion, and this Scripture gives me matter.

The words were spoken immediately to the Prophet Jeremy, a Son of Oil by
his Office, though not of him but improperly and figuratively. Quod dicitur
Jeremiae, Ecce constitui Te, non dubium quin figurata tota locutio sit, Aug.
lib. 3. de Doctrina Christiana cap. 11.
says ^aint Augustine. Jeremy then was the Messenger, not the Party, for which
reason one Translation reads not Constitui, but Legavi Te. Literally and
Properly, they are meant of Christ, importing his Regal Power, and the
Latitude of His Kingdom* Non ergo Ieremias, Ambros. in Psalm. 43.
sed Dominus Jesus. Not Jeremy, but the Lord Jesus, says ^t. Ambrose. Nor is
He alone, St. Cyprian, St. Chrysostom, Victorinus and others agree with him.
Which makes good St. Hieromes attestation, Multi hunc locum sup^r Persona
Christi intelligunt: Diverse understand this Text of Christ's Person. Hieron.
C^mment. in Ierem. 1.
Nevertheless, as we d^aw Coppies without wrong to the Original, so without
injury to the sense of the Text, or the Person of Christ; I shall apply the
words to the King, who in respect of his Office and Domination upon Earth is
Christ's Image and Deputy; the Christus Domini, the Lords Anointed.

First therefore, Divis. 1.
I shall from hence trace this Sovereign Power to the very Spring, discovering
unto you the Author whose Ordinance Dominion is, who is God Himself; Ego
Constitui, I have set, or I have Constituted.

Secondly, the Person Exalted, Thee. 2.


Thirdly, the Extent of this Exaltation, Over the Nations, 3.
and over the Kingdoms.

Fourthly, 4.
the End or Exercise of His Power, which is twofold: 1. Destructive, to Root
out, and to pull down, to Destroy and to throw down. 2. Conservative, To
Build, and to Plant.


The Ecce here prefixed shall serve as an Herald to usher in my Discourse and
Application.

Behold. Behold.
And sure an Argument wherein God and the King are interessed will deserve an
Ecce. Both these Persons meet in the Text, yet in that order, that the King may
know his Dependence upon God, and the People their obedience to the King, even
for this reason, because God has set him over them* Where He comes privileged
by such an Author, and vested with such Authori^y, He will deserve not an Ecce
alone, but an Osanna too, Blessed be he that comes in the Name of the Lord.
1. I have set.
For this, I, is the Lord, I have set.

Though you find no Name subscribed, the Deed sufficiently declares the
Author. And where the Act is Eloquent, other denominations are of little use.
Men are divided by their Tribes, and distinguished by their Titles; If God have
any Name, it is to be read in his Attributes; the first of which is His Power,
and the effect of that Power; Ego Constitui, I have set thee up.

The Government of the Earth is in the hand of the Lord; Ecclesiastic. 10.4.
and when Time is, He will set up a profitable Ruler over it, says the son
of Syrac. Heathens themselves were sensible of this truth. Homer terms Kings,
(...), and Callimachus, Homer. Callimachus.
(...), The Offspring of Jupiter. So Tacitus, Tacitus Annal. lib. 3.
Principes imperium a Deo habent, eosque instar Dei esse. Princes receive their
Scepters from God, and are in His stead.

Do they not appear worse then Heathens who go about to fetch the derivation
of Kings from any other Pedigree then this? Those who either place the power of
making them in the Pope, as do the Pontificials; or in the People, as
Buchanan, Populo jus est, Buchanan de Iure Reg. Edit. Anno 158^. Edimburgi.
ut imperium cui vult deferat; Or that join the People in Commission with God,
abridging the Latitude of the Text, and liberty of Gods institutions: Deum
Reges Instituere, Regna Regibus dare, Iunius Brutus vindic. quaest. 3.
Reges Eligere, Populum Reges Constituere, Regna tradere, Electionem suo
suffragio comprobare, (A Distinction whose terms are contrary to the Text,
It Is there Constitui te:) God Institutes, the People constitute the King; God
gives the Kingdom, the people deliver it; God elects, but the People confirm
the Election. If this be true, sure our Bibles are false, and our
interpretation as erroneous as our Texts: Why do not these Men who in many
things so nearly parallel the Jesuits, get leave from their Consistory, as
the other from the Conclave, to frame an Index Expurgatorius, to expunge those
places of Scripture which make against them? Dan. 4.7.
Blot out that of Daniel; The most High rules in the Kingdom, and gives it
to whomsoever He will. You heard now, who said the People had right to bestow
it where they listed. Blot out that of Moses; Let the Lord God of the Spirits
of all flesh appoint a man over the Congregation. Number. 27.17.
Nisi Regem suffragiis Electum habeamus, vereor ne legitimum ullum habituri
simus. Buchan. ibid. Prove. 8.5.
Gods election is nothing, unless the People approve it. Lastly, Blot out that
of Solomon; By me Kings reign: These men have more wisely ordered the matter.
And let Kings Themselves no more write, Dei Gratia (which Rebuffus notes to be
the just acknowledgement of His Power, who gave Them Theirs) since it is not so
much, By the Grace of God, as by the favor and Leave of the People.

It was ignorance of the first Cause, which threw a Mist of blindness upon the
World; which Mist for all the Beams of Knowledge that have shone upon it,
never since could clear up. For it is a permanent Error in mankind to mistake
the Instruments, and Secondary Agents in Gods purposes, for the Maine
Efficient. It is so in this, where because in the settling or translation of
Kingdoms, some Intermediate Actors are used, many ascribe th^se Effects to
them, which are only the work of God. The Romans were wont variously to
distinguish the derivation of their Empire. By Force, so Julius Caesar was
invested: By the Senates Election, Eutrop. lib. 7.
so Tiberius. By the Soldiers, so Severus. Fenestel. cap. 4.
By Inheritance, so Octavius Augustus But to what means soever they imputed
their Emperors, were it Birth or Conquest, Election or Usurpation, it is God
who gives the Title to Kingdoms by the First, and He also directs and permits
it by the Last.

When the Israelites desired a King, they asked him of God, who first designed
Him, and by a Law never to be reversed, reserved the Choice as a Prerogative
peculiar to Himself. Thou shall make Him King, Deuteronomy. 17.15.
whom the Lord thy God shall choose over Thee; so that if he come in by any
other way, the Act is quarreled by the Prophet, and disclaimed by God
himself, They have set up a King, but not by me. Hos. 8.4:
If by Succession, it is God, who Regulates and prolongs that happy Line.
Children are Gods blessing to every private family; but an Heir to a Kingdom,
is His Blessing to a Land. Which Blessing is enlarged in the goodness of the
Successor. Therefore when the good Emperor Marcus Aurelius, perceived the ill
inclination of his Son Commodus who was to succeed, he wished himself dead.
But contrary to him, Hiram congratulates those who were sent from Iudaea.
Blessed be the Lord God, 1 King. 5.7
who has given unto David a wise Son over this mighty People. And this was
that Son whom David professes the Lord Himself had made choice of. Of all my
Sons (for the Lord has given me many) He has chosen Solomon to sit upon the
Throne of the Kingdom of the Lord over Israel. 1 Chr. 28.5.
Nor only in these Calmes of Peace, but in the Tempest of War, where the
Sword hewes out a title to the Crown, and the Robe of the Prince, instead of
Purple, is Dyed in Blood; Even in this storm, is God the Pilot, to guide all
actions to His Ends. In the passing away of the first Monarchies from the
Assyrian to the Persian, His hand was set to the deed, visible upon the Wall,
and legible in those fatal Characters which told Belshazzar, that the Date of
his Kingdom was numbered and finished. Dan. 5.26.
And truly if you consider the power of Belshazzar, and the number of his
tributary Princes, and the strength of Babylon his Metropolis which was fenced
with a treble Wall of great height, and the difficulties Cyrus encountered at
the assault, being forced by many Channels and trenches to drain the River of
Euphrates, that so he might approach the Walls which otherwise had been
inaccessible, you will perceive it was not an Arm of Flesh, 2 Chro. 32.8 Sr.
Walter Rauleigh. Hist. 1. part. lib. 3. cap. 3. page 35.
but the Ordinance of God, which made Cyrus strong and successful.

Let all the Kings of the Earth then Throw down their Scepters before this
Maker of Kings* and ascribe unto Him Their Kingdoms and their Power, for they
are His. Tuum est Regnum and Potentia. It Is part of the Doxology in Christ's
prayer. Let them not reckon their Crowns the acquisition of their own
wisdom or strength; as Jacob told Joseph concerning his portion, With my
Sword, Genesis 48.22.
and with my Bow I took it. But cry with that victorious Captain of the Lords
Battles, Judge. 7.20.
The Sword of the Lord, and of Gedeon. The Lord first, and then Gedeon. Gedeon
may be the instrument, the hand to atchieve; but God the Cause, God the Guider
and Director of the Stroke.

And as the King casts down His Crown before the Lord, Let the People cast
themselves down before the King. They that lift up their hands against Him in
public Rebellion, or their Tongues in murmur against his commands, or their
Hearts in disobedient and discontented thoughts, are as ill Subjects to God as
to the King. You need not ask, Whom have they resisted? St. Paul tells you,
Romans 13.2.
They have resisted the Ordinance of God; for Non est He has his power from
God, His Office is Gods Ordinance, His person dignified by Him too. Constitui
Te; I have set Thee up, which is the Kings Exaltation, my second point. 2 Thee.


When our Savior rebuked the unruly Wind and Sea, the Disciples askd with
wonder, Math. 8.27.
Who is this whom both Elements of Air and Water obey? If any enquire who he
is before whom God has prostrated the obedience of of his people, by whom he
calmeth the uproare of the multitude, And strivings of the people; Psalm. 18.8.
He can be no other then the Man whom the King of Kings was pleased to honor
above all the rest. He may be greater then all the Rulers of the Earth, the
Lord Christ, but less He cannot be then the Lords Anointed. He may well be
that Lord unto whom the Lord said, Psalm. 110.1.
sit Thou on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool, (for
the Text naturally bears it) but meaner He cannot be, then the Man of Gods
right hand, Psalm. 80.17.
whom he has set up and made so strong for Himself and for His purposes.

It was an Argument of Gods mercy and care of the World, that though the
Apostasy of Mankind deserved in justice a final d^ssolu^ion whereby all things
might have reverted into their first Chaos, yet in the very Act of His
displeasure when He dissipated those who in the building of Babel cast up a
Mound against Heaven, and raised a work to assault Him in his Throne, He
appointed a Ruler over every People, Eccle. 17.15
when He divided the Nations. Co^mon-wealths without their Governor were like
Ships without an Helm, in danger to strike upon the Sand or break upon the
Rocks. The King is the States Pilot, and His Law the Compass. By Him are we
kept safe from Enemies, who by invasion might break in upon us from abroad, and
by Him defended from Domesticke quarrels in which by falling foul on one
another, our Fortune might be broken into nothing. Sheep without a Shepherd,
and Water without a Bank, and a Body without an Head are Emblemes of a State
without a King. The King is the Head, the People the Body. He is the Shepherd,
they the Sheep. Homer. Iliad.
Homer calls Menelaus (...). And Moses beseeches God to appoint a man over the
Congregation, Number. 27.16.
least they should be like Sheep without a Shepherd. Lastly, as Saint John
says, Aquae sunt populi. Rev. 17.15.
The people are as an inundation of Water, like the waves for number, and for
noise, and would resemble the wild disorder of a wrought Sea (for David joins
the Noise of the waves, Psalm. 65.7.
and the madness of the people together:) did not the King by his Authority
limit their inconstant motion. So necessary is a King, even as Cujus usus non
minor inter homines quam ignis, aquae, solis and Aeris, Calv. Instit. lib. 4.
cap. 20. Lam. 4.20.
Air to our Breath; It Is Calvin's expression, and a true one. The Prophet
Jeremy calls Him the Breath of our Nostrils.

There is nothing which more clearly demonstrates the God of Order, then the
subordinate Government of the Kingdoms of the Earth. Nor does any form of
Government come so near His Own, which is the Archetype, the first and best
pattern of all others; as the Monarchall, when a state is governed by a King
as sole Commander over all. For in this singularity of power, that person who
is (...), the lively Image of God, will some way represent the Unity of his
Maker too. Therefore Gerson defines Dominion, that it is a Sovereign Rule
eommitted to One, Regnum describitur, Gerson part. 2. de Origin, Iur. and leg.
Aristot.
quod est Politia sub uno Bono, Which Aristotle confesses to be the most
Divine and Ancient kind of Gubernation. Vetustissima and Divinissima Regis
gubernatio. Search the whole volume of holy Writ, from Moses to the Judges, and
from them to the Kings, and tell me whether you find more then One
successively designed by God to be the Prince and Ruler of the people. Indeed
there is good natural reason for it. Should the Account of time be regulated,
not by the Sun alone who is the Prince and Monarch of the Sky, but by the
joint Motion of the other Planets, which were a kind of Oligarchy; or by the
Stars of the first Magnitude which are Optimates Coeli the Peers of Heaven,
and were an Aristocracy; what disorder would then creep into our Calendar? But
how great would that Confusion prove, if those Gregarian sparks, those Plebeian
lesser Stars, which people the Sky, and only glimmer by that Contribution
of Light which they receive from the greater Luminaries, should have a
predominant influence upon our Seasons? To prevent therefore such irregular
mischief, the Creator gave the rule of the Day to the Sun alone* And He who
kindled that Glorious light in the Firmament, Set up also the King to govern
by the splendor of his Authority upon Earth, as being the Light of our Israel,
2 Samuel 21.17
and Gods Lieutenant; or (so Plato calls Him) as God amongst Men, Plato in
Polit.
(...).

Nor only amongst the people of God, but in all other Nations of the world was
the Authority at first singly invested in the King, if you will believe Justin
the Historian. Principio rerum gentium nationumque imperium penes Reges erat.
Justin. Hist. lib. 1.
And though Livy reports that Regum imperium grave visum est, Livius. Dec. 2.
lib. 1.
and Vnius Dominatio populo Romano displicuit, the Romans disliked their
Government under One, and thought they should do better to put the command of
the Commonwealth from a King to a Senate, or to Consuls, yet (as Gregorius
Tholosanus well observes) in a very short time they dearly repented the error
of their alteration. Gregor. Tholo^an. Syntag. jur. lib. 47. ca. 17 n. 1.
Magna vis necessitatis urgentis quae etiam superbissimos cogat stultitiam suam
fateri and aliquando resipiscere. For not nine years after, upon the
insurrection of Manlius Octavius, one of Tarquins Race, (...). Plutarch. in
Camillo.
they were forced to put the Government to one again, whom they styled
Dictatour, who was indeed a Monarch for his time, freely and absolutely
commanding all: for so is his Office described by the writers of the Grecian
affairs, as Gregor. Tholos. observes, (...).

It Is true that once in the Carthaginian war against Hannibal, Polyb. Hist.
lib. 3.
the giddy multitude made two Dictatours, Minutius Rufus and Fabius Maximus.
Plutarch. in Fabio Max.
But upon the loss of that part of the Army which was led by Minutius, whose
pride and rashness by dividing himself from the counsels or help of his
Colleague, hazarded the whole Commonwealth, they would have no more Dictatours
then Fabius. Nor did they ever after ordain more then one; even until the
time of Julius Caesar who retained the style of perpetual Dictatour, reducing
the Roman Government according to the first form into one Hand, only
exchanging the title of King into Emperor.

I add no more of this: Plutarch tells us, that in perilous times nothing so
much conduces to the safety of a State then Si unus in principatu una
sententia and libera, (...). Plutarch. in Camillo.
and impuni magistratu fungeretur (so Gregor. Tholosanus renders him.) That one
only exercised a free independent and uncontrol'd Authority over all. Whereas
commands depending upon diverse votes beget distraction and ruin. And as this
course prevents war, so it best conserves peace; Pacis interest omnem
Potestatem ad unum transferri. Tacit. Hist. lib. 1.
Indeed if there be but one soul to inform the natural body, why should
there be more then one to rule the body of a State? In the predominance of the
will or the fantasy, or the affections, or the passions, above reason which
should be Sovereign, we see what a distracted Man is made. Is it not the same
in a State? when phantasticke or wilful or turbulent spirits rise up to
contradict their Prince, and disturb a Realm? I shut up this Point, in the
conclusion of Tacitus; Tacitus Annal. 1.
Unum imperii corpus unius animo regendum videtur. It Is best to trust the care
of the Kingdom to that one whom God has appointed over it. I have set thee
over the Nations, and over the Kingdoms, which imports the Latitude of His
Power, and is my third point.

It was an old complaint, 3. Over the Nations.
that ill Glosses corrupted good Laws. Those perversions have long since crept
into the Book of God, and men's particular interests have distorted the Texts
thereto their own practices. This Scripture has not escaped the Rack of some
Interpretations which would strain it to authorize an Universal Monarchy, and
others who from this foundation would raise the Popes Supremacy above Kings.

For the first, I deny not the words taken in their primitive meaning import an
Universal Sovereignty; But it is in Him only whose Inheritance is the
Heathen, Psalm. 2.8.
whose title is King of Kings; that is the Son of God, Rev. 19.16.
for (...), Psa. 103.19.
His Kingdom rules over all. But to extend this to any son of Man, is
contrary to Gods purpose, and above man's capacity. When Nebuchadnezzar is
termed King of Kings, Dan. 2.37.
it is in respect of the many Tribu^ary Kings under him. Quia multis and magnis
Regibus imperabat; Per^rius in Dan. 2.
And when Cyrus professes, Ezra. 1.2.
The Lord of Heaven and Earth had given him all the Kingdoms of the Earth; All
is taken Synecdochically, for the Greatest or the Most. Genesis 14.1.
So though Tidal be called King of the Nations, he was only King of the
Scythians. But where this style is left indefinite and absolute, it belongs
only to Christ. If then such a one as Salmander, call himself, Omnipotent:
Drexel. Prodrom. Eternit. cap. 1.
or the Emperor of Bisnega delight to be styled, Magnarum Provinciarum Deus,
Dominus Orientis, Austri, Septentrionis, Occidentis and Maris, The God of great
Provinces, Lord of the four quarters of the Earth and of the Sea; or the
Persian, Frater Solis and Lunae, siderum particeps, Brother to the Sun and
Moon, Kinsman to the Stars: or Solomon the Turkish Emperor, Lord of Lords;
I shall not much wonder: These are such who in their timpanous excrescent
Titles imitate Him of whom the Spirit of God testifies, (...), Revel. 13.4.
A mouth was given Him which spoke high Blasphemy. But if any who should know
Christ better, and understand their own limits are so excessive in their
claims, as if all the world were made for one alone (as La conveniencia de las
dos Monarquias Catolicas de la Iglesia Romana y la del Imperio Espanol. Author
Iuan de la Puente Madrid. 1612.
Iuan de Puente settles it upon the Catholic King) by assuming so much to
themselves, they detract from Christ, usurping upon his right. I deny not
diverse Kingdoms, and several Nations may be united under one Scepter. It was
a vaunt of the Roman Empire, and perhaps true enough, that Solemn utrumque
currere in imperio suo cernebat, Petrus Cunaeus de Repub. Heb. l. 1. cap. 10.
The rising and setting Sun were the extent of their Territory in the length.
But God only, is that great King, in whose hand are all the corners of the
Earth. Psalm. 95.4.
The Son of Man is Sole Lord of the Princes of the Earth: Revel. 1.5.
Unto Him the Ancient of days gives such Dominion and such a Kingdom, Dan.
7.14, 27.
that all People, Nations, and Languages, and all Powers serve and obey Him.

For the other that is the Popes Supremacy, a thing not dreamed of in the
Churches purer times; it is a pride ill comporting with the Mitre, and much
mis-becomming Peter's Successor. If Christ disliked the strife for precedence
amongst the Disciples, Luke 22.26.
determining the controversy so, that he who made himself Least, was by Him
reputed Highest; we may well conclude, that Princeps Apostolorum, Prince of the
Apostles, was an attribute never begot in His purpose, nor formed in his
School. In what Luciferian forge then may we believe that style of Princeps
Regum, Lord of Kings and Disposer of Kingdoms, was shaped? If the Master allow
not his Apostles to quarrel amongst themselves for Place, can we think, he
likes that the Apostolical See should justle with His Anointed for the
upper-hand? whereas Pindarus could say, that (...), Pindar.
Kings are the Highest upon Earth; and a better Author, Super Imperatorem non
est nisi Deus qui fecit Imperatorem, God only here is above the Emperor. And
yet He who is Servus Servorum, A Servant of Servants in nothing but his Name,
has by his aequivocall practice long attempted the lifting up his Triple Mitre
above the Crown (as Neptune once his Trident above Jupiter:) And whenever He
lists to abuse the Throne, by setting his own Chair where that should stand;
He will abuse Scripture to make it good. If He list to play at Football with
Crowns, spurning them into what Gole he pleases, as once Celestin. 4. settled
the Crown, and then kicked it off the Emperor Henry 6. head. He has an Omnia
sub jecisti pedibus ejus, for his warrant, Thou have put all things under his
feet. Psalm. 8.7.
If He will make the neck of the King his footstool, as Alexander 3. used the
Emperor Frederick Barbarossa at Venice; he quotes the Psalm for it, Thou
shall tread the young Lion and the Dragon under thy feet. Psalm. 90.13.
If he desire to lift up his own Candlestick made of the Alchymy of swelling
Ambition and Avarice, wrought by the Jesuits, the best Chemists of the world,
enchased and imbossed by the Canonists with titles of the richest Blasphemy
which the tongue of men or devils could devise, Dominus Deus noster Papa,
Extravagant. Johan. xxii. Tit. 14. verbo Declaremus.
Our Lord God the Pope, and Theses Caraffae d^dica^^ Paulo Quinto vice-Deo.
Neapol. Excus. 1609. Revel. 1.12.
Vice-God; One who Non obstante jure Divino, in despite of Gods Law does what
he lists: I say, if he desire to set his counterfeit Candlestick higher then any
of the Seven Golden Candlesticks, and then make his own dim Candle, (whose
modest light ought To shine in good works before men) blaze like a Comet to out
shine the lights of Earth, and vie with the Host of Heaven for Luster, he can
find Text for that too: so did Innocent III. from Gods creating Two Lights,
one to rule the day, Genesis 1.16.
the other to rule the night, and blushes not to make Himself the Greater. So
that whereas Christ whose Vicar he calls himself, is content with the style of
(...), The Star of the morning* Revel. 22.16
no proportion of light, nor measure of brightness will serve as Emblem of his
Power, but the Sun. Not to trouble you farther: if he desire to pare the
Authority of Princes, and make the King his Subject, He will with Boniface 8.
and John 22 pervert this very Text, I have set Thee over the Nations and
Kingdoms.

The note is altered much since the days of Gregory the great, He (as He
acknowledges to Theotista the Emperor Mauritius his sister) took his
Bishopric then as a Donative from the Emperor, Grego. Epist. 5.
Ecce Serenissimus Dominus Imperator fieri jussit. He was pleased to make him
so. Now in requital, his Successor takes upon him to make the Emperor.
Formerly, the Pope was wont to begin His letters to Kings with this salutation,
Salutem in eo per quem Reges regnant, Health and safety be to you in Him by
whom Kings reign; now he salutes in his Gratiam and Apostolicam Benedictionem.
own Name, for he takes on him to dispose the Kingdom, and command the King.
It was not so from the beginning; Aaron the High Priest never quarrelled with
Moses for the place, but obeyed him in all things, as Prince and Ruler. 1 King.
2 35
And Solomon exercised his authority upon Abiathar, thrusting him from his
Priesthood, and bestowing it upon Zadoc. Indeed the best Popes ever submitted
to the Regal Authority; and one of them gives the reason Eleutherius by name,
who in an Epistle of his, written to King Lucius, Antiquit. Britannic. page 5.
in Margin.
sometimes King of this Island, (which Epistle is recorded amongst the Laws of
Edward the Confessor) tells him, Vicarius vero Dei estis in regno, He was
within his own Kingdom Gods Vicar, set up with absolute power to govern the
Person and the Place, Church as well as State; which is the just meaning of
being Set over Nations and Kingdoms.

But much of your wonder concerning the Popes Ambition will be taken off, when
you shall know the Consistory to be a Competitour in the Canvase for
Superiority above Kings. S^ecan. de Discipline. Eccles. p. 456
Quotquot Christi aut Ecclesiae nomine censeri volunt, Disciplinae sese
subjiciant. As many as are Members of Christ, and of His Church, must subject
themselves to the Consistorian Discipline, Non hic excipitur Episcopus aut
Imperator? Nulla hic acceptio aut exceptio personarum. ibi. B^za. De Presbyt.
page 124.
neither Emperor nor Bishop excepted. And Beza is as zealous as he in the
cause; Quis tandem Reges aut Principes? etc. Who shall exclude Kings or Princes
from this Non Humana sed Divina dominatione; not Humane, but Divine domination
of the Presbytery?

Nay some of this rigid Sect have gone so far, that as the scornful Bramble
in the Parable of Io^ham scratcht and contended with the Better Trees for the
Kingdom, Judge. 9.15.
they make the people scramble with their Prince for priori^y, and carry it
too; Iun. Brutus Vindic. contra Tyrannos quest. 3. Buchanan. de Iure regni.
Populus potior Rege. And another, Populus Rege praestantior etiam and major,
Populi in legibus ferendis summa potestas. Lex Rege, Populus lege potentior.
The People greater and better then the King. The Law above the King, the People
above the Law. Read they that list, they are the words of Buchanan. I know I
may take up the Prophets words in this particular, Habac. 1.5.
I tell you a wonder, which many whilst they hear will not believe. But it is
an undeniable truth. Let the Allegations I have produced out of their own
Books testify for me, that I slander them not. Whence you may plainly
discern, that these two jarring extremes, Papacy and Presbytery, whose faces
stand contrary to each other, whose opinions are opposite as the sides of the
Diameter, meet in this one Ecliptic line, to darken the Authority of Gods
Anointed; To pluck Him down, and hold Him under whom God has set over Nations
and Kingdoms, to Root out, and to pull down, to Destroy and throw down, to
Build and to Plant; which is the Exercise of his Regal Power, and my last part.

When I consider the Majesty of a King, his spreading Titles, 4. To Root out,
and pull down. to Build, and to Plant. Dan. 4.8. P^al. 82.6.
like Nebuchadnezzars Tree whose forehead touched the Clouds, whose style
reaches Divinity; For God Himself has said, They are Gods: When I consider
the extent of his Command, and the subjects of His Power, I cannot but conclude
with Livy, Livius li. 26.
Regnum res inter Deos hominesque pulcherrima, A Kingdom is the most excellent
thing in the eyes of God or men. But when I consider the disquiet, the frequent
toil and daily disturbance to which a King is submitted, I may with another
vary the style, Potentia quid est aliud quam speciosa molestia? Ludovicus Vives.
Dominion is nothing but a glorious trouble. They that only look upon the
glittering matter of a Diadem, and the Luster of the Jewels set in it, may
apprehend somewhat to delight the eye: but could they understand how many cares
are lodged and concentred within the Pale and Circle of that Crown, I may in
the words of a great King say, They scarce would take it for the wearing,
though it lay in their way. It was (no doubt) a sad Experience which wrung
those words from Caesar's mouth, when you would name a Mass of cares and
crosses, Cogita Caesarem, Think upon Caesar. We who are shrubs, and in the
humble valley of a private life, shroud our obscure heads, hear not the loud
Tempests nor feel those incessant storms which beat upon the Cedar; whose
exalted top raises him nearer to the lightening and rage of the upper Element.
We who sit within our own thresholds and under our own Vines, are not sensible
of every noise and danger which threatens a State. Post upon Post, Micah. 4.4.
Ier. 51.31.
and Messenger after Messenger run to advertise the King, and whosoevers
Midnight is interrupted by the news, Ours can complain of no disturbance. We
therefore who enjoy the blessing of His shelter, and reap the fruits of His
Care, whose trouble is to confirm our quiet, and whose broken sleeps, (as
Epaminondas once told his Soldiers) are to procure our sounder rest; were
there no command of God, nor tie of Religion which should enjoyne us to obey
and love Him whom He has set over us, might think our selves bound to yield
Him these duties, as largely merited in the pains He takes to support our
good, and his continual labor to effect that Peace which we more freely taste
then He. I may justly use that speech which once the Poet to Augustus, Ovid.
Trist. l. 2.
No^ tibi contingunt quae gentibus otia praestas


Man is borne to labor, says Job, The very Bread he eats is molded with the
toil of his hand, Job 5.7.
and macerated with the sweat of his brow. And truly if we observe it, this
bread of carfulness is served up to the Kings Board as part of his Diet. This
Text will show you of what grains it is made up, and with what labor kneaded;
as if God had translated the First Man's Curse, into the Best Man's Office. You
have heard of Swords broken into Plowshares, Esai 2.4.
and Spears into Sithes; I can from hence tell you of Spades and Pruning Hooks
turned into Scepters. Adams Husbandry is a Type of the Kings Office. Adam was
set to dig and dress the ground; Genesis 3.23.
so is the King, to Root out and to Plant, to cast down, and Build. Houses are
indeed Epitomes of Kingdoms, and Gardens Models of Commonwealths. When God
speaks of a Nation or Kingdom to build and plant it, Ierem. 18.9.
the King is both his Over-seer and Actour. He is (...), like a faithful
Architect, He builds up the walls of his Jerusalem, and repaires the breaches
of Sion, that so he may secure all from the searching drifts of fraud, or gusts
of open violence. Nor is He Cementarius only, but in a sense Hortulaenus too.
His Office has in it (...), somewhat of the dressing of a Garden or husbanding
ground. Let not the Comparison seem vile; God Himself accepts it. He is (...)
(says Christ) the Husbandman, John 15.1. 1 Cor. 3.9.
and we (...) His husbandry. He sowed us in the bed of Nature, and will reap
us in Glory hereafter. He plants us in our several vocations, and by the
irrigation of His grace quickens our Root, and our Leaf, our faith, and our
works which are the germination and fruit of that faith. Mary Magdalen mistook
Christ for the Gardener, and Saint Augustine commends her mistake. How can we
dislike the figure in his Deputy the King? when God is here pleased to express
His Office by Planting and plucking up by the Root. The disorders of the people
are the rubbish of a Land, their Vices like weeds; the Schismatic is a Thorn
in the sides of the Church, the factious a Thistle in the State. He that
desires to make a clear and flourishing Commonwealth, must cleanse the soil
from such rank weeds extirpe the Brambles, and lop off the fear boughs, else
never can any Plantation of good Morality or Religion thrive.

I need not further pursue the Metaphor. These last words present unto your
view the two Pillars upon which a Kingdom leanes, the Justice and Mercy of the
King. The one in the conservation of good Plants, and cherishing such
dispositions as are built for virtue to inhabit. These are the Duo verba laeta
(says Saint Hierom) The other in punishing the bad, Hieron. Comment. in Ierem.
1.11.
expressed in Quatuor Tristibus in four sad words, though the Septuagint sets
down but three, Septuagint.
(...)*

These Quatuor Infausta (for our Tr^nslation numbers them according to St.
Hierom and the Chaldee Paraphrase) Rooting out and pulling down, and destroying
and throwing down, comprehend the Coercive power of Christ as King. For which
cause ^xpositors illustrate this place by the Iron R^d wherewith he bruiseth
the Nations, Psalm. 2.9.
and the Sharp Sword in the Revelation. Revel. 1.16.
This Coercive power has he committed to his Deputy. And it is one of the
flowers of the Crown peculiar to his Regal Office Naturally and Regularly
exercised by the King: for by his masters warrant He bears the Sword; and
says Saint Paul, He bears it not in vain. Romans 13.4.
Indeed He should bear it in vain, did it either sleep in the Soabberd
through the slack execution of Laws; or when it should strik, were it hindered
and withheld by other hands, who as Judges of the Kings Actions countermand
that Authority which God intended as Absolute, as it is Lawful. Much more if
when it is drawn out, the edge should be turned against Him.

Arise O Sword, and smite my Shepherd, was the barbarous inhumanity used
toward Christ, Zach. 13.7^
and (I confess) oft-times since practiced upon His Vicegerent. I do not
only mean the Sword of Excommunication more frequently used by the Bishop of
Rome then his Crosyer, (At which weapon also Knox and Buchanan have showed
themselves as cunning Fencers as he) but the Material, the Criminal Sword,
And this defended as stiffely by those you scarcely would suspect. Men, who
like the mutinous Israelites, upon all occasions of pretended discontent, Exodus
32.4.
cry down Moses, and set up an Idol made out of popular Votes and
Contributions. Men who have found an arm to weild the Sword of Justice, which
God never appointed, in the manage of which irregular Authority they have
presumed to set the people on the Bench, and place the King at the Bar. Hear
it justified by one of their own pens, Buchanan. de Iur. Regn.
Rex cum ad populi judicium vocatur, Minor ad Majorem in jus vocatur when the
King is cited by the People, the less is brought in question by the greater.
Ecce iterum Buchananus, Iuvenal. Satyr.
and est mihi saepe vocandus Ad parts. This is strange stuff, which I know as
much offends you, who are dutifully met in the fear of God, and in this Holy
Place to do Honor unto His Anointed whom* He has set over you, to hear, as
me to rehearse. How much more ingenuously and mannerly do the Jesuits deal
with Princes then these kinds of men? Suarius in his Book written against our
late learned Sovereign; Post quam Rex legitime constitutus est supremam habet
potestatem in his omnibus ad quae illa^ accepit, etiamsi a Populo illam
acceperit. Suarius Defens. Fid. Cathol. lib. 3. cap. 3.
Admit the King were made by the people, (as it is quite otherwise, He is
constituted by God,) yet being made, he has an absolute independent and
unquestionable Authority over the People. And Mariana thus writes, Johan.
Mariana de Rege and Reg. Inst. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Adjuncta est Regia Majestas quasi Multitudinis Custos. The King is that Person
unto whom God has committed the charge and custody of the people. A truth
which ye have the more reason to value, since it comes from their pens whom you
all know to have been none of the best friends to Sovereignty. 1 Esdr. 4.41
But Magna est veritas; Great is the truth every where, and great this truth
which extorts consent from these, and will evict it from all, but such who
praeposterous to Gods order and method will needs read this Text backward,
turning the heels to Heaven, the head to Earth, whiles they go about to
whelme the Kingdom over the King; and set the Nations, that is, the people,
above Him whom God has set over them. I have set Thee over Nations and
Kingdoms.

Application
I have done with the Text, and should here end. But your expectation, and the
duty I owe to this Day, require some just Commemoration from me. Here therefore
my Ecce turns to you, who in your relation to the Text are concerned with the
King. If I have hitherto spoken of a King, is he King for his own sake or for
yours? No, the Text tells, he is Super vos constitutus, He is set over you. As
God then has given him the Kingdom, so he has given you the King, Vobis
datus est; and in that gift, as he has Crowned the King with a Crown of Gold,
he has Crowned you with a Garland of Peace. There was a time, when there was
no King in Israel: Judge. 17.6.
would you know the Character of that time? Every man did what was good in his
own eyes. No Law then but Lust and Will the Rule of each ones Actions: Might,
armed with injury and violence, made the weaker Subjects, and outrage was
authorized by the power of the Actour. Think, how beyond all expression
miserable your case were, should the anger of God cause those times to revert
upon you. When barbarous Rapes and ho^rid Massacres, (cries wherewith your
ears have never been acquainted) should sound in every corner of your City.
Here then begin your thanks to God, that to prevent all these mischiefs, He
has given you a King.

And now, as God once said to Moses in the top of Mount Pisgah, let me say to
you, Deuteronomy. 3.27.
Lift up your eyes Westward, and Northward, and Southward, and Eastward. Look
upon any other parts of the World which are governed without a King; or where
there is a King, yet so abridgd in his Authority that He is, as it were in
Wardship to a Senate or some such Supervisors, in Saint Paul's phrase Under
Tutours and Governors, Gal. 4.2.
and from the manifest inconveniences which Plurality of Rulers has produced
in the World (for They are a punishment to a Land) learn to prize your own
happiness under one Ruler, Prove. 28.2.
as he in Homer, (...), Homer. Iliad. 2.
and to pray that those may never be Masters of their will, who would subject
either Him or you to then Tumultuous Parity. Look forth yet once more upon
Kingdoms governed by forms Monarchall and Absolute as yours; and think
whether Talem Constituit; whither God has set such a one over them as over
you. Whether the People (in David's words) are in such a case as you, Psalm.
145.15
free to the exercise of true Religion, and quietly enjoying every man his own;
and from these steps you will find cause abundant to raise the measure and to
multiply the acts of your thankesgiving to Almighty God, and to say, He has
not dealt so with any other Nation. Psalm. 147.20
When in the grateful apprehension of these blessings, you have applied unto
your selves what I have now said, I shall most properly apply all other
circumstances of this Text, both to the Day, and to the Person in whose honor
it is solemnized.

I may indeed justly take up the words of our Savior in the Gospel, Luke 4.21.
This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears.

Fifteen years are now fully run out since God who Takes away, and sets
up Kings, Dan. 2.21.
did with one hand both take from us and restore. He translated one King into
his own Kingdom, and established another upon this Throne. Thus Dominus dedit,
Job 1.21.
Dominus abstulit. The Lord gave, and the Lord took away, Blessed be the Name
of the Lord. This very day was our Sky darkened, and by the setting of a Sun
ever Glorious and Memorable in his Race, an unnatural midnight threatened us
even at Noone day, for then He fell; yet I may truly say, Sol occubuit, nox
nulla secuta est: though that Light was taken from our eyes, no night ensued;
for a New Light kindled out of His Ashes began to shine upon us, and that
Stella de Jacob in a good sense, That Star of Jacob, who was risen long
before, and (though at some distance) sparkled in our hopes, now increasing in
the proportion of his light, appeared as he drew near a perfect Sun, in our
Zodiac. Where ever since He has happily run; and may he there long continue
in Himself, and longer in His Posterity, even whilst the Sun and Moon in the
Firmament continue their Motion and Light. That so this Hodie in my Text may
bear toward Him some part of that signification which it does to Christ his
Master, whose yesterday and to day is for ever.

This day has God set Him up, and Over Nations and Kingdoms, literally so.
Gregor. Tholosan. Synta. Iur. lib. 6. cap. 7. n. 6.
Those who are well read in the School of Honor, and have taken the Altitude
of Princes Titles, define four Dukedomes to the making of a Kingdom, and
four Earledomes to each of them. How God has magnified that sacred Person
whom He has set over you, may be discerned in the number of His Realms. Under
His Scepter are Several Kingdoms, and shall I say different Nations? or
rather, what more commends the skill and confirms the greatness of the
Builder, Two of Them by Union made One: According to that of the Prophet,
Faciam eos in gentem unam. Ezekiel. 37 22.
I will make them one Nation. How that Cement which combined them is now grown
loose, or that distance appears to make them look like Two again, becomes not
me to dispute. I will rather pray that He who is the Great Peacemaker may in
his good time close the rupture, and as our Gracious Sovereign has by all
means endeavored their Re-uniting (in this according to the Text truly
Cementarius) So in the return to their Obedience unto Him, They may be rendered
One with Us again. Only this, with much joy I must take leave to say; That
what ever else occasions the difference, Religion cannot be the Cause. It was
blasphemously spoken by Rabshakeh: 2 Kin. 1.10
Let not thy God deceiv^ thee in whom thou trustest. In all Christian modesty I
say to you, Let not any on whose trust you rely, Those who undertake to speak
from God, deceive you by persuading This to be the Cause. I appeal to their
own Conscience, if they dare be tried by truth, whether in any One Fundamental
point our Church has shrunk from the Orthodox Faith, or fallen nearer to
Popery Now then at the first Reformation. Our Sacraments as then, so now
administered, that no jealousy of Romish Superstition or slighting profanation
can taint either Him that Gives, or those that Receive. Our Ceremonies the
same, and Those much praised and indeed admired by learned Bucer in his Censure
passed upon the English Liturgy, Bucer. Scrip. Anglic. page 456. Basil. 1577.
at the request of Archbishop Cranmer, Egi gratias Deo qui dedisset vobis has
Caeremonias eo puritatis reformare: nec enim quicquam in illis deprehendi quod
non sit ex verbo Dei desumptum, aut saltem ei non adversetur commode acceptum.
Calvin. Epist. 200. Anglis Francfordiens.
And by Calvin earnestly commended to those English who sled to Frankeford,
whom he exhorts to Conform. And as he persuades them, to be less Rigid, Vos
ultra modum rigidos esse nolim; so He professes that himself would become more
moderate; and if ever he lived to Print his works anew, correct those
asperities which gave offense. Calvin. de libero Arbitrio contra Pighium.
citat. a Spalatensi lib. 7. cap. 12. page 318.
Hoc quoque non gravatim agnosco. Nos, si quando recudantur opera nostra, quae
rudiora erant expolire, mitigare quae asperius dicta, etc. Denique in quibus
offensionis periculum veremur, moderari etiam and mitigare.

Quod ad formulam Precum and Rituum Ecclesiasticorum valde probo ut certa illa
extet, a qua Pastoribus in sua functione discedere non liceat. Calvin. Epist.
ad Protector. Angliae. 87.
Lastly, our Book of Common Prayer whose Form for the general is according to
Mr. Calvin's own Rule, in his Epistle to the L. Protector of England Settled and
Constant: whose particular Matter, by Bucer, Peter Martyr, and other learned
Divines who lived in the Time of the Reformation, was approved as a work beyond
Exception, every way consonant to the Word of God. Bucer. loc. cit. cap. 1.
In descriptione Communionis and Quotidianarum Precum nihil video in Libro esse
descriptum, quod non sit ex Divinis Literis desumptum, si non ad verbum, ut
Psalmi and Lectiones, tamen sensu, ut Collectae. For which cause he exhorts,
that with all religious care it should be retained and vindicated from neglect.
Religione igitur summa retinenda erit and vindicanda haec ceremonia. This I
say, continues not varied from the second Service Book of King Edward VI. but
in some Two Circumstances; One in the Litany, where somewhat is left out; Act
for Uniformiry of Common Prayer.
the Other in the Communion, where somewhat is added, as the Act before our own
declares. And therein, Those very words, whose omission in the last Printed
Service Books occasioned so much Cavil, are justly the same with King Edward
the Sixths Service Book of the first Edition.

If any doubt the truth of what I deliver, let their own Eye resolve them. It
was St. Paul's commendation of the Berans, Act. 17^11.
that they took not things upon trust, but themselves searched to see if they
were so indeed. I would feign commend their Example to you, who if you can be
content so to do, you will neither be misperswaded by any who for their own ends
suggest apparent falsehoods, nor prejudicate those who contradict them.

You see the Latitude of the Kings Domination considered in the Subjects,
Nations and Kingdoms. Will you see in what manner He has exercised His Power
over Them? And here I appeal to all: Under what Kings Scepter has been
greater care taken to prevent Divisions and weed Faction out of the Church?
Witness that Declaration of his Majesty which banished those abstruse
controversies concerning Gods Decrees of Election or Reprobation from the
Pulpit. Themes, which only filled the Hearers with scruples, and sent them
home with fears; Teaching by it busy men to preach Christ as they ought, not
Themselves, by venting their dangerous wit or Spleen. Or when has more
sedulitie been used to remove all scandalous Rubbish out of the State, which
ill morality or lawless abuse of local custom had contracted? When held
Distributive Justice (which Plato terms (...), the Prop of Kingdoms) a more
equal Balance, to give every man his own? Or when has Criminal Justice
been tempered with more Mercy? It was a just complaint of Draco'es Laws in
Lacedaemonia, that their Execution was as bloody as their Character, for they
were written in Bloody Letters: And the Romans lamented the cruelty of those
Tribunals where the cheap Proscription of Lives made the Judgment Seat little
differ from a Shambles: Amos 2.6.
Poor men sold for shoos (so the Prophet.) Or as the Turks to this day sell
heads, so many for an Asper. If there be (as I would hope otherwise) any such
amongst us, who make such low account of men's lives, that they destroy, where
they might Build hopes of amendment; or Pluck up by the Root, where they need
but pare the Leaf: If there be any who in discharge of such places are
governed more by Custom then Conscience, who take dark Circumstance and lame
surmise for Evidence, rashly giving Sentence, and as precipitately proceeding
to Execution, Let their own Souls run the fearful hazard of this Account.
They learn it not from Him who placed them on the Tribunal, whose Sword has
seldom been wet with striking Offenders, and scarcely unsheathed against
those who brought themselves within the reach of His Coercive Justice. I may
well apply that of Seneca, By practicing so long upon his Patience, Eum docent
esse crudelem, qui discere non potest, They have whetted and provoked Him to a
Severity, which He has been most unwilling to put in Execution.

Now for the Conservative part of His Office, expressed in these Terms, To
Build, and to Plant: whether you take Building Materially or Morally, in both
these sens^s has He been and still is a Glorious Builder. Nor will I carry you
far off for instance. As the Disciples to Christ concerning the Temple of
Jerusalem, Mark. 18.1.
so let me say to you, (...), See the Materials for the re-edifying of this
Mother Church, of which should I say nothing, the Timber would cry, Et Saxa
loquentur, and the very stones speak. Did any Eye within these few years hope
to behold this neglected Temple (like Sion in her mournful widdowhood sitting
in the Dust) trimmed up like a fresh Bride? Her wrinckled face guttered with
the tears of her decay, and furrowed by the injury of Time, made smooth
again, Her ragged garments changed into costly robes. Need I tell you who has
put upon her, Beauty for Dust and Rubbish, and a face of Repair for Ruin? Is
it not the zeal of our most gracious Jehoash? who has not only (as King
Iehoash) said, Go out into the Cities of Judah, and gather of all Israel
money, 2 Chr. 24.5
to repair the House of God, but set them a pattern in His Own Munificence; Is
it not His zeal, and the Care of his Pious Iehoiaeda the High Priest? who has
faithfully Stewarded the cheerful Contributions of the Princes and all the
People, verse. 10.
and (what I mention to your Reputation) Your Benevolence to the advancement of
this Good work performed to God, and to His House.

verse. 16.
I can refer you to other Walls then These, of differing Matter, and quite
another Station; whose Foundations are laid not in the Hills, Psalm. 86.1^
(as the Psalmist spoke of Jerusalem) but in the Floods. I do not here cry
out in the Poets wonder, Quanti montes volvuntur aquarum! what Hills of water
roll there? but what a Royal Navy (for Number and Burden far exceeding
all which preceded Him) to bestride and mount the tops of those foaming
Billows? what Mountains of Oak upon those Watery Mountains? what Wooden
Castles to keep the Ocean in awe? like strong Walls and Bulwarks to repel
those Adversaries, who have long made this Kingdom the aim of their Ambition
and Revenge. V. Chalcondil. Mart. Crusi^. in Turco-Graec. and Archiepiscop.
Mytelen. de capt. Constant.
It was the Grecians Obloquie, indeed the Loss of the whole Empire, that at
the Siege of Constantinople they would not help their Emperor Constantinus
Palaeologus with money, either to provide Ammunition, or pay Soldiers to Man
the Walls; A.D. 1453 29. Maii.
by which defect that famous City was left to the pillage of Mahomet, and
their incomparable wealth enriched the Turks, a very small portion whereof
timely afforded had saved all, and rescued themselves from slavery. It will be
much for your Honor that in succeeding Times History may not have cause to
report you men of such narrow hearts or Close hands; And let it be your present
Comfort, that, like good Patriots for your Countries safety, you have
contributed to the Building and Manning of those Wooden Walls; which unless
they be able to keep off an Enemy, You flatter your selves in vain to think
that yours at home can do it.

Finally, for his Moral Building, I may boldly affirm, That for all the
virtues requisite to the making up of a most complete Prince, and the Example
of such a Life wherein the blackest fangs of detraction (though dared to speak
their worst) can find nothing to traduce or fasten on, No one (Consult your
Chronicles) I say no One has more fairly Edified, then He whom God has set
over You. With how much truth may I apply to Him the Poets Complement to
Augustus?

Ovid. Trist. lib. 2.
Vrbs quoque Te, and rerum lassat tutela tuarum,
Et Morum, similes quos cupis esse Tui.
He has as Gloriously Reigned over you in His Example, as in His Care. And to
the whole World approved Himself as Great a King in Virtue, as in Title; In
every particular, making good that Rule, Sit Exemplo major qui est authoritate
Maximus. Whether I look on his Oeconomick Relations as Husband, Father, or
indeed as a good Man: Or whether I mention his solid Wisdom, and clear
Judgment, able to steer the Counsels, and direct the most prudent Ministers
of State in His Affairs: Or his undaunted Courage (for as God has given Him a
strong and Active Body, so He has matched it with as Active a Mind) not sparing
to adventure His own Person where the safety of His People required. And thus,
-- Monstrat tolerare labores, Non jubet, He has not only commanded others
upon danger, but lead them on Himself: Or His excellent Moderation and
Patience, not apt to be wrought into easy heat or rash effect of Passion: Or
the Humility of His Disposition made up of Titus his Affability accessible to
the meanest Suitors who come to solicit Him, and at all times more like a
Father then a Master to those about Him: Or His singular Integrity, in which He
may acquit Himself as righteous Samuel once did, Bear record of me before
the Lord, whom have I done wrong to, or whom have I hurt, 1 Samuel 12.3.
or of whose hand have I received any Bribe to blind my Eyes? making His
Justice, not His Power, the rule of what He does. For Nescit posse quod posse
non debet, He will not know the use of his Authority, but where Religion and
Right make his Commands legitimate.

Let me not here omit the Regular distribution of his Time, for his Exercise,
for his Meals, through the whole Course of his Life never guilty of the least
intemperance. It Is that which Solomon holds worth the noting: Blessed art thou,
Eccles. 10.17.
O Land, when thy Princes eat in due season, for strength, not for excess. But
above all, (that indeed which crowns the rest,) The Regularity of his
Devotions, used by Him with such Reverence and Constancy, that He has made the
Court Canonical by His hours. Twice every Day, and openly presenting Himself
in Gods Service, as if He meant by his own practice to demonstrate before His
Household, a Text much like the Apostles Rule, 2 These. 3.10
He that will not Pray, let him not Eat.

I am not to learn, that in such Arguments as these, men's ears are commonly
so obstructed with prejudice, Truth can hardly find Admittance; The supposed
Ends of the Speaker, or flattery of the Object are the ordinary excuses to
divert their belief. But this must not prohibit me to speak, nor should it
make you loath to hear. I do not forget Where I am, or Whose Errand I deliver.
This is no place to give Titles to Men, but to give Honor to God. Yet I must
tell you, when there is so much Justice in the Cause, and so much Merit in the
Person, and such an Opportunity as this to warrant, and my Conscience to bear
Record, that in the Attestation of Saint Paul, I speak the truth in Christ,
Romans 9.1.
I lie not. For it is not Quod Audivimus, but Quod vidimus, I take not up on
hearesay, my own Attendance has long and often made me an Eyewitness, and I
thank God that I have seen it. I say, for me on these terms to be silent,
were to prevaricate against the Truth; and for you not to desire to hear it,
were to declare your selves most unthankful to God, who has blessed you with so
Religious and Just a King.

I might add a great deal more: But as the Person I speak of needs not, so
all I can deliver, falls short, and rather Darkens then Sets Him forth. I will
therefore in the last Place, for all the virtues His Example has Planted
amongst you, for His sincere endeavors to continue (like a true Nursing Father
of His Church) the Religion planted in It, Esa. 49.23.
Exhort you to Pray, that for our sins God deprive not us too soon, of so rich
a Blessing, by Taking Him away. For if there be any (as I am far from the
belief) who love not to hear Him praised; I hope they may well like to hear
Him Prayed for. Pray therefore for the Life of the King, Ezra 6.10.
and of his Sons: Pray for Him, and for His Plants, The Pledges of our future
Peace; That God will bless Him in His Gracious Queen, and Her happy Fruits,
In His Root, and in His Branch, Deuteronomy. 28.3.
In the City, and in the Field. Let all who rise up against Him be Covered with
shame and ruin, Psa. 132.19.
But upon Himself, Let His Crown flourish; O let it long flourish. And when the
sad Day comes wherein He must exchange This Kingdom for a Better; Let His
Crown of Gold be changed into a Crown of Glory. Amen.

FINIS.

