THE DRVNKARDS Warning. A Sermon Preached at Canterbury in the Cathedral
Church of CHRIST.

By THOMAS KINGSMILL Mr. of Arts, and Preacher of the Word at Hyth, one of the
Cinque Ports, in the County of Kent.

Eccles. 31.25. (...)

Imprinted at London by N. Oaks for Richard Collins at the sign of the three
Kings in Paul's Churchyard. 1631.

TO THE RIGHT Reverend Father in God, JOHN by GODS Providence, Lord Bishop of
St. Asaph: Grace, Mercy, and Peace, be Multiplied.
THE Charge that was given to the Prophet Esaias, by the Lord himself, cry
aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, and show my people their
Transgressions, and the House of Jacob their sins: Esaias 58.1
is also imposed (Right Reverend Father in God) on every Preacher of the Word,
in these last days and perilous times. For iniquity abounds now, as much as
ever it did: there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the Land; by
swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery, men
break out, and blood touches blood. Hose. 4.1.2
They rise up early in the morning, that they may follow strong drink, they
continue until night, till wine inflame them. Esaias 5.11.
Oh! now is the time (if ever) for a Preacher to lift up his voice, and cry
down these loud-crying sins.

As for my self, I have already (by Gods assistance) lifted up my voice in a
Sermon, in a great Congregation, against the beastly sin of Drunkenness: but a
man may cry louder with pen, then with tongue: and be heard further out of
the Press, then out of the Pulpit. Therefore (since there is no Labourer so
simple, but may bring somewhat to Gods building:) I have encouraged my self,
upon assurance of your Lordships pardon, humbly to commend this Sermon (as it
was delivered, with out addition, or detraction) to the view of your Wisdom:
and under your protection, to the Householde of Faith. Not doubting, but that
which has passed the favorable censure of so Reverend, and so Learned an
assembly, as then were the Hearers: will now find like acceptance with all
that be judicious and indifferent Readers.

Many weighty reasons I could show, that moved me to Dedicate these my slender
labors unto your Lordship: but I forbear to express them, least I exceed an
Epistle to so small a Book; and make the Walls as big, as the City. And thus
having satisfied my desire, by giving some testimony of my duty to your
Lordship: fearing to hinder the course of your more serious cogitations, and
actions; I humbly take my leave, and commend my self to your favor, and your
Lordship to the grace, and favor of God in Christ.

From Hyth one of the Cinque Ports in Kent. February 12. 1630
Your Lordships most obliged to all humble duty. Thomas Kingsmill.

THE DRVNKARDS warning.
PRO. 23. VER. 21. For the Drunkard, and the Glutton shall come to poverty.


IT were vain to be at open defiance with iniquity, if first we subdue not
beastly Concupiscence in Gluttony: which like a false-hearted subject in a
City, is ready to work a mischief at home, when the foreign enemy is
encountered abroad. Many not knowing the right order of a spiritual Combat,
cherish that vice, and give the onset upon some other sin: it may be
valiantly, I dare say, unprofitably, at length in steppeth Gluttony for the
rescue, violently tearing out the throat of Virtue, and giving sin as much
advantage as it had before. Let this Traitor be first wounded, the flesh
subdued, and brought into subjection, then shall you with more facility get the
mastery over all transgression.

Gluttony, if we take it largely, brancheth it self into Drunkenness and all
excess in meat or drink. The body of my Text contains both, which may thus
be read a part, though Hypozeugma join both in one: The Drunkard shall come to
Poverty: and the glutton shall come to poverty. The former only is now the
object of my speech, wherein you may observe the party delinquent, and his
heavy punishment.

Defin.
Drunkenness is a violent privation of reason, by excessive drinking, through
inordinate affection to any lyquor of intoxicating power. Loss of reason:
Excessive drinking: Inordinate affection: these three make drunkenness
complete.

The first, is the loss of reason, either in whole, or in part: Proprijssime
illi dicuntur ebrij, qui prae nimio potu mente altenantur, Zanc. in Ep. ad
Ephe. c. 5. p. 18.. de Ebrietate.
they are most properly said to be drunken, who are deprived of reason by
excessive drinking. As for the intemperate drinker, that can down with
abundance of lyquor, and yet for strength of brain is no whit moved in body
or mind: I suppose, I may truly call him a Glutton, how ever I excuse him
not. Tanto nequior, quanto sub poculo inuictior, Aug. de ver. apost ser. 4.
the more able a man is to bear his lyquor, the more full of Satan, if he
abuse his strength that way. Woe unto them that are mighty to drink wine, and
men of strength to mingle strong drink. Esaias 5.22.

But there is a twofold privation of reason, to wit; natural, and violent.
When a sober man lies down to rest, sleep depriueth him of reason for a
little time. Yet so as that he can have it, and use it at his pleasure: if he
appoint one to call him, or a Bell to a wake him at such an hour. Like Pliny
his Cranes, Not. histor. lib 10. ca. 3.
who in a long journey maintain a watch all night, and have their Sentinels
that stand with one foot, and hold a stone in the other: if they chance to
sleep, down falls the stone, and awaketh them. But the Drunkard, being
violently bereft of reason by the fume of the Grape, has no such shift to
recover his wits: Till the lyquor cease working, he is not himself, whether
he sleep or wake: Ebrietas ita mentem alienat ut vbi sit nesciat, Isidor,
senten. lib. 2. ca. 43.
Drunkenness does so besot him, that he knows not where he is.

A man is violently bereft of reason diverse manner of ways; by strong sents,
and poisonous herbs, that cause distraction. Anger, lust, vayne-glory,
covetousness, each vehement inordinate affection, deserves the name of
Drunkenness: They are drunken, but not with wine, they stagger, but not with
strong drink. Esaias 29.9. But Solomon speaks here of drunkenness by wine, be
not amongst wine-bibbers: where by Wine, is meant any lyquor of intoxicating
power. Ebrietas dicta est quasi extra briam, quod debitam vini mensuram
excedit. In Aquin. 22^. q. 150 ar. 1.
Drunkenness is so called (says Lessius) from taking strong drink out of
measure. When (as Saint Augustine has it) Ad mensuras sine mensura bibunt. De
temp. ser. 231.
By full cups and measures, men drink out of measure.

It is not simply unlawful to drink Wine, if we keep a mean: according to
that of Caietan, Vinum potatum non inebriat, nisi sit multum respectu illius
qui bibit, quantumcunque parum sit quod bibitur, In Aqu. loc. dic
It is not bare drinking Wine does intoxicate the brain, if it be not much in
regard of the drinker: though but little in measure, he exceeds to ebriety,
that exceeds the strength of his brain to bear it. Oh! be not drunken with
wine wherein is excess; but be filled with the Spirit. Ephe. 5. chap. 18.

Yet one thing is missing to make drunkenness complete; namely, inordinate
affection; who so has this, is a Drunkard in heart, though he drink not a
drop: as he is an Adulterer, that lusts after a Woman, though he commit not
the deed.

I blame not all affection to, or delectation in drinking wine: Creatum est in
iucunditatem, non in ebrietatem: Ambros. de Helia et ieiun. c. 11
It Was created for iucundity, not for ebriety; to make glad the heart. Psalm.
104.15. It were extreme folly to cry out, I would there were no Wine, because
some are never quiet, but when they are at it. A man might as well say, I would
there were no night because of Thieves, no Women because of adultery, no
Weapons because of murder: Vinum datum est vt rideamus, non vt derideamur:
Chrysostom. in Math. 17. hom. 58.
Wine is given to make us laugh, not to be laughed at, to preserve health, not
to destroy it: God has graced thee with this excellent blessing, see thou
disgrace not thy self by intemperate drinking.

But inordinate affection to the Wine, we blame: when a man, knowing the
strength of the lyquor, be it Wine, Beer, hot Water, or what else soever, yet
takes such delight therein, as to enjoy his cups, he willingly depriueth
himself of reason, and becomes a beast: for what difference is there
between a man, in such a case, and a beast: but that one is unreasonable,
naturally, the other voluntarily?

Not that all Drunkards will the absence of reason directly, as some do to rid
themselves of cares for the time: it is enough, nay too much, to will it
indirectly, and in its cause: they are not weary of their wits, feign they
would enjoy their cups, and reason too, but if both cannot be had, they bid
reason adieu with all their heart; of the twain, choosing rather to want wit,
then Wine.

Now here arises a doubt: Noah drank Wine and was drunken: Gene. 9.21
was he worthy blame? Before the flood, in that drunken age, they had no Wine
at all, though happily they had wild Vines, and did eat of the Grapes: but Noah
was the first, yea, and that after the flood, who dressed the vine, and pressed
the grape: for which cause (says Berosus) he was called Ianus, the inuentor of
wine, from (...) that signifies Wine; who is said to have two faces, because
he saw two Worlds, to wit, before and after the flood. Noe dedit naturam, sed
ignorauit pote^tiam, itaque nec vinum suo pepercit Authori. Ambros. de Helia
and ieiun. ca. 5.
Noah gave Wine its nature, but knew not the power; wherefore it spared not the
Author, but made him drunken. Again, Noe deceptus est, quia vini vis
ignorabatur: cap. 6.
Noah was overtaken by chance, because he knew not the strength of it. So that
(as Saint Ambrose says) it was Per ignorantiam, non per intemperantiam. cap. 5.
For want of experience; and not through intemperance. Heereuppon the Summists
acquit him of sin; and I excuse him A tanto, non a toto: He was drunken, but
no Drunkard, I may safely extenuate, but I dare not annihilate the sin.
Without question, Noah sinned, and was pardoned; yet let no man be emboldned
to do the like: ho^y men's weaknesses, should not encourage us to wickedness.
Instruant Patriarchae, non solum docentes, sed etiam errantes. Ambros. de
Abrahama Patriarcha cap. 6.
Let the Patriarchs instruct us, not only by Doctrine, but also by falling. If
they being so godly, had their slips and falls: let him that thinks he
stands, take heed least he fall: Non solum attend, quod inebriatus est
iustus: sed quod postea hoc iterum et non acciderit. Chrysostom. ad loc.
Noah was once drunk and no more: follow him in repentance, and not in sin.

A sick man has no affection to wine, but abhors it: yet upon his Doctors
prescription, he is willing to drink drunken, to procure a vomit, and recover
health: does he offend herein? Aquinas says, Cibus et potus est moderandus,
secundum quoth competit corpor is valetudini; Aqui: 22^: q: 150: ar: 2 ^ m.
that we are so to moderate our selves in meat and drink, as it may stand
with the health of the body: whereby it sometime comes to pass, that what is
but enough for the sound, were too much for one sick: And again, what is but
enough for the sick, were too much for the sound. Whereupon the Summists hold
it no sin.

But it is not material what they say: I am sure the Scripture says, We may not
do ill, that good may come of it. In a desperate case, to preserve the body
from infection, it is lawful to chop off a leg, or an arm, but to procure
health, it is not lawful to deprive ones-selfe of reason. Malum non sentitur, quoth
per ebrietatem committitur: Isidor: lib: 2 senten: c. 43
when a man is drunken, he knows not what mischief he may do; he is like
enough to murder, commit adultery, or any other Villainy. Admit his friends
bind him, or lock him up, to prevent such outrage, till he come to himself:
yet they are not able to keep him from a desire to kill, and whore; the tongue
is an unruly evil, which no man can tame: he will fall to cursing, and
swearing, do all his friends what they can: therefore let no man take that
ungodly course, to recover health.

Suppose a man meet, with lewd company, who will quarrel, fight, and stab, if
he pledge not their healthes: if in giving them content, he drink more then
his share to save his life, were he too blame? The Summists say no; but Saint
Augustine says yea: De tempor. sermon. 232.
If once it come to that pass, that thou must drink, or dye, twere better for
thy body to be slain when thou art sober, then thy soul to perish through
drunkenness.

But I will no longer digress; I am now chiefly to deal with the Drunkard,
and not with a drunken man: Plurimum interesse concedes, inter ebrium, et
ebriosum, Sen lib. ep. Epistol. 83.
there is great difference between a drunken man, and a drunkard: Potest et
qui ebrius est, tunc primum esse, nec habere hoc vitium; et qui ebriosus est,
saepe extra ebrietatem esse. Loc. dic.
Some are once drunken, and no more, and the common Drunkard may sometime have
his wits about him. Now says Augustine, In homine iusto, etsi non
ebriositatis, at certe ebrietatis causa quaerenda est: Contra Faust. l. 22.
cap. 44.
The just man for being once drunken is much too blame. But the Drunkard is the
object of my speech, it is even he shall come to poverty.

Solomon had many other arguments to dissuade from drunkenness, as we find
in the following part of the Chapter; but (as they say) there is no woe to
want: of all things, men love not to hear of that, therefore is this reason
placed in the forefront, as most powerful to prevail with us: the drunkard
shall come to poverty: or, as the root (...) imports, shall be driven out of his
inheritance, and thrust from his possession.

Tradesmen (says Ambrose) Vno die bibunt multorum labores, De Helia et ieiun.
c. 11.
drink as much in a day, as they get in a week: they spend their money,
mispend their time, neglect their servants, how is it possible such men should
thrive? if they be not yet poor, ^ere long they shall: poverty will set upon
them like an armed man, without resistance.

Rich men (if given unto the pot) may not look to escape: they will spend
frankly, swagger, and fight, sometime unto their cost: they will buy, and sell,
give and lend, chop, and change, they care not what; when the drink is in, the
wit is out: at length Gods secret judgment creeps upon their estate: be the
Drunkard whosoever, (if Solomon say true,) he shall come to poverty: no
possession, though never so large, can bear him out.

Thus ye have heard the Exposition: now suffer (I beseech you) a word of
Exhortation. I know I take, an hard task in hand to prevail with the
Drunkard; out alas I find Saint Augustines words to be true in this our age,
Ebrietatis malum ita per vniuersum mundum a pluribus in consuetudinem missum
est, vt ab illis qui Dei praecepta cognoscere nolunt, iam nec putetur, nec
credatur esse peccatum; De tempor: ser: 231.
Drunkenness is now in such request throughout the world, that many call it
into question whether it be a sin, and deserve reproof. Shall we speak
against Drunkards? Says Basil, In emortuum auditum insonabimus, Contra
Ebriosos.
we had as good round a dead-man in the ear.

Why then what course shall we take? Physicians in the dangerous time of the
plague, come not at the infected, if past cure, but give Antidotes to preserve
the sound: but we must speak unto all, that all may be profited, the sober
preserved, and as we hope, the Drunkard reclaymed: but whether they will
hear, or whether they will forbear, we must not be silent, that they may know
there has bin a Prophet amongst them. Ezech. 2.5
The Fountain casts out her water, though no man come to drink: and we must
Preach, though few regard. If we plant, and water, we need not doubt, but
God will give increase: such is the strength and power of the word, as to
profit none it is impossible: much may fall into the beaten way, and among
stones, yet some will light upon good ground, and bring forth fruit. As the
rain comes down from Heaven, and returns not thither, but waters the
earth, and makes it fruitful: so my word (says the Lord) shall not return
empty to me, but shall do whatsoever I will.

Admit Drunkards do not presently amend, but will to the tap-house again: yet
can they not do it with such boldness, as they did before: their heart will
smite them when they enter in, and think upon the words they heard, they will
even blush to follow their wo^ted course: for if they should do so, they know
this were (...), to war with God himself, and kick against the prick,
whereby they declare to the world that they are despisers of Gods word, who when
they know their masters will, yet are so obstinate, that they will do contrary.

Give ear then (I beseech you) to the words of Solomon, Prou. 20.1. Wine is a
mocker, strong drink is raging; and whosoever is deceived thereby, is not
wise. Vinum Dei donum: Ebrietas diaboli opus est: Chrysostom. in Matthew. 22. hom.
71.
He blames not the wine, but the drinker: nor him neither, if he keep a
mean: Medicina optima, quando commensurationem habet optimam; Loc. notato.
if it be taken moderately, it helps our infirmity: drink no longer water,
but use a little wine for thy stomachs sake, and thine often infirmities. 1 Timothy 5.23
It is the excess must be avoided, as Solomon has showed: and that for three
regards. First, wine is a mocker. The Drunkard laugheth at the Judgments of
God, that are denounced against him: he neither fears God, nor reuerenceth
man, but amids his cups will laugh the best to scorn. As certain youths did,
who making merry, and drinking freely, were bold with King Pyrrhus, Plutar.
(...) the life of Pyrrhus.
to speak their pleasure of him in very undutiful sort, and being brought
before him, he asked them whether it were so? It is true, and it please your
Grace, said one of them, we said it indeed, and had not our wine failed us, we
had spoken a great deal more. What an audacious part is this, that
pot-companions will presume to deride Kings, yea to mock God himself. Ah! be
not deceived, God is not mocked, though he forbear a while to put his threats
in execution, on hope of their conversion; if they will not amend, at length he
will strike home.

The drunkard mocketh others, but he is most ridiculous himself, all his
absurd speeches, and idle gestures, make others laugh. In Lycurgus his days,
Plutarc's in the life of Lycurgus
drunken men were brought into common-hals, that little children might behold
what a ridiculous and beastly thing it was for a man to be drunken.

Secondly, strong drink is raging. Seneca says, that drunkenness is voluntary
madness: non minor, sed breuior, Epistol. 83.
no less than so; though happily it last not so long: but for the time, he
rages like a madman, he will swear, and swagger, quarrel and fight; de
ebrietate ad arma consurgit, pro vino sanguis effunditur. Ambros. de Helia and
ieiun. ca. 11.
of late he powered in wine, but now he will power out his neighbors blood.

Alexander King of Macedon, in his drunkenness slew Clytus his dearest friend;
but when he was sober, and understood the matter, he took it so heavily, that
he could have died willingly: mori voluit, certe debuit, indeed (says Seneca)
Loco notat.
he ought to have died: he that kills a man when he is drunken, deserves to
be hanged when he is sober; especially if his drunkenness were voluntary, let
him undergo the law of Pittacus, and suffer double punishment: first, for
immoderate drinking, then for committing outrage in his drunkenness.

Thirdly, whosoever is deceived thereby, is not wise) the root is (...)
sapere; he cannot relish well. Prae^nimio voluptatis studio, voluptatem se
amitere nesciunt, Basil. Magnus contra Ebriosos.
drunkards hunt after pleasure in their cups: but taking over much, they loose
their taste.

A small sound delights the ear; too loud a noise will make one deaf a small
light does please the eye, but gazing on the Sun will make one blind, a sober
draught affects the taste, but too much wine offends the palate: the full soul
loatheth an hony-combe: but to the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet;
Pro. 27.7.
the drunkards wine seems water to him, but the sober man's water is turned
into wine: the Israelites drank honey out of a rock: the water was so pleasant
to them, being sore a thirst.

But, sapere quod hoc verbo significatur, est mentes, non palati* Mercer. on
Pa^in, in ^adice (...)
The taste here meant, is of the mind, not of the palate. Now the drunkard
comes short of that: ventrem and mentem nemo replere potest, a full belly
has an empty brain; whoredom, and Wine take away the heart, Hos. 4.11.

Sapientis est ordinare (says Thomas on the Masters Prologue;) it is the part of
a wise man, to order all his doings to the right end: but the drunkard cannot
do so, whether the end be in aliquo speciali artificio, vel in tota vita
humana, vel simpliciter vltimus. In some special work, or moral, or God
himself.

The end whereat a Carpenter does aim, is an house for habitation: and who so
can give best direction to inferior workmen, is a wise man As a wise
master builder, I have laid the foundation, and another builds thereon. 1.
Cor. 3.10
Now the drunkard in his cups, is not able to give direction, in any particular
vocation. The Preacher cannot, Esaias 28.7. They have erred through wine, and
through strong drink are cut of the way: they are swallowed up of wine, they
err in vision, they stumble in judgment. The Magistrate cannot. Pro. 31.45.
It is not for Kings, O Lemuel, it is not for Kings, to drink wine, nor for
Princes strong drink, least they forget the Law, and pervert the judgment of
any of the afflicted. A filly woman could appeal from Philip King of Macedon
being drunken, to the same King when he should be sober: that he might well
consider the matter, before he passed sentence against her. The Tradesman
cannot: what need I go to particulars in a general truth? Whosoever is
deceived thereby, is not wise.

If the end be moral, to live well and happily on earth, he that can best
order all his actions to that end, is a wise man. Pro. 10.23
It is a sport to a fool to do mischief, but a man of understanding has
wisdom: true, and the drunkard has none, he is such a fool, that he cares
not what mischief he does himself, or others in body, goods, or name:
whereby it comes to pass, that he leads a most unhappy life. Or if the end
be, simpliciter vltimus, even God himself, who so orders his course aright
to obtain this end, is a wise man indeed, sapere, nihil aliudest, nisi verum
Deum justice ac pijs cultibus honorare: Lactan. de vera sapien cap. 1.
to be wise is nothing else, but to worship the true God aright. O keep, and do
the Commandments of the Lord: for this is your wisdom, and your understanding
in the sight of the Nations. Deuteronomy. 4.6.
Again, sapientia, est intelligentia, vel ad bonum, rectumque faciendum vel
abstinentia dictoru^ factorumque improborum, Lactan. de iustitia c 19
wisdom is an understanding heart, to eschew evil, and do good, the fear of
God, that is wisdom: and to depart from evil, is understanding. Job 28.28.

But drunkards have no fear of God before their eyes, they say unto the Lord,
depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways: Job 21.14.
neither have they any heart to depart from evil: therefore as for wine,
whosoever is deceived thereby, is not wise.

What if a man should say he is a very fool; the word of the Lord is verified
in such: my people is foolish, they have not known me, they are sottish
children, and have none understanding, they are wise to do evil, but to do
good they have no knowledge. Ier. 4.22.


Sane discimus vitandam ebrietatem, per quam crimina vitare non possumus.
Ambros. de Abrah. Patriar. c. 6
in any case avoid drunkenness, which disableth you to shun wickedness. Oh it is
a Capital crime, with as many heads as Hydra. What sin can be sovile, that
drunkards will not venture on? ebrietas fomentum libidinis, Ambros. de Hell. and
ieiu. cap. 16.
drunkenness provoke men to wantonness: their eyes behold strange women, Verse
33.
they will make no bones of adultery, nor yet of idolatry* the People sat
down to eat, and drink, and rose up to play, that play was idolatry, to
worship the golden calfe which Aaron made. Basil. Mag contra ebriosos.
And thus at length it appears, that wine is a mocker, strong drink is
raging, and whosoever is deceived thereby, is not wise.

Solomon tells us again that ungodly men rejoice to do evil Pro: 2.14.
(...)
the root for evil is (...) taratantarizare, taken from the sound of the
trumpet, laetitiae causa vocem at tollere, to lift up the voice for joy. This
inepta laetitia, foolish mirth, is in all iniquity; but chiefly in ebriety.

The sober man well understands the manifold calamities that befall him in
this life, which make him say of laughter it is mad, and of mirth, what does
it: Eccles. 2.2.
but wine turns every thought into i^ty, and mirth: so that a man remembers
neither sorrow, nor debt: 1 Esd. 3.20.
He does even enjoy his cups, which makes his heart to leap, supposing
felicity to consist therein: he cannot contain, but breaks forth into
outward signs of joy, he begins to laugh, dance, and sing tara-tantara: but
alas poor soul, if he knew all, he has more cause to weep.

Go to now ye Drunkards, weep and howl for the miseries that shall come
upon you howl ye Ships of Tarshish, (says Esaias,) Esaias 23.1.
and well does the Prophet compare Drunkards to ships Says Ambrose, De Helia
et ieiun. c. 19.
They that go down to the Sea in ships, that do business in great waters,
reele too and fro, and stagger; so does the Drunkard; they are at their wits
end, so is the Drunkard; they are troubled with winds, and raging waters, so
is the drunkard: they cast out their lading, so does the Drunkard: Os
posteriorum partium assumit vsum: Chrysostom. ad pop. hom. 54
his mouth executes the office of the lower parts: they scarce escape with
life, no more does the Drunkard: Plerique dum vomunt epulum, fudere animam:
Ambros. de Helia et eiiun. cap. 8.
too many vomit up drink, and life together. Alexander at a supper brought out
a crown for a reward to him that drank most: Plutarc. Alexa.
Promachus swallowed down four gallons of wine, and wan the Crown worth a
Talent; but he lived not above three days after, and forty one of his
fellows dyed of an extreme cold, that took them in their drunkenness. A
fearful example, and a fair warning for all pot-companions. Though the
Mariners escape with life, yet they are half undone, their wares are lost, and
their ship well-nigh broken: So is the Drunkard almost, if not quite undone,
Ebrietas mors omnium virtutum: Vincen. specul. mor. lib. 3. par. 8 did. 8.
Drunkenness is the shipwreck of all goodness, his modesty, sobriety, and
temperance, most precious wares, are cast away, and the ship of his body is
fore shaken, with palsies, and other diseases, that he will have much ado to
patch it up again.

Who goes with a rugged coat? the Drunkard: who turns wife and children out
of doors? the Drunkard. Who has woe? who has sorrow? who has contentions?
who has babbling? who has wounds without cause? who has rednes of eyes? they
that tarry long at the wine, they that go to seek mixed wine. Oh! look not
upon the wine, when it is red: when it gives his color in the cap: when (...)
it self aright: at the last it biteth like a Serpent, and stingeth like an
Adder.

Man that is in honor, and understands not, is like the beast that perish.
Psalm. 49.10
Tell me O man, wherein differest thou from a beast? is it not in the excellent
gift of reason, whereby thou rulest the creatures? Oh! then, be not thou so
base to be led by the sway of sensual desire, and for the love of liquor turn
thy self on grazing with Nebuchadnezzar among the beasts of the field. The
silly Ass will quench his thirst, and drink no more: but thou for thy
pleasure, wilt pass the bounds of nature, and become a beast, nay rather
worse: for they have no reason, no more have thou: but they can use their
limbs, so can not thou. Whereto shall I liken drunkards? but to the Idols
of the heathen, who have eyes, and see not, ears and hear not, feet, and
walk not.

The Drunkard can neither read, nor pray; he is not for the works of piety,
or policy: to say plainly, he is good for just nothing; like the unprofitable
ground, which having drunk too much, bears no fruit, but turns into dirt.
Alas! what good fruit should we expect from a Drunkard? Who is no better then
a dead man, nay worse by far: he that is dead can do neither good nor ill,
but the Drunkard is dead to all goodness whatsoever, and alive, yea very
active to all wickedness.

Lo, ye have heard how the Drunkard is void of goodness, apt to lewdness,
and that he shall be impouerished, diseased, a thousand ways tormented in this
life. If it come to pass, when he hears the words of this curse, that he
bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the
imagination of mine heart, to add drunkenness to thirst: the Lord will not
spare him, but then the anger of the Lord, and his iealousy shall smoke
against that man. Deuteronomy. 29.19.20. Woe to them that rise early in the morning,
that they may follow strong drink, that continue until night, till the wine
inflame them. Esaias 5.11, Vae lamentabilis est acclamatio, lamentatione autem
digni sunt ebriosi, quia regnum Dei non possidebunt. Basil. Mag. contra
ebrioses.
Woe is a doleful exclamation, and indeed all drunkards deserve lamentation,
for they are in the Catalogue of those that shall never inherit the kingdom
of God.

Audite, et cauete vos, O quibus istud malum non in crimine, sed in vsu est,
Orig. in Gen c. 19. hom. 5
hear and beware, O ye that blame not this sin, but make a common practice
of it: have some respect to your outward estate, to the tears of your wives,
to the good of your children: be not altogether careless of the health of your
bodies, of the virtue of your mind, of the Laws of God, of the saving of your
souls: prefer not a little beastly pleasure before them all: do not
wilfully cast away your selves, for whom Christ dyed.

If ye repent, and amend, he is ready to forgive: I can show your pardon
from the great King of Heaven, for all that is past, the tenor whereof is
this, Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and
let him return to the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God,
for he will abundantly pardon. Esaias 55.7
Gods mercy is greater then your misery: Ye cannot be so infinite in sinning,
as he is infinite in pardoning, if you repent.

I know an evil habit is not cast off in a moment, but by degrees: therefore
(as Saint Augustine advises) De tempor. sermon. 232.
presently withdraw one cup, to morrow another, and next day another, till you
come to a settled, and sober diet. Give thy self to fasting and prayer, without
which exercise this kind of Devil is not cast out. Then have a care to shun
lewd company, be not amongst Wine-bibbers, least they make thee return to thy
wonted course: Bonum esse inter malos, est quasi natare contra torrentem,
Ste^^a de contemp. mundi p. 2. cap. 27.
to be abstemious among the Gluttonous, were to swim against the stream.

If urgent occasions call thee to such places, resolve by Gods grace not to
pledge their healths: Nay, but they will stab then! care not for that: look
what wrong they offer thee, bear it patiently, and God will reward thee. Nemo
dicat, quod in istis temporibus martyrs non sint; quotidie martyrs fiunt:
August. de temp. s. 232
let no man say, we have no Martyrs in these our days, we have Martyrs
daily: A Martyr, is a witness of the truth of God, and whatsoever a man
suffers for the truth sake, the Lord esteems it no less then Martyrdom.

Moreover, consider the great want of Christ's poor members, and thou will not
for pity, wast that prodigally, wherewith the bowels of the Saints may be
refreshed.

Finally, be a frequent hearer of the word, and thou shall often meet with
good exhortations to sobriety, and powerful reasons to diswade from
drunkenness.

Use these remedies conscionably, and thou will soon abandon this iniquity: so
shall thou live godly, righteously, and soberly in this present world, to the
glory of God, the good example of thy Neighbor, and the saving of thy soul,
through Gods tender mercy in Christ Jesus. To whom with the Father, and the Holy
Ghost, be ascribed all Glory, Honor, and Praise, Power, Might, and dominion,
of us, and all people, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

