A declararation of such tempestious, and outrageous Fluddes, as has been in
diverse places of England. 1570.

To such as have been touched with these Calamities of water, by the great
Fluddes in this present year 1570.
DAVID the Prophet, in the.107. Psalm, speaking of the marvelous works and
wounders y^ god does by his power show before the sons of men: stirs up
the Godly to praise and extol his majesty, and moves the wicked and
stubborn, to the fear and dread of his ho^rible vengeance. He turns (says
he) the Floods into a wilderness, and the springes of water into dry ground,
Psalm. 10 33.
and a fruitful land into barrenness, for ^^e wickedness of them y^ dwell
therein. Which notable sentence, may be well considred, more aptly applied, but
chiefly of us well examined: waying how fearfully the Lord has bestowed upon
us his, marvelous judgments, in y^ he has turned many of our fruitful Feelds
and Marshes, Pastures and Meadows into unmerciful Floods and streams,
unlooked for, by changyng as he did in the old world, the moderate course of
the upper Fountains; which were ordained to water the earth, and so to make it
fruitful, into immoderate, and unseasonable Fluddes, which in steed of making
fruitful, has made barren many places of the Earth in this our country by
destruction of the Creatures, as Pastures, Corn, Cattle, Sheep, Neat, Horse,
Beasts, Oxen, Kine, and such like, with some of y^ bodies of men, though not
so generally, as in the first Flood, neither half so extremely, as our sins
do deserve, which crave not so light a scurge as moist and coolynge plashes
of water, but hot and burning flakes of Fire and Brimstone, which for less
offenses God poured upon Sodom and Gomorrah. The cause of which barrenness
(as David says) in this our fruitful country, is our wickedness, which are
the inhabitants of the same, as is to be approved by markynge the fruits, and
operation of two kinds of people within this land: especially upon whom these
calamities have faullen, to weete, the Rich and the Poor. As concerning the
one, namely the Rich men, Esaias. 3.
if ever the Prophet Esayes woe, against them that ioygne house to house and
land to land (till there be no more place left for the poor) could ever be
applied it may be applied unto them, which as Amos the Prophet says, Amos. 4.
are the fat Kyne of Basin in the Mountains of Samaria, which oppress y^
poor and destroy the needy. To whom Abacuk says, That their covetousness is
an evil covetousness to their houses, whereby they seek to set their neast on
hie, and to escape from the power of evil. Thou have (says the Prophet)
conseled shame to thine own house, and by destroying many people, and have
sinned against thine own soul. For the Stone shall cry out of the wall, and
the Beam out of the Timber shall answer it, as now the Seals of the War and
Parchment of the Leaces has cried vengeance and destruction to the
Leasemongers of England: and the conditions have cried out of the Leases, which
have been enhau^sed and raised, answeryng, woe worth such covetous caytifs, as
have caused the care full cries of so many poor. Thou righteous God, plague
these covetous Leasemongers, these greedy grasiers, which have converted the
Tillage, of much erable ground, to the grasing of Sheep, and Northern Oxen,
whereby they enriche them selves with the ruin and decay of thousands, round
about them. Thou God that see this their unmerciful dealing, open the
clouds, water their pastures sown with sheep, in steed of men and Corn of
all grains, give their flock moisture, that they may see them by thousands
swim above the ground, and at the fall of the waters, to lie dead upon their
watered land. Which cry God has heard, and this is the cause of such ruin and
destruction. The Rich are so welthie, that they are without Judgment, without
mercy, and that has caused their Herds to be wasted, their Flocks to be
deminished, their Granges made pasturelesse, with the pitiful fluddes past,
whereby much of their substance has perished. For whose sakes also the Poor
are made partakers of these great losses. Those rich Landelordes, yet adding
to their troubles, whom the Lord has smitten, by exactyng still their
outrageous Rents, as well for the half year past, wherein these perils have
happened: as before, not considering y^ the Lord did it to plague them withal,
because of their covetousness. God give them repentance, before the Lord be
too to much sturred, and provoked to anger, by their wickedness: Least y^ if
these favorable thretnynges be despised, the Just and righteous God, do in
steed of water, raygne down Fire and Brimstone upon them, and in steed of
the ouerflowing of their pastures, with watery streams: ouerflow the careless
consciences, with cruel flames of Hell fire, and everlasting dampnacion: and in
steed of the loss and wrack of sheep and cattle, Shipwreck and Landwracke,
of both their bodies and souls, which all their rustie Gold and Silver shall
never be able to recover again. And the Poor, God give them patience to bear
this the Lords visitation thankfully: knowing that the poor cries, and the
Lord hears him, and that the Lord is the refuge and strong hold of the
poor, in time of necessity, who has his ears open, to hear their
complaints, and is ready at hand to help them and receive their prayers. God
grant that they murmr not at God handyworke, in striking the little they had,
but that they may say, with blessed Job, the Lord gave it, the Lord has taken
his own again, blessed be his name for ever and ever. So shall we be Gods
humble Children, both rich and poor, embrasing his Rods of correction, as
means to amend our lives. The rich forsaking their former covetous
unmerciful greediness: The poor learning to be more thankful and faithful in
staiyng upon Gods providence that God may restore us from the hand of
strangers, Psalm. 144.
whose mouth talks of vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of
falsehood: That our Sons may be as the Plants growing up in their youth: and
our daughters as the polished corners of the Temple: That our countries may be
full and abundant with diverse sorts, and that our sheep may bring forth
thousands, and ten thousands in our streets: That our Oxen may be strong to
labor, and that there be no invasion, nor going out, nor decaying in our
streets, which blessings God will multiply upon us, if we al will once begin to
fear him, blessed are the people that are in such a case, yea blessed are we
if the Lord be our God, his wonders make us fear and obey him, his mercy make
us al to love and serve him, through his Son, Jesus Christ, our only savior.
AMEN.

Math. 22. Give unto Caesar that which belongs unto Caesar, and unto God,
that belongs unto God. 1. Peter. 2. Submit your self to all manner ordinance
of man for the Lords sake: whether it be unto the King, as to the chief head,
either unto Rulers as unto them that are sent of him, for the punishment of
evil doers, but for the praise of them that do well. Deutro. 11. He that
obeys the voice of God, is blessed, and he that obeys not is cast of.
A declaration or discourse of the great wonderful ouerflowyngs of waters
within this Realm of England, whereby has been much loss of ground Cattle,
Houses, and goods, to the utter vndooynge of a great number of men, beside the
loss of the lives of many men Women and Children, most lamentable to hear.
Which was in the year of our Lord M.D.LXX.
Bedforde.
THE fifth of October about midnight, the Water ouerflowed so much, that men
were feign to forsake their Beds, and one woman drowned. Where also were lost
a great number of Sheep, Oxen, Kine, Horse and other cattle. Amongst other
there, one master Cartwrite Gentleman, having his House enclosed round about,
the water came in so much, that a Carte being laden with Thorns did swim about
the ground. He lost by the same Flood, Sheep and other cattle, to the value
of an C. pounds. The same Gentleman had a close gate by the high ways side,
where y^ water ran over so extremely, that at the fall thereof it made such an
hole, that it was.xl. foot deep, so that no man could pass that way without
great danger. To the fillyng up of the said Hole, or Pit, was cast in by the
men of the said Town xxv. loades of Fagots, and.xx. load of Horse Doung,
which said Fagots and Horse doung, filled not the hole.

Also one master Lee at the Freers in Bedforde, having a fair yearde wherein
was great store of Elm trees, whereof.lx. were blown down with the roots
pulled clean out of the ground. Also he had a close of Conies that were
clean destroyed.

In the County of Norfolk.
THE Sea brake in between Wisbich, and Walsockenne, and at the Cross keys,
drowning Tilney, and old Linne, Saint Mary Teding, S. Mary Tid, S. John's,
Wawple, Walton, and Walsocken, Einney, Iarmans, and Stowe brinck all being
within the space of.x. Miles. At the Cross keys the goodman of the Inn had
built an house, with a strong Foundation joining unto an other House being old
and not so strong, wherein were certain Guests and when the water came in so
violently the goodman of the house being in the stronger House, called the men
out of the old House, and they would have gone down the stayres, but the water
was so high that they could not com down, wherefore they went back again, and
brake an hole into the other House, where they went through, and the last man
was no sooner in: But the old house fell down. The Walls of the houses were
broken down, and the Horses that were tied at the Maunger, (which was made
fast in ye ground) did swim in the water, when the Stable was clean carried
away, until the waters were aswaged, and were saved a live, and y^ people were
constrained to get up to the highest parts of the house, and to be carried away
in Boats.

At Yermouth a great part of the Bridge was carried away.

The house upon the Haven, called the Haven house, wherein was one Nicholas
Iosselin, the Haven man, and his son, with all their tools was carried into
the Marshes.vi. miles from the Haven where it stood upright where they
continued long time without meat or drink.

Item at Iermans brig street, was very much hurt done, by extreme Fluds that
were there.

Item one Thomas Smith of Yarmouth lost a Ship, and.vii. men and a Boy in it.

Item, at Newarke by Yarmouth were lost.xii. Sail.

Item, a great Hulke laden with Oil and Pitche, was lost at Worry Sand, and
about.xx. men lost therein and.xxx. saved by the Hulke boat.

In the Bishoprike of Ely:
THese towns and villages were ouerflowed, that is to say, Wisbich, Guyhorn,
Parson, Drove, and Hobshouse. This Hobshouse being an alms house (and the
water breaking down the Walls of it) the wind blew the clothes of from the bed
of a poor man and his wife, they being a cold, a waked and suddenly stepped out
of his Bed to reach up his Clothes, and stepte up to the Belly in Water, and
then he thinking himself to be in danger (as he was indeed) and he knowing
the best way to escape the danger of the Water, took his wife in his neck and
carried her away and so were both saved.

Item in Wisbich was a Garden, a Tenice play and a Bowlinge Alley walled about
with brick (which was worth.xx.li. by year to the owner) quite destroyed by
the water.

Lincoln Shire.
MUmby Chapel the whole town was lost except three houses. A Ship was driven
upon an house the Sailors thinking they had been upon a Rock committed
themselves to God, and three of the Mariners leapt out of the ship and
chanced to to take hold on the house top and so saved them selves: and the
wife of the same lying in child bed did clime up into the top of the house,
was also saved by the Mariners, her Husband and child being both drowned.

Item the church was wholly overthrown except the steeple.

Between Boston and Newcastle were.lx. Sea vessailes, as small ships Craires,
and such like, lost upon the Coasts of Boston, Hummerston, Marshchappell,
Tetney, Stepney, Nercots, Kelby, and Grimsby, where no ship can com in without a
Pilate, which were al lost with goods, corn, and Cattle, with all the Salt
cotes, where the chief and finest Salt was made, were utterly destroyed, to the
utter undoing of many a man and great lamentacion both of old and young.

Wentford Bridge being very strong of.viii. Arches in length, had.iii. of the
Arches broken, and clean carried away.

Master Smith, at the Swanne, there had his house (being.iii. stories high,)
ouerflowed unto the third story, and the walls of the stable were broken down,
and the horses tied to the Maunger, were all drowned.

Many men had great loss, as well of sheep, Kyne, Oxen, great Mares, Coltes,
of the breed of the great horses, and other cattle innumerable, of which, the
names of many of them shall here follow.

Master Pellam lost.xi.C. sheep at Mumby Chapel.

In Sommercote were lost.v.c. sheep that were of the inhabitaunce there.

Item between Hummerston, and Grimsby were lost.xi. c. sheep, of one master
Speneers, whose shepherd about midday coming to his wife, and asked his
Dinner, and she being more bold then mannerly, said he should have none of
her, then he chanced to look toward the Marshes, where the sheep were, and
saw the water break in so fiersly that the sheep would be lost, if they were
not brought from thence, said that he was not a good shepherd, y^ would not
venture his life for his sheep, and so went straight to drive them from thence:
both he and his sheep were drowned, and after the water being gone: he was
found dead, standing upright in a ditch.

Master Thimbleby, lost.CC.xx. sheep.

M. Dimock, lost.cccc. sheep.

M. Marsh* lost.ccccc. sheep.

M. Madison, lost a ship.

M. William Askugh of Kelsey, sir Hugh Askugh. M. Merin. M. Fitz Williams of
Maplethorp, lost by estimacion.xx.M. of cattle one and other.

Boorn was ouerflowed to y^ midway of the height of the church.

Steeping, was wholly carried away, where was a waine lode of Willowe tops, the
body of the Waine, with the Willowes, carried one way, and the Axiltree and
Wheels, an other way.

Huntington Shyre.
IN the Town of S. Eeds, ye water flowed into the Town in such abundance,
that it ran through the town and the Church, being in the midst thereof, having
about the Churchyearde a Brick wall, of two yeards hie, was so ouerflowed,
that Boats were rowed over it without touching of the same.

Item, a little from Huntington, were three men riding, upon the Causey being
then ouerflowed (the water on the Causey being not deep, and thinking no
danger therein) chanced to com into a place where the water had gulled away the
Earth, and the Gravel, were carried away with the water: and Willowes growing
on both sides the way two of them caught hold on the Willowes and left their
Horses, and saved them selves, and the third chanced to catch a very little
twig of a Willowe, between his Fyngers, having very little hold, and forsaking
horse, which was carried a great way from him, had much pain to keep his hold
on the twig, and hold his head above the water, and his Horse returning with
force against the stream, came again unto him, and under him, by which
means, he set his feet upon him and gat better hold of the Willowe and so
saved himself, and the Horse was immediately carried away that he never saw him
after.

Item, Holland, Leuerington, Newton, Chapel in the Sea, long Sutton, and
Holbich, were ouerflowed. And in this Country also was great loss of Cattle.

Stafford Shire.
IN the low parts in Moorland in a little town called Cliffeeld there was a
man, his wife, and a sucking child in her arms, overwhelmed and slain, by
the violence of the waters, and the boistrous winds.

Warwick Shire.
THE Water, called Haven, that passes by the Town, called Stratford upon
Haven, did run with such violence, that meeting with the Water called the
Siuerne, drove it back.x. Miles, against the cource ouerflowing much ground
and drowning much Cattle.

Northampton Shire.
IN Newport town, were two houses ouerthrown* and in one of the^ an old man,
and an old woman were overwhelmed and slain, and in the same Town on the back
side of the Sarazins head, the water did spring out of ye hard grauelly ground
and flowed so fast that certain Merchaunts (sytting there at diner) were feign
to rise and depart from thence to save them selves.

Buckingham Shyre.
SIR Henry Ley, Knight, lost by the floods of water the number of.iii.M. sheep,
besides horse and other Cattle a great number.

Sussex.
IN the Wish at Rye, (a place so called,) the water came in so suddenly and
flowed so hie, that the people were feign to clime up, to the highest parts of
their Houses, remaining there in great fear, until they were helped by other
men, which did fetch them, with Boats from their Windows, and highest parts
of their houses, who were glad to escape with saving their lives, and losyng
their goods.

The chief time, and spring of this Tide, was about midnight, whereby there was
great loss of sheep, and other cattle with out number, to the utter undoing
of many a poor man, and great loss of many other, whose pitious case, is to
be lamented.

At Rye, the water flowed so vehemently, that it brake into the Marshes, and
made such a way that where of late years, a small Uessel could not pass in at
half flood, now a great Uessell may come in at low water, where also, is good
Harborough for ships, not only to the great commodity of all Sailors, that
have to do there: but also profitable to the most part of the inhabitants there.

Of those marshes, one master Shepherd, was chief owner, who had many Poles,
standing in the same place, very meet for the drying of their fyshing Nets,
for the which he received money of them that dried their Nets there, and
although he was paid for the same sufficiently enough, yet being not therewith
contented, he gave them warning that they should pay more money, or else they
should no more han^ their nets there, ye which (eue^ (...) in the same (...) to
pass by Gods ordinance, that they were by the flood that night, carried all
away, so that his denial, lost his Poles and saved their nets, to the great
comfort of a great number, though it were contrary to the said owners
expectacion and will.

Kent.
AT Broom hill, in Romney marsh, iiii. Miles from Rye, the water came in so
outragiously, that it brake down the marsh walls, one master Bury, being
owner thereof, who lost by the same a thousand one hundred threescore and two of
his Sheep, and it is thought that the marsh is never like to be gotten again.

Item, at Erith breach, a Mariner riding by the Marshes, seeing two maids in
the marshes, and perceiving the waters breaking in so fast, that the Maids
were not like to escape: rode unto them, and one of them gat up behind him, and
the other took hold on the Horse tail, and by that were both saved from
drowning.

In the same marsh, were drowned a great number of sheep.

Item, there in a Marsh land that was sown, were two boys keeping Crows, in
the after noone, saw the water breking in so rashly, gat them up into a cart,
that was not far from them, where they were feign to tarry until the next tide,
which came in so boistrously, that it had like to overthrow both the Cart and
the boys, and the one of the^ being more stronger then the other, kept the
other in his arms, where he with cold, wet, and fear died, so that he was
feign to let him fall from him into the matter, when he perceived that he was
past recovery.

A little from that place, were also drowned.M. of Sheep, and many other
Cattle.

Essex.
FRom a Town called Raynam, unto the town named Maldon, all along by the Water
side, were the Marshes all overflowed wherein were a great number of cattle
drowned, to the great loss of many a man.

Suffolk.
IN Clay, were two Ships laden with Danske Ware, came to shore with no man in
them, nor any man can tell of whence they are.

In Clay, the dwellers there lost a very great Percell of Salt, and Herrings,
Barelled, being housed in an house Walled with Brick, three foot thick, and
yet the Wall was broken down.

Also, there was lost much Saffron ground, with many other things more, to the
great hindrau^ce of many a man.

Item, in Walderswick, Dunwich, and Blaybrooke, was great loss, of Board,
Planck, Timber, and Salt.

Oxford.
A Great part of the Bridge, by Magdalen College, was born clean away, and
many Trees were turned up by the root.

WE Read in the Sermons of Jeremy the Prophet, the.44. Chapter that Jeremy
did labor to bring them from Idolatry which were fled into the Land of Egypt
to Pathors, and declared what plagues and miseries God had laid upon them, and
would lay upon them, til they were destroyed utterly, which council of the
Prophet, they not only little set by, but were with malice and extreme
impudent madness so incensed, that they gave a plain answer to the Prophet.
The words which thou have spoken in the name of the Lord unto us we will not
hear them: But we will do whatsoever thing goes out of our own mouth, as to
burn incence to the Queen of Heaven, and to pour out Drinck offerings unto
her as we have don, both we and our Fathers, our Kings, and our Princes, in
the Cities of Judah, and in the streates of Jerusalem: for then had we plenty
of Uitailes, and were well and felt no evil, but since we left of to burn
Incence to the Queen of Heaven, and to pour out the drinck offerings, before
her, we have had scarceness of all things, and have been consumed by the
sword, and by famine, which impudent answer, may be likened to the answer of
our Egiptian Papists or Babilonicall Idolators (Which in times past, sang Salve
Regina, and Regina Coeli letare, to the virgin Mary, whom Idolatrously they
call the Queen of Heaven) To the Preachers of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, we
hear your words that you speak in the name of the Lord, but as for us, we
will never believe them, but will be as we have been. Though we cannot have
our Peevish Idolatry, and Apish Religion openly, yet we will in hearts
(vnrefourmed) sacrifise to ye Queen of Heaven, and say, Maria Matter gratia,
Matter misericordia, tu nos ab host protege, in hora mortis suscipe: y^ is.
Mary thou mother of grace, and mother of mercy, in like case defend us from our
Foes, we pray, and take us in our dying day. As al our blind generacions have
done before us, as our good holy Fathers, the Popes, have taught us from time
to time, and as our Fathers, and good Cacolike Kinsfolks have don, in the
countreies of England, and the Cities of Britain, and in the streets of
London, Caunterbury, York, Bristowe, Sarisbury, Westchester and Norwiche and
as our good Brethren in Northumberlande, and Westmerlande, Ridsedale, and
Tidsedale, and our friends of the Bishoprik of Durham, and our false folish
favorers of Fables in Suffolk, and Northfolke, of late have done, Which we
if their quarters, gracious Queen of Heaven, did not more fear us that hang
on London gates, and diverse Towers and Trees, in this country then either our
obedience to God or Queen, does move us) would even now do also, as our
fathers have done before us, for then when the Mass was up, Images of blissed
holy Saints, the holy Rood, and our Lady, saint Thomas of Canterbury, and
Saint Fraunces, with his bloody side, and all the trimsy trash, and peltinge
paltrie, of that holy, holy, Whore of Rome, our mother holy Church, then had we
a merry world, althings were plenty, we had Uictailes and all things in
abundance, and felt no ill, but since this new fangled Religion, which they call
the gospel, which our Fathers never knew, (and yet were led to the Devil well
enough) was Preached: we have had scarcity of all things, and have been
consumed by Sword and famine, with Fire and water, as now al men may see by
these great Fluds, which God has sent to plague them for their Heresy, and
because they have despised our old, ancient, and holy Church, and Religion yt
has continued in worship this seven or.viii. hundredth year (and less) and
have brought in, this new religion that began but in Paradise and was devised
but the last day, (when God before the World was made, in his everlasting
wisdom, and good purpose, of mere knowledge thought it good.) Thus I say do
blind Idolaters make arguments, esteeming Religion, by the belly, and in steed
of acknowledging Gods works, (which sends both plenty and Dearth, Rain, and
dry Weather, Fluddes, and dry land, Riches, and poverty, sycknes and health,
attributing all to their dome Idolles, which are cursed with their makers, and
worshippers, but as Jeremy said to the Egiptian Israelitish Idolaters: so I
might sai to our Roman Popisticall Englishmen, the Lord saw your peuish
Idolatry and in steed of plagues, gave you much abundance of mercy, which
might have moved you from Idolatry, to his true religion, but when he saw
your Impudency, and Whores Forheads, that would not repent, and be ashamed of
your brutish Idolatry he plagued you, and Scour^ed you, and that by many
fearful Rods, from which your Queen of Heaven could not save, nor all your
Idolles deliver you, in the days of your said Sacrifice, when every Church had
a Lady priest, and every Church a God locked in a Box, in the midst of your
Idolatry, were there not as great, and greater shows of wrath felt as now
there is laid upon us, that are in the light of the Gospel, I must needs
confess, to punish, as I have said in my Epistle, the lewd livers under the
Gospel? yes verily. For in the days of King Henry the, viii. I will not reap
open what has happened before in older monum^nts, when Gylford Marsh in the
county of Sussex nere to Ry, was drowned with all the Cattle and sheep, a
mountyng to merueilous number, with much of Chaynecourt Marsh, Kyte Marsh, and
the marshes of the Isle of ^^^ene in Kent: when your queen of Heaven could not
save them, but that they were feign to fetch Haystackes and Beanestackes, to
stop up Damines, for fear of drowning all the Country about, which time also
the country of Sealand was drowned, from Armew to Dort, where not only sheep
and Oxen were lost, but all that ever inhabited, within.xxx. mile compass, yea
wherein our Ladies Priests, our Ladies Pictures, yea your Queen of Heavens
Temples, your Alters and Pixes, with your real Gods, which innumerable were all
drowned, not being able to help themselves and their worshippers, but perished
with bruit beasts, and the whole country, which shall never be recovered again.
When also about.xxxvii. year agon, there was such a Hayle, as slew both men
and Cattle and Corne-beaten down in the time of Harvest, that not
withstanding Deruelgethren the Welshime^s Idol God, all y^ Corn was destroyed
being (ready to be reaped) in the ear on the ground, and in many places of
England, notwithstanding your Queen of Heaven, whom you serve in all
blindness of Popery. There came such Rain, by the space of.v. weeks, with
such fearful Hail that all the Wheat, Barley, Beans, Otes, and other grain,
with Apples, pears and other Fruits, were utterly lost, never reaped. Mowne,
nor gathred, but rotten in the Earth, and beaten to Mortar with the shower.
About which time also, all Plumsted Marshes here by y^ Thames were drowned,
which lie almost al wast til this day. Also in Queen Mary's days, when the
Queen of Heavens sacrifices were again erected, why did she not save Sandwich
Marshes, and the Cattle and Treasure therein.

E^^ly marshes, and the marshes of the Isle of Hartly: the Marshes of Herne and
Whitslable. Beside the miserable Famine that God sent over all this land, when
Wheat was at a French crown a Bushel, and many that could get neither Wheat
nor Barley, nor Beans, were glad to eat Acorn bread, and many to sterue for
lack of Beans and Acorns: when Spanish Mules and Iades were fed with Wheat:
beside the sword, and Robberies of strangers, that the Queen of Heaven
suffered her worshippers to be plagued with all, that rightly they might accuse
them selves of such vile sin as caused god to be angry, which also (and not
our Religion) is ye cause (as theirs was) of our Fluds and other Rods of Gods
correction to make holely to live in so holy a Religion, both upon the
Papists and Christians, powered at this time by Gods Almighty hand on the
Papists for their blindness, on the lose lived professors of the Gospel for
their lewd conversation. God give us al grace truly to repent and by Jesus
Christ, so to seek for Pardon, that for him and through him, all our
ignorance, blasphemy and Idolatry, weakness, lewdness, and Hipocrisy, may
be forgeuen in this world, that in the world to com we may have life
everlasting. Amen

FINIS.
(quod) T. Knel. Iu.

Imprinted at London in Fleetstreet, by William* How: for John Allde, and
William Pickeryng. 1571.




