THE FOVRTH SERMON PREACHED AT HAMPTON COURT ON Tuesday the last of Sept. 1606.

BY JOHN KING Doctor of Divinity, and Deane of Christ-Church in Oxon.

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes Printer to the University. 1607.

8. Cantic. 11. Solomon had a vineyard in Baal-hamon: he gave the vineyard unto
keepers: every one brings for the fruit thereof a thousand pieces of Silver.
I Remember a difference they Hieron.
make of the three books of Solomon according to their subjects, three
several sciences or disciplines, that lead man to his bliss; the first whereof
is Moral, the second Natural, the third Theoricall and Supernatural.

1 In his Proverbs, because of the precepts and institutes of good life, they
observe Ethickes.

2 In Ecclesiastes, because of the search and knowledge of causes, and
distinction of substances from shadows and vanities, Physickes.

3* Lastly in his book of the Canticles, they consider Metaphysickes; wherein
is a sacred (...), hymen, or marriage songue ( Voluntatum, non voc^m
co^sonantia, (...)
not so much in words, as in will) containing an indissoluble conjunction
betwixt Christ and his Church.

Wherefore J make no quaestion, but as the rest of the body, so this part of the
songue also is spiritual and divine* and that Solomon, like M^yses elsewhere,
has a veil upon his face, and leaving the least and lowest room to the
literal sense, aims for the most part at mysteries. For that Solomon in his
proper person the first and best known by the name of Solomon, had a vineyard
in proper terms without any metaphor, or translation; and seated in
Baal-hamon, whither you make it a proper name as Heshbon, and Engaddi, and
other vineyards in the book of God, or whether common and appellatiue, because
of the plenty and store that was in it; and that he set out his vineyard to
Keeppers at a price* alowing a competency to the^ for their labor and culture
bestowed, and reserving a rent to himself; is either true in the story, it
was so indeed, or incongruity the^ is none, but it might be. A part of his
Ro^al demaines is in vineyards, and Orchards, and paradises, in the 2. of
Ecclesiastes.

All this (notwithstanding) is but the outward shell to an inward kernel. the
foot of the ladder next to the ground, as in the vision of Jacob, wherein there
is yet no climbing up. wherefore the counsel of Bernard is from the 23. of the
proverbs, when we are called to the table of a rich man, to consider diligently
what is set before us* fratres ad men sam Salomo^^^ s^demus, superni^ Ser. 30,
in. Cant. (...). 63.
est refert^ delitii^^ Brethren, says he we sit at the table of Solomon, the
meat that is set before us is heavenly and divine. The Apostle said, has God
care of oxen? Number quid de vine is and vitibus and virg^lt is cu^a est Deo? in
like manner; has God care of vineyardes? Homines, non arbores amat homo-deus:
he that is God and man louethmen, not trees. His conclusion for all is, opera
hic and impensa mentibus d^nda, non fructibus: the cost and care we bestow
must be spiritual upon our souls, not corporal upon the fruits of vineyards.

Who then is this Solomon? or what this vineyarde? what this Baal-hamon? These
Keepers? this fruit? this rent? who and what are they?

Solomon is not Solomon the King of Israel* but the King of Kings: not
Solomon from the earth earthly, but Solomon from heaven heavenly, he that in
the Bernar. ser. 27, in. Cantic.
Gospel is more then Solomon, vsque adeo meus Solomon, Solomon est, vt non
modo pacificus, ^ed pax ipsa vo^etur. The Solomon whom I mean is so rightly a
Solomon, that he is not only a peacemaker, but very peace it self. Solomon is
Christ.

The vineyard is his Church, a metaphor well known in the scriptures, were it a
stranger unto you, I would lead you into acquaintance with it throughout the
whole book of God. But it is not so, vinea intelligibilis, an intellectual,
mystical vineyard is his Church: planted by Gods right hand, grounded in faith,
rooted in charity, watered by the word of the preachers, dug and manured by
the discipline of Magistrates, the wine whereof has the savor and taste of a
good conscience within, the color and cute of an holy co^versation without,
and the winepresse by which it runs abroad, is the tongue of open and
thankeful confession to the praise of God.

Baal-hamon is the site of it, vallis, or planities, or domius multitudinis,
soilicet vini, a valley or plain or lord of store, to wee^, of wine. The
Greeks say, (...), where the comprehension of people, that is of plenty was.
It is Corn^ filius olei by an other allegory in the 5. of Esaias a fertile and
fat hill. J^deed so populous is the Church of Christ, that she meruaileth at
her increase of children, and asks in the prophet, Quis genuit mihi ist^s?
who has begotten me 49. Esa.
these? and the children themselves cry, the place is to strait for us. Her
beginning was at Jerusalem, but being thence abandoned, migrauit, non perijt,
she travailed, Bern.
perished not: pulsa de ciuitate, ab vniuersitate excipitur, being expelled the
city, she is received of the whole world. Howbeit, we must ever remember there
is also a choice made. For this vineyard is planted in Baal-hamon, not in the
open field, whose portion is the Genes. 3.
curse of brambles, and briars; but in a several, peculiar, enclosed piece of
ground, it is hortus conclusus, as the Cant. 4.
garden of Eden, and lies within a hedge or fense, as a mount within railes.
And whatsoever grows without it, is labrusca, not v^^, some sower or hedge
Esa. 5. Deuteronomy. 32.
grape, not good to eat, or rather the grape of Sodom or cluster of Gomorrhe,
which grows but to the fire* My meaning is, extra ecclesiam nulla salus,
without the Church no salvation: which made the good Emperor Theodosius
resolve with himself, Malo esse membru^ ecclesiae quam caput imperii, I h^d
rather be a member of the Church, then head of the whole empire.

The keepers of this vinyard are both the magistrate, and minister, for that
the former also is, cannot be doubted: he is nutritious ecclesiae, the nursing
father of the Church, and perregnum terrenum c^leste regnum ^^i dor.
proficit, Kingdoms of the earth are good helps and furtherances to the
kingdom of heaven. Ego communis Eusebius. de vi^ Constable.
quidam sum episcepus etc. I am a certain common Bishop among you* and as it
were at large, said the worthy Co^sta^tine (as you hard not long since.) But
this field has been reapt already to my hands. The later is a keeper also, but
with no little odds. The difference must ever be held between the Diadem, and
Ephod, the kingdom and priesthood, between (...), 1. Pe^. 2.
the sovereign, and any other subordinate magistrate. Every superiority is not
impery, nor every supervision and inspection, dominion. The power that the one
has, is regal* and imperial, that the other pastoral and paternall; The one
in things appertaineing to God alone; the other long l^teque with a farther
extent both to God and man without limitation; the one as lord and master, the
other as a father; the one by ma^datory and coactiue authority enforcing, the
other rather exhorting and perswaiding: or if ever he command, whereas the one
upon pain of loosing liberty, or limme, or life; the other does it in the name
of God, and before the Lord, and Romans 13.
his holy angels, and upon denunciation of Gods judgments, The one bears the
sword: the other has a sword too; but it is the sword of the spirit; or m^cro
ecclesiasticus, the sword of the Church, wherewith he smites not the body, but
the conscience; or rather not a sword, but the Keys of the church, the one
has Psalm. 2.
a rod of iron to crush in pieces, the other has not more then the rod of his
lips. Jn a word, to the one belongs tribute, to the other rather tithes and
offerings: Romans 13.
to the one fear, to the other rather reverence, to the one (...), necessary
compulsory subjection (you must needs obey) to the other rather (...), a
necessary too, but more inclining to a voluntary, a better tempered, and rather
persuaded kind of submission.

But more accommodate to the mind of my text, next and most immediately knit to
the custody and care of this vineyard (according to the Apostles phrase, ye 1.
Cor. 3.
are (...) Gods husbandry) are the pastors of the Church: of whom God
speaks by his Propher, sili hominis posuite speculatorem, son of man I have
3. Ezech. ^. ler.
made thee a watchman: and I have set thee over nations and kingdoms, vt
evellas, and destruas, and plants, to pluck up, and destroy; and plant, etc.
rusticani sudoris schemate quodam (Bernard to Engenius) figuring the pains of
De Consid.
the past our by the toil of an husbandman. For all these have sarculum
linguae, a cultre in their tongues: (sarculum, non sceptrum, says Bernard to
the same Eugenius Ser. 58. super. Cant.
again, a cultre, not a scepter) and gladium verbi, non ferri, a ^word of the
word of God, not of ^ron. And their office is, 2. Tim. 4. Argue, increpa
improve, rebuke, there is putatio, pruning of the vine; but withal obsecra
entreat, there is plantatio planting. To be short, Paul is a planter, Apollos
is a waterer; and all the rest are (...), some way or other laborers with God
in husbanding this vineyard.

The fruit of a vineyard is the blood of the grape. This is fructus
nativitatis, Psalm. 107. The true native fruit of it. The vine shall speak for
her self from that parable, Iud. 9. and tell you what her fruit is: Vinum
laetificans Deum and homines, wine that gladdeth both God and men. ( Vinu^
laetitiae, not luxuriae: nor libidinis, wine Bern.
of comfort, and gladness, not of excess.) It may be Vinum moestificans some
times, wine of sorrow. Mark the parable. The Olive has her fatnes, the figtree
her sweetness alone, those be their qualities: but est vineae quaedam acrimonia
and seueritas, wine must be somewhat tart, as well as pleasant: Coniungi debent
suavitas Ser. 60. in. Cantic.
and seueritas: Sweetness and sharpnes must be joined together. As necessary it
is at times to hear the voice of the Church condemnantem, condemning, as
consola^ tem, comforting, and reposcentem, requiring, exacting the duties of
christianity, as ignoscentem, pardoning faults and defaults, which she
shalespie: at some times to feel her hand, plectentem, smiting, as well as
amplecte^tem, embracing at some others. There must be both manna, and vtrga in
the arc, bread for refection, and a rod for correction, osculum and fraenum, a
kiss for friends, a bridle for refractary and stubburne persons. I named it
planting and pruning before: there must be both doctrine and discipline, else
is 'there wanting one of the two principal pillars, that the Church should
stand upon.

Shall I say in a word what this fruit of the vineyard is? Go to the parable
once more. Vinum quod l^tificat Deum and homines: whatsoever are the duties of
either table of the law, toward God in the former, in the later toward man the
image of God, are the fruits of this vineyard that is the Church of Christ: and
fruct us natiuitatis, the natural and kindly fruits. For to what other end
werewe made, redeemed, rege nerate, begotten a new by the immortal seed of Gods
word, sanctified and seasoned by his holy spirit, but that we should keep his
laws, and walk before him in holiness, and righteousness to our lives end?

Lastly the rent that is given for the fruit of this vineyard. Luke 16. is that
redderatione^ at the coming of Solomon: the issue whereof will be on the one
side, gaudium and corona, our joy and our crown; and Euge serve Phil. 4. Math.
25. Ezech. 3. and 33.
bone, well done good servant: on the other, sanguinem requiro, Irequire that
blood at thy hands, which has been spilt through thy negligence. Let Keepers
well weigh with themselves the rent they must the^ bring. 1. The reckoning
rises very high, as appears by the su^me in my text mill arge^tei, a
thousand pieces of silver. 2. The singularity of acco^ptants aggravateth the
danger, vir afferet, that is, quisque, singuli afferent, every one shall account
by the pole: and therefore folly for any one keeper to say no^ agnoscar in
populo magno, there Eccle. 16.
are so many keepers of us, that what is my one soul amongst so many
thousands? posuerunt me custodem in vineis (went before in the Canticle) vineam
meam no^ Cap. 1.
custodiui. They made me a keeper of the vineyards, and I have not kept mine
own vineyard: wherevpo^ says St Bernard, Ego huius loci occasion meipsum
reprehendere soleo, quod animarum curam suscep^rim: By occasion of this place I
am wont to be displeased with my self (since the chardge of my private self
was so difficulte) that ever I took upon me the cure of souls. To
recapirulate all that has bin spoken, Solomon is Christ; the vineyard is his
Church; Baal hamon the increase; the keepers are pastors; the fruit is the
love both of God and man; the rent, is the reckoning that must be yielded up
at the coming of Solomon.

What care the Lord has ever embraced and te^dered his Church with (to omit
his quid vltra? in the 5. of Esaias, what should I more have done? If we look
but in at the next doors to my text, will presently appear, vinea mea, quae
m^hi, coram me: my vineyard, which is mine or belongs tomee, is before me.
His constant, redoubled asseveration, in so many possessiue, respective,
relative terms, of so near appropriation, alliance, and amity, that we
cannot imagine a girdle about the reins of a man to be nearer, no nor the
apple within his ey, nor bowels within his belly dearer unto him. My vineyard,
which is mine, is before me always under the light of his countenance, under
the eye of his providence, and the everlasting object both of his looks, and
of his love also.

A part of which his love, and not the least is, as he dealt with the wounded
man in the Gospel, whom by reason of his many infirmities he commended to the
goodman of the Inn, and delivered him two pence ^uk. 10.
(say they were the two testaments) in stock, and whatsoever he should more
expend in counsel and comfort and his own pains-taking, he would repay all
at his back return: so be holding from the height of his sanctuary the
co^ditio^ of his vinyard, in so much danger of miscariage by foxes within, and
wildbores without, serpentibus and apparentibus says Bernard, latenter and
patenter, openly and secretly oppugning the weal thereof, himself the
principal (...) husbandman Ioh. 15. after the days of his flesh, has
commended it to other keepers, non efficaciam quaerens, sed congruentiam, not
out of want to himself, but for convenience to it, man unto man being the
meetest instrument to lead him to salvation, ( speak thou unto us, 20. Exodus
and we will hear thee, but let not the Lord speak, least we die.) To these he
has perpetuated life and continuance not in their singular persons, but in
their line and succession, Ego vobiscum vsque ad finem saeculi, I am with you
(o ye keepers) to the worlds end. So the Apostle witnesses, Ephesians. 4. 11. He
has given some to be Apostles, some prophets, some Evangelists, some pastors
and teachers, for the gathering together of his saints, for the work of the
ministry, for the building of the body of Christ donec occurramus omnes,
till we all meet, etc.

Now what difference there is between keepers, and keepers themselves, I stand
not to declare unto you. Stabo super custodiam meam, but distributing the whole
Church of Christ into two ranckes and companies, ordinem, and plebem as
Tertullian sorteth the^, Exhort. ad cast. Desug. in. perseq.
duces or pastores, and gregem; clerum, and populum; priest, and people. I may
truly affirm that the custody of this vineyard has ever past through the
hands of those ordered persons, whom Ecclesiastical vvriters call (...),
consecrated men, the spirit of God Act. 13. and Romans 1. (...) men separated and
put a part, the fathers (...), clericos, ecclesiasticos, spiritual, clergy
and churchmen. And these by undoubted commission from Christ, succession from
Apostles and Apostolic persons, confirmation of the primitive and purer
Church, and prescription of all ages down to our own times, have been ever
invested with dispensation of the mysteries of Christ, administration of the
word and sacraments, power of the keys, remission and retention of offenses,
exclusion from, or admissio^ into the Church of Christ, imposition of hands,
for the raising up of new seed to the brethren deceased, with other the like
provinces and chardges belonging to them alone. Answerable to which their
offices, and not disagreeing to the name of Custodes in my text, are those
usual titls of theirs throughout the book of God (...) Stewards, (...),
pastors, (...), and in the writings of the learned, Antistites, praesules,
praepositi, rectores, etc. all names of superiority and government; albeit in
regard of their daiely service to God and his Church, because Episcopatus is
opus, a bishopric is a work, and not honos, honor alone, but onus, a
burden, and they are bound by their callings prodesse, to do good, as well as
praesse, to sit in place of government (as the kingdom it self also is
termed splendida seruitus, an honorable kind of service) they are styled by
the names of (...), to betoken and put them in mind of their ministry.

Endless were my talk to undergo the proof of all the particulars before
mentioned: but I am freed from the weight thereof. My service at the present is
rather in the negative and destructive part; not so much to declare unto you
what the authority of those keepers has bin, and now far it reached, as to show
there are others in the Church of Christ, to whom these chardges never
appertained.

I cannot deny but the keepers of this vineyard abused the vineyard, none more.
They became such keepers of it, as wolves are over sheep, Tradidit eam
custodibus, says my text; I may as truly say, Custodes tradiderunt eam, in an
other sense her keepers betrayed her. Jndeed they proved traditores traitors
against her. Dicimini pastores, cum situ raptores* you are called Bern.
pastors you are devourers. And again, not Cultores dressers, nor custodes
guardians, but L^trones, and fures, thieves and robbets. They succeeded in the
Apostles roumes, but without imitation, in sede not in fide, in their seat not
their faith. They had ministerij locu^ not zelum, the place but not the zeal
of their ministratio^. They ran ad cathedram, not ad curam, to the chaires, not
the cures of their predecessors. They followed those holy men as a tempest
follows a calm, or sickness health (says Gregorv Naz.) that is, they came
after them. And what with their idleness, ignorance, avarice, ambition, tyranny
pride, having at length turned famulatum in fastu^, their ministry of the
gospel into a Luciferia^ pride, to overtop the Emperor himself, they so
infected and afflicted the Church of God, and waxed so intolerable, that they
could neither endure their own sores, nor abide other men's remedies; multitudo
reprehe^d^ntium* did but indurare impatientiam, they grew much the worse if any
reproved them. By reason of which their obdurance it came to pass, that as
Kings were expelled out of Rome, for Tarquinius Superbus his offense, and the
Anabaptists in Sleydan.
Germany must needs create a new world of magistrates, because those in
present authority did not please them* so for the wrongs and abuses that some
keepers offered to the vinevard* all must be turned out; at least of those that
were chief of the^, not their superfluous lop, (as one called it) taken a way,
but the very substantial root hewn quite down Aedibus, sedibus effugari
(which is B^inards word) to be driven out of house and home, might not suffice,
unless out of diocese and jurisdiction, out of life and being: and not the
presbyteri, the persons peccant themselves done away (which was Dio^^etians
persequution) but (that which was Iulians, and for worse) i^ sum presbyterium,
their whole race and revenew, lively hood and mainetenance utterly
extinguished: Their patrimonies and inheritances (a^ by a lex Agraria)
dissipated into so many hands, as that without a miracle they might never
return to the right owners again: As if they had yowed to themselves to sow
the land of the church with salt, that it might ever remain^e barre^, and never
the^ceforth bear fruit more to prophets and prophets children. What? must al^e
removed and an utter desolatio^ made because some had delinquished? Ca^ they
call to mind never a Cypria^, nor Chrysosto^, nor Basil, nor Na^ianze^, nor
Austin, ^o one of those ancient Bishops of Rome, which well near 40. in a row
witnessed their good co^fessio^s under those bloody persecuting Pilats of the
Empire, which may stand in the gap, and plead for the service that Bishops had
done to the Church of Christ; but all must down? Esto, Athanasium culpauerint
aliqui say that Athanasius (said Athanasius him Epist. ad. solit. vit. agent.
self of himself) were to blame, and might justly be taxed quid alij fecere
episcopi? aut quis ab illis Arsenius interfectus est? what have the rest of the
Bishops done? what Arsenius has bin murt bexed by them? A strange kind of
reformation; the whole body destroyed, because some parts are disordered and
diseased, Our Savior dealt not thus in that other institution of marriage: but
when he perceived (says ^e^ome) that things were come ad ^ to their last and
worst condition, he brought the^ back ad ^ to their first an^ best again; Ab
initio no^ erat sic, f^o^ the beginning it was not so. The E^arr. in. Psalm. 71
Merchant in St. Austin does better plead for himself and his calling, Si
mentior, ego mentior, non negotium, when they chardged his profession with
lying and fraud; if I lie, it is I that lie, not my profession. So shall you
have husbandmen, that for a storm of wether destroying their come, will
bl^sph^me the name of God; At ho^ non faciunt agri^olaboni, those that are good
will never do it. The like perhaps is in other courses and trades of life. At
hominu^ ^sta, non rerum peccata sunt, these are personalorim^s, not real
imp^tations. All this is not ma^kt in the ^ase of these keepers: but against
them, their callings, and their livings is the voice of Edom heard, Down with
them, down with them, even unto the ground. And when they are down, let the^
n^uer rise up again.

In steed of these are erected a new sort of keepers, of a strange composition
and concretion, part of clergy, part of Laity, as of old and new cloth peeced
together: the assembly, sessions, Senate, Synedryon, Consistory, Court of
which persons (call it as you list) they name the Presbytery* and that
presbytery they call the Church, at least an epitome of the Church, a lively
representation and portr^icture of the universal Church, the perfect body of
Christ, the tribunal of Christ, yea coel^m in terr^^ fitum, a ver^e he^ve^
seated upon the earth: the administration in these men's hands they tea^me
d^uine and apostolic institution* an individual companion of the Gospel, the
holy discipline, the discipline of Christ, half the kingdom of Christ, an
undoubted note of the Church, the eternal coun^a^^e of God, the scepter of
Judah, yea the scepter of the son of God, without which he rules not: lastly
they entitle the governors themselves, ^en^ors of manners, guardians of
discipline, presidents over the ^^we of God, Vicars of Christ* set over the
people in things appertaining to God, and such as watch over their souls; and
rather then fail, they make them Ecclesi^sticall, Ministers* Bishops prophets,
to whom the spirits of prophets are subject, yea they s^icke not to say, that
(...), bodily the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, etc. to whom our Savior
writes, may be understood of their pr^^byters; with other the like
innumerable attributes, wherewith they labor to array the nakedness and novelty of
this late formed discipline, which never to this hour saw the age of a man,
threes^ore and te^ years. What needed all this? licet sapere sine pomp^ men may
be wise without gl^rying too much of their wis^^^. But it fared herein, as at
the dedication of Nabu^ hodo ^o^o^s id^ll with cornet, trumpet, sackbut,
p^^lt^r^^, dul^ime^, and all manner of instruments of music; so the whole
book of God must be vnbow^lled, and all the wi^ of man ransa^kt, to findeou^ a
style honorable enough for their new erected presbytery.

And because ^om^n sine act^ nihil est, name without power avails not, they
have assigned the^ offices no^ inferior to their titles. You vvoulde vvonder
to hear, that those of the laity should have ought to do in administration of
sacraments: yet have I heard that even these do deliver the Cup in some
places. But what of the preaching of the word? you shall be told, that there
is no difference between them and pastors, save public and private; for what
the one do in pulpits, the other do in their consistories. It were incredible
to be spoken, but that he that runs may read it in their published and
divulged books, that those whole descriptions appropriated by the holy Ghost,
to Bishops* presbyters, and deacons, 1. Tim. 3. and Tit. 1. should be applied
to their un preaching presbyters. They may consult, admonish, comfort, correct,
examine, allow, refuse, suspend, excommunicate, absolve, and finally order all
things belonging to the Church, that is to say in effect, directly, or
indirectly and collaterally, at first or at second hand, all things; some of
these dutie^ severally and apart, each elder in his tribe; others jointly, and
in communion with colleagues. As na^ely, when they meet together. 1. Theirs
are elections and reiections of all church officers. 2. Excommunications,
absolutions, and the power of the k^ies, theirs. 3. Theirs the disceptation and
decision of all matters whatsoever concerning either corrupt manners, or
perverse doctrine. Add unto these imposition of hands, common and profane
upon consecrate persons, and ordination of the ministers of Christ by those
that are without orders.

After such hard and burdensome provinces, perhaps you will ask me what the
persons themselves ^r^ (these Areopagites and Amphictiones, iudge^ of
s^weightie affairs) to whom it is given thus to expatiate and revell through
every corner of the house of God. No doubt they are all Bez^l^^ls at least and
Aholiabs, or Zorobbabels, men of excellent both spirits, and gifts, furnished
for such businesses. I distinguished formerly in the Christian commonwealth
two several sorts, to w^^t, Clergy, and Laity. One and (it may be) the better
part of this Court are pastors and Doctors: the other, and far the more, such
for the most part,

Quales ex humili magna ad fastigia re^u^
Attollit, quoties voluit fortuna iocari,
Such as the satyr notes, to day D^m^,

-- momento turbinis exit Marcus Dama, -- to day a tradesman, tomorrow a
churchman, to day an artificer, tomorrow an elder* and so likewise back again.

Alternar^ vices mirab^re: -- we may justly wonder at their changes. Hesterni
Quirites, our yesterdaies Luke 10.
rulers and governors of the Church, the next day return back to their wo^ted
callings; like him that professed, Zach. 13. I am no prophet, I am an
husbandman: Husbandry was my trade from my youth up. ^ know not well what to
make of them, but as St. Bernard wrote of himself, Epist. 245. Ego quaeda^
Chimaera mei saeculi nec clericum gero, nec laicum: I am a kind of mo^ster of
my time, for I am neither cleark, nor lay* man In a word such they are, of whom
I will not speak so cursedly, as the Scribes and Pharisees did, This people
that know not the law, are accursed, Ioh. 7. neither* so ba^barously and
unchristianly, as the papists do, when by wrongful misapplication they abuse
scripture: Give not holy things to dogs; Cast not pearl before swine:
meaning in both these, the people must be debarred from reading of scriptures,
who therefore, they say, are called (...) because they are (...), indeed no
better in sense and understanding, then very stones. But this I am sure of,
wise men never thought it fit to join with them in consultations of learning
and judgment. Their protestations are to the contrary, (...), wise men please
not the people, neither does the people please the^. Vnus mihi pro populo,
populus pro vno. Cato pro centum millibus, and Plato instar omnium. One man of
sort worth all the rest. Hi in manibus suis speraverunt, Al Eccle. 38.
these hope in their hands, and every one is skilful in his own work: without
these cannot Cities be maintai ned, etc. Sed in ecclesiam no^ transiliunt,
super sellam iudicij non sedent, neque palam faciunt disciplin^m and iudicium,
They are not asked their counsel in the congregation of the people, neither
sit they upon judgment seats, neither are they meet for hard matters.

I have showed you in part what they have assumed unto themselves, but have
not declared as yet, what adventures they made to bring things to pass. The
beginnings at first were small, the proceedings wonderful, as of agraine of
mustardseed, that becomes a great tree. I appeal to the truth of my story.
That discipline, which at the first begged her allowa^ce from some neighbor
Churches, was ready in the end to set her foot in the neck of her friends,
and not much less then founders.

Asperius nih il est humili, cum surgit in altum. Witness the Pope toward the
Emperor,

-- Qui fluvialibus vndis
Int^muit torrens, fluit acrius amne perenni.
You shall often have a land-floud, engendered but of rain water, that will be
more violent for the time then a living and ever flowing river. Did they
continue their begging? nothing less. Molestu^ est hoc verbum rogo: it is a
grief to crave. They quickly turned rogare into vim irrogare (as Bernards word
is) craving into compelling. They call for reformation, and reformation is
granted them in doctrine and sacraments, to the uttermost. That will not serve:
but reformation after this form ( the Dagon of popish hierarchy, episcopal
pre-eminence must fall before the arc (I take it) of the presbytery) or they
will never be subject* to any mortal man. Do you stick to yield us this? J
now call to mind what praise St. Ambrose gave of the people of Millan, when
there was hot persecution in the City, for the voice they then all used,
Rogamus Auguste, non pugnamus, We entreat O Emperor, we Lib. 5. epist. 33
fight not: perhaps they durst not: yes, Non timemus, sed rogamus, we fear
not, yet we entreat. He affirms it to be the voice of the holy Ghost speaking
in them. He red at that time upon Job: and he went up into his pulpitt, he
said, vnum Job miraturus, to wonder at one Job, but he found them al Jobs
worthy to be wondered at for their singular patience. The like St. Bernard in an
Epistle to Jews the french king: profecto stabimus and pugnabimus vsque ad
mortem (si ita oportuerit) pro Epist. 221.
matre nostra, armis quibus licet; no^ scutis et gladijs* sed precibus
fletibusque ad Deum, Assuredly we well stand and fight for our mother, if need
be, unto death, with such arms as we may, not with sword and target, but with
prayers and tears to God. But with these we have to deal with, it fared quite
otherwise, pugnamus Auguste or Augusta, no^ rogamus, King or Queen whosoever,
we entreat not, we must and will have it. I deny not but motions there were
some, and admonitions, petitions, supplications; but as physic raught upon a
daggers point; either you must take it, or they will drive it down your
throat. For see the sequel. They break forth to assemblies, confederacies,
associations, subscriptions, sacraments, oaths, menacings, thundrings and
lightnings from the Church, excommunications denounced, yea banners displaid in
open field: Quis sensus armorum, etc. did the Orator ask? I may ask with St.
Bernard, vbi timor mentis, rubo^ fro^tis? where was either conscience toward
God, or reverence toward his anointed? yet on they must. This dissipline must
be advanced, and Princs submit themselves unto it. And that Prince, King, or
Emperor that shall a^nulle it, is to be held for an enemy to God, and himself
unworthy to be are rule over any of Gods people. What do [heare against the
anointed of the Lord, his Lieuetenants on earth, Gods of the earth, solo Deo
minores, Tertul. Bern.
subject to none save God? Christus aliter and iussit, and gessit, Christ bade,
Christ did otherwise. Conditor Caesaris Caesari tributum dedit, He that made
Caesar, paid tribute to Caesar. Peter and Paul did otherwise; alter amisso,
alter submisso in cruce capite, both sealed their obedience to the Emperor with
sundry their deaths. And their writings have an other language: Let every Romans
13.
soul be subject to the higher powers. They will say that 1. Tim. 2.
was in the churches infancy. And let prayers and supplicatio^s be made for all, especially for kings. So thieves must be prayed for, and yet punished for
their theevery. And Princes must be obeyed, whether good or bad. No it is
blasphemy to say so, I am sure it is blasphemy to say, as they say, Quis
credidit auditui nostro? Who will believe our report? An non iustius os loquens
talia fustibus Berrn.
tunderetur, quam rationibus refelleretur? I could lead you along into aforrest
of the most vnpriestly positions, and unchristian, vnsubiect* like practices,
that ever were heard of. Nude nuda loquor, I speak truths truly. They are
now become mundi fabul^, and can no more lie hid, then the sun in the
firmament. J am sorry it should be so. With a tender and trembling hand, I
confess, do I touch the sores of friends. Whereas, were J to deal against a
professed enemy to the Gospel of Christ, I would sharpen my style against him
to the uttermost of my power, and cut, as with the point of a Diamond. But the
Apostle has taught me, Non possumus aliquid contraveritatem sed 2. Cor. 13.
pro veritare: we can do nothing against the truth but for the truth.
Amicus-Socrates, amicus Plato, sed magis amica veritas. Although, why should I
call the^ friends, whose violent and tumultuary spirits have wrought so much
trouble to Christian states? And therefore, non verenda retego, sed inverecunda
confuto, I uncover not the shame of father, nor brother, nor friend, but rather
discover and confute things that were past all shame.

But say that the supreme magistrate, thus dared as you heard before, will not
submit himself, nor admit the government so eagerly pursued? What then? There
are other inferior magistrates to stand in place: and Nobles were at first
ordained by God to bridle Princes. A good doctrine. What if the Nobles make a
conscience therein? Then is the land without any magistrate at all, and the
sword in the peoples hands. Belike the people themselves when we are fallen so
low, are (...), headless, unless they be guided and directed by their
presbyteries. These are not gradus, but praecipitia, steps, but downe-fals. You
see we are come at lenght to a fair pass: from the head of authority, the
eyes of wisdom, ears of discreation, tongues of persuasion and grace, breasts
of counsel and direction, arms of true puissance and fortitude, to the very
feet (of obedience and subjection, they should be) they must needs prove, of
disorder and confusion. The feere rule all A mere Cyclopicall state.

-- ingens corpus cui lumen ademptum,
Agreat and unwieldy body without an eye.
Now in this (...), the world turned vpside down, where the people commands
all, what has been done to trouble the peace both of Church, and common
wealth? Rather what not? The beginninges were tragical, with the trumpet of
Sheba, the tongue of Shimei, and not much less then the hand of Zimri; the
proceedings tyrannical, the end in process of time likely to have proved
more then intolerable. He prophesied not amiss of this way, when as yet she
lay in her cradle, as it were, and swathing clowts, and was commended to the
liking of an other nation. Timet^^ altera tyrannis, we are afraid of an other
tyranny. (Novus pontificatus, a new p^pedome, was the judge meant of an other.)
The style may now be altered upon the eve^t of things, by those that write
testemeipso, upon their experience a thousand times, Sentitur altera tyrannis,
we fe^l^ that which other feared.

For when they shall hold, that the supreme Magistrate professing the faith. (I
speak not of N^ma, nor Nero) I say the supreme Christian magistrate ( cu^us
Muscul.
potestas sancta* sanctae leges, sanctus gladius) has authority over his
subjects, not as they are Christians, but as they are men; authority over
Bishops and Priests, not as they are such, but as they are men: (wherein I have
much wondered with my self, that they which abhor popery, so much, even in
matters of ceremonies, should so nearly approach to it in substantial
assertions;) that the king is no competent judge in pulpit affaiers; and as
touching the law of God he shall be indeed vindex vtriusque tabulae, an avenger
of both tables; but as for the ordering of the Church, he may sit in the
assembly as an honorable member of the church to vote and consent with the
rest, but not otherwise; when they shall give him potestatem facti, but not
iuris, power to execute, but not to ordain; and custodiam, vindictam; not
constitutionem, promulgationem; (which is to make him carnificem, their
executioner alone says Erastus:) and to yield him supremacy in causes
Ecclesiastical, is to take both swords from the Pope and give them to the
King, to pull down a spiritual Pope, and erect a temporal: when they shall say,
that the political government is subalterne to the ecclesiastical, and quasi
inferius quoddam subsellium, and as it were a lower kind of Court; and that
Princes themselves, though they be the nursing-fathers of the Church, yet they
are her servants too, and therefore must ever remember to submit themselves,
subject their scepters, and cast down their crowns before her, yea and to
lick the very dust of her feet (whereof I trust 49. Esa.
they will make an allegory, and not understand by the feet of the Church the
feet of Church men;) and lastly that scepters, and crow^es, and swords are
but pompous and* glorious ceremonies; with a number the like positions: who
will make quaestion but their doings have been answerable thereunto, in
assembling themselves together at their pleasures, in proclaiming pub lique
fastes, in making, and marring, and altering church orders; yea in compelling
the magistrate himself to order, as if they were Ephori Regis, *tutors and
over seers of him, so far forth as to excommunicate his sacred person, and
being excommunicate*, that is, ca^t down unto hell, to deem him unworthy to
hold life upon the earth. Against which presumptions of theirs, if the King
cannot help himself, let him be as an Idol fastened to the wall, that has
hands without handling, and cannot drive the birds from his head, nor wipe away
the dust from his ^ies, or as a skarcrow that stands idly in a garden of
cucu^bers.

M Gualter pastor of the Church at Zurick, who lived at that very time, when
the breath of life was first breathed upon the face of this new created
discipline, in his commentaries upon the first to the Corinthians the 5. Chap.
besides sundry other places, shows his dislike of those, that are not
contented with their christian magistrates unless they also have their
ecclesiastical senates; nor contented therewith, are angry at other churches
that have them not. Sedp^rca^t illi nobis, etc. says he, let them b^are with
us, and no^ be over-rast* in passing their judgment upon us, nor think every
shoe fit to be drawn upon the foot of every Church. He blames them for
their frequencie of excommunications, whereby it may come to pass, that the
number of the excommunicate may be grea ter sometime then the communicants
themselves, and their theatricall satisfactions, to set offenders upon the
stage, and tire them out with immoderate pena^ces; but especially their
ex^o^munications against Kings, by which they become ridiculous both to them,
and others,

Dum vel^ti lep^res dare iur^ leonibus ^udent. Surely I think when first they
claimed their authority over people and pastor, they stretched it with cords;
but when over Kings and the sovereigns of the earth, they drew it with
cart-ropes. For they then took upon them without leave, and practiced without
law, that which if the king should grant them, he might likewise answer them,
as Solomon did his mother in hi^ suite for Adoniah, postul^ ^i and regnum, you
were 1. Reg. 2.
best take the kingdom too, ^it being no more possible there should be two
authenticke authorities within one kingdom, then that one and the same body
can bear two heads.

If any demand the reason, how a Church discipline so lately sprunge, the time
and place of whose breed is so well known (one termed it Talmud Sab^udicu^)
should be able to propagate it self throughout so many repurged Churches of
Christendom, and carry the protection and patronage of so many excellent
men; that at what time they cast up the dregs of Antichristian corruptions,
whereof they had labored and lien sick along time, they should at the present
so greedylie drink down this delicate wine of humane plausible invention;
let him breefly understand. Parents it had of incomparable worth and credit in
the Church of Christ, which begot it with the strength of imagination (I think
they thought it good) bare it not without pain, and with much contradiction,
brought it forth with zeal, nursed it with care, christened it with the
holiest names they could devise, apparrelled it with the fairest colors and
pretexts of scripture and the primitive church, and so sent it forth into the
world as delitias humani generis, the blessedst babe that ever any age of the
world brought forth, bearing the right stamp of the purest and surest
reformation. Quis non in hun^errorem abripiatur ducibus Calvino and Beza?
(said a learned AdS^
father of our Church, though not of our nation, who like a Tiresias had in a
sort experienced both kinds of governments.) You are not ignorant what Jerome
held of Origin, Malo cum Origin errare, qua^ cum alijs vera sentire, he had
rather err with Origin, then think the truth with other men. Anaxagoras ^ivem
esse nigram dixit, ferresne siegaidem dicerem? Anaxagoras might say the snow
was black, an other might not do it. The fashion of the world is, Pauci res
ips as sequuntur, plures nominarerum, plurimi nomina magistrorum. I am of Paul,
one cries, an other, I am of Cephas.

-- Tutum est peccare authoribus illis, Men hold it safe to err by authority.
Of which men I will speak no worse, having been the sons of mine own
mother, and fathers of many sons begotten in the gospel of Christ, then
Austin said of Cyprian, a glorious star in the firmament of the Church, and
one that lost his light for the testimony of the truth; Sicut 6. De bapt. cont.
donat. 26.
multa erant quae doctus Cyprianus doceret, sic erat and aliquidquod Cyprianus
docibilis disceret; Learned Cypri an raught, and learned Cyprian might learn.
He maintained an error about the rebaptization of heretics cum octoginta fere
Episcopis Africanarum ecclesiaru^, 1. De bapt. cont. donat. 18.
that no man may wonder at an error in the Church, an error of continuance
(it lasted through many Africa^ Councils) vpheld by as worthy pillars as the
church had any. (...), may the be it Act. 14.
that dwell in mortality say, (though their fames live in their ever-liuing
books, and their names are written in the book of life) we also are men, we
are no better then our fathers, we know but in part, we have our affections,
and imperfections, errors, and escapes and blemishes, as all other men.

It is not to be thought, but their grounds were firm and immovable, whereon
they stayed themselves. According to the rule of Tertullia^, id verius, quod
prius, De praescr.
the elder the better, they have made their discipline the offspring of Christ
and the most ancient apostolic Church; from whence they persuade themselves,
they are able to derive it along throughout all ages (as by certain ruins,
they say rather traces and foot prints in the writings of the learned may
appear) down to these present times, hence forth of force to continne to the
worlds end.

Our answer to this has been, whilst the husbandmen yet stepped, and being not
thoroughly awaked up on better advise suffered these tares to grow up in the
Church, carried (it seems) with the stream of a common received opinion,
that such presbyteries had erst been; our answer has beenell say (admitting
that antiquity that never was) yet that one and the selfsame form of
Church-policie be fitteth not all times, and all places; but according to the
variety thereof recipit, im^ exigit, receives, ^ay requires variation of
orders. The answer was very in it. For who can conceive, that one and the
same fashion can accord unto her in her infancy, and fuller growth,
persecuted, and in peace, flying with the woman in the wilderness* and resting
as the dove in the arc; lying in the caves of the ground, and sitting as a
Queen upon a glorious seat; sometimes under an heathen Emperor, sometimes a
Christian; now an Arria^, and then orthodoxe again; at one time dwelling in
lerusalem, a city built at unity within it self; at an other diffused into a
large and open region; whilst she is pusillus gre^, a little* stock, and when
her children come stocking by troops* as doves to their windows; lastly in the
days of her marriage* if I may so speak) and in the days of her widowhood*
when the bridegroom is taken from her; in the full flood, Ocean, and tedundancy
of the miraculous gifts of the holy Ghost, and when she is reduced to a measure
and stint, but of ordinary graces? You may as well shape, a coat for the moon
waxing, waning, cha^ging into so many forms, as set down one manner of
discipline for the body of the Church. They call it the Churches; Liverie;
which I see not but in the summer of her peace may be of one stuff, of an
other in the winter of her troubles, Say these elders had been in the
Primitine Church (as they never were) therefore to continue? Si revacas
temporum illorum mores, Muscul.
primum conditiones, and statum quoque illorum revoca; If you will call back
the uses of those times, make the state of our times equal unto them, and put
us under a pagan Emperor, and persequntion again. Gloria filiae regis ab
intus, the internal beawty of Psalm. 45.
the Church is always the same, but her outward garment is of diverse colors
and requisite it is that it should be so: for if there were no alteration,
ceremonies would be taken not to be ceremonies, but matters of substance. To
conclude, Tertullians rule is infallible, Regula De vel. virg.
fidei immobilis, irreformabilis, caetera disciplina and conversationis
admittunt nou^tatem correctionis: One body, one spirit, one lord, one faith,
one baptism: Ephesians, 4.
One government, one policy, one ceremony, one discipline was never spoken.

But that is not the bucklet we hold forth against them at this time. Let them
lead us into these cellars of the bridegroom (as the phrase of this book is)
and from the vessel of any one sentence or syllable therein draw out unto us,
the smallest drop of assurance, that ever this presbytery was instituted by
Christ or his Apostles, and we are ready upon the sight to join hands with
them. But I verily assure my self, unless they will wrest and pervert
scripture, and in steed of the natural milk it gives, enforce out the blood
of violent interpretation, and cause it to walk a mile or two farther for
their fancy, the^ ever the holy Ghost meant it, there is not one word to be
found, that assertaineth this opinion.

J find in the book of Christ a double presbytery mentioned; one of the
Jews, whereof Paul speaks Act. 22. 5. the chief priest does bear me witness,
(...), and the whole state and consistory of the elders. From thence was he
armed with letters and power to Damascus, to persecute the Saints: albeit the
flower and strength of this presbytery was then cropped, what by the kingdom of
Herod, and what by the Roman Lieutenantship: the other of the Christians,
whereof we read 1. Tim. 4. 14. Neglect not the grace, which was given unto thee
etc. per impositionem m^nuu^ (...); of the company of the elders. But nether
does the former of these proportionate, nor the latter import any such
presbytery as is now exacted.

That of the Jews they suppose, though it conclude not directly, yet it
alludeth at least, and gives some warrant to the Christian eldership.
Allusions are not demonstrations. And simply to in^erre from the law to the
Gospel, from Moses to Christ, from his temporary judicials and tribunals, to
the perpetual policies and iudgment-seates of all Christian states, from
Canaan, to the whole world of Christendom, is no warrantable consequution. But
nearer to the purpose. Jn those Synedrions and Courts of the Jews, whither
that great and principal* metropolitical, parliamentary assembly, or whither
their inferior and subordinate sessions, consider in brief with me these 4.
points; 1. the persons, 2. the places, 3. the pleas, 4. the power.

1. The persons (besides Priests and Levites, which were ad subsidium (faith
Josephus) for assistance to the civil magistrate, for direction in doubts and
difficulte cases of the law, for the Lord in things appertaining to God. 2.
Chro. 19.) thosed say of the other sort, whither they were suggested by the
counsel of Jethro* Exodus 18. 21. and again repeated by Moses, Deuter. 1. 15.
they were all ^o be wise and known m^n, chief of the tribes, whom they made
Captains over thousands, and hundrethes, and fifties, and tennes, only in the
smaller matters: or whither those sea^^nty appointed by God himself for
weightier affairs. Number. 11. Moses must know them to be of the elders of the
people and governors, over them, verse. 16. Or add unto these from the first
of Number. 16. the ^vvelue Princes for the twelve tribes, they were famous in the
congregation, princes of the tribes of their fathers, and heads over thousands
of Israel. Lastly by commission from Jehosophat* 3. Chron. 19. 8. ^ none were
designed to these gouernements and judgments but the chief of the families of
Israel.

2. The place for important businesses, that which the Lord him self should
choose, 17. Deuteronomy. 8 (sometimes Shilo, sometimes Jerusalem) or for easier
causes, the Cities: throughout all the tribes* Deuteronomy. 16. 8. Or all the strong
cities in Judah. 2. Chron. 19. 5.

3 The causes, such as fell out in Co^trouersy between a man and his brother.
Deuteronomy. 1. 16. between blood and blood, plea and plea, plague and plague, Deuteronomy.
17. 8. between law and precept, statute and judgment, 2. Chron. 19. 10. Where
Amariab the Priest was ordained chief in all matters of the Lord, and Zabadiah
a ruler of the house of Judah was for all the kings affairs.

4 Lastly their power was: The people shall hear, and fear, and not do
presumptuously; and that man that shall do presumptuously, that man shall die,
Deuteronomy. 17. 12. The persons you see then, none but principal, the places
cathedral, the causes universal, the authority peremptory and final:
Lastly (which may be joined to the other) since God and the King both have their
several agents and advocates, the proceeding equal and impartial: let them
now frame their presbytery out of either of these two. Unless they will turn
Cities into Parishes, and Villages, and Hamlets; Magistrates, Priests, and
Levites into priests and people without magistrate; and regem himself
sometimes into reum; and bring Moses to his own bar; unless Princes into
mechanistes and artificers; heads into heels for the most part, and perhaps
into tails, as the scripture speaks; unless sword into keys, death into
Church Censures; Corporal into spiritual; Civil into sacred and
Ecclesiastical, which were to turn (...) Italiam, and to make a (...)
transmutation of al things, not far unlike the transubstantiation of papists,
as one compared it, they can never extract their presbytery out of those
assemblies.

Notwithstanding they have brought themselves in belief, that our Savior then
transferred the Synedrion of the Jews into the Christian Church, when he gave
that direction, Mat. 18. 15. concerning offenses Dic ecclesiae, tell the
church. A place not easy to be understood, because ecclesia is (...), a term
of Abulens.
diverse acceptions. It signifies multitudine^ ad aliquid, an assembly of any
quality, or to any purpose whatsoever, whither it be (...) or (...), lawful,
or unlawful, sacred or profane. What Dic ecclesiae truly means, dicant, qui
possunt (S. Austin of an other subject) si tamen possunt probare, quod dicunt;
ego me ignorare confit^or. How beit their argument is in danger soon to be
overthrown: tell the Church: therefore no Church in all Christianity whither to
resort for releise of our grievances, but this miscellane church of the
presbytery? For our better examination hereof;

1 Certain it is, that the offenses there meant are private and personal, and
such as lay in the power of the party offended to bury in secret without
farther discovery, (...), if thy brother shall offend against thee, and, if he
shall hear thee, thou have gained thy brother, there may be an end without
farther complaint, which in public scandals and crimes against God and his
church may not be.

2 From the apparent degrees of proceeding against such trespassers, as. 1.
(...), between thee and him alo^e; 2. (...), one or two more* 3. (...), then
tell the Church Chrysostom collecteth, vides non supplicij, se^emendationis
gratia id fieri you see the end proposed in this course is not punishment, but
amendment: therefore no need to bring the matter into open Court, there to
receive chastisement.

3 It seems the Church is not oier and determiner in these complaints,
because there is added in a fourth place, If he hear not the Church, let him
be unto thee etc. but the presbyteries I hope will both hear and determine
all that comes before them.

4 It is not said, if he hear not the Church, let the Church excommunicate
him (as the presbyteries do over-often) but (...), Let him be unto thee, as an
Ethnicke or Publican. So that he is sent back again to the plaintiff, as it
were to censure him. As much as to say, Immedi^abili ^orbo laborat (Chrysostom.)
he is incurably sick. Relinque illum morbo suo (Erasm.) leave him to his
disease: Deo Curandum (Abulens.) to be cured by God himself. Noli illum
deputare in numero fratrum tuorum, neque tamen salus eius negligenda est
(Austin) Esteem him not in the number of thy brethren yet so, as without
neglect of his salvation. How may that be? amputetur a familiari consortio
(Erasm.) abstineas ab eo vt confundatur (Origin) Hold no famyliar acquaintance
with him, that thou may put him to shame.

5 Finally there ought to be no doubt, but this was spoken to the Jews,
because the reproach is, sit tibi tanquam Ethnicus, let him be unto thee, as an
heathen: there being no nation under heaven, that disdeigned and detested
Gentiles save the Jews alone. Ethnicis, exquibus deinde composita erat
ecclesia, praeceptum dare noluit, vt seipsos fugere^t. He gave no precept to
the Gentiles, of whom the Church was afterward composed, to shunt themselves.
He would rather have said, if he had spoken to the Gentiles, sit tibi tanquam
Iudaus, let him be as a Jew unto thee. What is all this then to us Christians?

6 Shall we further ask the minds of the learned for the clearer explanation
of these words? One tells us, Non ad synagogam ablegat suos, he remitteth
Gloss. no^.
not his disciples to the synagogue, for redress of their wrongs. There was
little help to be hoped for, where they presently excommunicated all that but
professed Calvin.
Christ. An other helps out the reason, Erat tu^ ecclesia adulterata, the
Church that them was, was adulterated, and therefore unmeet to be judge over
Christians. Was there no church of Christ which they might Brent.
repair unto? Yes, fuit illorum temporum Ecclesiola, in Bucer.
deed, there was a little church at that time; but ecclesiae facies nulla, that
Church had no appearance without. Calvin.
Nay, nulla adbue ecclesia, will a third say* there was not any Church at all.
And yet we are willed, you hear, to tell the Church. Which some say was an
order Gloss. nou.
appointed by CHRIST to last to the worlds end* others, no general rule
prescribed to the Church Brent.
for all ages, but a temporatie precept like those other in the Gospel, Go not
into the way of the Gentiles; and possess not silver nor gold in your
purses. St. Jerome says, Die Ecclesiae, is as much to say, as multis dicendum
est, vt detestationieum habeant, tell many to make him hateful unto them: vt
qui pudore non potuit, sa^uetur opprobrijs, that whom honesty and ingenuity
could not, disgrace may reclaim. St. Chrysostom says, ecclesiae, that is,
his qui praeside^t ecclesiae, the rulers of the Church. Carth. ioineth the^
both in one, vel congregationi communiter, vel praelato, id est, iudici, either
the congregation at large, or the praelate, that is, the judge: no^ quod ipse
sit multitudo, sed praeest multitudini, Abulens. not that the prelate is the
whole multitude, but because he is chief over it. Aquinas likewise both.
Ecclesiae, that is, vel toti multitudini, vt co^fu^datur, vel iudicibus ut
corrigatur; either the whole multitude for his co^fusio^, or the judges for his
correction. Lastly Erasmus both: vt vel multitudinis co^sensu, vel ^oru^
authoritate qui multitudini praesunt, emendetur; that either by consent of the
multitude, or authority of those that are over the Are^.
multitude, he may be amended. Some say, Dic ecclesiae that is, in caetu
fidelium, in quo verbum and sacramenta recte administrantur; in the assembly of
the faithful wherein the word and sacraments are rightly administered. Others to
the contrary: Nemo it a accipiat quasi in Bucer.
publica concione, let no man understand it so as if in a public auditory:
for nec ratio, nec vsus suadet congreganda^^sse ecclesia^ (says Caietan) it
stands not either with reason or custom; that the whole Church should be
troubled about a private fault. Lastly they are but of yesterday, that tell you
Dic ecclesiae is no more to say, ^llyr. etc.
then Dic sentoribus et Doctoribus personam ecclesiae representa^tibus tell the
elders and Doctors that repraesent Brent.
the person of the Church: whereas it should be, rem defer ad certos illos
iudices, qui ex vniuerso corpore ecclesiae in magistratum legitime sunt electi,
defer the matter to those select judges which are lawfully chosen to the
magistracy out of the whole body of the Church. Now sum up al into one. 1.
Not to the Synagogue, why? 2. that Church was adulterated. 3. the other was but
a little Church. 4. had no face of a Church. 5. no essence. 6. an order to the
worlds end. 7. a temporary praecept. 8. elders and doctors, 9. Certain and
lawful magistrates. 10. in the assembly of the faithful. 11. not in an open
auditory. 12. multitude in common. 13. presidents over the multitude. How is it
possible out of a place of scripture, so variously interpreted by ancient and
modern writers to make faith and persuasion to the world, that the Church
intended by our Savior is that Church, which they labor for?

But they have other subsidiary scriptures, especially where the Christian
presbytery is more expressly named, that make without controversy for their
purpose. By name, that to Timothy 1. and 4. per impositionem manuum
presbyterii: which though some have expounded the office and ministration it
self, which Timothy then received, yet grant it imports an order and company
of men from whom he received it, the very imposition of hands there named does
sufficiently discharge them from being lay elders. There was a presbytery, we
deny not, in the primitive Church, that is to say a college or convent of
presbyters, assistants to the Bishop: which Ignatius in an epistle to the
Trallians calls (...), a knot of Apostles: and afterward asking what that
presbytery was, (...); answers himself, (...), an holy congregation,
counsailours and coassessours to the Bishop. And for these at the time of
ordination to hold their hands upon the heads of presbyters and deacons iuxta
manum episcopi (as you have heard before) near the hand of the Bishop was
agreeable to a Canon of the fourth counsel of Carthage.

There remains one place more 1. Tim. 5. 17. which they hold as a Delphian
oracle, their Deus Terminus, that yields to none, an unremovable argument
never to be answered.

The elders that rule well, let them be accounted worthy of double honor;
especially those that labor in the word and doctrine. This is the mine wherout
the whole body and frame of their consistory is dug, pastors, where it is
said (...), in the word; Doctors, out of the next, (...) and doctrine. Their
lay elders out of the former, (...), the elders that rule well* where (...) is
the genus common to both kinds; but the essential difference that gives name
and being, is (...); and not (...) laboring and not laboring in word and
doctrine.

(...), especially is their Mercury to interpret all; a sign of discretion and
distinction to pass betwixt the governors of both these sorts. Their illation
is, there were elders that ruled well, and labored besides in the word and
doctrine; therefore there were other elders that ruled and labored not etc.
This is the Gorgons head that amazeth and amateth all that look upon it. It
were quickly answered, by the judgment of a learned divine upon this place,
Calvinus primus est qui locum hunc de senioribus exponit, that exposition then
Adr. S^^
belike is not very old. But for fuller satisfaction.

1 All the fathers of the Church that ever interpreted this scripture, Greek,
and Latin; I add unto the^ Chrysostom. Oecumen. Theodoret. Theophyl. Jerome.
Ambrose.
the schools, and to those the later writers, (such of our own times except,
who Pigmalion-like are fallen into admiration of their own work) I aver
co^fidently, they all understand the place of (...), dispensatores verbi,
pastors, Doctors, dispensers of the word, etc. Iudicant, praedicant, so they
thought, and so they wrote and published. We may deliver their opinion
summarily in one word of Caieta^, Nomen presbyteri hoc in loco ordinis est; The
name of elder in this place is a name of order. Then where are their lay elders?

2 (...), which signifies both honor, and allowance, from the just
correspondences and circumstances of the place, is rather to be rendered in the
later sense. So Chrysostom understands it, (...), nourishment and raiment,
and the subministration of necessary things, whereof he gives the reason,
which never any law of God, nor any rule or example of the Church of Christ
awarded to these lay rulers.

3 The double that is here spoken of, (not the compensation of those that rule
ill, for they are quite excluded, and deserve nothing; but of such as rule well)
is not in comparison with any Lay governors, but double (says Chrysostom)
(...), in regard of widows (...), in regard of deacons, both which were to
have their maintenance, though not so much as others, (...), simply when he
says double he means ample, So says Theodoret, duplici, that i^, ampliori;
o^ double, and officij, et doctrinae (Jerome) both for their office and for
their pains; or double, and reverentie, and subsidij (Aquinas) both of
reverence and maintenance; or double sibi. and suis (Winton) both for
themselves, and those of their chardge.

4 (...), especially, which they make, as it were, the hindge and rudder to
turn all about, does not with those learned distinguish betwixt preaching, and
no^ preaching elders. First, Non dicit qui praesunt, sed qui been praesunt,
says Caietan, as Oecumenius before him. But who are those? Qui super officium
superinte^dendi adiungunt and laborem, who to their office of superintendencie
and oversight put also their industry. So as, nihilest hoc verbum Maxim (with
some) sed explicatio been: Especially in the later member does but explicate
well in the former: (Carthus.) Qui vere presbyteros agunt, qui non solum
integritate vitae praelucent populo, verum etiam laborant in dispensatione
sermonis evangelici (Erasmus) goodlivers, and paineful preachers. How many
interpretations might be brought to divert and disapoint their lay governors?
Jf either there were such as but red and administered* Sacraments in the Church,
and preached not (as the most reverend Archb. of Canterb. last deceased proves
at large) these may (...), rule well in their places, and be worthy of their due
regard, though not equal with others: or if there were good Bishops, which
overworne and wasted with years (whereof St. Jerome Aug. ep. 13.
spoke, Et nos nostra habuimuste^pora, We also had our times; and again, Ego
quondam miles, nunc veteranus, I was once a soldier, now a Veteran) could not
labor ep. 14.
in the word and doctrine, as aforetime, but pleaded their privilege of age,
Nobu debetur otium; yet these Id.
might continue their estimation of good governors, and deserve their honor:
or if there were those, that albeit they did (...) in the word and doctrine,
that is, take ordinary and convenient pains, yet they did not (...) (the word
here used) put themselves to exceeding and distresful labor, either by bodily
travail up and down, vsque ad lassitudinem ossium, even to the wearying of
their bones, whilst others kept their homes, or not without hazard of their
lives, because in time of persecution, the especialty and difference of honor
might be allotted to such men: or lastly the Apostle might mean that it was
not enough to live well, (...), to teach Christian philosophy Chrysostom.
by good life, to make the^ selves examples to their flocks, (some having held
an opinion, (...) Oecum.
that good life was enough to a good ruler.) (...), For there must be
instructing Chrysostom.
by word of mouth; else in matters of controversy ((...)) what does life
avail? For which cause with other Episcopal qualities (...), with hospitality,
modesty and the rest, (...) 1. Tim. 3.
the Apostle numbreth aptnes and ability to teach. So then the genuine and true
sense of the words by analogy of this whole scripture, and judgment of the
learned is: The elders not Lay, but Clergy, which govern well sibi, familijs,
gregibus, themselves, their families, their flocks, are worthy, whither of
high regard, or abundant supply, or both, it skilleth not: especially those
that labor in word and doctrine, not Pastors and Doctors distinct; but in
verbo scientibus, in doctrina ignorantibus (Anselm.) in the word to those that
know already, in doctrine to those that are yet to learn; in verbo
exhortationis, in doctrina instructionis (Carth.) in word of exhortation in
doctrine of instruction: in verbo exhortatorio affectus, doctrina instruente
intellectum (Caiet) exhortation for the affections, instruction for the
understanding. Where (...) especially, needs not be aduersatiue, or a
particle of discretion, but may be put (...) to serve for interpretation, they
that rule well, that is to say, they that labor etc. nor does it signify
praesertim especially, for the^ they think it should have been (...), with
some other help put to it; but plurimum earnestly: nor is it praepositum, a
particle of praeposition set before the verb, but appositum of appositio^, to
be construed after it in this sense, maxim laborantes, that is, laborantes
maxim. Or if they will needs have it distinctiue and to make a difference
between two sorts, yet does it not follow of diverse persons, but parts of
their calling; not subjects, but respects; not generum, but munerum, kinds and
professions of men, but branches of their function. As if you should say for
example sake, the Ministers that rule well in attendance and care of their
flocks, and that labor in word and doctrine, are worthy of double honor;
especially those that seek and maintain the peace of the Church: In which
speech the persons are still the same that were, but their qualities and
duties diuersified. Or thus: the King that rules his people well, and
labors the good both of Church, and commonwealth, is worthy of double
honor, both of allegiance, and alowance from his subjects; especially he that
takes up the cross of Christ, and bears his soul in his hands, as ready
and as likely to lay down his life for defense of the truth, as any of his
subjects. Lastly, what mine opinion of this sentence in hand is, can no way
better appear, then by a parallel piece of scripture 1. These. 5. at the 12.
verse. Compare it with this to Timothy, and you shall find not the morning and
evening suns more like. Now we be seech you brethren that you know them, which
labor amongst you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you; that you
have them in singular love for their work sake. For (...) to Timothy, you have
(...) here, from the same theme, superiors in both; there (...), and here
(...), in both laboring; for word and doctrine in the one, in the other,
(...), admonition* there (...), double honor, here (...), singular love;
Lastly the reason is here given of this superabundant affection toward the^,
(...) for their work sake, which is the truest employed cause of honor in that
other place, since (...) is no more to say, then especially for that they labor
amongst you.

But it has fared with our brethren in this case, as with him that stood on
the Key at Athens, and every ship that was arriving toward the haue^ he cried
was his: so they wheresoever they have met with any word though but common and
general, and diversely expounded, yet that bears any the least propension and
favor toward the upholding of the eldership, presently they conclude that
very species and sort of all others, which they most fansy: as if all winds
blew for their government, and none else.

Thence they inferred from the 18. of Math. Tell the Church, Ergo no Church
there but this presbytery. Thence from the rule to Timothy, The elders that
rule well etc. therefore these lay elders. Thence, from the 12. to the Romans he
that rules with diligence, thefore these rulers. And 1. Cor. 12. because
(...), gouermentes, is one of the gifts of the holy Ghost there named,
therefore this government. Because Tertullian has, In Apol.
Praesident apud nos probati quique seniores, theer govern with us none but
approved seniours: And Jerome upon Esaias 3. Nos habemus in ecclesia senatum
nostrum, caetu^ presbyterorum, we have in the Church our senate, a company of
presbyters; and upon. Tit. 1. Communi presbyterorum consilio regeba^tur
ecclesiae, Churches were governed by a common counsel of presbyters; quorum
sine consilio nihil agebatur in ecclesia, Ambr. upon 1. Tim. 5. without whose
counsel nothing was done in the Church: (which may be well understood of
elders in years and experience and gravity, having some te^porary commission
to assist in ordering the Church, but no ordination perpetual and divine, as
is now urged;) therefore these and none others are those preside^ts, and
senators, and advisers intended by the fathers.

I am now at an end: And I heartily wish in the bowels of our Savior there
might at last be an end of all these controversies* that in variety of opinions
our brethren would propose to themselves the example of the ancient fathers, of
whom it is said, sanctorum patrum disputationes non contentiones, sed
collationes erant; the fathers conferred and reasoned about matters in
question, contended not. It is agreed betwixt St Jerome and St Austin before
they dispute vt veritas superet, that truth may be the conqueror: Cumque tu
v^ceris, says the one, and ego vincam, si errore^ meum intellexer^; et e
contrario me vincente t^ superas: upon that condition, whither you or I win,
we both win by understanding our errors. Cyprian (of who^ before) though
dissenting in judgment from other 1. De bapt. Cont. Donat 18.
learned of the Church, yet never severed himself, and persuaded others
likewise not to do it: Et si se ille se parasse^, quam multi sequerentur,
quantum sibi nomen inter homines faceret quanto lo^gius Cyprianistae, quam
Donatistae vocare^tur? Cyprians breach with the church would have drawn many
followers after him, and have spread the name of Cyprianists, farther then
Donatistes. But in whom there is more then this, a willing and wilful
disturbance of the churches peace, I would in the name of God they were
thoroughly persuaded, that they are as strictly bound to preserve vnum, as
verum, unity, as verity, pacem, as fidem, the quiet as the faith of the Church:
and that there will be little difference held at Salomons rent-day, whither
they have wounded the head, which is Solomon himself with haeretical opinion,
or whither lacerated and rent in pieces his body with schismatic
distraction. Ecclesia est illud corpus Christi, quod charius habuit, quam quod
tradidit morti: He gave his natural body to death to redeem his Ad Ephesians.
homil. 11. mor
mystical, which was much dearer unto him. Dico and obtestor (was the fearful
protestation of St. Chrysostom) ne quis dicat, nemo dixit, ignorau^^us, non
put avimus peccatum: I say and protest that no man may plead ignorance,
ecclesiam scindere non minus est peccatum, quam in haere ^in incidere, schism
in the church is as great a sin as haresie. And, from the judgment of an
holy man ( dixit vir sanctus) inexpiabilis culpa, nec Cyp.
sanguine eluitur macula ista: the fault is vnexpiable; the blood of martyrdom
cannot wash out this spot. I now call to mind a dialogue that Tully has in
his books de legibus; where interloquution passes between 3. Philosophers,
Quintus, Marcus, and Atticus. The argument was definibus bonorum and malorum.
The first begins, Controversam rem and plenam dissensionis inter
doctissimos: a matter of great controversy and debate amongst the most
learned: the second, sed aliqua^do tamen iudicandam, yet it must be determined:
the third, qui istuc fieri potest A. Gellio mortuo? how can it ever be since
A. Gellius is dead? Quintus replieth, quid tandem id adre^? what is that to the
matter? Atticus answers him, J have heard that he called all the Philosophers
at Athens into one place, and earnestly labored them to set some end to their
controversies; quod si essent eo animo vt nollent at atem in litibus conterere,
posse rem convenire: if they were of that mind that they would not spend
their days in strife, they might come to agreement. Blessed be the name of
God, we have no such impediment to the composing of our controversies. Our A.
Gellius lives (and long may he live, even for ever and ever.) But why do I
borrow a profane name? Rather out of my text, our Solomon, our Pacificus
lives, who after the Prince of our peace, has best interpreted this name
amongst us; who has turned swords into sithes, and spears into matt^ckes, and
set peace within the borders of his own kingdoms and of nations about us.
Whose first and foremost care has bin not only to plant a vineyard (even to
build Churches where Churches were not) but to plant it in Baal-hamon, in rich
and fertile ground, to endow it with land and living, to bring tithes and
oblations into the Mal. 3.
store house, that there may be meat in the house of the Lord for Prophets and
their sons after them. A good and gracious Araunah: of who^ it is witnessed,
2. Sam. vlt* that he gave to the king and as a king; both his threshing store
for an altar, and his oxen for sacrifice, and his chariots and plough-harnesse
for fire. Our King and as a King, has taken no less care out of his royal and
religious heart, both for altar, sacrifice, and fire, for church, and
maintenance to it. And finding by experience the miserable policy of that
discipline, which has brought upon the ministers of the gospel verissimos
labores and certissimam egestatem, vnstinted pains, and undoubted penury,
having turned the livings of the Church into Nunries (one says) I know not his
meaning, unless he understand Nonres, or non entia, (as you heard the last
day) seeks by all princely means to put blood into the veins of the Church
again, which many daughters of the horsleach have sucked out, and to bring
back to life that presbyterium, liuelyhoode of the Church, which many a Julian
has done away, and to the profligation whereof, even that presbytery, whereof
we speak, has been accessory. There wants nothing, for ought I see, but so
much wisdom and grace and thankfulness in us that are the keepers of the
vineyard, as to embrace the opportunity of time now offered us, which our
fathers before us would have been glad of, and posterity after us heartily
wish for: and all contentions laid aside, join hand and heart with his
religious Majesty in propagation of this vineyard, and propugnation of the
gospel and faith of Christ; whose life more precious then thousa^ds of ours
(as the people spoke of David's) is a thousand times more sought after, the^ any
of ours; as if the enemies of God and his majesty had decreed amongst
themselves, as the Aramites against the King of Israel 1. reg. 22. fight
neither against great nor small, save only against the King of GREAT BRITAIN
and his OFFSPRING. Our Kalanders of so many black and fatal days, wherein
there was but a step between him and death, shall record to posterity his
faithful and constant dealing with the covenant of God, and cause them to
bless his memory, and speak al good of his name: Which to be done in our
days, whom it rather concerns in duty to acknowledge, and who reap the
fruit of his virtues, is accounted the sol^cismes and barbarismes of the Court,
and those that shall doit, the kings parasites and flatterers. They are
deceived that so think: there is no such solaecisme nor barbarism in it. It
is true grammar loquution, or rather sound chapel and church divinity to
bless where God has blessed. If an angel from heaven were the subject of my
speech, J would not call sour, sweet: my tongue should rather cleave for ever
to the roof of my mouth. Shall J not therefore call sweet, sweet? and confer
honor (even to the honor of Gods own name, joy of our hearts, encouragement
and provocation of so illustrious iustrume^ts to go on their course) where God
has conferred it? Surely J will* and therefore J conclude with that of the
Queen of Saba to 1. Reg. 10.
Salomo^, blessed be the Lord thy God which loved THEE to set thee on the
thro^e of Britain, because the Lord lo ued BRITAIN for ever, and made thee
King to do a quity and justice. O Lord give thy judgments to the King and thy
righteousness to the Kings son. And as Genesis 49.
Jacob prophesied of that scepter, that it should not depart from Judah til
Shiloh came, so if thy holy will be, let not the scepter of these Kingdoms
depart from our Jacob, our Solomon, our pacificus and his Line, till that
Shiloh come again. To whom with the father and the holy ghost, al might and
mercy be ascribed in his Church for ever.

FINIS.

