FUNERAL ELEGIES; Consecrated to the immortal memory, of the Right Honorable
the Lady Katherine Paston, late wife to the truly noble, and heroicke, William
Paston of Oxned Esquire.

Vivit post funera virtus. LONDON, Printed by T. Cotes, for Andrew Crook,
dwelling at the sign of the Gun in Ivy-lane. 1637.

To the no less honored, for virtuous habits, and natural endowments, than
high birth, the Lady Elizabeth Bertue, Daughter to the right Noble, and most
accomplished Lord, ROBERT Earl of Lindsey, etc.
Madam,
TO render an acknowledgement of those great engagements and duties which J
shall ever owe to the illustrious memory of that most serene and truly
honorable Lady your dear deceased Sister, to whom you were as nearly allied
in virtue as in blood, J humbly present these modest Elegies to salute your
maiden palms: Not only mine, but the generally received opinion, of her most
conspicuous worth, and honor has importuned me (who was her most unworthy
beneficiary) to undertake the performance of this service; and the unstained
candor of your noble disposition persuades me not to despair of your gracious
acceptance.

Your Honors most humbly devoted servant Ra. Knevet.

Funeral Elegies.
Eleg. 1.
ANd must our brows with Cypress sad be bound?
Because Calista is with glory crowned,
Immortal splendent bays, that grow upon
Mount Sion high, not earthly Helicon.
In sable dark must we our bodies dight?
Because our Saint is clad in robes of white.
Shall we on earth sob forth our Elegyes?
While she sings Allelujah in the skies:
Our sorrows are prepost'rous, and we err
In offering patheticke songs to her,
Whose virtues rare require a Lyrists quill,
Or rather Panegyrists learned skill.
Homer, and Virgill caroling her praise,
(Had they lived now) might well have won the bays,
Although the Iliads, and the Aeneids both,
Had nere been borne: these works were built on froth:
For it is a question, not resolved yet,
When Ilium was sacked, or whether it,
Was ruined by the Greeks at all; and why
Should Virgill censured be for flattery?
'Cause he derived the great Cesarian name,
From Varlets, that survived their Cities flame,
From one that left his friends, and wife engaged,
When bloody Mars, and fiery Vulcan ragd:
Doubtless a pious Knight, and debonaire,
Who brought his wronged Mistress to despair,
Then fled from her, whom basely he deceived,
Though nobly she had him, and his relieved.
True Virtue is my subject, and that such,
As seldom did ere Woman own so much.
Honors great example, beauties bright throne,
The Temple of sincere religion,
An Altar of unfaigned piety,
The Golden branch of true nobility,
The Palace of the Graces, and the sphere,
Wherein no cloud, nor meteour did appear,
The Pyramid of love, Truths precious shrine,
The help, and hope of all the sacred nine,
The Treasury of thoughts pure, and sublime,
The Phoebe, and the Phoenix of her time;
All these was she: yea more then these was she:
But what she was, clear Angels only see;
For tongue, or pen of Man, cannot express
Such bright unlimited existences.
She was: she is declind: she being gone,
The World that had two Suns, has now but one;
And we envelop'd in a night of sorrow,
In darkness mourn, despairing of a morrow;
For who can be so rich of hope, t'expect
That Nature can her Parallel erect,
Since she on her expended has such store
Of gifts, that she is become a bankrupt poor?
As when some wealthy Tradesman does demise,
The sum of all his richest merchandise,
In a fair vessel to the fickle seas,
Hoping to reap a plentiful increase,
By this adventure; but the Winds conspire
With froward Neptune, to cross his desire,
And ruin all his hopes, for in one hour
The greedy Ocean does his goods devour:
So our rich Argosie (which fraighted was,
Not with Tobacco, Indico, nor glass,
But with pearls, gemmes, gold, amber, spiceries,
Arabian gummes, and what the treasuries
Of the two Indies could afford) is lost,
Her fair carine's wracked on the shelvy coast
Of frail mortality: The Grave has won
Natures chief jewel, and the World's undone:
The golden chain of causes is dissolved,
And Chaos (that so long has been involved
In the unseene abyss) attempts to rise,
And make both Orbs, and Elements his prize.
The Worlds soul's fled; the exit of her breath,
Threatens (I fear) an universal death;
For in her fate all virtues did decline,
All beauties were eclipst, and ceast to shine:
But if true honor shall her end survive,
If real worth shall in her absence thrive,
Posterity shall her example praise,
For such great benefits, numbering those days,
Which she spent here on earth, with pebbles white:
Princes shall trophyes rear, and Poets write,
Striving to make her name last with her bliss,
And raise her fame as high as now she is.
As the Pantarba, brightet of all gemmes,
Does darkest nights enlighten with her beams,
And by a hidden sympathy, attract
Adjacent stones, in heaps together packt;
But Nature, least a jewel so renowned,
Should lose esteem, by being often found,
Has in the bowels of the center, hid
This precious secret, and decreede beside,
That being found it soon again is lost,
If not preserved, with wondrous care, and cost:
So our bright Goddess, (whose resplendent worth
That in this night of vice, did rays send forth
Of sanctity divine, drawing all hearts,
To honor, and adore, so high deserts)
Was soon snatched hence, yet not through our neglect,
Or want of due obsequious respect;
But rather 'cause Heaven thought the world unfit,
For such a gemme to be a Cabinet.
The Coral growing in the Ocean blew,
Wants hardness, and retains a pallid hue:
There churlish billows often the same do daunt;
But when air breathes upon this watery plant,
It instantly becomes a crimson stone,
And many precious properties puts on;
The Artist then it with pure metal deckes,
For Infant Kings, to wear about their necks.
So pious souls, that in the Ocean wide,
Of this tumult'ous universe abide,
No firm existence, nor fair luster have,
Tossed to and fro by every adverse wave,
Of sorrowful disasters, but when Time
Has them advanced above the stars sublime,
Then consorts they become of Angels bright,
Adorned with golden crowns, and vestures white.
Thus change of native soil brings Souls to bliss
A Wiseman much by travel betterd is.
But ye fair eyes, Apostrophe to La. E. B.
like diamonds richly set,
On a white, rosy, circuled carkanet,
That late sweld up the streams of cristall The name of the river running at
the foot of Oxned.
Bure,
With your more cristall tears, and rills more pure,
Forbear to drop those pearls, lest your sad none,
Transform your selves to stars, and us to stone:
(Thrice honored Lady) you that lately were
The sweet associate, of your Sister dear,
When ye like those auspicious lights did shine,
Which happy calmes to Mariners presigne.
Like Turtles chaste, or silver-brested Swannes
Stroking the thin air with their snowy fannes,
Ye late appeared: but cruel Death (God wot)
With ruthlesse blade, has cut the Gordian knot
Of your society, Death only could divide,
Such blessed bonds, a league so strongly tied.
Nor can expense of sorrows find redress,
For this sad accident, or make it less:
Griefs are no cures for ill's, and do arise
From humane weakness, not from reason wise.
When great Darius, of his consort dear
Deprived was, by Atropos severe,
To grief he renderd up his royal breast,
No solace would he take, nor any rest.
Then grave Democritus informed the King,
That he from death, to life his Queen would bring,
If he would grant him, what he should entreat,
For the effecting of a work so great:
Darius condescends, and bids him ask,
What means he thought convenient for this task:
Names of three Persons only he requested,
That never had with sorrow been molested,
For losses of a kinsman, or a friend.
The King then did strict inquisition send,
Through all his Kingdoms, to search out such men:
But when they could be no where found nor seen
He found his error, and the fatal law
Of unmoved destinye, and nature saw;
Hence took he comfort, and with bounty high;
The Wiseman for his cure did gratify.
Grief is a passion, and all passions must
Confined be, unto a measure just,
Lest they like swelling spring tides overthrow
The banks of Reason, and the same oerflow:
Like Nilus they are not, who rising high
Presageth plenty and fertility;
Nor must they always in their channels run,
Like him, but suffer intermssion:
For sorrow that is never spent or done,
Flows like the infernal River Acheron:
And they who with perpetual groans express
Their passions, for a friend gone hence in peace,
Like croaking frogs in muddy styxe become,
While the bewailed enjoyes Elysium.
Jove (on a time) the Goddesses did call
To an assembly, where among them all
He dignities and honors did impart,
Well corresponding with each ones desert:
Too late Dame-Sorrow to this meeting came,
Whom Jove (for tardinesse) did justly blame
For he bestowed had all his gifts before,
And had for her no honor left in store;
But she importuned him, for to confer
Some favor, or gratuity on her:
He (having nothing else) unto her lent
The tears, and plaints, which are at fun'rals spent:
Now as each Goddess loves those persons well,
Whose sweet oblations she is wont to smell,
So if to sorrow we shall often bring
Sad sighs, and mourning, for an offering,
She never will forsake us: But if we
Neglect her humble votaries to be,
Withdrawing those sad duties she requires,
Like one despised, she soon from us retires.
If tears concerned the good of souls deceast,
Of if they could add ought unto their rest,
I should turn Heraclitus, and lament,
Until my eyes had all that moisture spent,
Which from the brain they take (this being done)
They should dissolve themselves, and in tears run,
Expending in an office so divine,
Both humors aqueous, and christalline:
But since that tears (on such occasions shed)
Nor benefit the living, nor the dead,
Let us them for a better end reserve;
They rightly used, for precious balmes may serve:
Nor do I Stoicall paradoxes hold;
For they deliver, that no Wiseman should
Give way to griefs, I rather think it fitter,
That none should drink too deep of cups so bitter:
But never did excessive sorrows merit
Such liberty, and freedom to inherit,
As lately, when she left our horizon,
Whose presence made our age a golden one:
Honor, Grief, Joy, shall never cease to express
Her Virtue, Death, and present happiness:
And if that Reason, shall prohibit all
Immod'rate tears, for such a funeral,
The Nights shall mourn in blackes, and Mornes, shall weep,
Until Calista wakes, from her last sleep.
Eleg. 2.
Retreat (sad passions) to your channels now,
Let sorrows inundations cease to flow:
Griefs, (which distinguish Mortals from the Gods)
Ought to be limited with periods,
Lest action by such torrents overborne,
Should virtue leave abandoned to the scorn
Of faithless Fortune, her undoubted slave.
Then cease (ye weeping Hyades) to lave
That marble shrine, wherein those relics lie,
Which (whilome) harbored such nobility,
That all our tears shed there (though we were sure
We could drop richest pearls or amber pure)
Were to be valued, or esteemd no more,
Then if a cisterne small should spend his store,
To gratify the swelling Ocean:
No more, then if fond Time should lend a spanne
Of his finite dimension, to supply
The wants of infinite Eternity.
Her worth was so sublime, so clear, so full,
That humane intellects prove weak, and dull,
While they the same contemplate, wanting might,
(Like bastard Eaglets) to behold such light.
The Caspian-seas stand mur'd in hilly bounds,
Yea Neptunes Empire, airye Jove surrounds;
A lucide Orb of fire does these enfold,
The Heavens about the Elements are roul'd;
Heavens are invovl'd with Heavens; the stars decline
Unto their periods: Time and Place confine
This great magnificence of Natures store,
But She (whose early absence we deplore)
Surmounts all these immensities, as far,
As does the largest sphere, the smallest star.
I injure her (I fear) while I compare
Those things, which frail, and transitory are,
With that immortal, unimagin'd bliss,
Which crowns her, in her Apotheosis;
Then stoop (my Muse) from that celestial place,
Whose radiant luster, and translucent grace,
Those crowned Candidates can only gust,
Who have put off their mourning weeds of dust.
Like that fair Bird, in snowy plumage dressed,
Which silver Po does plow with his soft breast,
Singing his requiem, to the sighing stream;
So let my Muse assume the stately theme,
Of true nobility, and real worth,
While she in buskined strain, strives to set forth
True honor to the life; list to my song,
Ye that have souls; to you these Odes belong:
If Men will not give ear, then Rocks and Trees
Shall conge's give, and echo plaudit'es,
While I of her do sing: for virtues fire
Does animate more bodies, then the Lyre
Of Orpheus could: her pure celestial heat
Invites the God's themselves, with Men to treat.
Virtue alone, is to be valued more,
Then many painted scutchions, or a score
Of swelling titles, for numerous descents,
And titles, be but her gay ornaments:
It argues but a spirit dull and cold,
To summon monuments and statues old,
For proof to gentry, or a name to rear,
On what the worms have left; as if we were
Devoide of arts and hearts, whereby to merit
That praise, and bays, which virtue should inherit;
And must become beholding unto stones,
For all our styles, and reputations:
But where illust'rous ancestry we find,
Annexed unto an honorable mind,
Nobility there shines like Luna bright,
With orbed face, amongst stars of lesser light.
As ciphers (by themselves) no sums design,
But if with figures ye the same combine,
Large numbers they compose; so ancestry
For nothing stands, if virtue be not by.
What need I thus expatiate, or search through
The golden grove of ethickes, for to show
A definition, or a character
Of this heroical habit, since in her
(Of whom I sing) nobility did shine,
With such pellucid rays, and beams divine,
That it essential seemed, and not acquired;
Not accidental, but from heaven inspired.
Heaven lent her to the earth, and would not trust
With such a gemme (too long) a world of dust;
But like a prudent Creditour becomes,
That calls for quick repayment of those sums,
Which to profuser Prodigalls he lent,
To free himself from further detriment,
Which through forbearance of so large a debt,
Must needs result; Had she bin longer kept
On Earth, perhaps base Earth would then have vaunted
Of her fruition, whom the blessed Heavens wanted.
The Lilly, Rose, and fragrant Violet,
Those choicest gemmes of Floras cabinet,
Show life's epitomes, and then retreat
To longer deaths, in Vestas bosom great:
Where they must sleep, until Apollo shall
Come from his southern progress, and recall
(With his reviving heat) them to review
The world, and it adorn, with their bright hue:
For as Antheus, by his stronger foe,
Thrown to the earth, recovered vigor so;
So do terrestrial seeds from earth derive
Their vital strength, and humor nutritive.
The Sun resignes to Vesper, and each star
Retires at the return of Phoebus carre;
Thus by a natural vicissitude,
Alternally things alterd, are renewd
In their corruptions, ever rise, and fall,
'Till in a conflagration general,
This World like the Arabian Bird shall burn,
That an immortal Phoenix, from her urne
May rise, arrayd with those illustr'ous plumes,
Which neither age decays, nor time consumes.
But the (whom we lament) although she tried
No more then one short life, and but once died,
Yet her one funeral did on us light,
More like a public ruin, then the weight
Of any private cross, yea we may call
Her death, a greivance epidemicall,
A loss, which no reprisall can redress,
Whose greatness, rather silent griefs express,
Then golden lines, for passions do exceed
Those measures, which the modest Muses tread,
Nor can the sorrows of a troubled mind,
By any pen, or pencill be confined.
But whether strayes my wandering Muse misled
Through Labyrinthes of cares, by sorrows thread,
As if she were intent, with dreary lays,
To aim at Cypress wreaths, not crowns of bays?
Let sad Electra, hidden in her sphere,
Lament incinerated Ilium there:
Let Niobe in Sypileian stone,
Latonas hate, and her own pride bemone:
Let Biblis melted to a cold clear bourne,
For her incest'ous fires still wail and mourn.
Yea let ambiguous tears those fun'ralls steep,
Where riper Heirs, or younger widows weep:
Like personated Mourners at the graves,
Of some old crabbed, and decrepit knaves.
Such feigned libations we abhor, and fear
To make false immolations unto her,
Who was so true, so noble, so divine,
In name, and really a Derivat. a Graec. (...), purus.
Katherine.
She had no spots like Cynthia, nor was she
Mercuriall, or like light Cythere:
But She Astraea was: Astraea just,
Who fleeing hence, did leave old Time entrust,
To keep in wardrobe cold her robes of clay;
But if these shall through his neglect decay,
Yet shall she find at last this vesture frail,
Transmuted to a fresh immortal veyle.
Eleg. 3.
1.
WHen Hills, and Valleys, wrapped in sheets of snow,
Did penance for their summer luxury,
And Winter old unto the world did show,
The Sceletons of trees, muffling the sky
With vapors cold, and strewing frequently
The earth with watery confects, then I stood
On that fair tract, where Bure creeps lazily
To pay his tribute to a greater flood,
Clept Yar, none of the meanest of blew Neptunes brood.
2.
There I beheld the snowy Swannes retreat,
Unto the silver creekes, with motion sad:
Each face of things expressed a ruin great,
But two-fac'd Ianus all in sable clad,
Those joyous sports, and merryments forbad,
Which whilome he was wont to tolerate:
The Gods themselves (it seems) a feeling had,
Of our disasters, when Calista's fate,
Our sorrows, and her endless joys did propagate.
3.
Calista fair, at whose nativity,
All happy stars auxiliary were,
With kind aspects, shining auspiciously:
For as each gentle God and Goddess clear,
Pandora did adorn with bount'ous cheer,
Placing on her all properties divine,
Which made her so unparalled appear;
So did both fixed, and errant stars combine
With precious gifts, to dignifie this Heroine.
4.
Though from illust'rous ancestors she came,
From Lords sublimed, for chivalrous renown;
Yet did her virtues overtoppe her name,
And all those adventitious glories crown,
Which Fortune, or high birth, had on her thrown:
Her piety, and worth, was so immense
That Heaven (it seems) sent this Panthaea down,
As some great blessing, but revoked her hence
For our ingratitude, or some such high offense.
5.
Death like Ulysses (while we were intent
To sports, and triumphs, dreading no distress,
And fearelesse of so dire an accident)
Stole our Palladium hence, the Patroness
Of all our hopes, and chiefest happiness:
Then Feasts were turned to funerals, no name
Was heard that any solace did express,
And all our mirth, like burning Troy became,
Consumed to cinders black, in griefs uncessant flame.
6.
As when the Vestall fires extinguished were,
Through some unhappy Virgins frail neglect,
Then Romes Patricians, fraught with dreary cheer,
In mourning habits dight, were wont t'expect
The dreadful issue, of some dire effect,
So when that lucid flame, which did maintain,
Calista's life by cruel death was checked,
Sighs did abound, and sorrows flow amain,
Eyes did their banks inundate and each cheek distaine.
7.
Man's a plant animal, a tree revers't,
Whose root's the brain, his limbs the branches be,
But blood's the sap, through every vein dispers't,
Which aliment imparts with justice free,
Unto each member of this mysticke tree:
Hair are the leaves, which do the same attire,
Excrescent humors are the gummes (we see)
Flowing from thence; the fruit which does aspire,
Be actions good, or ill; the seed whereof's desire.
8.
But our fair plant, (the fairest that ere grew)
Such apples on her Verdant branches bare,
As the Hesperian Gardens never knew,
Nor had Alcinous any fruit so rare;
She was a tree, with which none might compare:
This Tree by Heaven's decree transplanted is;
We of her happy shade deprived are,
While she removed into eternal bliss,
Becomes a Tree of life, in highest Paradise.
9.
Letter-puff'd Pedants boldly dare aver,
That every star another world contains;
These, Cities in the skies would seem to rear,
Yet build but Castles in the air (fond swains)
That strange conclusions, from fanaticke brains
Strive to produce, when they below might see
(Perhaps) more Worlds; for Verity maintains
That Man's Microcosme; each he or she
Is of a greater World, the brief epitome.
10.
Man's head is heaven, the brighter stars fixed there
Are Fancy, Intellect, and Memory,
The senses eke like Planets do appear,
Each in his sphere, the Heart which does supply
All parts with vital heat, is Phoebus high;
The liver is the Moon, whose pregnant breasts
With purple juice embalmes this Monarchy;
Four Humors are the Elements, and these
The basement do compose of this celestial piece.
11.
But such a world was our Calista bright,
As was the world, before it injurd was,
Through Woman's weakness, and a Serpents spite:
For as a sevenfold luster then did grace
Each glorious star, and planet, in his place;
As then earth bred no plant of bad effects,
Nor nourished any beast of savage race;
So clearest worth adorned in all respects,
This peerless Dame, who was the glory of her sex.
12.
Sharp-sighted Speculatists perhaps may find
The causes of those colors, that array
The flowery meades in May, some subtle mind
May the abstruse decrees of stars survey,
Or light on the (long sought for) North-west way
The Elixir may be found by Art; the cause
Of swift Euripus flux, Time may bewray:
But never shall appear in time, or place,
So rare a creature, as divine Calista was.
13.
Nature turned Spagyricke in forming her:
Of ordinary stuff she was not made,
But of extracted matter, pure, and clear,
Which Natures Chymistrie prepared had,
By separating the good, from the bad:
This happy temper did in her impresse,
Those rich endowments, with which she was clad;
Virtue, and Beauty; Women blessed with these
Become incarnate Angels, earthly Goddesses.
14.
As that fair Picture of the Cyprian Queen,
Drawn by the Coan Painter, did exceed
The bravest pieces, that were ever seen,
Though it was not complete, nor finished;
Even so Calista's life though soon it fled,
Ere she of youth had passed the vernall Line,
Before Time had her to her Solstice led;
Yet this short life of hers was so divine,
That it long lives of earthly Saints seemed to out shine.
15.
And though her luster was extinct so soon,
Yet she no Comet was, no falling star,
No fading Meteour, or changing Moon;
But she a Sphere was, wherein Virtues rare,
Like fixed auspicious Asterismes did glare,
Whose glories did the Deity invite,
To free this blessed Orb, from earthly care,
Transposing her to his eternal light,
So to augment the splendour of his kingdom bright.
16.
She was betimes discharged from griefs, and fears;
Yea grant, she might have interrestriall bliss,
Exceeded a whole Myriade of years;
Yet had she bin no more like what she is,
Than Atoms be to largest substances;
For things finite, no due proportion hold,
With any infinite existences:
But in some measure, may our eyes behold
Her past, and present state, by setting dross to gold.
17.
By help of Jacobs staff, the Artist wise
May take the altitude of any star;
But Jacobs ladder only will suffice,
For us to view those blessings singular,
Wherewith all pious Souls enriched are,
The precious bowels of Mount Poosin,
Pearls and rich Amber, which the Seas prepare,
The choicest gemmes of Natures Magazine,
Are merely counterfeits, compared with wealth divine.
18.
(Oh lovely Sex) the Worlds most fair half part,
That ar't by heavens high providence designd,
To be a coadjutrice, to impart
Constant duration, to that mortal kind,
Which God has with his proper image signed,
This precious jewels loss do thou lament,
By whom thou did such estimation find;
For she is gone, whose virtues excellent,
The chiefest price and luster to all females lent.
19.
(Ye gentle Ladies) Luminaries bright
Of this worlds sphere, terrestrial Goddesses,
That murder like the Basiliskes with sight,
Who are by Natures bounty, graced no less,
Then Arts, and ornaments advantages;
By her example fair discern, and see
The way, that leads to truest happiness;
Tread ye Calista's paths, and strive to be
As chaste, as pious, and as good, as late was she.
20.
She was: her glass is run; her periods done;
Oh sentence fraught with dole and dreary care.
She was esteemed the ages Parragon,
For qualities, and all those habits rare,
Wherein heroical beauties ought to share;
Oh honored name, and fame that never dies.
She is enthroned above the highest star,
Crowned with the sum of all felicities;
Oh bliss, not to be seen by any mortal eyes.
Inscriptio funebris.
Haec Niobe tegit, defletque funestus exuvias, celeberrimae Dnae. D. Katherinae
Paston, quondam Sponsae dilectissimae, dignissimi Viri Gulielmi Paston,
Armigeri, filiaeque natu maximae, honoratissimi Domini, Roberti Comitis
Lindisiae, Magni Angliae Camerarii, and Constabularii, etc.

Haec Heroina sublimes suos natales summa v^rtute superavit, vixit omnibus tam
corporis quam animi dotibus omnifariam, abu deque ornata, and honorata. Ex
dolor puerperii pientissime obiit 3. Calend. Ianuar. An. Dom. 1636

Tres Filiolos spectatissimae, speratissimaeq indolis superstites, mill vero
moerores, suis reliquit.

Epicedium.
Needs She another Monument of stone,
Who had so many better than this one?
All which were Noble Hearts, whom her decease,
Transmuted into marble Niobes:
Each tomb was arched about with weeping eyes,
Whom sorrows blasts, did likewise cristalize:
True Piety, Virtue, Love, and honored Blood,
On both sides, as Corinthian columns stood:
Three Children Angels were, which did disperse
Youth, Beauty, Wealth, like flowers on each hearse:
A foliage of humane frail estate,
The basement of the work did variate:
But Glory like a Pyramid above,
The Fabric crowned, and reached the Court of Jove.
Though these, renowned Mausoleums were,
Yet her sad Consort reared this structure here,
That future Ages might from it collect,
Her matchless merit, and his true respect.
FINIS.

