THE THEORIKE AND PRACTIKE OF MODERN WARS, Discoursed in Dialogue wise.

WHEREIN IS DECLARED THE NEGLECT OF Martial discipline: the inconvenience
thereof: the imperfections of many training Captains: a redress by due
regard had: the fittest weapons for our Modern War: the use of the same:
the parts of a perfect soldier in general and in particular: the Officers in
degrees, with their several duties: the imbattailing of men in forms now most
in use: with figures and Tables to the same: with sundry other martial
points. Written by ROBERT BARRET.

Comprehended in six Books.

Ozar morir, da la vida. ANCHORA SPEI
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for William Ponsonby. 1598.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
VNG IE SERVIRAY
blazon or coat of arms

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MY SINGVLAR GOOD LORD, HENRY EARL OF PEMBROKE, LORD
HARBERT OF Cardiffe, Marmion, and Saint Quintin, Lord President of her
Majesty's Council established in the Principality and dominions of Wales,
and the Marches of the same; of the most noble order of the Garter, knight;
Lord Lieutenant within the Principality and dominions of South Wales and
North Wales, and the Marches thereto adjoining; and of the Counties of VVilt
and Sommerset, etc.
RIght Honorable, having spent the most part of my time in the profession of
Arms, and that among foreign nations, as the French, the Dutch, the Italian,
and Spaniard, I have been moved by sundry my friends, to set down in writing
such Martial points, as I have noted, gathered, or learned from them, whereby,
such young Gentlemen, and others, my willing country men, as have not, as yet,
entered within the bounds of Mars his bloody field, may, at the last, gather
some instructions, to be the readier at the Alarm given: the which seems not
far off. And since my principal scope and purpose has been, to open these
discourses to the behoof of the younger and vnexperimented sort, I have
therefore emboldened my self, with your good Honors consent, and favor, to
dedicate them unto that Noble young Lord your son, as a matter (were it
handled by a more perfect soldier then my self) befitting his Lordship, as
well for the Martial virtues already shining in him, as for the sympathy that
his honorable birth and Nobility has with this subject which we treat of,
being war and Arms. Thus humbly craving your good honors consent, I beseech
the Almighty for ever to bless you with all honor and felicity.

Your Honors humbly at command, ROBERT BARRET.

TO THE RIGHT NOBLE YOUNG LORD, WILLIAM, LORD HARBERT of Cardiffe, son and
Heir apparent to the right Honorable Earl of Pembroke. Robert Barret wishes
increase of all Honor and virtue.
MOst Noble young Lord, and of honorable expectation, although your young
years, have scarce arrived yet to the bearing of Arms, nevertheless on the
assured hope conceived of your honorable parts, as so nobly each way descended,
(whose virtue has always shined to the glory of your name and house) I have
emboldened my self to offer unto your Lordships view and protection, these
Military discourses, penned upon occasion of conference had with sundry
Gentlemen, and by them wished to be published. Many good reasons have moved me
to dedicate them unto your Lordship, as well in respect of your own virtues
(resembling altogether that Noble Earl of Pembroke, your Graundfather, and
that worthy Sir Phillip Sidney your Uncle) as also in respect of the great and
weighty Commandes which your Right Honorable father does worthily hold over
us, in these our Western parts and Wales, under our dread Sovereign. Such as
they are, I humbly beseech your Lordship to accept, as from a soldier, who
humbly offers himself and his service unto your self, next unto my good
Queen and dear Country.

Your Lordships humbly at command ROBERT BARRET.

TO ALL MEN OF WAR IN GENERAL.
Honorable soldiers, and brave men of war, of what degree soever, I am
assured there is none of you that will spurn at these my pains taken, as
penned, not to instruct the experimented and Martial sort, such as you are,
but the inexpert and young Gentlemen, which have not yet entered commons in Mars
his Camp. For what good is herein contained, shall redound to your glory and
fame in general: and what faults and errors be herein committed, must rest
upon me, bear them off as I may. Let us love one another, that God may love us
all, and give us true Martial valor to the service and defense of our dread
Sovereign and dear Country.

Yours in all love, ROBERT BARRET.

TO ALL GALLANT MINDED GENTLEMEN, and my good country men in general.
GAllant minded young Gentlemen, and good countriemen in general, which have
not yet marched under Mars his Colors, nor known the parts incident to his
followers, for your instructions have these discourses been principally penned:
the which although they be but rough, and not polished with school terms, yet
happily not so barraine, but you may reap some good fruit from them, being
read, and noted with due regard* to your behoof (perhaps) in these behouefull
times. I am not ignorant that sundry have treated upon the like subject, and
all to good end: but yet they observe not all one method, neither I my self
(happily) such as every one would wish. It is somewhat hard to please few, but
harder to please many, and none can please all: although mine intent has been
(as others no doubt, the like) both to please and profit the most. These
approaching times do require such unpleasant matter, yet the necessity is such:
and therefore to be regarded. Accept it friendly, as I have penned it
willingly, so shall I hold my self both rewarded and satisfied.

Your well wisher ROBERT BARRET.

William Sa. in praise of the Author and his work.
THose that in quiet states do sing of war,
Or write instructions for the Martial crew,
Must never think to escape the envious jar
Of those, who wealth, not honor still pursue.
For they do fear least soldiers growing strong,
Command the pelf which they have gathered long.
Then worthy Barret, honored may thou be,
That dreadlesse all the teene of base conceits,
Have writ a work, shall still eternize thee,
In spite of envy with her sly deceipts:
For thou that often in battle bold have stood,
Have now done that, shall do thy country good.
For which his pains let this suffice, to show
The love one soldier ought to bear another,
Kindly embrace his work, for well you know,
A soldiers merits, does exceed all other:
And say with me, as justly say you may;
His travels do deserve our praise for ay.
William Sa. Gentleman.

THE FIRST BOOK OF WAR DISCOURSES AND MARTIAL DISCIPLINE.
The first Dialogue:
Wherein is reasoned of the Neglect of Martial Discipline, and inconveniences
thereof: the comparison of Weapons ancient and modern, with their different
Executions: the imperfections of many training Captains: the perfect training
of men, to great effect: the due sortment of Weapons now used: the contempt of
Soldiers, and causes thereof.

Gentleman. GOod Captain, I pray, if your leisure will permit, let us have
your company some few days, familiarlie to discourse with you upon such
matter as time, cause, and occasion shall minister: for since the rumor of
this troublesome world toward, The cause of the beginning of these Discourses.
I mean, besides the brables of Ireland, the great preparations of the
ambitious Spaniard, pretended as is thought against us, both my self, and
other country Gentlemen, vnexperimented in such martial causes, have not a
little mused thereupon: and so much the more, by reason of the strait charges
and commands directed from her Majesty, and her honorable privy Counsel
unto us of every Shire, to make good provision of furniture, and our people to
be well trained: the which seems not done without some great occasions
known, or matters greatly suspected: What think you of it?


Captain. Sir, I will draw my leisure and poor skill to the uttermost, to
satisfy, in what I can, your courteous request. And first, concerning mine
opinion touching the ambitious and proud minded Spaniard, The Spaniard, as well
by his own imperious inclination, as by the Pope and Clergies suggestion, and
instigation of English and Irish Papists, has these thirty years imagined
Englands subversion. Example, in Anno 1588.
I say; that besides her Majesty and her honorable Counsel, it is not
unknown unto a number of honest gentlemen and soldiers of our nation, that
the Spaniard has above these thirty years, as well by his own natural
imperious inclination, as by the Satanicall suggestion of the Romain Pope and
Clergy, and continual instigation of our English and Irish Papists, both
desired, pretended and practiced the utter ruin, subversion and conquest of
our religion, state, and realm: the experiment whereof in Anno 1588. last,
with his Invincible Navy, so by him termed, attempting our seas and coasts,
we have yet fresh in memory: whereof we may well say: Deus pro nobis pugnabat.


Gent. But do you think that he will yet attempt the like, considering his
foyles, and losses then received?


Captain. The Spaniard to be suspected for many reasons.
Why sir, do you think that so mighty a Prince, so proud and ambitious a
Nation, possessing so many mighty kingdoms, such inestimable Indies, such
plenty of wealth, such ready subjects, such skillful warriors, such brave
Conductors, such store of shipping, and having such an egger on as is the
pestiferous Pope, will not yet attempt what he can, were it but to recover his
honor and reputation lost in the last action?


Gent. Yet many men hardly to be persuaded.
Truly Captain, a number of us country Gentlemen can hardly be so persuaded,
and especially our common country people.


Captain. Indeed I do not greatly marvel thereat, considering our long
continued peace under our gracious Sovereigns reign (whom God long maintain
over us) wherein we have not known what the name of war has meant, much
less the effects thereof: Peace breeds security; security, careless minds:
careless minds, contempt of war: contempt of war, vnmartial minds. Men having
lived long in peace, seldom suspect war.

Securitas parit periculum.

By neglect of martial discipline, many kingdoms subverted.

Examples.

Good to shake off security, and be careful for our safety.


For long peace has bred Security; security, careless minds; careless
minds: contempt of war; contempt of war, the dispising of souldiarie and
Martial discipline; the dispising of Martial discipline, unwilling minds I
fear me: so that it can hardly be beaten into our brains, I mean a number of
us, that we which so long have found the fruits of peace, should ever feel
the effects of war. To prove that long peace, and neglect of Martial
discipline has metamorphosed manly minds, nay whole States and kingdoms; let
us consider the Macedonians prowess, the Grecians policy, the Romans
valor, the Carthaginians stratagems, so long as they maintained Martial
discipline, ruled each the Monarchy in their times: but discipline neglected,
disorders grew on, new Martialists sprung up, and ouerturned their wealth,
state, and kingdoms, with a final ruin of their names and Nations.

I speak not this, but for example, to put us the more in mind to shake off
security, to mistrust the worst, to make us more ready and willing to be
trained in Martial points, not grudging at the charge, but frankely to offer
it, to fit us with furniture, and desirous to be instructed in the knowledge
and managing of each arms in their kind; whereby if so proud an enemy should
attempt any thing against us, we might be ready, with resolute minds, to
beard him to the uttermost. I could say much more, but this may suffice to a
willing mind to conceive.


Gent. Inueterat^ opinion not easy to be altered, touching black bills and
bows.
You have touched many points under a few terms, but (Captain) all this and
much more will hardly persuade our rural sort; and I think many of us
Gentlemen not far better minded: for in executing her Majesty's commands, for
trayning our men, providing of armor, I hear many say, what need so much a
do, and great charge in Calliuer, Musket, Pyke and Corselet? our ancestors won
many battles with bows, black Bills, and Iackes. But what think you of that?


Captain. Time alters the order of war, with new inventions daily.

The fiery weapons Canon and musket.


Sir, then was then, and now is now; the wars are much altered since the fiery
weapons first came up: the Cannon, the Musket, the Caliuer and Pistol.
Although some have attempted stiffly to maintain the sufficiency of Bows, yet
daily experience does and will show us the contrary. And for that their
reasons have been answered by others, I leave at this instant to speak thereof.


Gent. Why, do you not like of our old archerie of England?


Capt. I do not altogether disalow them; The reputation of Archerie much
blemished, since the invention of fiery weapons.
true it is, they may serve to some sorts of service, but to no such effect as
any of the fiery weapons.


Gent. Will not a thousand bows handled by good bowmen, do as good service, as
a thousand hargubuze or muskets, especially amongst horsemen?


Capt. No, were there such bowmen as were in the old time, yet could there be
no comparison.


Gent. Your reasons.


Capt. First, you must confess that one of your best Archers can hardly shoot
any good sheffe arrow above twelve score off, to perform any great execution,
except upon a naked man, Bows far inferior unto Calliuer or Musket.
or horse. A good Calliuer charged with good powder and bullet, and discharged
at point blanck by any reasonable shot, will, at that distance, perform afar
better execution, yea, to pass any armor, except it be of prooffe, and much
more near the mark the^ your Archer shall: And the said Calliuer at randon
will reach and perform twenty, or four and twenty score off, whereunto you
have few archers will come near. And if you reply, that a good archer will
shoot many shots to one; The readiness of the one and the other: with their
different executions.

Archers may shoot in v^llie. The execution of the bow not comparable to the
musket.


Truly no, your archer shall hardly get one in five of a ready shot, nay
happily scarce one; besides, considering the execution of the one and the
other, there is great odds, and no comparison at all.


Gent. But our bowmen may shoot by vollies, as thick as hayle in the air.


Capt. They may shoot thick, but to small performance, except (as I said) upon
naked men or horse. But should there be led but eight hundred perfect
hargubuziers, or six hundred good musketeers against your thousand bowmen, I
think your bowmen would be forced to forsake their ground, all premises
considered: and moreover a vollie of musket or hargubuze goes with more
terror, fury, and execution, then does your vollie of arrows. And again,
against a resolute troop of horse, either Pistoletiers, Hargulatiers or
Lanciers, they will stand less time (except they be well fro^ted with hedge,
ditch or tre^ch; or seconded with a strong stand of pikes,) then either
Hargubuze or Musket, considering the execution of the one and the other. The
weapon not of deadly execution, little to be feared.

Bow men have most use in open field, and in set battles shot are used in all
services.


And what soldier is he, that comes against a weapon wherein there is little
hazard of life, which will not more resolutely charge, then against a weapon,
whose execution he knows to be present death? Many more reasons might be
alleged for the sufficiency of the one, and the insufficiency of the other,
but others have answered the same already, besides the proof which daily
experience brings: and thus you hear mine opinion of your Bows; desiring
you (Gentlemen and others) not to conceive sinisterly of me for this mine
opinion, as not held of me for any dislike I have of our old Archery of
England: but that common experience has made it most manifest in these our
later wars: well wishing in my heart (had it been Gods good will) that this
infernal fiery engine had never bin found out. Then might we boldly have
compared (as our ancestors did) with the proudest Archers in the world.

But you must note this by the way, The fiery weapon without practice
dangerous to the handler.
that the fiery shot, either on horseback, or foot, being not in hands of
the skillful, may do unto themselves more hurt then good: wherefore the same is
often to be practiced, that men may grow perfect and skillful therein.


Gent. Well, to stand in argument I will not, for I have seen little trial
either of the one or the other. But what think you of our abundance of black
Bills which we think to be the next natural weapon for the Englishman?


Capt. True it is, that in time past our nation has performed round slaughter.
work therewith: but the wars and weapons are now altered from them days,
and we must accommodate our selves to the now used weapons, To accommodate our
selves to the now used weapons, ord^r, and times.
order, and time, to answer our enemies with the semblable, else happily shall
we find ourselves short of our reckening, with our all-too late repentance.
But might I have, in stead of these black Bills and Iacks, so many good armed
Pikes, I mean good Corslelts furnished, I would think my self far better
either to offend or defend.


Gent. Why, would you not allow short weapon in the field?


Capt. Not many short weapon in the field.

When to be used.


Truly no, not many, yet would I not exclude them all. For I know them
necessary for many pieces of service; as to perform execution if the enemy
break, or fly; to mingle with shot to back them if need be; to pass with
Conuoyes, and to stand by your Artillery; to creep along trenches, and enter
into mines, where the Pike would be ouerlong; Target of Proof.
but best for the mine or breach is the Target of prooffe, Pikes, most
honorable weapon in the field.
short sword, and Pistol: but for the plain field, neither black bill,
Halbard, nor Partizan comparable to the Pike.


Gent. In a set battle would you not have Bills or Halbards for the guard of
your Colors?


Capt. Short weapon about the Ensign not so a^ailable as the Pike.

The Reasons.


As few as might be* for in their steds far better were so many armed Pikes,
in mine opinion, considering that in set Battles when men come to the shock,
or push of the Pike, they sarrie close together, and the first three, five, or
seven ranks do bear the chief brunt; and entered so far, men buckle
Pell-Mell, close together, by which time commonly the one side reculeth or
swayeth, and a battle once reculing does not lightly hold long, so that ere
the Center of the Battaill be touched one side must fall to disaray; men once
disordered, they commonly fall to rout, the rout is pursued with slaughter and
ruin. Against horse the like reasons are to be made: thus either to offend or
defend, far better is the Pike, then either Bill, or Halbard. And to
conclude, the strength of the Battle is the armed Pike, The armed Pike, the
strength of the battle.
so they be equally sorted with Harquebuze and Musket.


Gent. What mean you by equally sorted?


Capt. The equal sortment of weapons, offensive and defensive.

Country people loath to be at charge.


I mean as much to offend, as to defend: To offend I would wish to every
hundred men 25 Muskets, and 25 Calliuers at the least, 40 armed Piks, 7 or 8
Halbards, and 2 or 3 Targets of proof to defend, and so of all other numbers.


Gent. Your proportion I like well, but our country people are loath to be at
the charges of so many costly weapons, although her Majesty and her honorable
privy Counsel, have given orders and directions for the same.


Capt. Our dangerous time to be regarded.

Men living long in security, amazed in alterations.


I perceive it to be so, whereat I grieve not a little, considering, how
dangerous is the time; how malicious, strong, and politic is the enemy; how
careless, yea senseless are we; and how unwilling to our own weal? But
should these your secure men once hear the Alarm of the enemy, (from the
which God defend us,) then should you soon see them alter their copies,
change their colors, forget their great bragges of black Bills and Bows,
and stand at their wits end what course to take; and should they yet recall
their courage, and pluck up their spirits, and dare to look the enemy in
the face, what guides (I pray) have they? Want of good guides.
It is not enough to say down with them, down with them, Lay on Bills and
Bows: Actions not effected with words, but with conduction, order men with
suitable weapons.
they should encounter strong squares of armed Pikes, gallant squadrons of
Muskets, brave troops of shot, conducted by skillful Leaders: then should they
soon see the difference of weapons; the danger of the one, the little doubt of
the other, with repentance (perhaps) for not taking them to other weapons in
time. Thus much I speak to our inueterate concei^ers of bows and black bills.


Gent. But we have trained companies, and selected bands, to answer our
enemies with like weapons. Selected bands.



Capt. True it is, Companies well trained to great and good purpose. The
danger of ignorant leaders and trayners.
there have been good orders set down for the same, and no doubt, well
performed in many parts of our country: but I my self have seen many simple
Leaders, simple in deed to train, much less to bring men to fight: for where
the blind leads the blind, both fall into the ditch.


Gent. You mean this by our country Gentlemen and Citizens, who have the
trayning of their shires and towns, and never came in wars, but her Majesty
and Council have so appointed it for many good respects.


Capt. I know it very well, for many good respects, but I am well assured that
her Majesty would well like of such country or citizen Captains, Trayning
Captains very skillful, ought to provide good officers.
as would be careful to provide themselves of good Officers; such as have
seen wars, and borne office in the same, I mean honest and valiant men, not
tapsterly praters, and ale-bench braggers, who know no point of souldierie in
the world. And if your Captains were each furnished with one or two such good
officers, I mean honest men, and of experience, no doubt, but they might then
do far better then they now do; and by such they might learn many good
points of service, to their good, and their companies good instructions; yet
not so much as thereby to become sufficient Captains.


Gent. Our Captains have Books of War, Books of war.
whereby they may learn more in one days reading, then you have in a whole
years service; and then no great need of such, which were but charge to small
purpose.


Captain. Truly good Sir, pardon me, you speak according to your skill; Now
to answer you, Three sorts of war writers.
I say: Such books have been written by men of sundry humors, sundry
qualities, and sundry professions. As some have been penned by learned men, 1
as Politicians, Geometricians, and Mathematicians, which never saw any wars;
2
Some by men of small learning, but by their practice and long continuance in
wars; Some again have been penned by men both of good learning and long
experience in wars: 3
the last of these are to be best approved, The last ^^st approved.

Comparison^.


as all men of judgment must confess. Now, the vnsouldier-learned, to the
unlettered soldier may be paralleld or comparaisoned, as the Physician
Theorike to the gross practitioner, and unto the learned soldier, as the
Theorike only unto the Theorike and Practike jointly in a perfect Physician.
And this is my opinion of the diversity of warre-writers, of all which I
suppose the last to be chiefly followed. Reading Captains three sorts.
Well, now to your reading Captains: many of them that read, 1
do neither understand the Method nor meaning of the writer; 2
many do understand the Method, and not the meaning; and some again (as men
of quicker conceit, 3
most fit for wars) do understand both Method and meaning: The best wa^^ing
experience, far from a worthy Captains.
yet by want of experience and practice, they are far from a perfect
soldier, and more from a worthy Captain. The proof of this is soon seen,
for of your first sort, Example of the first sort.
bring one of them into the field with a hundred men, he will never rank them
aright without help; and (God knows) with what puzzeling and toil: there is
the end of his service, yea and thinks he has done well too. Now let one of
your second sort come into the field with the like number, Example of the
second sort.
he will rank them three and three, but at every third rank he must call to
his boy, holae sir, where is my Book? and having all ranked them, then
marches he on fair, and far wide from a soldiers march: then comes he to
cast them into a ring, about, about, about, till he has enclosed himself in
the Center; now there is he puzzelled, hola master stand still until I have
looked in my Book: by this time there is a fair ring broken. Example of the
third sort.
Lastly, let your third quick conceipted man come into the field with his
company, he ranks them by three, five, or seven in a rank: Pikes, half in
front, half in trains; Colors and brown Bills in the midst; deuides his
shot, half in vaward, half in rereward, and marches on in some pretty good
sort, casts his Ring, and happily comes out again; but two to one he
misseth his counter-ring. Well, this is well, say our Citizens and country
people. But how far all these Captains are wide to show their soldiers the
right use of each weapon, a man of mean judgment may perceive, much less to
bring them to the face of the enemy without a manifest danger, Dangerous for
vnexperimented Captains to bring men to fight.
or wilful overthrow: Examples hereof I might recite enough, but I pray God, if
ever it come to the proof, we leave not too many examples our selves. For
there be many points in a soldier, and more in a Captain, which can not be
attained by reading, Many points to be in a soldier, and more in a Captain,
not attained by reading, but by experience, and that de veras.

Orderly trayning by good Trainers to good purpose. Points wherein a soldier
is to be fully instructed.


but by practice and experience; and that de Veras, as the Spaniard says, in
earnest; and not de Burla, in jest. True it is, the trayning of men, is to
good and very great purpose, especially were it done in such sufficient sort,
and by such sufficient Trayners, as the waightinesse of the cause requires:
wherein each soldier should perfectly learn his march; know the several
sounds of the Drum, to keep his place and array in good order; when to
march; when and how to charge; when to retire; when to stand; how to handle the
weapon committed unto him; with a number of other points, most needful in
these times to be thoroughly known unto your trained men, yea, and to others
also, were it possible.


Gent. Truly (Captain) you deal somewhat roundly with our Citizen and
country Captains, scarce worth thanks at their hands.


Capt. Sir, I would be loath to offend any; but being demanded, I must needs
speak the truth, so near as I can: for according to my opinion and skill, I
have answered your questions: Questions and demands do draw out semblable
answers.

Careful and diligent men to be commended.

Men of sundry constitutions fit for sundry purposes.

Natural instinct does work wonderful effects in all kind of professions.


giving you to understand, that my opinion is not so of all: for I do know many
sufficient Gentlemen and Citizens most willing to the service, who are highly
to be commended for their good care and diligence therein: yet doubtless they
will be to seek in many points, if it should come to the proof. True it is,
all men are not of one constitution of body, humors, and spirits: for some men
are fit for wars, some for peace, some for the country, some for the city,
some for learning, some for manual crafts, some to govern, some to be
governed, some able to conduct a Company, but not a Regiment; some a Regiment,
but not a Royal Camp: of which last sort very few are to be found. To
conclude, Natural inclination does work wonderful effects in all kind of
Professions; for some men (being naturally humoured thereunto) do prove better
soldiers in five years experience, then some others in fifteen: and it is
much, yea, it imports all almost, to be often in Action. For a man haunting
long the wars, To be often in action breeds knowledge. Comparison. Little
reputation of Soldiers in our age with us.
and seeing little execution, is as one that uses often the Fence-schooles, but
never takes weapon in hand. And if any of my speeches may seem unto some, to
exceed the bounds of Decorum, I have been urged thereunto by the little
reputation had of Soldiers amongst us: for surely, such as have followed the
wars are despised almost of every man, until a very pinch of need does
come; then have we fair speeches; good countenances for a little time; but the
action once ended, and the fear past, frowns do follow and cold rewards: so
that the profession of Arms has amongst us, of all others, been least
esteemed in these our later days; The reasons.
the reason is, we have had little need of wars, and consequently little use,
whereby we are grown ignorant in the Art.


Gent. Then I perceive, Experience coupled with natural instinct, most perfect.

The bad reputation of Soldiers springs much from their own disorders.

The disorders of men of war proceeding from two causes.

1. The bad election. 2. The little discipline.
Favorite electio^s.


Experience makes men perfect, but most perfectest, if with Experience be
coupled the natural instinct you speak of: but me thinks, that the bad
reputation we have had of Soldiers in our age, springs not of the little use
we have had of wars, so much, as from the disorder of such as have professed
the same.


Capt. I must confess there has been, and is many times, great disorders
committed by some professors and followers of wars; the which, in mine
opinion, proceeds from two causes: the one from the bad choice of some
Captains, Soldiers and Officers, made at the first, by those who had
commission or authority for the same: next, by reason of the little discipline
used amongst those so chosen; for many have bin chosen by favor, friendship, or
affection, little respecting their experience, virtues, or vices; whereby most
commonly, the fawning flatterer, the audacious prater, the subtle make-shift,
is preferred before the silent man, the approved person, or the plain dealing
fellow. Then such being chosen and preferred, how do you think the conduction
should be good? Again, the Companies that are commonly levied, Faults
committed by the Justices of peace in leuying of Soldiers.
are drawn forth by the Justices of peace, who to disburden their town or
shire of corrupt weeds, as they term it, do pick out the scumme of their
country, thinking such men sufficient for the wars: what wrong thereby is
done to the service, the issues of many actions do often times manifest. Now,
such choice made both of soldiers and Captains, what good can be expected
from them? For little amendment grows where lewd Liberty bears sway: Little
amendment grows where lewd liberty bears sway.
for wars disorderly used, is the Chaos of confusion; and wars well
conducted and disciplined, is the Harmony of Justice.


Gent. I pray (good Captain) since you have thus far waded into the matter,
let us entreat you to show us the parts of a Soldier, the use of his weapon,
and the order of your modern war.


Capt. These three matters handled would ask a great volume, far above my
reach: All wars are either offensive or defensive.

Maintained, managed and conducted by money, men and arms, by policy, order,
and by good Chiefs.


neuerthesse, to satisfy in part your courteous demand, I will do my best.
Then thus I begin to reason: First, Wars are of two sorts, either
offensive, or defensive; maintained and performed with men, armor and money;
managed with Policy, Order and Stratagems; conducted and perfected by a
singular General, brave Commanders, and resolute Soldiers. To begin therefore
from the lowest degree unto the highest, I will declare unto you what parts I
could wish in every degree, and what order in the same, following herein for
the the most part, the Italian and Spaniard, by whom the best discipline of
war in our days has been used, and supplying where they are defective.


Gent. What Nation, think you, do prove best Soldiers? for we are of
opinion, that there is no Soldier to the Englishman.


Capt. Truly, for strength, valor, and courage, I suppose us comparable to
any nation whatsoever: The English for valor and courage comparable to any.

It is the nature of every nation to think best of themselves.

Vegetius opinions and reasons, what climate breeds the best soldiers.


but surely for subtle policy and martial discipline, especially in this our
latter age, some other nations do exceed us. And it is the nature of every
nation to esteem and think best of themselves: but Vegetius holds opinion,
the man borne under the temperate Zone and climate, to be fittest for wars:
For (says he) the Soldier of the Septentrionall or North Climate, by reason
of his wide distance from the Sun, does abound in hot blood, and is of good
courage, and great strength: entering into battle without fear, but rash and
inconsiderate in the same: void of consideration and counsel in most of his
actions. And on the contrary, the Meridionall man, by reason of the neerenesse
of the Sun, the which they have almost for their Zenith, are fearful and
faint-hearted, and very loath to enter into battle, except constrained and
urged thereunto; but withal, very subtle, wary and sharpe-witted: therefore
(says he) Men of the middle Climate, participating of both the extremes, are
best for the wars; as men hardy, quick, of great direction and counsel,
well proportioned, and of reasonable good disposition and health. But I
suppose, that of either nation by military discipline and practice, Men born
under any climate may prove good soldiers by experience and discipline.
may prove good and excellent Warriors.


Gent. But yet, me thinks, that men of great stature are of greatest strength,
and so most terrible to the enemy, and fittest for the wars.


Cap. True, in the first ranks tall men do make a fair show, but now the
artillery and fiery weapon has greatly diminished their authority: yet
before this infernal engine was used in the world, the opinions of the most
famous Captains were different herein: Sundry opinions what statured me^ be
most fit for wars.

The mean, best allowed.

To be served with our own nation is best for us.


for Alexander esteemed men of little stature, for most valiant and hardy:
Pyrrhus, per contra, liked the goodly, tall and large proportioned men: but
Julius Caesar, as more considerate and wise, rather chose men of mean stature,
as naturally strong, of determinate minds and courage, and capable of counsel
and prudence. But we must be served with our own nation, out of the which
ought to be chosen the most discreet, godly, and virtuous Captains, and
Officers of most experience, annexed with virtue, and Soldiers of honest
behavior and conditions, which (by skillful Captains) may soon be brought to
be ready men.


THE SECOND DIALOGVE; WHEREIN IS declared the general parts, The parts of a
Soldier in general, his valorous determination grounded.

1. Upon defense of true religion. 2. For the honor of his Prince. 3. For the
safety of his country. 4 To learn diligently the Art he professes, which is
war.
Many men of base birth by valor and virtue attained high degree.

Maximinus.


wished to be in a Soldier.
Gentleman. WEll now, I pray you declare the general parts of a Soldier.


Capt. It is necessary that he which enters into this action, that he ground
his valorous determination upon four principles. First, upon defense of true
Religion: secondly, the honor of his Prince: thirdly, the safety of his
country: fourthly, diligently to learn the Art he professes, which is war,
whereby many men of low degree and base lineage have attained unto great
dignity, credit, and fame: as Caius Marius, borne of poor parents in a
village of the Arpines, came to be a famous commander of the Romans:
Valentinian, a poor man's son of Sybaly in Hungaria, a Roman Emperor:
Maximinus, borne in a base town of Thracia, unto the like dignity: and
Nicholas Pichinnino, the son of a Butcher, to be Captain general of Philip
Vicount Duke of Millans army, and other Potentats of Italy. Many others might
be remembered, both English, French, Italian, and Spanish, borne of low degree,
which by their value, virtue, prudence, and conduction, mounted to such high
Types of honor.

Now he that takes this resolution, He ought to be diligent, careful,
vigilant, and obedient: and above all to fear God. To choose honest Camaradas.
ought to be diligent, careful, vigilant, and obedient, and above all, to have
the fear of God. To choose to his Camaradas and companions men well acquainted,
and of honest conditions; no factioners nor mutiners, whose company is more
dangerous then the devil himself. With his Camaradas, he is to demean
himself, sober, quiet, and friendly: rather severe then lavish in speeches:
for licentious talkers do easily loose their friends, their estimation and
own quietness.

Let him be mindful to serve God; for although all professions are thereto
bound, yet none more deeply then the valiant soldier, whose actions are every
hour in danger of death: and without doubt, he that so does, fights with
more bold resolution and courage, and is thereby brought through manifold
dangers, and unto vnexpectable events.

Let him be no blasphemer, No blasphemer.
nor swearer: for besides that such a one is infamous to the world, he is
assured to be punished by Gods divine justice, whereof many examples have been
seen.

Let him abstain from dice, No idle gamesters.
cards, and idle games; for common gamsters, although they have many other good
parts in them, yet are they not esteemed according to their better parts, but
rather discredited, getting enemies, questions, and brawles, with many other
inconveniences that follows.

Let him not be over curious in his fare and diet, but content himself with
such provisions as be provided in the camp. Not curious in fare.

To eschew drunkenness.




In any wise let him eschew the beastly vice of drunkenness; for crammed
panches and drunken nowls are apt to nothing but to be sluggish, slothful, and
drowsy, and in their drunken pangs to have their throats cut. Examples
whereof there are too many extant; as of Tomyris Queen of the Scythians, who
overthrew Cirus, with his three hundred thousand Persians, in their beastly
drunkenness; and of Spargapises the said Tomyris son, who being first
entrapped and foundred with the like vice of drunkenness, was first by the
same Cyrus defeated and taken; with many more such examples. Gluttons and
dru^kard, bre^de many disorders.
Besides, the soldier given to this vice of gluttony and drunkenness, does
disturb all towns, villages, and all lodgements wheresoever he comes with
his unruly hurly burly and robberies, never contenting himself with the ability
of his poor host; whereby great scandales do arise, causing many times many
Towns, Cities and whole provinces to revolt from their Princes, caused by the
disorder of such insatiable drunkards and gluttons. The which insolences are
carefully to be prevented, Examples of punishment. Decimare.
and severely punished; as did Julius Caesar at the siege of Placentia in
Lombardie, Dezimare or tenth the ninth Legion by sound of the horn (an
ignominious chastisement) for spoiling, and robbing certain villages of his
friends. And the Emperor Aurelius did severely punish such soldiers as did
take any thing from their host perforce: with much more severity did Aufidius
Cassius reform the robberies and spoils done by his disordered companies.
Aufidius.
And Pescennius Niger did condemn unto death, a whole Camarada of Soldiers,
for taking a cock from their host where they lodged, perforce: And great
Tamberlan punished so severely one of his soldiers for such like offense, that
the rigor thereof did so correct and discipline his camp, that where his army
lodged three days together in one place, a tree full laden with fruit, would at
their departure remain whole, Temperance, and Abstinence.
and untouched. On the contrary, the virtue of abstinence and temperance has
been such, and so great in some, as it has rested a perpetual fame, and
praise to their names; and have thereby atchiued great and honorable
enterprises.

Chaste and honest.
Moreover let our soldier be chaste and honest in his living, refraining
sensuality with all possible instancie, avoiding all occasions which might move
him to that vice: for those that do give themselves thereunto, do commonly
become cowards in their determinations, with little felicity, or good hap in
their attempts. For they become lasey, Excess of lechery breeds cowards minds
and diseased bodies. Examples.
sickly, and feeble, and chiefly, such as do carry women with them, having most
ordinarily their ends accompanied with dishonor and shame, and their effeminacy
many times the hinderance of great actions: As it chanced unto the imperial
camp, after their famous sack of Rome, whereat they lost their General
Burbon, so that the Prince of Orange, and other Imperial Captains, durst not
meet nor stop the passage of Monsieur de Lautrech, General of the French
army, which marched toward Naples, to regaine that kingdom, by reason that
they saw their soldiers so estranged from their former valor, as men corrupt
and effeminate with the vices of the city: and as it fell out with Hannibals
army at Capua; which in short time, of valiant, became vile: of bold and
venturous, cowards and dastards: of careful and vigilant, sluggards, slow and
careless: whereby Marcus Marcellus made it known unto the world, that
Hanniball might be conquered. The which vice ought with all rigor to be
chastened.

Decent in apparel. Over curious in attire is sign of a Carpet knight, a
humor unfit for war.
He ought to be very moderate, and not over garish in his apparel and garments:
for it is a principle, found true by experience, that he that is curious in his
gate and attire, is never like to prove a perfect soldier; for they require
different humors, to the deep skill in war, and the dainty curiosity of
Carpet knights. Examples of garish camps, easily defeated, many might be
produced, but time permits me not: but the beauty and bravery of a soldier
is his bright and glittring armor, not gaudy attire, and peacockes plumes.

Yet places and times unmeet to be respected.
I do not thereby infer, that a soldier coming to his Princes court, or in
other places absent from the wars, should not go more gallantly attired,
according to the place and quality of his person.

Loving and obedient unto his Captain.
He shall bear a great love and true affection unto his Captain, and obey him,
and the other officers of the camp, with great respect: for the very day that
he first enters to be a soldier, he does secretly swear, and promise to
serve his Prince, by obeying his officers: for the true order of war is a
very resemblance of true religion, ordained of God, which binds the soldier
to observe Justice, Loyalty, constancy, Justice, loyalty, constan^^^,
patience, silence and obedience.
patience, and silence, and above all, obedience; through the which is easily
attained the perfection in arms, and means to atchiue great enterprises
though never so difficult: as Plato says very well, that love and obedience
is sign of a generous mind, not subject unto passions and unruly fits; for
he that wants the virtue of obedience and patience, Not subject unto passions.

Disobedience breeds many mischiefs.

Not to attempt any thing without his Captains consent.


though otherwise never so valiant a soldier, is unworthy the name. For no
greater mischief can befall a camp then disobedience, nor from whence greater
damages do proceed: too many examples thereof do abound. Therefore a good
soldier ought not go against the determinations of his General, no nor to
pass out of the tre^ches, although it were with intent to show his valor in
some singular combat, or in any particular challe^ge, without his Generals
license (for he is not now his own man, but the Princes, who does give him pay)
remembering the rigorous punishment which Manlius Torquatus did execute upon his
own son Titus Manlius, Example of rigorous punishment for disobedience.
commanding his head to be stricken off in his own presence, for having passed
his command in sallying forth to fight with Genutius Metius Captain of the
Tusculans, who gave him the defy and challenge; nothing auailing the poor
Gentleman, in having overcome and slain his enemy, nor the whole armies
supplications, and entreaties. The like rigor used Posthumous Tiburtus against
his son Aulus Posthumous, at his return from his conquered enemy.


Gent. Put if his Prince makes wars against other Christians, as commonly it
falls out, is it no grudge to the soldiers conscience to fight against them?


Capt. I suppose none, The soldier is bound to obey his Prince, without
examining the cause of the war.
for the soldier is bound to serve his Prince, and to defend his desseignes;
and it touches him not, much to examine whether the war be just or iniust,
not being against Gods true religion: but in such a case, I would wish men to
be well advised.

Our soldier ought patiently to suffer the adversities and travels that do
fall out in the courses and chances of war also, Patie^tly to suffer the
adversities of war.
showing tokens of true virtue, not to be ouergreedy and hasty for his pay,
although he stand in great need thereof, but rather with cheerful
countenance, show his constancy, eschewing by all means possible, rebellions
and mutinies, which often upon such cases do succeed, and in no case be
partaker with mutiners, for always the end of such, is sharp and shameful
death: examples whereof are rife in every nation.

If in encounters and battles where he shall happen to be, Careful execution
ere he fall to the spoil.

An vnsouldierly part to be scraping and spoiling.


the enemies hap to be overcome, let him set all his care and diligence in
execution of the victory with his weapon, and not in the spoil of apparel,
robes, and trash: least he be accounted an unruly scraper, as too many now a
days be: for many disorders do happen by the disorder of covetous spoilers,
many times to the dishonor of the action, and loss of their lives.

The like consideration he ought to have in the expugnation of any fort, To
pursue the victory thoroughly. Not cruel upon cold blood.
city or town. He shall pursue the victory even until the enemy be wholly
yielded, and rendered, and license granted to fall unto the sack and spoil:
wherein he shall deporte himself neither cruel nor covetous, as a number of
bad and graceless fellows do, which without respect of God or man, do leave
no kind of ravening cruelty vncommitted, Favorable and merciful to the
humble vanquished.
with brutall rauishment both of women and maids, and with merciless
murdering of poor innocents yielded: rather in such cases shall he show
himself favorable and merciful to the humble vanquished, procuring to defend
them, and especially silly women and maidens: for God, no doubt, will be well
pleased in so doing.

To choose the weapon wherein be most d^lighteth. The pike and corslet most
honora^le weapon for the footman.

The musk^t of most execution of any fury manual weapon.

To practice all weapons.

The sword and target important to many effects.


Let him make choice of the arms which he means to use, and whereunto he
^indeth himself most affected and fit, and to exercise all sorts of weapons;
as is used in the schools of the Ianizzaries Turks. The pike and corselet is
of most estimation with footmen, for being a weapon of most firmness in the
field, wherewith all squares of men are formed, as a most sure defense against
the fury of horsemen. Of fiery manual weapons, the musket is of most
execution and force; next to them, the calliuers; those to enuiron the pikes,
and to be divided into many small troops and bands, do serve to best purpose.

Let him practice each sort of weapon, although he profess the Pike, Calliuer
or Musket, and particularly the sword and target; the which in mine opinion is
very important to many effects, where men join close together: and moreover
they be very necessary, to view, and reknowledge batteries, to begin assaults,
to make an entrance, to give a Camisada, and to many other purposes presented
in wars.

To learn the seuer^ll sound of the drum.
Also must he learn the several soundes of the Drum, whereby to obey to that
which is commanded (for the Drum is the Commanders voice,) giving due
attention to understand the same, and carefully to note and mark the signs
made by the Captain and officers, without prattling to his next companions; for
it is one of the greatest faults that a soldier can commit, and a sign of
great ligeritie and lightness.

It is also a great point in a soldier to be skillful in swimming: To be
skillful in swimming.
as at imbarkments, disimbarkments, and passing over rivers, and sundry other
occasions incident to wars.

Courageous and resolute in encou^ters.
In skirmishes and encounters, he should be valiant and resolute, for the
soldier that is timorous, can never incline his heart to any haughty
enterprise, nor a fearful fainting stomach neither dares to attend, nor
attempt any hot charge, which for viletie and fear, is noted with shame and
infamy amongst all warrelike nations.

Vigilant and careful at sentinel.

Not to dis^rme himself until he see his ensign unarmed in corpse de guard.


He shall be very careful to be always vigilant, and ready, being placed
for Sentinel or in the Corpse de guard: where he shall not put off his armor
until his Ensigne-bearer be first unarmed, on whom he ought to have his eyes
fixed, to imitate, as he should upon his Colors to follow in the field. The
faults herein committed, are severely to be punished: for in Sentinels
consists the security of the camp. The Romans punished Caius Sulpitius
with rigorous death, for his negligence herein, throwing him headlong down
from the high Capitol rocks, what night the Gauls attempted the surprising
thereof, which Marcus Manlius manfully defended.

Loyal to his Prince.
He shall keep unspotted his fidelity to his Prince, and although there befall
him many disgustos, and insufferable toils, yet shall he not pass to the
enemies camp, for not to be tatched a traitor, a foul and odious offense,
rigorously to be punished amongst all nations, from all ages and times; and
never yet traitor to his Prince made ever any good end, whereof too many
examples do abound; The treason may be liked, but the traitor never beloved nor
trusted.

No shifter from Company to Company.
He shall continue and assist in the company where he first began, without
shifting from company to company: for using the contrary, he shall be esteemed
a wavering companion of small consideration and constancy.

In his eating and drinking he shall not be curious to keep any precise
hours, Not curious of hours for eating: but to prevent time.
more then the time will permit; yet let him procure to prevent time herein:
for a man hungry and ouerwatched, shall weakly perform his service in the
field.

When he shall lie in Camp or garrison, To practice warlike exercises in
vacant time.
let him at vacant times occupy himself in warlike exercises, wherein virtue
excels fortune: as in leaping, running, wrestling, tossing the Pike,
pitching the Bar, throwing the Sledge, and in the practice of all sorts of
weapons, which he shall use for his recreation: unto the which exercises, I
wish Captains should inure their companies, as did King Pyrrhus his soldiers,
rewarding such as excelled herein.

It shall be wonderful available for him to read Histories, To delight in
reading of histories. The profits proceeding thereof.
for nothing does more revive the spirits, and sharpen and perfectionate the
wits of man. Therein shall he find the erecting, the government, the
alteration or fall of Monarchies, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths: the courses
and changes of times, and ages; the conductions, and stratagemes of battles
won and lost; the carriage of brave men, and baseness of bad persons; the
virtue and fame of the valiant, the shame and infamy of the vile: the use of
ancient discipline, and manner of our Modern wars. In fine, there shall he
behold the state of Peace and War.

And for as much as no man can reduce those things unto perfection whereof he
is ignorant, Careful to mark the courses kept by his superior officers.
and knows not the Art, let him diligently mark, consider, and remember the
orders which the higher Officers do observe, in framing their Squadrons of
Infanterie and Cauallerie, and the place of the great Artilerie in the march,
field and Camp; and the plot of the alodgement according to the disposition of
the ground where the Camp shall then be, with the manner of the intrenching,
with the placing of the Ordinance, and defenses for the same.

And if he find himself at the siege of any strong place, town or fortress,
let him diligently view the situation, and the order that is taken for the
battery thereof: and if happily he be within a fort of defense; let him well
mark the course that is taken for the defending thereof. Thus viewing,
considering, conceiving, and observing all these aforesaid points, and many
more used in military actions, and that which touches every officer in
particular, even from the Caporall to the Captain general, to the end he may
be thoroughly perfect in the Art he professes; The profession of arms
foundation of Nobility.
thereby to advance and vantage himself, since it is the very source, mother,
and foundation of Nobility: reason therefore it is, that it be perfectly
understood of the professors and followers thereof, seeing that all practices
of mechanical Arts do follow the same order and course to come to the cunning
of their craft.


Gent. Good Captain, So many good parts hardly to be found in one (...).
you have largely discoursed upon the points and parts in general, which ought
to be in a soldier; and me thinks so many good parts are hardly to be found
in one man.


Capt. True it is, Every honorable soldier ought to endeavor himself to
attain^ wha^ he can.
and very rare in deed: yet every honorable soldier, that resolves to follow
wars, ought, with all his endeavor, to try to attain to all those good
parts, according to his capacity and wit: and although his ability be not
able to attain all; Some better then few, few better then none at all.
yet unto some: some better then few, few better then none at all; the first
to be honored, the next to be accepted, the third to be rejected.

Many good parts (...) a soldier, gotten by experience, and perfected with
learning.
Thus may you see how many good parts are requisite to a perfect soldier; not
learned by hearesay, nor gained with ease: but with care, diligence, industry,
valor, practice and continuance; and most of all perfected with learning,
annexed with long exercise and use.


Gent. Then I see you would have a soldier to be learned withal, which you
seemed to dislike in our book Captain at the first.


Capt. You mistake me far, for I ever allow and honor the learned soldier:
for what famous Commanders have there yet been, Most famous Commanders were
learned.
unlearned and without letters? Themistocles, Alcibiades, Alexander, Caesar,
Scipio, with all the rout of the brave Roman Commanders, and as many brave
men as ever were since, were men learned, and read. Thus I rest for this time,
till a new day to begin.


The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK OF WAR DISCOURSES AND MARTIAL DISCIPLINE.
The first Dialogue:
Wherein is declared the particular parts of sundry Martial Officers, from
the Caporall to the Captain of Infanterie.

Gentleman. CVrteous Captain, your yesterdayes Discourses, have given us such
content, that we are now inflamed to know further herein. Wherefore I beseech
you to proceed with your Martial matters, describing unto us each office in
particular, whereunto my self, and these other Gentlemen will give our
diligent attention.


Capt. The orders observed by Antiquity I let pass, falling in few terms,
to our Modern customs, wherein you shall understand, All Camps formed of
men, weapons, munition, and good Chiefes.
that all Camps are framed of Men, Weapons, Munition, and good Chieftaines,
wherein there is some difference in every Nation; but the course which herein I
mean to follow, shall be most after the Italian and Spaniard, who have had the
chief managing of wars in Europe these 50. or 60. years; and with whom I
have most frequented and served.

A Royal camp therefore, being levied and gathered, the Prince with his
Council of war, The Co^maunders of a camp in degrees.

Army is divided into sundry Regiments.

The Regiment into sundry bands. The officers of a Regiment.

The number of a Band.


appoints a most sufficient General, then a Campe-master general, a
Captain general of the Cauallerie, a Captain general of the Artillery: the
Camp is divided into sundry Tertios or Regiments; over every regiment a
Campe-maister or Colonel; the Campe-maister deuides his regiment into
companies, over every company a Captain, also every Regiment has his Sergeant
Mayor, and over the whole army a Sergeant Mayor General.

Touching the number of a several Company, some think 100. some 150.
sufficient; but whether it be of 100.150.200.300. or more, or a Regiment of
such several companies, being fitted with Captains and Officers of
sufficiency, it imports not much: for some Captains can better govern 300.
then some others 150.

Now the Captain, having his company appointed which he is to direct, govern
and command, The Captain and his officers of a Company.
he chooses his Lieutenant, Ensign, Sergeant, Drum, Phifes, and Cabos de
squadra, or Caporals, and Cabos de camera. Now for sundry and often occasions
offered in war, the which must be encountered with order, policy and government
of numbers, more or less, it is necessary to divide the companies into
Squadras, as well pikes as shot, containing each Squadron twenty five men: and
over each squadron a Cabo de squadra, with which office I mean to begin.


The Caporall his election and office.
Capt. The parts to be in a Caporall.
When the Captain electeth his Caporals, he ought to do it with such
consideration, that amongst his soldiers, one, chosen to this office, none
should excel him in valor, virtue, experience, and diligence; yea and in age
also, to the end he might be respected with more love and reverence: so that he
deport him self among them, To be with his soldiers, as a father with his
children.
as a father with his children, his conditions being a pattern unto them,
asswaging and ending their debates and quarrels, reducing them unto amity,
with loving one another, in such sort that they may all be of one will, desire,
and ligue.

Let him learn perfectly every soldiers name, and to know the quality and
valor of every one in particular, To cause them to keep their arms neat and
clean, and to show them the use thereof.

The glittering show of armors is the rejoicing of a camp.

He shall persuade them to all cleanliness and honesty, and dissuade them from
vice.


and be earnest with them to keep their armor neat, clean and bright, and
often to practice the weapon they carry, he himself ensigning and teaching
the Bisognios and raw men: for, besides that it concerns every one in
particular for his own defense, and thereby the better to know his valor and
skill, nothing does more rejoice and glorify a Camp, then the glittering show
and shining of their armor.

He shall persuade them to go neat and clean in their apparel, but with
modesty and profit. He shall reprehend them for swearing and lewd speeches:
and shall not permit them any prohibited games, the which he must do with such
sagacitie and wary means, that they result not against him, and so reject and
contemn his reputation, thereby loosing their love and his former respect, for
the punishment remains not in his hands, nor in any other inferior Officer,
but it appertains to the Campe-maister or Lord high Marshall.

To be obedient unto his superior officers.

Being at any peace of service with his Squadra alone, his care and authority
great.

His care at the Corpse de guard.


In presence of his superior Officers, he is to observe array, order, and
obedience, as the rest of the soldiers do, but being with his Squadron alone
in any skance, trench, Ambuscado, or abroad at the watch, or to such other
effects, he bears at that time his Captains authority: as, being at watch or
guard in any open place, he is to enscance and fortify as commodity and the
place will permit, to resist the attempt of the enemy, being by them charged,
ordering and appointing all his company to stand with their weapon ready
bent, still, without rumor, and resolute to defend. And being at watch in the
Corpse de guard, let him provide fire, cole, and wood, to make light as well by
day as by night, especially, if his Squadron be shot, to spare the over much
wasting of match, whereof he must see they be well provided, as also of powder
and bullet, and concerns to him the distribution of the same amongst them.

His care, office, and duty in ward, watch, and Sentinel.
Being appointed to ward or watch, let him provide to be first refreshed with
victuals, and his Camarada also: then enter thereunto orderly, from whence
neither he, nor any of his Squadron, is to depart upon pain of life, until
the Sergeant do call and command him from the same.

The care, order, and regard in placing watch and Sentinel.
In placing of the Sentinels, there are so many aduertisements to be given, as
there are differences of situations and places; and therefore it is to be
remitted to the discretion of the Scout-maister (if there be any) or unto the
care of the diligent Sergeant, careful Caporall, or other such officer, to set
them in such sort, and with such disposition of the ground and place, and
distance, that they may before the enemy arrive, give aduiseme^t in sufficient
time to the Corpse de guard, whereby they may be ready with weapon ready bent.
In places of suspicion and danger, to place men of best importance.
And therefore in such places of suspect and danger, there ought to be placed
soldiers of importance and care, and men of best credit, since it concerns
the security of the Camp, which remains quiet, reposed, and at rest,
trusting unto the care and diligence of these Sentinels, unto the which an
order is to be given, how to behave themselves, in any alarmes presented,
giving them the Word delivered by the Sergeant. And if the place be obscure,
and full of covert, he shall set abroad certain forlorn Sentinels without the
Word, single, and if occasion require, double; a shot and a pyke, to give
knowledge of the alarm. This is sometimes done with a whistle or hysse, for
not to disturb the camp without great need or good occasion. His principal
care is, To visit and reuisite often the watch.
to visit and reuisite them, as well by day as by night, making his
Contraround with great care and diligence, and to be ready at every call and
need.

He is to repart the victuals, To repart the victual with equity and right.
delivered by the Sergeant for his Squadron, with liberality and equality
unto every Camarada, without partiality to any; and shall procure that in
their lodgings they accommodate themselves together as true companions, and
loyal friends; he himself being so unto all, both in deed and word, for the
better to keep them at command and obedience, the which does most import to
the well effecting of any act, and so shall he accomplish what is encharged and
commanded him as a prudent Officer.


Gent. Then, is the word to be given to every several Sentinel, saving to the
forlorn Sentinels, as it appears by you, or unto the Caporals only as I
have heard say?


Capt. Amongst the Spanish companies of their old Regiments, where their
soldiers be experimented, The word not to be trusted unto raw soldiers and
bisognios.
trusty and careful, it is so used; but amongst new companies, the Caporals
only have the Word, who are to be ready upon every call of the Sentinels, to
see the occasion, and to take the Word: the which is so done with great
consideration, for many inconveniences and disorders which raw Bisognios will
commit: and therefore those Posts or Sentinels which had the word, being
relieved and changed, are presently by the Sergeant or Officer, carried unto
the Corpse de guard; and not suffered to depart thence until the watch be
discharged.


Gent. In what order is he to take the word?


Capt. Being a shot, he ought to have his piece ready charged and primed, and
to cock his burning match, The order how the Sentinel is to receive the word
of such as come near him.
and so to present his piece; and being a pikeman, to tertiar or charge his
pike, and no further off then that with so low a voice as they may understand
one another, to demand the Word, as in the Sergeant Majors office I will more
at large declare.

Now every Caporall or Cabo de esquadra deuides his Squadra into two equal
parts; Camarada, what.
naming either of them a Camarada: containing each twelve soldiers, or any
other number, according to the proportion of his Squadra. And over every
Camarada, Capo de Camara.
or such number of soldiers, is there appointed a Cabo de Camara, being the
most sufficientest soldier of the said Camarada. The which Capos de Camara,
are assistents unto the Caporall, for the good direction and government of his
Squadron, and are necessary Officers for the speedy embattelling or changing
of proportions of any number of men, as hereafter shall be declared.


The Sergeant of a Band, his election and office.
Capt. In the election of the Sergeant, there is greater consideration to be
had, for that in him consists the principal parts of the observation of
Military discipline. In the Sergeant of a Band there ought to be military
discipline. Skillful, valiant, quick.
And for that the execution of the superior officers orders and commands, do
concern his charge and duty, it imports much, that he be a skillful and
valiant soldier, and well experimented in martial matters; and (I say) of so
great importance, that more tolerable it were, all the other officers of the
company (yea were it the Captain himself) to be raw men and Bisognios, with
little experience and skill, and the Sergeant not so; who of necessity ought to
be an expert soldier, and of great spirit and diligence.

Requisite that ^e be somewhat learned and seen in Arithmetike, to know how to
sort his weapons, and to frame his squadron the sooner. To draw each sort of
weapon by themselves.
It is requisite that he be somewhat learned, both to write and read, and to
cipher, whereby to keep a roll or list of all the soldiers of his company,
with their several weapons, and have them in memory by names of the Camaradas,
and to know distinctly how many armed Corslets, and unarmed pikes, with the
short weapons, what number of Shot, Musket and Calliuer; to set with diligence
at an instant all his company in order, as occasion shall cause, and the place
require wherein he shall be. And to the end that he do it not confusedly, let
him draw each sort of weapons by themselves, whereby to set them in order with
more consideration, dispatch and ease; placing the most expert soldiers and
best armed, in the front, rereguard, and flanks, where greatest occasion shall
require. For it touches him to see that his company be well ranked, The best
armed in front, flanks, and rereward.
in equal distance, and in good array, with their armor and weapon fitted,
and used in their due nature; the which he must do, with great forecast,
cheerful speeches, and courteous words, binding them thereby to love him, to
regard him, to respect him; instructing the Drums and Phifes their several
soundes, as how to sound a Call, To instruct the drum the several sounds.
a Troop, a March swift or slow, an Alarm, a Charge, a Retreit, etc.

The manner to rank a several Band.
Sundry orders are used in ranking and placing each sort of weapon in a single
company, but the best observed is this; the Muskets first and Calliuers in
foreward and rereward equally divided, the Pykes in like sort with their armed
corslets in front, rereward, and flanks, containing in the Center their
Ensign, with their armed Halberds: to be ranked by 3.5. or 7, as the Sergeant
shall think good. But to enter into skirmishes, or to frame any Squadrons, let
him observe the order appointed by his Sergeant Mayor, showing himself
diligent and ready therein; in so doing he gayneth honor, reputation, and
credit: and doing the contrary, infamy, dishonor, and shame, breeding cause
of disorder, and loosing of time.

To divide the squadron for several services.
It is his office to order and divide the Squadrons, assigning which shall be
for the Corpse de guard, which for the walls, which for the streets of the
quarter where they are lodged, and which are to accompany the Colors; and he
shall not suffer any soldier to come thither without his Arms fully
furnished. To appoint them to their several service.
He is also to appoint which shall go to the Scout-watch, and those which
shall work in the Ra^pier and Trenches. If any quarrels or brawles do arise
amongst the company, it is his part to apprehe^d the offenders, yet in such
sort, that he dismeasure himself with none, but execute the same with great
moderation.

It is also his office to set and remove the watches, To set and remove the
watches.

To give the word with all secrecy and circumspectio^


conducting them to the place where they are to remain, counselling the
Caporals what they are to do, communicating his opinion in placing the
Sentinels: and to give them the Word with all circumspection and secrecy, as
was delivered to him by the Sergeant Mayor.

And although it touches the Caporals to know the provisions which the
Soldiers have of powder, To be careful for the soldiers provision.
shot, and match, and other munitions and arms, yet the Superintendencie
thereof rests in him: for, besides that it imports the Princes commodity,
the bad distribution thereof does hazard many times the safety of the whole
Army, coming to fail and want in time of necessity.

When occasion is offered, he is to fight as well as the rest, choosing his
place, which shall seem him fit to return to his office, and accomplish the
duty of a true and perfect Soldier: therefore he shall go always gallantly
armed with a fair Millan Corslet and Burgonet, and his weapon a Halbard or
Partizan, but by reason of his continual motion, The proper arming of a
Serg^a^t
not over heavy: his Halbard borne after him unto his lodging, thereby to be
the better respected and known.

If there want victuals to be sold in the Camp, His care is to provide and
call for victuals f^r the soldiers.
it touches him to procure from the Armies store, to the end that his Company
fall not into want: the which being procured, he shall distribute the same unto
the Caporals, who are especially to divide it amongst the Camaradas. The like
he is to do for match, powder, and shot, and other convenient things, that his
Company may be well ordered, and well provided.

In the absence of his Captain he is to use the like obedience unto his
Lieutenant, In absence of the Captain to be obedient to the Lieutenant.
or Ensign, who remain in his room to govern the Company: and
particularly he ought to carry great respect unto the Sergeant Mayor, readily
accomplishing all his orders and commands, and very often to come in his
presence, reknowledging him for his superior officer, well remembering and
marking what he shall ordain and command in all occasions offered: considering
the desseignes and courses that are taken, By diligence, pains and industry to
climb to higher degree.
to the end that by such semblable instructions and examples, and by his good
diligence and valor, he may deserve and ascend to higher degree and place.


The Ensigne-bearer or Alferes, his election and office.
In the choice of the Ensign bearer, the Captain is to have many and great
considerations, The parts required to be in an Ensigne-bearer.
for that it is not only enough for such a one to be a good Soldier, bold
and valiant, but to be his equal (if it may be) in valor, discretion and
counsel, because many times, in his, and his Lieutenants absence, the
government of the Company does belong to this Officer. The Ensign is the
foundation of the company, and in whom consists the honor and reputation of
Captain and soldiers.
And for as much as the Ensign is the very foundation of the Company, and
therein consists the honor, and his, and his soldiers reputation, it is
necessary, that he unto who^ this office is incommended and committed have in
him the parts of a perfect Castellano, or Captain of a castle, in nobleness
and estimation of honor, to know how to keep it, The Ensign-bearer to die in
defense of his Ensign.

The Ensign for the field the smaller, for garrison, then the bigger.


and die in the defense thereof, never abandoning the same, as many valiant and
honorable Ensigne-bearers have done, to their immortal praise and fame.

When a Company is newly levied and erected, the Captain causes his Ensign
to be made of what color it seems him best: and if the service be for the
field, he makes it somewhat less, the lighter and easier to be handled; but
in Garrisons it is made somewhat larger, because it is most often camped upon
the wall.

Gent. Why are they called Ensigns, and from whence came that name?


Cap. The ancient Romans reparted the people of their Armies into Legions,
Cohorts, Centuries, and Maniples: and to be severally known, they carried upon
spears or pikes ends, the figures of Eagles, Dragons, and such like; and some
the pictures of their Emperor, and called the same Signa: whereupon the
Italian and French calls them Insignes: Wherefore called Ensigns.

Why called Banners: why called Colors.


but the Spaniard names them Vanderas, from the Almaine word Vanderen: and we
Englishmen do call them of late Colors, by reason of the variety of colors
they be made of; whereby they be the better noted and known to the company.

Now, the Ensign made and finished, and fastened unto a speare-headed staff,
sharp pointed with iron, the Captain with his own hands delivers it unto
his Ensigne-bearer, encharging him the custody and defense thereof, with a
solemn oath, The Ensigns delivered to the Ensigne-bearer by the Captain with
great solemnity and oath.

After any singular piece of service, it is the Ensign bearers due yet by gift
of the Captain.

The Ensign bearer to go gallantly armed.


to be true to his Prince and Captain; accompanied with many honorable
words, the which he is bound to return to the Captain, if the Company be
dissolved or casht, before any notable piece of service performed, either at
breach, battery, encounter, or battle, wherein he has valiantly fought, and
honorably defended the same; for from thence forward it is the Alferes due, as
deserved for his manhood and valor: but yet to receive the same from the
Captain as an honorable gift.

He shall always go gallant and well armed, with a fair Corslet, Burgonet,
short sword and mean dagger, which are his proper arming, with a fair
Halberd, when he bears not his Colors, borne after him to his lodging, or
elsewhere, thereby to be the better respected and known.

To show himself terrible to the Enemy.
He must show himself dreadful and terrible to the Enemy with his drawn
sword in his right hand, and in his left the Ensign bravely displayed and
vaunced.

In cases where he is obliged and bound to fight, and to follow with the
soldiers; as when the Enemy shall have broken the Squadron, The times and
cases when the Ensigne-bearer is to fight.
even unto his Front and rank, or if to run in array, and in the scaling and
assaults of batteries or walls, or in such other conflicts, he must push and
thrust with the point of his Ensign: and therefore let him procure to have to
his Camaradas most valiant and expert Soldiers: for although that every
Soldier of the company be bound to his succor, defense and aid, for their
common honor, yet those that are most obliged, will most adventure themselves
therein; as well appeared at the assault of the city of Aphrica in Barbary,
in Charles the fifth his time, when John de Vega Viceroy of Sicilia, and the
Lord Garcia de Toledo gained it: where the Ensigne-bearer of Captain Moreruela
(being his brother) being overthrown and sore wounded, Examples.
was by the Sergeant, (who was also brother unto them) seconded and succored,
causing him to retire, himself remaining with the Ensign; and passing forward
with the same, like a valiant soldier, was slain; the Captain seeing him
fall, took up the Ensign, perfourming the Ensigne-bearers office and duty,
until the place was entered: wherein he was so sore hurt and wounded, that few
days after he died thereof, and his Alferes also: so three brave brethren
valiantly died in the defense of one Ensign. Some such examples have we had
amongst the brave soldiers of our Nation to their renown and fame.


Gent. If in fight the Ensign be broken, The Ensign broken or torn in fight,
no dishonor to the Ensign bearer, if he retain the truncke in his hand.

In march how he is to behave himself.


and the Enemy do carry away a part thereof, does the Ensigne-bearer lose
thereby his reputation?


Capt. No, not a jot: so that he keeps the very trunk of the staff in his
hand.

When the Company does march, the Ensigne-bearer may carry his Colors resting
upon his shoulder, either open or folded up: but making a stand or Alto, he is
bound by duty to advance the Ensign, and not to campear it, or pitch it on
the ground: for that is the trick of a Bisognio, and does repugne the
authority and gravity of his office.

In fights, In fights, in encounter, in musters, and in his Generals presence
how he is to behave himself. In presence of the Prince, how. The Ensigns
place in a squadron or battle, the right ^and is the place of pre-eminence.
in encounters, in musters, and in presence of the Lord General, he must carry
his Colors displayed, and passing by him he must advance it, only bowing the
point somewhat downward without any more ceremonies: but if he pass by the
king or Prince, he shall withal bow somewhat one of his knees, as a difference
from the General.

In Ordinances, or framed battles, always the Ensigns do march in one large
or long rank jointly, in the midst of the Squadron, the most place of honor
is the left and right outsides, the Ensign on the right hand carrying the
pre-eminence, who gives direction and order to the rest in this sort: if he
bears his Ensign on his shoulder loose, so are all the rest to carry theirs;
and if fardled up, all they are to do in the like order: and so imitating him
in all other manners and shows: The Abanderados.
and if he delivers his unto his Abanderado, and take the Halberd, the rest
are to do the like: and the self same orders are to be observed by the
Auanderados: for it is an unseemly show to see in a rank of Ensigns,
different orders one from another.

The Abanderados are used to be soldiers, and some do set their own servants
to that office. These ought to go well apparelled and well armed: for I have
seen sometimes amongst the Spaniards, the Alferes themselves to pass into
other ranks to fight, leaving the Ensign with the Abanderado: but I like it
not; for it is not lawful for the Ensigne-bearer to leave his Colors, Not
lawful for the Ensigne-bearer to enter into fight, but with the Ensign in his
hand.

The Ensign to be accompanied with a Corpse d^garde in his lodging.


neither to fight but with the same in his hand, and that upon such occasions,
as before I have declared; no, though it were to show his valor and prowess.

In the lodging the Ensign should be accompanied with a Corpse de guard,
although it be in place of quiet, and out of all suspicion, as well for the
authority and reputation of the same, as to avoid many inconveniences which
happen to succeed through mutinies, brawles and frayes. It is also convenient
that the Ensigne-bearer have always with him a Drum, to call his company
together, and for such occasions as shall be offered: for the Ensigns should
be of such veneration, and have been so respected of the Soldiers, The
veneration and respect of the Ensign.
that there has seldom been seen any one flying to the sanctuary thereof
(avoiding the Soldiers fury) to be pursued or hurt, esteeming their Ensign
a thing inviolable: as it fell out in Brescia, when the mutinous soldiers would
have slain the Lord Jews Yearts, their General, who flying to the Ensign, it
was enough to cause them to leave off so shameful and so abominable attempt.

The soldiers not to disarme themselves until the Ensigne-bearer be first
unarmed and Ensign placed up.

When the Ensign-bearer is to disarme.


When the Soldiers do enter into any Corpse de guard, either in Castle, town,
fortress, or camp, they ought not to disarme themselves until they see their
Alferes first unarmed, upon whom they should have their eyes fixed, to imitate,
as they have upon the Ensign he bears to follow: wherefore the
Ensigne-bearer is not to disarme until the gates of the Fort or place of
defense wherein they are, be first shut; and if it be in camp or field, when
it seems that he may safely do it, and not otherwise: to the end that the
soldiers take not example from him of vnsoldiarie negligence and sloth, but
rather of all vigilance, care and pain.


Gent. You have largely set down the aduertisements touching this Officer,
wherein you have notified many martial points, unknown to us: therefore I pray
proceed to the Lieutenants office and duty.


Capt. This Officer amongst the Spanish companies is not used: but amongst us,
the Italians and French, therefore I will touch somewhat of him by the way.


The Lieutenant his office and duty.
He therefore that is chosen to this office, ought to be a man of great
experience, fidelity and valor, who in the absence of his Captain, carries
his room, charge and command; The parts that ^ught to be in a Lieutenant.

Not to arrogate over much authority to himself,


unto whom the soldiers and under-officers are to obey, for the time, as unto
the Captain himself: notwithstanding he must use it with such discretion and
moderation, that he arrogate not too much unto himself; but at his Captains
return he shall with all love, truth, and duty, inform him of all things and
matters passed.

If any questions and civil debates do arise amongst the soldiers of his
band, he is to pacify, judge and determine the same with gravity and good
speeches: whereby he shall bind them more firmly unto him in obedience and
love: To pacify and determine the soldiers brables with gravity and good
speeches.

To cause offenders to be apprehended.

To see the company furnished with all necessaries.

To counsel, aid and assist the Sergeant in his office

To pass with the company to the Corpse de guard.

To visit and reuisite the watch.


and when as he cannot concert and agree them, he is to refer them over unto
his Captain; but the most faulty and offenders he may cause to be
apprehended, and send them to the Colonel or Marshall.

It is his charge and office to see that the Company be provided of all
necessaries, aduertising the Caporals to see well to their charges, and
aduising the Sergeant to be diligent, careful, and ready in his office,
wherein he shall aid, help and assist him, both in ordering the company, and in
setting the watch, the which he is precisely bound to perform himself, in the
Sergea^ts absence or time of infirmity.

He is to pass with the Company unto the Corpse de guard, to see the watch and
Sentinels set, and often times to visit and reuisite the same; and to persuade
the soldiers to respect, with obedience, their Sergeant and Caporals:
wherefore it imports him to be well spoken, discreet and wise, to move and
persuade them with sound reasons, to the observation and obedience of Military
discipline, disburdening thereby his Captain of many and sundry toiles.

To see the soldiers appointed to their lodgings.
It touches him also to see the soldiers appointed to their lodgings, giving
order for the same unto the Harbenger, and how he shall distribute the baggage
and carriage amongst the particular soldiers, and the sick men carefully to
be looked unto, not suffering these Harbengers or Furriers to rob, purloine,
and filch as they are wont to do, whereby great scandals do arise, as at the
rising of the Vlishingers, and in sundry other places has appeared.

His place of march (his Captain being present) is in the Rere-ward of all the
company, His place of march.
but after any fight or skirmish, in retiring and marching out of the field, he
is to pass before, and the Captain in the rere-ward. Now, for as much as by
that, as shall be declared in the ordinary Captains office, may easily be
understood the duty of this officer, having the whole company in charge, it
seems me to have said at this present, sufficient herein.

The Captain of Infanterie, his election and office.
First, Captains chosen by the counsel of war and state, or by Vize-royes
of provinces.
at the leuying and erecting of new Companies, in Spain, the Captains of
Infanterie are appointed by the Counsel of state and war, and when places be
void in the garrisons and Camp, new Captains are placed by the Generals and
Vize royes in their several gouernme^ts: but with us the Lords of the privy
Council do commonly appoint them.

Gent. Truly, the election made by such personages must needs be good and sure.


Capt. It should seem so indeed: nevertheless it has been seen many times,
that both some Generals, Little consideration used many times in bestowing their
charges. Inconveniences arising from favorite elections.
Vize royes, and Counselors also have missed in the consideration thereof,
bestowing those charges upon their followers, and Court-familiars and
favorites, whereby has risen damage to the Prince, and discredit to the
action: for by means of such fauorit-elections, many valiant and skilful
soldiers do remain without charge, fit for their skill and valor; whereby
(remaining in service) they obey not their such chosen officers, neither do
they attempt such honorable enterprises as often times are offered, The expert
soldier loath to obey the inexpert Captain.
seeing that they are neither to be honored, nor rewarded for the same, seeing
that men of little good sort, Bisognios, and of small skill and experience, are
only by favor, preferred before them unto those charges, due to them by right;
which is the cause that Military discipline is fallen to decay, and stands in
great need of reformation.


Gent. How might that be?


Capt. Mary (in mine opinion) with the Princes and Potentates due reputation,
Good order for reformation.
favor and regard: the which may easily be done thus. When any new Companies
are levied and raised, then not to give the conduction and charge of them, for
affection and favor, unto such as lie fawning in the Court for the same, but
to give order unto their Generals, Vize-royes and Colonels, assisting in their
Camps, and in the government of their several Provinces, to send them lysts or
rolls of the most ancient, Captains to be chosen out of the best approved
Lieutenants.

None to be captains except first a Lieutenant.

None Lieutenant but first an Ensign.

None Ensign but first a Sergeant.


most skillful and best renowned Lieutenants that they have, and out of those
to elect and choose Captains; and of those which before were Ensigns, to
choose for Lieutenants: and Sergeant to be Ensigne-bearers; and Caporals to be
Sergeants; and of the best approved soldiers to choose for Caporals. And the
very same orders should the Vize-royes and Generals observe, and not to elect
him for Captain who never was Lieutenant; nor him for Lieutenant, who never
was Ensign: and that the Treasurers of the Camps and Nauies should not set
down place to an Ensigne-bearer, who never was Sergeant; nor to a Sergea^t,
which never was Caporall: and that this order among the^ all should be
inuiolably observed and kept: by this order should the companies be perfect and
well disciplined conseruing great quiet and good order amongst them; the
soldiers using great obedience to their officers, seeing themselves commanded
by such skillful masters, and every man will in his room and place, Hope of
preferment makes men obedient and diligent.
use his diligence, skill, valor, and endeavor, hoping thereby to ascend to
the degrees of others before him.


Gent. But with us in England, where (thanks be to God) we have had little
occasion of wars, this order would hardly be observed, considering the little
choice we have of men of such sort.


Capt. True it is, we have small choice in deed: nevertheless, there be many
brave men of our nation which have long followed the wars, Many have spent
their patrimony in wars, but few enriched thereby.
both in the Low countries, France, and other places, many of them spending
their wealth and patrimony in the same, and men of good sufficiency, were
they employed, yet rest they obscure and without charge many of them, Favorite
election is a cross to old soldiers.
by reason of the favorite election before named. What courage then to follow
wars?


Gent. But many of your French and Low-countrie seruitors do hold too high an
opinion of themselves, A fond conceit of some seruitours.

A worse mind of some common soldiers.

The first to be disliked, as men inconsiderate.

The second as me^ neither fit for peace nor war.

The more honest minds less apt to beg or crave.


thinking that for a few years service in foreign parts, they merit an
everlasting reward and pay: and your common soldiers, the action once ended,
do scorn to return to their former occupations and trades.


Cap. Both those sorts do I deeply condemn with you; the first, as men fondly
conceited and inconsiderate; the second, as men neither good for peace nor
war. But we must not say they be all such, neither many such, I hope; for I
do know many others brave and honest men, that live contented with their lot,
though in mean estate, not begging nor craving with bold and shameless
faces, (for the more honester mind, the less apt to beg and crave) but
applying themselves to some honest course and trade, to maintain their poor
living; well knowing that The wars once ended, the Princes purse not able,
neither necessary to maintain all idle: The wars ended the Princes purse not
to maintain all idle.
nevertheless, the wars again revived, As ready to serve, as the proudest
he. And again, I do know many others, men of honest minds, and of good
courage, who having long followed the wars, and of good proof in the same,
being out of action by the aforesaid occasions, and having no trade, few
friends, and less means, do pass (God knows) but barely, a thing to be
pitied, and wished to be considered. Now out of these (I suppose) ought our
Captains and Officers to be chosen, Men having long followed the wars, and
of good proof in the same, most fit to be chosen for Captains.
in these dangerous seasons, with some reasonable allowance toward their
maintenance, levied by such means, as should be found most fit by her
Majesty's honorable Counsel; and subjects and commons most willing to the
same: which, no doubt, would prove to wonderful great effect, especially to
our true training and bringing men to be ready: for, Captained as we are, our
blind ignorance may chance breed our own woe.


Gent. Such choice (in mine opinion) were good indeed, to bring our people to
more perfection in soldiarie points, especially to bring them to the face of
the enemy to fight: but we have Muster-masters appointed in every Shiere, men
of service and skill, both to instruct our Captains, and to train our
soldiers, who have pay allowed them for the same.


Capt. Muster-maisters what they ought to be.
Since the other cannot be, surely this course is good: provided that these
Muster-masters be such men as I speak of; I mean expert, valiant, skillful,
discreet, and especially dilligent men; but if they want those parts, As good
never a whit, as never the better: wherefore I could heartily wish (considering
this fickle and dangerous (...) Lieutenants of every shire, and Captains and
Gentlemen of the (...) provide them of some good Officers at the least: not
only to fur^^^ (...) selves with good armor and furniture, but also to cause
all others, (...) to carry the charge thereof, to provide them in like sort,
changing those ^^^roued black Bills and Bows into good Muskets, In stead of
bow^^ and bills good pikes and muskets.
Pikes and Corslets, not ^^^^uring any for friendship or affection, nor
wincking at faults, I know not for what small causes, A caneat for Captains
and Muster-maisters
but to see it performed. Wishing also our trayning Captains, and
Muster-maisters, to look well to their charge and duty; and besides their
diligent trayning, to see each fault amended, and that in due time, for their
own credits sake.


Gent. What course would you wish to be taken, for the redress and reformation
hereof, men having already provided bows and bills?


Capt. Marry thus: What order for converting bills and bows into pikes and
muskets.
Look in every Parish, how many men might be found able to bear the charge of
an Armed Pike, which is with a Corslet complet, let them be charged therewith;
the charge at the most will not amount unto above forty shillings: a small
sum to a man of any wealth, considering it is for the defense of lands, A
good consideration.
goods, liberty, life and all.


Gent. But happily they will grudge thereat, as a great charge.


Capt. The more pity and shame: For how many men able to bear the charge
thereof, A bad sort of people.
shall you see in a lewd Ale house, tavern, and bowling Alley, to lose twice
that value in one day or night, at cards, dice, or other vnthristie game, To
grudge at a good action, sign of a beastly mind.
and never grudge thereat? But their grudging at so good an action, shows
their ignorance, and base beastly minds: but grudge or grudge not, provide it
they should, had I the commission: for the vrgentnesse of the cause does
deeply require it. A miserable mind.
And again how many of these grumbling snudges shall you see which repine at a
penny for so good an action, yet can find pounds by hundreds to buy their
poor neighbors out of their livings, goods and all; men of bad consideration
and worse conscience. Good courses.
Next, such men as should be found able to bear the charge of a Musket, should
provide one in like sort, which with 30 or 40 shillings charge would be well
performed: and where one man were not sufficient thereunto, join a couple;
where not two, join three; where not three, join four; so making a common
purse to buy the same: for I could wish the most weapon in the field to be Pike
and Musket. Pike and musket the most weapon in the field.
Again, such as have Calliuers imposed upon them already, if they be found men
able for more, (for we must stretch our ability in this case) turn them to a
Musket on Gods name, passing over the charge of the Calliuer unto another less
able; then such as shall thus be found, see they provide it good and sufficient;
and not such rotten stuff as commonly I see. Now for such as have bows and
bills imposed upon them already: let them alter the weapons, providing in their
stead good Pikes and Muskets: and where one is not found sufficient, join two
or three, as I said before.


Gent. What, would you have them cast away their bows and bills, having been
charged with the same already?


Capt. Not so, Bows and bills yet serviceable in some sort.
they may serve yet to many purposes. For all those weapons (before spoken of)
provided, shall serve but for your trained men: and your bills and bows, which
every man, or most men can handle, shall, (if need require) be put in place of
service befitting them weapons.


Gent. What order would you wish for match, powder and shot, would you have the
burden thereof upon such as do find the piece?


Capt. An order for powder and match for training days.
No, not all the charge: but I would wish a general seazement to be made upon
every parish, for as much as should suffice for officers wages, match, and
powder for one trayning day, to be delivered unto the Captain, or some other
officer for that purpose, to provide the same ready, to see it justly
distributed, and well spent in the training (with as little waste as might be)
and so from training to training, as the service shall continue.


Gent. And for the general store, what say you of that?


Capt. A great care to be had for the general store.
I hope there is sufficient care had thereof already: if not, I could wish such
as have the commission and charge thereof to look well thereunto, having a due
regard to the waightinesse of the cause; and to see that the moneys collected
for that purpose be substantially and thoroughly bestowed in pikes and corslets,
muskets, caliuers, match, powder, lead, and all other things there unto
appertaining; that in the time of service nothing be found wanting: for wants
in time and pinch of service have hindered great actions, Want of necessaries
in time of service, has hindered great actions.
as I my self and others have seen: beseeching our good Lord God, so to
stir up the hearts of our high Commanders (as I trust he does) to have great
care and due regard to the most necessary provision of such munitions, since our
modern wars depend much upon the same. But I have long digressed from the
officer I had in hand, unto who^ I think it is time to return.


Gent. It was of the election of a Captain of foot-bands; but of the parts of
his charge and duty you have not yet touched.


Capt. Whom to be chosen for a Captain of footbands.
Then, a Captain of Infanterie, or foot-band, should have in him all the parts
(before rehearsed) of a perfect soldier, having worthily passed through all
the aforesad degrees of service: as first to have been a Caporall, from a
Caporal to a Sergeant, from a Sergea^t to an Ensign, from an Ensigne-bearer to
a Lieutenant, and from a Lieutenant to this office; and one who in all those
offices has well performed his parts and duty, to the end he may the better
know how to command and order every one in his degree. The parts to be desired
in a Captain.
And particularly it is to be respected, that he be a man that fears God,
virtuous, wise, politic, valiant, careful, vigilant, and (as a thing of great
importance) well experimented in martial affairs: for disorderly shall he
govern in wars, Disorderly shall he govern in wars, who was never skilful
in the art.
which never was skillful in the Art.


Gent. So many good parts in one subject are hard to be found.


Capt. Yet some such men there are; and where there are not all those parts,
let the choice be made of such, in whom most are to be found.


Genesis Being chosen, and his charge appointed him, what is then required?


Cap. The captains care in the election of his officers.
To know how to choose necessary officers for the government of his company, and
to see they may be such, as their degrees and places should require; for in
this election he shall greatly show his skill, prudence, and wisdom; the which
parts if he himself have, he will choose men like unto himself; if not, then
per contra, as it has been seen many times; Similis similem sibi quaerit.
yea and those places to have been sold, and chopped and changed for money.


Gent. What number would you have a foot-company to contain?


Capt. Some man may be sufficient to govern three hundred, some two hundred,
some one hundred, as I have said before.


Gent. How would you have a Company sorted with weapons?


Capt. To every 100 men I would wish 40 pikes, 10 halbards, of which number 2 or
3 to be targets of proof, The due sorting of weapons.
25 muskets, and 25 calliuers, and so to the higher numbers.


Gent. Thus you would have as many pikes with halbards, as you have of shot:
but I have heard some say, that they would two thirds of shot to one third of
pikes.


Capt. True, provided that there be the full number of muskets, or rather more;
for I would be as well provided to defend, as to offend.


Gent. What imports so great a number of muskets?


Capt. Much, The advantage of musket.
considering the wonderful execution of that weapon: for one good musket may
be accounted for two calliuers.


Gent. But the musket is a heavy carriage, and painful to be handled; not fit
but for strong and mighty men.


Capt. You would not be of that mind, had you ever seen any good service,
especially amongst the Spaniards, who use them almost generally: and I am
assured that for courage and strength, we are comparable, yea do excel them:
but many of us want their practice, Skill and obedience.
yea and happily their obedience. Now considering that the musket has his
rest, the heaviness thereof is many times eased: and again, for the handling,
Practice makes perfect.
Practice makes perfect, as in all other weapons.


Genesis What officers think you necessary for a Company of three hundred men?


Cap. One Lieutenant, Necessary officers to a band of three hundred men.
one Ensigne-bearer, two Sergeants, twelve Caporals, after the reckening of 25
soldiers to every squadron (the Captain squadron accounted for one,) one
harbinger or furrier, one Chyrurgian skillful in his art, and his servant.
three Drums, and as many Phifes.


Gent. The Company newly levied, and officers chosen, what is the Captain to
do first before he march with the same?


Capt. Having provided his Colors, The Ensign to be incommended to the
Ensigne-bearer.
he shall with solemnity inco^mend it unto his Alferes or Ensigne-bearer, as
before is declared, and then shall divide his soldiers into squadrons, choosing
for his own squadron the most experimented men, and of best sort.


Gent. Wherefore does the Captain choose a squadron to himself, being commander
of the whole Company?


Capt. Because it is a matter of much importance, and necessary, in respect
that this squadron stands in such predicament, The Captains Squadron.
that any Gentleman, though never so illustrious; and any Alferes, Lieutenant
or Sergeant may serve as soldier in the same, No blemish unto any Gentleman, to
serve as a common soldier in the Captains squadron.

Aduantaged in Pays.


without any disparagement or blemish to their reputation, although they
themselves have had men under their charge; for such ought to be aduantaged in
their pays, and the Captain to respect and esteem them as his own person,
and counsel and consult with them, choosing officers out of them when any do
want. And if any piece of service be presented, wherein he shall be occasioned
to use some part of his company, he chooses of those, such as he shall think
good, and inco^mendeth the action unto them: and to give breathing unto men of
less account in encounters and skirmishes which are offered: and, even for very
shame of them, the common soldiers (knowing they shall be marked and noted)
will fight more resolute and ready. Besides, men of such sort are a great
beauty to the band, being commonly better armed then the rest.

He is the^ to procure what he can, To instruct and procure his soldiers to the
fear of God.
that his soldiers be good Christians, and men fearing God (for God knows,
there be a number neither regarding their creation nor Christianity.) For no
action is either good, or like to be, where this foundation is not first laid.

To appease debates.

To reprehend and pun^sh dish nest livers.

Few b^d do corrupt a number of good.

To exercise them often to their Arms.


If there be any banding, secting or passionating amongst them, he is to appease
and compound the same: and those that do live dishonest* infamous, or tatched
with foul crimes, let him first charitablie reprehend them; whereupon, if they
amend not, yet more severely; if not then, and all necessary preuentions used,
let them be cashed out of the band; for a few bad do soon corrupt a number of
good.

He must diligently use his soldiers to the often exercise of their Arms,
seeing them well furnished therewith, showing them the use of every kind of
weapon: and what orders they are to observe at encounters and battles,
according to the nature of their opposite enemy: for there is a difference
between the Germane, the French, Different nations different n^tures. To
practice all military exercises.

The Captain equal with his soldiers in all peril and pain.


the Italian, and Spaniard, being nations of different humors, natures,
courage, policy, and conduction. Also that he see them practice all other
exercises necessary for wars, so that nothing be done disorderly in the
Company: carefully in all actions observing military discipline: being equal
with his soldiers in all perils and pains, which is a great encouragement to
the soldiers, and an increasing of their love toward their Captain and not
to send them out like headless men, himself remaining behind safe under
covert, as such sometimes have been seen.

To muster and train often. The order to be observed in trayning.
He shall often times muster, show, and train his Company, causing them to
march in good order, keeping well their arayes, in march, countermarch, in
ring, in S.D or G. forms, all which are framed by the only order of marching:
and bring them into squadrons of battles of sundry sorts and forms, showing
them how to march orderly therein, how to charge either against horse or foot,
how to retire with their faces still toward the enemy: and how to turn their
faces, making front of either flank or train, and to wheel about, if
occasion should serve, but a thing hard, and not easy to be performed: how to
disband, and how to fall into troops. By these means he shall know his
Company the better, be better reputed of, Men ready for action to great
importance.
and make his men more apt and ready for action: a thing very important for a
Captain.

Great care to keep array in marching.
When he marches with his Company, he must be careful that his soldiers
break not out of rank, although it be in their own country, or in country of
our friends, out of danger or suspect of the enemy, to the end that they
neither rifle, spoil, Disorderly behauior of ^ad soldiers breeds many
mischiefs
nor rob houses, gardens, or orchards, and other places of corn and fruits;
for thereby do rise and result many times great scandals and tumults amongst the
naturals of the country wherein they march, and is cause that they are but
badlie ^ntertained at their lodgings: wherein he is to have great care and
vigilance, that his soldiers grow not licencious upon their poor hosts,
neither offer them abuse for their meat and provision, but be contented with
such as is given them, according to the ability of their poor hosts,
Disorders to be punished.
chastening with great severity the offenders herein: for in so doing he shall
acquist and gain the name and reputation of a Christianlike, virtuous and
discreet Captain: but Captains doing the contrary, suffering their soldiers
to grow over licentious and lewd, The tolleratio^ of evils breeds many
inconuenie^ces.
have procured to themselves and their companies great hatred, infamies and
grudgings, with their throats many times cut by the country Boores: examples
hereof too too many, both in France and the Low Countries.

Now his band being of compound weapons, he himself may use and carry either
Calliuer, What weapon the Captain is to use
Musket or Pike, as he shall fancy most, but the Pike is most honorable,
dividing his shot into fore-ward and rere-ward of the pikes, containing in
their center the Ensign and Halbards. But if the band be al pikes, or all shot
alone, (which order I have seen observed amongst the Spaniards) then being
pikes, he is by duty to carry a pike, himself armed in a Corslet complete,
wherein he shall be curious to have them gallant and good; which will cause his
Company to imitate him therein. But if his Company be all shot, then is he in
like sort bound by duty to carry a piece, either Musket or Calliuer, gallantly
furnished, Vnsoldiarly trick of a training captain.
and neatlie kept. And not in musters and traynings to carry neither
long-sword, neither Halbard, neither leading-staffe, neither halfe-pike,
neither yet a page going before him; for it is a Bisognios trick, ill
beseeming a perfect Captain. The captain being set to defend any place, what
he is to do.


If he be commanded with his Company to the defense and guard of any place; he
is to repair, to rampiere, to entrench, and to fortify himself therein, with
all speed, care, diligence, and forecast: and defend the same with resolute
valor, as diverse valiant Captains have done, both in time past, and also in
our age, whose fame in histories, is, and ever will be fresh, in despite of
envy.

If the Army be encamped; Commanded to any piece of service, what he is to do.
and being commanded unto any piece of service, he must show therein great
valor, vigilancie and care, animating his soldiers, and consulting with his
officers and most experimented men of his Company, and after determination
had, to show himself courageous and resolute. But let him well beware that he
attempt nothing inconsiderate and rash, as many ignorant men have done, To
attempt nothing inconsiderate and rash.
to their own and companies confusion. For those that go without prevention,
preconsideration, and forecast of such successes and casualties as may befall,
do in the very action find themselves puzzeled, amazed, and at their wits end,
with their overthrow in fine. Therefore to avoid such inconveniences, and
hazards, let the Captain be well assured to observe the orders and instructions
given him by the higher Co^manders, To observe the orders given by his
commander.
if manifest occasion be not seen that in observing the same, great damage may
ensue, or good occasion be lost.

It imports him also much to be a good Orator, and to have a sweet vain in
speech, To be a good Orator, and to what purpose.
and all other Commanders and officers in like sort, that have people in
charge, to persuade, move, or dissuade their soldiers, as occasions shall
serve; to persuade to good actions; to dissuade from bad factions; to commend
valor and virtue; to reprehend faults and vices, and things done without order
and discipline; to encourage, move and stir up men's minds to battles and
brave encounters, and to induce men by good speeches to endure patiently, and
with constant hearts the toils, wants, and discommodities, which commonly are
presented in casualties of war, whereby they arise not in mutinies, nor into
such other dissolutions, by reason of impatiencie in semblable adversities.

A point of great virtue it is in a Captain, not to be over covetous and
greedy, but frank and liberal amongst his soldiers and followers, succouring
them to his best ability in their necessities and needs; A captain not to be
over covetous, but careful for his soldiers.
procuring that they be orderly paid, and not basely to wrong them, in
detaining, deceiving and robbing them of their pays, as some bad Captains
have been wont to do, who with little honesty, and less fear of God, have
made a practice thereof: such unworthy Captains the Lord General ought
severely to punish.

Item, such day as his Company has the guard, he must send his Sergea^t to take
the Word from the Sergeant Mayor, or some other such personage who has order
for the same, To take the word
with the which Word he is to govern his watch and Sentinels for that night:
for therein consists the security of the Camp.

In visiting the Sentinels and Corpse de guard he must use great care and
diligence: and see that his soldiers and officers do precisely perform what
touches them therein, Careful to visit the Sentinels.
according to the order he shall have received from his superior Commanders:
and cause that his Company be always provided with candles and torches, and
such other lights, To be provided of lights for the night time.

To be obedient and diligent about his super^our command^rs.


for the redress of many casualties cha^cing in the night.

He shall obey the ordinances of the Sergeant Mayor, and other his superior
officers with great good will and diligence, respecting the^, and accompanying
them, the more to move them to love and affect him: and shall procure to learn
from the^ the orders and courses they shall take in prosecuting the war: for
it is a great virtue to be curious to know that which touches his profession:
and it imports him much to understand it perfectly, whereby he may find
himself furnished with more considerations, and more ready for matters
committed unto him, thereby to advance himself in his Princes service, and in
credit and reputation to his own person, bearing with a magnanimous and equal
mind, as well his adverse, as his prosperous fortune, a rare and principal
virtue.

Necessary carriage and baggage in marching. But not over pestersome.
At marching unto any place with his company, let him procure that they be
provided of necessary baggage: but yet with such moderation, that in no sort
he suffer his soldiers to be pestered and cumbred; but as light as may be,
but with their armor and weapon, to the end, that if occasion be offered to
encounter with the enemy, they may find themselves more ready and determinate
to gain booties from them, then careful to conserve their own trash and
baggage: not permitting any soldier to have any horse, but some few and
particular of his most expert men, Few horses to be permitted in footbands.

The Captain is most ordinarily to lodge among his soldiers.

Not to be over curious in his diet and fare.

Examples.

To entreat his soldiers with gentle words and good works.

A good Captain is as a father to his soldiers, and they as children unto him.

Soldiers loving their captains will adventure their lives for their common
honor.


the which may serve in steed of light horses, to discover and take knowledge,
and to send aduises, if need should require.

In his alodgements, he should most ordinarily lodge amongst, or near his
soldiers, giving them examples with his virtues and good behavior, being
companion with them in hardness of living, not procuring to himself dainties and
curious meats, imitating herein Cato Vticensis, and George Castriot Lord of
Albania, Hannibal, Scipio, Caesar, and others.

In fine he shall entreat his soldiers with gentle words and good works,
accounting them as his sons and children, whereby they may love him, and
respect him as their father; and being thus linked, he shall enterprise no act,
wherein they will not follow him with great love, willingness and valor,
boldly aduenturing their lives for their common honor, gaining to himself
thereby great fame and reputation with the General and the whole Army; thereby
binding his Prince to reward him according to his valor, virtue and deserts.


Gent. You have declared many good parts belonging to a Captain: I would that
our Captains were half so well furnished.


Capt. I would they had all these good parts, and many more, if more might be:
then should we have less cause to make reckening of our enemies.


The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK OF WAR DISCOURSES AND MARTIAL DISCIPLINE.
The first Dialogue:
Wherein is declared the order of a Roman Legion, with their deuisions: and
the manner of the Grecians Phalanx: also a form of trayning to be practiced
and used amongst us, with the use and handling of each weapon in their kind:
and other military points.

Gentleman. FRiendly Captain, your yesterdayes Discourses, have so delighted,
contented and enflamed both my self, and these other Gentlemen, that we must
needs entreat you to proceed, and to speak somewhat of the higher Officers of
the field: wherefore I pray satisfy us herein.


Capt. Gentlemen, I would those parts of skill were in me to answer your
requests, and to satisfy your expectations. Nevertheless seeing you are so
well bent, and inclined to the understanding of Military courses; I will, to
my best ability and knowledge, declare unto you such matters as I have found
by mine own experience, either learned from the directions of brave
Commanders under whom I have served, or gathered out of the best authors which
have written upon this subject War. Indeed at the beginning of these our
speeches, I did not then think to have marched so far into this Martial
field, Discontinuance breeds forgetfulness.
for my five or six years discontinuance from action, had almost driven all
the courses, order and method thereof out of my mind and memory: but your
curious demaundes and questions, have both drawn me on, sharpened my wit, and
refresht my memory: wherein if I have erred, or may miss hereafter (as no man
but erreth, some more, some less) I submit my self to the censure and
correction of men more experimented, and of better parts then my self.


Gent. Truly Captain, you say very well; and I would we had many of no meaner
parts, nor of no worse meaning then your self, in mine opinion; then no
doubt, but our common soldiers should be better instructed, and be better
dealt withal, then they now are by some of their Captains. But letting these
matters pass; I pray what order would you wish to be observed in the trayning
of our soldiers here with us in the country, since we are commanded to train,
and as yet I see little good order observed in the same.


Capt. Touching the true and orderly trayning of your people in this our
Modern Militia, I have in general roued over some part thereof already; but
not so particularly as such an action would require: wherein I could heartily
wish, that, as near as possible we might, we should reduce ourselves with such
arms as we now use, unto the form, manner, and course of the ancient Romans
in their Militia and discipline of war, The military discipline of the
Romans to be followed.
although ages, seasons, and inventions, have altered much and many weapons by
them used.


Gent. I pray what order did the Romans observe in their wars? and how were
they armed?


Capt. The Romans divided their foot people of war into men armed with
heavy armor, (or, as we may term it, armor complete) and into light armed
men. Grauis armatura of the Romans.

Velites of the Romans, and their armings.


Those which were light armed, they called by one common name, Velites; under
which word they understood all such as carried slinges, darts, bows,
crosse-bowes, and such like: the greatest part of whom, were armed with a skull
or close Cellat for the head; and had, besides their other weapons, a shield or
Target upon their left arm to defend and cover themselves, and did fight or
skirmish in straggling sort, a good distance from those that were armed with
heavy or complete armor in Squadron. Unto those may we well compare our shot,
especially them of the forlorn hope, or Enfans Perdus, as the French do term
them. Their people armed with heavy or complete armor, The arming of those of
grauis armatura.
had first a Cellat or Burgonet, which covered their head, and reached over
their shoulders: then for their body a Cuyrasse, whose flappes or tasses
covered their thighs, even down to the knees; their legs and arms were
armed with Greaues and Vambraces: and for their defense they carried a shield
of four foot long, and two foot and a half broad, bound about with a band of
iron; and for weapon they had a sword, not over long, girt unto their left
side, and a short dagger upon their right; and in their hand a Iauelin or Dart,
which they called Pilum, the which at the beginning of their fight they did
lance or dart at the enemy: unto these may we compare our Corslets and Pykes,
whereof we frame our battles or battaillions: and our armed halbards,
partisans, and other short weapon. Commonly a Roman army consisted of two
Roman Legions, A Roman army.
which was a Consuls army, and of two Auxiliarie legions, which were of their
friends or confederates.

Their Legion consisted at the first, but of three thousand footmen, and three
hundred horse; Roman legion Coho^t, Centurie, Maniple.
but afterward increased unto 5.6 or 8000. foot. Their legion they divided
into Cohortes, Maniples, and Centuries. Every legion of 6000. foot, was
divided into ten Cohorts, at 600. to every Cohort, and every Cohort into six
Centuries, after 100. men to every Centurie: and every Centurie into four
Maniples, after 25. soldiers unto every Maniple, or into five Maniples, at 20.
soldiers to every Maniple. A legion distinguished into 3. Hastati, Principes,
Triarij. Their order of placing.
Moreover, every legion was divided into 3. parts, or orders of battles, into
Hastati, Principes, and Triarij. The Hastati were set in the front of their
army, in order of Squadrons thick and sure; behind them were placed the
Principes, but with the order of their Squadrons more rare and thinner. After
these again were ranged the Triarij, but with the order of their Squadrons,
much more thinner then the Principes.

Now their slingers, darters, archers, or crosse-bowes, and such light armed,
were placed without these Battles, Velitat, their places to fight.
or Squadrons on the flanks and front, between the horsemen and their armed
battle: as we do, or ought to do (in mine opinion) our shot, some fil^ers of
Pykes, Halberds, and such other short weapon.


Gent. What sort of men think you fittest to be chosen for soldiers, and to
be trained; and what order in their trayning?


Capt. I suppose, Whom fittest to be chosen for soldiers. Signs by the
phisiognomie.
men of the better sort, from the age of eighteen years unto thirty years,
are fittest to be chosen. Now the signs whereby to conjecture the persons most
apt for wars, by the Phisiognomie, and proportion of body, are these: The
eyes quick, lively and piercing; the head and countenance upright; the breast
broad and strong; the shoulders large; the arms long; the fingers strong and
synowie; the belly thin; the ribs large; the thigh big; the leg full,
and the foot lean and dry: for whosoever is of this disposition, and with
these conditions, cannot choose but be nimble and strong, which are two
qualities, chiefly to be required in a soldier.

I could wish that those Bands which are appointed to be trained (for of the
Officers I have spoken before) should be by their Captain, New soldiers to be
often trained.
Muster-maister, and other Officers, trained at the least once every month, or
oftener, as the weather and season will permit: and every Caporall, with his
Cabos de Camera, to train and instruct their Esquadra, especially of shot,
once every week, or once every fortnight at the least: ensigning them the use
of their weapon, and order of slight skirmish: Practice breeds readiness.
For often practice makes men ready, especially and shot, the which without
readiness and skill is a weapon of little advantage; and in the hands of
perfect soldiers, is a weapon of great advantage, and of wonderful execution.

Now the several companies, having been well applied and taught for a time by
their Captain and other officers, Sundry companies to join together.
I would wish, should once every three months, meet and join some four or
five companies together, in some convenient place, then and there to bring them
into such forms as should be needful for so many companies. And once a year
at the least, all the companies of the whole shire to meet in some most
convenient place together, then and there to be instructed in the orders how to
march, 1. To march 2. To encampe. 3. To fight.

how to encampe, and how to fight: dividing them into so many parts or
battaillions, as unto their chief Officer shall seem good.


Gent. What course would you wish the Captain of a single company to observe
in the trayning of his soldiers?


Capt. First having his company leauied and chosen of the better sort of
people, as is said, Rules to be observed by a careful Captain.
let your raw Captain, (for so I term those which never were in action)
provide himself, if possible he may, of a good Lieutenant, and a sufficient
Sergeant, and a skillful Drummer. Then let his people be suited with such sort
of weapon as is appointed. The which I would wish to be (as I have said before)
to every hundred of men, 25. muskets, 25. Calliuers, and 40. or more of pikes
and corslets, and the rest, short weapon; as halberds, swords and targets, and
such like.

Now having suited every man with a convenient weapon, I would wish your
Muster-maister, if your Captain have not the skill (for your Muster-master
ought to be a man of experience) first to declare unto them the parts that
ought to be in a soldier in general, Military points to be ensigned new
soldiers.
as before is declared; then to ensign them the right carriage of their arms
and weapon: then to know the several soundes of the Drum: next to learn to
keep his rank and file orderly; and so to march either swift or slow, step
by step with the sound of the Drum; then how to keep their array, being cast
into a ring, or any other form; with the coming out again, and returning
into a counter-ring; and out of the same into a march, and countermarch: then
how to make their Alto or stand, and how to double their ranks, until they
bring themselves into a just square of men, if their numbers will permit it;
and how to double their ^^les, either upon the left or right hand, and so to
fall off again, both from file and rank: and being in squadron, how to turn
their faces on either, or any part, making front on any flank or train, as
occasion shall be offered. Then the perfect use and managing of every weapon
in his due nature and kind: A good Captain will soon make ready soldiers.
and so by a continual use they may (by good instructers) become soon to be
ready soldiers.


Gent. Here be many good parts under a few words; but they are too brief for
me to understand: wherefore I pray dilate more at large thereof: and first,
what mean you by the carriage of his weapon?


Cap. The art of war better delivered by act the^ words.
To discourse upon al these points particularly, it would be over long: and might
better be showed in act the^ in words: yet to satisfy you somewhat herein, I
will speak of the particulars here and there, as I shall be occasioned, and shall
call the^ to memory. First therefore, The Harquebuzier his armings and weapons.
the soldier that is appointed to carry a calliuer, is first to be ensigned how
to carry his piece upon his left shoulder, with his flaske at his girdle, or
ha^ging by at Port-flask, or Flask-leather upon the right thigh, and upon the
left side of his girdle, to have his touchboxe fastened by the string, hanging
down somewhat long by the strings, sufficient to be taken, and to prime his
piece with touch-powder: and on his right side a Bullet bag or purse of
canuas, or leather for bullets. Also some three or four yards of match, in
several pieces hanging at his girdle, with one piece of match of a yard long
in his left hand, holden fast by the third finger of the same hand, having the
one or both the ends of the same, lighted, or fired. To charge.
Also to be provided of a priming iron or wire, of a steel and flint stone, to
strike fire upon any sudden occasion, either to spare the burning of match,
or to fire their matches if the same do chance to go out. Then how to charge
his piece, either with his flask or bandelier, and the^ to let slip the bullet
down into the barrel after the powder, and to ram the same with paper, tow
or such like, thrusting the same down with the scouring stick, if time will
permit: or else (a more readier way) thus; After that the bullet is slipped
down unto the powder, to put after the same some two or three corns of
powder, which will wedge fast the bullet. This being done, To cock the match.
let him hold his Calliuer with his left hand, (as in his charging he ought to
do the like) griping the same by the stock, somewhat near under the cock,
betwixt his thombe and four fingers; then, holding the nose of his piece
somewhat upward (for not to enda^ger his fellows) to take the one end of his
lighted match, with his forefinger, middle finger, and tho^be of his right hand,
and so to cock the same, having a regard that it may fall due within the pan:
finally if it be a crooked stock piece, to set the same unto the left side of
his breast, retiring his right foot some half step behind the left, or
advancing the left foot some half pace before the right, To level.
and so to take his due leuel: and holding the hindermost part of the stock
betwixt the thombe and forefinger of his right hand, and with the other three
fingers to draw to the serre, To discharge.
and so to discharge his piece with agility having done the which, To retire.
To recharge.
to retire souldier-like, and charge again, giving place to his next fellow,
or seconder. But being a straight stocked piece (the which I hold for the
better) he is to place the same upon the right side of his breast, fast against
his shoulder, leuelling and discharging, as aforesaid. And for other arms he
is to be fitted with a short sword, and mean dagger, and a Spanish morion. Now
the musketier is to carry his musket upon his left or right shoulder; The
musketier his arming and his forke weapon.
for it imports not much on whether, so they observe the order of the first
rank, with his Forke or rest in his left hand, fastened about his hand wrest
or little finger by a string, having his flask and touchbox fitted as before is
said, or having a bandalier, the same to be over the left shoulder, To charge.
and under the right arm. Now to charge the same, he must hold his musket with
his left hand, having his rest trayling by the string, and put the but end of
the stock upon the ground, then with his flaske or bandalier to charge his
piece with powder, slipping down the bullet into the barrel after the same,
and to fasten it with two or three corns of powder, as is aforesaid; then to
clappe the musket into his forke, planting the lower end or pike of the rest
into the ground near unto his left foot, and resting the but end of the
stock upon his left thigh, To cock his match.
then to prime his pan with touch powder. And having his match ready, as before
is said, to take the piece of match that hangs by the middle or third finger
of his left hand, betwixt the thombe and fore finger of his right hand, and
with his middle finger to measure at what length to cock the same, To level.
to fall with a proportioned length into the pan. The which being done, let him
retire his right foot somewhat back, and stand firm upon the same: and
holding fast both the musket and rest with his left hand, to raise the but end
of his musket from his thigh unto his breast, and to fasten the same firm and
close unto his right shoulder and breast, To discharge.
holding fast the said hinder part of the stock betwixt his right thombe and
fore finger, drawing down the serre with the other three fingers, and so
taking due level to discharge. Having performed the which, let him vncocke his
match, clap his musket upon his shoulder with a half turn, and so retire,
trailing his rest or forke by the stringe, and giving place to others, To
retire. To recharge.
go charge again: finally for other arms, a reasonable short sword, a mean
dagger; with no morion, but a fair hat and feather.


Gent. Thus I perceive your fiery shot have many busy skils, without knowledge
of all the which it is hard to become a perfect shot.


Capt. True; Advise.
and therefore often to be practiced: But here let the muster-maister and
trayning Captain be well advised not to suffer their shot to carry any bullet
about them, in time of their trainings, and fained skirmishes, for fear of
danger, that might thereby ensue among themselves. But now and then after their
training, How to bring the bisognios fir s^ to the bullet.
to take every shot single, and to see him charge his piece orderly with powder
and bullet as aforesaid; and having a great but erected to that purpose (the
which ought to be in every hundred or Baily-wicke) to cause them to level, and
discharge at the blancke thereof, orderly one after another: encouraging those
which do make the fairest shot.

Now for the Pike, The piker his armings and weapon
which the Spaniards do term Sen^ora y Reyna de las armas, the Queen and
mistress of weapons. The soldier which carries the same, is to be well armed
with a good corslet, furnished with his gorget, Morion, tasses, pouldrons,
vambraces, and gauntlets also; to be armed as he ought to be; whatsoever
opinion other men may hold to the contrary, supposing a bare pair of Cuyrasses
only sufficient: but I am of opinion, that the armed Picquier ought to be
armed in all points (as I have said) for defense: and then to offend, to be
weaponed with a good Pike of ground Ash, The pike of 17. or 18. foot.
of seuenteen or eighteen foot long at the least, well and strongly headed,
with the cheeks three foot long, or there about: and for other weapon, The
dagger.
to wear a good short sword and dagger: for the dagger is a weapon of great
advantage in Pell mell.

Objection.
And if it be replied, that the soldier so heavy armed, is not for any great
march, Answer.
or speedy execution; I say, that among well ordered Regiments, there are also
yet some unarmed pikes, that is without any corslet, or, at the most, the bare
cuyrats only and morion, the which the Italians do call Picche secche. Now
these are reserved and employed in such pieces of light service. Picha se^cha.
And the Picquier, either armed or unarmed is to be showed and taught the
carriage and use of his pike; The carrying and handling of the pike.
as first to tertiar or carry the same orderly upon his shoulder, holding the
same with his four fingers upon the upper part of the staff, and his thombe
under the staff, near unto his shoulder, basing down the blunt end thereof,
to advance the point, and poizing the pike with an equal poize upon his
thombe and shoulder, always in march keeping the lower end of his pike on the
one side of his foremans leg still aduertising that in march the pike is to
be carried upon the right shoulder, of every soldier throughout every file,
saving the utmost file on the left side of the arrayes or ordinances, which are
to carry their pikes upon their left shoulders only, always regarding how
those of the foremost ranks do carry their weapon, the rest to do the same
throughout every rank and file following: for order and form do require the
same. To make Alto, to arbolare, or advance.

To rear.


Next he is to be taught how to plant his pike on the ground, at any stand or
Alto: then how to arbolare or advance his pike, that is; to rear his pike
upright against his right shoulder* and with his right hand stretched down
unto his thigh, to hold the same near unto the but-end betwixt his four
fingers and his thombe, stretching his forefinger downward unto the but-end of
his pike, and so advance the same upright and high against his right shoulder,
resting and staying the same with his right hand against his right thigh and
knee, When to advance.
as before is said. Now this is to be done at such times, as being brought into
a Ring, and serreyng close shoulder to shoulder, then to advance their piks in
this sort at the enclosing thereof, and so to continue until they fall out of
the ring again into a larger march. Also the same is used by some, at their
arriving unto the corpse de guard, at the setting of the watch before their
chief Commander or officer; even as the first rank shall arrive into the corpse
de guard, some ten or twelve pases from the place of their stand; to arbolare
their pikes; and so rank after rank, carrying them in the same order until
they come unto their place of station, there to make Alto, and to plant their
pikes upon the ground, as the squadron is formed. To present, To charge.
But principally, the soldiers marching in squadron, and upon point to come to
the push of the pike with their foot enemy, then are they first to advance
their pikes, as is said, bearing the same orderly with the right hand against
the right thigh, and the left hand above near about the shoulder, and so to
charge upon the left hand and push, To push.
standing firm and sure upon the left foot. But if the squadron be charged
with any troops of the enemies horse, To cowch.
then must the Picquiers cowch their pikes fast under the right foot, holding
the same (...) the left hand, and bow down the point thereof against the
breast of the hor^e, To Couch.
having his right hand ready to draw his sword, if occasion shall be offered.

Now how necessary and auayleable this continual use and practice is, may
easily be gathered from the sundry victories of the ancient Romans. Who both
in their Camps and Garrisons had their Tesserarios (which were as our Sergeant
Majors) to ensign and teach their people of war the use and managing of
their arms, The Romans Tesserarios their training.
at all idle and vacant times. The old soldier, sometimes once in a day, and
the Tirones, which we term Bisognios, or new soldiers, twice in the day, or
as occasion served: so were their people always ready and perfect. And again
they did not only practice them in the knowledge of their weapons, but many
times also did conduct their Companies for their recreation into the field,
there causing them to run, Virtuous exercis^^
to leap, to iumpe, to wrestle, to throw the sledge, to pitch the bar, and
such like exercises; and sometimes also to learn to swim, as a quality very
befitting a soldier. Moreover, they did many times cause their soldiers, as
well foot as horse, To march out fained skirmish.
to march armed at all points, even as it were to serve against their enemy,
once or twice in a month, every man carrying his own provision and victuals,
and giving and receiving the charge, even as in hostile fight: and this did
they for the space of ten miles, five out, and five home. Thus with these
exercises they brought their people to be able, quick, and ready to serve upon
all occasions, and did more good service with twenty thousand of such so
trained and practiced, Ready men, aduantagious.
then with thirty or forty thousand of raw and untrained men: But to have a
soldier to be very perfect, and a good executioner indeed, it is needful to
have bin in some good pieces of service, and to have seen men to fall on both
sides, To be a good executioner must have seen service.

To toss the pike.


which does flesh and harden a soldier very much. Finally the good Picquier
ought to learn to toss his pike well, with the due handling of the same, and
to be skillful therein; since it is the weapon he professes: for 100 of ready
pikemen, are better then 200 that know not the use of the weapon. Now the
halbarders ought to be fully armed with a corslet as is the Picquier; but in
marching he is always to bear the same on the right shoulder, The halberd.
holding the lower end thereof, with his right hand almost close to his right
thigh and knee.


Gent. You have well discoursed touching the caryage and handling of the
calliuer, musket, pike, and halbard. But now, I pray what mean you by doubling
your rank and file?


Capt. By rank I mean every row, or order of men, standing shoulder by
shoulder, Rank what it is. File what it is.
either in march or squadron, reaching a long from the one side of the squadron
unto the other. And by file, I understand all the line, order, or row of all
the soldiers standing consequently one after another, from front to the
train, either in march or squadron. Now, the doubling of rank or file is
thus. First suppose your company to be of 100 pikes (as for the shot we will
speak of hereafter) and you would bring them into a just square of men: The
doubling of rank and file.
first search out the Cubike root of your number, and it is 10; then (after
the first order) you shall cause them by the sound of the drum, By single file.
to embattell, to march up in single files, at 10 men in every file, and the
head man of every 10 to be a Caporal or Cabo de Camera; and as the first 10 is
come up unto the place where you mean to frame your squadro^, cause them to
make Alto; then call up the second file, at 10 per file, causing them to march
up close pouldron to pouldron of the first te^, and there to firm and stand:
then the third file, then the fourth and so consequently the rest, until your
squadron be formed: your ensign marching up in the middle file, as in this
figure may appear.

Here you see them drawn up in single files, at 10 men in every file: and so
your squadron is framed, 10 files, and 10 ranks or 10 in flank, and 10 in
front.


An other order is thus: you may march them up in 2, 3, 4, or 5, files at once,
and 10 ranks (for the number even or od imports nothing) if at 2 files at
once, By maniple or many files.
then are they marched up and framed at five commings up: if at 3 files at
once, then at three marchings up at 3 files per Maniple, which make 9 files,
and 1 single file, at 10 men per file: which makes your just square of men.
Now if you will march them up, by 4 files at once, they are 2 marchings or
Maniples, at 4 files, 10 ranks, and one Maniple, at 2 files per Maniple, and
so again is your squadron formed. And again if you would march them up by 5
files at once, and 10 ranks, they come up in 2 Maniples, and so is your
squadron justly framed.

How to double the rank^.
Your squadron being thus framed and set, at 10 ranks, and 10 files, the^ to
double the ranks, you shall cause upon an other sound of the drum, those of
the second rank, to step in betwixt them of the first rank, beginning either
upon the left or right hand first, as you will: and the 4 rank to double the
3, and again the 6 rank to double the 5, and the 8 rank to double the 7, and
finally the 10 to double the 9, so shall your battle or squadron come to be 20
in breadth, and 5 in length or depth; or 20 files and 5 ranks, which is in
form of a battle of double front as by these figures appears.



Here you see the ranks doubled into 20 files and 5 ranks. Then cause them
upon another sound of the drum, To fall off.
to fall of, or back again into their former places: and so to double again
upon the other hand, and fall off again. Now, to double the file; To double
the file.
cause the second file to double the first either upon the left or right hand,
as it shall please you to begin, and the fourth file to double the third, and
the sixth the fifth, and the eight the seventh, and the tenth file to double the
ninth, as in these figures following may appear.



And here you may see the file doubled, reduced into five files, at 20 men per
file, upon the right hand: the like you shall cause them to do upon the left
hand: having first caused them to fall off from their file, bringing them into
their former square again.

Then shall you go unto the train of your battle or squadron, and upon
another sound of the drum, To turn their faces and make front of any part
you shall command all your soldiers to turn their faces upon a sudden
toward you: then causing them to double both rank and file that way, as you
did the other way before: thus with a little pains taking and practice, you
shall soon bring your soldiers to be ready and skillful in these alterations
of forms, and many more. The like may be done with any other greater numbers,
either in battles or battallion, or by making the front of any flank.


Gent. But to what end serves all this?


Capt. Marie, to many good purposes: For the first order of doubling the ranks
(besides the readiness it breeds in the soldiers) does serve to alter upon
a sudden your grand square of men, Doubling of ranks and files serves to
sundry purposes.
into a square of ground, or into a battle of double front, and to many other
purposes, in framing of many small battallions one grand square. And again,
the second order in doubling of the files, does serve to many such other
purposes: as if upon a sudden your foot enemy shall come to charge you upon the
flank, then by doubling their files, and suddenly turning their faces upon the
enemy, they shall make of flank the front, and so be ready with double
hands, either to receive or give the charge. For those battles of square of
ground, or battles of double fronts, do bring many hands to fight at once:
being very aduantagious for footmen against footmen, as reason and experience
proves and shows.

And again, if you draw or divide your battle or battallions into maniples,
to march through straights or narrow passages, To pass straights
this order of doubling the files is very ready and available, as thus. If
your battle or squadron be of 5184 pikes, whose square root is 72: now your
passage will permit but 8 men to march in front; then must you divide your
square root 72 by 8, so comes it to be 9 maniples of 8 men in rank or
breadth. And say yet again, that the straight or passage does fall yet more
narrow, or straighten less, then to contain 8 men in front, the^ cause every
maniple, at the very entering of the straight, to double their files, and so of
8 you shall make 4 files per maniple: the which being shouldred up close
together, will contain no more room in breadth then the 8 did before. And
having passed the straight, cause them to fall into their former proportion,
and so maniple after maniple in passing the straight.


Genesis But if the squadron or maniple were of od numbers, it would not so fall out.


Capt. Od files or ranks.
That imports not: for the od file or rank which rests vndoubled, may in
passing of the straight, close up shoulder to shoulder unto the rest, observing
their proper stations in files; and if the passage will not permit that, then
to fall back after the train of their maniple, and having passed the
straight, to sleeue up in file, pouldron to pouldron of their fellows, and so
to fall into their former proportion. The like of any other od numbers may be
done with very great facility.

Now, for as much as I entend to frame both figures and tables of sundry sorts
of battles and battallions, in our discourse following* I will at this instant
be the more brief; supposing this, at this present to suffice. For he which
conceiueth and understands this well, may do the like with any other numbers
great or small.


Gent. And what course do you appoint the shot belonging to those numbers of
pikes, to observe in these alterations of proportion?


Capt. The shot appertaining unto every such number, Shot, how to be practiced.
may be practiced in the like or semblable sort, either alone by themselves, or
placed in two grand sleeves along by the flanks of their squadron or
battallions. Example.
As for example: If unto the former number of 100 pikes, there were
proportioned and suited 100 shot, calliuer and musket, these would I draw out
into 5 per rank, which would make 20 ranks. Those 20 ranks would I cut off or
divide in the midst, so should I have 10 ranks for to sleeue the one flank
of the battallion, and 10 ranks for the other flank, at 5 men per rank, or 5
files in every rank, which is all one. These 2 sleeves being placed, may be
doubled with the pikes by rank or file, for practice sake only. But if you
were engaged to fight with the enemy, I would wish all great sleeves of shot
to be divided into many small troops, the one still to second another: as
hereafter shall be declared and showed. And lo here another order: the 2 grand
sleeves being al musketeers, as the battle or battallio^ does advance and
march on toward the enemy, Musketeers, how to discharge upon a march.
and coming once within reach of the musket, then the first ranks of these
sleeves of muskets many discharge in marching in this sort. The first ranks
stepping some two or three paces forward, and there those of the right sleeue
to step one half pace toward the right hand, and those of the left sleeue, one
half pase toward the left hand, having in the mean space made themselves
ready, and cocked their matches, then with readiness and expedition all those
of the^ first ranks, their muskets being upon their rests or forks, to
discharge at once, and keep their station, and charge again, permitting other
ranks to proceed before them. Then presently those of the second rank to step
up just before the first rank, as the battle or battallion marches, and so to
discharge as their former fellows had done before: and then the 3. rank before
the 2. and the 4. before the 3. and so all the other ranks consequently with
this kind of double march: and at the train of the last rank, those of the
first to follow up again: How to discharge upon a countermarch.
and so consequently the rest. But if it chance their squadron of pikes to be
distressed, and forced to retire, they are to discharge at the enemy, retiring
back, upon a countermarch, as these figures following shall plainly denote
unto you the manner and order.

The First Figure.
The second Figure with the Muskets discharging in marchings.
The third Figure upon the retrait, the shot discharging upon a Countermarch.


Musketeers wheeled into a half moon to discharge in vollie.
There is yet another order of discharging of troops of Muskets in vollie, the
which I have seen used by the Italian and Spaniard, thus. Your Musketeers
being divided into sundry troops, of 30, 40 or 50 in a troop, the one to
second the other: then the two first troops standing upon the two angles of
your squadron or battle, may be drawn up by two officers, by three, four or
five at the most in a rank: and the said officers being at a sufficient
distance to discharge, shall cause the Musketeers to close somewhat near,
shoulder to shoulder, and so wheeling them about in figure of a half Moon,
shall at their due semicircle, or half compass, cause the Musketeers to make
Alto; and clapping their muskets on their rests, close one by an others
shoulder, and each one having a care to his forefellowes, they shall at one
instant, discharge altogether at one vollie upon the enemy, and so retire,
giving place to other troops: the manner and form whereof shall by these
figures following appear.

Troops or squadras of muskets at 50. per troop 5. in rank.



Gent. Your calliuers or small shot, would you have them to discharge in these
manners and orders before spoken of and figured?


Capt. No; Calliuers divided into small troops to discharge by file.
but I would with the calliuers or small shot to be divided into sundry small
troops, of 20, 30, 40 or 50 in a troop; and by their several officers to be
led up, and to skirmish in single file, discharging readily one after another
in file, and so wheeling about upon the left hand, to retire, giving place unto
others to second them, and to fall into their form of troop again; and then
recharging advisedly to be ready to come up to second others, as their turn
comes; of which manner of small troops, shall often in our discourses
following, be denoted and showed. Now to conclude these orders of training, I
will set down one point more to be observed by one single company, or two, or
three companies jointly coming into the Corpse de guard to their watch,
reserving many other particular matters until I come to treat of the office of
the Sergeant Mayor, where many Military points shall be at large discoursed.
You must note that every single company marching and training alone, The
arraunging of a small company to march.
their pikes are first ranked by 3, 4, 5, 6 or 7 or more in a rank, according
to their number (the number of even or od, in rank imports nothing, as I
said before) having their ensign, and halbards contained within the center or
middle rank of their pikes. Then the shot is to be ranked altogether with the
like number of men in a rank, and then to cut them off, or divide them at the
middle rank; leading the one half of them unto the forefront of the pikes,
Order to be observed entering into the Corpse de guard.
and there to place them in even files with the pikes, and the other half is
to be brought unto the train of the pikes, and there filed in like manner,
always regarding to place the muskets of the first half of your shot, in the
foremost ranks, and those of the other half, in the hindermost rank. Now thus
marching on, and coming to the place of Corpse de guard, the shot of the
vantgard are to make Alto, or stand, then the pikes to march up by, them; and
the first rank of pikes coming unto the foremost rank of the shot, to make
Alto also, and then the pikes to double their ranks, as before is declared, to
bring themselves into squadron, even rank for rank with the shot. This being
done, then the other shot of the rereward is to march up upon the other hand of
the pikes, rank for rank with the said square of pikes: and so is your
squadron or battallion formed as by these figures following may appear; where
I suppose one or two companies together in march, The march.
containing in all 100 pikes, and halberds, and 100 shot, they march on 5 per
rank; the shot of the vantgard makes their stand, then do the pikes march up
by them, and coming unto their foremost rank of the shot do stand also; and
there double their ranks, so are they 10 ranks, and ten files: lastly comes
up the shot of the arereward and garnisheth the other flank, even rank with
rank, and so is the squadron framed and garnished with shot.



Thus me thinks that I have sufficiently entreated of this order of training,
as for other sorts of imbattailing we will hereafter speak of, as occasion
shall be offered.


THE SECOND DIALOGVE.
Wherein is declared of quadrat battles, both of men and ground: opinions
tocuhing the mingling of short weapons with the pikes, and lyning of battles
with the same confuted: the framing of battles of pikes in three sorts: the
placing of shot about the batell, with the places of the horse and artillery.

Gentleman. TThen I pray pass to your other officers of war.


Capt. There be many petie officers used amongst us, as Clarke of the band,
Drummer, Forage master, Scout master, Trench master, Quarter master,
Caporals of the field, and such like, of whom I will speak particularly
nothing; but including them under the charge of other superior officers: of the
which I will begin with the duty of a Sergeant Mayor, whose office is of such
importance, care, industry and skill, especially in day of battle, that I must
be constrained before I enter into the parts of his office, to describe the
orders of fights and battles most used in these our modern wars, as a thing
most pertinent unto the aforesaid officer, touching the sundry forms of
battles used by antiquity; wherein (in mine opinion) the Romans did most
excel: I will speak, at this instant, little more then what is said before,
considering that ages, times, occurrents, inventions and customs have altered,
and daily does, what antiquity thought best and best assured.

The forms of battles in our time are not many, yet every man almost has a
several opinion thereof; but common reason and experience has made most men
confess and agree, that of all forms the square battle, be it either of
square of men, or square of ground, is the most assured, most strong, and most
apt to be reduced into any other form.


Gent. What mean you by this word Battle?


Cap. By the word Battle, I understand in this place a whole united body of
soldiers well disciplined, all armed with pikes, to fight in day of battle,
an act of arms, with good hope of victory, the which for more security has
the front, the train, and the two flanks of complet corslets, to the end that
being assailed or charged, they may make the face or front of any or every side
or part; and valiantly receive the charge, and may also charge and break the
enemy, and attain the victory. The ca^allery and shot, not contained within
the body of the battle.
Now in this body I understand neither the shot, nor cauallery, the which are
to have an other order to another end.


Gent. Are these battles framed in one sort only, or in more, or in many, or
in how many; or what manner I pray are they made?


Capt Your curious demand deserves answer, I told you before that many sorts
of battles have been framed by valiant and expert Captains: but the best
approved, and most used now, is the square battle, be it either of men or
ground.


Gent. I would gladly know the reason why they make their battles square; and
what is meant by square of men and square of ground.


Capt. The reason why battles are framed in quadrat proportion.
Battles are made square, and so used, for that they are apt to frame the Front
of every side or part, which could not be if they were Triangles, or of any
other form used by antiquity. And it does much import that the Front be
gaillard and strong: for the front once broken, the battle stands in hazard.
And again, to serrie or close Pouldron to Pouldron the square form is best:
for that they close equally together, and strengthen the front to the
victory. And this shall suffice touching the Quadrat. Square of men, and
square of ground, what it is.
Now, concerning the difference of square of men, and square of ground, I say:
that the square of men is, when there be so many men in front as in flank, or
so many in length as in breadth; and this sort of battle comes to be in
ground two times, and one third more long then broad, and a Quadrat of ground
will be of men two times and one third more broad then long.


Gent. In how many manners may these square battles be made?


Capt. Were the Companies all of pikes, with corslets complet and not mixed with
bare pikes, (which is not lightly to be found) the framing of any of these
sorts of battles would be very ready and easy, and might be soon brought into
any proportion without confusion: the which being of pikes armed and unarmed,
will require more care, Battles consisting of armed and unarmed pikes, framed
in three manner of ways.
labor, and pains, to the framing thereof. Now therefore I say, in three
sorts or manners, most available and most commodiously are battles framed in
these days, consisting of armed and unarmed pikes.

1 The first manner is when an army does march with the one half of the armed
pikes in the foreward, and the other half in the reareward of the unarmed
pikes. Now in the body of this battle I understand no short weapon, (but
reserve them to another place and unto another purpose, as before I have said,
and will heareafter speak more thereof) but all pikes, for the battle thereby
would be more readily framed, more brauer in sight, and more stronger to fight,
in mine opinion.

2 The second fashion is, when the army marches company by company, with their
armed pikes in the foreward and reareward of every particular company.

3 The third order is, when an army marches Maniple by Maniple, with the
armed pikes in the Front and train of every particular Maniple. And besides
this, when the armed pikes which do serve to arm the two flanks, do march the
one part before, and the other part behind, and these also are called Maniples:
for a Maniple is here called so many ranks throughout the battle, as the
battle is in length, Maniple, what it is.
at so many per rank as they march in ordinance or array. And although the
armed pikes which do march at the head or tail of the arrayes of Maniples to
arm the two sides, if it happen at any time that they march not to the full
length of the battle, yet nevertheless when they be put unto their office to
arm the two sides, although they be not in length to the length of the
battle, at so many in rank as is appointed to arm the two flanks, yet are
they called Maniples also. And again, any part of shot or pikes, that be
drawn a part, to be set to defend any straight, or to scarmush, may also be
called a Maniple: but being shot, Shot in troupe^.
are fitter called troops, after the french word.

Now of these sundry sorts of imbattailling of men, as well of proportions of
equality as of inequality, and of battallions of the same nature, as well even
as odd battallions, serving to the framing of cross battles with such other
like, I will frame certain calculations or tables, the which shall serve to
sundry numbers of men and orders, according to the judgment of the skillful
soldier, which shall be in the last book of these discourses.


Gent. But me thinks you are not much affected to have any halberdes or bills
in your battle, which is contrary to our opinion and custom: for we call them
the guard of the ensigns, and slaughter of the field.


Capt. Truly, Halberds and short weapon no^ liked of in the body of the
battle. The reasons why.
I would not wish any such weapon in the body of a standing battle, if we
might be provided otherwise of pikes: my reasons are these. For the pikes being
Terciard or charged over hand to encounter a battle of footmen, or couched
under the foot to receive any troops of horse, do one of them fall so
proportionally within or after another; even as their ranks of men are distant
in their several stations, the second following the first, the third the
second, and the fourth following the third, and so consequently every rank
seconding one another, that it seems it were as good for a man to come upon a
brazen wall (if they stand resolute) as upon such a battle of pikes, except
they should be marched or encountered with the like weapons and proportions. Now
if this be the best course to receive or charge footmen, then no doubt (not
being thus mingled with short weapons) it must needs be the best battle to
receive a charge of horse.


Gent. Although you disalow and disprove to have your battle of pikes mingled
with short weapon; yet would you not allow them about the ensigns in the center
of the battle?


Capt For what purpose in the center of the battle?


Gent. To defend the ensigns with hand blows.


Cap. I suppose it an error. Halberds not liked of about the colors.

The reasons why.


For who does not know that if the enemy be like to be victor, the armed pikes
will yield backward as they feel themselves distressed, so as when the pikes
are in such manner crashed and clustred together, that they can no longer charge
and push with their pikes, then will the throng or press in the center be so
great, that the halberds and bills shall have little room to strike; nay short
swords will hardly have rome at that instant either to thrust or to strike. I
would think daggers would do more execution at that time, and in that press
until one side fall to flight: Daggers auail^able in pell mell. Short weapon
in a stand of pikes vnseemeli^.
so I see no reason at all for halberds or bills to have place in a battle or
stand of pikes: Besides the unseemly show they make either by themselves in
the center, or mingled among pikes.


Gent. So I perceive you would quight exclude all halberds and bills out of your
battle, and so not at all to be used.


Capt. Conclude not so short upon me, because I give them no place within the
body of the battle. For if you remember, in our former discourses, at the
equal sortment of weapons, I allowed to every hundred of men 8 or 10 halberds.
The which bills and halberds with other short weapons as swords and targets,
Short weapon their places of best service.
and long swords, and such like, shall serve as in a place of best service for
them, to mingle with your naked troops of shot, and also (placed with some
pikes) for the guard of the carriage and munition and ordinance, or for execution
if the enemy begin to break and slye, with sundry such services not contained
in the body of the battle.


Gent. Well, you have satisfied us herein; but what think you of sundry other
opinions touching the lining of battles with shot or bows?


Capt. Lyning of battles with shot or bows disliked.

Lyning of shot in single rank.


Touching such lining I will show you mine opinion against them. Now first for
that kind of lining which is used in placing a pike and a shot, I am sure that
the shot cannot be so hurtful to the enemy, as they will weaken the battle:
my reason is this. No army, I am certain, shall be so ordered, that the
battle shall be left bare without his troops of shot before, to keep the
enemy doing in skirmish, until the battles be ready to join, and charge or
couch their pikes: at that instant have the shot, that line the battle, their
time to serve, even as the pikes are couched, The reasons.
and not before. Now let men of consideration and experience judge, whether it
be possible for them to discharge above one shot a piece, and that not above
three ranks of them; and thereupon, whether those shot can at that time of
service be such a strength to the battle, as if an armed pike were in the
room. I do suppose the battle would be much stronger, if the shot were rid
from thence, and pikes in their places. Then it falls out, that this kind of
lining is not good. Lyning with shot in another sort more tolerable.
Now, touching another kind of lining with shot, which is 3, 4, 5, 6, or 7,
ranks of pikes; and then 3, 4, or 5 ranks of shot, and then pikes, and then
shot again. In deed this kind of lining is the most tolerable, and yet not
without his discommodities: for if such a battle join with a battle of
foot, the shot cannot play until the ranks of pikes before them are broken;
which cannot be, but that their own men and their enemy shall be mingled pell
mell one among another. Then tell me by reason, how those shot can serve that
are the lining, but they must needs kill as well their own men, as their
enemy, being thus mingled at all adventures. And if this be the end of their
service (as indeed it is) by a forced necessity to kill without choice, then
must it needs follow, that they are rather hurtful then serviceable in that
place: far better therefore pikes in their romes.

Lyning with bows, a combersome tying weapon.
And now for your lining with bows, a combersome tying weapon in a throng of
men; it must needs be concluded by reason, that where calliuers, which are no
tying weapons, are yet unprofitable, in that place how can bows, to which it
requires such elbow rome, and are so troublesome, be any ways in that sort
commodious or to be allowed?


Genesis Your reasons and conclusions have wonderful well liked us; wherefore now
I pray return again to your framing of battles of pikes only, without short
weapons.


Capt. I told you before, that battles are made most auaileably, and most
commodiously, in three manner of ways: showing you every several order, and
that when time should permit, I would frame tables for the easy ordering of
each.


Gent. But shall your tables serve for the framing of one whole body of a
battle, or for more?


Capt. Tables to be framed, and to what end.
These tables shall serve to make either one, two, or three battles of an army,
or so many as shall be requisite and needful, either to offend the enemy or
to defend; and also according to the situation of the ground, and shall serve
only to have in a readiness and memory, all that which a battle well ordered
would require, according to the ground where it shall be; so that there shall
need no more but to command the men to be marshalled into the order that
shall be appointed to the framing of the battle, according to the situation
of the ground. But first I will set you down orderly a table of proportional
numbers, in such proportion as one would make the breadth of the battle to
have unto the length, and so many will set down of proportional numbers, as
shall suffice to make every sort of battle, Proportinall numbers ^e^uin^ to
the setting of battles.

Proportions of equality.


that may be more large then long, or equal; as hereafter shall appear. And
now of proportional numbers, I will begin to speak of those which be in
proportion of equality: as 1 to 1, 2 to 2, 3 to 3, 4 to 4, and 5 to 5, and 6 to
6, and so of more; provided they be of equal comparison the one to the other.
But yet to frame a battle, those shall be taken which be in least proportion,
as 1 to 1, and those numbers which are of equal comparison, as 1 to 1, do
serve only to make the battle quadrat of number of men: that is, so many men
in breadth as in depth of the battle. But when you will make a battle that
may be of more men in breadth then in depth, then shall you take the numbers
which be in proportion of inequality, so much as you would have the battle to
be of more men in breadth then in depth; Proportions of inequality.
as 3 to 2, or 5 to 3, or 7 to 4, and such like, as shall be found in these
tables following of numbers compared the one to the other in inequality:
beginning with those of the least proportion. A table of proportions, of so
much as you would have the battle to contain in breadth of number of men unto
the length.
Proportion of Equality.
As 1 to 1, that is, the battle to contain so many men in breadth as in
length.

Proportions of Inequality.
That is, the battle to be more broad then long, or more in front then in
flank.

As 2 to 1, that is, the battle twice so broad as long.

3 to 1, that is, three times so broad as long.

4 to 1, that is, four times so broad as long.

5 to 1, that is, five times so broad as long,

6 to 1, that is, six times so broad as long.





To bring these fractions into whole numbers of proportion, you must work
thus: Multiply the whole number by the denominator of the fraction, and adding
thereunto the numerator of the said fraction, the proportion is found: as for
example, to have the battle to contain two times, and a third more broad
then long* I seek in the table 2 whereof the whole number is 2, and the
fraction is. Now multiply the whole number 2, by the fractions denominator 3,
and it makes 6, whereunto ad the fractions numerator, which is 1, and it
amounts 7, so is 2 in proportion as 7 is to 3, and so must you work any the
like numbers.

In all these aforesaid proportions, to make the battles of proportion of
equality, that is as broad as it is deep, or of inequality, which is more in
breadth then in depth, both these ways is to be understood of men, and not of
ground; for of the proportions of ground I will speak hereafter. These
proportions of men and not of ground.



Gent. Me thinks I understand touching the proportions of equality, and
inequality, and that is so broad as deep, or more in breadth then in depth,
understanding of men, both of the one manner, and the other; but I would gladly
(Captain) that you would show it us by example, for so we shall the better
conceive of the matter.


Capt. I will most willingly: Therefore to begin, I will set down to make a
square battle of number of men, that is, so many men in front as in flank:
And let our whole number be 5000 men, of armed pikes, and single pikes one with
another. Now to frame this quadrat battle, you shall take in the aforesaid
tables, the numbers of proportions of equality, which are as 1 to 1. Then must
you set down your rule in this sort: The rule to frame a square battle of men.
Setting down first the proportion of equality for the first and second
number, and the number of men for the third number, thus 1 prime, 1 second,
5000 third. This being done, multiply the 3 number which is 5000, the number
of men by 1, the second number, and it makes still 5000, (for 1 does neither
multiply nor divide) then divide the said first multiplied number 5000 by 1
the first number, and it makes yet 5000. Now out of that 5000, you shall take
the quadrat root, which is 70. So 70 ranks of men shall your battle
contain, ^
both in breadth and length; and there will remain 100 men. For 70 multiplied
into itself resulteth 4900, the which deducted out of 5000, there rests 100
men, the which 100 men divide by 70, so will there arise one more rank of men,
and yet will there remain 30 men over, the which one rank shall be joined
unto the 70 ranks aforesaid, so are they 71 in breadth and 70 in length: but
to the end you may better understand me, I will go showing the same by figures,
whereof this shall be the first.



And the 30 men which do remain out of the body of the battle, they shall be
reserved for other purposes.

And this square battle of number of men may be done in a more shorter and
readier way, A more exquisit way to frame any square battle of men. ^
thus. Take the quadrat root of 5000 simply, which is 70, and with this 70
divide the 5000 men, so will there come 71 for the breadth of the battle, and
there will remain 30 men. And thus your battle will contain 70 ranks in
length, and 71 men per rank in breadth, with 30 men remaining as aforesaid.
Now although the battle be more broad then long, or more men in front then in
flank by one rank, yet is it nevertheless, after the order of war, called
a square battle of men.

The table drawn aforesaid for the proportion of equality, that is, that the
battle do contain so many men in breadth as in length, shall serve also to
show the order which is to be observed in the battles that are to be be made
of more men in front then in flank, that is, in proportion of inequality, as
hereafter I will show you, giving you to understand that all the figures shall
have their scala divided into pases, Geometrical scale. foot.
and every geometrical pase into 5 foot, of the which measure of feet I have
here under set down the fourth part, which is three inches, for that every
foot is divided into 12 inches, to the end you may conceive what quantity of
ground every battle of pikes would require, allowing for every man's station
set in array to fight, 3 foot in front, that is, from pouldron to pouldron, and
7 foot in flank, that is 3 foot before, and 3 foot behind, for the use of
his weapon, and one foot for his own station.




Gent By this your example you have satisfied me wondrous well, in giving me
to understand how to set a battle quadrat of any number of men, which is so
many men in front as in flank: yet would I desire to know how to arm or
impale this battle with armed pikes, both front, tail, and the two flanks,
considering that few armies have all their pikemen furnished with corslets
complete.


Capt. True, there are few armies that have scarce the one half of their
pikemen armed with corslets, which is a great part of the strength and beauty
of the battle, therefore we must seek a course how to impale any battle with
such armed pikes as they have: To empale the battle with your armed pikes the
rule.
to do the which these rules following shall serve to impale any battle, as
well of proportion of inequality, as of equality, the foreward, the reareward,
and the two flanks, with pikes and armed corslets. Now I suppose the whole
number of pikes to be 5000, as well armed as unarmed, whereof there be 2000
armed pikes with corslets; the said 2000 I will repart into two equal parts,
by 2, or taking the of 2000, which is 1000: and with this 1000, will I impale
the two flanks, and with the other 1000 will I arm the front and train of
the battle. ^
Now first to arm the two flanks of the battle with 1000 armed pikes, I will
divide 1000 by 70, which is the depth or flank of the battle, and the product
will be 14 ranks of pikes to arm the flanks of the battle, with 20 pikes of
surplussage: the 14 ranks shall be halfed, or divided into halues, which is 7
ranks; with the which 7 ranks I will arm the one side, and with the other 7
ranks the other side of the battle, or more or less unto any side, as
occasion or need shall require: as in this figure following shall appear.



And the 20 armed pikes which before remained, The Romans. ^
shall be added unto the other 1000 which are to arm the front and rearegard
of the battle, so they are 1020 pikes armed: with these 1020 armed pikes,
shall the front and rereward be armed thus; first deduct the 14 ranks, which
went to arm the two flanks of 70 men in length, out of 71, which is the
breadth of the battle, so rests 57 ranks for the breadth: with this 57
divide the 1020 armed pikes, and there will come forth 17 ranks of armed
pikes, to arm the head and tail of the battle: and of these 17 ranks you
shall set 9 ranks in the front, and 8 ranks in the reareward; with more or
less on either, as need and cause shall require: as by this 3 figure
following shall appear.



Thus this square battle of men comes to be in length 70 ranks, at 71 men
per rank in front with 9 ranks of armed pikes in the vaward, and 8 ranks in
the reareward: and with 7 ranks of armed pikes at each side in length, as you
see. And remaining 51 armed pikes out of the impalement, the which you may
place at the angles or corners of the unarmed pikes, as ye see in the 4 figure,
or where you shall think fittest for the defense and strength of the battle;
and not to leave them out, (for being part of the square) as you did the 30
pikes which before remained at the enlarging of so many men in rank in the
first figure. The which 51 armed pikes are now placed in the angles of the
battle, as in the 4 figure before may appear: that is, with 7 ranks at 2 men
per rank in the fore angles, and 6. ranks at 2 men per rank in the reareward
angles.


Gent. O how it delights me to have learned of you, how to arm or impale a
battle. But now would I feign know if there be this number of men in the
battle by you supposed, with the 30 at first remaining.


Capt. To know if there be in this battle the number of 5000 men, with the 30
which advanced at the first framing of the battle, The proof. ^
do thus: multiply the length by the breadth, that is 70 by 71 men, and it
amounts 4970 men; unto the which adioyne the 30 which remained, so will they
amount unto 5000 pikemen, armed and unarmed, as before was set down, to set
the said battle, in the first figure, which is your demand.


Gent. This is very easy; but now would I feign know, if they have the
proportion of equality.


Capt. That you shall know thus: divide the breadth by the length, as to repart
71 by 70, the product is 1. And although that 1 do remain of the breadth, yet
it is called a square battle nevertheless.


Gent. Captain, I am well satisfied in understanding the proportion that a
battle has in breadth to the length: but now would I gladly know how long and
large is this square battle of men, I mean how much ground it will occupy?


Capt. First you must understand (as I told you before) that every man
martialled in battle array to fight, A rule to know what quantity of ground
any battle will require, each armed man's station 3 foot in breadth 7 foot
for length. ^
will require in his station, 3 foot of ground in breadth, that is from
shoulder to shoulder, and 7 foot of ground for length, that is 3 foot for
before him, 3 foot for behind him, and 1. foot of ground for his own station.
This being noted: then must you multiply the 71 ranks of men in front by 3
foot, and they will amount unto 213 foot, and the 213 foot shall be divided
by 5 foot, accounting 5 foot to a pase, and the geometrical pase to contain
2 ordinary going steps or pases of a man: so will there come forth 42 pases and
3 foot. By this reckening will the battle contain 42 pases and 3 foot.

And now to know the length thereof in ground, you shall multiply the 70.
ranks of length of the battle, by 7 foot, so will there come 490 foot, the
which 490 foot you must divide by 5 foot (which is a pase) and there arises
98 pases; and so does the battle contain in length 98 pases of ground. Thus
the square battle of number of men comes to contain more ground in length
then in breadth about 2 twice and third, as you have seen in the 3 and 4
figures of the square battle of men. Thus you have understood of a battle,
square of number of men, with their armed pikes in front, in train, and the
two flanks: which is in such order as the said battle should be framed upon
the point to fight.


Gent. I have very well understood the order that should be kept, to know how
broad and long is the battle of ground: but I beseech you to show me now, the
order to be observed in the framing of the said battles, so that there should
need no more but the Sergeant Mayor, to appoint the soldiers the order they
should keep, for to frame and order the said battle with speed and in
readiness.


Capt. A rule to frame these battles with speed.
Truly, your demand is good, since that speediness is the proper and peculiar
part of the arming of these battles. To do the which you shall work thus: The
armed pikes which are in the 2 flanks shall be accommodated and placed in the
front and in train of the battle, as in the calculation of the 3 and 4
figure, whereas there be 70. ranks, at 14 men per rank, that is 7 men in
rank for the arming of every flank, ^
then multiplying 70 by 14, do amount 980 armed men; and 980. armed men you
shall divide by 57. which is the rest of the breadth of the battle, (being of
unarmed pikes) and there resulteth 17 ranks, at 57 armed men per rank. Of the
which 17 ranks, at 57 men by rank, there shall be adjoined 9 ranks unto the
front, and 8 ranks unto the train of the battle, with the other 9 and 8
ranks, which were before of armed pikes at the front and train: So the battle
shall be in length or by flancke 87 ranks, at 57 men per rank in front, with
18 ranks of armed pikes at the foreward, and 16 ranks of armed pikes in the
reareward, as in this figure following shall appear.



What to do with the remains.
And the 11 armed Pikes which remained at the last division, when it shall be time
to arm the two flanks of the battle with speed, then unto one of the two
flanks shall they be added, which is unto that flank where the same shall be
found wanting.


Gent. Me thinks that I understand sufficiently, how to arm and set a battle
with celeritie and speed at every occasion as shall be offered, and also the
order to be observed in setting a battle of equality, which is as many men
in breadth as in length: but now I would gladly learn how to frame a battle
of inequality, which is of more men in breadth then in length?


Capt. Rules to frame all battles in proportion of inequality, or two fold
battles.
Sir, knowing how to frame the calculation of the proportion of equality, that
is, as many men in breadth as in length of a battle, it shall be very easy
for you to do that of inequality; which is a battle more broad then long:
yet nevertheless will I give you the instruction of the proportion of
inequality. Now put the case, that you will frame a battle of proportion of
inequality, which is of more men in breadth then in length, and that your
number be 5000 men, of armed and unarmed Pikes, as before is said of the Square
battle of men. And put the case that you will frame this battle times more in
breadth then in length (for this proportion is more used then any other in
wars) for that this is the proportion which comes to make a battle quadrat
of ground, wherein most men are brought at once to fight in front. And to make
this battle you shall take in the table 2 and which is in proportion as 7 to
3: and these two numbers are to be set down for the first, and second thing.
Now to have the length of the battle, the second number is set down for the
second thing, and the number of men which you will have to be embattailed for
the third as hereunder appears. Then proceed as is done in framing the Square
battle of men. The Rule. ^
^. Then multiply and divide as before is said. The same order is to be
observed in every other proportion of battles, which you would make of more men
in breadth then in length, termed by some Englishmen, Bastard square, Broad
square, and Base square, or by some others, Twice fold Battles. To work the
which, now multiply 5000 the third, by 3 the second, and they make 15000: and
this 15000 shall be divided by 7 the first, whereof the product is 2142, and 6
men remaining, of which 6 make no account. Now of 2142 extract the quadrat
root, which is 46 and 26 yet remaining, of which 26 make no reckening also, as
before is said: and, this 46 (the root of 2142) is the length of the battle.
Now, the breadth or front thereof shall be found by dividing the 5000 men by 46
the length of the battle, and there will come 108 men in rank for breadth of
the battle, and 32 men remaining, the which 32 men shall stand out of the
battle, as before is said in the Square battle of men. Thus shall this
battle contain in flank 46 ranks, and in front 108 men per rank, as in
this sixth figure will appear. And there will remain 32 men, which are not
contained within the body of the battle.

The sixth figure. Bode 108 men in rank.



Gent. Now having understood how to frame this battle of proportion of
inequality, which is of more men in breadth then in length, in every
proportion with facility, show me how to arm the same with armed pikes.


Capt. To arm this battle of inequality, that is, more men in front then in
flank, I will show you very easily. Let us suppose to arm this battle round
about, the front, The order how to empale with armed pikes the battles in
proportio^s of inequality.
the train, and the two sides proportionally, according to the proportion that
the breadth of the said battle has unto the length of the same, which is, as
7 unto 3. Add the said 7 unto 3, and it is 10: so shall it be as 10 to 3. Then
see in 5000 men, how many be armed with corslets, and I set that there be 2000,
as before is said in arming the Quadrat battle of number of men. Now shall you
part these 2000 armed pikes into two proportional parts, as 10 to 3, the one
part to arm the two flanks, ^
the other to arm the vaward and rereward of the battle; then place down
your rule in this sort. If 10 require what 3/2000. Now multiply 3 the second
with 2000 the third, and it resulteth 6000: and this 6000 divide by 10 the
first, so will there come 600 armed men; and these 600 armed men shall be to
arm the two sides: and deducting 600 out of 2000, there rests 1400 armed
men, the which are to arm the front and reregard of the battle. Now must
these 600 armed men be reparted by the length of the battle, that is, by 46.
so will there come 13 in rank for the length. And of these 13 ranks, you
shall place 7 per rank on the one side, and 6 per rank on the other side of
the battle in length, as in the figure on the next page appears.

Remains. ^
And there remains 2 armed men, the which shall be joined with the 1400 armed
men, and it makes 1402, and with these 1402 shall the vaward and rereward of
the battle be armed. Now for to arm this fro^t and train of the battle,
there shall first be deducted 13 ranks of armed men of the length, out of 108
ranks, the breadth of the battle, and there will remain 95, and the 1402
armed men shall be divided by this 95, and there will come 14 ranks at 95 men
per rank of armed men. Now of these 14 ranks there shall be placed 7 ranks
at the front, and 7 on the rereward of the battle. So the battle shall
contain in length or by flank 46 ranks at 108 men by rank in front, with 7
armed men per rank on the one side, and 6 armed men per rank on the other
side of the battle in flank, and 72 armed men remaining, the which you shall
place where you shall think best, as here appears in figure.



Now the 72 men remaining, I have placed in the 4 angles, as in this 8 figure
above appears:


Genesis I perceive how to arm a battle of proportion of inequality, the
vaward, the reareward, and the two sides: But (I pray) tell me, the battle
being thus framed, how I may know whether this battle has this proportion of
his breadth to his length, that is 2 times and more broad then long or as 7 to
3.


Capt. To know if the length to the breadth of the battle has his proportion,
The proofs.
as 7 to 3, you shall divide 108 the breadth, by 46 the length, the product will
be 2, and 16 remaining, which is about of 46 a little more.


Gent. But how shall I prove, that in this battle of inequality there be the
5000 men contained?


Capt. Thus: multiply the breadth of the battle 108, by 46 the length, and
they will amount 4968, unto the which add the 32 men which remained, and the
sum is 5000.


Gent. Now I beseech you to declare unto me the length and breadth of ground,
that the battle of inequality does occupy.


Capt. Marry, The rule to know the quantity of ground this battle contains.
thus: It shall be supposed to allow 3 foot in breadth, and 7 foot in length
for every soldier, or little more or less, as shall be thought good: Now
multiplying 3 foot with 108 men, the breadth of the battle, it will amount
324 foot, and 324 foot shall be divided by 5 (accounting 5 foot to a pase)
thereof will come 64 pases and, which is 4 foot, and that is the breadth of
the battle.

And to know the length of the battle, multiply 46 ranks of length by 7
foot, there will come 322 foot: and divide the said 322 by 5, there will come
64 pases and, which is 2 foot, for the length of the battle: which will be
near about the length of proportion: and this is the perfect battle of ground.


Gent. I pray, let me ask you, In what manner might I accommodate the
calculation of the battle, to the end that it might be done with dispatch and
readiness, as you have showed me before in the Quadrate battle of number of
men?


Capt. To do this: The rule to accommodate this calculation with speed. ^
Where to place the remains.
deduct 13 ranks of armed men which are in the two flanks in length, out of
108 men in breadth, there will rest 95 per rank in breadth of the battle.
Then shall be sought in 13 men by rank in length, how many armed men by
multiplying 46 of length, by 13 ranks, will amount 598, and 598 shall be
divided by 95 the product will be 6 ranks of men, at 95 per rank of armed
men, and 28 armed men remaining: And of these 6 ranks of armed men, there
shall be put 3 at the head, and 3 at the tail of the battle, with the other 7
ranks which were there before: And so the battle shall contain in length 52
ranks, at 95 men per rank in breadth, with 10 ranks at the head, and 10
ranks at the tail of armed men, as I will show you in this 9 figure
following: and there remains 28 armed men, the which at the time that this
battle is made, shall be placed in one of the flanks, for there they want, as
before is said in the account of the 5 figure of the Square battle of men.


Gent. I rest so well satisfied with your good discourses and demonstrations,
that I find my self more and more desirous to demand of you other
particularities: wherefore I pray you to show me the manner to march, and set
a battle with speed, occasion offering to fight.


Capt. Willingly, as far as my small skill will extend. Therefore touching the
order of marching, and out of the order of the said marching, to set a battle
with speed; I say that there are three manners observed in the making thereof:
of the which before that I declare their orders one by one, I will with
brevity repeat all that which before I showed you.

Repetitions of the former.
I have told you before, how to make the Calculation of battles, as well of the
squares of men, as of Proportio^s of inequality, containing more men in
breadth then length (termed by us Englishmen Bastard squares, Broad squares,
and Base squares.) And I have told you of the proportion of the breadth unto
the length: and moreover, how broad and long will the said battles contain in
ground: the which instructions will serve to frame any other battle, that may
be more broad then long in any other proportion, with the help of the Tables
which before I have showed you: for in the same may be found every proportion
that shall be needful, to frame any battle which may be more broad then long
in number of men, or equal.

Now will I show you the manner how to frame a battle with speed; and this shall
be by the instructions of the tables before given. Out of 3 manner of marchings
to frame a battle with speed. The first manner.
And this battle shall be speedily set after the order of the three manners of
marching, as at the beginning I told you. The first manner is, when the
companies do march with one part of the armed Pikes at the foreward, and an
other part at the rereward of the unarmed Pikes, as I will show you in the
tenth figure.

In this case, having the Table in memory, only there rests to commit unto
two expert officers (as Caporals of the field, or such like) at the time of
setting the battle, that the one go unto the head and the other unto the
train of the Ordenances or Arrayes: and let him that stands at the head, cause
or command to turn or wheel either from the right hand, or from the left (as
shall be most convenient) 95 ranks, at 10 armed men per rank, and having
finished, to set the 95 ranks at 10 armed men per rank, he shall cause them
to turn their faces from that part whither the Ordinances or Arrayes do look,
as you shall see designed in the eleventh figure on the page next following.



Then besides this, let him place 32 ranks of the arraies of the unarmed pikes
at the backs of the armed pikes, so many as they be ranks in length in the
battle of the unarmed pikes, as in the 8 table before figured appears;
afterward let him go from hand to hand, drawing out of the arraies 32 ranks of
unarmed pikes, and set them one by another shoulder to shoulder, as I have
demonstrated in the 12 figure, and as I will show you in this 13 figure.



And as the Arraies of the unarmed Pikes shall be placed shoulder to shoulder
one of another, at the backs of the first 10 ranks of the armed Pikes; then
the Officer which stands with the armed pikes for the train, shall draw
forth 95 ranks, at 10 men per rank of armed pikes, and place them with their
shoulders to the backs of the unarmed pikes, as in this 14 figure shall
appear.

This being done, let the Officer of the Vanguarde draw out three ranks of the
armed pikes, and arm the one flank at 7 men in rank; and he that is at the
Reregard, let him take 3 rank of his armed pikes, and arm the other flank,
at 6 men in rank, as in this fifteenth figure appears.

And there remains 72 armed men: the which shall be placed in the angles of
the Battle, in such order as I showed you in the declaration of the fourth
figure; and as here again in this sixteenth figure shall appear.

Or otherwise acco^modate those 72 armed men aforesaid (being of the number
contained within the body of the battle) thus: let there of them be made 2
ranks, to set unto the one or unto the other flank of the battle, where you
shall see most need and occasion, for the defense and strength thereof. But now
they shall be placed one rank upon the one flank, and another upon the other
flank of the battle; as here in this seventeenth figure shall plainly appear.

And there will yet remain 8 armed men, to place where you shall think good.
Aduertising you, that if you should have set the 72 armed men which before
remained, at the head or tail of the battle, it would not have reached unto
one whole or full rank unto the breadth of the battle: for an entire rank of
the inner part of the battle in breadth is 95 men, that is, so many as the
breadth of the unarmed pikes do contain. Thus the battle declared by the
aforesaid 17 figure will be in length 46 ranks, at 108 men per rank in
breadth, with the 7 ranks of armed pikes in the front, and 7 ranks in the
reareward, and with 8 men per rank of armed pikes on the one flank, and 7 men
by rank of armed pikes on the other flank, as in the aforesaid 17 figure
appears, with the 8 men which remained, placed in the body of the battle.


Gent. Assuredly (Captain) this order seems wonderful good. But now unto
the other two orders which you spoke of.


Cap. Touching the second manner of framing of battles. First the calculation or
table of the battle must be had in memory (as before is said) in what
proportion the said battle would be framed, and the army marching company by
company, as I will show you in the 18 figure: every captain shall be commanded
by the Sergeant mayor, to make so many ranks of their pikes as the length of
the battle shall contain, as in the 18 and 19 figures shall appear. Now let
us suppose the said battle to contain in length 52 ranks, with 10 ranks of
armed pikes at the head, and as many at the train, as is showed in the
declaration of the ninth and 14 figures, and that every Captain do make 52
ranks, with 10 armed pikes before, and 10 behind, as in the 18 figure is
showed. And if any Captain be found which has not to accomplish that number,
let him join with another Captain, and betwixt them both let them make up
that number of 52 ranks. This being done, Captain by Captain shall set their
ranks shoulder to shoulder the one of the other, and shall so frame the
battle 52 ranks in length, with 10 armed pikes by rank before, and 10
behind. After that shall be framed the battle, as I will show you in this 20
figure following. This being done, one of the 4 Caporals of the field, shall go
unto the head, and another unto the reareward: then he which is at the head,
shall take away from the front of the battle 3 ranks of armed pikes, and arm
therewith one of the flanks* at 7 men per rank in length, adjoining unto them
the 28 armed pikes, which he lacks to furnish out the length of 46 ranks at
7 men per rank, as is said in the declaration of the 9 figure.

And the other Caporall or officer, which is at the train of the battle. He
also shall take away or draw forth from the train 3 ranks of armed pikes,
and arm with them the other side or flank, at 6 men per rank, in length of
46 ranks. So shall the battle be formed 46 ranks long, at 108 men per rank
in front or breadth, with 7 ranks of armed pikes in fro^t, and as many in
train, and with 7 armed men per rank on the one flank, and with 6 men by
rank, on the other flank armed pikes: as I showed in the 8 figure of the
table and also in the 21 figure following.

And there will remain out of the body of the battle 32 men, and they shall
be placed as I said in the last of the third order, at the beginning: moreover
there remains 72 armed men.

You must note and conceive, that in the 18 figure, where the companies do
march one after another by five in a rank, and in the 19 figure, where they do
come up shoulder to shoulder to the framing of the battle, as may appear,
although the full number of companies do not there appear, as is requisite: yet
it is to be conceived that they do consequently one follow another, but want of
rome in paper cutteth them off.



And the 72 armed pikes remaining, which are of the number contained within the
body of the battle, shall be placed either in the four corners of the unarmed
pikes, as in the 16 figure may be seen; or else in each of the two sides or
flanks, as in the 17 figure appears, where there is one rank adjoined unto
the one flank, and another unto the other flank; or else you may arm and
strength with the same 72 armed pikes, any one of the flanks, as need or
occasion shall require.


Gent. You have described the first and second order of imbattailing excellent
well, in mine opinion, therefore (I pray) proceed to the third.


Capt. The manner of the third order is thus, The third order by marching
maniple by maniple.
When the army is caused to march Maniple by Maniple, with their armed pikes
in vantgard and rearegard of every particular Maniples; and with one Maniple
all of armed pikes, which marches in the vantgard of the Maniples which have
their unarmed pikes in their middle or center: the which Maniples of all armed
pikes, is that which serves to arm the one flank of the battle. Besides
this, there marches another Maniple of all armed pikes, after all the
Maniples; and this Maniple serves to arm the other flank of the battle. And
the Maniples must march the one after the other, as in the figure appears.

Now, there rests how to bring those into Maniples of this last order, which
do march in the full length of the battle, with their armed pikes in front and
train; the which shall be done in this sort. Let it be supposed (as the 17
figure of the second order does show) that there shall be drawn forth 15 men
in rank of armed pikes in length of the battle, which serve to arm the two
flanks, out of 108 men per rank, the breadth of the battle, there rests 93
men per rank for breadth or front. And these 93 must be divided into so many
parts, as one would that the Maniples should march in ordinance or arraies, the
one after another, as the way will permit.

Now say that I will have the Maniples to march by 5 in a rank, then must I
divide the 93 (the breadth of the battle) by 5, whereof comes Maniples 18,
which shall contain in length ranks 46 at 5 men in a rank; and one Maniple
remaining at 3 men per rank; the which Maniple is also 46 ranks in length, at
3 men in ranks. Notwithstanding it shall march (in marching) at 5 men in rank
after all the Maniples aforesaid. And the 18 Maniples do march with 7 ranks
of armed pikes before, and 7 ranks after: and the Maniple of 3 per rank,
shall, at the time of setting the battle, distend to the shoulders of the
other Maniples at 3 per rank, with 7 ranks, armed pikes in front, and 7
ranks armed pikes in train. And the other two Maniples of armed pikes, which
serve to arm the two flanks, the one marches in the vantgard, and the other
in the reareward of the Maniples which have their unarmed pikes in the middle
(yet at 5 in rank) as appears in the 22 figure, and at the instant that the
battle is to be set, the Sergeant Mayor shall accommodate and fasten the
Maniples of all armed pikes, that marches in the foreward of all the Maniples,
into 46 ranks, at 8 men armed per rank, and the other Maniples shall follow
from hand to hand, pouldron to pouldron, the one to the other, as the 23 figure
and 24 declares, beginning with the armed Maniple, which armeth the flank at
8 men in rank by length. These Maniples thus brought shoulder to shoulder, one
to the other, then shall follow that Maniple of and per rank (the which yet
marches at 5 per rank in array) and shall distend unto the shoulders of the
other Maniple, at 3 per rank, with 7 armed pikes in front, and 7 in train.
After all this shall follow the other Maniple of all armed pikes, and shall
stretch forth unto 7 in a rank unto the shoulder of the other Maniples, to
arm the other flank of the battle. And thus is the battle framed 46 ranks
in length, at 108 men by rank in breadth, with 7 ranks of armed pikes in
front, and 7 in train, and with 8 armed pikes in rank, on the one flank, and
7 in a rank on the other flank, of armed pikes, as in the 24 and 25 figures:
and there remains 32 armed pikes, the which shall be placed as I said before,
in the last manner of the third order.

Aduertising you, Advertisement.
that although I have given order and examples to arm the front, train, and
both flanks of the battle, in form and manner as I have set down in the 24
and 25 figures, with placing the armed pikes which remained out of them which
armed the front, train, and both the flanks of the battle, in the angles and
flanks of the said battle, as by their several figures may be seen; yet,
notwithstanding the aforesaid examples, they may be placed where most need and
occasion shall serve to strengthen the battle, either in front, in train, or
in any flank. So may you also, as occasion shall require, set more armed pikes
upon any part, for the more strength and security of the battle. And this
much may suffice, Fiery weapons.
touching the body of a formed battle. Next ensues, the fiery weapons,
Muskets and Caliuers, how they should be placed.


Gent. I pray let us understand the order of them also.


Capt. As the armed pike is the strength of the battle, The armed pike is the
strength of the battle, so is the shot the fury of the field. Shot and pikes
of necessity to be coupled.

The one without the other of no great force.


so without question, is the shot the fury of the field: but the one without
the other is weakened the better half of their strength. Therefore of
necessity (according to the course of wars in these days) the one is to be
coupled and matched with the other, in such convenient proportion, that the
advantage of the one may help the disauantage of the other. For a stand of
pikes, though never so well armed, being charged and assailed with the like, or
a less number of shot, by every man's judgment would have the worse, and not
able to abide the field, unless they had shot, to answer their enemies shot.
In like sort, any troop of shot, though never so brave and expert, being in
open field, having no stand of pikes, or such other weapon, nor hedge, ditch,
trench, or rampire, to relieve and succor them, could not long endure the
force of horse, especially Launciers. The sortement of these weapons, offensive
and defensive.
Now the due sortement and matching of these weapons to offend, and defend, and
to aid one another, as above is said, of the best experimented is accounted
thus: Unto every 100 men, to have one third pikes (with some few short weapon)
and two thirds Calliuers.

But were the one half (or more) of your shot, Muskets, as the Spanyardes most
commonly now use, and so to be wished with us also, then less number of shot
would serve and more of pikes, The advantage of musket.
(as I said at the beginning of our discourses.) For every Musket, considering
the wonderful execution of that weapon, may be valued for two Caliuers.
Touching the placing of these fiery weapons about the body of the battle,
there has been, and yet is, sundry opinions. Of some of them I have already
spoken in these discourses, namely, of lyning of battles with shot, or short
weapon, by me disliked; having there declared my reasons for the same.

But before I come to the placing and ordering of shot (for being a weapon not
skilfully and warily used, is of more danger to our selves then to the enemy
sometimes) I will put you in mind of one notable oversight in our shot
(especially of the crooked stockt Calliuer; notable oversight of our shot in
charging and discharging their pieces.
) For many soldiers ouer-curiously carrying and conueying their piece with the
nose downward, and striving to be seen nymble and quick in discharging, (not
considering that one shot well bestowed, avails many unadvisedly spent,) have
let slipped the bullet out of their pieces barrel upon the ground, before the
discharging thereof. Whereby it comes to pass many times, that an hundred
shot, having in skirmish discharged their piece three or four times a piece,
against two hundred of the enemies, and scarce slain two of them. A great
indiscretion, and to be better regarded and amended; the which may easily be
done thus, A redress and easy way, how to fasten the bullet.
either after having charged and slipped the bullet out of his mouth into the
barrel of the piece, by mounting the nose thereof somewhat upward, holding his
piece firmly with his left hand, or else by stopping after the bullet, which
is easily done, only by putting two or three corns of powder into the piece
after the bullet.

How some do use to place their shot about the battle of pikes.
In placing the shot about the battle, some do use to flank the two sides of
the battle with sleeves of shot, by 11, 13, 15, or 17 in a rank, or more or
less, as they shall think good; and place the said sleeves of shot, 10 or 12
foot distant from the armed pikes; and the rest of their shot in 4 great
troops at the angles of the battle, without the said sleeves, serving for
horns or wings unto the battle, and the horsemen to be placed without them
again, as in these figures following appears.



A better order to divide your shot into troops.
But (in mine opinion) this order is not so good, as if the shot were divided
into sundry small troops, trouping round about the battle the one to second
the other: placed in form as hereafter shall follow thus. First, your graund
square (or more battailions if you will) being set, To girdle the stand of
pikes with shot.
then impale or girdle the same round about with shot, by 3, 5, or 7, or more,
in a rank (according to the proportion of the battle, near adjoining unto the
armed pikes, to be by them guarded from the horse, The shot in small troops,
one to second an other.
if need were; The rest of the shot divide into many small troops by 30 40,
or 50 in a troop, to troop round about the battle, with some reasonable
distance from the same, to maintain skirmish or fight which way soever the
enemy approach: Provided that the same troops be still maintained, one to
second another, that the battle may be by them shadowed, to the end that the
skirmishes or troops of the enemies may not have that advantage, to play with
their shot upon your battle: for he is but a foolish shot, that shoots at,
or among light skirmishers, where he may discharge upon the body of his enemies
battle, which stands thick together, The armed pikes once overthrown the
battle stands in hazard.
and is a fair mark to shoot at; for the armed pikes once overthrown, which
is the strength of the field, the victory by all likelihood is like to ensue.

The empalement, especially in the front, I would wish to be Muskets, some 3 or
5 in a rank, according to the greatness of the battle; and those not to
discharge, The girdling shot to discharge at 20 pases^ff, and not farther.
until the battles approach within 20 pases distant, and then thoroughly to
discharge in vollie upon the face of the enemy: the which cannot choose, but
must slay many, and wound a number in the enemies front; the effect whereof
shall breed great encouragement unto you, and disencouragement, and weakening
to the enemy. You may also (if you please) place at every corner of your battle
a squadron of Muskets, near unto the girdling shot, at 50 Muskets in each
squadron, or as occasion shall require; who, upon the enemies battle
approaching, wheeling a little about, in form of a half Moon, shall discharge
their volly all at once, upon the body of the enemies battle. What execution
the Musket performs, such as have been in good actions do know very well;
and scarcely to be believed of those which never saw any service. The figure of
this battle, empaled with shot, cornered with Muskets, and trouped round about
with the rest of their shot, winged with horse, as men at arms (if they have
any) and Launciers, and light horse, with the place of the field ordinance, and
forlorn skirmishers, shall hereafter ensue, on the other side of the leaf.

The imbattailing of 5200 pikes, armed and unarmed, short weapon 1300, muskets
3250, calliuers 3250. And of (...) arms, 400: and Lances 1000, and 600
hargulutiers, with 14 field pieces.


And if you would fight with the same number of men in sundry battallions of
the same kind; dividing them into 3 battallions, distinguished by vangard,
battle, and reareward, work thus: first divide your grand number of men,
which is 4968, by 3 and the product will be 1656 men for every battallion. ^
Now, to frame their battallions in the same proportion that your grand square
was of, which was, as 7 to 3, couch down your number thus: 7 -- 3 -- 1656.
Multiply, and divide, and the product will come forth 709, of the which
extract the cubike root, which is 26 men for the length or depth of the
battallion; by this 26 divide the number of men for your battallion being 1656,
and the product will be 63 men, for the breadth or front of each battallion.
Now the order to march these battallions up to fight (wherein must be
considered the ground, and diverse other advantages) the one to second the
other, behold here in figure, where the vangard (being foremost) having
encountered the enemy, and finding themselves weak, retireth orderly, and the
battle aduanceth, who joining with the vangard, do both together give a second
charge, and being yet distressed, the reareward marches up close by the
battle, and renew the fight a fresh; of the which order of battle, and
battallions, there shall be both figures and tables extant in our last book.
The shot and horse belonging to these numbers, are to be divided, and placed by
the Campe-Maister General, and Sergeant Mayor General, on grounds of most
advantage. or if it be thought good, the vantgard may be placed in the middle,
the battle on the right wing, and the reareward on the left wing; as the
ground, occasion, and the commanders opinion shall concur, and every
battallion to have his proportional shot divided into sundry troops, the one
to second another, as before appears.

A particular dec^aration of the former battle in figure.
In the before figured battle, I have placed and set down the shot, and short
weapons, belonging unto the proportion of the said battle, as here following
shall particularly be declared.

First, the battle or body of pikes, armed and unarmed (containing in number
4968, The battle or body of pikes.
as in the figure before appears) I have framed in proportion of inequality,
being 2 times more in breadth then in length in number of men (called commonly
a broad square) which is in proportion as 7 to 3, which proportion covers the
due quadrate of ground, Impaled with armed pikes.
as before I have at large recited, being impaled round about with 7 ranks of
armed pikes, at 108 men per rank in front, and 46 ranks in flank. For the
furnishing of which battle with shot, and short weapon, in due proportion to
the same, I have presupposed this course and order following; after the rate to
every 100 men; The sortement of the weapons.
40 pikes, 10, halberds and short weapon, 25 Muskets, and 25 Calliuers. Which
battle contains pikes 5200, (whereof is within the body of the battle, 4968
pikes) halberds and short weapon 1300, Muskets 3250, Calliuers, 3250; being in
all 13000 men sorted and suited with weapons as appears, and severally placed
to fight (as I suppose) to most advantage, thus. First the body of the battle
contains pikes 4968 armed and unarmed; being 108 in front, and 46 ranks in
flank; the which body is environed or girdled with Muskets at 5 in rank
round: Girdled with muskets.
1640 4 Squadro^s of Muskets, at the angles of the battle, at 50 per squadron.
0200 30 Troops of shot, on the one flank, at 30 in a troop, amounts. Shot
in troops.
0900 30 Troops of shot on the other flank, at 30 in a troop, amounts 0900
17 Troops of shot, in the forlorn hope, at 30 in a troop, amounts 0510 46
Troops of shot, in the reareguarde, at 30 in a troop, amounts 1380 Sum
total of the shot bestowed about the battle. 5530 More shot is bestowed about
the guarde of one part of the artilliarie 0350 More shot placed in guarde of
the other part of the artilliarie 0350 Finally there is shot left to guarde the
munition, sum 0270 Thus you see the whole number bestowed, amounts 6500
Halbards and short weapon 1300 bestowed as follows.
06 Troops short weapon, mingled with the shot on the one flank at 30. 0180 06
Troops short weapon, mingled with shot, on the other flank at 30. 0180 05
Troops short weapon, mingled the forlorn hope, shot at 30 in tr. 0. Halbardes
and short weapons.
0150 08 Troops short weapon, mingled with the shot in the reareguard. at 30.
0240 More short weapon with the one part of the artillery to guard 0200 More
short weapon with the other part of the artillery 0200 Finally the rest of
halbardes and short weapon, are with the munition 0150 Thus also is bestowed
the whole number of short weapon 1300


The remains of the pikes where placed.
Finally, there remained 232 pikes, the which are placed in two squadrons, with
the rest of the halbardes and short weapon, containing in each squadron 116
pikes and 200 short weapon as in their several figures may appear.
Aduertising moreover, To draw some pikes out of the center of the battle.
that out of the body of the battle may be drawn some small number of pikes,
to be employed with the other pikes and halbardes, at the guarde of the
artillery and munition: which room shall serve for Drums, Phiphes,
Chirurgians, and hurt men: where also is the place of the General, if he
think good; But with this prouiso, that you draw not so many pikes from the
heart of your battle, that you leave the same heartlesse.

To conclude; The said battle is winged with 2 squadrons of men at arms; Men
at arms.
at 200 in each squadron, with 2 troops of Launciers, Launciers.
at 500 in every troop; and with 2 troops of hargulutiers, Hargulutiers.
and other shot on horseback, at 300 horse in every troop. And before them
again is placed 14 pieces of field ordinance, Great ordinance.
in two parts, having by them their guardes of shot and pikes, as appears.

Thus have you here seen in figure the embattailling, and bestowing of 5200
pikes, The number of each.
6500 shot, and 1300 short weapon: and of 400 men at arms, and 1000 Launciers,
and 600 hargoletiers, imbattailled and placed, and ready engaged to fight, as
particularly above appears.


Gent. Truly, for mine own part I have little skill to judge, but in mine
opinion, this seems wonderful strong for one battle: but me thinks, you
have framed your battle of more men in breadth then in length.


Capt. So it is; The broad square battle bring the most hands at once to fight
in front.
For I have set 108 men in breadth, and 46 ranks in length: the reasons
thereof I showed you before: for by this means there comes more hands at
once to fight in front, and the flanks notwithstanding sufficient strong,
especially having any advantage by the seat, which battle comes to be an
equal square of ground, and a broad square of men, in proportion of
inequality, as 7 is to 3, The square of ground.
that is two times, and a third of men more broad then long.

But for these forms of battles, as they bring most hands to fight at once; so
are they not equally strong on each side, as is the just square of men:
wherefore it behooves the leaders thereof, A care to be had to the situation of
ground.
to have a care to the situation of the ground, and to procure (as near as
they can) that the enemy may charge but in the front, so shall they be
wonderful strong either against horse or foot. And to encounter any foot
enemy (for no great force of enemies horse may be brought into one I Will, I
suppose) no form more strong then this, for one only battle.


Gent. Why, are there used more battles then one in one fight?


Capt. Yea truly, Venturous to set al our fortune upon the brunt of one sole
battle.

So is it dangerous for inexpert men to fight in sundry battallions.

Men come not often to hand blows, as in old time, the shot so imployeth the
field.


and with great reason and advantage, were men expert and skillful. For as it
is venturous to set ones fortune upon the brunt of one sole battle, so is it
dangerous to frame many batallions, except men be very skillful and well
practiced therein, by reason of the difficulty in seconding one another. And
again it is rarely seen in our days, that men come often to hand-blowes, as
in old time they did: For now in this age, the shot so employeth and busieth
the field (being well backed with a resolute stand of pikes) that the most
valiantest and skilfullest therein do commonly import the victory, or the
best, at the least wise, before men come to many hand-blowes.


Gent. But your battle thus framed, and engaged to fight, what order take you
therein then?


Capt. It is hard for any man to give any direct course, Hard to ascertaine any
course of fight before the enemies order be known and seen. Occurrants of
war be manifold and strange.
before the enemy be known and seen. For the occurants of war be so
manifold and strange, that sometimes upon a moment, the first resolutions and
courses taken are to be altered: as was well to be seen in our actions with
the Spanyardes in anno 1588 at sea. Where our first determinations and
appointed orders, were upon our joining with the enemy quite altered, and
changed; and so changing daily, as occasions were offered. And in land service
more occurrantes do befall hourly, which hereafter we will speak of.

The shot on horse back commonly beg^n the first skirmishes.

At the field ordinance do commonly begin the first puzzeling. The forlorn
hope to disband, and having skirmished to retire to the flanks. One troop of
shot to second an either.


But now partly to answer your demand: First the enemy discovered,
approaching, and engaging us to fight, happily some skirmishes may be begun by
the hargoletiers and light horse; but the battles approaching and coming within
shot, the field ordinance, on both sides (if there be any) begin to go off, at
which artillery the first puzzelling does commonly begin, each part attempting
to surprise the others ordinance: then the loose shot in the forelorne hope on
both sides begin to disband and fall to flat skirmish: their office performed,
having been well bearded, they retire to the flanks and reareward of the
battle, from whence they are supplied and continually seconded with other
fresh troops, so still maintaining fight, till the horse do offer to charge,
the which are commonly encountered with horse again: if not, then the shot
retire behind their stand of pikes, and are then also aided with their
halberdes and short weapon, and some half pikes mingled among them; The
squadrons of muskets when to discharge. The couching of the pikes.
upon whose charging, the Muskets of impaling and the squadrons at the angles
do roundly bestow their vollie in the face of the enemy, then the pikes are
couched fast under the right foot, guarding the girdling shot under their
succor; the which girdling shot, are to kneel upon their right knee under the
couched pikes, and closing close together do stand with resolute heart, hand,
and body, holding the pike at a reasonable distance, in the left hand, and
their swords ready drawn in their right hand of the first 3, or 4, ranks,
being sure to stand firm, and couching their pikes point to the breast of the
horse, for that is the place of most advantage. A square of pikes handled by
resolute men, not easy to be broken by horse.
A squadron of pikes thus couched and handled by resolute and honest men, I
cannot see how any troop of horse dare venture upon them: and if they do, yet
not able to break far in, if men stand resolute: so of force must they
retire with loss and disadvantage. But if they be encountered with equal
numbers, Against foot to charge ouerhand.

Valor and skill is second means of victory, but God the chief and first.

The duties of diligent officers in time of battle.


proportions, and force of pikemen, then (if they will) they advance their
pikes until they come to the push, then with charging over hand to thrust and
push courageous and valiantly; at which time valor and skill is showed, as
second means of victory, but God the first cause and giver of all.


Gent. In few words you have finished a battle: But your leaders and
Commanders, how are they this while employed?


Capt. Every one according to his office and place, to encourage and animate
the soldiers, to redress with speed any disorders happening in their own
troops, to epsy the disorders or negligence of the enemy, taking advantage
upon such occasion: with sundry other points, which in their several duties
shall be declared.


The second Dialogue, wherein is declared the order of many ancient forms of
imbattailing.
Gentleman. YOu spoke of more sorts of battles, I pray therefore declare unto
us their orders, how many, in what forms, and to what uses.


Capt. Although I have before somewhat touched the same, not minding to meddle
farther then with our fights now most accustomed, The just square of men best
allowed, out of the which all other proportions may be reduced.
yet nevertheless drawn on by your good and curious demaundes, I will, the
best I can, particularly describe them. Therefore, as I have before declared of
all forms of battles now in our age most in use, best approved, and best
allowed of, is the just square of men, as equally strong on every side, and
most fit, and best assured for the open field; and out of which quadrate all
other forms may easily be reduced. Next unto that, The quadrat of ground.
and most aduantagious (indeed) to fight, is the quadrate of ground by good
regard had, wherein many hands are brought at one time to fight. Of both the
which forms I have before largely discoursed, as well the manner how to frame
them, as their due sortement with weapons, and shot to the same; I will now
speak somewhat of the rest, of the which there are many sorts serving in old
time unto many purposes (but now with us quite out of use) as the Diamant
battle, Sundry ancient forms of battles now out of use.
the Wedge battle or Triangle, the Sheers battle, the Saw battle, the Moon
battle, the SDG battles and the Cross battle, with such like, and chiefly
the battle compounded of sundry battallions; the which last recited, of all
others, I think to be the most strong and aduantagious, The danger of raw men,
were men expert, skillful, and ready: but raw, as in our days they be, very
difficult and dangerous to be handled.

The nearest therefore unto the square of men, The Diamant battle.

The framing thereof out of the graund square.


is the Diamant battle; unto the framing whereof, out of the said square,
there needs no more, but whereas the leader stood before on the square of the
battle, let him appoint another to go to the next corner or angle thereof, and
willing the pikes to turn their faces upon him, and they shall straight, out
of the square, march into a Diamant proportion: which form when you are
disposed to alter, do no more but appoint the leader to the square, where he
first stood, commanding the pikes to turn their faces upon him, and they
shall forthwith march into a square battle again. The facility is great both
herein and in all others, and that without any confusion, as by their several
figures following shall appear; the which I have framed of 25 letters, the
better to give you to understand.



And again out of the Diamant form may be reduced two triangles, by cutting
or dividing the same in the midst at the two flat angles, as in this figure
of a Diamant form may appear by the pricks running along: and of 2 triangles
may be framed a Sheeres battle and of 3 or 4 triangles may in like sort be
framed the Saw battle, by joining the angles together as in their figures
following shall appear.

Here you see the square reduced into a Diamant form, with only turning their
faces unto the right angle E, as above appears, and so marching on, do fall
into a perfect Diamant form, with two sharp angles, and two flat. But in
their march they will stretch ouer-long, each man from his leadesman, so will
it be of no force to fight, by reason of their raritie and thin standing, as in
the former figure may appear by F.B. and by L.G.C. and by G.M.H.D. and by
VV.R.N.N.E, the two sharp angles; A more stronger framin of the Diamant battle.
and so of the rest. To reform the which fault; First command your men to
stand in the form they are; then causing the two sides of the first angle E to
stand yet firm, and command every one of the rest (except the said two sides)
to march on, one after another, until he come to find himself in a due
distance, each after his leadsman: thus F. shall march up toward B. until he
find A. to be his left-side fellow, the^ there to rest: the^ again G. shall
proceed toward C. until B. be his side fellow, L following him until F. be
his side fellow, then shall H. pass forward toward D. until he find C. to be
his side fellow, M. following, H. and Q. following M. Then shall I. step up
between D. and K, and N. following I, and R. following N, and VV. following R.
Likewise O, shall go nearer unto K. until he find P. his right side fellow,
and N. on his left side: S. shall follow O, and X. shall follow S: then shall
T. proceed toward P, and Y. follow T. Lastly Z. shall step up between and.
and Y: So is there framed a perfect triangle or wedge battle; as in this
figure following shall appear.



Here have you seen, how out of a square of men has bin first reduced a
Diamant battle simple; and out of the Diamant a triangle or wedge battle in
perfect order to fight, which is with 1. man in the first rank, 3 in the
second, and 5 in the third rank, and so consequently augmenting 2 in every
rank, with the Ensign in the midst. Now, by this order out of 2 just
squares of men, are reduced 2 triangles; and of two perfect Triangles, Out of 2
just squares of men is framed 2 triangles.

Of 2 triangles is framed a Diamant.


is formed a Perfect Diamant battle, by joining the two rereward parts
together. But first out of the one Triangle must be drawn the last rank of
all, the which may be placed at the latter point of the Diamant battle, or
else as the Sergea^t Mayor shall think good. The figures of both which
squadrons reduced into Diamant forms, and from Diamants into 2 Triangles,
lastly adjoining the 2 Triangle back parts together, is formed a perfect
Diamant battle fit to fight; as by their several figures here following may
be seen.

The square.


These two squadrons shall be reduced into 2 triangles, in manner as aforesaid,
which will be in form following.

The triangle.


In these 6 former figures, I have declared the order how, out of 2 squadrons
of men, to bring them into 2 Diamant forms simple, and out of 2 Diamant forms
single, to reduce them into 2 perfect Triangles, by causing all their middle
ranks to march up, until they find their leadsman before them in their due
distance: the which 2 Triangles, being thus perfected (as in the 4 and 5 figure
may appear) and joining the two back parts together, do make this perfect
Diamant form to fight, as here by the 2 figures following shall appear. But
of the second figure I have drawn the latter rank of one of the Triangles,
being nine men, and placed them at one of the corners.



Now, touching the Sheeres battle, the same is to be made of 4 battallions of
equal proportion, working, as before you did with the Diamant and Triangle
battles: the which 4 battallions being reduced (as before is said) into 2
triangles, and joining their two corners together, is framed the Sheeres
battle, as here you see.

The Sheeres battle.


Lo here the Sheere battle framed of 4 battallions; to back the which you
must draw up 2, 3 or 4 ranks of pikes according to the proportion of the
battle, and place them on the back part thereof, as you see above designed by
this letter O, where I have backed the same with 2 ranks, at 18 men in a
rank. And also the same order is to be observed in the Saw battle, as after
appears. Next is the Saw battle, which contains 3 sharp angles framed of
6 battallions, in such order as the Wedge, and Sheeres battles before wrought,
as here in the figure following is designed.

The Saw battle.


Thus you see this Saw battle framed and reduced out of 6 square battallions.
But there is another order yet to frame these Diamant, An other order yet to
frame their battles.
Triangle, Saw, and Sheere battles, which is thus: Place in the first angle or
rank, one man; in the second rank 3 men, in the third rank, 5 men, and in
the fourth rank 7 men; and so consequently adding unto every rank 2 men,
until you have finished your battle into such proportion as you shall think
good.

Now, there have I spent more time in those trifling forms and unused
proportions then I needed, but only to give you content, and to the end to
show, that he, which is a Sergeant Mayor, A Sergeant mayor ought not to be
ignorant of any forms of embattailing as well ancient as modern.
ought not to be ignorant in any manner of proportions, as well ancient as
modern; whereby he may be both able, skillful and ready to frame, alter, and
change his proportions, as occasion shall be offered, and that with facility
and speed.


Gent. To what intent and purpose were these proportions of Diamant, Triangle,
Sheeres, and Saw battles first devised?


Capt. The Triangle and Diamant battles were invented by antiquity to
encounter the square, To what purpose these terms were first devised.
the Sheeres battle to encounter the Triangle or Wedge battle, and the Saw
battle to encounter the Sheeres battle. All the which are in small use in our
days.


Gent. Will you speak nothing of the Cross battle, so much commended by some
men; nor of the battle compounded of sundry battallions?


Capt. The Cross battles have been most used by the Swedens, The cross
battle, and order thereof.
and high Germans. The form whereof, be it in sundry battallions severally
appointed, or in one whole and entire battle all together joined, is no doubt,
of marvelous great strength and very excellent conueyance: by reason of the
sundry places of safeguard and defense ministered to the shot and hurt persons
therein. It is commonly framed of 5 battallions or squadrons, 4 in cross wise,
and one in the middle: the which middle battallion may contain your Ensigns
and short weapons: but if it be framed of 4 battallions, with the center
vnfilled, then may the center contain the impedimentes and baggage of the
army.



A declaration of these Cross battles.
I have here figured a Cross battle compounded of 5 battallions, the middle
battallion contains the Ensigns and short weapons without their shot. And in
the second figure I have set down the said Cross battle, with their shot
bestowed, in the 4 void angles or corners, in 4 other battallions or
squadrons, as may appear. Now for as much as I intend to frame certain Tables
to the forming of every sort and manner of all these foresaid battles and
battallions of all numbers of me^, from the smallest number unto 10000 pikes, I
will leave at this instant to speak any more thereof: hoping this already
spoken to be sufficient for any willing minded Gentlemen, which have not yet
seen wars, and desirous to understand some points of martial matters: for
unto those do I write, and not unto the expert soldier, whose skill and
experience, annexed with learning I honor and reverence. Speculatio^ without
practice, but half the Art.
For surely speculation without Practice, is but half of the Art, but both
jointly together makes the same perfect.


Gent. Although we have bin tedious unto you, yet I pray let us entreat you, to
show us the order of the battle compounded of many battallions.


Capt. To divide a small power into many parts, dangerous.
To divide a small power into many parts, were but dangerous: but having a
sufficient and competent army, the manner is now a days to divide them but
into 3, distinguished into Vantgard, Battle and Rereward; yet, if men were
perfect and ready, a sufficient army might well be reparted into sundry
battallions, contained in two or three fro^ts, near after the ancient Romans,
the one to supply and second the other a matter of great importance, especially
if it should come to campall fight, by reason of the diverse breathings and
succouring one another; a thing seldom seen in our age.


Gent. What mean you by a sufficient and competent army.


Capt. Not a handful of men of three or four thousand, as we use now a days:
But I understand that a sufficient and able army should contain 12000 pikes
and short weapons or there abouts, What to be a sufficient army.
and as many shot; making 24000 in both and also 6000 horse.


Gent. How would you repart these 12000 pikes and short weapon into 3
battallions, distinguished into vantgard, battle, and reareward: or into more
battallions. I pray show unto us the order thereof in figures.


Capt. Of these 12000 pikes and short weapon, behold here in figure 11000 of
them (for there is 1000 reserved for other purposes) divided, first into 3
battles, or squares of men, and then again into 9 battallions, and lastly into
12, as by their several figures shall appear.

The figure of 11000 pikes, reparted into 3 battles.
Into three battles.


The figure of 11000 pikes divided into 9 battallions.


Into twelve battallions.
The figure of 11000 pikes, reparted into 12 battallions.



Gent. Vantgard.
The first or vantgard of the 11000 pikes reparted into 3 battles, contains
4900 piquiers, whose square root is 70, which is 70 ranks, and 70 men per
rank, or 70 in front, and 70 in flank, or 70 ranks and 70 files: all which is
all one. In the second of those 3 battles, distinguished by name of battle, is
contained 3969 pikes whose square root is 63 containing so many men in front
and flank. Battle.
the third of those battles, termed by the name of reareward, does contain
1936 pikes, Lastly, Reareward
the cubike root whereof is 44, and so many it contains in front and flank:
being all square battles of men.

Now in the marching of these battles up to fight, there is great and many
considerations to be had; Many considerations in bringing men to fight.
both for the wind, the sun, and advantage of ground, and also the quantity
and quality of the enemy: as whether he do exceed more in foot, then in
horse; and also their manner and form of embattailing. All which
considerations, and many more, must proceed from the good capacity, sound
intendement, and military skill of our General, and other commanders of our
army; unto whom if it shall so seem necessary, and occasion so require, first
to lead the va^tgard alone to fight, the same is afterward to be seconded by
the battle, marching up by the right or left flank of the vantgard, and
joining with whom, may renew the fight a fresh. And then if it fall out, that
they should be again distressed, the rereward is then to march up upon either
the right or left side, as cause shall most require, and so joining with the
other two, to renew again their encounter and fight, wherein both skill
valor, and virtue must be showed.

A consideration.
And whereas I have in those battles proportioned 70 men to the depth of the
vangard, and but 63 to the battle, and 44 to the rereward, the which drawn up
together in that proportion should badly correspond by reason of their
different depthes, or flanks; it must be therefore considered, that the first
shocke and brunt is commonly the hardest, and no doubt but many men of the
first ranks must fall at their several encounters: and coming so to pass (as
of necessity it would) then these different proportions should soon come to be
different; as any judicious men may conceive.

Secondly, A declaration of the 9 battallions.
the said number of the 3 battles are divided into 9 battallions of the same
kind and nature that their grand battles were of, whereof there is made 3
fronts, in the first front is contained 4 battallions or squadrons, with their
several spaces betwixt. The second front or supply is framed of 3 battallions,
with their several spaces betwixt. And the third front or last hope and
succor contains 2 battallions. The which 2 battallions I have placed upon
the two out angles of the 3 middle battallions; and in the void spaces
betwixt, is placed the impediments and baggage of the army. The several
breadth, depthes, and numbers of every of these battallions, are set down in
their several figures.


Gent. To what purpose serves the void spaces betwixt every battle?


Capt. The void spaces may serve for the troops of shot to sallie out of
skirmish with the enemy, The void spaces to what purpose.
and to retire again, and also for the 3 battallions of the second front, to
march up and pass betwixt them, for the battallions of the first front having
encountered the enemy, and feeling themselves distressed, are warily and orderly
to retire with their faces and weapon point bent upon the enemy. At which
retiring the Battallions of the second front, are to advance foreward, and to
pass in betwixt the void spaces of the first 4 battallions, and so all
joining valiantly together with the first, Sundry charges and fresh heads.
to make a fresh head, and to begin a second fight. And being then again
distressed, they are all orderly to retire, as is said. Then lastly the two
battallions of the 3 front, are to advance the one up by the one side of the
other battallions, and the other up by the other side of them; or as occasion
shall most require: and then finally all jointly together to give a third and
final fight. By which order it should seem, fortune to abandon them thrice
before that they should be quighte vanquished.

And last of all, A declaration of the 12 battallions.
the former 3 battles are reparted into 12 battallions of the same kind,
distinguished into 3 fronts. The first front whereof contains 5 battallions,
of 961 men in each battallion, whose square root is 31 with their several
spaces betwixt. The second front is framed of 4 battallions, of 961 men each,
whose square root is still 31, with several spaces betwixt every battallion.
And the third front is formed of 3 battailions, containing in each 625 men,
whose square root is 25 for front and flank. The which three fronts of
battallions, are orderly to advance, to charge, to retire, and to recharge, as
in the former discourse is described.


Gent. The shot belonging unto the said numbers, where are they to be placed
and employed?


Capt. The shot appertaining unto every of these battles and battallions ought
to be divided (in mine opinion) into sundry small troops; trouping about the
said battles and battallions to maintain skirmish, and some to be placed upon
banks, The shot parted into sundry troops.
ditches, and ground of advantage (the situation yielding such) according to
the direction of the Sergeant Mayor general: and the cauallery a reasonable
distance without the out angles of the battles or battalions, The cauallery.
in troops and squadrons, serving as wings to the same, and upon grounds of
advantage and places fit for their service, with good regard had, that they
pass not on the front of your battallions, for danger of disordering your own
squadrons upon their retrait, as in folio 72 is described.


Gent. What quantity of ground shall these battles and battallions require?


Capt. The quantity of ground for each soldiers station.
I have said before, that unto every picquier at the time of joining the charge,
is to be allowed for his station in front or breadth, that is, from shoulder to
shoulder, at the least 3 foot; and for depth, that is, for before and after 7
foot at the least, for his own station, and for the use of this weapon. And
the void spaces betwixt the battallions are to contain in breadth as much as
do the battallions of the second front, within the which they are to advance
and pass: so is it easily to be calculated, what quantity of ground such order
of battles and battallions will require. Moreover it must be considered, that
there must be a convenient space of ground remain between the train of the
first order of battallions, and the front of the second order, and in like sort
from the train of the second order, unto the front of the third^ order: as
some 20, or 25 pases betwixt each, or such as the ground will permit, or
occasion require.


Gent. What place is the general and other chief commanders to keep in these
orders of fightes: or are they to be on horseback or on foot?


Capt. The Lord general is to be well mounted, and the Campe-Maister General,
and Sergeant Mayor General, are to be mounted on good geldings, Andadoras and
not Corradoras. What commander and officers to be mounted.
Whereby they may speedily pass from place to place, especially the
Campe-maister and Sergeant Mayor general, to execute the Lord Generals
commands, to keep the squadrons in order, and to redress the disordered: as
in such occurrants shall be requisite.

The General his place, is commonly in the space upon the front of the second
order of the battallions: The General his place.
from whence he may most conveniently send his directions and orders: to do the
which, besides the Campe-maister and Sergeant Mayor General, and his Trumpet,
and chief Drummer, he is to have attendant upon him certain expert gentlemen
both on horseback and on foot.

The Colonels of every foot regiment, are with their companies to serve on
foot, being arraunged to fight: their due place is the right angle of the
first rank of their squadro^s, The Colonels.
and their Lieutenants in the left angle of the same ranks, the Captains and
other inferior officers, in rank also, as their place requires; as more at
large in their several duties is declared.

But in case that a Colonel were in any piece of service with his regiment
alone, then is he to employ the place and office of a General, for the
present service. The Ensigns are to be placed in the center, or near the
center, toward the foremost ranks of every battle or battallion, and to stand
in rank also. Finally of these 12000 pikes and short weapon, there is reserved
out, about 1000 to serve to other purposes: as to guard the artillery, munition,
and impediments, and such other pieces of service.

Another order to divide an army into sundry small squadrons.
There is yet another order of dividing an army into sundry small battallions,
or squadrons of one kind, each squadron containing 100 pikes, 10 in front, and
10 deep, embattailed by single files, of 10 men in every file, the order and
manner whereof is in folio 38, 42, 43, particularly described.


Gent I pray, how should a regiment or many, or an army be martialled or
embattailled after this manner? The manner.



Capt. If you would have all your army divided into battallions or squadrons of
that kind, then are the Colonels of every particular regiment, to cause the
companies of their regiment to embattel themselves, upon a sound of the drum,
in such small battallions or squadrons of 100 pikes, in every squadron 10 in
front, and 10 deep, as in folio 38, 39, and 4 may appear.

And suppose that the 24000 footmen were reparted into 20 regiments, after 1200
into every regiment: of the which 1200 men there is 600 picquiers, those 600
picquiers are to be embattailed into 6 small squadrons of 100 in each squadron,
at 10 in front and 10 deep. Being thus embattailed into sundry small squadrons
of one kind, they may with great facility be brought into any proportion you
will, as by these figures following may appear. Where you see embattailed the
picquiers of three regiments several into their small squadrons, of 100 in each
squadron, at 10 in front, and 10 deep, all in one front.



In the first figure you may behold 3 regiments embattailed into 18 small
squadrons; in the second figure behold the same reduced into a battle of
double front, or into a due square of ground, which is twice so many men in
front as in flank: and in the 3 figure, you may see the said 3 regiments
brought into a just square of men; that is, as many men in breadth as in depth:
the order whereof is thus.

The first regiment being embattailed into 6 small squadrons, and placed in one
equal front, the second regiment (being embattailed in the like manner) is to
march up unto the train of the first 6 squadrons, there joining squadron with
squadron, and answering file with file. After them again is the other last 6
squadrons to march up unto the train of those 6 middle squadrons, and placed
even squadron with squadron and file with file: so that of these three
regiments there is made one body of a battle of broad front, or due square of
ground, which is twice so many men in breadth as in depth, as by the second
figure may appear.

The order.
Finally, if you should be occasioned to reduce the said three regiments into one
grand battle of equal proportion, or due square of men: then place 4 of these
small squadrons in one front, on whose train 4 other squadrons, are to march
up; and then again 4 others, and lastly the last four squadrons; so that
squadron with squadron, and file with file, may equally answer one another, as
in the third figure may appear. Where, of 16 of these small squadrons is
framed a battle in proportion of equality: which is so many men in depth as in
front: and there remains out two small squadrons, the which are to serve to
other purposes, either for a supply, or to other services.

Thus have you seen these three regiments embattailed and brought into sundry
proportions. An army may be framed of sundry small squadrons.
Likewise in the same manner may a whole army be ranged and ordered by good
conductors, into sundry battallions, and distinguished, either into one, two,
or three fronts: as the just occasions, and the judicious intendement of the
good commander shall concur and find convenient.


Gent. By describing unto us these several orders of reparting an army into
sundry battallions and squadrons, ye have contented us wonderful well: and it
seems (in mine opinion) much aduantagious, being discretly and orderly
handled. But how should the shot, due unto those regiments, be placed and
ordered?


Cap. The shot belonging unto these regiments, divided into sundry battles,
battallions and squadrons, should be reparted into sundry small troops, of 50
in each troop, at 5 in front, and 10 in depth, or more, or less, as occasion
shall procure; the ordering and placing of which shot does appear, in folio 42
43, and 73, and is in many other places described; so that one troop may
always be ready to second another, and to give breathing one to another.


Gent. But what have you next to speak more of, before you return to the
office of the Sergeant Mayor: by reason of whose office you have made these
sundry demonstrations of diverse and many sorts of battles, and battallions, as
a matter most pertinent unto the said Sergeant Mayor his office.


Cap. I should now set down the tables of all these sundry proportions: as
first of battles in proportion of equality; Of tables to be framed.
which is the just square of men; their order of ranking; their dividing into
Maniples, and so marching up shoulder to shoulder, to bring them into their
former order of battle, with the marching up of their remainers: their due
numbers of girdling shot, and the dividing of the said battles into sundry
battallions of the same kind: then again, the tables of battles in proportion
of inequality, Even.
which is more in breadth then depth: with their deuisions into battallions of
that sort, and the table of even battallions for cross battles, and of other
proportions, with the quantity of ground that every of them would require; but
time permits me not: reserving the same unto the last book of these our
military discourses.

But I must now speak something by the way, of marching our battle through
straightes, and being passed, how to fall again into the former proportions.

When you come to any straight, To march an army thorough straightes.
it must be considered of what wideness the passages are, and how many men may
go in front easily through the same; and then may you accordingly, at your
discretion, choose whether you will draw your battle out into the former
Maniples, that the same marched in before their coming into battle (as in the
several tables thereof shall be showed) or into more Maniples or parts, if
thereunto you shall be compelled by the narrowness of the place: Drawn into
Maniples.
which likewise being so wide, that fewer Maniples then you marched up before,
will serve for their division, you may accordingly also draw them out into 3,
5, 7, or 9, Maniples, as the nature of the straight, and your judgment
concurring together shall think meet. The Ensign to be contained in the
middle Maniple.
Always provided, that the ensigns be contained in the middle Maniple: and
having passed the straightes, you may again draw them up shoulder to shoulder,
as in the order of marching in Maniples, is before in folio 62, 63, 66, and 68
declared; whereby easily and without confusion they shall forthwith fall in
their former proportion. But as concerning your shot, The shot, in troops most
serviceable.
you shall not need (except the straight be very narrow) to draw them out into
any such parts, without it be those in the girdling, which as they stand in
proportion in the battle, must be drawn out into Maniples with the pikes, for
if mine opinion might be received touching the other shot, I would always
advise, that the residue should ever more remain in many small troops, not
above 40, or 50 shot, at the most in a troop, as before I have showed, for
that by experience I know the same to be of greatest force, and readiness for
service: be it therefore in plain or straight, or how soever, the more troops
your shot be severed into, the better shall the enemy still be applied; The one
to second another.
besides the seconding the one of the other with such quick dispatch, shall
cause that after the first troops have once discharged, they retiring
themselves behind all the rest, shall be sure against they come up again to
have leisure enough to charge sufficiently and surely, that few shot shall be
spent in vain, as they do when great numbers be clustred together.

Now, If the enemy co^straine to fight in the straight them to quarter your
Army.
if it should fortune (as most commonly it chances) that the enemy should
fight with you in the straight, then must you not draw your battle into those
Maniples or parts, but consider whether the straight be such, as will suffice
you to go thorough, holding the same proportion that you have. If not, then
consider whether squaring the battle into 4 parts, To quarter the battle into
sundry battallions.
you may with so many battallions pass to encounter with the enemy, if so you
cannot, it seems unto me the rediest and safest way, to divide your battle
into more battallions, as for example: first to proportion them out into 4 or
6, if those be not convenient, then into 8, if you think that will not serve,
then into 12 or 16 battallions, or as the passage will permit, which thing may
more easily be brought to pass, if the body of your battle do consist of
pikes only, which, were the same of compound weapons, could in no wise be so
^odainely done, without great confusion; as a man of any judgment may
conceive: and as by these figures following shall plainly appear.

Not to enter unadvisedly into any straigh^s.
But before the arrival unto such straights and passages, the wise Commander is
carefully to consider, and to send sundry scoutes abroad to discover: and also
shall cause (if possible he may) the summities, higher grounds, craggy rocks,
thickets, woods, and other places of advantage, to be first possessed by his
own people, sending to that effect, shot, half pikes, and such like.

The figures of quartering a battle.


In dividing and quartering of all which, as may appear, the place of the
Ensigns is still crossed, to redress the which the Sergeant Mayor or
Colonel, may place them where he thinks fittest: drawing out, where every
Ensign shall stand, one pike; and replace the same pike in the first room of
the Ensign which at the out drawing of the Ensign remained void.


The end of the third book.
THE FOVRTH BOOK OF WAR DISCOURSES AND MARTIAL DISCIPLINE.
The first Dialogue:
Wherein is declared the election, office, and duty of a Sergeant Mayor, with
sundry points of Military discipline, etc. and marching of the Army.

Gentleman. TRuly (Captain) this order for passing of Straights, does content
me wonderful well: and me thinks, having ready men, and good officers, very
easy and ready to be performed. But now (I pray) if there restes no more to
be spoken herein, begin to show us the choosing and office of a Sergeant Mayor,
which in day of battle, seems an office of great importance.


Capt. I did at the begininng of my second book, declare unto you, that a
Prince leuying an Army royal, does by his Council (or Council of war, The
chief Commanders of an Army.

Divided into Regiments.

The officers of the Regiment.

Divided into Companies.

The officers of a Company.

Sergeant Mayor of a Regiment.

A Sergeant Mayor general.


if there be any such in the realm) appoint first a most sufficient General,
then a Camp-maister general, a Captain general of the Cauallery, and a
Captain general of the Artillery. The Army is divided into sundry Tertios
or Regiments; over every Regiment, a Camp-maister or Colonel. The Cololonell
deuides his Regiment into sundry bands or companies, and over every company
a Captain: every Captain has his Lieutenant, his Alferes or Ensignebearer,
his Sergeants, his Caporals, and his Drums and Phifes. Also every Regiment
has his Sergeant Mayor; and over the whole Camp or Army, a Sergeant Mayor
general: of which Officer I mean now to treat.


The election and office of a Sergeant Mayor.
The election of the Sergeant Mayor, is made by the General, out of such as
the Colonels do name unto him. A Sergeant Mayor is the general Minister of a
whole Regiment. His office consists in marching, in imbattailing, and encamping.
His office is, to be the general minister or officer of a whole Regiment of
sundry companies, and Superintendent of all the Sergeants of the same. By
whose hand and industry, the Camp-maister or Colonel, does give and appoint
the orders convenient to the due government of his Regiment or Army: as in
marching, in encamping, and imbattailing, and in such other matters concerning
hereunto: whereby may be gathered the parts, the qualities, the valor, the
great skill, experience and diligence, which ought to be in him, who is chosen
to this degree of office; being of such importance, that in the time of the
Greeks and Romans, this office was credited unto none; but the Generals them
selves did execute the same in their own person.

The Sergeant Majors office is of much higher degree, The Sergeant Mayor of
higher degree then any ordinary Captain.
then any ordinary Captain: for every Captain does receive his directions
from the Sergeant Mayor; and the Sergeant Mayor from the Colonel or General,
or from the King or Emperor himself, if he be in field. For he is barred no
gate nor entry, but is freely suffered to enter, Great regard to be had in the
election of this officer.

Skill and natural instinct.


even into the Generals tent, or Kings chamber. Therefore there ought great
regard to be had, in the election of this officer. Which being done in a person
of insufficie^cie, does many times cause great inconveniences to arise: and the
person so chosen, for want of skill and natural instinct, not knowing how to
uphold his due authority, gravity, and power, does lose oftentimes his due
respect and reverence of the Captains, and other officers: whereby it had been
better for him to have remained a Captain of a single company, then to have
risen to this degree of office, being not fit, for skill and nature thereunto.

Gent. Then I perceive that you would wish him that should use the place of
this office, besides his experience and skill, to be also of a natural
inclination befitting the same.


Capt. So is my meaning: For besides his long experience and practice in
wars, he ought yet to have a certain natural instinct befitting this
office: for as much as the most of his actions are to be handled in the face
and view of the enemy, His actions are handled for the most, in the view and
face of the enemy. The parts to be required in a Sergeant Mayor. To epsy
advantages. Not to let slip good occasions offered.
and in place of greatest peril; as ready at every instant to redress every
disorder. He ought besides his long experience, to be valiant, learned, quick
witted, and ready conceited, wise, discreet, and ready both to see, and
foresee, as well their own, as the enemies orders or disorders; preventing,
redressing, and taking advantage, as time and occurrants shall be offered, not
letting slip any occasion offered.


Gent. Is the Sergeant Mayor to have any particular company to himself, as
the other Captains of Infanterie have?


Capt. No truly, and that for many good respects: For in the absence of the
Colonel, he has the command of the whole Regiment, among the Spanish
Tertios.


Gent. You said that the office of the Sergeant Mayor did consist in three
things; that is, in the good order of marching, in the sure manner of
encamping, and in the perfect forms of imbattailing: wherefore I pray
discourse more at large thereof unto us.


Capt. Truly (Gentlemen) if you remember, I have before at large declared
touching the embattailing of men, To k^^w to frame his squadron, to march with
the same, to bring the^ to fight. A squadro^ what it is.

To be victorious or invincible.

The army b^st ordered and disciplined, is like to be Lord of the victory.


the ordering of squadrons, their dividing into Maniples, and the forms of
sundry kind of battles with us most in use: but yet to give you content, I
will repeat some part thereof again. Wherefore it concerns this officer to
know how to frame his squadrons, to march with the same, and bring them to
fight. Now, a squadron of men is, (as before I said in folio 45.) A
congregation of soldiers orderly ranged and set, by the which is pretended to
give unto every one such place and room, as they may fight without hindering
one another, and to unite all their forces together, in such sort that they may
attain to their principal intents and end, which is to be victorious or
invincible. So that we ought to think that the army which is best ordered and
disciplined, although of lesser numbers, Vegetius his reasons.
is like to be, by all reason, Lord of the victory: as Vegetius declares very
well, giving the reason why the ancient Romans became conquerours of most
nations of the world; saying that in greatness they were not like to the
Almaines, neither comparable in number to the French, neither so subtle as the
Aphricanes, nor so strong as the Spanyardes, The advantage of practice and good
discipline.
nor so furious as the Brittanes, nor so wise as the Grecians, yet did they
make easy, and answer all these disaduantages and difficulties, by only
maintaining their people well exercised in arms, and practice of war, and
keeping them well disciplined and reformed in manners. And for as much as
squadrons and battles be formed of numbers of soldiers, more or less,
according to the greatness of the army, it is necessary that this officer
do perfectly know, It is necessary to have ^n writing the just number of
every company and their sortme^t of weapons. To have always an Idea in the
head of sundry forms of battles. To be skillful in Arithmetike.
and have in writing, the just number of every company; as how many pikes, how
many halbardes, and how many shot, and before occasion or necessity befall, do
make a common habit in his head and memory, framing therein many and variable
forms of those which are now most in use, as the just square of men, and
quadrate of ground, and the battles of many sorts of proportions of
inequality, with all the others whereof before I have written. To do the
which, it is most needful that he be very skillful in Arithmetike, for
without the same, he should hardly perform his office: and not only to know
how to embattell the companies of his own Regiment, but of many Regiments
together, and of any number: A battle framed of sundry Tertios by the Duke de
Alua at Lisbona. The Tertios of Naples, Sicilia and Lombardie. Spanish Tertios.
for that many times the General does command to frame a battle of sundry
Regiments together; as did the old Duke de Alua at the taking of Lisbona, and
conquering of Portugal. Who commanded, that of the Tertios of Naples,
Lombardie, and Sicilia, there should be one battle made and framed; and of the
Tertios of Don Rodrigo Sapata, and Don Gabriell Ninio, an other, and of the
Tertio of Don Luys Henriques, another squadron: and that out of all the six
Tertios there should be drawn 2100 shot, to serve to other purposes. And for
as much as the Sergeant Mayor was not very skillful and ready herein, The
Sergeant Mayor by want of skill, much puzzeled.
they found them selves much puzzelled in doing thereof; and fell into many
faults, in presence of their General and Princes: and in general judgment
of the whole Camp wherein I then served.


Gent. Truly it was a matter well worth the noting, but is there more sorts of
imbattailing then those you have spoken of before?


Capt. I have already spoken of the most; yet of diverse nations used
diuersely; of all which forms I would have the Sergeant Mayor to be skilled
and seen, although the conduction of our wars now a days, Our wars now a
days do consist more in surprises, assaults, and batteries, then in main fight.
does consist more in surprises, assaults, and batteries, then open field
fight, and although the best now in use, are but two or three, viz. the first
square of men, and the square of ground, and their division into battallions of
that kind, according to the weapons wherewithal we now fight.


Gent. Which of these do you hold for most assured and strong?


Capt. I hold them all for sufficient strong, but the difference which may
happen, The difference to be judged by the situation of the ground and
occasions to fight. Just square of men.
is to be judged according to the situation and disposition of the ground, and
occasions to fight, and by the order that the camp shall observe. For in some
occasions the square of men would be best, as in open field, without advantage
of hedge, ditch, water, marish or wood, or where the enemy is strong in horse,
to charge on every side: the which just square of men, in every part is found
to be equally strong, and apt every way to receive the charge: the which could
not be so, ^attell in broad front.
were the battle ouerlong afront, and narrow in flank, as is the bastard,
broad, or base square; but yet in other occasions, where these advantages are
to be found, it were better to fight in broad front, for that thereby, many
hands do come to fight at once together in the vantguard, and with more
difficulty to be compassed by the enemy, having any of the advantages before
spoken of to friend: but most commonly, if necessity, occasion, or situation
do not constrain otherwise, the quadrat of ground is best, and most used, as
best proportioned with equal strength in vantguard and reareward (especially
against footmen) and also flanked sufficiently strong: and which of all other
does occupy least quantity of ground.


Gent. What mean you by Bastard square, Broad square, and Base square.


Capt. The Bastard square, What is mea^t by bastard square, broad square, and
base square.
is the battle which contains almost twice so many men in front, as in
flank, in proportion as 1 is to 1: the Broad square is the battle which
contains more, or as much, as twice so many men in front, as in flank, as is
2 to 1, or 2, which is as 7 to 3: and the Base square, is the battle which
contains almost thrice, or 3 times more in breadth then in depth, which
proportion is as 8 to 2, or 3 to 1, or such other proportions of inequality,
as fol. 51.


Gent. You have before declared at large the manner how to frame all these sorts
of battles: therefore it is needelesse to demand it again; whereby I perceive
how necessary it is for the Sergeant Mayor to be both learned and skillful in
Arithmeticke: but does it import any thing, whether the ranks be of eue^ number
or odd?


Capt. No truly, The ranks even or odd imports little.
but a custom used amongst us, without any ground: for battles are to be set
according to the number of men, and the same to be framed as the situation of
the ground will permit; therefore the number of Par or Impar does little import
to the strengthening of the battle: but the due proportioning thereof
according to the quantity of your men, to be accommodated to the ground, or
situation; and above all, The brave conduction of the Commanders, and the
resolute valor of the soldiers, is the firmness of the battle.
the brave conduction of the Commanders and the resolute valor of the
soldiers, is the strength and firmness of the battle.


Gent. What order is to be taken in setting of battles with speed and
facility, that the confusion of the soldiers disturb not the same,
especially where men be unruly, every one thrusting himself into the first
ranks of the foreward, in such disorder many times, that neither the Sergeant
Mayor nor Colonels themselves shall be able to frame a battle in good sort?


Capt. The care to redress this inconvenience touches the Sergeant Mayor; A
politic order to be observed, in setting a battle when the soldiers be
unruly.
and therefore he ought to give advise and warning unto every company before
they come to this point, that they beware of such confusion, disorder, and
disobedience; notifying unto them that the Ensign or Ensigns which were of
the ward that day, should frame the first ranks of the vantgard; and the
Ensigns or Companies that had the ward last before, should successively
follow; and those which were afterward to have the ward, to succeed them
again, and then next such as first were gathered to the squadrons.

Moreover giving aduisement to the officers, that they suffer none of the
soldiers of their band to come without their armor, No soldier to come with
his armor by peece-meale or broken.
by peece-meale and unfurnished: for by such faults, although that by the
aforesaid reasons, the vantguard appertains unto them, yet they loose their
pre-eminence, for coming so ill armed; and justly may others, better armed, be
placed in their rooms.


Gent. And if (perhaps) upon the Alarm given (as commonly it falls out)
all the Companies in Arms, do join and gather together, unto the Corpse de
guarde or place of assembly, in such a case, what is the Sergeant Mayor to do?


Capt. An order to frame a squadro^, of unruly soul^iers upon the Alarm given,
or suddenly.

A fine check of unruly soldiers.


He shall frame together that confused and disordered body, placing the
Captains before: and shall draw his battle from out one of the flanks, or
out of the rereward, as he shall find it most commodious: the which he shall
do with great facility, and thereby shall defraude those that were cause of
such confusion: and it shall serve unto two good effects: the one, he shall
frame his battle with speed, and the other, he shall by this means chasten
the unruly and disobedient, by leaving them in the rereward, who seeing this
order taken by the Sergeant Mayor, will ever afterward, be more obedient and
tractable to be set in order.


Gent. But the battle or squadron of pikes being set, in what order is the
same garnished with shot, and how many and great shall the sleeves thereof be,
and how far distant placed from the pikes? for I have heard different
opinions therein; whereof, although you have said somewhat already, yet I pray,
let us hear something more of the same.


Capt. No soldier is ignorant, that the squadron of pikes being set, is to be
impaled or girdled with shot, The d^e and natural girdling with shot.
as many ranks of shot, as pikes. But the due and natural girdling indeed,
ought to be no more shot in rank, then that the pike may well cover and
defend, especially where the enemy does abound in Cauallerie. And so under the
defense and favor of the pike, there cannot conveniently stand above one rank
of three shot at the most, and so many (in mine opinion) should the girdling
contain: the which girdling shot, kneeling upon one knee, under the covert of
the couched pikes, should, at the charging of the horsemen, discharge their
vollie in their face and bosom, When and how to discharge their vollie.
which would be no small galling unto them. But when this danger of horse is
not to be feared, then the impalement may be made of more shot in a rank, at
the discretion of the Sergeant Mayor, according to the quantity of shot
contained in his companies, and the rest of the shot to be divided into sundry
small troops (as I said before) to troop round about the battle, Shot in
sundry small troops trouping round about the battle. Every troop to be led
forth to skirmish by their Caporall.

Squadrons of muskets, at the angles of the battle.


with some reasonable distance from the same: the which manner of small
troops, I esteem to be far better then the sleeves containing great
numbers, and more ready to be brought to skirmish, every several troop to be
led forth by his Caporall, and some Captains to ouersee the whole.

Moreover, I would think good, at every angle of the battle to be placed a
good squadron of Muskets, which should serve to flanker it every way, even as
the Caualleros or Trauassos do the curtain of a fort: so that a well framed
battle or squadron of pikes, well impaled with shot, and anguled with
squadrons of Muskets, seems a Castle with his curtains Caualleros, and
ditches: the manner whereof being framed of expert and resolute men, is of
wonderful force, the which was well to be seen in the journey of Carua^ in
Barbary, where Don Aluaro de Sandy, with 4000 Spanyardes, A brave retraict of
Don Aluaro de Sandy made in Barbary, with 4000. foot against 20000. horse.
foot soldiers of great valor, made a brave famous retraict, the space of 4.
or 5. miles in a champion field, being be set and charged by Cydearfa, king of
the Moors, with above twenty thousand horse, at the least five or six times,
with the loss of only 80 men of his; and the slaughter of seven or eight
hundred of the enemy. Which is a gallant example what brave footmen may do,
being conducted by a good chief.


Gent. Your orders and reasons do like me very well: but yet of one thing I
stand in some doubt, and would gladly be resolved therein, which is, that our
bands and companies of infanterie, have commonly two thirds of shot, unto one
third of pikes, so that the battle empaled, sleeued and anguled with shot,
there will yet abound and remain good store of shot nevertheless. Now where
should those be bestowed, to be safe from the fury of horse, if the enemy
should therein greatly abound?


Capt. Your question is good, and I my self have bethought me many times
thereupon: wherefore if your ground be such that the enemies horse may charge
you but upon two parts at the most at once, then may the shot retire safely on
the contrary parts: but if you be imbattailled in open Campania, without any
advantage for you, and your enemy very strong in horse, and you few horse or
none to reanswere them, An order for the safeguard of shot in open campania,
where the enemy abounds in horse.
then (in mine opinion) the surest way is thus (as I said before) in speaking
of lining of battles with shot, first to place 5, 6, and 7 ranks of armed
pikes, or more, and girdle them with 5 ranks of shot, close under the guard and
shelter of the pikes, on the out side: then again within those first ranks of
pikes, 3, 4, or 5 ranks of shot, then certain ranks of pikes, and then shot
again; and so consequently, as your numbers and occasions shall require, as in
this figure appears.

The figure of such a battle of mixed weapons.


Here is to be noted that in such cases where your battle may be charged on
every part or side, that then those ranks in flank which have a wider
distance then those men which are in front, do march up closer together,
whereby they may make the front of equal strength and distance, of station
every way.

In this figure first you see placed the girdling shot 5 in a rank, under the
guard and succor of the pikes, Declaration of the figure.
then 9 ranks of pikes, then certain ranks of shot, and then pikes again;
and so consequently to the center, where is placed the ensigns, and short
weapon, and munition. The girdling shot upon the very charging of the enemies
horse, and at the couching of their pikes, may (kneeling upon one knee, the
better to be under the covert of the pikes) discharge in the bosom of the
enemy, not above twenty pases of: and then the pikes being couched, the other
ranks of shot, contained within them, are to discharge close over the heads
of the couched pikes before them, and so successively as the other pikes shall
be couched the shot contained within them shall discharge. So thus (in my
conceit) would this order contain in safety, the most part of your shot, and
be sufficient strong, and a great gauling unto horse.


Gent. This order I think to be good, where the enemy abounds in number of
horse. But now I pray tell us what order is the Sergeant Mayor to take and
observe, when these companies do march?


Capt Herein consists great skill, Great skill and care in the marching of an
Army.
care, direction, and discipline; for generally men be loath and unwilling to be
tied to any strict and painful order, especially Besonnios, wanting practice
and patience; for upon every light occasion, they will break and disaray, as
when they come to any straight or vnplained way, or when they feel themselves
a little wearied or chafed with heat, running on every side disorderly to seek
water, The disorders of soldiers do many times grow through remissness and
negligence of officers. What the Sergeant Mayor is to do, being in the open
field with the army. Vantgard, battle, and reareward.
which often times has been cause of many defeatments. And many times again
upon small occasions do they dismande themselves, the cause thereof growing
from the over remissness and negligence of the officers, in not correcting at
first, such disorders with rigor and severity, as the vrgentnesse of the cause
would require, and for that they want the care and diligence to redress such
mismeanours, as hereafter I will speak of, declaring first what the Sergeant
Mayor is to do, being in Campania: which is to go take the orders to be
observed from the General, and to know whether his tertio or regiment is that
day to have the vantgard, battle, or reareward; the which he is to do the
night before that the army is to march, although that the General many times
for many good respects, will not make the same known, until the very hour of
marching.

And this shall he do chiefly that day, which touches his regiment to have the
vantgard. And therefore it is always important for him to know the ways most
commodious, To know the ways most salli^b^e, for the soldiers to march.
and most salliable for the soldiers and companies out of the camp: for many
Sergeant Majors having erred herein, have found themselves puzzelled, confused,
and ashamed in presence of their Generals, guiding their regiments by ways
pestered with carts, wagons, and baggage of the camp. And at other times for
conducting them through passages so difficult and combersome, that they have
been constrained to break their arraies. For at the removing of a camp, the
prauncing and neighing of horses on every side, and the crossing of carts,
Great noise and rumor in removing of a camp.
baggage and carriages, and the noise of drums and trumpets, is such and so
great, that (if he be not very preconsiderate in the same, and know well the
way, where he is to conduct his companies) he runs many times into those
inconveniences: and chiefly when the camp does dislodge by night, or in days
mistie and dark, for then is the danger most to be doubted: therefore it
imports much, that the Sergeant Mayor be very skillful in the region and
country where they are to pass, To be skillful in the country where they are
to march.

Sundry considerations.


and to know the distances from place to place, and the qualities of the ways
and passages, with their straights, and enclosures, their hills, valleys,
rivers, brooks, lakes, moors, meddowes, fields, open or enclosed, forests,
woods, thickets, or whether the country be stony, plain field, or ditched,
and all difference of situations of grounds, as well of the hills, and high
mountains, as of the plain and champain; to the end, that he may consider,
foresee, prevent, To what end.
and prepare for every place where the enemy may annoy him. For many times one
regiment is to march alone, and then does it touch the Sergeant Mayor to have
the care and speculation hereof, as it does the Campe-Maister General when the
whole army marches, for that it befall him not, as it did unto the Romans in
the Furcas Caudinas and unto many other through the like misregard. Examples of
the Romans at Furcas Caudinas. To procure faithful and trusty guides.

Hannibal deceived.


And for more security hereof, they are to procure faithful and trusty guides,
and skilful way leaders, to the end not to be beguiled and abused, as Hannibal
was, when he warred in Italy against the Romans, who willing to lead his
army unto Cassinum, was led and guided unto Casilinum, to be put into the hands
of Quintus Fabius Maximus, General of the Romans his enemies.

Now the order being known, To cause the drum mayor to sound the reco^a or
removing.

The Captains of footmen.

To assemble the companies in the place of arms, and there to frame his
squadrons.

The Sergeants of bands, what to do.

To divide the battle into Maniples, if the passage be narrow.


and the way reknowledged, and the hour of removing at hand, he is to
command the drum mayor to sound the call Recoia or assembling, and every
Captain of infantery to cause their baggage to be trussed up and laden, and
shall straight ways draw forth his ensigns out of their quarter into the
place of arms, and there shall frame his battle or squadron, reparting their
Captains into such places as concerns them that day, and shall dispose and
appoint the Sergeants of ordinary bands in such sort, that every one may know
what part he has to govern and set in order. And for as much as it is seldom
seen, that the ways, fields, and passages be so large, that the whole
battle may march all in front, he is to frame his ordinances arraies or
Maniples no greater, then that the same may march commodiously and at ease
thorough the same, the order whereof I have at large declared in folio 62, 67,
68 and 92: always provided, that he quarter or divide not his battle (if the
passage will so permit) into no less then the third part of the front thereof,
as thus, if the front be of 27 pikes, the Maniples or ordinance shall be of 9,
and if 21 in front, then the division or quartering shall be of 7 in front, and
so of other numbers: for he is to conduct his companies so well disciplined and
ordered, that occasion being offered, he may with speed and readiness frame
and set his battle, or battallions, reparting the Captains and officers in
places most convenient, as before is said.


Gent. But tell us how is he to repart them, and who shall go in the vantgard;
which in the battle, and who in the reareward; and in what part shall the
Colors be placed, that this readiness and quick dispatch, might be performed
in setting the battle as you speak of?


Capt. The order I have partly spoken of before; The order in marching of
vantgards, battle, and rea reward.
but to give you content, I will repeat it again: therefore me thinks that
the order to be observed therein, is thus. That the shot of the forlorn hope,
and the shot of the right flank (being divided into many small troops as I
said) should march before, then next, the girdling shot, of the said right
side; after them should follow the ordinances and Maniples of pikes, in such
sort and order as before is declared: and to the end that the ensigns go not
crossed either in one sort or other, The ensigns where to be placed fitt^st.
he is to place them alone after another, within so many ranks of pikes, so
that when soever he brings his Maniples up together pouldron to pouldron, to
the framing of his battle, they may still remain in their convenient places,
which is in the center.

Then after the pikes shall follow the girdling shot of the left flank, and
last of all in the reareward shall follow the troops of shot belonging to the
left flank, and reareward, and having passed the straight, and the squadron
formed, then may they repair each girdling shot, Having passed the straight to
march up pouldron to pouldron again.
and troops to their due and convenient rooms, as before; of which orders of
Maniples, and quartering of battles, I have before declared at large.


Gent. Is there any meaning or mystery in marching the left or right side shot
before in the vantgard.


Capt. None truly, that I know of, more then that in all our actions we ought
to incline what we can unto perfection: and as the right hand is the more
perfect and noble, In all our actions to incline to perfection.
from thence it is reason, that we begin to frame our battles, and in that
place also to begin to disseuer them.


Gent. The munition, and baggage belonging to the Companies, where are they to
go, to cause least hinderance, and to pass in most security?


Capt. The consideration that is to be had when an army does march, is, that
if the enemy be known to be on head the vantgard, upon the way you are to
pass, then let the munition and baggage be placed in the reareward;
Considerations to be had where the munition is to march.
and per contra, if the enemy be found to be in the reareward, then pass your
baggage to the forward: and if on the right side, then convey it to the left;
and if on the left side, then transport it unto the right, with the like
consideration, and in this sort shall the camp be always a wall and defense
unto the munition and baggage. And if in marching the enemy do offer to fight,
the munition by this means, shall be no let or hinderance at all. And besides
all this, there ought to be sent abroad certain Hargulutiers or light horse,
Certain light horsemen to be sent out to scout before the munition.

In countries secure from the enemy, the munition is to pass before with a
sufficient card. The reasons.


to scoute before the munition and carriage, to prevent the sudden incursions
of the enemies straggling horse. The same order ought also to be observed in the
marching of one regiment alone. But in case that there were no enemy, and they
might march through places plain, safe, and secure, the munition and carriage
ought always to pass in the foreward, with a sufficient guard of pikes, shot,
and short weapons; and that for good respect, and because it is very commodious
for the soldiers, that when they come well wearied to their quarter, they may
find their tents ready pitched, and many times their forage provided, and not
to stay attending and expecting the same, coming many times, wet, dirtie, over
tired, and half dead with hunger: and again if by hap any of the cariages do
fall, the owners of the baggage may help to redress, whereby to save their
baggage and furniture: which could not be done if it marched in the reareward.


Gent. But if it should happen, that in none of these said parts, the baggage
might march in safety (as in Barbary, or other Champaine country, where the
enemies number consists most of horse) and we not having sufficient numbers
to answer them, what is then to be done, where the enemy may charge on every
side?


Cap. In parts of danger the munition is to march in the center, or among the
squadrons.
Then in the center of the battle, or betwixt the squadrons, with their
convenient guard, as before is said: for besides that little which the soldier
has, and carries the same there, it is reason he defend and keep it; so in
the like sort he is to procure that the enemy detrusse him not thereof, neither
the enemy to glory that perforce he has dispoiled us of any thing, Better to
loose the munition then to hazard the whole army. The munition forsaken
sometimes for policy sake.

Example at the battle of Vicentia in Italy.


for the great part of reputation which is lost thereby: but if the same may
not be conserved without manifest danger, and the squadrons thereby to be
disaraied, then ought it to be forsaken and left: the which many brave
commanders have not only done, but some have left their carriage to the enemy
of purpose, to the end that by rifling the same they might fall into some
disorder; by which means and policy they might the sooner defeat them, and
obtain the victory: as did Prospero Colonna and the Marquis de Pescara at the
battle of Vicentia in Italy, whereat the Venetians, and the Captain: Marquis
Aluiano were broken and overthrown.


Gent. The foot soldiers horses and their boys, where are they to go when
they them selves mount on horse back, and their boys do carry their weapon and
armor in their Masters rooms?


Capt. I would wish as few horses as might be with the foot companies, but
only for some officers and sick persons: As few horses as might be to be
permitted in foot companies.

Noe foot soldier to pass out of the camp on horseback.

Where the foot soldiers horses are to go.

The orders to be observed when the foot soldiers do mount on horseback.


but for such as be, it is manifestly known, that it is forbidden by all good
discipline of war, that no foot soldier do pass out of the camp or alodgement
on horseback, neither on horseback to enter into the same, but always at
sallying he acccompany his colors, at the least a mile, and before the arriual
to their allodgement, the like. To do the which, their horses may go by one
side of the battle, if the way will permit it; and if not, then at the train
thereof, until they have license granted to mount; and yet not that to be
permitted, until their foot Captain be first mounted; and then may they mount
on horseback, and put them selves in order with the Captain or officer that
is to conduct them, and to this effect should the Sergeant Mayor name and
appoint some one. And if they be of the shot of the vantgard, then are they to
follow their vantgard troops of shot; and if pike men, then to follow their
arraies or Maniples of pikes: and in like sort shall the Hargabuziers of the
reareward do, placing themselves in the train of their troops, and shall set
their boys and pages with their arms in their rooms and places, to the end
that if occasion be offered, every mounted soldier may alight, and step to
his room and place, without disordering their ordinance or arrayes at all. In
the like sort shall such foot soldiers as have boys carrying their arms,
do: and when occasion is for the soldier to take him to his arms, The boys
to be shifted out of the battle.
having received the same from the boys, let the boys be shifted out of the
battle: for I hold it not for good, as I have seen some Sergeant Majors, to
place those boys near unto their Ensigns, either before or after them: for
by this means may the battle be disordered and broken, and none of those
which mounted on horseback, can readily find their due rooms and places. A
thing which the Sergeant Mayor should greatly regard, to keep his companies
always in good order.


Gent. In their marching should not the soldiers make stayings and pausings,
to ease and rest themselves.


Capt. It is very necessary that they make some Altoes or stands to ease them,
To make sundry altoes or stand, to ease and refresh the soldiers.
and that they might refresh themselves with such short victuals as they bear
along with them, and by a little reposing, they may breath and ease them of the
weariness of the way, and so conserve themselves in good order. For although
the soldier be never so much practiced and inured, and though the shot may
suffer the ways travel without any great pawsing, yet the pikemen, as men
laden with their armor, are not able to endure the same, especially in days
of scorching heat, Careful to make the Altoes or sta^ds in places convenient
and fit.
without danger of sickness, or brusing of their bodies. Therefore the
Campe-maister or Sergeant Mayor ought to be very considerate and careful, to
cause the stands to be made, as the commodity shall be offered, and necessity
require it, to the end, no disgrace might befall them. And for that it has
been sometimes seen, that the Sergeant Majors taking little regard here unto,
have conducted their Regiments very disorderly, Disorderly conduction causes of
overthrows.
making a long trace file or line (as it were) of them: the vantguard distant
from the rereward at the least three or four miles; in such sort, that by much
lesser numbers then the numbers of their own companies, they may many times,
be beaten and overthrown: as it chanced unto the French army in Lombardie,
being defeated by Antonio de Leyua, governor there, for the Emperor Charles,
at their marching toward Viagrass^, their Commander, Example at Via grassa in
Lombardie, when the Cou^tie Sanpaule was taken.

To make always the stands near fresh waters, and to be careful that the
soldiers straggle not.


the County Sanpaule being taken: for having passed too forward with his
vantguard, leaving behind him more then was convenient, the County Guido de
Rangon with the ariereward, who had the charge thereof. The Sergeant Mayor is
therefore to be careful, to make always his stands and Altoes near unto some
good waters, the officers taking great care and watchfulness, that in those
stoppes and stayings, the soldiers dismeanour not themselves, nor range not
disorderly unto the next adjoining places, nor run into orchardes, nor
gardens to rifle and spoil, for it is contrary to good military discipline.


Gent. When the camp does march, passes the Sergeant Mayor on foot or on
horseback?


Capt. The Sergeant Mayor is always to pass on horseback, and to what
effects.

If he meet the General, not to alight from his horse.


On horseback; For unto this officer only is his horse allowed him, and at all
times to ride, and into every part, and upon any occasion, and to trauerse and
pass through the Arrayes of the battle, visiting, providing, and ordering all
things concerning the same; and also to take the word from the General: and
being on horseback, if he chance to meet him, he is not to alight, as some
unskillful Sergeant Majors are wont to do. For the solicitude, care, and
readiness, apperteining to this office, is such, and so great, that it
requires he enjoy such a prehemine^ce. Nor yet to dismount from his horse in
the day of battle, and wherefore.
Neither yet in the day of battle ought he to dismount, nor enter into ra^ke
with the other Captains, as some will seem to say; for in the fight he
serves but for one, but being on horseback, he may value for many, in
viewing, reuiewing, ordering and redressing many and sundry occurra^ts, which
in such times are offered, importing many times the good success of the
victory, and therefore he is to go armed but lightly, His armor light with a
short tru^chion in his hand. No afront to the soldier, deserving it, to be
corrected by the Sergeant Mayor.
with a short baston or trunchion in his hand, which shall serve him to apart
horses, cariages and baggage, which oftentimes do disturb and hinder the
squadrons, and to show and point with the same some things that he commands,
and orders that he ordains to be done, and sometimes to correct therewith the
disobedience of unruly soldiers: whereat no man ought to be offended, or take
it for any affront, since it is done for corrections sake.


Gent. In what part ought the Sergeant Mayor to stand or go, when the army
does march?


Capt. The ordinary place of the Colonel is the vanguard; and so the Sergeant
Mayor, Where the Sergeant Mayor is to pass, when the army does march.
being his officer, by whom he sends his Commaundes unto the Captains,
Ensigns, and Officers, ought always to be near unto his person.


Gent. But if the enemy be known to be behind or after your rereward?


Capt. In such case he shall remain in the rereward, But if the enemy be
known to be in the rereward he is to pass in the rereward.

To reprehend the faults of the Sergeants.

If the arrayes be broken to be ready to redress them. No Captains or other
under officers to pass the word, stand; but the Sergea^t Mayor, or other
superior officer.

The Camp-maister as head of the Regiment, the Sergeant Mayor as guide of the
battle.

The foot soldiers to alight from their horses a mile ere they come to their
lodging.

The place of alodgement to be first viewed by the Sergea^t Mayor.

At their arrival to frame his squadrons in the place of arms. Orders to be
observed at the alodgement.

The place of arms to be kept all free and vnpestered.


but to assist there in such sort, as he forget not to make the Alto or stand
sometimes, and to stay until he has passed through all the arrayes of the
marching squadrons or army. And if he find that the Sergeants do not their
duties, in keeping the soldiers in good order and array, he shall severely
reprehend them for the same, being a thing of such importance, and that no
negligence be found in conseruing due order and array, so that none might be
broken if possible it were. And if the arrayes be broken, as sometimes it
happens by reason of the straight passages, it behooves him to be very ready
and vigilant to redress them again, and if to do the same it should need to
make a stand, an officer is presently to be sent to the Sergeant Mayor: and
neither Captain, Alferes, nor any other officer to pass the word, stand,
either to this effect or any other, as it oftentimes falls out, crying stand,
or march, from hand to hand, unless the necessity be so urgent, as not
permitting time to signify the same unto the Camp-maister or Sergeant Mayor.
For by reason of this abuse of every officer to pass and give the word, upon
every small occasion there do succeed many inconveniences, and is as much as
to usurp the prehemine^ce, which only is due to the Camp-master, as head of
the Regiment, and unto the Sergeant Mayor, as guide of the battle. And
therefore it is very necessary, that the soldier or officer which so shall
do, to be well punished for the same. And the Sergeant Mayor is to be careful,
that the Captains and soldiers which are on horseback, do alight, and set
themselves into the arrayes, a good mile before they come unto their
allodgement, the which ought to be first viewed by himself, or his coadiutor,
somewhat before the companies do arrive, and at their arriving to frame his
battle in the place thereof, and not to suffer any soldier to pass unto his
quarter, or to dismaunde himself in the order, until the whole Regiment be
all entered; and he, or his coadiutor in his name, coming unto the companies,
do license them to their lodgings and quarter.

The which ensigns are placed in the front of the quarter of every company,
all in one rank, and from thence downward the soldiers to be lodged. And the
Sergeant Mayor shall not permit nor suffer any carriage or baggage to be put
before them, nor pestered within the place of arms, neither any fire to be
there made, nor any other impediments; for from thence forward, it is only a
place of arms or assembly, and is to be left free and vnpestered for only
the battle when it is to be set.


THE SECOND DIALOGVE.
Wherein is declared, of the encamping of an army: the placing of the corpse de
guardes, scoutes and Sentinels: The Sergeant Mayor what he is to do, at the
first encampement of the army.

First to draw forth a corpse deguard some 80 pases without the ring of the
emcampement.


their several duties: the order of visiting and reuisiting the Sentinels, and
their relieuing and changing: the order of giving and taking the word, with
sundry other martial points, appertaining to such cases.

Gentleman. IN lodging and emcamping the regiments or army, the which being
settled, the Sergeant Mayor, what is he then to do?


Capt. Presently to draw forth a corpse de guard, about threescore or fourscore
pases from the face of the encamping, of some five and twenty or thirty
soldiers, and those are to be of one of the companies which was of the watch
the night before, since that until a fresh watch do enter, and the 24 hours
be fully accomplished, it appertains unto them that entered therein before,
except a whole company be set there by day to the ward; and in such case it
belongs to the companies of shot, The orders to be observed.
if there be any particular shot companies in the camp. And this Corpse de
guarde which is to be drawn out, is to be set in the self same place where
the company of the watch is to be placed at night.

To reknowledge the quarters and to reform all incombrances.
This being done, he is to reknowledge his quarters very well, and to see if
there be any need to raze plain any places, that the soldiers may
commodiously sallie forth to the Alarm for it falls out many times, that
the companies be lodged in orchards, gardens, vine-yards, and among bushes,
from whence they cannot come but with some difficulty, the which he is to
redress; and to make plain and easy any thing that may empeach and hinder
the speedy setting of the battle, and framing of the squadrons; which as well
for this purpose, as for the fortifying of the camp, and leuelling the ways
and passages for the artillery, with such other services, Pioners to amend
combersome ways.
there is always in the camp certain companies of pioners, the jurisdiction
of whom does belong unto the General of the artillery, or to the Campe-maister
General, unto whom he is to repair, to provide him with speed of such as
shall be needful.

To go to the Campe-maister general or his marshall, to receive orders from
him to sundry purposes; as for the watch, the ward, guard for the munition, to
scout, and discover, who to provide wood, and to assist in trenching.

Being with his own regiment alone, what he is to do.

The Sentinels how to be placed. To consult with other officers.


And if the whole army be there, he is to go unto the Camp-maister General, and
know of him how many ensigns of his regiment are to be put to the watch, and
in what place or part, and what companies are to guard the munition, and in
other most convenient places for the service and security of the camp; and
such as are to go abroad to discover, and to scout, and who are to provide
wood, water, and other necessaries; and what companies are to assist in making
the trenches, and bulwarks, and other fortifications, reparting the same
works amongst all the bands of his regiment (for unworthy is he the name of a
soldier, which will not put to his helping hand in such cases) in sort that
every one have their share of the labor in order. But if he be with his own
regiment alone, it then concerns him to reknowledge, foresee, and to provide
and give order for all: and to place the Sentinels in such order and distance,
that no man may pass out, nor enter into the quarters of the alodgement
without their view and sight. And if his regiment be jointly with the other
regiments or tertios of the same nation, or of another, he is to conioyne with
the other Sergeant Majors, and consult, counsel, and concur with them
touching the placing of the gards and Sentinels: so that there may be found no
negligence nor imperfection, since all this office consists in care,
vigilancie, readiness, and order.

To go to the General for the word, and orders to be observed.
It concerns him also, to go unto the General for the word, and to receive
the order and course to be followed the next day, and to go presently unto the
Campe-maister to show him thereof: although that sometimes the Campe-maisters
or Colonels themselves do take the word and order from the General, and give
the same unto the Sergeant Majors, yet properly the doing thereof does
appertain to the Sergeant Mayor his office.

To have great care in placing the watches and gards.
And as touching the watches and gards, he ought to have great consideration,
not to place them, if the enemy be at hand, before the entering in of the night:
for he ought to prevent, if possible it might be, that the enemy perceive not
where he sets his watches and Sentinels.

And when it were time he shall call together the company or companies, To
fore advertise the soldiers by the drum mayor.

To reknowledge and view the places of guard and Sentinels.

To appoint them the order in going the roundes

To visit and reuisit all the aforesaid orders.

To reprehend the faulty.

The negligence of Commanders breeds contempt in soldiers.

The encampement to be entrenched.

Where the corpse de guard to be set. Natural fence, good.


which should be of the watch; the which are to be advertised thereof from the
morning, by the Drum Mayor of the regiment, and he is then to set them in
their places, the which as I said, ought to be reknowledged and viewed, and
showed unto the Sergeants of such companies where they are to place their
Sentinels, and he is to appoint them what order they are to keep in going
their roundes: always reserving a particular care, to visit and reuisit all
the before appointed matters and orders.

And if he shall find any negligence or carelessness in such officers, he is to
reprehend and chasten them with such severity as the case and cause shall
require, for in the not executing the same, he becomes to be contemned,
unrespected, and his commandes and orders misprised: and so by consequence to
introduce a very corrupt discipline.


Gent. What distance from the quarters and camp should the gards and watches
be placed and set.


Capt. In encamping an army, it is accustomed most commonly to entrench round
about the quarters thereof, for more security and strength to the allodgement:
and when it is so, the companies which have the ward, are always to sallie to
guard the trenches, which is the wall of the camp. But in case there be no
trenches, the Corpse de guard (in mine opinion) is not to be placed above 70, or
80, pases distance (as I have said before) from the front of the allodgements
in his place of arms; yet sometimes there be found ditches, bottoms, and
valleys so strong, that it shall be good for the gards to be placed there,
although they be farther distant off, Great silence is to be kept in the body
of the watch.
then I speak of; for such strengths by nature do serve and stand in steed of
ditches and trenches. But not finding such natural fences, the watches are to
be placed, as before I have said. For thus, as well for the security of the
quarters, as for (if need should require) to succor those companies, it is
better they be placed near then far off. And it is to be noted, as a thing
of great importance, that great silence be kept in the body of the watch, at
the least all rumor and loud noises are to be excluded, The Sentinels what
distance asunder, and from the Corpse de guard.
and in their conuersations to talk modestly, stilly, and with low voices.


Gent. And the Sentinels, what distance should they stand from the Corpse de
guard?


Capt. About thirty pases, The Sentinels the wall of the camp, therefore
near together.
little more or less.


Gent. And how far the one from the other?


Capt. There ought to be no more distance betwixt them, then that they may
easily discern one an other, how dark soever the night be. For the Sentinels,
being the wall of the camp, and which do serve that no body may enter in, nor
pass out thereof, Sentinels better double the^ single.
without being seen and discovered, now if they should be placed too wide a
distance off, that would not follow, which is pretended.


Gent. And those Sentinels are they to be single? The Sentinel vigilant,
silent and careful.



Capt. No, but double, for four eyes may see and discern better then two, and
because, if sleep do assail them, or could, the one (oppressed with sleep)
might walk, and the other stand vigilant at the watch, with all stillness and
silence, and without talking, with open eyes, and ready listening ears; for
many times it chances to hear that, which the obscurenesse of the night will
not suffer to see: and if they do perceive, In hearing or seeing any thing what
the Sentinel is to do.
hear, or see any thing, whereof they ought to give advise to the officers,
let the one go thither, and the other stay, and not to leave the Sentinel post
forsaken: and therefore, for these and such like causes, it is much more safer,
requisite, The single Sentinels, where.
and needful that they be double. But those which are set yet 30 pases
farther, are to be single, which of some are improperly called forlorn
Sentinels, not having the word, as the doubles have, the which are to be placed
in the same distance, His duty what to do.
as are the first, and command and order given, that in descrying any thing,
they are to retire to the post of the double Sentinels, and giving advise and
notice of what they heard or saw, are to return to their places, without
giving the Alarm: Not to give Alarm, but upon reasonable cause. When to give
the Alarm.

Fear and imaginations do disturb men's senses.


but in case that there were any notable number of horse or foot discovered,
in retiring unto the double Sentinels, and all three perceiving the same for
certain, and affirming it, then the Alarm is to be stricken, and in other
sort, not: For many times, unto one man alone, fear or imagination does cause
few people to seem many, and many things to seem to be, which are not
indeed: and at no time, is the Alarm to be stricken in the camp without good
and urgent cause. For remedy whereof it is a matter of great importance, that
the Sergeant Mayor, To visit and reuisite the Sentinels, at sundry hours in
the night, to good effects.
every night, at different hours, do ordinarily visit and reuisite the
watches and Sentinels, as well to see that they observe and perform his orders
and commaundes, as to the end that the officers and soldiers, understanding
his courses taken, be more vigilant and careful in their watches, fearing to
be punished if they incur into any defaults and negligences.


Gent. What call you the forlorn Sentinel, since you say, they are improperly
so termed? The proper forlorn Sentinel, what it is.



Capt. The proper forlorn Sentinel is that, which is set, either on
horseback or foot, as necessity shall require, near unto the enemies
camp; to the end, to epsy and give advise if any companies or troops shall
sallie thereout, or if the camp do remove secretly. And this such Sentinel is
to be placed in some part so near unto the enemy, that being discryed and
seen, he shall with great difficulty retire and escape: An example.
and is never set but upon necessity of such like aduises: As when Frauncis
the French king, did relieve and victual Landresie, which the Emperor Charles
held besieged, who determined to give him battle the next day before he were
departed; and so Don Fernando de Gonzaga, who was General, commanded Captain
Salazar that he should that night put himself near unto the enemies camp,
thereby to understand their desseignes and intents: but he missed to effect the
same. The forlorn Se^tinell, not to have the word but a different Contersigne.
So the French retired in safety and well without any perceiving thereof. And
thus these Sentinels have not the word that is kept in our camp, for the
inconvenience that might hap, if being taken by the enemy, and corrupted with
rewards or otherwise, they thereby might know our word: but he ought to have a
different contersigne, that when he returns, he may be known thereby.


Gent. What order is observed in the day of the Word?


Capt. The order to be observed in the day of the word.
I have already told you, that the Sergeant Mayor does take the same from the
General, and gives it unto the Sergeants, and they unto the Caporals and
Sentinels: but with this consideration, that the Sergeant Mayor give not the
same unto the Sergeants, being in Campania, until the very instant that they
set the Sentinels and watch: And if they be in town of garrison, Citadell, or
Fortress of defense, not until the shutting in of the gates, and the
Sergeants and Caporals not to give it unto the Sentinels, until the very point
of their placing at their stands or posts. With some the word does pass no
further then the Caporals. Dangerous to trust the word with raw soldiers.



Gent. You say here, that the Se^tinels should have the Word; but I have heard
say, that among our English seruitours in the Low Countries, the Word passes
no further then the Caporals; and the Sentinels not to have the Word at all.


Capt. Indeed among raw soldiers there is good reason for the same, for the
sundry inconuenie^ces that might otherwise follow thereon. But with the Spanish
Tercios, where they be experimented men, as well in military actions, as in
firm loyalty to their king, this order has been observed, as I speak of.


Gent. Then the Caporall having the Word, and the Sentinel, not: what is the
Sentinel to do, when occasion is to demand the Word? The Sentinel not having
the word, what to do.



Capt. The Sentinel finding any occasion, is to cause the party to stand, and
presently with an audible voice to call his Caporall; who with speed, from the
Corpse de guard, repaireth to the Se^tinels post, and there himself takes the
Word.


Gent. What order is observed among the officers and soldiers in taking the
Word the one from the other? being a thing of such importance, we would gladly
know it.


Capt. When any Officer or Captain of the Round, The order to be observed in
taking the word, by the officers, and soldiers the one from the other. The
shot; how? The pike; in what manner?

The officer or Round; ought to give the word unto the Sentinel first.

The soldier set at Sentinel, not bound to reknowledge any person, without
giving the word.

The word is the mean in war to exclude all deceipts.

The sight and hearing, easily deceived, especially by night. Example.

A foul error.


will, upon any occasion, draw near unto the Sentinel, the Sentinel, being a
shot, ought to cock his burning match, having the piece charged and primed, and
so to present it, and being a pike man to Terciar or charge his pike, and no
farther off, then that with so low a voice, as they may but understand one
another, to demand the Word, and in like order and consideration ought the
officer or Round to give it unto the Se^tinell, when he comes to visit it;
the which Sentinel, ought by no means to suffer any person to come near unto
him, except he give him first the Word, no although he knew him to be his
Captain or Sergeant Mayor, or Camp-maister: for the soldier being set at the
Sentinel is not bound to acknowledge any person, for to permit him to approach
unto him, but such as shall give him the Word which was given by the General,
and so to the guardes, by the mouth of the Sergeant Mayor: which is the ^eanes
and instrument used in wars, to exclude all suspectes, and decits: For we
see, the sight and hearing is easily deceived, although it be by day, then how
much more by night; as was well to be seen by Publius Considius one of Caesar's
Captains, a man esteemed for valiant and skillful (as one who had served in
the armies of Lucius Sylla, and Marcus Crassus) whom Caesar sending to
reknowledge and view the camp of the Heluetians his enemies, with certain
spies, and to see if Titus Labienus had gained and possessed a hill, whereunto
Caesar had sent him, he missed and erred so much in the reknowledging thereof,
that he came running unto Caesar, and told him, that the hill, which he had
commanded Titus Labienus to gain, was already possessed by the enemy, being
quite the contrary; which caused that Caesar failed to defeat the enemy that
day. And therefore in cases of such importance, there ought great care and
consideration to be had.

And again the officer or Round, when he goes visiting the post or Sentinels,
if he find them ready and vigilant (being that which is expected) he has no
need to approach always unto them, The Round finding the Sentinel vigila^t,
need not always approach near him.
but to pass along and visit the rest: and if he find them all with this
watchfulness and ready, let him return to his Corpse de guard.


Gent. I have heard say, that the Sentinel ought not to suffer any person to
pass by without giving him the word; and me thinks that you say, that the
officer or Round, finding the Sentinel waking and vigilant, and having seen
them, may return to his Corpse de guard without giving the Word.


Capt. The Sentinel ought to suffer none to pass in or out of the camp
without giving the word.

The officer or Round.


The obligation and duty of the Sentinel is, not to permit any person to pass
in or out from the camp, without giving him first the word, neither yet to
come near where he stands: but if the officer or Round do pass through the
Sentinels within distance of 8 or 10 pases, it is sufficient that he speak,
and pass by, and is not bound to give the Word. But if in case they were to
come from out of the camp, he is in no wise to suffer them to come near to
reknowledge him, although it were at the abouesaid distance without giving him
the Word: and if happily such person will not give it, Refusing to give the
word, he may discharge as at an enemy.

How to deal with such as come into the camp.


he may discharge at him, as at his enemy. And although he give him the Word,
he is not to permit him to enter freely into the camp, but to accompany him
unto the double Sentinels, and consigne him unto them, for that one of the^ may
forthwith, convey him to the Corpo de guardia, and there deliver him to the
Sergeant, or Alferes, or to the Captain of the company, who are bound to give
present advise thereof unto the Sergeant Mayor, unto whom it concerns to
convey him to the Camp-maister, or General, if the case so require.


Gent. When the Alarm is given, what the Se^tinels are to do.
When the Alarm is given, are all the Sentinels to retire to their Corpse de
guards.


Capt. No sir; for they never should forsake their posts without license of
their officer, and that they do withdraw them, except those which do give the
Alarm; who seeing so great a fury of the enemies to come upon them, which
they are not able to withstand, that then indeed they ought to retire to their
Corpse de guards?


Gent. In such occasions do all the Ensigns, which are at the watch make a
squadron together, When the Alarm is given, what order is to be taken with the
ensigns or companies.

The Generals guard, and guard of the munition, not to stir.

To frame the squadrons with all diligence.

To enquire the cause of the Alarm.

To advertise the General and Camp-maister thereof.

The companies set in squadron not to disseuer without license from the
General.

To return the Sentinels to their posts, or stations.


or every one apart?


Capt. They all join together in that Corpse de guard, which stands most
commodious for a place of arms, the which the Sergeant Mayor ought to show
them before hand; whither also the rest, which are in their quarters, should
repair; but not those which are guarde to the General, nor those that do guard
the munitio^, nor out of the place of arms, or at the guarde of the quarters,
for those are not to leave their posts or stations; but of the others the
Sergeant Mayor shall frame his battle or squadron with all possible speed and
diligence: and then shall presently enquire the cause of the Alarm, the which
being known, he shall presently by his officers, give advise unto the
Regiments next unto him, and above all, he is to advertise his Camp-maister and
General; without order from whom, the companies already set in battle may not
return to their quarters and guardes. And so the Sergeant Mayor, after they be
fully satisfied and assured that they may disba^d and break up, he ought to
demand license of the General for the same, and shall return to set his
posts as before they were. And if he shall perceive it to be needful to
reenforce and strengthen his guardes, he ought to do it with more or less
numbers, as the necessity shall require it.


Gent. I have heard that some Sergeant Majors do draw out of their principal
Corpse de guards where their ensigns and companies do stand, and the first
Se^tinels, other small Corpse de gards; To draw out of the grand Corpse de guard,
other small Corpse de guards.

The small Corpse de guard to what effect.


but I know not to what end?


Capt. That Sergeant Mayor does not amiss: for that Corpse de guard is of those
soldiers which are for the Sentinels, and Round that night; for that the
officer, when he is to relieve and change them, may find them more ready. And
these Corpse de guardes do serve also, that the Sentinels may have succor near
at hand, if need should require: and again, they help also to keep the
guardes more vigilant, and the soldiers more ready to the service of their
ensigns.


THE THIRD DIALOGVE.
Wherein is declared, some orders to be observed by the Sergeant Mayor, in the
very fact of arms: and in surprises and Camisadas, and Ambuscados: and to be a
general procurer of the soldiers good.

Gentleman. WHat orders is the Sergeant Mayor to observe, in the times of fight
with the enemy?


Capt. The Sergeant Mayor cannot keep any certain rule therein, considering
the diversity of chances, stratagems and policies, which in every moment do
happen in war.

But in the action of battle, he is to see, and to foresee (as before I said)
as well their own, as their enemies orders, and disorders; to redress with
all valor, readiness, and skill, What the Sergeant Mayor is to do in the fact
of battle.
what is needful in his own squadrons, and to epsy every advantage upon the
enemy: and valiantly to animate, order and encourage his soldiers to valor,
virtue and honor; and that with courageous and honorable words: and if by
fortune any of his squadrons be disordered and broken, he must with all
speediness, courage, and skill redress the same.


Gent. But if any men in the ranks of his squadrons be hurt or slain, either
by the enemies great shot, or otherwise, so that wanting there those men which
so are slain or hurt, how are these ranks to be refurnished, so that it may
be done without confusion?


Capt. The order of the Romans, The Romans order was to fight in
battallions. The Greeks did fight in Phalangia, or square. Men slain or hurt
in the first ranks, how to reform the ranks. The fore ranks to be always
kept full.
as I have already said, was to fight in order of battallions, the one to
second the other, which is a very strong order of fight, were men expert and
skillful therein: And the manner of the Greeks was in Phalangia; which is a
just square of men, whom we do therein imitate: which manner of square of men
is, each man standing consequently in rank, and in file one after other: so
that if any of the first files or ranks be slain or hurt, the next soldier
succeeding the same man hurt or slain, is to step up into his place and room,
and the next after to follow him; and so successively one to follow another,
even unto the center or train of the squadron: in such sort that always the
foremost ranks be fully furnished.


Gent. And what is to be done with those hurt and slain men, for me thinks
they should be looked unto. officers appointed to withdraw hurt and slain men
out of the battle.



Capt. The Spaniardes have a laudable custom, which is, that they have
certain men appointed of purpose, to retract and draw forth of the squadrons,
such men as be hurt, and to bring them unto the chirurgians: and for such as
be slain right out, to convey them away, so that their slain numbers is
never lightly known to the enemy. Which order I would wish to be received and
observed amongst us.


Gent. What other parts are there yet in him to be required?


Capt. To be skillful in giving a Camisada.

Example.

To conduct the soldiers with great silence unto the Camisada.

To inuest their shirtes.

To perform with resolution, and all celerity.

In such difficult attempts the Sergeant Mayor to be conductor.

Example.

In Ambuscados the soldiers to be silent and ready.

To charge suddenly.

The Sergeant Mayor to be solicitous with the general for armor, and other
necessaries for his regiment.

How the same to be reparted.

To be the universal procurer of the soldiers good.

Hurt or sick men to be conveyed to the hospitals.

All under officers to assist the Sergeant Mayor.

The carriage-maisters.

The Harbingers.

The Sergeants.

Lieutenant and Alferes.

Drum Mayor.

Caporals of the field.

The Sergeant Majors Coadiutors.


Moreover the Sergeant Mayor ought to be very expert, and to be very skillful,
and well advised, in the course which is to be kept in giving a camisada: as
that was, which was given unto the Prince of Oranges army by the Spaniards,
when he came to relieve grave Lodwike his brother, being besieged within Mouns
in Henault, by Duke d'Alua, which was such, that he was feign to raise his
camp, and retire toward Germany. Now in such cases, the Sergeant Mayor must
conduct his soldiers with great silence, even to the place of the enemies
camp, and there shall he command them to put their shirtes upon their armor,
at one instant making ready to effect their desseignes, whereunto they shall
pass with all speed and resolution, before that the enemy may be aduertized
thereof by their Sentinels. And also when other great occasions are offered,
where it is needful to carry the soldiers with great silence, secrecy, and
stillness, he is to be their guide; as did the Sergeant Mayor Valleio, when
Mondragon with his regiment passed over the river Schalt, to succor their
friends besieges in Targoes.

And in Ambuscados, which are to be done in places of covert; as woods,
thickets, hollow ways, or hills, he is to be careful that the soldiers be
silent and without noise, for not to be discovered, until their espials and
watches, appointed for that purpose, do give them the sign of the convenient
time of their sudden charge upon the enemy.

Also it is the Sergeant Majors part to be sollicitous and diligent with the
prince or Captain General of the army, and the other superior officers, for
the providing of armor, and other necessaries for the companies of his
regiment, and for the other munitions of powder, match, lead, and victuals: the
which he shall cause to be reparted unto the Sergeants of the bands, to be by
them delivered unto the Caporals, who are to distribute the same among the
companies.

And to conclude, he ought to be the universal procurer of the soldiers good,
procuring their pays, and that they be succored in their necessities and
wants. And if there be any hurt men or sick, he is to procure that they may
be carried with all care, unto the hospitals or such places deputed for the
same, providing them of cariages, necessaries, and guides if need require. To
do all the which he has all the officers of the regiment for helpers and
ministers; which are to assist and obey him, For the cariage-maister is to
furnish him with carts, and cariages as shall be needful, and the furrier
mayor, to provide and bring munition at the day of battle: and the Sergeants
to assist him, to set the squadrons and to keep the companies in order and
array: and the ensigns and Lieutenants to give and notify the orders and
commandes to the gards for the service of the companies: and the drum mayor
to proclaim and sound the general commandes, bandos, and laws of the field,
and to give warning unto the Captains, and companies, which are to have the
watch: and the Caporals of the field, being his Coadiutors, to assist and help
him in all matters, and actions general touching his office, with whom he is
to consult, and communicate his proper authority unto the best experimented of
them (with leave of his superior commanders) and unto which Coadiutor the
Captains and officers ought to be obedient, The Sergeant Majors Coadiutor.
as unto the Sergeant Mayor him self, receiving also from him their order and
commaundes: and therefore it behooves that he be a very sufficient person, of
good deserts, and known to be such; to the end, that the respect which is
borne to him for his office sake, be not lost, if the parts requisite in such
a personage be not found in him. It touches not only the Sergeant Mayor to be
a general master of all Military discipline, The Sergeant Mayor a general
master of all military discipline. A procurer of the soldiers souls health
in general. Banishing all public crimes, and common offenders.
and the universal procurer of all necessary things for the soldiers bodies
(as I have said) but he is also precisely bound to be the procurer of their
souls health, by punishing and banishing all public crimes and sins out of
every Band and Company, as lewd keepers of common women, thieves, pilferers,
disordered persons, and drunkardes, bawdes and brawlers, and all such as live
infamousely, and above all to be very careful not to suffer any blasphemer,
yea, if it were possible, not to have any swearing by the name of God, since
that with all these sins the divine Majesty is highly offended: which if
herein he have the care that is required, he shall not fail to be well
reputed, The reward of a good officer, both in heaven and earth.
favored and esteemed of the Prince, under whose ensigns he warreth, and also
be blessed of God, both in heaven and earth.


THE FOWERTH DIALOGVE.
Wherein is treated of the office, duty and parts of a Sergeant Mayor,
entering with his regiment into a fortress or town of garrison, to keep the
same: and the orders therein to be observed, both of officers and soldiers.

Gentleman. GOod Captain, you have very well and largely declared the office,
parts and duties of a Sergeant Mayor, lying in the field and Camp; wherefore I
pray let us now entreat you to show the parts of his office entering with his
regiment into a fortress or town of garrison, to defend and keep the same.


Capt. Having found you so kind and courteous (Gentlemen) I can do no less but
endeavor my self to content you in what I may: The Sergeant Mayor entering with
his regiment into any Fort or town of strength to keep the same, what he is
to do.

1. To reknowledge the place well. 2. The places necessary for the Corpse de
guards, Sentinels, and Rounds. 3. The place of assembly.
To divide the companies, and the orders to be observed he must give in writing
unto ever Captain.


and therefore I say, that when any regiment does enter into any fortress,
town, or castle, to reside there for the defense thereof, the Sergeant Mayor
is presently to reknowledge and view every part of the same, both within and
without, and to consider the parts most necessary where to place the Corpse de
guards, and to set the Sentinels: and also to mark the most conuenientest
places for the Rounds to pass, and to see the place or places of assembly or
Arms, whereunto the Captains and Companies are to gather and assemble, if in
case any alarmes be given: and this being done, he is presently to divide the
Companies according as he shall see it most convenient for the guard and
custody of the place. And of this repartition (communicating it first unto his
Colonel) he is to give an order and instruction in writing, firmed with his
hand unto the Captains and Ensigns of every Company, reserving a copy
thereof himself, to the end that no officer might with reason excuse
himself, if he should chance to commit any fault or negligence in any thing
touching the guard of that which was commanded him, seeing it was delivered
him in writing.

Great care to be had in dividing the guardes.
And because there is great consideration and care to be had in dividing the
guardes of a Fort, Hold, and Town of defense, chiefly if any enemy army be
expected to the same, notwithstanding that in all other times this care and
foresight is to be observed in this function: No company to have any one place
assigned them to k^epe customably.

The reasons.

In the evening to assemble the companies of the watch.

To draw lots, or cast dice for the quarters.

No company nor squadras to know their quarter until the very hour of seting
the watch.

To consider whether the places for the Corpse de guard be commodious.

Reparations to be done.

Garrits, and watch houses.

The walks for the Roundes to be made commodious.


he should in no case assign unto every company the part of the wall or
bulwark which they are ordinarily to keep: for the most often that towns
have been taken by practice, tracto, or treason, the principal cause has
been, that the Sentinel or officer, which so sells the place, has known
the part and quarter where ordinarily he was to guard and watch, whereof we
have many examples: and therefore he ought to assemble, and gather into the
place every evening, the companies which are to be that night of the watch,
and that they draw lots, or cast the dice for the quarters which shall concern
them to keep: and the troops or squadraes, and Sentinels shall observe the
same order: in such sort that neither any company, may foreknow his quarter,
nor yet the squadra, what part of the wall does appertain unto them, until
the very hour that the watches be set, and placed in the same.

Now this partition being made (as is said) he is to consider very well,
whether the Corpse de guard, where the company or companies are to enter into
and stand, be fit and commodious; and also those of the gates and caualleros.
And if they have need of repairing, let him cause it forthwith to be done,
and also the garrits and watch houses, where the posts and Sentinels are to be
placed, and whether they be sufficient to defend and keep out the rain: and
this to be done at the charge of the city or town, as is accustomed. And if
the Rounds cannot commodiously pass round about the walls, he is to cause it to
be accommodated forthwith. And must see, that there be sufficient store of
torches, cressets, linkes, and lanthornes, as well to be kept in the Corpse de
guard, as for the roundes and counter roundes. In placing the companies which
are to have the watch, To provide store of torches and lights for the night.

To set the watch an hour before night.

No soldier suffered to disarme himself until the shutting in of the gates.

The soldiers not to disarme until the Alferes be unarmed.


the Sergeant Majors do use different orders; for some do set them in the
morning, and others in the evening; sooner, or later, as they shall think
good. But in mine opinion, if necessity did not otherwise constrain, I would
always set them (especially in summer time) an hour before the sun setting,
as well for that the soldier should come supped, and so should have no
occasion therefore to go out of the watch, as for that until the shutting in
of the gates, no soldier should be permitted to disarme himself, giving them
to understand how foul it is, and ill beseeming the profession of a soldier,
that no sooner they are entered into the Corpse de guard, but that their Corslets
be hanged up upon the walls: yea and some do use it in the Camp, having the
enemies army at hand, the which fault is intolerable, and they ought not to do
it, until they see their Alferes disarmed first, on whom they ought to fix
their eyes, to imitate, as they do on their ensigns in the field, The orders
to be observed at the opening of the gates.
to follow.

At the opening of the Gates, the Sergeant Mayor ought to appoint the Sergea^t
or Sergeants, that be of the guard, that they be present at the shutting and
opening of the same, and the soldiers always to betake them to their arms,
not suffering any to carry cloak, mantle or such like thing, to trouble them
at that instant, and that there first pass forth at the wicket (which serves
for that purpose) five or six soldiers, who shall discover, take knowledge,
and view, seventy or eighty pases out abroad into the fields: and finding
all things safe and secure, Not suffering the people to pass out or in by
throngs.
the gates shall be opened, first suffering the in-people to pass forth, and
that not by throngs, as commonly is used, but by little and little orderly;
especially if there be cariages, carts, or baggage: and until all those be
passed out, he shall suffer none to enter in, neither permit them to approach
nigh unto the gates. And the issuing out of the people being ended, with the
like regard and order ought the out-people to enter; always having in the
Corpse de guard of the gate, both by day and night, two Sentinels, one at the
weapons, and the other in the field; and that every one of these should have a
Spontone, The Sentinel to have a Spontone.
or a long sharp iron, to the end, that when any waine, wagon, or cart, laden
with hay or such like, do pass by, he may therewith thrust the same thorough,
to know if there be any deceit therein hidden. For a Garrison may easily be
deceived by such guiles and stratagemes. Like as Caesar de Napolie did attempt
at Turine, Example of a practice.
although he effected it not, being prevented by the advice and diligence of a
Smith, an inhabiter of that place.

He is to cause wood to be provided for all the guardes, To provide wood for
the corpse de guard.

Places to be provided in the corpse de guard to acco^modate the arms


although that cold weather constrain it not, for that to light their matches
it is always needful to have fire. And that in the Corpse de guard there be
place commodious to hang up their Corslets, and to accommodate their pieces in
good order: seeing not only that it is necessary, that the soldiers may with
speed and readiness betake them to their Arms, if in case the Alarm be
stricken, but also to avoid all confusion, and also for the adorning of the
Corpse de guard.

And when the Ensigns or companies shall enter for guard or watch into the
place, the Sergeant Mayor is to be present, and he ought not to suffer then
any gaming Tables; Not to suffer any gaming tables the watch entering into the
place.

To receive their colors with great respect and reverence.

To keep good account of the number of the soldiers.


but the soldiers to receive in their Colors with great respect and
reverence, since they represent the authority Royal: and in doing the
contrary, it repugneth all good Military discipline. And he is to keep a
good account and reckening with the soldiers that serve in every Company,
according to the muster that they made, whereof he is to have feed and
certificate from the Pay-maister or Treasurer, and knowing thereby, that they
bring to the guard and watch, much lesser number of people then they receive
pay for, he ought to take a reckening of the officers of the Companies, and for
being careless herein, many soldiers do serve many times but badly. And he
ought not to suffer, that in their entering in or going out from the watch, To
have regard that their Arms be complete and good, and inconvenient order.
there want any piece of their Corslets, or Morian to the shot, neither that
they serve with rustie armor, nor of the antique fashion; neither that any
Pike do want his head, cheeks, or arming; for that in having them, it does not
only beautify the squadron, but it makes it to seem more then it is, All
apparitions yielding terror to the enemy, to be esteemed.
which is a circumstance of great importance, since all the apparitions which
may yield terror to the enemy, are to be esteemed, and much accounted of.


Gent. In what order do the Ensigns enter into the place?


Capt. Unto the Corpse de guard, The orders to be observed by the companies
entering into the Corpse de guard.
the shot goes always in the Vantgard, and there arriving, do open, making a
lane or street, betwixt the which the Pikes do enter, and march in their
Arrayes: and (in mine opinion) they should not carry them advanced up, Another
order set down in folio 46.
as I have many times seen used, but they should pass in betwixt the shot,
with their pikes on their shoulders, marching as they come; and at their
ariuing, unto the head of the shot where the Captain stands, without opening
or disaraying, and then advance their pikes, abiding in their ranks, and so
from hand to hand, each rank to do the like: and then the shot at that
arriving and rearing of their pikes, shall draw near and empale the first
ranks on each side, and so consequently the rest, unto the end of this order;
in such sort that the squadron may remain formed and garnished. Two companies
entering at once into the Corpse de guard.
And if by chance two companies do come at once into the place, as many times
it chances, then ought they jointly to form the squadron, with their shot on
each flank, and the corslets not to break their arrayes, aduertising that
always the ensigns be in the center thereof.


Gent. And the companies which stand at the ward, what are they to do when the
others do enter?


Capt. They must attend ready armed and arms in hand, standing upon one side
of the Corpse de guard, The companies which were at the watch, what to do.
until that those companies which do enter, have finished their squadron; and
then do they march in order toward their lodging, accompanying first their
Colors home.

And the Sergeant Mayor is to be careful, to visit every day the Corpse de
guards, The Sergeant Mayor is to visit the Corpse de guard.
whereby he shall cause, that neither the soldiers nor officers do absent
themselves from their watch, and that there be no brawles nor brables therein.
And it does import much, that he do the like in the Roundes and counter
Roundes.

Unruly soldiers to be punished.
And if any should dismeanor himself, breeding question or braule, either in
word or deed, he is severely to be punished, for the great inconveniences that
may ensue thereupon, being so many men together with weapon in hand.

And he is to provide that the Roundes and counter Roundes be of more or less
men, The Roundes and counter Roundes.
or more or less continued, according as need shall require: but they never
should return to their Colors from whence they departed, until they have
furnished their quarter, Their dut^es and charge.
the which they ought to bestow and spend in giving turns about the walls, and
veiwing the vigilance and carfulness of the Sentinels: and the like ought
those to do, which do go their Roundes in the town.


Gent. When the Roundes and counter Roundes do meet, as well in the camp as
in a Castle,, who is to give the Word one to the other first?


Capt. The counter Roundes are most commonly of officers, and therefore by
reason and duty the Round is to give place, The Round is to give the Word
first unto the counter Round.
and to give the Word first unto the counter Round. But for as much as
Captains themselves do use to round in the ordenary quarters, it is
convenient, to the end that none may justly be agrieued, and to disbarre all
odds and inconveniences, that the Sergeant Mayor (as a person, unto whose
charge and office is the disposing and appointing of the guards, The Sergeant
Mayor is to give order for this point.
Roundes, and counter Roundes) do give order unto the companies in what manner
they are to behave themselves in this particular point: which shall be, that
always the Round to give place, and give the Word unto the counter Round: and
thence forth shall appoint the counter Roundes to be of officers of the
companies, as is accustomed.

And in case that in the one and the other there be officers, or that both be
of soldiers, it is great reason that the Round do yield and give the Word
first, for that the counter Rounds be of more pre-eminence: The counter Rounds
duty and charge.
the which are not only ordained to do the same which do the Roundes: which is
to see unto the care and vigilancie of the guardes and Sentinels, but they are
also ordained to see if the Roundes do fail in their duties: The Governor and
Sergeant Mayor rounding extraordinarily is to give the Word first unto the
Round.

The Round is to give the Word first unto the Sentinel, and to take account of
a such as they shall meet.

If any pass out of the forest by night, to give aduertisment thereof.

The guard not to retire by day till an officer come to remove them.

To visit and revisit al things often and as different hours.

To reprehend with gravity and courteous speeches.


But this is to be understood in case that the supra Roundes be as ordenary as
the Roundes: for that when the Colonel or Governor of the fort, or the
Sergeant Mayor do extraordinarily visit and Round, as they are wont to do,
then is it their part to give the Word unto the Round: the which being not
advertised that they be any supra Round, he is bound to give the Word unto none
but only unto the Sentinel: and all those which he shall meet, he ought to
view, and take account of them, of that which they do, and whither they go;
apprehending such as he shall find faulty, or any other suspected person that
he shall fortune to meet. And if by chance there pass any body by night out
of the fort or garrison, as commonly it happens, it is needful to advertise
the Sergeant Mayor thereof, who should thereupon take order to change the Word
which the watch had, for the inconvenience that might happen for not doing the
same.


Gent. And the guardes by day, may they retire without farther order?


Capt. No truly, until the Sergeant Mayor, or his Coadiutor, do come to
withdraw them in such manner as they were set, placing the guardes that are to
remain there by day. And for as much as I have spoken very much touching this
officer, I will conclude with saying, that he ought to visit and reuisite at
diverse and different hours, all things that he has provided, after their
well ordering; and see how they be performed, reprehending and punishing what
he shall find worthy punishment. But he ought to do this in good and courteous
sort, and sober manner, knowing how to command with sweet and gentle words,
having a natural grace thereunto, and gravity, whereby to be obeyed, in such
sort, that when he would determine to execute his desseignes, and his
superiors charges and commandes, all the soldiers and officers might bear
him that due respect and obedience, The drum is the voice of the commander.

To provide good Drummers.


which should be needful to bring the same to effect. Finally, let the
Sergeant Mayor be very careful to provide good drummers, and men skillful in
their art, especially their Drum Majors; for the drum is the voice of the
commander in the field: and besides their skill with the drum, to be men of
good capacity and judgment; also to speak sundry languages, being behouefull
for many important occasions wherein they are to be employed.


Gent. Captain, Many good parts ought to be in the p^rsonage of a Sergeant
Mayor.
you have thoroughly discoursed touching the office of a Sergeant Mayor; whereby
is to be understood how many great and good parts ought to be in the personage
called to this martial function. Now I pray tell what degree of office comes
next.


THE FIRST DIALOGVE.
Wherein is declared the Election, Office, parts and duties of a Camp master
or Colonel, and from whence these names Colonel, and Camp-maister did spring,
with some discourse touching the nature of the Spaniardes.

The Camp-maister or Colonel, his Election and Office.
Gentlemen. THe next officer, in superior degree, is the Camp-maister or
Colonel. The election of this officer is made by the Prince, with the advice
of his Council of state and war. His office is, to be Commander and
Chiefteine over the Captains, and all the other officers of his Tertio or
Regiment: The Colonel his office and Command is over the Captains and
soldiers of his regiment.
having jurisdiction and dominion over them all. Whereby may be inferred and
gathered the parts and qualities which ought to be in him, and the great skill
and experience in war; as one who ought to exceed them all, for to know how
to command, rule, and govern them, with authority, prudence and valor. And
for as much as in many occurrants and occasions, growing and presented in
wars, he ought to know how to perform the parts and office of a Lord high
General, Principal parts in a Colonel.
being alone with the companies of his own Regiment, as when his General
commands him to the battery, or siege of any fort or City, or to defend
any town or fortress, or to war in open Campania, to give battle to the
enemy, to make incursions, to retire and withdraw skirmishers, to frame
bridges over rivers, to fortify himself in camp, to conduct artillery, and
many other pieces of service to be performed with a band of three or four
thousand men: whereof there are many rare examples, extant of many brave
Colonels, who have showed themselves singular herein, both English, Example of
brave Colonels Lucius Martius.

The two Scipios slain.

Asdruball the Carthagian.


French, and Spanish, in our late and modern wars, bravely behauing
themselves, as did Lucius Martius, a Roman Knight, when he gathered together
the relictes of the defeated armies of the two Scipios, having had those their
two Consuls slain by Asdruball the Carthagian in a campall battle. Therefore,
I say, for as much as by that which is already spoken, may be understood, that
he, which is a Campe-maister should be endued and graced with the like good
parts and skill, To conduct, to fight and govern well.
for to conduct, fight, and govern well, as a Captain General, I will leave
to recite now, until I come to declare the parts and qualities due to be
found in a High General of an army Royal; and from thence shall be
considered what concerns this officer, and so will I at this present, speak
only of such things as he ought to provide for the good conduction and
government of the companies of his Regiment.

In the time of the Emperor Charles the fifth, Frauncis the French king, and
Henry the eight, Colonels with us, which the Spanyardes do call Maestres de
Ca^po, and wherefore so called.
king of England, those were entitled Colonels, or, as some will, Coronels,
which the Spaniardes do call Maesters de Campo: being yet called Colonels, by
the Italians, the French, the Germans, and by us Englishmen, so called: by
the Spaniardes, Maestres de Campo, for having, quited and deprived them the
pre-eminence which they had to elect Captains and Sergeant Majors, the Lord
high Generals reserving the same unto themselves, leaving unto them no more but
the command, and authority in the administration of justice, and in the
effects of war. For commonly the Captainries are appointed by the Prince or
General: The Colonel electeth to himself a Lieutenant, and Alferes, a
Sergeant, and Caporals.

From good and skilful officers, ensues the observing of good orders.


the Colonel electing unto himself a most sufficient Lieutenant and Alferes,
a Sergeant, and Caporals, all men of due sufficiency, to the end that his
Captains may imitate him therein; for that, that it imports much to have
good and skillful officers, since from them does grow the observing of good
orders, and unto the army the due use and exercise of arms, with the
perfection of discipline, and all good parts to the perfection of infanterie,
with encouragement to the soldiers, that with them the Colonel may attain
honor, glory, and fame by his actions, and military courses.


Gent. Thus it seems that this name of Camp-maister is but modern. The name
of Colonel or Camp-maister, but modern.



Capt. True; Neither the name of Colonel very ancient.


Gent. Then, how were those called before time, which had the government of
soldiers in armies?


Capt. They were called Duces (guides) of which amongst the Romans there were
three sorts, By the Romans called Duces, differenced into 3. parts.

1. Duces Militares. 2. Duces Prouinciales. 3. Duces Limitan^i.

or differences viz. Duces Militares, Duces Prouinciales, and Duces Limitanei;
intituling those, Duces Militares, which went ordinarily with the armies:
having each, under their charge and rule, one thousand men or more, as have now
our Ca^p-maisters or Colonels, or rather our Generals. The other, entitled
Duces Prouinciales, were those which had all the soldiers of one Province,
under their command and charge; as have the Camp-maisters of the Tertios of
Naples, Sicilia, and Lombardie. The third, called Duces Limitanei, were those
which had under their charge and government, all the men of war on the
frontiers to the enemies, as had our Lord Marchers in England.


Gent. Thus the titles of Dukes sprung first from the wars.


Capt. So did the titles of Earls, The titles of Dukes, Earls, Marquises, and
Knights, sprang from the wars. The Colonels company preceedeth all others of
his regiment.

The Coronell ought to be a perfect soldier.

Being such, the other officers will more punctuallie perform their duty.


Marquises and Knights. But now to return to our matter. The Colonels company
or band, does preceede all the other companies of his Regiment, both in place
and in all other occasions. And now for to know how to command and govern all
the officers of his band, and of all the other companies in his regiment, he
ought most perfectly to understand that which touches every particular
officer, even from the Capo de squadra, unto the Sergeant Mayor: and it would
be a matter of great importance, to have exercised, and to have risen up
through all these offices, the better how to know, and perfectionate his own:
for by knowing this, the Captain, the Sergeant Mayor and all the rest, will
walk more warily, and pass more punctually in the accomplishing of all their
charges and duties, knowing that they have a commander so skillful, which
quickly will perceive, either their virtues or vices: persuading them to the
one, and dissuading the^ from the other: the which in actions of war do
either greatly help, The squadra of the Colonel, band ought to be soldiers of
experience and valor and be aduantaged in their pays. To consult with his
officers, and old soldiers.
or greatly hinder.

In the squadra which belongs to himself, out of his own company there
ought to be soldiers of great experience and valor, which should be
aduantaged in their pays, and whom he must esteem and make great account of,
consulting often with them, and with his Captains and officers of best
carriage, and most experience in his companies: For many times a private
soldier of experience and judgment, will give better reasons, counsel and
advise, then many other of higher degree: which often has been proved, and
examples extant.

To procure that all military discipline be duly observed.

The duties of his officers and soldiers one to another.


He ought to procure that all military discipline be duly observed and that his
Captains, and the other officers under his charge, do obey, respect, and honor
him, since they are bound thereunto, as unto the person of their proper
General, in all things concerning the service of their Prince: and that the
soldiers do obey their Captains and officers with great humility, and
reknowledgement, and in like sort that the officers do command and govern
them with convenient speeches, and good entertainment and courtesy. And it
shall also much avail him to know the names of his Captains, To know readily
the names of his Captains and officers.
Lieutenants, Alferes, Sergeants and Caporals, and of all the particular
soldiers, if it were possible; for in the pinches of war, it is to great
effect, to call a Captain, officer, or soldier by his proper name.

The Sergeant Mayor is obliged (as I have before declared) to receive his
orders and directions from his Colonel, and with his opinion and appointment,
to augment or diminish the guards. But this to be understood, when there is no
Camp-maister General in the army, The Camp-maister general* with us the Lord
high Marshall, his pre-eminence in field.

In the administration of justice to govern with all equity and right.

Parts of his office.


whose proper office this is, whom he ought to respect and obey, and to
accomplish all orders by him appointed, touching his charge.

In the administration of justice, he is to govern with great discretion and
wisdom, executing it with all equity and right, that his soldiers thereby
may both love him and fear him; for it concerns the Master of the Camp, to
apprehe^de, to discharge, and to punish, and also of life and death, in all
delicts and cases deserving such punishments; and in things and matters
committed against the commands, laws, and bandos of the high General of the
infanterie; and in whose absence he may command orders and make laws, and
punish those that go against them, and obey them not; For, for the execution of
justice he has his appointed officers, with their pays for the same; and also
he does judge and determine their civil differences and debates, which shall
arise among the officers and soldiers of his regiment. And if any do find
themselves aggrieued with his sentences, Appellatio^s to be made to the high
General.
they may appeal unto the Lord high General or Camp-maister General, that
being unjust, they may revoke them; and if not, then command them to be
executed. And in all these matters touching the administration of justice, if
the Colonel general, or Lord high Marshall (being there any such) will
intermeddle therein, he may; and, as superior and preheminent in office, he may
command, ordain, do, and undo; diminish or augment the authority and
pre-eminence unto the Colonel. It concerns him also to have regard to the
place of victuals or market, His charge over the victuallers or victuals.
that there be no deceit used against the soldiers; and he is to set the
price, weight, and measure of all that is sold, and to put good guardes to see
that the merchants and victuallers may keep their stuff and wares in
security and safe; and for the same, do the merchants and victuallers pay
every Saturday, for every staule or booth, some six pence a piece or more; all
this, being with his regiment alone, where there is no Camp-maister General;
unto whose office this does properly appertain. He is to be careful and
diligent with the Lord high General for his soldiers pays: To be careful
for the soldiers pays.
and see they be provided of armor, necessaries and needful munitions, and
the same to be distributed, as before I have set down: and this he is to do
with such earnest diligence and affection, that he may oblige them all to
acknowledge and confess him for their true father, and faithful Commander.

Among the Spanish companies in Italy, To be made acquainted with all new
soldiers entertained into any ^ande.
it is accustomed that no Captain do entertain any soldier into his band,
but that the Maestre de Campo do first see and approve him, especially of a
strange nation, being not a particular and well known personage; for many
inconveniences, that may follow thereon.


Gent. But I have heard say, The Spaniards will not permit any soldier of a
stranger nation to bear office among them.
that the Spaniard permits none of a strange nation; though of never so good
parts and service, to ascend unto any degree of office among them: which is
contrary to us: for our Princes, in time past, have received, esteemed, and
advanced, many strangers, being personages of virtue, valor, and desert.


Capt. So did the Spaniardes in time past, in the times of their kings of
Castillia and Aragon, in their sharp wars amongst themselves, and against
the Moors, wherein many of our nation did singular themselves, and from whom
are descended many of the chief houses of Spain. The Spaniardes pride and
ambition grew principally since the discovery of the Indies.
But since their wonderful discovery of the Indias, by Columba an Italian;
their marvelous conquestes therein; their inestimable treasures, long since
brought home, and continually received from thence; their long continuance in
wars, being nuzzelled therein by Charles the fifth; the brave Provinces of
Italy and Flanders by him annexed unto their crown; Favors of fortune.
with sundry such favors of fortune, has inflamed them with such imperious
minds, and possessed them with such proud and high conceits, with such
jealousy of their honors, as they term it; and invested them with such an
habit of scorn and pride, that it is a wonder if they permit any honorable
Gentleman of a strange nation, though endued with never so many good parts,
and served them never so well; to ascend unto any high degree of command
amongst them, their envy is such. Their envy to the Prince of Parma.

God may suffer them for the sins of some nations.


For let us but thoroughly mark and consider the actions of the brave Prince of
Parma, done in their service, yet by them envied, obscured, and slaundered what
they may, and you may easily perceive the verity hereof. But what will be the
end of their ambition and pride I know not. It may be that God suffers the^,
for the sins of some nations, as by Flaunders and France may appear, and
also by their attempts against us. A good consideration.
But who can tell, whether the Lord using them for a minister, as the loving
father does the rod, to correct his beloved children; who, after correction or
amendment, casts the rod into the fire. God grant us the spirit of true
repentance, the which if we have, we little need to fear the smart of this
odious rod. Yet this much I say again for the Spaniard, that any brave
Gentleman, serving valiantly amongst them, in place of a private soldier,
shall be esteemed, beloved, and favored of them, so he aspire not to command:
a great sign of ungrateful minds: Every brave man of war bears a tatch
of ambition.

Envy and fearful jealousy ever rise in the world.


for who knows not, that every brave man of war bears a tatch of
ambition, and of aspiring mind, deeming their virtue valor, and service to
deserve degree of charge: a thing not to be misliked, in mine opinion, so it be
procured by lawful and honest means. But envy and fearful jealousy, is now
over rife in the world, reigning commonly amongst men, not of the best deserts,
fearing a companion with them in office.


Gent. Me thinks, The proud Spaniardes Mappa Mundi to be Crossed.
you have showed us the proud Spaniardes Mappa Mundi; wherefore it were good
for us to crosselyne him what we may.


Capt. Proud Spaniard indeed, and ambitious also; his mind never resting like
Siziphus rolling stone. But it was not so, two or three hundred years agone:
for then were they poor, and contented to live quietly with their neighbors,
and glad of their good wills, Poverty breeds humility; humility breeds
credit; credit breeds advancement, advancement brings wealth; wealth breeds
pride; pride sprouts ambition; ambition begets envy; envy brocheth wars;
wars brings poverty; poverty brings peace.

A pretty confession of a Biscayn Spaniard.

The Indian gold the s^^ew of the war.


for poverty made them humble; their humility brought them favor and credit,
credit wrought their advancement; advancement heapt by fortune, brought
wealth; wealth bred their pride; their pride sprouted ambition; their ambition
begat envy; and their envy engendered wars; wars may breed poverty, and
poverty breeds peace. Hereupon will I report you certain speeches passed
betwixt my self, and a young Biscain Spaniard, of whom I had the examination,
with others his companions, not long since, at Laugharns, a sea coast town in
Southwales. After having answered unto such points and interrogatories, as were
unto him propounded in presence of the Lieutenant of that Shire and other
Gentlemen, I demanded of him again touching his kings Armadas, and
preparation for wars. Captain (says he) our king has ships but unwilling
mariners, his preparation of the last Summer is now dissolved: his home bound
Indies fleet being safely arrived; and his out bound sent away; After this safe
arrival of this his Indian fleet, bringing the sinew of his wars, what he
will do, I know not, and every spring there is speeches of war; but I
perceive small performance and effecting; and but bad success yet, especially
against your nation. But how soever the game goes, we, the poor do smart, and
I wish the ill year to his Eggars and setters on; the Pope, his Clergy, and
some his war Commanders; who, the wars being ended, should happily live
but hardly; The Spaniards ambition warreth upon all Christendom.

The Indias failing, the Spaniard soon a beggar.

A good suspicion.


what nation is there, which our ambition has not warred on? The Italian, the
French, the Flemming, and you the English; of the poor Indians I speak
nothing, which feeds him with wealth, which were they cut from him, or should
they rebel, or should his fleets fail him but two or three years together,
he were in hazard to be a beggar. He aspireth all, and aymeth a conquest of his
neighbor nations: but God knows which of them may arise in the end, and be
our confusion: for my Genius suspecteth somewhat; and this was the effect of
his speeches.


Gent. His speeches were to be mused at, if he spoke bona fide.


Capt. Bona fide, or not: but such were his speeches. Well now it is time for
me to return to our Colonel, from whom I have long been absent, by reason of
your demand.

The Colonel is to carry a great respect to his high General.

To be a faithful counselor.

His proper arming.

To be most commonly on horse back.


He is greatly to respect and honor his Lord high General, obeying and
performing his commands and orders with great care and diligence, procuring to
keep himself always in his grace and favor, being a faithful counselor
unto him: and to execute his Commissions (having first thoroughly conceived and
understood them) with great, valor, and readiness. His arming is the proper
arming of a Captain, but to be always, or most commonly on horseback,
providing and ordering all things most necessary and convenient for the good
government of his companies. But if his Regiment should sallie out to battle,
and all his Captains placed in rank, To dismount on foot his regiment
sallying out to battle.
he shall then dismount, and shall guide his companies on foot, for the
honor and estimation of the infanterie: as well was showed at the great muster
of all the Spanish army before king Philip and his Queen at Vadaioz, at the
conquest of Portugal: And for as much, as the other parts which may seem to
concern a worthy Colonel, may be considered, when we come to speak of a
Captain General touching his office and charge, I will conclude, concerning
this officer, with the words of Cicero in his Oration Pro Lege Manilia: The
parts to be in a great Commander in war.
declaring the parts of a great Commander in war: which is, great
experience in martial actions; deep knowledge in histories; a life not
spotted with notable crimes; to be magnanimous and valiant; and to be beloved,
feared, and followed of his soldiers: and finally to have fortune to friend.


The end of the fourth Book.
THE FIFTH BOOK OF WAR DISCOURSES AND MARTIAL DISCIPLINE.
The first Dialogue:
Wherein is declared the election and office of a Captain general of the
Artillery, or Master of the Ordinance: with certain discourses touching
fortifications, as well natural as artificial: and the confines of kingdoms
or realms, as well Maritime as Inland: the difficulty of their defenses, to
bar a strong enemy the entry: with other particular points touching Fortes
and fortified Towns.

The General of the Artillery, or Master of the Ordinance, his election and
office.
Captain. THE place and office of the General of the Artillery, or Master
of the Ordinance, What personage to be chosen to be Master of the Ordinance.
is appointed by the Prince. His function is of great quality and trust, for
the reputation had of the same, and for the effects which the same performs:
and therefore is always encommended and bestowed upon personages of great
gravity and authority, and of great prudence, valor and experience: for
besides the government which he has of the Artillery of the Army, when the
same encampeth: it touches him, His duty both abroad and at home.
by reason and course of war, to provide for all the sorts and strengths of
the realm; and to appoint the orders for their fortification and defense.


Gent. These things are no doubt of great consideration, therefore we would
willingly hear what courses might be taken for the fortifying and defense of a
realm, to withstand the enemies attempts.


Capt. The strength of every King or Prince, consists in the quantity and
quality of his subjects, and in the good quality of his dominion and country.


Gent. I pray show us more particularly hereof.


Capt. I say (gentlemen) that those Princes and Republikes are judged most
mighty, which in their kingdoms and states, do maintain, 1 good religion, 2
good laws, Those kingdoms most strong, which do maintain good religion, good
laws, and good arms.

All provinces strong by nature, by art, or by both. Strong by nature, how.

Strong by art, how.


3 and good arms; and who do enjoy wholesome air, 2 fertile ground, and 3
natural strength, with such other desirable commodities; wherefore to explane
the matter more, you are to understand, that all kingdoms or provinces are
strong either by nature, or by art, or by both.

They are strong by nature, when they are environed with the seas round about,
or part thereof, or backed with lakes, mountains, rivers, or deserts. And
those are strong by art, which in their frontiers, and in places most
convenient, have towns, castles, and fortresses, fortified by art.


Gent. It seems by this, that the Captain General of the Artillery ought to
be very skillful in artificial fortifications, I pray therefore declare unto
us, the considerations to be had in fortifying a place or realm.


Capt. All confines are either Mediterraneall, or Maritime, or both the one and
the other; All confines are either Mediterraniall or Maritime or both.
Considerations.
and either they are in mountainous places, or in plain champain, or do
participate of the one, and the other. If they be Mediterraneall, it must be
viewed and considered on what part the enemy might enter to offend the
country, and what passages he might have most commodious to conduct his Army,
with his munitions and impediments. And it is to be considered also, on what
parts he may most easily make his inrodes, and retire again with safety, and
whether there be any situation, which being fortified by the enemy, might
molest and annoy the country adjoining.

Maritime Confines.
If the confines of the kingdom be Maritime or sea coast, all the coasts and
compases are to be viewed and remarked; and to see and consider, whether there
be any gulf, shore, baye, creek, haven, port, or any river mouth, whereinto
the enemy entering with his navy, and there landing, might annoy and assail a
country. Nota.
For sea coasts, although they be in some respects strong, yet are they to be
entered by a navy by sea, and do hold the defendant in great suspense and care,
not knowing where, or in what part, such navy will arrive; and so is he driven
to greater charge, being constrained to keep garrisons in every suspected
place.

And yet it is not enough to keep good strengths in places most necessary,
and well provided, for that many times there is found a shore, a baye, a
creek, or river mouth, not before esteemed or thought upon, whereunto the
enemy arriving and entering with a mighty navy, A principal note Example of the
Spanish navy, and arms in Portugal.
and there fortifying himself upon some strong and fit situation, does put the
country and kingdom in great peril and danger. As was seen by the Spanish
navy and army, at the conquest of the Portugal kingdom, who touched at the
head of Caxcais, and landed in a place never thought upon by the Portingall, so
they found themselves deceived, thinking that the disembarkment should have
been betwixt the city and San Gillians Castle, where they stood fortified in
their trenches, with determination to defend the landing. Sundry landings of
Sir Francis Drake, in the Indias and in the parts of Spain. Sea coasts to be
defended with difficulty and cost.
And the sundry brave la^dings of Sir Francis Drake in the Indias, and in many
parts of Spain and Portugal (at most of the which I my self have bin) do
verify the same: whereby it is manifestly to be gathered, that sea coast
countries are to be defended with great difficulty, cost, and charge, and with
doubtful success, yea although that they have many places strong by nature.
And for as much as there be diverse and variable qualities of confines, and no
certain rule to be given thereupon, nor what distance there should be from
frontier to frontier, it must be presupposed that the confines of a kingdom,
The confines of a kingdom resembled to the circuit of a city.
does hold some correspondency with the circuit of a city: in the fortification
whereof, the bulwarks are the most important members, the which are set in the
place where they may most offend the enemy, and also defend themselves, and the
city; regarding therein due distance, in such sort that the one may defend the
other, with their Artillery and small shot, and in like manner the Curtines
betwixt bulwark and bulwark; with other aduertisements therein to be
considered. And even so the sorts to be made in the frontiers, The fortes of
confines what proportion to hold.
are to hold the like proportion, and correspondency with the confines of the
country, as do the bulwarks with the courtines of a city; the one being placed
so near unto the other, that they may assist and succor one another, and in
such parts as may most damnifie the enemy, and best defend themselves.

The places most apt to receive offense by the enemy, being found out, and also
to offend him, Places apt to receive offense by the enemy, are first to be
fortified.
it is necessary to fortify the same, as well the sea coasts as the inland,
with strong fortifications, castles, and bulwarks taking wonderful
aduisement, and careful consideration in choosing the situations thereof,
whether it be on plains, or hills, or Maritime; or consisting of all three,
understanding only the compass or circuit of the fort, with a certain
convenient space round about the same.

Of situations in plains, How situation^ in plains are strong. Holland and
Zealand.
those are strong, which are environed with deep lakes, great moors, and high
water shores, and banks, and those which may be sunk under water in time of
necessity, as in Holland and Zealand, and these which have a Campania raza, or
plain Champain, sufficient distant from all things that might ouer-commaund
the same, as is the Castle of Millan and Antwerpe, and such like.

Of situation upon a hill, Castles of Millan and Antwerpe. Situation upon a
hill, how it is strong.
that is strong which stands in the most highest part thereof, all vnderlayed
with natural rocks round about, not having near it any superior nor equal
mount: for in effect all situations which have a difficult access are strong,
when they cannot be offended from other adjoining mounts; and much more
stronger, if not minable; as is the fort of San Sebastian in Guipuscua, and
that of Denia in Valencia, with sundry others the like: for mining is the
greatest offense that such fortes can receive.

The Maritime situations are strong, Maritime situations, how they are strong.

Saint Gillians Castle.

Pennion of Veles.


when they be compassed with the sea, as is the little fort at Plymouth, or
partly compassed with the sea, and the rest divided from the maine, by great
and deep ditches, as is the Castle of San Gyllians by Lisbona; or built upon
some top of a rock, with the above said commodities; as is the Pennion of
Veles Malaga within the straightes of Gribratar in Spain, How all strong
places are expugned.
and such others.

All strong places are expugned either by force or battery and arms, or by
treason, or by surprise, or by long besieging, but we are now to treat of no
more, but of the manifest expugnation wherewith holds and fortes are won,
which is, by battery, by assault, by scaling, by undermining, and such like.

Cities are made strong by nature and industry; of that by nature, we have
already spoken in the strength of situations.

Cities made strong by nature and industry.

Strong by industry, how.

By matter.

By form.


Cities by industry are strong, by the form and by the matter.

Strong by the matter, when they have thick walls, great Terraplenes, and
broad and deep ditches.

By the form they are strong, when it is framed such, that when the most
farthest off that may be, and from most parts and quarters, it may offend the
enemy with Cannon and fiery shot.

Circular figure.
Of this sort are those, which do most near aproach unto the Circular figure;
but with good regard of the due largenes of the Curtines, and the equal
distance of bulwark to bulwark.

Fortes of 5, 6, 7, 8, or 10 Angles. The 4 anguled the worst.

Small places of themselves, but weak.

Over large not long defencible.


There enters amongst these all Fortes and strong Towns, consisting of five,
six, seven, eight or ten Angles; and Curtains, by direct line, and how many
more Angles, so much the better, the four Anguled of all others is the worst.

And it is to be noted, that very small places are of themselves but weak,
because they cannot so sufficiently resist any excessive battery, and other
offenses, as great places may, which have room capable enough to raise
defenses, and necessary Rampartes against any great force: neither yet ought
they to be so large, that the circuit thereof would require a whole army to
defend it.

Fortifications of Cities and Castles is grounded principally against the
offense of artillery.

Artillery is divided into sizes royal and lesser.


The fortifications of Cities and Castles is grounded principally against the
offense of artillery, and is also defended with the same.

And it is to be noted, that the artillery is divided and differenced, into
greatness or Sizes royal, and into lesser sizes.

Of the Size royal, is that piece which shoots a bullet from seventeen pound
weight upward; as is the Culuerine, the quarter Cannon, the demi Cannon, the
Cannon and double Cannon; the Pedrera, Basilisco, and such like. And for the
lesser size and difference, is to be understood all pieces that shoot bullet of
weight from seventeen pound downward, as is the demi Culuerine, the Saker,
the Minion, the Falcon, the Falconet, even to the Rabinet, and Hargubuze a
Croek.

What artillery most offensive to fortresses and strong places.
The artillery from whence a City, Fortress or Fort, may receive most offense
and damage, is that of the greatest size, and greatness: for of the lesser
size there is no great doubt to be had, since that the demi Culuerine can do no
great offense nor damage, and from that size downward: and therefore the
Bulwarks, Terraplenes, and Parapets, are to be made in such sort and strength,
as they may be able to resist and bear of the blow and gulpe of the artillery
of the greatest size: and Mattockes, shouels and spades are fit instruments and
tools to the same.

Strong places to be coupled with their convenient members.

The members of all strong places are.


Resolution taken of the form of the City, Fortress, or fort, be it either of
5, 6, 7, or 10 Angles, or of how many soever, it is necessary to couple the
same with their convenient members, to make it of proportional strength; which
are these following.


Bulwarks. Bulwarks.
The Bulwarks are made upon the Angles or corners of the form of the City or
Fort, and of such size and measure as shall seem due and convenient unto the
skillful engyner; and they ought to be made obtuse or blunt, and not sharp:
for so they are more strong and capable.

The parts of a Bulwark are the Trauesses or flankers; The parts of a Bulwark.
the Orecchion or Pome, or guard, or shoulder; the front or Curtain; the
Counter front or Spurs; the Pestiles or Parapets; the place or room for the
artillery in the under Trauesse or flanker, and in the upper; the entrances
into the one and the other, and into the place above.

The Bulwarks, as I said, are placed upon the Angles, and from any part (you
will) of the Angle is taken 120, The placing of Bulwarks and order how.
or 130 foot, for the places of the Artillery both above and beneath, and for
his Parapets and place of the same Bulwark, and at the end of this said number
is taken the Trauesse unto the right Angle above the Curtine of the said
measure; from the head of the which measure, and from the point of the first
Trauesse next adjoining, is drawn an indefinitiue line; and doing the like
from the other part of the Angle and from the other Trauesse, these two
straight lines shall come to be cut, in the which cutting shall the Angle of
the Bulwark be.

And it is to be noted, that it shall be better that the Curtines of the
Bulwark, do stand in such sort, that they may be touched or beaten from the
first Cannonera, The Curtine.
from whose flanker or Trauesse it takes his defense and the point may be
taken somewhat more distant from the flanker in a large Curtine; and according
as one would make the Bulwark great or little, so the measures must be
increased or diminished with conueniencie.

It is necessary to make in the Bulwarks certain issues or sallies, the which
are made on the part that looks toward the flanker or Trauesse: and the
Bulwark having an Orecchion, Issues, or Sallies.
they are made in the first Trauesse, under the first Cannonera or Cannon
room: and at the least it ought to have one, for that they be very necessary
for the defense of the ditch, and to put people out thereat. And for the better
to give you to understand, I should draw a Plat or figure of the Bulwark, but
time now permits me not.

The Tronera or which stands next unto the Orecchion ought to defend the
front of the Bulwark, and part of the ditch, although the first may defend the
whole, The Tronera, o^
and therefore the point or front of the Orecchion shall always end with two
blunt or obtuse Angles, and shall be somewhat more narrow in the said front or
end, th in then beginning near unto the Tronera.

The Pendent or bending of the Parapet should be somewhat round or slope, to the
end that the shot of the artillery, The Pendent of the Parapets.
beating thereupon, might glance up, for not to annoy those that stand at the
defense, which would if they are made straight upon a right line: and from the
said Parapet shall be discovered the covert way a long the edge or border of
the ditch. The Counterfortes, and the other appertenances of the Bulwark have
also their measures and proportions; the which I leave to repeat to avoid
prolixitie; and because they may be more or less, according to the desseigns
and Plats of the perfe Inginers.


The Cauallero within side, adjoining to the Curtine.
The Caualleres within side adjoining to the Curtine, Caualliere.
are builded in the midst of them; and from such Caualleres are the Curtins
or walls of the Bulwark defended, and also the field. And for this cause are
the Bulwarks wont to be made more sharp, and less strong, and they are to be
more higher then the Curtines, and open toward the field.

Caualliere a Cauallio.
Cauallere a Cauallo, called a Platform or bastard.
The Platformes or Cauallers without the Curtines, are in like sort built about
the middle of the wall, and without, as are the bulwarks, and his height is of
the highness of the wall. These against a good battery are but weak, for that
one of their flankers is easily beaten down, and so the city more easy to be
annoyed; and have no more but one Cannonera, with his place high and low, which
defends the great curitne and the curtin of the bulwark: the angle is made
in respect of the two bulwarks. This sort of platformes is made upon
necessity, betwixt the two bulwarks, by reason that the walls or curtines are
over long, and above due measure: it were better to seek some other remedy,
and not to use this sort of flankers; for they be weak and dangerous.

The Caualleres within side, and distant from the Curtines.
Cauallero, or a mount within side distant from the curtine.
The Cauallers aparted from the walls, are built in places which have any high
ground without, and opposite, which may discover and annoy the city; and on
such part where the enemy may come in covert, eue^ unto the ditch, without
being seen or annoyed: they are to be made of such height, as may suffice to
see over the seat that it would discover; and are made so broad and large, as
may be capable for the artillery, which is pretended to be there planted, and
the thickness of the Parapets, as should be sufficient; for they come first to
be battered with the enemies artillery: and are to be builded so far distant
from the walls, that the ruins, when they be battered come not to annoy the
soldiers, that stand at the defense. These Caualleres ought in no wise to be
made within the bulwarks, for so it would occupy the place that should serve to
defend them; but to be built in some place behind them, or on some other part;
they have also their Scarphe or Alambor, and are to be open on that part next
unto the town, with their entrances good and sure from any offense that might
come from without.

The Tenazas, or
The Tenaza, or
The Tenazas are made in place of the platformes, being set within the wall; and
also are built in hilly situations, upon, or toward the turning of the valley:
and are the best manner of flankers, for it is nothing else but a Curtine
defended with his bulwarks.

The Tizeras, Dientes, and Casamats.
Tizeras, and Casamats, or
The Dientes and Tizeras, and other simple flankers, are to be accommodated in
situations or seats strong by nature; for they come evil to purpose on plain
grounds, not in place that may be battered: and therefore the curtines which be
defended with such manner of Trauesses ought to be short; for having but one
flanker they are but badly defended. Their measure or sizes are bigger or
lesser, according to the quality of the seat where they be set.

Casamats were wont to be made in steed and place, where we now plant our
Platformes, but so low that they arrived not unto the alture of the ditch. They
are unprofitable, for they are soon over covered with the ruin that falls
from the battery, and smothered with the smoke of their own Ordenance: for
they be all close and covered, and do give means unto the enemy to aproach
near unto the walls, with trenches, or such like aprochings.

The gates of the City, or Fortress.
The gates or ports are to be placed in parts most commodious for the
service of the city, The gates.
both in peace and war, convenient to receive in, or put out people,
necessary, and most safe and sure from all manner of offenses, and so low that
the ditch may hide and cover them. The gate must have his drawbridge made of
timber, and his rastell or drawer of strong timber or iron; and must also have
his Serracenesca or Percluys.

The way which comes from without, should not come direct upon the gate, The
way from without.
to the end it be not easily discovered into the field; but of sufficient
wideness, for the passages of carts, waynes, and artillery; and of a moderate
highness.

The Terraplene, and place or broad way behind the same; and the spaces of
Retreats.
The Terraplene, The Terraplene.
the only remedy against the fury of the artillery, is to be made within, or
close behind the wall, and within the bulwark and caualleros. It ought to be
framed in such manner, that the wall being fallen, the same may remain and
stand like a mighty mount against the enemy: and should be made of such fast
and massy earth, that it crumble, slip, nor roll not, and so fall down; as
did a fortification made at Carthagena in Spain, for being made of running
sand. The height and breadth thereof ought to be such as the commodity and seat
will require.

Toward the City on the inner part, it ought to decline and bend down by
little and little, for the easy ascending to the defense of the wall; not
only for the loose soldiers, An open way at the foot of the Terraplene.
but also for a formed squadron, and the artillery. There should be within at
the very foot of the Terraplene, an open way round about the city, and
withal, behind the same, certain convenient spaces and rooms to contain
squadrons of soldiers for to succor and relieve those that stand at the
defense of the walls, and also to make retraites into, when necessity should
constrain.

The ditch small or great.
The ditch is made on the out side round about the wall, The ditches.
and ought to be made so deep, and cast up so high, that it should cover the
wall, at the least unto the Cordone, and no more but to the beginning of the
Parapete; for that, for to batter the wall, the enemy would be constrained to
mount up: and should be of such wideness, that it might not be well passed
over with bridges, ladders, or other engines, and difficult to be filled with
any matter. It should have in the midst a little ditch or gutter, which shall
serve as well to receive the waters, as to assure them somewhat from the mine;
and also to give some hinderance to the enemy, when either perforce, or by
surprise, or by treason, they should enter into the ditch. At the end of the
ditch there should be made a close way or passage, by the which the soldiers
might secretly sallie to annoy the enemy; and to defend the ditch; and
themselves to be defended from the wall: and round about the ditch there should
be another like vault or privy way.

The Campania raza, or plain Champain, without the town.
Campania raza.
The Campania or field without the City ought to be razed or plained a thousand
pases round about, beginning from the border or ring of the ditch; or at the
least of six hundred pases: and there should remain neither ditches, walls,
gardens, orchards, nor buildings, nor bounds, nor by-pathes, nor hollow ways,
nor any thing else that might yield means unto the enemy to approach the City,
without being endangered: rasing down in like sort, all other things that
might serve for Cauallero or Mount, to advantage the enemy to the battery.

All these things are the members of a fortification, the which how much more
fit, and proportionally they be placed about the body and circuit of a City,
so much does it make the same more strong and beautiful.

THE SECOND DIALOGVE.
Wherein is entreated of the refortifying of any old Castles, Towns, or
Cities, with the considerations to be had in the same: fit for the safety and
defense thereof.

Gentleman. Refortifying of old places of strength.
YOu have declared of most things necessary to any new fortifications: but now,
because more commonly old Castles and Cities be repaired and refortified, then
new forts erected; I pray, what order is there to be taken in such
refortifications?


Capt. Situations of Cities and fortresses.
All Cities, Towns, Fortresses or Castles, do stand either on a plain or on a
hill, or on the sea shore (as before is said) or else participating of all
three: now whether it be on maritime confines, or in land bounds, before that
one come to raze down the old walls, and to build up new, these matters
following are first to be considered, as well for the situation without as
within.


Annotations of the out situations.
Annotations of the out situatio^s.
It must be remarked and considered if the City or situation without be upon a
hill, or on plain, or participating of both; and of what sort is the one and
the oother, of these qualities: if there run any river along by the City or
near it, of what quantity or greatness it is, and toward what part it
runs: and if it have any lake or poole adjoining near unto it, of what
greatness it is, or of what store of water; or if there be about it any little
hills or banks which might endammage the place: or if there be any valleis,
bottoms, or hollow ways, where the enemy might be hidden, and come to annoy
the City; of what qualities the mount or hill is, whereupon it is seated,
either if of hard stone, or of soft, frangible, and easy. Now if it be in a
plain, there must be considered (above the above said) how the ditch stands,
how the field, and how the rivers run.

It is also to be noted, Annotations.
that if in any of these situations there be near adjoining any woods,
vineyards, orchardes, garde^s, tuffe of trees, houses, Churches, Monasteries,
or other edifices, considering whether they be such as may annoy the enemy, or
render him any commodity, whereby he may easily harm the City.

If the seat of the city, fort, or fortress, be maritime, or sea coast, (...)
must be considered the quality of that sea, and of the haven or port, and of
what depth it is, whether it has any little Isle or rock near unto it, the
which the enemy enjoying may offend and annoy you, and whether it has any
shore, bay, receptacle, or place of refuge, or any riuer-mouth, where the
enemies fleet riding easily at an anchor, might hinder and empeach, their
succor by sea, and continually molest them: what distance there is from the
wall unto the sea, and whether it be such that the enemy may advantage
himself therewith: and all the abouesayd considerations touching the
situations of sea or land, noting the same with great care, heed, and forecast.

Annotations of the seat within the City, Fort, or Castle.
The same care and regard is to be had within the place, Annotations within the
place.
and to reknowledge every part thereof particularly; beginning with the form,
and then the height and thickness of the wall, and the quality thereof:
moreover it is to be viewed in what part it is most weak and feeble; what
flankers it has; what Terraplene; how high, and how thick; what space betwixt
the same and the habitations and dwellings: what gates, how framed and seated:
what ditch; how broad, and how deep: whether dry, or with water: what entries,
or sallies: of the waters without the place, City, or Castle, or within;
whether by open Canales, or by covered Aquaductes: whether the most habitations
of the City be on high above the alture of the walls, or equal with them, or
whether the walls do surmount the City: and finally all other considerations,
worthy to be noted.

These considerations duly had, and resolution taken, then a plat must be
drawn with convenient rules and measures to reduce the said City, A plat to
be drawn.
Town, or Fort, to the best form that may be, with as little ruin and
defacing of houses or churches as may possible be, placing the bulwarks, the
Caualleros, and the Tenazas, and other edifices convenient to their seats,
sometimes shortning, sometimes enlarging the place; profiting themselves with
the old buildings (being good thereunto) taking away the little Turrets which
stand betwixt the trauesses; reducing the wall unto the due altitude, putting
the Terraplene a little distant from the same, for not to bear it down;
helping it with fagots, bauens, and such other stuff.

The ditch should be made with all his appertenances, and convenient measures.

And for as much as old Towns, Cities, and Fortes, being of diverse forms,
some round, some of sharp angles, and some of obtuse angles, or right, with
their Curtines either long, or short out of measure, it would be impossible to
give any particular rule for every one: therefore it were good and necessary
that the skillfull Enginer should advantage himself with the already said
rules and measures commodious, Skillful Enginer.
and with his own good wit and judgment: for so may there be fortified any
place upon any manner of seat: only he ought be advised to profit him with
the old to spare his masters purse what he may, but yet without overmuch
damnifying and weakening the fortification.

To fortify the feeblest parts first.
Resolution taken upon the desseigne or model of the form and greatness that
the City or fortress is to have, he must begin to fortify the feeblest
place first, and the aptest to be offended, foreseeing, and providing, that
before he overthrow any of the old, that that which he builds a new, may
stand in defense. There shall be made gates, and sallies, and their streets
both within and without: and the space or way behind the terraplene; and round
about without shall all things be made plain and disencombred: and with other
appertinances, as before is declared.

Gent. There be some Cities and towns compassed about with such altures or
heights, that the soldiers cannot well stand at the defense thereof, without
being enda^maged either in front, in flank, or at the back: what remedy is
there for that?


Remedy and defense of a place, annoyed with diverse altitudes.
Capt. Places annoyed by diverse altures, the remedies.
The best and most secure remedy shall be to take in the said heights with the
walls of the city or place: but when, for good respects it cannot so be done,
the wall should be withdrawe^ inward so far, that the offenses coming from
such mount, being so far distant, might come to be of little effect or force:
and when none of these two things may be done, then being in front it is
necessary to fortify in contra such a stepdame, that might be able to resist
all rigor offered from the same, placing against it a strong and gallant point
of bulwark, A point of bulwark.
if the seat will permit it; in such sort that from such a stepdame, the
Cannoneras of the flankers, which are to guarde this bulwark, may not be
embocked or stopped up: for it must be procured, what possible one may, that
the Cannoneries be not offended and annoyed. And if there cannot be placed a
good point of a bulwark, then build there a Tenaza, Tenaza, what it is.
that is, to wit, one Curtine with two bulwarks, making them well
proportioned, and to purpose; and much more higher then accustomed, with a
Cauallero, Cauallero, or mount.
or mount to the same in place most convenient, which may ouertop, or at the
least be equal to such an annoying height: Or a Cauallero without, with such
Parapets and capacity, as should be convenient unto so great an annoyance. And
if the upper parts may be yet endammaged, then raise the walls so high, that
they may be shadowed with an archrooffe covered with good earth and turfe: and
if this yet suffice not to shadow the defendants, although that the Parapets
be more high then accustomed, raise them yet so much higher, as might suffice;
The canoneries.
and make the Cannoneries that they may shoot from above somewhat downward, to
the end they may not be annoyed by such a stepdame; and make the Terraplene
within full of steps or gresses, for the defendants to pass up to defend, and
to descend at need or time to be shadowed.

Trees to be planted upon the terraplene.
Upon these Terraplenes should trees be planted, if the ground will bear it,
and that well and thick; for, besides that they do their part in shadowing,
they will help also to fasten the earth; and will serve to make fagots, and
other convenient reparations. The ditch should be made somewhat deep then
ordinary, with his little ditch or gutter in the midst, and with his wels for
the countermines.

When the defendants might be annoyed on any flank, Flankers.
defending any Curtine, then should there be made flankers and Caualleros all
alo^g such Curtines on the inner side, and of such height as they may cover the
said Curtine, with their entrances from the one to the other, which might give
commodity to the soldiers to go and pass to the defense. Remedy against the
back part offenses.
Being offended on the back part; the remedy is, to make the like Parapet as
is on the fore part of the Curtine: and in any manner or sort, trees be
aduantageous on every Terraplene, since they do shadow, that the enemy cannot
discover what is done within. And moreover they do help to the use of
fortification, as well with fagots, as with other needful timber; and do
defend and bear off the inconvenience of blustering storms and winds, from the
inhabitants within.

These, Three manner of offendings.

An over commanding no^^^e is a stepdame to a fortress.


and such others are the remedies to be observed against the abouesayd three
manners of offendings. But if all these three might be remedied, by taking the
said mount or stepdame that offendes and damnifieth the place; or to apart from
it as wide as were needful, I suppose that that were the best: for otherwise,
the time permitting it, and the quality of these confines, it would be better
to choose another seat for a new fortification, lest that by a long and gallant
assailling, it fall at last into the enemies hands.

It is not only sufficient, that the City, Castle, or Fort, be well
fortified in manner as abouesaid, A sufficient garrison of defense. What
considerations to be had and what provisions to be made.

Needful implements, at batteries offensive and defensive.


or in any other better, if also it be not sufficiently furnished with a
convenient garrison for defense thereof: for so were it like a body without a
soul; and besides this, if it have not provision of all sorts of victuals,
artillery and munition, and of all other arms offensive and defensive, in
good and sufficient quantity: and of shouels, spades, mattocks, pickaxes,
hatchets, axes, sawes, wedges, hammers, iron-sledges, bars of iron, nails,
ropes, etc. and other necessaries to work in earth, or in the walls, or in
stone, or in timber, and also in water; maunds, baskets, hampiers, and small
hand-panniers, hand-barrowes, and wheele-barrowes to carry earth; barrels,
tubbes, sacks, boordes, planckes, beams, posts, rafters, stakes, watlings,
gabbions, and all other things needful, at batteries, and besieging; without
the which it is impossible to rampire, repair, and to retrench against
batteries, assaults, and other offenses of the enemy. All the which belong unto
the office, All the which belonging to the office of the master of the
Ordinance.
care and duty of the General of the Artillery, to see them provided in
every town of garrison and fortress of defense within the Realm, which
stands for the defense and safety of the same.


Gent. These fortifications you speak of, are very costly, and not to be
performed but by a mighty Prince; therefore is there no other mean of
fortifying of less charge, then brick, or stone and lyme?


Capt. Yes truly, Fortifications of earth and turfe of great strength against
the cannon with small charge.

Objection.


in mine opinion; The which is done only with good earth and turfe, without
any stone work at all (or little at least) framed in manner and form as these
aforesaid: and as I suppose, of as good or better effect, against the Cannon,
the^ the other, by reason of the great ruins that the other makes, at any
forcible battery, and so more easy to be assaulted: although it may be
objected, that these fortifications of earth are of less during and small
continuance, especially where the same is environed with wet ditches, and those
of running water. True; Answer.
but the repairing thereof is of little charge, time and labor, in respect of
the charge, time and labor of the other; which is not performed (if the place
be of any greatness) but with expense of Millions: as may appear by Antwerpe
and the Citadell thereof, the Castle of Millan, the Citadell of Turine, and
the Citadell of Mets in Lorraine, with sundry others the like. On the contrary,
let us mark and note a number of other places fortified with earth and turfe
only, as is the great town of Gaunt, and as was Oudenard, Sluice and
Mastricht, and sundry other places in the Low countries, which have endured
such gallant batteries and fierce assaults, sufficient to weary a great Prince
his power and purse, and sundry other goodly Cities in East Germany, which I
have seen fortified in no other sort: and from thence may be gathered
(comparing the charge of the one and the other, and the effects in fine to be
as one) that the fortifications of earth may serve to good purpose, and of
continuance sufficient.


THE THIRD DIALOGVE.
Wherein is set down the particular officers belonging to the great
Artillery, under the command and charge of the Master of the Ordenance: the
boats for bridges, and the Artillery, with all the appertenances to the same,
needful to an Army royal.

Gentleman. TOuching fortifications of either sort, and of the alterations and
refortifying of old towns and Castles, we have understood sufficiently: but
when there is any Army levied, what charge has he therein?


Capt. An army levied, the charge of the Master of the Ordinance.
When there is an Army newly levied and framed, the Captain general of the
Artillery, or Master of the Ordinance, as we call him, has under his charge
the Artillery thereof, with munitions convenient of all sorts, kinds and
qualities; and armor and weapons for the people of war, a swell foot as
horse: and under his command they are kept, delivered, ordered and
distributed. Cariages and people belonging to the Master of the Ordinance.
And to carry the same, he conducteth under pay, horses, oxen, carts, waines,
carters, wainemen, enginers, gunners, carpenters, smiths, fou^ders, armorers,
mariners, calkers, pioners, laborers, and other people of such service, which
both ordinary and extraordinary, are wont, and ought to be under his charge
and government, for the service, use and conservation of the Artillery, and
of the Armor, Bridges built upon boats.
and of all sorts of Munition: and for bridges, barks and boats, and other
Addresses and engines, which are used and needful to be framed to pass
rivers, and other passages, according as cause and occasion shall be offered.
And for the administration and services of all the which rehearsed things, to
assist and help him, he has these officers following, among the Spaniards.


Officers.
The Officers which do assist the Master of the Ordinance, are these.
Clarke of the Ordinance.
The Clarke of the Artillery or Ordinance, who keeps account of the pays,
and other charges made in the same, by Libranzas or tickets, from the Master
of the Ordinance, and an officer under him.

The Paymaister of the said Artillery, Pay-maister. Purueyer general.
and his officer.

The Comittie, or Purueyour general, who has charge to provide all
Bastiments, provision, and other necessary things for the people attending
upon the Artillery.

Four Lieutenants to the said Master of the Ordinance. Lieutenants.
Maiordomes, and their several charges.


Four Maiordomes or Stewards; who have the charge of the said Artillery, and
of the munition, and things thereunto appertaining, whereof they are to give
account: the one taking the charge of the mounted Ordinance, and the shot and
powder of the Cannon, etc. The other, of the powder for the small shot, match,
lead, pikes, lances, murrions, corslets, muskets, calliuers, and of the
artificial fires, or fireworkes, with their appertenances. And the other two,
of all the other things necessary, and otherwise belonging unto the said
Artillery; and of all the tools for the Pioners, and of all sorts of
iron-workes, and nails of all sorts, with all necessaries that belong unto the
cariages of the Ordinance, and carts and wagons for the same: as, wheels,
axeltrees, ladles, sponges, rammers, linepinnes, leauers, wedges, and all such
other implements, as do appertain unto the said Artillery; and wine, and
vinegar to cool the Ordinance, soap, candles, cordage of all sorts, with
lanternes, crescets, iron chains, and such other things: all the which are to
be distributed by order of the Master of the Ordinance. This office of four
Maiordomes may be resumed by one, being a very sufficient man, having three
officers under him.

A Furrier Mayor of the Artillery, An Harbinger Mayor.

A Chancellor, and other persons attending.


and one other to repart the provisions.

A Chaunceller. 30 Gentlemen of the Artillery, which do attend upon the person
of the General of the Ordinance. 30 Hargulutiers or hargubuze on horseback,
attending also upon him: 8 Halbardiers for his guard: two or three Interpreters
attending upon his person; Other people belonging to the Commander.
a Minister or Preacher, a Physician, a master Chirurgian and his servant, a
Trumpeter, two or three Enginers or more, two or three Refiners of powder, or
as need shall require.

With every piece of Ordinance that is in the camp, Gunners and other Officers.
there ought to go two or three Gunners. Besides there must be, Mine masters,
Smithes, Cowpers or Carpenters, and Wheelewrights, to make wheels, axeltrees,
and coffers, belonging to the Artillery, some fifteen or twenty, according
to the number of the Ordinance.

Boats and Bridges.
To pass the Army over deep rivers, Boats and barges' whereon to frame
bridges.

Solima^ the great Turk.


they use to carry great boats and barges of a yard deep by the board;
whereupon they frame Bridges made of strong timber and plankes, as did Soliman
the great Turk to pass his Army over the river Drauo or Drylo in Dalmatia,
when he went to expugne Ciguet, where he died. And had Don Sebastian, that
unfortunate king of Portugal, carried such boats, and bridges with him, Don
Sebastian king of Portugal.
at his unlucky journey into Barbary, to have passed with them over the river
Lucus, and marched toward Alarache, and not thrust himself so far into the
country as he did, happily he and his Army had not been so fowlly overthrown
as they were. God suffering a Prince to run to ruin, bereaues him sense and
wits.
But when God will suffer a Prince to fall to his foil, he shall never
ascertaine nor hit upon any good direction and counsel, but runs headlong
unto his wrack and perdition.

The Prince of Parma his bridge made over the river Chaldis.
The Prince of Parma made the like bridge over the river of Antwerpe, but of
more wonder and strength, serving unto two great purposes: the one, to stop the
passage that no shipping with victuals might come up to Antwerpe, then by him
beleaguered, and the other, to pass his camp out of Brabant into Flanders at
his pleasure.

Boats for the bridge how many
They are used to carry for these bridges, some 20, 30, or 40 boats, according
to the greatness of the river, to carry and conduct the which, these people and
officers ensuing are needful.

A Captain of the boats, with officers and mariners.
A Captain of the boats, a master workman to join them together, 20
mariners and calkers, or more or less as shall be needful to the number of
the boats, six horsemen to conduct them when they pass by land; eight men
who have in their charge the iron works, cables, anchors, and grappling, four
men to annoint and greaze the axletrees of the carriages and carts in going;
one smith and his man, a wheele-wright and his man.

All these people does the Captain of the barks command and conduct, and see
to them that they have their tools necessary, and about them, and to provide
them carts, waines, or wagons to carry them.

Moreover there ought to be in the camp ten or twelve smiths, as well to make
and mend Irons needful, as to shoe horses, and such like services.

Gent. What number and sort of Artillery is used to be carried with an Army
Royal?


Capt. Such as shall be thought necessary, according to the greatness of the
enterprise, and the Princes pleasure: but such as are used to be carried in
such iornies by the French, Italian, and Spaniard, I will as near as I can
show you.


The Artillery more or less, that is used to be conducted with an Army.
The Artillery used to be conducted with an Army, and the necessaries thereunto
belonging.
30 Cannons for battery, that shoot bullet from 44, 50, 60, and some 70 pound
weight; from 6, to 10 inches in height.

20 demi Cannons, from 24 pound bullet, to 30 pound.

20 Culuerins, from 16 pound, to 20 pound bullet.

15 demi Culuerines; 20 Falcons: 25 Falconets; and 12 Sakers.

5000 Quintals or Centenaires of Cannon powder, to remain in the place of
garrison of most respect, ox hide to cover the powder in carriage; 600 quintals
of hargubuze powder, and a number of lether bags or satchels, to carry powder
behind men on horseback, and when any battery is set.

9 or 10 thousand Cannon shot, 7 or 8 thousand demi Cannon shot, 3 or 4
thousand Culuerine shot, 3 thousand demi Culuerine shot, 2 thousand Falcon
shot, 2 or 3 thousand bullets of lead for Falconets, 6000 shot of diverse
sizes. All these shot and bullets must be carried in coffers, and strong maunds
made of oziers or mats, 300 Centenaires of lead, 500 Centenaires of match, 2000
iron shouels, 7 or 8 thousand mattocks, 4 or 5 thousand pickaxes, 2000 axes and
hatchets to cut wood, 1500 wood hooks, and tools to make faggots: the
greatest part of all these iron tools are to have handles, and healues. There
must also be tables, plankes, and boordes, and good store of such other timber
for many necessary causes: great store of hand maundes, and baskets to carry
earth to the bastion, and gabions; sea compases also, and 4000 great iron
nails for the cariages of the Artillery, and of other middle and lesser sizes:
four great sawes, and many small; eight great iron sledges to break rocks
and great stones, to make the way plain for the cariages: 20 iron crows, and
iron bars as many: 150 quintals of iron: 50 quintals of steel: 20 augers of
the great sort, middle, and lesser sort; two talladores or, which are engines
to mount and dismount ordinance: and many spare chargers or ladles of brass,
and many rammers, sponges, and such like, for double Cannon, Cannon, Culuerine,
demi Culuerine, Saker, Minion, Falcon, etc.

Good store of nails of sundry sorts, as well for the wheels of the
Artillery, as for sundry other purposes; many chains of iron to draw the
artillery; store of iron cloutes for the axletrees, with some iron bands for
the wheels; two Romanas which is a certain skale or beam to weigh powder,
match, etc. All tools appertaining unto a smiths forge.

Horse nails and horse shoes of all sizes; good store of Cotton match for the
lint stocks; cordage of sundry sorts; small cables for the artillery; certain
cariages, or beds for the Artillery; and spare wheels to the same: with
axletrees, and such like: certain carts and wheels extraordinary to carry the
munition.

Eight great coffers, whereof 2 to be full of tallow candles, for the
Carpenters and other officers to work by night, and 2 with lanternes, and 2
with cere-clothes and the other 2 with torches and wax candles, and such other
lights: 150 kinderkins and barrels to carry the small cordage, and small iron
ware, and greasing for the axeltrees, 50 kintals of soape, tar, and soft
grease to anoint the axletrees of the cariages of the ordinance; 60 bundels of
scaling ladders, and 3000 muskets and caliuers in store.

Moreover there must be carried with them to make artificial fires, some
quantity of Sal niter, or peter, as we term it, Brimstone, sal guma, camphora,
pitch, rozine, turpentine, tar, cole of young hasell, or willow, aqua vitae,
liquid vernize, tutia, arsenike, alexandrina non praeparata, linsseede oil,
common lamp oil, Call viua, quicksilver, wax, strong vinegar, and saltpeter
three or four times refined: of all these no great quantity, for they be
costly, and seldom used.

Gent. Truly it is a wonder, to hear and consider what a number of diverse and
sundry things do of necessity, The charge of great ordinance is wonderful.
appertain unto this great ordinance, and the number of officers and people to
govern the same: the horses and oxen to draw the^: such store of carts,
waines, and wagons to carry the munition: which must needs be a wonderful
charge unto a Prince, which either voluntary or constrained, does use many of
them, as of necessity any Prince maintaining war, either offensive or
defensive, must needs do.


Capt. Therefore have I made this large relation, The Spaniard in continual
action. Without the Indias the Spanish king soon a beggar.
rather to let you understand the excessive charge that a prince is at in
managing of war, the^ of necessity to be inserted in this place: especially
being in continual actio^, as the Spaniard is: wherefore I say, as did the young
Biscaino one of his subjects, being in examination with me as before I told
you, that without the Indies, the spanish king were soon a beggar. And much
more would you wonder, should I make a particular recital of the charge he is,
and has bin at, in the long wars of the Low countries; in his preparation
for the conquest of Portugal; in his fleet and action unto Tercera Island; in
his proud attempt against us; In his brables in Britayn; besides the incredible
number of his pistolets continually flying in (almost) every nation, The
Spanish gold infecteth good princes subjects.
to infect, corrupt, and pierce the minds, hearts, and souls of good Princes
subjects, to their Princes annoyance, and their own confusion in fine. Italy,
France, and Flanders, too full of his pencionary troops: I pray God, that
other nations taste not of his infection.


THE FOVRTH DIALOGVE.
Declaring the number of beasts to draw each piece of Ordinance: what people,
and officers to attend them: the duty of the Maister-gunner, and others under
him. Item sundry other parts and duties belonging to the Captain General of
the Artillery, as at battery and such like, the quantity of powder,
correspondent to every several piece: with other martial annotations.

Gentleman. WHat number of oxen and horses are necessary to draw every
particular piece of great Ordinance?


Capt. Horses to draw a Cannon of the greatest size, etc. Horses to draw a
Culuerine.
To draw a Cannon of the greatest size, they use to put 24 horses or oxen in
fair weather, and in soul 30. And for a demi Cannon 18 or 20. And to draw a
Culuerine in fair weather, 24, and in foul weather accordingly. To draw a
Saker 12 or 14 beasts; and for a Falcon 8 beasts, etc.

A good cart, waine, or wagon, will carry 60 Cannon shot, and of others after
that rate, Carriage of Cannon shot and other munition.
and are drawn with 6, or 8 horses: and after the same order and weight, go
the other carts and cariages with powder, lead, match, iron, iron-tooles,
armor, and all other munition. One cart to carry a bridge bark: and all these
things considered, the Captain General of the Artillery takes up all these
carts and beasts at the Prince prices, being in their own dominions; and in
other countries as he may get them for pay.


Gent. Then being in others country, what order is to be observed herein?


Capt. Order for beasts and Carriages.
The Master of the ordinance agrees and bargaineth with some certain persons
who do offer themselves to serve in the actions with a thousand horse or two,
as did one Andrew Dun, in the service of Charles the fifth, in his wars of
Gelderland and France.


Gent. What people and officers are necessary to attend upon, and to conduct
these carts and carriages?


Capt. The officers and people for the carriages.
First the principal person over all the said horses, with 2 halberdiers
attending upon him, a clarke to take the account and muster of all these
cariages, with his halberdier attendant, a Harbenger, and a Mayorall, which
goes with every thousand beasts, a Cill Master, or Lieutenant to the
Mayorall, over every 200 horses or beasts; a Provost over the horses which draw
the Artillery, two Carpenters, and two ferriers or smithes.


Gent. There would need a great number of people and strength to lade and
unlade all these cariages; and to help about the Ordinance?


Capt. Pioners, under the Master of the ordinance, and to what purposes.
True, and therefore the General of the Artillery has under his charge, a
great number of laborers or Pioners, which of necessity must be had in a camp,
and follow an Army, to make trenches, Rampires, Minings, Countermines, ditches,
caves; to make plain the ways for the army to march; to accommodate the
passages for the Artillery to pass; to raise mounts to plant ordinance upon;
to place and fill the gabbions; to dig earth for the same; to undermine walls,
and towns, and to raze those of any gained places down; to cut timber to
fortify withal; to dig wells for water, and great pits to bury and to cast
therein, the garbedge, filthiness, and offalls of the camp; and serving to a
number of such necessary uses.

Over the said Pioners there are Captains appointed to govern them, Captains
over the Pioners.
which should be men very expert in fortifications, trenching, mining, counter
mining, and in all sorts of engines concerning a camp, and battery actions:
and therefore besides their experience, they ought to be learned and well
skilled in all manner of fortifications, both in camp, town, or fortress.
These Pioners do go before the camp with a sufficient band of soldiers for
their guard, The Pioners guarded by soldiers.

The Pioners tools.


carrying with them mattockes, spades, shouells, pikaxes, crows of iron,
barrells, baskets, hampiers, and such other tools; and over every three or
four hundred Pioners a Captain.

The gunners ought to have over them a Maister-gunner, to rule and command
them, A master gunner over all the gunners.
and to see that they do their duties, and to be men sufficient in their art.
He ought also to see all things provided and necessary for the Artillery, as
carriage, axletrees, wheels, ladles, spunges, rammers, iron crows, leauers,
shouells, mattocks, His office and charge for necessary tools.
gabions, baskets, ropes, chains, coins for the breetch of every piece, to
coin it up or down: powder both serpentine and corn powder; cotton match,
lintstockes, priming irons, their rules or instruments to take the level,
Taladros that is, engines to mount and dismount the ordinance; shot of all
sorts and sizes, and heights; cartages of all sizes; trunckes, arrows and
balls of wildfire, and stuff to make the same, with all things necessary to
his charge, office, and art; giving still his diligent attendance upon the
Master of the ordinance, to know his orders and commands, executing the same
with all diligent care and fidelity.

It behooves the General of the Artillery to procure and see all these
aforesaid matters provided, The master of the ordinance his principal care
and charge.
and good orders kept in the same, as superior commander thereof; and that
there be sufficient provisions of al kind of munitions and arms, as well
defensive as offensive, both for the infantery and Cauallery, and that there be
wonderful care had in the conseruing of the same, giving order and charge
thereof, unto the Mayordomes; the which they are to distribute and deliver out
by Librazas, or Tickets, from the said General of the Artillery, or else not.

The Gentlemen of the Artillery attending upon his person, Gentlelmen of the
Artillery.
ought to be men of great sufficiency to execute any orders by him commanded,
being men very discreet and modest; for many inconveniences do follow, being
gross headed and disordered persons

The Captain General of the Artillery, Particular parts of the Master of the
ordinance.
besides the before recited parts, ought to be learned, and well read in
histories, and stratagems of war; seen in speculation of Geometry and
Mathematikes, with the practike thereof; to know grounds and distances, waights,
measures, qualities and the effects of the Artillery; to judge where is the
most convenient part of any place to be battered; Sundry good considerations.
how to convey his ordinance thither; the place where to plant them, and the
planting of the same, for to take any commodity that might help the
defendants: and regard that the enemy may not surprise his Ordinance; fencing
them with gabbio^s, maunds, and trenches, and guarded with appointed troops of
shot, pikes, and short weapons; having a respect first to dismount the enemies
Artillery, that might in any manner annoy the camp; then to bend his
batteries from two or three plantings, upon most places of advantage, as cause
shall require, to ruinate their Curtine, and make good breaches: lastly, well
regarding, that before any assault be given, to cut off all flankers, and
trauesses of annoyance.

Skillful in mynings.
He ought also himself to be skillful in myning, and counter-myning, and in all
artificial fire works, and shooting in great Ordinance, not giving overmuch
credit unto others, unless they be men well known to be of experience and
skill.


Gent. Then it seems, he should be a Maister-gunner also.


Capt. To be skillful in shooting of great ordinance, and their particularities.
It is most requisite that he be well skilled in the art, being master over
all; the which may easily be attained, having good speculation therein, annexed
with some practice, knowing the names of every particular piece, and their
several waights, lengths, bigness, and boares of the cylinder, their true
dispart, the height and poize of every their bullet, the quantity of powder
serving to every one, their distance at point blanke, their best vantage at
Randon, their several raunges, the goodness and difference of powder, the
simples and compounds thereof, the ladles, sponges, and rammers befitting every
one, the making of all these, with a number of other points belonging to the
art.


Gent. What powder does each piece require, according to his shot?


Capt. It consists much in the goodness or badnesse of the powder; for the
powder being good the less will serve, is sooner fiered, does better
execution, and heateth not the piece so much. The quantity of powder to
several pieces, and their bullets. Cannon, Demy-Cannon. Culuerine.
The common use is unto every double Cannon, of 58, 64, or 70 pound Bullet, to
allow in powder the of the weight of the shot: and to every Demy-Cannon after
the same rate: as for example; a Cannon of 64 pound shot, to allow 41 pound of
powder for his due charge, and so of the rest: and to every whole Culuerine,
and demi Culuerine (being pieces double fortified with metal) to allow them
in powder the of the weight of the bullet: as for example; a Culuerine of 20
pound weight bullet, to give of good corn powder 16 pound for his charge. And
unto the Saker, Mynion, and Falcon, somewhat better allowance; The Ladles.
as almost to the weight of their bullet. The Ladle twice equally filled, to
all these abouesaid pieces, is their due charge in powder. With the artillery
and munition there is always a Corpse de guard, both of Infanterie and
Cauallerie. The charge of the placing and setting of them belongs unto the
Camp-maister General, called with us the High Marshall of the field.

The election of the officers.
The election of all the aforesaid officers, and Gentlemen of the artillery,
Enginers, and Pioners belongs unto this Master of the Ordinance, except the
treasurer, and Pay-maister; whom either the Prince or the Lord high General
does name and appoint: To have wary and careful people about the Ordinance.
but besides this aforesaid guard of foot and horse, it behooves the Miaster of
the Ordinance to set other careful and wary people both to guard them and view
them, that the Ordinance be not nailed, nor the munition fiered; as did a
paisant, issuing out of Verona (being besieged by two great armies, of the
Venetians and Frauncis the French king, and Marc Antonio Colonna defendant
within) and set fire to the munitions of the Venetians camp.

The Captain General of the Artillery does cause to be paid all the
officers, The Master of the ordinance his care for payment of his people.

Their respect to him.


Gentlemen, Enginers, and Pioners, which go under his conduction: and they
ought to obey him, reverence and respect him as their superior, punishing
their offenses as they be committed, as well in peace as in war: and
commending and rewarding such as have valiantly and virtuously demeaned
themselves; so shall he be beloved, obeyed, and honored.


Gent. Truly this office is of great and honorable charge, and many businesses
belonging to the same.


Capt. So it is indeed; and therefore encommended and bestowed upon personages
of great quality, learning, wisdom and experience in martial affairs: and
one who is always of the counsel of war.


The Captain General of the Cauallery his Election, charge, and office.
THE FIRST DIALOGVE.
Wherein is reasoned of the Election, charge, and duty of this officer: the
comparison of the Infanterie with the Cauallerie, with examples of both: and of
certain pieces of service to be performed with the horse.

Gentleman. I Pray now to the Captain General of the horse.


Capt. The Captain General of the Cauallerie, Captain General of the horse
is elected by the Prince.

To be a personage of honor and title.


is commonly chosen and appointed by the Prince; and for being a charge of so
high authority and prehemine^ce, it is always encommended and bestowed upon a
personage of honor and title, or some very honorable Gentleman, who has had
great experience and practice in war: considering the great and weighty
occasions that commonly therein are offered to be performed and effected with
the Cauallerie: and so he that is chosen to this charge, ought to have in him,
all, or the most of the good parts to be expected in a High Lord General of an
Army, the which may be considered when I come to speak of that officer:
referring the same until then, except some particular points, which may fall
out in questions by the way.


Gent. Then shall we gladly hear them, and remarke them also; but which think
you to be of most utility in the wars, either the Cauallerie or Infanterie?


Capt. In mine opinion the Infanterie is to be preferred, being well instructed
and disciplined in their Art.


Gent. But I have heard the contrary opinion, in approving the horse; saying,
that they are the reputation of the Prince and army.


Capt. I hold partly the same estimation of them: The comparison betwixt ^orse
and foot.
but yet I would gladly have mine opinion excused: that they are not comparable
to deal with resolute foot, except upon great and manifest advantage, and in
place and ground of very great favor for them: The footmen preferred.
For a resolute stand of pikes, with their convenient troops of shot, will
give them sore stops, and returns with dishonor; as has plainly appeared by
the memorable battles of our famous kings of England, obtained with their foot
companies against the proud Cheualry of France, Agincourt field.
as at Agincourt field, and at sundry other their honorable battles. Yea and
many times it has bin seen, that shot companies, alone, being helped by some
advantage, to put them to the foil, as did the Marquise de Pescara, Marquise
de Pescara.
with 800 shot only, break, foil, and disorder Charles de la Noye, then vice
Roy of Naples, with all his Cauallerie at the battle of Pauia. Battle of
Pauia. County Carmagnola against the Switzers.
Another example we have of the County Francisco Carmagnolla (being Captain
General of Philip Vicou^t Duke of Myllan his army) going with six thousand
horse against the Switzers, was by them repulsed by the valor and length of
their pikes, who having regathered his disordered troops, considering from
whence their disadvantage grew, turned head again upon the enemy; and he
himself, and his companies dismounted on foot, and with their Lances in hand
framed a foot squadron, and charged the enemy a fresh, and so brake, and
overthrew them, in number above fifteen thousand; who by force of horse could
not be removed: imitating herein Marcus Valerius Coruinus, Marcus Valerius
Coruinus, in the Punike war.
who being Consul, and Captain against the Samnites in the first Punik war,
and in their last battle, not able to break on the^ by reason of their long
pikes wherewith they defended themselves, commanded his horsemen to dismount,
and on foot armed as they were, with their Lances to fight with the enemy,
whereby he overthrew them and put them to flight; with the victory and their
baggage remaining in his hands. And again in the battle that Constantine
Roxianus, Captain General to Sigismund, king of Polonia, had with Basilius
the great Duke of Muscouia, by the river Brisna, who surmounted him much in
horse, three thousand footmen only, which he had in his army, wan him that
day the honor and victory. Many examples more might be recited, both ancient
and modern, but I rest with these; remembering that among the ancient Romans,
Among the ancient Romans the footmen of more estimation then the horsemen.
their foot was always of more estimation then their horse, holding a true
opinion, that the infanterie well disciplined, is the sinew of the war, the
fortress of the Realm, and the walls of the City.


Gent. But I have heard say, that in these wars of Netherland, after that the
Gran Commandador dyed, and that the states revolted, with determination to
clear their country quite of the Spaniardes, Don Alonzo de Vargas.
that Don Alonzo de Vargas, who had then the Spanish Cauallerie in charge, did
great exploits therewith, in encounters which he had with the state, foot and
horse.


Capt. The difference between old experimented soldiers and new raw men.
It is true; But you must consider that those were old and experimented
soldiers, resling upon a valiant resolution; the others, Bisonnios and raw
people, raised up upon a sudden conceit: in which actions is maruellously to
be marked the difference between men of experience and Bisonnios, the brave
carriage of the one, and the bad conduction of the others; as appeared in the
reencounter at Tilmont, At Tilmont reincounter.

Sack of Antwerp Example.


and at the succouring of Captain Mountsdock, being taken by them of Mastrich:
and most notably in the sack of Antwerpe, where not to the number of 5000.
Spaniardes, enclosed within their Citadell, gave the overthrow and foil, unto
above 16000. of the Antwerpians, bravely armed, encamped within their own
town. In like sort, at the overthrow of Gibleo; where not above 600. horse of
Don John de Austria his troops, The overthrow of Gibleio.
defeated above 15000. of the states, most strange and wonderful; only for
want of good leaders, and good conductours; the enemy espying the advantage of
their simple conduction and oversight. But you must understand, that in the
most of these actions they were always well backed with brave companies on
foot: but had they been matched with equal enemies, these their matters of
marvel had never been chronicled.

Marry I say, The Cauallerie very necessary for many pieces of service.
that the Cauallerie is precisely very necessary for many pieces of service: as
to make incursions, to pursue the flying enemy, as in the battle where the
Duke of Saxonies troops were broken, and himself taken near the river Albis.
And again, to give a suddein charge upon the enemies flanks, or rereward; and
to epsy advantage if the enemy disaray, as before is said in the battle of
Gibleio: and again, to scoute, to discover, to guarde any conuoy, or to
surprise any conuoy; Captain^ Arrio at Pauia.
and to relieve with money any besieged place; as did Captain Arrio those that
were besieged in Pauia: to carry victuals or munition for a need and pinch to
a distressed Scance: to pass over rivers, and to stop the fury of the
current, to render the passage more easy for the footmen; as was seen in the
passing through the river Albis. Conradus the Emperor passed the river
Meandrus.
And when the Emperor Conradus passed with his army over the river Meandrus,
and there defeated a great number of Turks: and also to shock with the enemies
horse, to make Caualgadas, or great marches, for any sudden surprisall or
Camizado, each horse carrying, for need, a footeman behind: and to gain, with
speed, any straight or passage, to scour the coasts, to epsy the enemies
desseignes and courses, to conduct, or to spoil forage; with many other
pieces of service accidental in war.


THE SECOND DIALOGVE.
Wherein is declared the difference, and armings of the Cauallerie; with the
proper service pertaining to each difference: the parts to be expected in
such as serve on horseback.

Gentleman. HOw is your Cauallerie differenced and armed? The Cauallerie
differenced into three sorts.

1. Men at arms. 2. Demi Lances. 3. Shot on horseback.




Capt. In these our days, the Cauallerie is most commonly differenced in three
sorts: Into men at Arms, or Companies of Ordinance termed by some; but now
little in use: Into demi Lances, now called Lanciers, and into shot on
horseback, named Hargulutiers or Hargubuziers, or Carbins, Petranels, and
Pistolliers.

The Man at Arms is armed complete, The Man at Arms his arming, weapon and
mounture.
with his cuyrasses of proose, his close helmet with a beuer, a gorget, strong
pouldrons, vambraces, gauntlets and taisses; a strong Lance well headed with
steel, an arming sword; and at his sadle bow, a mace, well mounted upon a
strong and courageous horse, having a deep and strong sadle, with the two
cuissets of Pistol proose, his horse barded with a sufficient Pectron, crinier
and chieffront etc. a strong bridle, double rayned, whereof one to be of wire
were not amiss against the blow of a sword. Men at Arms are commonly men of
^itle and quality.
These Men at Arms were wo^t to have five or six horses attendant upon each
one. In this Company of Ordinance, are few, but men of quality and Gentles of
good birth: the charge thereof is great.

Unto every Company of these does belong, One trumpet, one Ensign, one
Guidon, and one Cornet.
one Trumpet, one Ensign, one Guidon, and one Cornet: the Ensign over the Men
at Arms, the Cornet over the Lanciers, and the Guidon over the shot on
horseback. Now by reason of their heavy arming, their marches are but slow;
and not lightly marching except the camp dislodge: and then to keep an equal
place with the foot camp, divided into good squadrons upon either side of the
battle, Divided into squadron.
with a convenient distance from the same: for being too near, many
inconveniences do many times happen, especially having charged or encountered
the enemy; and driven to retire, do hazard many times to disaray their own
battle. Their parts of service.
Their service is commonly, espying advantage to break upon the squadrons of
pikes, to encounter the enemies horse, and to relieve their own light horse,
if by hap they be put to a retrait. But a good squadron of pikes, The
honorable valor of pikes footmen.
of resolute men, well empaled and girdled with musket, does greatly discredit
their ancient reputation now in these our days.

The arming of the Lanciers.
The arming of the Lanciers, is a good pair of cuirats, the fore part of
Pistol proof, a strong cask with his open vizier, of like proof, two l'ames
of his pouldrons, two or three of his taisses of Pistol proof also, the rest,
his pouldro^s, vambraces, gauntlets, His weapons.
taisses and cuissets, as light as may be: a strong Lance well pointed, a good
curtilace, and short dagger, and a Pistol at his saddle bow in a case of
leather: His m^^nting.
a strong saddle with his two cuissets for the knees; and well mounted upon a
strong horse vnbarded, and their cassackes of the color of the Ensign.

Lanciers, for many pieces of service far better then men at arms.

The parts of a a L^u^^i^r.

Their place of (...).

Their Cornet. Their pales of service.


I suppose these Lanciers, for most pieces of service, far better then men at
arms, especially as our wars are now conducted. They ought to know how to
manage well a horse, run a good carrier, break surely a Lance, to be ready
with their arming sword and pistol. Their place of march and service is before
the men at arms a good distance, in troops or squadrons, with their Cornet in
the midst, or within the third rank before. They serve to many purposes, and
to most pieces of service, as well to break on a squadron of pikes, first
shaken or disarayed by shot, as to encounter the enemies horse, to back and
succor the Petranels and Hargulutiers being distressed, to conduct their own,
and to detrusse the enemies conuoy in company with the Carbines and other
shot, to surprise the enemies troops upon any advantage spied: and in
general, good for most pieces of service fit for horse; whereunto the men at
arms are both too heavy and unapt.

The Petranell and Pist^lier his arming.
The Petranell and Pistolier is armed with a good pair of Cuyrats of pistol
proof, and open Burganet, as is the Lancier, a pair of well arming pouldrons,
one gauntlet for the ^ridle hand, no vambraces, but in steed thereof some
other easy arming, and lighter mounted then the Lancier is, with a good saddle
and bridle according; His weapon.
then weaponed with a good short sword and dagger, a Petranell piece, which is
with a snap-hance, or, one long pistol, as the French now use the^, fastened
in a case of leather, at the saddle bow, or else a pair of pistols in one case
as do the R^ytters; Their service.
their service is (as before of the Lanciers) in most pieces of nimble service;
and are of most annoyance unto the pikes, being not well guarded with shot.
Their place of march.
Their place of march is next before the Lanciers and so in their services, by
whom they are seconded, marching in troops like sleeves of shot, seconding one
another in order. They must be skillful to manage their horse; to learn him
to trot, The parts of the Pistolier.
to stop well, to wheel readily, for their actions are not upon the spur, as
the Lanciers are, but to skirmish bravely upon the face of the enemy,
discharging, and wheeling about, one troop seconding another; and to break in
also if occasion be offered. They are very good against foot shot, if they be
not friended with hedge, ditch, or some such place of advantage: in their
middle troops is the Guidon placed. The place of their guidon.

The shot on horseback, his furniture and weapon.




Finally the Hargulutiers, Carbines, or Hargubuziers on horseback not armed at
all, or else with light arming: and they have a good Hargubuze, or a Petranell,
or horsemans piece, as some call it, with a good short sword and dagger well
girt unto him, His mounting.
mounted upon a pretty light horse, such as be our Northern nagges, befitted
with a saddle, bridle and furniture correspondent, with a necessary flaske and
touch-boxe for his piece, and a purse at his girdle, with bullets, and his
other necessaries. Their parts of service.
These and the other shot on horseback do serve principally for great
Caualgadas, they serve to watch, to ward, to discover, to scoute, to forage,
to skirmish, for Ambuscados, for gaining of a straight, hills, and ground of
advantage, to be put for a forlorn. Sentinel, to discover the enemies
proceedings, They may alight on foot, and do the duty of foot shot.
to spoil forrages, and to assail troops at their lodgings, either in
villages, straights, or fields; and if occasion serve, they may alight and
serve on foot, either to assail a straight, to surprise a barrier, to
perform an Ambuscado, and in such points of sudden service, do the duty of
foot shot, wherein they may do many good pieces of service to the enemies
annoyance: who, if the enemy bring shot to displace them, they may dislodge, if
they find the party unequal, and betake them to their horse. In good
conductions, always seconded with the Pistoliers, or Lanciers.

Their parts incident


And in good conductions they are always seconded with armed Pistols or
Lances: for they are not lightly turned out to any piece of service upon armed
men, without being accompanied with Lances, or cuyrats on horseback, I mean
armed petranels or pistoliers. They ought to be very nimble both to mount on
horseback, and to dismount; to manage their horse every manner of way; to be
very ready and quick with their piece, discharging on every part, To perform
3. acts at one instant.
as cause shall require, inuring their horse both to the crack and fire; and
learn to perform three acts at one instant, his bridle hand, his piece, and
his spurs: wherein consists fine skill, with viuacitie of spirit, attained
by often use and practice. For they are the forlorn skirmishers on horseback,
who having performed their duty do retire behind their Lanciers and armed
pistols. And it is not enough to know how to ride a horse well, He ought to be
a good horseman and a good shot.
and unpracticed in his piece; neither is it enough to be skillful in his
piece, and ignorant in his horse: but the one must be coupled with the other
to make a perfect Hargulutier. The fiery weapon in the unskillful is
dangerous to themselves. General parts for horsemen.
For the fiery weapons being in hands of inexpert men, either on horseback or
foot, is of all other the most dangerous to themselves; and being in the hands
of perfect soldiers, is a weapon of most execution and advantage. To conclude,
all these aforesaid mounted people, ought to be seen and have some skill in
diseases of horses, and to know remedies for the same: and if need require, to
set a shoe also. All their baggage does pass with the munition and baggage of
the camp.


Gent. How are these troops sorted?


Capt. The discipline now used does require unto every five hundred Lances and
armed Cuyrats, The due sortme^t of horsemen.
one hundred, or one hundred and fifty of these aforesaid light horse.


Gent. What course does this General of the horse take with his troops, in
field, camp or garrison?


Capt. First he takes a roll of the bands committed to his charge (even as
does a Colonel of Infanterie with his) with the names of their Captains, The
General of the horsemen, his courses taken in field, camp, or garrison.
viewing well their mounting and arming, to see it be sufficient: and his
several sorts of horsemen disposed in several troops, as I said before; in
the morning when the trumpet sounds to make ready the horse, he shall
repair to the Lord Generals tent, to know his pleasure: the which being
known, he brings forth the Generals Ensign or standard, whereunto his
Captains do repair with their companies in a readiness, whom he ranketh in
good troops, each sort by them selves, with their Cornets and Guidons in
midst of their troops. And as occasion shall be offered, to send them
abroad, he shall appoint such as shall watch, scoute and discover, and others
to relieve them again, committing them to the Scout-maister.

When the high Marshall goes to view the ground.

When the army enters into the camp, his duty what to do.


When the Camp-maister General goes to view the ground to encampe upon, the
General of the horse sends sufficient troops to attend upon him.

When the army enters into the camp, he shall with all his Cauallerie,
remain mounted in the field, until the Infanterie be all encamped, and then
to enter orderly with his horse troops, and repair unto their allodgements,
using therein indifferency to each band in their kind; giving order unto his
Scoutes that they come not out of the field, until the trumpets sound to the
watch at night, and Corpse de guardes set, and Sentinels brought forth of the
camp and placed at their posts.

To guarde the forragers.
He must appoint horses to attend on the Forragers, to guard and defend them
till they return with their forage.

To guarde conuoies.
He must also appoint a convenient conuoy of horse to guard the victuallers of
the camp, as well from the enemy, as from unruly soldiers.

In skirmishes and encounters one troop to second another.
In the order of his skirmishes, encounters, and charges, he must give order,
one troop to second another, that if the first be repulsed, being well
seconded, they may have time to regather themselves into order again, sparing
his armed me^ from such skirmishes, and his La^ciers what he may, reserving
them to encounter with their equals, or break upon the enemies battle, as
occasion is offered: but always having a careful regard, A good Cau^at.
that his bands charge not too near the front of their own foot squadrons,
for fear of inconvenience that might ensue; as it fell out at the overthrow of
Gibleio: To epsy advantages, and to take them.
but rather espying what advantage he may, to charge the enemy in flank or in
rereward. For it is a great point of a man of war to find the occasion, and
to take it when it comes.


Gent. But has he the chief ordering of the squadrons of horse in battle, in
march, and in allodgement?


Capt. The chief ordering of the squadrons.
No, not the chief in those points, for that belongs to the Lord high
Marshall, or Camp-maister General, whose office is herein, as the Sergeant
Mayor General with foot companies.


The Campe-maister General or high Marshall, his Election, charge, and office.
THE FIRST DIALOGVE.
Wherein is set forth the parts to be expected in a Lord high Marshall: his
authority in an Army, and in the administration of justice, both civil, and
criminal: what officers attend upon him: with certain Martial orders, and
laws, etc.

Captain. THe office of the Campe-maister General, or Lord high Marshall, the
Prince with great consideration and advise, The high Marshall of the field, his
parts and duty.
does encharge upon a personage of great prudence and industry, and of great
experience and skill in martial causes; for that the administration of
justice, both civil and criminal, belongs unto his charge: and also the
encamping of the Army, and the fortifying the same with trenches, Corpse de
guards, Sentinels, and other military appertinances; and does assure with good
guards and scoutes all such as bring any manner of victuals unto the camp,
setting a rate and price upon all such vendible victual. And in the day of
battle he does preceede, His superintendencie in the day of battle.
and principally assist with all the Sergeant Majors of the Army, to the
disposing, ordering, and framing of all the battles, squadrons, and troops,
both of horse and foot appointed to fight, ordaining and commanding what
therein is to be done and executed: unto whom they and all the Colonels ought
to be obedient and to follow.


Gent. It seems to me by that which you have said, that in the Lord high
Marshall consists the most importancy of all the directions, and government
of the camp.


Capt. So does it indeed: and therefore it much behooves, that he which is to
perform this function, Skillful in all offices of war.
be a person singularly well skilled in all offices of war, and one who has
passed them through every office himself by degrees, (if such a one might be
found) the better to know what touches every one in particular.


Gent. What authority and power has he in the administration of justice?


Capt. Such (as I told you before) as have the Colonels: to command, to
apprehend, to discharge, and to punish both corporally, and with pain of
death, all delictes and cases, His authority in the administration of justice.
as shall deserve such semblable punishment; and on those that shall commit any
thing against the bandos, orders, and commands of the Lord high General, and
other superior officers: and has the chief hearing and determining of all
civil causes and questions arising among the people of war; and of the
appellations which are interposed from of the Sentences that were pronounced by
the Colonels, as high and supreme Iusticer of all the Army.


Gent. What officers has the Campe-maister General, or Lord high Marshal for
the execution of justice? The officers to the high Marshall.



Capt Among the Spaniardes, he has an Auditor, with his two Clerks, his
Alguazils, his iaylor, and executioner, and his Provost Marshal over the whole
ca^pe; with 20 or 30 Gentlemen to accompany him, and a Beadle to punish
Infraganti the offenses committed against the Bandos, laws, and orders of the
Camp.


Gent. What orders and laws are these?


Capt. Military laws and orders.
The orders are many, and of diverse nations used diversely, made by the high
General and his Counsel of war: but I take for military laws all those
which do charge, bind, and command the soldier upon pain of life, to live
honestly, to annoy no person without the leave of his General or superior
Commander; that he observe fidelity unto his Prince, that he use his arms in
their due nature and kind; and in sum, that he obey his superior officers,
under whose charge he swears to serve faithfully, and unto whom he is
soldier. The which points and articles are so general, and do comprehend so
many within them, that it were needful to recite some part of them
particularly; and chiefly such as condemn unto death: whereof such as I can
remember and gather together, I will declare unto you.

Martial laws.
1 First, whosoever commits or conspireth any treason against his Prince or
General, in what sort soever.

2 And he that gives any counsel, succor or aid unto his Princes enemies.

3 Item, whosoever uses any conference with the enemy without express license
from his General, or from one of the other two high Commanders.

4 Item, whosoever reuealeth their counsel and secrets unto the enemy; yea, or
unto any other of their own, chiefly if by the discovering thereof, any
mischief might ensue.

5 Item, who so sends unto the enemy either letter or message, without
license of the General, or his Lieutenant.

6 Item, whosoever gives not present advertisement unto his superior, of what
soever he shall understand and know, concerning the honor and benefit of his
Prince, or his Princes hinderance.

7 Item, whosoever runs from his own camp, or retireth to the enemy, or is
received under their defense and guard.

8 Item, whosoever being taken by the enemy, and escapes not, if conveniently
he might, except he has given his faith to be true prisoner, the which he
ought to observe and hold.

9 Item, whosoever renders up unto the enemy any town, fort, or fortress
committed to his custody, except he be more then constrained thereunto: and
having not performed therein the part of a good soldier, and an honest man.

10 Item, whosoever lifts up his hand against the person of his superior, or
against a Colonel, or other officer, with intent to offend him.

11 Item, whosoever puts his hand upon any head member or officer of any
regiment, or band whatsoever, especially when the said Commanders, or other
officer be in the execution of their office, except that the abouesayd do
wonderfully outrage and abuse him, and strike, and beat him without good
cause, and that to defend his life, being thereby in manifest peril.

12 Item whosoever shall kill his soldier upon his own fantasy, without just
cause, or kill any other of the Camp, otherwise then in his own defense.

13 Item, who soever shall raise any mutiny, or disobey the sounds of trumpet
or Drum in time of service, especially when they are made upon pain of death.

14 Item, who soever shall break truce, or peace, not having commission so to
do, from him that has authority for the same.

15 Item, who soever shall wilfully set fire in any house, or in any Church, or
in any other thing, without commandment of his Colonel.

16 Item, who soever shall ravish any woman or maid perforce.

17 Item, who soever shall spoil any Church without his Generals license.

18 Item, who soever shall enroll himself in two bands at once, or pass twice
in one Muster, or pass from Band to Band without license of his chief
Officers; for the Captain has no such authority.

19 Item, what Captain soever shall entertain any soldier departing from any
other Band without leave, or shall entice or procure any soldier so to do.

20 Item, who soever shall not follow his Ensign wheresoever it passes; or
any other guide being commanded thereunto.

21 Item, whosoever shall abandon his Ensign, or forsake the place he is to
keep, being in battle, without commandment so to do.

22 Item, whosoever shall not be found in the place where he was appointed and
set, but shall abandon the same.

23 Item, whosoever shall reveal the Watchword unto the enemy, or unto any
other, whereby any danger might ensue unto the camp.

24 Item, whosoever shall be found s^eeping at his post or Sentinel.

25 Item, whosoever shall abandon the place where he shall be set by his
Sergeant or other officer, whether it be in watch, ward, Sentinel, or scoute,
or in any other part, except he be removed by him which there placed him, or
other that he knows has the charge and authority thereof.

26 Item, whosoever being at Scoute or Sentinel, within or without the ca^pe,
and not found in his post, in case the enemy should assail the Camp, and
notice not given thereof through his default and negligence.

27 Ite^, whosoever is appointed to defend a breach, battery, trench, or
straight, and does quite abandon the same, although constrained by the enemy.

28 Item, whosoever, at the entry of any City, Town or Fort, taken by force
of arms, shall fall to the sack and spoil, and shall not follow his Colors,
whither soever it bends, without forsaking it at any time, until the
victory be fully achieved, and the General commands unto the sack by
sound of Drum or Trumpet; the which being not proclaimed and licenced, every
one ought to withhold their hands, and refrain from falling to the spoil and
pillage: upon the like pain.

29 Item, whosoever shall not do his endeavor and best to regaine and recover
his Colors, if by hap it fall into the enemies hands; and when it cannot be
recovered, it is needful to use some rigor upon such soldiers, as cowardly
suffered the same to be so lost.

30 Item, whosoever shall fly from the Battle, being there ranked and placed,
or march slow or fearfully, being upon point to fight; or show any other base
cowardice in what bad sort soever.

31 Item, whosoever shall feign himself sick upon the point of fight, or
slip a side when any action is to be performed.

32 Item, whosoever shall see his Commander or Superior officer in danger of
the enemy, and shall not presently assist and succor him to the best of his
power.

33 Item, whosoever shall rifle or dispoile any victualler (except of the
enemy) or any which brings any munitions or provisions for the camp.

34 Item, whosoever shall disualedge or spoil any of the Princes friends, or
rob, or steal any thing, especially arms and horses.

35 Item, whosoever shall ransacke, rifle, or ill entreat the people of the
country where the war is made, either in goods or person, except it be
proclaimed rebel to the Prince.

36 Item, whosoever is found disgarnished of his Arms, wherewithal he first
entered into the roll, chiefly if he has lost the same in gaming or by cowardly
flying away, and abandoning his weapon: or by any other such base default of
his: and the same law is to be understood of any horseman that shall play away
his horse or furniture; or loose the same through vilty or negligence, to be
constrained to restore the like, or the value, as is accustomed.

37 Item, whosoever shall stragle, wa^der, or range from the circuit of his
quarter, or regiment above a 100 pases, without license of one of his Superior
officers.

38 Item, whosoever shall receive any stranger or any other suspected person
into his lodging or quarter, without having first presented him before his
General or Superior, and shall have license of his Superior so to do.

39 Item, whosoever shall raise any question, brable, or braule in the watch,
or Ambuscado, or in scoute, or Sentinel, or in any other effect, where silence,
secrecy, and covert is to be required.

40 Item, whosoever shall be found first to injury any other either in word or
deed, for that quarrels do spring from injuries, and from quarrels and
braules, great disorders in a camp.

41 Item, whosoever shall run to any braule or fray, furnished with any other
arms, more then his sword and dagger, except he be a Captain, or any other
officer in the camp.

42 Item, whosoever shall offer himself to revenge any injury, either
presently offered, or of long time before, rather by any other way, then by
course of order and reason: yet is it not hereby forbidden, but that the Combat
may be demanded, of body to body, if the difference may not otherwise be
accommodated: which is a point reserved only to the General.

43 Item, whosoever shall offer any thrust, or blow, or push against his
adversary, with whom he has debate, either in jest or earnest, or in any other
sort, if an other cry Hola, or hold, with intent to depart them, except it be
in Combat, where no man shall be so hardy as so to cry or say, were it not the
General himself.

44 Item, whosoever shall take away the money that another has rightly won in
game, or put his hand thereupon without leave of him, who so has gained it.
But it seems good unto me, to the end to do well, and to avoid, and
withstand many inconveniences growing by game, utterly to forbid the same.

45 Item whosoever shall use any shifting, or cosenage, or packing, or any
manner of false play, or any manner of false dice, whereby any may be defrauded.

46 Item, whosoever shall put himself to pass on before the battle, whether
it be to arrive first at his lodging, or to any other such effect, or shall
disband and range from one place to another, whilst the battle or army does
march.

47 Item, whosoever shall set a tallage, rate, or ransom upon his host where
he does lodge, or other, being no prisoner in due course of war: and being
taken prisoner by just course of war, that then such ransom shall not exceed
the Capitulation made and agreed upon by the Commanders of the two Armies, if
any such be made: and if not, that then it be done with as much favor as may
be.

48 Item, whosoever shall enter into any Camp, Castle, or Fort of war,
otherwise then by the ordinary ports and issues, or shall pass out, either
over, or under the walls, it is a capital offense.

49 Item, whosoever shall prolong the retrait after that the drum or trumpet
has sounded the same: whether it be at any sallies made out of any city or
fortress, or in skirmish, or in any other encounter.

50 Item, whosoever speaks loud, or makes any noise, or rumor, whilst he
is in skirmish, battle, or otherwise, where silence is to be used, except they
be Co^manders and Officers.

51 Ite^, whosoever shall pass one whole day, without carrying or using his
assigned weapon, some part thereof; except he be otherwise employed in the
Princes service.

52 Item, whosoever shall do any thing whatsoever, or in whatsoever manner, that
might prejudice his Princes service, or be hurtful to his fellows.

53 Item, whosoever shall blaspheme the name of the eternal God, by vile
oaths, or otherwise.

Finally many other laws and articles are to be inserted, All martial laws
to be written in tables, and fixed up for every man to read.
as the General and Commanders shall devise and appoint, according to the
causes and occurrants: both the which, and all these, I would wish to be
written in some fair table, and fixed fast at the entrance of every Coronels
pauillion, for every man to view, read, and understand, An army without good
orders soon grows to confusion.
besides the open proclaming of the same. All the which, and many others, are
to be commanded to be observed and kept, to the end that good order and
reformation be had in the Camp; the which without the same, would soon grow to
confusion.


Gent. Doubtless (Captain) he which is chosen to be Maester del Campo
General, or Lord high Marshall of the field, ought to be a man of great wit,
experience, gravity, and knowledge, since so many things do concern him to
direct, govern, and administer: and principally the allodgeing or encamping of
the Army; the which seems to be a matter of great importance and skill.


Capt. No greater matter of charge that I know of, in the war; for besides
that it requires great practice and experience to discern what part is
fittest for the Cauallerie, The encamping of an Army, a thing of great
importance. Great considerations.
and what place for the Infanterie, and in what quarters the Artillery ought to
be planted, and in what parts the Corpse de guard, scouts, and Sentinels: yet
without comparison, it behooves him much more to have the reason, judgment,
and skill to discern whether the situatio^ has the parts and commodities to
be required; Situation and grounds a principal point.
and whether it be pitched in a place fit and convenient to defend the^ from the
attempts of the enemy: and that the provisions and victuals may safely pass
and come unto the camp, with a number of such other points; to effect the
which it is very important and necessary, that he be well skilled and practiced
in the country where he warreth, Skillful in the Country. Well seen in
Geography. Plats and Maps.
and that he be very well seen and skillful in the Geography thereof, having
the same perfectly drawn in plats and Mappes, with their Cities, Towns,
villages, forts, fortresses, farms, and Country houses, and the distance from
one to (...) our instructions: for God knows what world may fall out yet ere
we dye.


Capt. Well (Gentlemen) since you do still egg and draw me on, with your
curious demaundes, I will show you (the best I can) the orders observed by the
best Italian and Spanish Encampers.

Brief repetition.
You know that I have showed you before, of the general and particular parts of
a soldier, their several offices, even from the Caporall unto his
Camp-maister general: the number of a band, their due sortment and difference
of weapons, and their several uses: the orders of training, marching, and
embattailling in sundry manners now most in use; the several parts and duty
of every officer in degree, with a number of other points which now I remember
not. Now lastly to your demand touching the marching and allodgement of a
camp, I say: That when an Army marches near unto the enemies Army, it is
needful that there be had many and great considerations: Many and great
considerations in the marching of an Army.
as first when the one Army is not of equal force unto the other, or when one
is not disposed to come to the fact of battle, for not to put, by one only
battle into the hands of fortune all a man's ability and whole rest in fine,
as many misaduised men have done; therefore to prolong time, and to shun the
doubtful fact of arms, it were needful to make choice to march (if possible
you may) through mountain grounds and hilly, and with such advantage of
seat and ground, that the enemy may not with any reason of advantage, assault
you: But when this may not be yet eschued, at the least it is to be procured
to be done to the best advantages, and (as it were) with a certain hope of
victory; the which may partly be performed when you know how to profit your
self with the advantage that the situation will afford. And in your marching,
I would wish you to send some part of your light horse so near unto the enemy,
as continually you have notice of all their orders and courses. True it is,
that when you are in a country, where this advantage of hills is not to be
found, and must of necessity march through plains and champaine fields, and
have the enemy near at hand, it were then very hard to shun and avoid
battle, the which I would rather wish to be done, then otherwise, especially
if your Army do surmount your enemy in Cauallerie, for in such cases the
battle is not to be refused, your strength consisting most in horse, the which
by good conduction, gives a great part to the victory.

To march upon grounds of advantage, as did Fabius Maximus.

Charles the fifth.


This manner of marching upon grounds of advantage, we read antiquity to have
used; as did Fabius Maximus, when he encamped a long time with the Roman
Army, against the conqueror Hanniball: and in our time, as did Charles the
fifth in Germany, against the Protestants Army: both the which, by reason of
the situations and seats, did many times encampe and lodge with their armies,
not distant one from the other, above a Culuerine shot: the which might
possible be, by reason of the hills and mountain seats abounding in them
places. But this is seldom seen in the plains, Considerations to be had, the
Army marching in plains and champaines.
and champain grounds; in the which it is needful for him that shunneth the
battle, to march and pass, at the least, eight or ten miles distant from the
enemy: and must think to fortify at every allodgement, in such sort and
manner, that neither horse nor foot, in any array of battle, may not, but
with great difficulty, charge or enter upon you; the which is sufficient with
a campall fortification, or running camp, as some term it; and chiefly
because it ought to be done with great speed and diligence, the which
encamping, when it shall seem you good to continue, may be reduced into such
strength, as might seem sufficient.

And in the marching which the army shall make through plains and champain
fields, Points of advantage.
when it comes to pass to have either any little river, wood, or grove to
cover one flank of the camp, all diligence is to be used to gain such said
advantage: for it will be a matter of great importance. Always having a
regard, that the artillery, munition, and other impediments do always pass
on the contrary side from the enemy: and also that the squadrons of men at
arms, Men at arms and Lanciers to fla^ke the arrayes.
and Lanciers do flank the arrayes and battallions next toward the enemy, in
sort and manner convenient. And moreover a laudable custom it is, to divide the
camp into three squadrons or battles; The marching army divided into
vantguard, battle and rereward.

Their orders.


that is, in vantguard, battle and rereward, and every day to change the
point, making the vantguard, battle; and the battle rereward; and the
rereward, vantguard: and that every one of these parts may have their due
proportions and numbers of Cauallerie and shot, distinguished in their
convenient places; aduertising with great diligence and care, that there be
not mingled any unprofitable people among the Ordinances and squadrons of the
Infanterie; Unprofitable people to be shifted out of the squadron.
and that every battle be placed in their due appointed places and distances,
under their Ensigns and colors; in such sort that all the troops of
Cauallerie be quite cleared of unprofitable horses, and other impediments,
wherein the Germans horsemen do keep great order, Unprofitable horses and
impediments cleared. Part of the light horses to be continually abroad.
care, and diligence; very necessary to be imitated. It is a very good custom
besides, that part of the light horse be continually abroad at discovery and
scout; and to watch after every action that the enemies Army does, that you
may be always advertised thereof: so that, if occasion be, you may have
time, space, and commodity to prepare to the encounter and battle. Touching
the order of marching the camp, there can be no particular rules set down,
Referring to the third and fourth book.
more then I have before spoken of in the third and fourth book (where I have
entreated of the framing of squadrons, marching an Army, and of dividing the
same into Maniples, coming unto any straight passage or narrow ways) because
it must be accommodated according to the situation and quality of the country
wherein you march.

Let us now therefore pass on to speak of the allodgement of a camp; Parts
to be considered in the allodgement of a camp.

The situation, i^ plains.

Considerations.


and of the seats, and the form, and of the greatness, and of the
commodities, and of the fortifying the same; and of the orders to be therein
observed. And first touching the situation, I say; that being in a plain or
champain field, far distant from mounts and hills, it is then necessary to
have either rivers, or such quantity of waters, as may commodiously serve the
whole camp, both horse and foot: with aduisement that there may be had, from
the next adjoining woods, timber of all sorts, for the use and needs of the
camp: the like consideration is also to be had for forage for the horses, as
things not to be carried always after a camp: and to do it (when these
commodities may be had) with such sure fortifications, that the enemy may not
annoy you.

The circuit and greatness of the camp, The circuit of the camp.
ought not to be such, that might hinder, in any occasion offered, to succor,
keep and defend the same, as is convenient and needful; neither yet that it
be of such straightness, and narrowness, that the Army cannot have all his
commodities, eases, and places necessary to frame their squadrons, and set
themselves in battle ray: and common places for victuallers, pioners, and
others following the camp.

The forms.
And touching the form, it shall be such and in such order, as shall appear by
the plats and draughtes; accommodating the same unto the situations and
grounds: as moreover shall be seen every quarter with their places and
streets to issue forth, and with the place of the Generals lodging. And all
these things shall be set down in the most plainest and best order that we can.

Mountain situations.

Considerations.


And when in like sort it shall happen and occur to encampe upon any mountain
situation or hill: or may be variably set, as in a valley, near broken rocks,
rivers, woods, or hollow ways, and such like, if the Camp-maister General be
a skillful man of war (as he ought to be) and perfect in encamping an Army,
he may advantage himself greatly therewith: and shall with little art, most
strongly fortify his camp or allodgement. To beware to encampe in place
subject to any hill.

Dangerous.


But above all he must be well advised that he encampe not in any place
subject unto any hill or mount, or any alture that may ouerlooke the camp, and
so from thence batter the Curtines of the rampires; for being so occupied by
the enemy, the General should be forced to dislodge, and happily constrained
to fight to his great disadvantage: as it was like to fall out unto Frauncis
the French king, Example by Francis the French king at Cambresie.
when he was encamped at Cambresie, upon the borders of Picardie, for leaving
a little hill vnpossest, upon the one side of his encampement, the which
discovered over all his camp, and lay right over against the Curtines thereof:
Charles the fifth.
and the Emperor Charles, coming thither with his Army, the said place being
espied and reknowledged by his Captains, was by them encouraged, that,
although the hour were late, and his people much wearied with long marching,
yet were it not good to lose, and let slip the occasion to gain so
aduantagious a seat: But this profitable and prudent advise, was, by some
others of great authority, contradicted, saying; that the morning ensuing, the
same might be better performed. The which fell not so out; for the king being
advised of this error, sent that night his Italian Infanterie to take and
fortify the same hill: which did frustrate the Emperors desseignes.

There are many and sundry aduertisements to be yet given, touching the
marching, and encamping of an Army, but, for not to be tedious, I pass them
over; The Cauallerie in their allodgement to be defended by the Infanterie.
only aduertising that the Cauallerie, in their quarters and allodgement,
would be defended and shadowed by the Infanterie, as much as reasonably might
be; for that, upon any sudden alarm given, the horse are far more unready
then the foot, and do require a longer time in arming, and ordering; and of
the footmen, the shot to be sooner ready then the pikes, and therefore in the
encamping, the due consideration of each of these is to be had: as I have in my
plat of encamping, in fol. 157. set down.


THE FOVRTH DIALOGVE.
Wherein is set down the form, order, and Arithmeticall rules, for an
encampement, both horse and foot, with the quantity of ground for every man
and horse, his room and station, and the plats to the same, etc.

Captain. NOw for the better declaration of these allodgements and encamping,
we will give an example with his figure. To encampe therefore an Army in
Campania, with his due measures, well proportioned, according unto the seat
and place, it is necessary to know the superficies or face of the quarters of
the Cauallerie and Infanterie, with their due places and streets, and other
things necessary to the service of the camp.

And for example; An encampement of 36000. fighting men.
Let us suppose to make an encampement of 36000 fighting men: that is to say;
1000 men at arms; 3000 Lanciers, and 2000 light horse and Hargulutiers: and of
footmen 15000 shot, 12000 pikes, and 3000 short weapons. 8. allodgements to a
man at arms.

4. allodgement to a Lancier.

Every allodgement, 50 superficial foot, is 10 in length, 5 breadth.


Unto every man at Arms, we will allow 8 lodgings, and unto every Lancier and
Hargulutier we will allow 4 lodgings: and unto every room or lodging, as well
of Lanciers and light horse, as men at Arms, we will give 50 superficial
foot of ground, which shall be 5 foot in breadth, and 10 foot in length, as in
this figure may appear.



And unto every foot soldier, Every foot man's allodgement 64 superficial
foot.
with his furniture, we will allow 64 superficial foot of ground for his
lodging: which shall be 8 foot in length, and 8 foot in breadth, as appears
by this figure.



This being known, you shall then in the most commodious place about the
midst of the ground where you mean to encampe, The Generals standard.
set up the Generals standerd, and about the same, stake out a square plat of
ground of fifty or threescore pases square, for the Generals pauillion and
place. Then shall be lined out two straight streets, which shall come to cut
or cross one another at right angles in the midst of the Generals place; The
principal streets.
the which are called the principal streets, or Captain ways, extending East
and West, and North and South, or as the seat and region will permit. At the
head of every one of the which, shall be a guard and watch toward the enemy,
At every streets end, a guard.
and an issuing out of the Camp. The which two long streets, crossed at right
angles, as is aforesaid, comes to quarter your encamping ground into four
equal parts, the center whereof shall be the Generals pauillion and place, and
the other allodgements and quarters to be distinguished as in the Plat
following shall at large and particularly appear. The Generals pauillion.



The first plat of encampment.
An encampment of 30000 footmen, and 6000 horsemen, allodged and fortified in
an open Campania: having a river running on the one side.
Sorted 15000 shot. Sorted 12000 pikes. Sorted 03000 short weapons. sum 30000
footmen.
Sorted 1000 men at arms. Sorted 3000 Launciers. Sorted 2000 Light horse shot.
sum 6000 horsemen.


In this first figured plat of encampement of 30000 footmen and 6000 horsemen,
distinguished and quartered as particularly above appears, I have seated the
General with some other chief Commanders, in the center of all the men of
war, as by their several descriptions may be seen. I have moreover
distinguished the said camp into the usual names of Vauward, Battle, and
Rereward, the pikes and shot, marked with the letter A, do belong to the
Vauward, unto whom do answer the Launciers, marked with the said letter A. And
those marked with the letter B; do betoken the battle; unto them do answer the
men at arms, marked with B, also. And those marked with the letter C, are for
the reregard, unto whom do answer the light horse or Carbins, signed with the
like letter C. The farther declaration, practike rule, and order of the said
encampement, shall on the next side following be at large declared and shown.

The second figure of encampment.
This figure denotes an incamping in a valley betwixt 2 hills, with a small
river running in the midst: the one of the said hills being near unto the
camp, is to be fortified as appears: and the other being a sufficient
distance off; not.



You are to understand that in this figured incampement, the letter A does
signify the places of arms of the quarters of the Cauallery and Infantery,
with the General his place in the midst; and also the place of Arms
general: and all the streets and spaces betwixt the trenches and the lodgings
or quarters. The letter B does signify the quarters of the Launciers, and
light horse: the letter C, the quarters of the men at Arms: the letter D
denotes the quarter of the Infantery, pikes, and shot: the letter E, the place
of munition of the Artillery: the letter F, the allodgements of the chief
officers, and Noblemen: the letter G, the marketplace; the place of munition of
victuals: the letter I does signify the rooms for the pi^oners, artificers,
and the cattle that is to be slaughtered for the use of the camp (with this
prouiso, that there be none slaughtered within the trenches, nor any garbage,
nor other filth there to be suffered.) Finally the letter K denotes the fort
upon the hill, or little mount.

Capt. In the first of these two figured plats of encampement of 30000
footmen, and 6000 horsemen, A declaration of the former encampement. The
Generals place. The Lord Marshals allodgement.

The Treasurers allodgement.

The place of munition.

The place of market.


distinguished as there appears; I have dissigned for the Generals pauillion
and place, 80 pases square, comprehending therein the breadth of the two maine
streets, of 20 pases each in breadth. Upon one quarter of the Generals place,
is lodged the Lord Marshall and his retinew; upon another quarter is lodged the
Treasurer, with extraordinary Gentlemen and Ambassadors: upon another quarter
is the munition of victuals; and upon the last quarter, is made the place of
market: every of these 4 quarters, and places containing their narrow front,
butting upon the maine street South and North, and East and West, 45 pases and
in length 63 pases, fronting along the small cross streets. Round about three
of the said quarters, is drawn a small street, of 10 pases broad, and on the
other part is a street running, of 15 pases broad: without the which streets,
upon the one side of the Generals place, and the other two places of the Lord
Marshall, and munition of victuals, The 1000 men at arms quarter
I have quartered the 1000 men at arms in 4 little quarterets containing in
every quarteret 250 men at arms: allowing for every man at arms 6
allodgements, and 2 allodgements for his place of arms, which are 8
allodgements; containing every allodgement 50 superficial foot of ground, The
rule to work it.
that is, 10 foot in length, and 5 for breadth. Now, the working thereof is
thus: multiply the 1000 men at arms by 8 allodgements, it makes 8000
allodgements, the which 8000 multiply again by 50 foot superficial, which is
allowed for every allodgement, and it makes 400000 superficial foot; the
which 400000, 25 foot do make a superficial pase of 5 foot.
divide by 25, it comes out to be 16000 pases superficial, for 25
superficial foot, do make a superficial pase. So the 1000 men at arms do
require, 16000 pases superficial for their quarters, and place of arms. Now
to divide these 1000 men at arms into 4 little quarterets, each quarteret
co^taining 250 men at arms, divide the 16000 pases superficial by 4, and the
product will be 4000 superficial pases for every quarteret, whose square root
is 63, for the square of each quarteret, being quartered one way, with the
great maine street of 20 pases broad, ^ Their place of arms. ^ The light
horsemens quarter.
and the other way with a lesser street of 10 pases broad. Now to know the
square side of all these 4 quarterets, extract the quadrat root of the 16000
superficial pases, being 126 pases, and that is the due square of every side.
Finally to know what square of ground, the place of arms for these thousand
men at arms shall contain, multiply the 1000 men at arms by two allodgements
of every man, and it amounts 2000 allodgements: then again multiply these
2000 by 50 foot superficial for each allodgement, and it makes 100000
superficial foot, this 100000 superficial foot, divide by 25, to bring them
into superficial pases, and it produces 4000 pases superficial; of this 4000
pases superficial take the quadrat root, which comes out to be 63 pases
square, little more.

Thus the place of arms of these 4 little quarterets, co^taining in them all
1000 men at arms, does contain 63 pases square, besides the breadth of the
two streets, which cross the quarters, not comprehended therein. Upon the
other side of the Generals place, and also without the two other places of
market, and Noblemens lodgings, Southward, I have dissigned the 2000 light
horse, or Carbins, divided from the same by a street of 10 pases broad: unto
every light horse I have allowed 3 allodgements, and one allodgement for his
place of arms, which do make 4 allodgements for every lighthorse. Now to
multiply the 2000 light horse by 4, and it produces 8000 allodgements: then I
multiply again the 8000 by 50 foot, and it amounts unto 40000 foot
superficial; then to bring the^ into superficial pases, I divide the 4000000
foot by 25 (for 25 superficial foot, do make a superficial pase) and the
product will be 16000 superficial pases, ^
for their quarters and places of arms. Now, to repart these 2000 light horse
into 4 little quarterets, each quarteret co^taining 500 light horse, I divide the
16000 pases superficial by 4, and the product is 4000 superficial pases, for
every quarteret, the square root whereof is 63, being quartered one way with
the great maine street of 20 pases broad, running North and South, and the
other way with a lesser street of 10 pases broad, running East and West. Now
again, to know the square side of all these 4 quarterets; take the quadrat
root of the 16000 superficial pases, which is 126 and little more, and that
is the due square of every side of all the 4 quarterets, not comprehending the
breadth of the 2 streets which cross the same therein; and the of 126, which is
63, is the just square side of every one of the 4 little quarterets. And now
lastly to know what quantity of ground the place of arms for these 2000 light
horse will require, Their place of arms.
I multiply the 2000 light horse by 1 allodgement, which is 50 superficial
foot, and it makes 100000 superficial foot, the which 100000 I divide by
25, so it comes out to be 4000 superficial pases, the quadrat root whereof
is 63 and a little more, and so much contains their place of arms, besides
the breadth of the aforesaid two cross streets, the which do enlarge their
place of arms by so much. Thus are the men at arms lodged upon one side of
the Generals place, and the light horse upon the other side, as in the plat
plainly appears.

Next, upon the West part of the Generals place, and without the two quarters
or lodgings of the Marshall and Treasurer, with a street of 10 pases broad
betwixt, I have lodged the 3000 launciers in 6 little quarterets, The 3000
lanciers quartered into 6 quarterts.
containing each 500 launciers; unto every launcier I have given 3 allodgements
of 50 superficial foot per allodgement, and 1 allodgement for his place of
arms; the which are in all 4 allodgements to every Lancier. Now, I multiply
the 3000 launciers by 4 allodgements, and it amounts 12000 allodgements, the
which 12000 I multiply again by 50 foot superficial, and it makes 600000
superficial foot, the which 600000 superficial foot to bring them into
pases, I repart by 25, and it produces 24000 superficial pases. Now this
24000 superficial pases, I divide again by 6 (for that I allodge the 3000
lanciers in 6 quarterets) and the product will be 4000 superficial pases for
every quarteret, the quadrat root whereof being 63 little more, is the due
square of pases every way, of every one of these 6 quarterets: Their place of
arms. ^
then again I repart the 6000 lanciers by 6, and there comes forth 500
launciers to be allodged in every quarteret. Now to give unto these 3000
launciers their convenient places of arms, I allow unto every 1000 launciers
their place of arms contained betwixt two quarterets, allowing for the same
unto every Launcier one allodgement of 50 superficial foot; to do the which,
I multiply the 1000 launciers (which are contained within each two quarterets)
by 50 foot superficial, being the content of one allodgement, and it
amounts 50000 superficial foot, the which 50000 superficial foot, to
bring them into pases, I divide by 25, and it produces 2000 superficial
pases; the quadrat root whereof being 45 pases little less, is the due square
of the place of arms allowed for 1000 lanciers, allodged within two quarterets
(as in the plat appears) besides the breadth of the streets which do divide
the same, by so much enlarging every place of arms. Thus the 3000 launciers
are divided and allodged into 6 quarterets and unto every two quarterets is
appointed their place of arms, as in the first plat of encampment may appear.

Next upon the out sides of these 6 quarterets of launciers, A street of 15
pases broad.
and about the men at arms, and the place of victuals and market place, and
lastly about the Carbines or lighthorse, have I drawn and staked out a street
of 15 pases broad, to separate the horse companies from the foot, as by a red
line there drawn will appear. Then round about this said street, The 3000
footemens allodgement. The rule.
have I quartered and allodged the 30000 footmen into 30 quarterets,
distinguished by streets of 10 pases broad, containing in each 1000 footmen,
and unto every two quarterets their place of arms. Now to do the which, I have
given unto every footman for his allodgement 64 superficial foot of ground,
and unto every one 32 superficial foot of ground for his place of arms, both
the which sums do make 96 superficial foot of ground for every foot
soldier with the place of arms. This being done, I multiply the 30000
footmen by 96 superficial foot, and it comes unto 2880000 superficial
foot of ground for the quarters of these 30000 footmen, the which 2880000
superficial foot, I divide by 25 to bring them into superficial pases (for
25 superficial foot do make a superficial pase) and it produces 115200
superficial pases. Now, for as much as I do bestow and place these 30000
footmen, round about the Generals Pauillion and place, and wthout the ring of
the horsemens quarters (for the more surer guard of the General, and better
defense of the horsemen, who are longer time in arming then are the footmen,
if the enemy should offer any sudden attempt) and for that I think good to
divide them into 30 quarterets; Reparted into 30 quarterets.
I do repart the said 115200 superficial pases by 30, and the product will be
3840 superficial pases for every quarteret; the square root whereof being 62
pases (little less) is every quarteret of 1000 footmen, square by every side.

Now to give unto every two quarterets their place of arms, containing each
quarteret 1000 footmen, Their places of Arms.
is in both 2000 men, allowing to every foot soldier 32 superficial foot
for his place of arms, I do multiply the 2000 men by 32, and it amounts
unto 64000 superficial foot; then to bring them into pases, I divide the
64000 pases by 25, and there comes out 2560 superficial pases, whose quadrat
root is 50 and little more, the which 50 pases is the due square of every side
of the place of arms belonging unto 2 quarterets, besides the breadth of the
street which deuideth the said two quarterets; for by so much the more is the
place of arms enlarged. Thus are the 30000 footmen lodged, and divided into
30 quarterets, containing each quarteret 1000 men; and every square side of the
said quarteret, does contain 62 pases; and unto every 2 quarterets, is given
their place of arms, extending each way 50 pases, besides the breadth of the
streets that cutteth the same in the midst, whereby the places of arms be so
much enlarged.

And because that the shot are more ready then the pikes, I have placed almost
all the shot in the ring of almost all the outmost quarterets, The placing of
the shot.
to be ready to skirmish with the enemy (if he should attempt any thing)
whilst the other foot and horse do arm themselves: the which shot being in
all 15000, I have distributed thus. In the 4 quarterets which are upon the 4
angles of the allodgements, I have placed 750 shot, and into every one of the
other outermost quarters there is set 500 shot, being 20 outmost quarters,
besides the 4 angles; so there is bestowed about the ring of the allodgements
10000 shot: more in the 4 corner quarterets 3000 shot; and the other 2000 shot
are placed in the 4 other inmost quarterets, amongst the halberds and short
weapons: finally, all the pikes are placed in the quarterets within the shot;
as in the first plat of an encampement does particularly appear.

Munition of the Artillery.
Moreover, upon the North east angle of the encampement, I have desseigned the
place of munition of the Artillery, of 160 pases square; and on the South east
corner of the encampement, Places for victualers.
is there left 2 other smaler places of 65 pases broad, and 160 pases long,
serving for victualers, butchers, cooks, bakers, and such like: and without
them again, is there another long place for horses, oxen, and cattle serving
the camp: and upon the South side of the encampement are lodged, the wagoners,
carters, laborers, and some pioners: and again upon the North side of the
encampement, Places of the wagoners. Place for the gunners and artificers, and
pioners Place of arms general.
and by the place of munition of the Artillery, is placed first, the gunners,
and some officers of the Ordinance, and then the carpenters, wheel-wrights,
smiths, laborers, and some pioners, as there severally appears. And betwixt
the place of munition of the Ordinance, and the victualers place in the middle
front of the encampement, due east is placed the place of Arms general,
containing in breadth 280 pases, and 160 pases in length, East and West, and
upon the after front of this place of Arms general is placed, armourers,
cutlers, and such like, and at the one front of the 2 places of the victualers,
cooks, and bakers, are placed tailors, Division of the encampement. The
artillery placed.
shomakers, and such like. Moreover the encampement is divided East, and West
with 9 streets, and it is divided North and South, with 6 streets, of which,
the 2 maine streets do contain in breadth 20 pases, and the 4 others (lined
with red, East, and West, North, and South) 15 pases broad a piece, and the
rest (being small streets) of 10 pases broad every one. Finally, the ordinance
is placed, about 60 pases distant from the ring of the encampement, with a good
vaumure cast up before them; and the Artillery planted upon the same. Last of
all, is there a running trenche cast round about the Camp, A running trench.
about 80, or 100 pases distant without the vaumure of the Ordinance. All the
which matters do particularly appear in the aforesaid plat of encampement: but
if this Camp were to continue any long time upon some seat or place, then must
it be more stronger fortified, with deeper ditches, stronger bulwarks, and
scances, thicker terraplenes, higher caualleros and mounts, to scour with the
Ordinance round about the Camp, or otherwise fortified in such strong sort, as
the prudent Camp-maister, with his skillful enginers shall think good and
devise. The lodgings and tents of the Chief Commanders both of horse and
foot, Lodging of the commanders.
may be seated on the front of every their places of arms. To conclude I give
advertisement of one thing worthy noting: that there be no slaughter house
kept within the Ring of the Camp, No slaughter house kept within the ring of
the camp. Good considerations.
or any garbadge left; or any other thing of annoyance or stink, and also that
you encampe in no infectious place, least the corrupted air do infect your
people; as it did the French Kings camp before Naples.

This aforesaid calculation, By these rules well conceived, may any encampement
be made, and assigned.
method, and rule of encamping, will serve for example for another sort of
encamping upon any situation, of what number of men soever. But it must be
thoroughly conceived, practiced often, and the due measures well considered:
and having all the aforesaid points perfectly in sense and memory, there may
be made any encamping very readily; with the due proportion and measures of
the quarters, places, streets, and all other parts necessary to the same
encampement, upon what situation soever it be: as by the aforesaid writings,
rules, method, and desseignes, may be understood and learned,


THE FIFTH DIALOGVE.
Wherein is discoursed touching the removing of a Camp; and of the care and
diligence to be had therein.

Gentleman. TRuly (Captain) you have made a long discourse of the encamping of
an Army: and I never thought it had bin a matter of such skill and readiness,
whereby I perceive, it is not the least point of your Martial matters.


Capt. No truly, but rather one of the greatest, and a point of great
consideration, The encamp^ment is a point of great consideration.
care, and skill, and it imports much for a Campe-maister General to be most
expert therein: for by bad regard, and little skill, the whole camp may come to
be in hazard.


Gent. But I pray you what order is observed in removing of a camp, and
withdrawing from the enemy? The removing of a camp.



Capt. The marching and the encamping of an army being a continuate thing, the
dislodging or removing of a Camp must needs be a consequence. Therefore I
will with as much brevity, as I may conveniently, declare unto you what I
conceive thereof; and that which has bin seen in our time touching the same.
Presupposing therefore, that there be two enemy Armies, encamped within sight
one of another, or at the least not far distant asunder, and because it is a
most important matter, to know how many and sundry operations a brave man of
war or good chief may do, yet herein there is many considerations to be had.
For although to retire by night, Removing by night.
and to remove away from the enemy, does seem to be the surest remedy that can
be found, me thinks, notwithstanding that the same is not sufficient enough to
attain an intention with security, if the said retirer be not befriended,
either with the situation, or with some other parts and conditions of the
country whether he means to retire. And coming unto the particulars, I say;
that when a camp remoueth and dislodgeth by night, it is needful to use all
possible silence and diligence, Silence and diligence.
the which if it be not assisted with the seat, and qualities of the country,
it is not yet enough; as he which is to march thorough a plain and champain
country, and in open places, and not having (upon any occasion offered by the
enemy) some woods, valley, river, rocks, or such like, thorough the which me^
may hardly pass; but being so (as I say) it may the^ suffice to hold skirmish:
for that the enemies horse approaching may be thereby hindered and kept back;
but otherwise one should be constrained to fight against ones will, with great
disorder, especially carrying along the Artillery and other impediments of the
camp, To observe good array.
the which with reason is not to be left in pray to the enemy. And in like
sort it is not convenient to march the Army out of his ordinary pace, for if a
man be over sollicitous and hasty therein, it would easily conioyne an evil
opinion unto the soldiers former conceit, grown by such dislodging and
retiring: a matter truly of great danger to cause an vnremediable disorder to
ensue, as many times it has bin seen come to pass, whereas the army that
pursues the enemy, The pursuer.
has not those impediments and difficulties: for they may leave all
impediments behind. And if the pursuer do march with speed, it is done with
more desire and courage; the chieftaines using brave and honorable words, as
in such cases be convenient, and therefore (in mine opinion) the dislodging by
night is not very secure, Aided by advantage. Example.
unless it be (as I said) befriended and aided with some seat of advantage:
as it chanced unto the aforesaid Francis the French King, when at Cambresy, he
retired from the Emperor by night, that by the benefit of a great wood he
might save his Army: and having passed thorough the same, when the enemies
horse ouertooke him, where he made a stand; and where as well by reason of the
advantage of that wood, as by the commodity of the seat where he stood, he
might well and boldly fight with the enemy, as by experience of them of the
Emperors part was seen: who over greedily pursuing the enemy, issued out of
the wood, even upon his troops, where the most part of them were slain, or
taken prisoners.

Example.
The very same case happened also unto the protestants Army in Germany, when
they would remove and withdraw themselves from the Emperors camp, being both
the Camps near encamped together, that dislodging by night, they had not
far to march, to enter into a very strong valley, where they could not, but
with the enemies great disadvantage, be charged and set upon: and for that
there was in the same valley a little hill, the same was presently possessed by
the protestants, and planted with good store of field ordinance, and with
strong troops of foot and horse, and in such sort occupied, that what with
this preparation, and with that which they made in a near adjoining wood,
planting the same full of small shot; the Emperors power could not pursue
them, as they had pretended. For as soon as they were approached near unto
them, they saw that they were retired unto a place both by art and nature most
strong: and therefore were let pass without any more annoyance. Wherefore I
say, that with the favor of the seat, and quality of the country, the
dislodgement may be thus assured; as by the above recited examples may appear.
Better to dislodge by night then by day.
And always it is far better to dislodge by night then by day, for to gain
at the least, the distance of ground, to conduct the Camp to place of security
and strength: Considerations.
for the removing by day, without the great help and security of the seat,
most commonly is very dangerous; except the Remouer should far abound in
Cauallery; and therefore the Camp, which is inferior in horse, ought to
distant himself, as far as he can, from the enemy; for not, by such
accidents, to be constrained either to fight upon disadvantage, or commit some
other foul disorder.

Conclusion.
Thus have I at large (and more large then I meant) declared unto you, the
office and parts of a Campe-maister General, with the orders to be observed in
marching, in encamping, and in removing of a Camp, with rules and instructions
to effect the same: the which being well conceived, considered, and regarded,
may serve in time of service, to great good and importance.


Gent. Truly (Captain) you have taken pains herein, and have touched many
good points worthy noting; especially should wars fall upon us: from the
which God defend us. But have you yet any other officer to treat of, until you
come to the Lord high General?


The Election, office, charge and duty of the High treasurer of an Army.
Captain. THe High Treasurer of the Army, Treasurer of the Army.
is commonly chosen and appointed by the Prince; and is in the number of the
principal officers that are in the camp, and always one of the Council of
war, by reason of the great affairs committed to his charge and handling,
Money, the sinew of war.
which is, the kings monyes and Treasure, being the sinews of the war: and
without the same it were impossible for an Army long to hold and continue, The
parts of his office.
having to deal with a strong and obstinate enemy. This high Treasurer has
the bestowing of the kings money, in diverse and sundry uses; and all to
conduct the war to a good end. Moreover, he is to receive the tributes,
taxes, and tailliages of the Cities, Towns, or Countries, where the conquest
is made (if there be any such) and also does receive the money which the
Collegates do contribute, being any such ligue, and if they contribute money,
and not people of war.

He has in like sort the superintendencie of the victualling of the camp: and
is to have a great care to give content (to the uttermost of his power) as well
to the small, as to the great, and to see that as well the poor Pioner, as the
commanding Colonel be satisfied and paid their pays and duties, at due and
convenient terms, if he will that his Prince be well served, and the
soldiers to obey their Commanders and Captains: and to live in honest and
commendable sort, as disciplined people of war ought to do: An Army without
pay cannot long subsist.
otherwise, if the pay be wanting and not performed, I cannot see how a camp
can long stand on firm foot; or the soldier pass and live without robbing,
rifling, and spoiling, and to commit a thousand excesses: neither can I
perceive how any good order may be observed, if necessity constrain men to
commit these faults. Yet I will not hereby infer, but that in times of these
wantes and necessities, Patience a rare virtue.
men ought, with all possibility, to have patience, for it is a wonderful
virtue in a soldier, at such an instant pinch: and to abstain from committing
these excesses, although their pay be long on coming. For I know very well,
that monyes cannot always be provided, and come at the due time appointed, by
reason of sundry impediments that may hinder the same: Nothing more unjust then
to make men live by windy words and air.
and then ought the honest soldier to have patience. But if the pay stay over
long, there is nothing more unjust then to make me^ to live by windy words and
air: therefore in such mean while they ought, either to distribute le^dings or
a certain quantity of victuals daily, and also something to cloth men, and
other necessaries, expecting until the pay do come: or else they must be
suffered to live at their own discretion; that is, to take where and what they
may find: which is a thing not to be permitted, but in cases of great
extremity, and in cases, where all other remedies be past: Dangerous liberty
breeds insole^cie, a vice not easily revoked.
for this dangerous liberty is occasion that soldiers will fall into such an
insolency, that it would be almost impossible to reduce them again into their
first esse, or being, the which is of lesser loss and danger then to suffer
them to dye with famine, or to see the camp dissolved: one of the which would
of necessity ensue, were there not present remedy employed: and then the
fault is not to be imputed to the Commanders and Captains. An objection.
Some man happily will say that the Chieftaines may with sweet words and
persuasions entertain, and qualify the soldiers. I confess the same: but
that is but for a small time: and that too, no longer then that the soldiers
do give credit unto their persuasions: But when that they shall once perceive
that they are led forth with words, The answer.
and fed with wind from day to day, then is there no remedy to deteine them
long, but that they will murmur and grudge in diverse and sundry sorts; and
happily run into riot, seeing themselves deceived by their Commanders, unto
whom, from thence ever after they will give but slender credit and belief:
and may happily be an occasion, that they will another time distrust them, yea,
although that they tell them the truth; or at such time of importance as should
be greatly needful to perform any honorable action: therefore, one of the
principallest things that a Commander ought to have in recommendation, A great
Commander not to use many false speeches unto his soldiers.
is not to use false speeches to his soldiers, if the falsitie may afterward
be discovered. And although that herein there ought to be had great
consideration and regard, yet now a days, some will (forsooth) that fables do
pass for current pays; and Captains words, A bad opinion.
to serve soldiers food; whereby the credit of Commanders is greatly
diminished amongst men of war: and in conclusion, this is a willing to cover
officers faults, who happily have spent and employed the money in some their
other private commodity.


Gent. Soldiers sent into Ireland. Soldiers returning out of Ireland.
Doubtless there be many amisses that do pass in the world: for we have of
late sent soldiers over into Ireland at sundry times, and as often as we send,
we find others to return again from thence as fast, being able, sound and
sufficient men, yea more likely men then those that we sent thither: and in
conference with them, we hear but hard speeches, and truly were they true, a
thing to be pitied, A matter to be ^ooked unto, and to be redressed.
and to be more narrowly looked unto, by such as have authority for the same:
we are daily at charge, and often sending forth aids, the which doubtless, I
think to be most necessary, yea were it much more, then it is, considering
the great occasions and daily occurrants: but yet me thinks it very strange,
that strong and sufficient men should so flock from thence, ere the action were
performed, and new Bisognios sent in their rooms; which seems that there is
some mystery therein.


Capt. No doubt, but there be some faults in all parts of the world, and
happily among officers, who, although they see, yet will they wink, and bear
one with another: but greatly to be wished, where amisses be, reformation to be
had.


Gent. Some Lawyers opinion touching Captains and soldiers.
Truly I have heard some learned men, and good Lawyers say: that the most of
you Captains are but hungry fellows, which breeds many inconveniences: and
therefore (say they) it were far more necessary that the Gentlemen of every
country or shire should have the conduction and leading of their own
countrymen and neighbors, where by great amity and good orders would grow,
and more willingly fighting under their such country Captains, then under a
stranger whom they know not.


Capt. Those speeches and wished order in some respects were very good: An
answer.
but where have we in every shire such Ge^tlemen of experience and skill, fit
to conduct and lead men, especially against a brave and politic enemy: for
few we have that have seen service, especially Country gentlemen which never
went from home: and how dangerous it is for an ignorant man to perform the
parts of a perfect Captain, I have at large in our first book discoursed.
Indeed were it in a royal camp, well furnished with a number of good and
brave Commanders, and skillful officers, such country Captains were more
tolerable: but in other pieces of service, where many times, a private
Captain with a band or two of men, must perform the good parts of a Colonel,
or other great Commander, then I say, such your named Captains were
dangerous. Reasons I might show sufficient, but we should then prolong time
over much.


Gent. But they say, An objection.
that many of your Captains, are as skillesse as a raw country Gentleman: and
therefore of the two evils it were better to choose the least.


Capt. This point has already bin discoursed upon in our first book, The
answer.
and in mine opinion, the causes thereof shown: But let me tell your greedy
master Lawyers one thing, in favor of poor soldiers: that it is not so
light a matter to skirmish among the musket bullet, as it is to brawle at
Westminster bar: nor so easy to come to the push of the pike, as to pen out
a Lawing plea: nor so pleasant to pass amid the hizzing bullets as to walk in
Westminster Hall with hands full of gold: nor so iocande to hear the bouncing
of the Cannon; as to hearken to the cry of the crowching Clyents: nor so
delicate to lie in open Campania; as to wallow at home in a bed of down:
neither yet were the glittering of armor so gladsome an object to their eyes,
as the gobbes of gold by heaps in their studies; with many other points of
war not so toothsome as they suppose: I do not hereby infer against Law,
nor Lawyers, for I wot well, a common wealth cannot stand without order and
justice: but giving such to understand, as hold to hard a conceit of soldiers,
that the conductio^ of war is not of so small weight, as they suppose: and
happily should they ever come into any hot piece of service, at their return
home they would sing another song.

But let us return to the particular parts of our Treasurer of war.
Particular part^ of a Treasurer of war.
I say, that this officer is of great reputation; and the payment of Colonels,
Captains and other officers of war, are committed to his charge. First he
ought at the beginning of the actions to receive from the Lord General the
true number both of horsemen and footmen contained within the Army: and to
have a book made by perfect computation, how much is due every month to every
Colonel, Captain and all other officers, as well for them, as for their
Companies.

His proportion of pay he ought to make it well known to the General: whereby
the General might, in due time, procure provision of money from the Prince,
both for the soldiers pays, and other necessaries.

He must confer also with the Master of the victuals to know how the store
is furnished, that convenient provision may be made in time. The like care must
he have with the Master of the Ordinance for the supplying his store of
munition, as occasions and services of importance shall require.

He must know also of the Muster-maister, how the bands be furnished; what
soldiers be dead or slain; when, and how many; and how, and when supplied:
delivering pay to every Colonel and Captain accordingly, keeping the warrants
or notes of their hands for his discharge, and to advise well the
Muster-maister to have a good regard to the false Musters that many times be
made, to the hinderance of the action, and abusing of the Prince: a fault over
much used, and little regarded.

He is moreover to confer with the Captain General of the Artillery, which
is our Master of the Ordinance, to know whether he has any bills from the
Colonels and Captains for powder and other munition received; that the same
may be deducted at the day of pay.


Gent. What officers do assist or belong unto him?


Capt. There be sundry other officers, which are as it were appendent unto him;
as the Purueyor General, the Master of the victual, and the Pay-maister,
with their Clerks and Officers; of whom I leave to discourse, for that their
offices are well known and more desired: Officers commonly grow rich.
for that in our days they are very bad cooks that know not how to lick their
own fingers, and once an officer, and by consequence, a rich man. To conclude,
not only unto this officer, but unto all others almost, is Arithmetike a great
ease and help, not only to digest their accounts in good order, but also a
ready performance of the same.


The Office and parts of the Lord High General of the Army.
THE FIRST DIALOGVE.
Wherein is set forth the parts to be expected in so high a Commander: the
four principal qualities which the Romans considered in the Commanders of
their armies; how needful it is to have grave and experimented officers in
the Camp.

Captain. The Lord high General.
THe General, the Prince with the advice of his prudent Council, does elect,
choose, and appoint: and being an office of highest degree and greatest charge
in the field, it ought to be encommended unto a personage endued with parts
befitting the function. Therefore, as he is the Officer highest in degree, so
ought he, not only to know perfectly the parts of every other officer,
General parts.
but also to excel them all, in religion, wisdom, experience, policy,
gravity, secrecy, counsel, modesty, temperance, valor, magnanimity,
vigilancie, care, constancy, liberality, and resolution; with all other good
parts incident to a perfect man of war: and how much all these good parts
(and many more) ought to be in the personage elected to this high and careful
dignity, by our former discourses you may easily conceive and gather; to the
end that he, being their Chieftaine and head, may not only know how to
govern them both in general and in particular, in all Martial actions: A
lantern of virtue, for the Army to imitate.

A good chief will choose good Captains and officers: good Captains will
breed good soldiers. It is hard for one man to have all good parts.


but also in his virtuous life and carriage, be a pattern, light, and lantern
unto the whole Army, to imitate: for in our old proverb we say: such hunt,
such hound, such master, such man: and so by consequence, such Chief, such
followers. For most commonly a wise, valiant and virtuous General, will choose
wise, valiant, and virtuous Captains, and officers: good and virtuous
Captains, will, as near as they can, choose honest, sober, and virtuous
soldiers, or at the least, reform their faults, and do their best to bring
them to the due form of Military discipline. And as it is very hard for every
Commander to have all the good parts incident to his function, yet such as
are endued with many, or the most of these parts, are best to be esteemed; and
so consequently the rest. For the accidents of war are so diverse and
manifold, The accidents of war are diverse; sometimes altering men's humors.
that it alters many times the humors of men: except being endued with
constancy and magnanimity; which singular virtues few men possess: but
greatly to be wished in all high Commanders.

Now to discourse and reason in particular upon the parts due to a General,
our discourses would be over long; wherefore I will name the four principal,
which the ancient Greeks and Romans did consider in such personages as they
elected to be conductors of their Armies: The four principal virtues
considered by the Romans. 1 2 3 4
which were, 1 to be very expert and skillful in the Art of war, 2 to be
valiant and magnanimous, 3 to be of great gravity and authority; and 4 to be
fortunate in their successes: the which parts me thinks, a Prince ought to
regard and consider, in the election of his General.


Gent. These parts and qualities do seem to be very good indeed; but yet, I
pray, declare more particularly thereof, that we may the better understand the
same.


Capt. I say (Gentlemen) that those Republikes would have their Captains
General to have great experience in Martial actions, Experience ought to be
in Martial men.
whereby they might prudently command and govern therein; and therefore did
they always elect and choose personages of great experience and practice, and
of ripe years and judgment unto this office: yea with such consideration and
care, that of the Romans, after that the two Scipios were slain, The 2.
Scipios. Asdruball.
and their Armies overthrown, by Asdruball the Carthagenian in Spain; none of
their best experimented durst take upon him the former charge, Scipio Africanus.
but only young Scipio, called afterward Africanus, being son to one of the
slain Consuls, although contradicted by sundry Senators, and chiefly by
Quintus Fabius Maximus, Quintus Fabius Maximus.
alleging his young years, who only offered himself, and resolutely took
upon him the determination to go to that Province, and accepted the defense of
the same: showing himself therein the most valiant and noblest Gentleman then
left in the Roman Republike, and one that had been nuzled up in war even
from a child; but not above 28. years of age; which caused the Senators (as I
said) to misdoubt, that by reason of his young years, he should want the due
skill, experience, and prudence, convenient for the government of the Roman
Army.


Gent. But yet there have been many Princes in the world, who being of young
age began to govern, Alexander Magnus commanded being young.
and conduct their Armies: as Alexander being but a very youth, conquered all
Asia, and put all the whole world in a maze.


Capt. It is true, that many times for precise and forcible causes, it is
necessary that Kings and Princes should be present with their own Armies in
person, although their age and experience be not great. Young Princes in wars
ought to have grave and experimented Captains. Examples.
But when this comes to pass, they commonly carry with them, most ancient,
grave and experimented Captains: as did Alexander, of the best and of most
authority, which Philip, his father had for his Conductours and Counselors
of war: and many other of all nations have done the like, as in our time did
king Philip of Spain, when he made Don John de Austria his Captain General,
Don John de Austria.
he chose and appointed for his assister, Counselor, and Lieutenant, Don
Luis de Zuniga the grand Commendador of Castille: and many of our English kings
have done the like; as did the famous conqueror Edward the third, Edward the
3. the Prince of Wales.

The battle of Poytiers.

John king of France and Philip his son.

Don Sebastian king of Portugal.


who sent with his eldest son the brave Prince of Wales, for Coadiutors,
Counselors, and Captains, the valiant Earls of Warwick, Suffolk, Salisbury
and Oxenford; at their honorable journey into France, where at the battle of
Poytiers they overthrew the whole power of France, and took their king John
with his son Philip, and a great number of the French nobility prisoners.


Gent. Then how fortuned it that Don Sebastian king of Portugal, carried not
such experienced personages about him, at his disastred journey made into
Barbary, being himself so young, and without experience of war?


Capt. Insufferable nature of man.
You must note therein the proud and insufferable nature of man's mind;
especially of them two Provinces, Spain and Portugal, which will not
willingly endure any stranger to carry any office and dignity amongst them:
The Spanyardes will not endure any stranger to be a Commander among them.
and men of experience and conduction he had none in his own Realm, by
reason of his long continued peace.


Gent. Yet me thinks, that his determination was great and honorable.


Capt. It was so great, as was well seen by the success he had: and truly
none can deny but that he carried a brave mind, The rashness of youth and
want of skill.
and an high conceit: but yet by reason of his young age, and less skill, he
wanted convenient prudence to the conduction of so honorable an action: for his
presumption and boldness abounded, to his own, and his peoples overthrow,
which has grown to a by word among the Spaniards, to the Portugals reproach;
saying; Pocos, y locos, y mal auenturados. But I trust in God, that if it
please him to bless us no worse then hither unto he has done, The Spaniardes
ambition.
and to give us minds and prudence to prevent their mischiefs in time, we
shall one day yet say by them, Muchos, presuntuosos, y mal disgraciados: for
surely their pretenses and desseignes are most ambitious and cruel against all
Christian Princes and Countries, especially against us, upon whom they watch
but time and opportunity to pour out their whole pots of poison: wherefore it
stands us upon, It stands us upon to have an eye thereunto.
all true and valiant English hearts, to arm our selves first with the fear,
and honor of God; then with prudence, magnanimity, courage and valorous
resolution against this proud nation, the Popes mynions; Spaniardes I mean.
But indeed, had Don Sebastian been of such Martial prudence, and valor in
the same, Charles the fifth. Henry the fifth. Edward the 3. Henry the 3 king of
France. Prince of Ora^ge.
as was his grand father Charles the fifth: or was Henry the fifth, Edward the
third: and other noble kings of England and France, or as Henry the third now
king of France and Navarre, and as was George Scanderbeg, and the last Prince
of Orange, with sundry such others, he would have imitated them: who, in all
their actions did annexe and couple unto them, ancient and experimented
Captains, although they were most brave men themselves: as did Charles the
fifth choose for his General at his enterprise upon Tunez, Alonzo de Aualos,
Alonso de Aualos. Ferdinando de Toledo.
Marquis de Guasto; and in Germany he chose Ferdinando de Toledo, Duke of Alua:
and so did sundry of the other above named Princes, the like.


THE SECOND DIALOGVE.
Wherein is discoursed of military valor: and the sundry parts thereof: as
military prudence, with sundry stratagems of war: with many other martial
points.

Gentleman. WEll now, since you have declared unto us the first point, and
quality of a General (which is experience) I pray proceed to the rest.


Capt. The second I spoke of, was to have military valor and prudence.


Gent. How is this military valor to be understood?


Capt. Military valor, Military valor, what it is.
is to be understood with us, as true Magnanimity with the Latinists: which
is, besides his care in the actions of war; he is to have industry to
practice them, and readiness to effect them, and constancy and true fortitude
of mind in all perilous and dangerous successes, Parts of magnanimity.

Battle of Cress^^. Agincourt field* Henry king of France and Navarre against
the Duke de Main.


as had Edward the third at the battle of Cressy, and his son, the brave Prince
of Wales, at the battle of Poitiers; and as had our noble Henry the fifth at
Agincourt field: and as had of late, this present king of France and Navarre,
in his honorable battle, against his rebel, the Duke de Main, with all his
brave assistants, upon an Ashwednesday, being the fourth of March in Anno.
1590. By whose magnanimity and martial valor (next under God) was the victory
most honorably achieved, even at such time of extremity, as his troops were
disarayed and ready to fly; who most magnanimously, in the very pinch and
point of that disaray, rushed boldly amongst them, saying; C'est moy, mes
enfants, Voyez, icy vostre Roy. It is I my children, lo here your King:
whereby they were so comforted, and encouraged, that they regathered
themselves, made a fresh head, and conquered in fine their conquering enemies.

This fortitude, moreover does wonderfully aid and help to the overthrowing
and quenching of all disordinate appetites: Fortitude of mind.
and to the end you may the better understand me, I will declare the parts more
particularly. To little purpose were it for a Captain General to be
experienced, Experience manifested by valiant actions.
as before I have said, if his experience and skill did not manifest the same
with his valiant actions: and to put the same in execution, it is necessary
that he be careful, vigilant, and diligent in all the matters which he is to
attempt, and put in practice, and moreover to have a natural instinct and
humor befitting the same: A natural instinct to know the qualities of the
enemy.
as particularly to know the qualities of the enemies Commander; whether he be
over bold, rash, and inconsiderate, or timorous, sober, and reposed in his
actions: and whether he be subtle, Great points to be considered.
politic, and diligent, or blunt, base minded, and sluggish: whether he be a
man desirous to come to fact of arms, or a man of delay, avoiding the same:
also to know what counselors, conductors, and officers he has, and in fine
of what determinations: whether his enemies Army be of new reared people and
Bisognios, or of practiced, skillful, and ancient bands, and of what nation
they be: what desseignes and intents they hold, and unto what end they aspire:
and also to consider and paralleill his own forces with the strength and
powers of the adversary: helping himself in most of these matters, with good
and trusty espials, and those to be well rewarded and paid, Good and trusty
espials.
the which many times are as sovereign Antidotes against the poisonous
practices of the enemy: as the most brauest and skilfullest Commanders of the
world have used: as did Jews the eleventh, king of ^raunce, Jews the 11 king
of France Phillip Duke of Burgundy.

Phillip king of Spain.


against Phillip, Duke of Burgundy, and as did Charles the fifth, against the
Protestants in Germany: and as now does king Phillip of Spain, too too much in
all nations; and (no doubt) other Princes do practice the same: whereby many
desseignes be often discovered, and thereby prevented without fact of arms,
only with military prudence: the which may be effected and done with
continual diligence, Military prudence.
and ceaselesse care. For a brave mind and of high conceit, ought never to be
tired in toyling after virtue, and to attain with cost of travel the glorious
issues of his deep desseignes: as did our famous King, Henry the eight, and
others his predecessors, in their honorable attempts and atchiuements in
France: and as did Charles the fifth in his actions in Germany and Italy: and
as did Alexander, Julius Caesar, Hanniball, and Scipio, with many others more
in their honorable enterprises and conquests.

And for as much, as from such military care and diligence, there is to be
expected good success, From military care and diligence do spring good
successes. Examples.
it is convenient that the Captain General be very industrious, to know how
to inuente new occasions of war, to entertain the enemy with long delay, if
the case so require it; imitating Quintus Fabius Maximus, when he warred
against Hanniball. And many times to corrupt with money; as did Jews the
second king of France often practice; and as did Monsier dela Tresmoille,
Monsieur de Leuy and Triuultio, Generals to Jews the twelth King of France,
when he corrupted with money the Switzers which served under the pay of
Lodowik Sforza, Duke of Millan, upon whom they laid hands, and vilely
delivered him to his enemies, the French: and as did the Prince of Parma, with
the traitors, York, and Stanley, and the betraying and delivery of Sutphen
unto the Spaniards. And as principally does King Phillip of Spain corrupt with
his golden Pistolets the most parts of Europe; Phillips golden pistolets
corrupt most parts of Christendom. Gonzalo Fernades.
according to their grand Captain, Gonsalo Fernandes, saying: that Princes,
Generals, and great Commanders, ought by one means, or other seek to
overcome, and gain their purposes: be it by right or by wrong, a Spanish
principle.

Moreover he may by cunning means, and fained letters, cause the enemies
Captains to be suspected, S^^atagems by fained letters. Burbon ^ria^ultio.
and blemished; as did Burbon and Tryuultio, the King of France his Generals,
being besieged, and very hardly distressed within Myllau, by the Emperor
Maximilian, who sent of politic purpose, a servant of Triuultios (who spoke
the Switzer tongue perfectly well) with fained letters unto the Captains of that
nation, then serving in Maximilians Camp, thereby to cause them to be
suspected and doubted, Maximilian.
the which faining messenger being taken by the Sentinels and watches,
cunningly (like Synon at Troy) humbly beseeched them his life and pardon, and
that he would deliver them certain things which he had to deliver unto the
Colonels and Captains of the Switzers: the which being granted him, The
Switzers.
he drew out of his shoe the devised letter, which he carried to cause a
suspicion to grow upon these Captains: the which being seen and read by the
Emperor, holding for certain their contents to be true, and mistrusting some
treason, L^dowike Sforza.
as they had before used unto Lodowik Sforza, raised presently his camp, and
withdrew himself, with less constancy and credit, then to his honor and
reputation was convenient.

Also he ought to have great industry and skill to know how to encampe his
Army, Industry and skill to encampe, and to dislodge the enemy.
and to dislodge the enemy, cutting him from victuals and other commodities;
with blocking up of all passages and straights about the besieged place, and to
reknowledge and consider all the places of most strength and commodity:
wherefore it is needful that he be both learned and skilled in Geographie,
as well of the country and province where he warreth, as of al other parts in
general; well informing himself of the situations and dispositions of the
same, To have good intelligence.
of what temperature they be, of what firtilite they are, of what things they
abound, and of what things they want, what manner of people do inhabit the^,
and those of what conditions and manner of life; what religion they hold, with
what laws they be governed, what Princes do rule them, and what power and
valor they are of. All the which considerations, and many more stratagems are
to be attained with learning, and often reading of histories; as by all brave
Commanders which ever were yet, may well be understood, and therefore let no
man think, but that a soldier ought to be learned and read, Learning joined
with experience makes a perfect man of war.
the which conjoined with experience, makes him a perfect man of war: and
without this learning and reading a soldier may haunt many years the wars,
and never attain to the deep points of soldierie, the which by much reading
and fewer years of experience, may be far better perfected: Lucullus the
Roman.
as was seen by Lucullus the Roman commander, and many others of other
nations.

And also to have the more particular skill and knowledge herein, Drawn plats,
and mapp^s, with descriptions.
it imports much to have drawn plats, mappes, and models of every several
province, country, and region, with the descriptions of their mountains,
valleys, hills, champain fields, forests, woods, rivers, brooks, fennes,
lakes, pastures, and arable grounds, and whether their fields be open or
enclosed, narrow or large; what straights and passages difficult to pass, what
strong places and castles, what towns, cities, and boroughs, what Noble men's
places, and houses of pleasure, and what distance there is betwixt place, and
place; whereby to give assured directions and traces unto every action they
pretend and attempt; as did many of our famous Commanders in their honorable
wars in France and Scotland, and as did the Marquis de Pescara and Antonio
de Leyua, The Marquis de Pescara and Antonio de Leyua.

Industry, policy, and courage.


and other imperial Captains in their wars with the French, in the
provinces of Naples, Lombardy, and Piemont, who with a far lesser number,
badly paid, and worse preparations of war, with only industry, courage,
policy, and boldness, came to atchieue many enterprises, and to great
encounters, laid many Ambuscados, and gave many surprises and Camisadas to the
enemy, therereby gaining both honor and victory: as was seen in the battle
of Pauia, The battle of Pauia.
where Francis the French King was taken prisoner, and his Army quite
overthrown, with the states that he held in Italy. The like did many of our
brave English Kings in France, Scotland and other places, namely at the battle
of Poytiers, Agincourt field, and else where, where with a small number of
English soldiers, the whole strength and cheualry of France was overthrown,
slain, and taken prisoners, only by valor and martial industry. All the
which was performed with wonderful diligence, speed, secrecy, and resolution,
which be matters of great importance in the conduction of war.


Gent. Few numbers experienced bravely conducted, do atchiue great enterprises.
How say you, that it is a very important thing to execute the effect of war
with great speed and diligence, since you said but even now, that it was a
great point to know how to entertain the enemy with delays, as did Quintus
Fabius with Hannyball?


Capt. Policy preferred before rigor of war.

Battles subject to a thousand hazards.


It is true, that in good martial discipline, that General is more to be
accounted of, and esteemed, which knows how to overcome with policy,
wisdom, stratagems, and prudence, then with dint of sword and rigor of
weapons. For battles are subject unto a thousand hazards, and perils, as to the
temerity and rashness of heady Captains and soldiers, and unto the cowardice
sometimes of some particulars; with a number of such accidental fortunes: and
therefore in effect, prudence and patience, and not pride and rashness, do
produce good and happy events in war: Octauius Augustus.
and therefore the Emperor Octauius Augustus did more esteem the kingdom of
Mauritania, then all the other provinces which he possessed, for that he had
gained the same without blood, and the king of Naples Don Alonso, Don Alonso
king of Naples.

The Duke de Aniou.

A wise saying.


being challenged by his Competitor and enemy, the Duke of Aniou to come to
battle, he refused the same, saying; that it was the part of a good Captain
to know how to gain, and not to come to battle at the enemies appetite.

But this is principally to be understood, when a Prince is set upon and
distressed in his own country, as was then the said king Don Alonso, and the
case being such, let no Prince nor General use the temeritie and rashness, as
did Jews the King of Hungaria, Rashness of Jews king of Hungaria.
who joined in battle unadvisedly with Solomon the great Turk, being badly
counseled thereunto by the Archbishop Tomeres, being far inferior to his
enemy in numbers: yea, although he were equal, yet were it better to weary him
with delays, and cause him by such lingerings to be weary of the action; and
so retire in fine. And therefore to this end the Signory of Venice will have
their Generals to be rather wary and long delayers, To weary with delays,
rather then to be rash and furious. The Venetians order.

Successes of battles are doubtful. Julius Caesar's saying.

A good note.


then rash and furious warriors, not sparing any cost to prolong the same,
always avoiding the doubtful and uncertain successes of battle, yea
although they hold for certain to gain; if it be thought to cost much blood,
yet better to be refused: as Julius Caesar declared very well, saying: that he
ought to be accounted an unjust Captain if he did not more esteem the safety
of his Army, and the life of his soldiers, then his own proper commodity and
life. For those which do measure the hope of the victory, without the due
consideration of the profit or loss, that succeedes the same, do desire vain
and disordinate things, and do find many times the events and issues contrary
to their thoughts: as it chanced unto the French at the battle of Poytiers,
Examples.
where although they were in full hope of victory, yet they lost therein a
number of their nobility, with their King and his son taken prisoners: and
again, as it befell the said French at the battle of Rauenna, where although
they remained victors, Battle at Rauenna. Monsieur defoyx.
yet they lost Monsieur de Foyx their General, and many of his brave
Captains, whereby those which remained were constrained to retire, and pass
over the Alps, with more then good speed. Therefore to entertain the enemy
with long delays, without bringing ones self into the danger of fact of
arms, and to be at choice to accept or refuse the battle, if it be presented,
Many policies to be used to delay the fact of battle.

Speed and diligence in many pieces of service. Ambuscados, Camisadas,
Incursions, skirmishes.


there is to be used many policies, devises, and stratagems, and to attempt the
venturous effects (of necessity) speed, and diligence is to be required; as in
lodging Ambuscados, to give Camisadas, to sallie in skirmish, and to make
incursions and great Caualgados to surprise victuals and conuoies, to prevent
their allodgements, to possess straights and passages, to cut them from
victuals, and such like pieces of service: and especially if there be two of
the enemies powers separated the one from the other, and being necessary to
fight with them before they come to join; then I say, is wonderful dispatch,
speed and secret conduction to be required: Claudius Nero defeated Asdruball
Barquinus. The Duke of Bauier.

Frederick the Emperor.


as did Claudius Nero a Roman Captain, when he defeated and slew Asdruball
Barquinus, who was come out of Spain into Italy to join with his brother
Hannyball. The like did the Duke of Bauier, before that fresh aids were come
to join with his enemy, the Emperor Frederik. And as did the Duke of Alua,
holding Grave Lodwike besieged within Monts in Hennault, who understanding, and
seeing his brother the Prince of Orange, coming with a strong power to relieve
him, the very same night that he approached near, gave him a most furious
Camisado, and slew many of his people, whereby he was enforced the next day to
return without effecting his intent. Celeritie and quick dispatch in conquest
of a country.

Portugal wars.


And in the conquest of any country, city, or province, there is also great
celerity and quick dispatch to be used by the Captains, and Generals; as was
performed by the Duke de Alua, and the Marquis Sancta Cruz in their Portugal
wars, preventing by their martial prudence, many difficulties, not otherwise
easy to be dispatched, if the Portugals had had more wit, valor, and
counsel, then they had. And how much this celerity in some cases does avail,
may well be seen by the brave exploites of Sir Francis Drake, Sir Francis
Drake and Captain Carliel in the Indias.
and Captain Caerleil, at Sant Domingo, Carthagena, and Nombre de Dios, with
other parts of the Indies. Sundry other examples might be recited of actions
performed with celeritie, and secrecy: and for not applying quickenesse and
celerity in the execution, many times actions have bin greatly hindered, and
great inconveniences have ensued: as it happened unto Hanniball; who having the
victory and conquest of all Italy in his hands after the battle of Cannas,
Hanniball at the battle of Cannas.
lost all those advantages, only for not pursuing the aforesaid victory. But
yet in all these occurrants and occasions, Great care to be had to conserve the
Army.

Desperate assault, the spoiling of brave men.


there is great care and consideration to be had, to conserve the Army what
possible may be, and not to hazard the soldiers with dangerous assaults; for
commonly in such attempts the brauest men go to wrack, as was well to be seen
among the Spaniards in the expugnation of Haerlem, Mastricht, Sluice, and other
fortes of the low countries. And therefore Scipio the younger, when being
persuaded by some of his Captains to take Numantia by battery and assault, he
answered them, saying: that he esteemed more the saving of one Romans life,
then the killing of all those within Numantia; considering that the best men
are commonly lost in such attempts.

Constant in perils.
A General ought also to be very constant in hazardes and perils; for many
times it happens, that the determinations which men do take in pleasant
motions, and with great vigor of mind, before the very danger; but the
peril being once presented, and when it is most need to put the business in
execution, then being amazed and stricken with chilly fear, do they leave off
the attemptes, and dishonorably retire; and will by no means be reencouraged
thereunto: as did

To contemn any danger for to conserve our honor.
And he is to be accounted an excellent General, which contemns and
despises all imminent dangers, in respect to conserve his reputation and
honor: as many of our famous kings of England have done, in their own
persons, and as many times Henry, Examples of brave men.
now present king of France and Navarre, has done in many encounters which he
has had: and as did the County Lodron, when Castraneo the Emperor Ferdinando
his General forsook the Army under his charge in Hungaria, and fled away with
the most part of the horsemen, for fear of the Turks; the said County Lodron
being with those footmen which remained, was by them most humbly entreated to
be their Conductor and General in that disastred success, seeing that he,
which was their General and Commander had so shamefully forsaken them: the
which the said County accepted with great modesty, using unto them many grave
speeches, and honorable words, with abhorring the foul flying away of his
companion, and encouraging them bravely to defend themselves, with their
manfull resisting of their enemies, without imagining or thinking upon any
thing else, then valiantly to fight, and courageously to overcome. Then an
ancient Almaine soldier, seeing this County so full of spirit, and constant,
said in gracious manner thus unto him; My Lord, let it not seem unto you so
great a wonder the flying away of our General, seeing that he was mounted upon
so gallant a courser, as he was; which seemed that he expected to see how his
horse would run. Now, the County understanding the crafty meaning of this
old soldier, dismounted with all dexterity from his horse, and drawing out
his curtilax, cut off his horse legs, saying unto them with a cheerful
countenance; Honorable words.
My good companions, and dear countrymen, this day will I be both Captain
and soldier, and will fight on foot even as you do; Perform you the parts
of valiant men, for not to deceive mine opinion of you; and gain ye the
victory, or dye most honorably with revenging your deaths; and finishing this
war with your end and mine.

Not to be overcome with disordinate lusts.
Now to conclude with this military virtue: Great Commanders and Captains
Generals, should not suffer themselves to be ouerruled with disordinate
lusts, One foul vice may obscure many virtues.
and appetites: for in a noble personage one only vice is enough to obscure
and blemish a number of good virtues, as was seen by Alexander, and Philip his
father, by the foul excess of wine drinking; and by many others stained with
such other vices. Virtue exalts the possessors thereof.
And per contra, one singular virtue did wonderfully grace and exalte the
possessors thereof: and if it find foundation of Nobility and Illustrious
Blood, it frames thereupon the fabrica and building of a most excellent
Personage: and if it find no such foundation, yet it lays sufficient
foundation of it self: which has been seen in many Captains, who from base
degree and state, have ascended to be great Commanders and Princes, by their
wise and virtuous carriage, and by their modesty in manners, and by their
singular abstinence; whereof we have many and singular examples of sundry
virtuous men: as of Francis Sforza, Francis Sforza.
Duke of Millan, who imitating Scipio Aphricanus, would not once touch or abuse
a most bewtifull young maiden, which was taken by his soldiers in the Castle
of Casa noua, and presented unto him, whom he received into his pauillion;
being a matter of more importance to suppress the vices insulting in the
mind, The good life of the General a pattern to reform their Camp.
then to encounter a mighty enemy. And by this example of him self, might
this General, and many other such, which have been in the world, reform their
Camps; not permitting their soldiers and people of war, to grow licentious,
and to soil themselves in vices, since that nothing does make them more
effeminate, Vicious sensuality effeminates the mind.
and more unprofitable for war then the same: as well appeared in the
expugnation and sack of Numantia, being there overthrown so many Conductors
and Consuls, Example at Numantia. Scipio Aemilianus reformed his Camp.
without performing any thing: for being the Roman Army so corrupted with
vices, until Scipio Aemilianus came to command; who reformed the same, and
banished all light women and bad housewiues out of his camp, and caused his
soldiers to forsake and shake off all kind of curiosity and daintiness,
compelling them to eat their meat standing, and continually to practice their
weapons: the which reformations were of such importancie and effect, that
within a short time after, those of Numantiae sallying forth to skirmish, with
their accustomed confidence and courage, they were constrained to retire, and
turn their heels: whom, at their return into the City, being reprehended
and blamed by their General, for so flying from the Romans, whom they had so
often before time beaten, they answered him, saying; that the Roman soldiers
were the very same, How much imports a good Commander.
but that their Commander was another, and a man of more valor and better
government then those before passed.


THE THIRD DIALOGVE.
Wherein is discoursed of the other two virtues, Authority, and Fortune; and
their due significations: and in fine, what Counselors are to be chosen, and
coupled unto the Lord high General of an Army Royal: with other points.

Gentleman. NOw, since you have at large declared unto us the parts,
apperteining unto Military valor, and virtue; I pray proceed unto the other
qualities of a General.


Capt. The two remaining be, Authority and fortune do follow military valor
and virtue.
Authority, and Fortune; the which do imitate and follow the others, as the
shadow does the body. For a virtue (as I have before declared) does put in
execution and practice the Military precepts: and the wise Captain General
does thereof make an habit; whereby arises and springs (of necessity) the
fame of his valor and honorable acts; the which does accredite him, and
increase to him authority.


Gent. I understood that the authority in a Captain General, was, to be
nobly borne, and descended of illustrious blood.


Capt. It imports him much to be such; the better to be respected and
followed of those noble men and gentlemen, It imports much in wars to be
borne of illustrious blood
which do follow the wars: for peradventure they would not so incline unto
him, nor obey him with such subjection, if he were not such: therefore how much
nobler the personage of a General is, so much the more is he obliged to
adorn and furnish himself with the good parts and virtues which before I
have spoken of: for high title and favor makes not a man wise, prudent, and
virtuous, if he be not such of himself. For by these virtues; Severity and
liberality, two firm pillars of a General.
and by his severe punishing of the bad, and by his liberal rewarding of the
good, which be two of the firmest pillars that a General can hold, he shall
ascend unto the top of true perfection.


Gent. Do you say, that a General is to punish with severity: and always I
have understood, that it is more security for Princes, to be beloved for their
clemency, then to be feared for their rigor?


Capt. Cleme^cie toward the enemy, humbly yielded.
I understand that in Martial causes, clemency is to be used toward the
enemy humbly yielded: For, for to conquer it is a humane thing, but to pardon
and forgive, is a thing divine. And in truth, none can be termed a true
victory, if the same be not accompanied with some clemency: and therefore
Francis the French king, Francis the French king.
after the battle of Pauia, was wont to say, That kingdoms might be conquered
by force, and gained and conserved by riches, but the good fortune thereof,
when it seemed most prosperous, turned her tail at pleasure (and in one moment
in a manner) turned topsie turuie all that she had exalted in many years space.
But the preparations, occasions, and means how to use this clemency, and
mercy, and thereby to advance men's noble fames, is not a thing which every
Prince attaineth, and he may be accounted in every point happy who has the
same, and knows rightly how to use it, Example of clemency and pity.
as did our famous king Edward the third, and his victorious son Edward
Prince of Wales, unto king John of France, and Philip his son, after the
memorable battle of Poitiers; and as did Philip Duke of Millan, unto Don
Alonso of Naples; and the Sultan Saladine, unto the Christian women in
Jerusalem. For although the generous and haughty minds do rejoice in
victories, they do yet nevertheless grieve at others calamities: and therefore
Alexander wept for Darius: and Julius Caesar for Pompeius: and Marcellus for
Syracusa: and Scipio for Numantia.

The rigor of justice on whom, and where to be used. A General to be both
beloved and feared. Hanniball
But the rigor of justice ought to be exercised upon the own soldiers of the
camp, and people of war, their offenses deserving it: for in true discipline
of warrre, one is not to offend twice. And it imports much for a Captain
General to be both beloved and feared; as was Hanniball, who being but a
particular Ge^tleman of Carthage, without any other Signiories or state, and
had for his great enemies, the most principal Senators of the same Republike,
and the Army under his charge being of sundry nations, yet is it not in
writing that ever there was seen any mutiny amongst his soldiers, nor any
disagreeing in so many years as he warred in Spain, France, and Italy; by
reason that he chastened with rigor the delictes and offenses committed by his
people of war, and rewarded their noble acts with great liberality and
kindness; and paid them their due pays always in good time.


Gent. Without doubt Hanniball must needs be well served and obeyed, if he
paid his soldiers so royally and well.


Capt. I find no foundation more sure and firm then to do the same, to the
end to have an Army well conducted and governed. Soldiers well paid, a sure
foundation to good conduction.
For, if the soldiers be not paid, of necessity they must be suffered to
rob, spoil, raunge, and ransack, whereby to sustain themselves, as too too
much has been seen in these civil wars of France and Flanders: Want of pay
breeds many inconveniences.
the which, if they were well and duly paid, then all these inconveniences
should cease; and would serve with more wariness and care, as men bound
thereunto, and would fear punishment, if they should by hap offend.

Now, Good fortune proceeds, from experience, fortitude, and from authority.
felicity and good fortune, proceeds from knowledge, from fortitude, and from
authority. For the General which knows what he has to do, by skill and
experience, and has Military valor, to enterprise, and to execute with
consideration and authority, that thereby his soldiers may both believe him,
and follow him; such a one, without question, shall have good success: which
is the very true felicity and good fortune it self.


Gent. I never understood, till now, that felicity and good fortune did
consist in science and knowledge: for I have always heard say; that fortune
did most favor men of least wisdom, and in fine, fools.


Capt. Such was the opinion amongst the Stoicke Philosophers; co^ceiuing that
as there was one Prima causa, The Stoickes opinion of fortune.
eternal, omnipotent, and of infinite wisdom, known and discerned by the
order and harmony of his works: so in like sort, was there another causa,
imprudent, foolish, and inconsiderate; whose operations were without order, or
reason, or any wisdom at all; for that, with an irrational affection, it
both gave, and deprived men, of riches, dignity and honor: the which they
termed and entitled by the name of fortune; seeing her to be a friend of men
which did their matters, There is no other fortune, but the providence of God.
forte; which is to say, a casu, by chance, without conduction either of
reason or prudence. But in very truth there is none other fortune but the
providence of God, and the valor and ability of man: neither any other thing
that makes men disastred, and that things succeed them not, according to
their desires, but only the want of skill to practice their actions in due
times; and with such convenient means as the cases would require.


Gent. Truly, me thinks, that if a General should observe the rules by you
declared of these four principal parts and qualities: he should not fail of
good success in the most of his actions.


Capt. So think I also: The General ought to be skillful in all the offices
of war.
presupposing therewithal that he ought to know, and understand all that
which I have spoken of the other officers of war (and of much more yet
unspoken of) since that they are his inferiors; to the end that he may
perfectly know, how to command and govern them: for unworthily shall he
command and govern in wars, which is ignorant and unskillful in the
precepts and rules thereof.


Gent. What more yet concerns his office?


Capt. Marry, To choose good Counselors and men of experience.
to choose unto himself good Counselors to assist him in his good
government: for much more needful are the Counsels of men, wise and
experimented in Martial causes, then armor and weapons: for the greater
matters are better effected with the intendement, then achieved with the
sword, many times.


Gent. But are not the personages known, who are to be of the Counsel of
war, by reason of their offices.


Capt. The Counselors in war ordinarily known.
Yea sir: for ordinarily these following, be of the same: First the Captain
General of the men at arms, lances, and light horse; 2 the Captain General
of the artillery, or Master of the Ordinance: 3 the Camp-maister General, or
Lord high Marshall. 4 the Colonels of the Infanterie; and 5 also the Treasurer
of war. Respect to be had to grave and ancient soldiers.
But there is (moreover) respect to be had unto other grave personages; and in
the election of those, the General ought to have great consideration, and
insight: for deep, dangerous, and difficult matters, are to be consulted,
disputed, and reasoned with perfect intendements, and clear judgments. And
therefore there is not to be admitted unto the same, Men of mean judgment and
common sense, not to be permitted to be Counselors. A particular care.
men of mean judgments and of common sense: for those that are the
Counselors to a Prince, ought to be personages of great minds, high
conceits, and of equal intendement with the Prince. And that which he is
particularly to consider of them, is, to see that they be perfect soldiers,
and of great experience, and men of valorous determinations: but not rash,
headie, and harebrainde: for those Counsels are sufficient honorable, which
render security unto doubtful affairs. And on the contrary, those are most
affro^tous, and miserable; when being enterprised with temeritie, only to show
a vain presumption, and rigorous boldness of mind, they are wont to disturb
the good courses of the honorable enterprises, and of the victories whereof
great hope is to be had. And because it is a most ordinary thing amongst
Counselors to contradict one another, and to diminish one another authority,
he must be very careful to foresee and procure, To procure a general love
amongst them. Hatred and fear, are two bad Counselors in war.
that they be all loving friends together: for that, the most part of the
security of the camp consists in their unity, concord, and love: and that
they all may love him with entire affection: for hatred and fear be two bad
Counselors in war.

This (Gentlemen) is all that I am able to say touching the officers and high
Commanders in wars: what other stratagems and policies of war are, the
General, and other high Conductors of enterprises, may by their own Martial
prudence, and natural instinct, invent and put in practice, according to the
occurrants and accidents of war: for daily new courses and inventions are
found out: to answer the which new stratagemes are devised, and sic vicissitudo
rerum.


The end of the fifth Book.
THE SIXTH BOOK OF WAR DISCOURSES AND MARTIAL DISCIPLINE.
The first Dialogue:
Wherein is briefly touched of the orders of our now used fights: the great
commodity of due and skillful trayning: the tables for the embattailing of men
in graund square of men: and into battallions of the same kind: with
proportioned figures to the same: and arithmeticall rules to the working
thereof: and a declaration of every the said tables.

Gentleman. WEll (Captain) since you have in your former five books at large
discoursed touching most martial points; as well of soldiers, offices,
officers, and Commanders, as also of most sorts of imbattailing of men, now
most in use; wherein you have satisfied us wonderful well: yet, I pray
(according to your promise) will you now describe unto us their several
tables, A farther request for figures and tables of battles.
and figures to the same: whereby we (which are not skilled) may reap some
knowledge from thence: and so shall have good cause to yield you thanks for
your great pains.


Capt. Although that I have in our former discourses, declared (at large) of
most sorts of imbattailing, both ancient and modern; yet for better
declaration and understanding of the tables following, I must of necessity
repeat a great part thereof again. Errors found in battle.
Touching errors found in battles (according to mine opinion) by reason of
sundry compound weapons within the body of the same, I have spoken already.
What kind of battles may be held for good and firm.
Wherefore now let us consider, and declare, what kind of battles (by reason)
may be held for good and firm, considering our now used fights, and the
weapons most befitting the same, and suited in so good sort as may become able
to abide or perform a victory, whereunto they are appointed. Principally
therefore if you will rest upon one sole and entire battle, whether the same be
square of me^, or square of ground, To frame the squadron of pikes only. To
empale with shot. Shot divided into small troops.
or any other proportion, or form, as hearst, cross battle, or tryangle: the
which two first (as I have erst before said) do at this present day remain
chiefly in use among us: or divide your army into many battallions of that
kind, which your graund battle shall be formed of: then set your squadron of
battle or battallions round about under the guard of the pikes, with such
number of shot, as shall be best fitting unto the proportion of the same,
according to the Sergeant Mayor his appointment; either by 3, 5, or 7 shot in a
rank: and the rest to be reparted into many small troops, of 30, 40, or 50 in
a troop; trouping round about the battle, with a reasonable distance from the
same, to maintain skirmish, which way soever the enemy approaches. Providing
that the same troops be still maintained, one to second another, that the
battle may be by them shadowed, to the end that the enemies troops or
skirmishers may not have that advantage to discharge upon the body of your
battle.

The short weapon to be mingled with the troops of shot.
Now among these your troops of shot, it shall be very behouefull to mingle
some of your short weapons, as halbards, bills, swords and targets, half pikes,
and such like: for there shall your short weapon do best service, mixed with
your naked shot, to back them, if they should happen to be distressed by the
enemy.

Your battle thus framed, girdled, and environed with shot in troops, the
which troops, Troops of shot one to second an other.
seconding one another, shall still keep your battle shadowed, as in the
figures of all their kinds, set down before their several tables, shall
plainly appear: always regarding that your girdling shot do never discharge
until the enemy comes within 20, The girdling shot when to discharge
or 30, pases of them at the least; and then to discharge roundly upon the face
and body of the enemy. The which being performed, if they be encountered with
foot, they are speedily to retire unto either flank of the battle, or
sleeued in betwixt the pikes, or if encountered with horse, to bend down upon
one knee, under the guard and succor of the pike.

The rare victories of the Romans.
Now having deeply considered the rare victories and great conquests of the
ancient Romans, achieved (in mine opinion) by their due observing of true
martial discipline, and great readiness in their politic and sudden
alterations of their proportions, wherewith to encounter their enemies, I find
therein a most notable pattern of a right excellent Chiefetaine. The very
circumspection of whom, by a most wonderful regard, was cause unto them, of so
many, and such honorable victories: The readiness of soldiers to be
transported into any form.
wherein the continual readiness of their soldiers and people of war, to be
transported (with all facility) into every form, upon any occasion: and the
skillful direction of their Captains was such therein, as to so victorious a
people seemed to be most correspondent and convenient. The which true
discipline, obedience, skill, and readiness, were it used (and more then it
is) in this our age, I think wars would carry a far better conduction then
they now do.

The profit of true trayning.
This kind of readiness in soldiers, and the endeavor of a continual use unto
them in the same, especially in the time of their trainings (the which I could
wish to be put in practice with us by skillful trainers) upon what chance
soever should happen, has no doubt, seemed unto many, to be of no small
importance and force; and the rather do I so judge, for that having sounded the
depth and commodity thereof, I find the contrary negligence to bear with it a
note of most great imperfection. The disposition whereof, leaving unto the
knowledge and regard of every good and expert Captain, Out of the grand square
of men all battles to be reduced.
and for that I have at large discoursed thereof already in my third book of
these military discourses, I will at this present content my self, to show
unto you the several tables and figures of all these battles and battallions,
with the arithmeticall rules to frame the same; and how that out of the grand
square of men, may all these battallions and battles be reduced, and that
without any great confusion. The practike rules whereof I have, as I said, at
large set down in these our former discourses, as in the third book may
appear: In the third book.
moreover I have in sundry other places particularly declared and the orders of
the embattailing of men now most in use, with their order of impaling with
armed pikes, their divisions into Maniples, and the ready reframing of them
again into their grand square, as at large in the said third book appears
in many and diverse places.

Finally in the aforesaid third book, in folio 89, and 90, and in the fourth
book in folio 99, I have described the order to draw your army through
straights, and difficult passages, by quartering the same into such proportions
as the straights will permit: especially if the enemy do constrain you to
fight in the same, as most commonly it falls out: In the fifth book.
also in the fifth book, in folio 157 is dessigned a plat of encampement, with
the arithmeticall rules of the same: in the consideration of all which, the
value, and weight of this readiness, may unto the diligent regarders
(perchance) in their several descriptions, give some manifest appeara^ce.


A declaration of the tables of battles and battallions with the arithmeticall
rules to work the same.
In these tables following, The tables to 10000 armed pikes.
I have begun with the number of 10000 armed pikes; besides the shot and short
weapons, correspondent to these proportions, whereof I have before sufficiently
spoken in many places: for the division of which number of armed pikes, The
rules for the deuisions of the numbers.
with all numbers down ward, I have reduced into certain tables the
proportions of diverse battles, beginning with the square of men from the said
number of 10000 pikes downward, and the same not decreasing, by 50 or 100 but
by root, as first beginning with the square root of 10000, which is 100. The
which multiplied into it self, makes the said 10000: and so from the root
100 unto 099, and then 098, next 097, and so from root to root orderly, unto
the last square root, which is 1.

In which tables I have directed the order of marching of an army, as the
passage or way will permit: The order in marching.
whether you shall march 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, or 17 in a rank, and how many
ranks they shall be. To do the which, work thus. Divide the whole number of
men by so many in rank, The rules to the same.
as you will have them to march in; as by 3, 5, 7, etc. The number here I have
supposed to be 10000 men, the which 10000 to have them to march at 3 men per
rank, I do divide 3, and it produces 3333 ranks, and 1 man remaining, as in
the margin appears. And if you would have them to march by 5, 7, 9, ^
or any other number, per rank, work as you have done with the number 3.

Then how to divide the battle into Maniples or parts, To divide it into
Maniples.
and so to march them upon the way as strongly as the passage will permit; and
how the Maniples coming up shoulder to sholder, each weapon joins with his
like, making again the former square battle of men, The rule to do it.
with the remains that make not up a just Maniple or part: and also how to
march those said remains that they may come up shoulder to shoulder, with the
rest of the Maniples, to make up a just square. To do the which, ^
work thus: divide the root of your grand number of men by so many as you
would have them to march in a Maniple, and the product will be the number of
Maniples, with the remains (if any such there be) as for example, the square
root of 10000, is 100, the which 100 men, I do divide by 3 and it produces 33
Maniples, and one rank remaining, the which 1 rank is 100 men, the which 100
men, marching up by 1 in a rank, coming up shoulder to shoulder with the
grand square, makes just the same proportion of the grand square; as in the
Tables plainly may appear: So may you work by 5, 7, 9, 11, or any other
number, to bring them into Maniples with their remains. But here you shall
note, A Maniple what it signifies.
that a Maniple, does signify so many men in rank quite through your grand
square or battle, as you are disposed, or be constrained to divide the said
grand square into, whereby to pass through any straight or passage, and then
coming up shoulder to shoulder, do make your former square of men again.

Finally in the first table of the said square of men, in proportion of
equality, there is set down readily how many shot will girdle or impale the
battle of pikes, Shot to girdle the battle.
in what form soever you dispose the same, whether it be by 3, 5, 7, or 9 shot
in a rank, which is as many as you shall need to girdle withal, in mine
opinion: and if you are to encounter or be charged with horse, I suppose 3 to
be sufficient. To do the which, The rule to the same.
work you thus: First multiply your quadrate root, or square of men, by so
many as you mean or be disposed to girdle the same withal, the product
whereof will amount to the girdling shot for the one side or quarter; then
again multiply the said product by 4, for the 4 squares of the battle, and
the product thereof serves for the girdling of the said 4 square sides. Now
there will want to fill the 4 angles or corners, the which you must consider
whether you do impale by 3, 5, 7 or 9: then to multiply every angle by so
many per rank, ^
as you do impale by: as for example: the square root of 10000 is 100; the
said 100 I do multiply by 3, (for so many do I set to impale by) and it
makes 300 for the one square side of the battle; the which 300 I do again
multiply by 4, for all the 4 square sides of the battle, and it amounts
unto 1200 shot: then for the four corners or angles (considering that I do
impale by 3) first I multiply the said three by it self, and it makes 9 for
one angle: and then quadruple the said 9, it makes 36, the which 36 being
added unto the aforesaid 1200, and it amounts in all unto 1236 shot for the
full impalement of your squadron of 100 square root of men. And so may you do
with any other number, as in the tables will appear more at large.

Likewise on the left side of every leaf of the said tables, having first
turned the same over, you shall have opposite or against the number or battle,
which stands evermore on the right side of the said leaf, the same battle
divided into 3, To divide the grand square into battallions. The order to find
in the tables how the battallions be set.
5, or 7 battallions; the number of which battallions in each of them
contained, you shall find by drawing your finger evermore on the first Column
of every leaf on the right side, and where you find the number of the said
battallio^s, there shall you see in that distinction betwixt two long rules,
how every battallion shall be set, which two long rules are the second Column
of the tables: As for example: the grand battle of 10000 pikes, placed on the
right side of the leaf in the first Table, as in folio 16 may be seen, the
said grand battle you shall find divided into 3, 5 or 7 battallions, by
turning over the leaf looking upon the left side thereof, in the same folio
190. Now to know the square root of every of these battallions, draw your
finger continually down the first Column of every right side of the leaf,
until you come to find the due number of the said battallions, which is,
first 348, etc. the which number being found in the first Column in folio 191,
even there in the second Column you shall see the square root thereof to be
59, and so must you do by the rest of the battallions.

The order observed in the tables following.
In the first Column of the left side of every leaf, is placed the grand
square or battle of men: in the second Collumne is set the same battle
divided into 3. battallions: in the third Column is the number of every of
their several battallions, and in the fourth Column is the remains of the
said battallions, which is, how much they are less then the grand square of
men: and also in the said fourth Column, if they do abound the number of the
grand square, it shall be there set down, always marked with this word (
over) adjoining unto it, which word when you do find, then suppose that the
battallions are more then the grand battle, by so many as that number
contains. The like order is to be observed in the division of them into five
battallions, or into seven battallions.

As for the reducing or inducing of all battles and battallions out of, Of
reducing or inducing battles or battallions out of, or into the grand square of
men.
or into the grand square of men, I have before in folio 77, 78, 79, and so
forth, at large declared; as of the battle in Diamant proportion, of the
Triangle, of the Sheeres battle and Saw battle, and of the Cross battle,
and battle co^pounded of many battallio^s, unto the which I refer me: only
hereafter will I set down the figure and Tables of all, or the most of these,
and the order to be observed in the same: as I will at the beginning of every
Table declare: but first I will show you the declaration of every Column of
the Tables, as here is described.

A declaration of the use of the Columns, and numbers expressed in the Tables
following.
1 The number of 1 in the first column, contains therein the number of the
armed pikes of the grand battle of men. 2 The number of 2 over the second
column, contains in that part, the due number of the square root of the
battle. 3 The number of 3 in the third column, has in it, the order of
marching, as the ground will permit, be it by 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, or 17, in
rank. 4 The number of 4 contains in that column, the number of ranks,
either by 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, or 17 men in a rank. 5 The number of 5 has
in that column, the remainders of that which makes not up a just number of
ranks. 6 The number of 6 shows in that column, the number of the Maniples
or parts of each battle: whether they march by 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, or 17,
in a rank, the which marching up shoulder to shoulder, do make the square
battle of men, with the ensigns in the middle Maniple or part. 7 The number
of 7 in the seventh column, signifies the surplussage of armed pikes, that
makes not a just Maniple. 8 The number of 8 in the eight column, denotes the
whole overplus of the armed pikes that make not up a full Maniple. 9 The number
of 9 in that column, shows how many shall march in a rank of the over plus,
that made not up a just Maniple or part, which so marching up shoulder to
shoulder with the rest of the Maniples or parts, makes up the just square of
men. 10 The number of 10 in that column, shows how to girdle or impale your
battle with shot, whether it be by 3, 5, 7, or 9. which is sufficient to
girdle any battle. 11 The number of 11 carries in that column, what number
of shot every kind of imbattelling or girdling will occupy in each several
battle, whether the same be by 3, 5, 7, or 9 in rank of shot.
A declaration of the Tables of the Battallions.
1 The number of 1 in the first column, signifies the whole number of the
grand battle. 2 The number of 2 has in that collumne the division, be it by
3, 5, or 7. 3 The number of 3 has in that column, the number contained in
every several battallio^. 4 The number of 4 has in that column the remains
or overplus.
The figure of the square battle of men.


In this figure of a square battle of men, there is contained 10000 armed
Pikes, at 100 ranks, and 100 men by rank: girdled round about with seven
ranks of shot. The rest of the shot and short weapon, are bestowed in 165
small troops, containing 50 in every troop, trouping round about the
battle, so shadowing the same, and ready for skirmish, on what part soever
the enemy should offer fight: the rest of the shot and short weapon with some
pikes, are for the guard of the Artillery and Munition.

The figure of the grand square of 10000 Pikes, divided into 3 battallions.


The figure of the grand square reduced into 5 Battallions.


The figure of the 7 Battallions reduced out of the grand square of men.


The Tables of Battles in proportion of equality as, is 1, to 1.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 10000 100 3 3333 1 33 1 100 1 3 1236 5 2000 0 20 0 0 0
5 2100 7 1428 4 14 2 200 2 7 2996 9 1111 1 11 1 100 1 9 3924 100 11 909 1 9 1
100 1 13 768 1 7 9 900 9 15 666 10 6 10 1000 10 17 588 1 5 15 1500 5 9801 99 3
3267 0 33 0 0 0 3 1224 5 1960 4 19 4 396 4 5 20^0 7 1400 1 14 1 99 1 7 2968 9
1089 0 19 0 0 0 9 3888 99 11 891 0 9 0 0 0 13 752 12 7 8 792 8 15 653 6 6 9 891
9 17 576 9 5 14 1384 14 9604 98 3 3201 1 32 2 196 2 3 1212 5 1920 4 19 3 294 3
5 2060 7 1372 0 14 0 0 0 7 2940 9 1063 1 10 8 784 8 9 3852 98 11 873 1 8 10 986
10 13 738 10 7 7 866 7 15 640 4 6 8 784 8 17 564 0 5 13 1274 13 9409 97 3 3136
1 32 1 97 1 3 1200 5 1881 4 19 2 194 2 5 2040 7 1344 1 13 6 582 6 7 2912 9 1045
4 10 7 679 7 9 3816 97 11 855 4 8 9 873 9 13 723 10 7 6 502 6 15 627 4 6 7 699
7 17 553 8 5 12 1164 12 9216 96 3 3072 0 32 0 0 0 3 1180 5 1843 1 19 1 96 1 5
2020 7 1316 4 13 5 480 5 7 2884 9 1024 0 10 6 576 6 9 2780 96 11 837 9 8 8 768
8 13 708 12 7 5 580 5 15 614 6 6 6 576 6 17 542 2 5 11 1057 11 9025 95 3 3008 1
31 2 190 2 3 1176 5 1801 0 19 0 0 0 5 2000 7 1289 2 13 4 3^0 4 7 2756 9 1002 7
10 5 475 5 9 3744 95 11 824 5 8 7 665 7 13 694 3 7 4 380 4 15 601 10 6 5 475 5
17 530 15 5 10 950 10 Number of pikes to be imbattailled. The quadrate root.
To march in rank. Ranks how many. Remainder of men. Maniples of pikes. Ranks
of remainder. The whole overplus of pikes, after the Manip. How many pikes in
rank to march up. Number of shot to impale. The whole number of shot that do
impale.

The Table of Battallions of the grand square of men.
1 2 3 4 2 3 4 2 3 4 10000 3 3481 3249 3299 21 5 2340 2025 1936 1936 1764 35 7
1444 1444 1444 1444 1444 1369 1369 0 9801 3 3600 3600 2601 0 5 2500 2500 1600
1600 1600 1 7 2025 2025 1296 1296 1296 961 900 2 9604 3 3249 3136 3136 83 5
2025 2025 1849 1849 1849 7 7 1369 1369 1369 1369 1369 1369 1369 17 9409 3 3136
3136 3136 1 5 1936 1936 1849 1849 1849 7 1369 1369 1369 1369 1296 1296 1296 45
9216 3 3249 3249 2704 14 5 2116 2116 2116 1444 1444 10 7 1369 1369 1369 1296
1296 1296 1296 25 9025 3 3025 3025 2916 5 1764 1764 1764 1849 1849 7 1369 1369
1369 1225 1225 1225 1225

The Table of Battles in proportions of equality.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 8836 94 3 2945 1 31 1 94 1 3 1164 5 1767 1 18 4 376 4
5 1980 7 1262 2 13 3 242 3 7 2828 9 981 7 10 4 376 4 9 3708 94 11 803 3 8 6 564
6 13 679 9 7 3 282 3 15 589 1 6 4 376 4 17 519 13 5 9 846 9 8649 93 3 2883 0 31
0 0 0 3 1151 5 1729 4 18 3 279 3 5 1960 7 1235 4 13 2 186 2 7 2800 9 961 0 10 3
279 3 9 3627 93 11 786 3 8 5 465 5 11 13 665 4 7 2 186 2 15 576 9 6 3 279 3 17
508 13 5 8 744 8 8464 92 3 2821 1 30 2 184 2 3 1140 5 1672 4 18 2 184 2 5 1940
7 1209 1 13 1 92 1 7 2772 9 940 4 10 2 184 2 9 3636 92 11 769 5 ^8 4 368 4 13
651 1 ^7 1 92 1 15 564 4 6 2 184 2 17 486 2 5 7 644 7 8281 91 3 2760 1 30 1 91
1 3 1128 5 1656 1 18 1 91 1 5 1920 7 1187 0 13 0 0 0 7 2744 9 920 1 10 1 91 1 9
3600 91 11 752 9 8 3 273 3 13 637 0 7 0 0 0 15 552 1 6 1 91 1 17 487 2 5 6 546
6 8100 90 3 2780 0 30 0 0 0 3 1116 5 1420 0 18 0 0 0 5 1900 7 1157 1 12 6 540 6
7 2716 9 900 0 10 0 0 0 9 3564 90 11 736 4 8 2 180 2 13 623 1 6 12 1080 12 15
540 00 6 0 000 0 17 499 13 5 5 450 5 7921 89 3 2640 1 29 2 178 2 3 1104 5 1584
1 17 4 356 4 5 1880 7 1131 4 12 5 445 5 7 2688 9 880 1 9 8 712 8 9 3528 89 11
720 1 8 1 89 8 13 609 4 6 11 979 11 15 529 13 5 14 1246 14 17 465 16 5 4 356 4

The Table of Battallion to the grand square of men.
1 2 3 4 2 3 4 2 3 4 8836 3 3025 3025 2704 5 1764 1764 1764 1764 1764 62 7 1296
1296 1296 1225 1225 1225 1225 48 8649 3 2916 2916 2809 8 5 1764 1764 1764 1681
1681 5 7 1296 1296 1296 1296 1156 1156 1156 7 8464 3 2809 2809 2809 37 5 1849
1849 1849 1444 1444 29 7 1296 1296 1296 1296 1089 1089 1089 13 8281 3 3249 2500
2500 32 5 1681 1681 1681 1600 1600 38 7 1296 1296 1296 1024 1024 1024 1296 8100
3 2704 2704 2704 12 5 1936 1936 1936 1156 1156 7 1156 1156 1156 1156 1156 1156
1156 8 7921 3 2809 2809 2304 5 1600 1600 1600 1600 1520 7 1156 1156 1156 1156
1089 1089 1089 27

The Tables of Battles in proportion of equality.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 7744 88 3 2581 1 29 1 88 1 3 1092 5 1548 4 17 3 264 3
5 1860 7 1106 2 12 4 352 4 7 2260 9 860 4 9 7 616 7 9 3492 88 11 704 0 8 0 0 0
13 595 9 6 10 8^0 10 15 516 4 5 13 1144 13 17 455 9 5 3 264 3 7569 87 3 2523 0
29 0 0 0 3 1080 5 1513 4 27 2 174 2 5 1840 7 1081 2 12 3 261 3 7 2632 9 841 0 9
6 522 6 9 3456 87 11 688 1 7 10 870 10 13 582 3 6 9 783 9 15 501 14 5 12 1044
12 17 445 4 5 2 174 2 7396 86 3 2465 1 28 2 172 2 3 1068 5 1479 1 17 1 86 1 5
1820 7 1056 2 12 2 172 2 7 2604 9 821 7 9 5 430 5 9 3420 86 11 672 4 7 9 774 9
13 568 12 6 8 688 8 15 493 1 5 11 946 11 17 431 9 5 1 86 1 7225 85 3 2408 1 28
1 85 1 3 1056 5 1445 0 17 0 0 0 5 1800 7 1032 1 12 1 85 1 7 2576 9 802 7 9 4
420 4 9 3384 85 11 656 9 7 8 680 8 13 555 10 6 7 585 7 15 481 10 5 10 850 10 17
425 0 5 0 0 0 7056 84 3 2352 0 28 0 0 0 3 1044 5 1411 1 16 4 336 4 5 1780 7
1008 0 12 0 0 0 7 2548 9 784 0 9 3 552 3 9 3348 84 11 641 5 7 7 595 7 11 13 542
10 6 6 504 6 15 470 6 5 9 756 9 17 415 1 4 16 1244 16 6889 83 3 2292 1 27 2 166
2 3 1032 5 1377 4 16 3 244 3 5 1760 7 984 1 11 6 498 6 7 2520 9 765 4 9 2 166 2
9 3312 83 11 626 3 7 6 504 6 13 529 12 6 5 415 5 15 459 4 5 8 664 8 17 405 4 4
15 1245 15

The Table of Battallions of the battles of equal proportion.
1 2 3 4 2 3 4 2 3 4 7744 3 2401 2401 2916 26 5 1530 1530 1530 1530 1601 23 7
1156 1156 1089 1089 1089 1089 1089 13 7569 3 2704 2704 2116 45 5 1601 1601 1601
1369 1369 18 7 1089 1089 1089 1089 1089 1089 1024 11 7396 3 2500 2500 2401 5 5
1444 1444 1444 1530 1530 4 7 1089 1089 1089 1024 1024 1024 1024 33 7225 3 2681
2681 1936 7 5 1444 1444 1444 1444 1444 5 7 1089 1089 1089 1089 961 961 961 14
7056 3 2916 2916 1089 35 5 1444 1444 1369 1369 1369 61 7 1024 1024 1024 1024
1024 1024 900 12 6889 3 2916 2916 1024 33 5 1369 1369 1369 1369 1369 1369 44 7
1024 1024 1024 961 900 900 1024 32

The Table of Battles in proportion of equality.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 6724 82 3 2241 1 27 1 82 1 3 1020 5 1344 4 16 2 164 2
5 1740 7 960 4 11 5 410 5 7 2492 9 747 1 9 1 82 1 9 3276 82 11 611 3 7 5 410 5
13 517 3 6 4 328 4 15 448 4 5 7 574 7 17 395 9 4 14 1148 14 6561 81 3 2187 0 27
0 0 0 3 1008 5 1312 1 16 1 81 1 5 1728 7 937 2 11 4 324 4 7 2464 9 729 0 9 0 0
0 9 3240 81 11 596 5 7 4 324 4 13 504 9 6 3 243 3 15 437 6 5 6 486 6 17 385 16
4 13 1053 13 6400 80 3 2133 1 26 2 160 2 3 996 5 1280 0 16 0 0 0 5 1700 914 2
11 3 240 3 7 2436 9 711 1 8 8 640 8 9 3204 80 11 581 9 7 3 240 3 13 492 4 6 2
160 2 15 428 4 5 5 400 5 17 376 8 4 12 960 12 6241 79 3 2080 1 26 1 79 1 3 984
5 1248 1 15 4 316 4 5 1680 7 891 4 11 2 158 2 7 2408 9 693 4 8 7 553 7 9 316^
79 11 567 4 7 2 158 2 13 480 1 6 1 79 1 15 416 1 5 4 316 4 17 367 2 4 11 869 11
6084 78 3 2028 0 26 0 0 0 3 972 5 1216 4 15 3 234 3 5 1660 7 869 1 11 1 78 1 7
2380 9 676 0 8 6 468 6 9 3132 78 11 553 1 7 1 78 1 13 468 0 6 0 0 0 15 405 9 5
3 234 3 17 322 10 4 10 780 10 5929 77 3 1976 1 25 2 154 2 3 960 5 1185 4 15 2
154 2 5 1640 7 847 0 11 0 0 0 7 2332 9 658 7 8 5 385 5 9 3096 77 11 539 0 7 0 0
0 13 456 1 5 12 924 12 15 395 4 5 2 154 2 17 348 13 4 9 693 9

The Table of Battallions of the battles of equal proportion.
1 2 3 4 2 3 4 2 3 4 6724 3 2209 2209 2304 24 5 1369 1369 1369 1296 1296 25 7
961 961 961 961 961 961 961 3 6561 3 2401 2401 1764 5 5 1369 1369 1369 1225
1225 4 7 961 961 961 961 900 900 900 17 6400 3 2116 2116 2116 12 5 1296 1296
1296 1296 1225 9 7 900 900 900 900 900 900 961 19 6241 3 2116 2116 2025 5 1296
1296 1296 1156 1156 41 7 900 900 900 900 900 900 841 6084 3 2025 2025 2025 9 5
1025 1025 1025 1025 1156 28 7 900 900 900 900 900 784 784 20 5929 3 2304 2304
1296 25 5 1156 1156 1156 1225 1225 11 7 900 900 900 900 784 784 729 32

The Table of Battles in proportion of equality.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 5776 76 3 1295 1 25 1 76 1 3 948 5 1155 1 15 1 76 1 5
1620 7 825 1 10 6 456 6 7 2324 9 641 7 9 4 304 4 9 3060 76 11 525 1 6 10 760 10
13 444 4 5 11 830 11 15 384 8 5 1 76 1 17 339 13 4 8 608 8 5625 75 3 1875 0 25
0 0 0 3 936 5 1125 0 15 0 0 0 5 1600 7 803 4 10 5 375 5 7 2276 9 625 0 8 3 225
3 9 3024 75 11 511 4 6 9 675 9 13 432 9 5 10 750 10 15 375 0 5 0 0 0 17 ^30 15
4 7 525 7 5476 74 3 1825 1 24 2 148 2 3 924 5 1095 1 14 4 296 4 5 1580 7 753 5
10 4 296 4 7 2248 9 608 4 8 2 148 2 9 2988 74 11 497 9 6 8 592 8 13 421 3 5 9
666 9 15 365 1 4 14 1036 14 17 322 2 4 6 456 6 5329 73 3 1776 1 24 1 73 1 3 912
5 1065 4 14 3 219 3 5 1560 7 761 2 10 3 219 3 7 2240 9 592 1 8 1 73 1 9 2952 73
11 484 8 6 7 511 7 13 409 12 5 8 584 8 15 355 4 4 13 949 13 17 313 8 4 5 365
5184 72 3 1728 0 24 0 0 0 3 900 5 1036 4 14 2 144 2 5 1540 7 740 4 10 2 144 2 7
2192 9 567 0 8 0 0 0 9 2910 72 11 471 3 6 6 432 6 13 398 10 5 7 504 7 15 345 9
4 12 864 12 17 304 16 4 4 288 4 5041 71 3 1680 1 22 2 142 2 3 888 5 1008 1 14 1
71 1 5 1520 7 720 1 10 1 71 1 7 2184 9 560 1 7 8 568 8 9 2888 71 11 458 3 6 5
355 5 13 387 10 5 6 426 6 15 336 1 4 11 781 11 17 296 9 4 3 213 3

The Table of Battallions of the battles of equal proportion.
1 2 3 4 2 3 4 2 3 4 5776 3 2304 2304 1156 12 5 1156 1156 1155 1156 1156 4 7
841 841 841 841 841 784 784 3 5625 3 2304 2304 1024 over 7 5 1089 1089 1089
1156 1156 46 7 784 784 784 784 784 841 841 23 5476 3 1764 1764 1936 12 5 1089
1089 1089 1089 1089 33 7 784 784 784 784 784 784 784 12 5329 3 1764 1764 1764
33 5 1089 1089 1089 1024 1024 7 784 784 784 784 729 729 729 2 5184 3 1936 1600
1600 48 5 1024 1024 1024 1024 1089 1 7 784 729 729 729 729 729 729 26 5041 3
1681 1681 1681 2 5 1024 1024 1024 961 961 47 7 729 729 729 729 729 729 676 9

The Table of Battles of proportion of equality.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 4900 70 3 1633 1 23 1 70 1 3 876 5 980 0 14 0 0 0 5
1500 7 700 0 10 0 0 0 7 2136 9 544 4 7 7 490 7 9 2844 70 11 445 5 6 4 280 4 13
376 12 5 5 350 5 15 326 10 4 10 700 10 17 288 4 4 2 140 2 4761 69 3 1587 0 23 0
0 0 3 864 5 952 1 13 4 276 4 5 1480 7 680 1 9 6 414 6 7 2118 9 551 2 7 6 414 6
9 2808 69 11 432 9 6 3 207 3 13 366 3 5 4 276 4 15 316 6 4 9 621 9 17 280 1 4 1
69 1 46^4 68 3 2541 1 22 2 136 2 3 ^52 5 924 4 13 3 204 3 5 1480 7 632 0 9 5
340 5 7 2090 9 513 7 7 5 340 5 9 2772 68 11 420 4 6 2 136 2 13 355 9 5 3 204 3
15 308 4 4 8 544 8 17 272 0 4 0 0 0 4489 67 3 1496 1 22 1 67 1 3 840 5 897 4 13
2 134 2 5 1440 7 641 2 9 4 268 4 7 2062 9 498 7 7 4 268 4 9 2736 67 11 408 1 6
1 67 1 13 345 4 5 2 134 2 15 299 4 4 7 469 7 17 264 1 3 16 1072 16 4356 66 3
1452 0 22 0 0 0 3 820 5 871 1 13 1 66 1 5 1420 7 622 2 9 3 198 3 7 2034 9 472 8
7 3 198 3 9 2700 66 11 396 0 6 0 0 0 13 355 1 5 1 66 1 15 290 6 4 6 396 6 17
256 4 3 15 990 15 4225 65 3 1408 1 21 2 130 2 3 816 5 845 0 13 0 0 0 5 1400 7
603 4 9 2 130 2 7 2006 9 469 4 7 2 130 2 9 2664 65 11 384 1 5 10 650 10 13 325
0 5 0 0 0 15 281 10 4 5 325 5 17 248 9 3 14 910 14

The Table of Battallions of the battles of even square.
1 2 3 4 2 3 4 2 3 4 4900 3 1600 1600 1681 19 5 1024 1024 1024 900 900 28 7 729
729 729 729 676 625 7 4761 3 1520 1520 1520 20 5 961 961 961 961 900 28 7 676
676 676 676 676 676 676 29 4624 3 1521 1521 1521 34 5 961 961 900 900 900 2 7
676 676 676 676 676 625 625 4489 3 1444 1444 1600 1 5 900 900 900 900 841 48 7
676 676 625 625 625 625 625 12 4356 3 1444 1444 1444 24 5 961 961 961 739 739 5
7 625 625 625 625 625 625 625 19 4252 3 1369 1369 1369 43 5 841 841 841 841 841
20 7 625 625 625 625 625 676 676 3

The Table of Battles in proportion of equality.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 4096 64 3 1365 1 21 1 64 1 3 804 5 819 1 12 4 256 4 5
1380 7 585 1 9 1 64 1 7 1976 9 455 1 7 1 64 1 9 2628 64 11 372 4 5 9 576 9 13
315 1 4 12 768 12 15 273 1 4 4 256 4 17 240 16 3 13 832 13 3969 63 3 1323 0 21
0 0 0 3 792 5 0791 4 12 3 189 3 5 1360 7 567 0 9 0 0 0 7 1946 9 441 2 7 0 0 0 9
2592 63 11 360 9 5 8 504 8 13 305 4 4 11 693 11 15 264 9 4 3 189 3 17 223 8 3
12 756 12 3844 62 3 1281 1 20 2 124 2 3 780 5 768 4 12 2 124 2 5 1340 7 549 1 8
6 372 6 7 1918 9 427 1 6 8 496 8 9 2556 62 11 349 5 5 7 434 7 13 295 9 4 10 620
10 15 256 4 4 2 124 2 17 226 2 3 11 682 11 3721 61 3 1240 1 20 1 61 1 3 768 5
744 1 12 1 61 1 5 1320 7 531 4 8 5 305 5 7 1904 9 413 4 6 7 427 7 9 2520 61 11
338 3 5 6 366 6 13 286 3 4 9 549 9 15 248 1 4 1 61 1 17 218 3 3 10 610 10 3600
60 3 1200 0 20 0 0 0 3 756 5 720 0 12 0 0 0 5 1300 7 514 2 8 4 240 4 7 1862 60
9 400 0 6 6 360 6 11 327 3 5 5 300 5 3481 59 3 1160 1 19 2 118 2 3 744 5 696 1
11 4 236 4 5 1280 7 497 2 8 3 177 3 7 1834 59 9 386 7 6 4 296 4 11 316 5 5 4
236 5 3369 58 3 1121 1 19 1 58 1 3 732 5 672 4 11 3 174 3 5 1260 7 480 4 8 2
116 2 7 1806 58 9 373 7 6 4 232 4 11 305 9 5 3 174 3 3249 57 3 ^083 0 19 0 0 0
3 720 5 649 4 11 2 114 2 5 1240 7 401 1 8 1 57 1 7 1778 57 9 378 3 6 3 171 3 11
295 4 5 2 114 2

The Tables of Battallions to the battles of even squares.
1 2 3 4 2 3 4 2 3 4 4096 3 1369 1369 1369 11 5 784 841 841 841 784 5 7 576 576
576 576 576 576 625 15 3969 3 1225 1369 1369 6 5 784 784 784 784 841 8 7 576
576 576 576 576 529 529 31 3844 3 1296 1296 1225 27 5 784 784 784 739 739 14 7
576 576 576 529 529 529 529 3721 3 1225 1225 1225 46 5 739 739 739 739 739 26 7
529 529 529 529 529 529 529 18 3600 3 1225 1225 1156 6 5 739 739 739 676 676 31
7 529 529 529 529 529 484 484 13 3481 3 1156 1156 1156 13 5 676 676 676 676 739
35 3364 3 1089 1089 1156 9 5 676 676 625 625 625 35 3249 3 1089 1089 1089 1 5
676 676 625 625 625 11

The Table of Battles in proportion of equality.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 3136 56 3 1045 1 18 2 112 2 3 708 5 627 1 11 1 56 1 5
1240 56 7 448 0 8 0 0 0 7 1750 9 344 4 6 2 112 2 11 285 1 5 1 56 1 3925 55 3
1008 1 18 1 55 1 3 696 5 605 0 11 0 0 0 5 1220 55 7 432 1 7 6 330 6 7 1722 9
336 1 6 1 55 1 11 275 0 5 0 0 0 2916 54 3 972 0 18 0 0 0 3 684 5 583 1 10 4 216
4 5 1200 54 7 416 4 7 5 270 5 7 1694 9 334 0 6 0 0 0 11 265 1 4 10 540 10 2809
53 3 936 1 17 2 106 2 3 672 5 561 4 10 3 159 3 5 1180 53 7 401 2 7 4 212 4 7
1666 9 312 1 5 8 424 8 11 255 4 4 9 477 9 2704 52 3 901 1 17 1 52 1 3 660 5 540
4 10 2 104 2 5 1160 52 7 386 2 7 3 156 3 7 1638 9 300 4 5 7 364 7 9 2164 11 245
9 4 8 416 8 2601 51 3 867 0 17 0 0 0 3 648 5 520 1 10 1 51 1 5 1140 51 7 371 4
7 2 102 2 7 1610 9 289 0 5 6 306 6 11 236 5 4 7 357 7 2500 50 3 833 1 16 2 100
2 3 636 5 500 0 10 0 0 0 5 1120 50 7 359 1 7 1 50 1 7 1582 9 277 7 5 5 250 5 11
227 3 4 6 300 6 2401 49 3 800 1 16 1 49 1 3 624 5 480 1 9 4 196 4 5 1100 49 7
343 0 7 0 0 0 7 2554 9 266 7 5 4 196 4 11 218 3 4 5 245 5 2304 48 3 786 0 16 0
0 0 3 612 5 460 4 9 3 144 3 5 1080 48 7 329 1 6 6 288 6 7 1526 2209 47 3 736 1
15 2 94 2 3 600 5 441 4 9 2 94 2 5 1060 47 7 315 4 6 5 235 5 7 1498 2116 46 3
705 1 15 1 46 1 3 588 46 5 425 1 9 1 46 1 5 1040 7 302 2 6 4 184 4 7 1470

The Tables of Battallions of the battles of even squares of men.
1 2 3 4 2 3 4 3136 3 1024 1024 1089 5 625 625 625 625 625 625 3025 3 1024 1024
961 5 625 625 625 576 576 2916 3 1024 961 900 14 5 576 576 576 576 576 2809 3
961 961 900 13 5 576 576 576 529 529 2704 3 900 900 900 4 5 529 529 529 529 576
2601 3 900 841 841 19 5 529 529 529 529 484 2500 3 841 841 784 34 5 529 529 529
441 441 31 2401 3 841 784 784 8 5 484 484 484 484 441 24 2304 3 784 784 739 3 5
2209 3 739 739 739 8 2116 3 739 739 625 13

The Table of Battles in proportion of equalities.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 2025 45 3 675 0 15 0 0 0 3 576 5 405 0 9 0 0 0 5 1000
45 7 289 2 6 3 135 3 1936 44 3 646 1 1 2 88 2 3 564 5 387 1 8 4 176 4 5 980 44
7 276 4 6 2 88 2 1849 43 3 516 1 14 1 43 1 3 555 5 369 4 8 3 129 3 5 980 43 7
264 1 6 1 43 1 1764 42 3 588 0 14 0 0 0 3 540 5 352 4 8 2 84 2 5 940 42 7 252 0
6 0 0 0 1681 41 3 560 1 13 2 82 2 3 528 5 356 1 8 1 41 1 5 940 41 7 240 1 5 6
246 6 1600 40 3 53^ 1 13 1 40 1 3 510 5 320 0 ^ 0 0^ 0 5 900 40 7 228 4 5 5 200
5 0 4 1521 39 3 316 0 13 0 006 0 3 504 5 306 0 7 4 156 4 5 880 39 7 218 4 5 4
156 4 7 1444 38 3 481 1 12 2 76 2 3 492 5 288 4 7 3 114 3 5 860 38 7 206 2 5 3
114 3 1369 37 3 456 1 12 1 37 1 3 480 5 273 4 7 2 74 2 5 840 37 7 194 3 5 2 74
2 1296 36 3 432 0 12 0 0 0 3 468 5 259 1 7 1 36 1 5 820 56 7 185 1 5 1 36 1
1225 35 3 408 1 1 2 70 2 3 456 5 245 0 7 0 0 0 5 800 35 7 175 0 5 0 0 0 0 1156
34 3 385 1 11 1 34 1 3 444 5 231 1 6 4 136 4 5 780 34 7 163 5 4 6 204 6 1089 33
3 363 0 11 0 0 0 3 432 5 217 4 6 3 99 3 5 760 33 7 155 4 4 5 165 5 1024 32 3
341 1 10 2 64 2 3 420 5 204 4 6 2 64 2 5 740 32 7 146 2 4 4 128 4 7 961 31 3
320 1 10 1 31 1 3 408 192 1 6 1 31 1 5 720 31 7 137 2 4 3 93 3 900 30 ^ 300 0
10 0 0 0 3 396 180 0 6 0 0 0 5 700 30 7 128 4 4 2 60 2

The Tables of Battallions to the battles of even squares of men.
1 2 3 4 2025 3 676 676 676 3 1936 3 625 625 676 10 1849 3 625 625 676 23 1764
3 576 576 576 38 1681 3 576 576 529 1600 3 529 529 529 13 1521 3 529 529 441 23
1444 3 484 484 484 81 1369 3 441 441 484 65 1296 3 441 441 400 14 1225 3 441
400 361 23 1156 3 400 400 324 32 1089 3 361 361 361 6 1024 3 361 324 324 16 961
3 324 324 289 24 900 3 324 289 289 2

The Table of Battles in proportion of equality.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 841 29 3 280 1 9 2 58 2 3 384 29 5 168 1 5 4 116 4 5
680 7 120 1 4 1 29 1 784 28 3 261 1 9 1 28 1 3 372 5 156 4 5 3 84 3 5 660 28 7
112 0 4 0 0 0 0 729 27 3 243 0 9 0 0 0 3 360 27 5 145 4 5 2 54 2 5 640 676 26 3
225 1 8 2 52 2 3 348 26 5 135 1 5 1 26 1 5 620 625 25 3 208 1 8 1 25 1 3 336 25
5 125 0 5 0 0 0 5 600 576 24 3 192 0 8 0 0 0 3 324 24 5 115 1 4 4 96 4 5 580
529 23 3 176 1 7 2 46 2 3 312 23 5 105 4 4 3 69 4 5 484 22 3 161 1 7 1 22 1 3
300 22 5 96 3 4 2 44 2 441 21 3 147 0 7 0 0 0 3 288 21 5 88 1 4 1 21 1 400 20 3
133 1 6 2 40 2 3 276 20 5 80 0 4 0 0 0 361 19 3 120 1 6 1 19 1 3 264 19 5 72 1
3 4 76 4 0 324 18 3 108 0 6 0 0 0 3 252 18 5 64 4 3 3 54 3 289 17 3 96 1 5 2 34
2 3 240 17 5 57 4 3 2 34 2 256 16 3 85 1 5 1 16 1 3 228 16 5 51 1 3 1 16 1 225
15 3 75 0 5 0 0 0 3 216 15 5 45 0 3 0 0 0 196 14 3 65 1 4 2 28 2 3 204 14 5 39
1 2 4 56 4 169 13 3 56 1 4 1 13 1 3 192 13 5 33 4 2 3 39 3 144 12 3 48 0 4 0 0
0 3 180 12 5 28 4 2 2 24 2 141 11 3 40 1 3 2 22 2 3 168 11 5 24 1 2 1 11 1 100
10 3 33 1 3 1 10 1 3 156 10 5 20 0 2 0 0 0 0 81 9 3 27 0 3 0 0 0 3 144 9 5 16 1
1 4 36 4 64 8 3 21 1 2 2 16 2 8 5 12 4 1 3 24 3 49 7 3 16 1 2 1 7 1 7 5 9 4 1 2
14 2

The Table of Battallions, reduced out of the grand square of men.
1 2 3 4 841 3 289 289 256 7 784 3 256 256 256 16 729 3 256 256 225 8 676 3 225
225 225 1 625 3 225 196 196 8 576 3 196 196 196 15 529 3 196 169 169 5 484 3
169 144 144 17 441 3 144 144 144 9 400 3 144 144 121 9 361 3 121 121 121 2 324
3 121 100 100 3 289 3 100 100 81 8 256 3 81 81 81 13 225 3 81 81 64 1 196 3 64
64 64 4 169 3 64 64 49 8 144 3 49 49 49 3 121 3 49 36 36 6 100 3 36 36 25 3 The
end of the Table of Battallions reduced out of the battles of g. and squares of
men: upon the right side of every leaf.


The Table of Battles in proportion of equality.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 36 6 3 12 0 2 0 0 0 6 5 7 1 1 1 6 1 25 5 3 8 1 1 5 5 5
0 0 16 4 3 5 1 0 4 5 3 1 1 1 4 1 9 3 3 3 0 3 5 1 4 36 4 4 2 3 1 1 2 5 0 0 2 1 0
1 0 The whole number of armed pikes. The quadrate, or square root. Per rank
to march by: Ranks how many. Remains of ranks. Maniples, or parts. Remains
of pikes by rank. The whole over plus of remains. How many to march in ranks
of remain. The ranks to impale by. The number of shot that impale. Here
ends the Tables of Battles in proportion of equality, or the Battles of due
square of men: that is, how many ranks, so many men by rank; or how many
ranks, so many files.


Hereafter ensues the Tables and figures of two fold Battles; called broad
squares or hearst Battles: with the Battallions of that kind.
IN these Tables ensuing, I have set down the order and setting of sundry
Battles in proportion of inequality, as 2, unto 1, that is, twice so many men
in front as in flank, the which sort of Battles do come to co^taine near a
just square or quadrate of ground, which the battles of proportion of equality
(that is so many me^ in flank as in front) do not: for they contain in
ground, twice and more the quantity of ground, in flank or length that they
do in front or breadth; the reason and order thereof I have in my 3. book, in
fol. 45, 46 etc. and 50 at large declared, and so continuing, showing therein,
rules Arithmeticall to set all such sorts of Battles, and their impalement
with armed pikes; and divisions into Maniples: here only contenting my self
with setting forth the figures and Tables of the said Battles in proportion of
inequality; and how they are to be ordered into ranks for marching, and into
Maniples, and girdling with shot, as before in the Tables of squares of me^, or
Battles in proportion of equality, is at large set down and declared. And
also on the left side of every leaf is set down the said Battles or broad
squares, divided into sundry battallions of that kind, as into 3 or 5
battallions: the number of which battallions in each of them contained, you
shall find evermore in the first Column of every leaf on the right side; and
where you find the number of your battallions, there shall you see, betwixt two
long rules in that distinction (placed in the 2 Column) how every battallion
shall be set in front and flank, which is the just square root of every
battallion. Finally, I have here before you set down first, the figure of the
said broad square of men, or Battle in proportion of inequality, as 2 unto 1,
which comes to contain, near the just quadrat of ground, girdled round
about with 7 ranks of shot; and the rest of the shot, and short weapon due to
this number and proportion of pikes, are divided into sundry troops of 50, in
every troop, trouping round about the maine Battle; as I have done before in
the figure of the just square of men. I have here also desseigned in figure the
said broad square or hearst Battle, divided into sundry battallions of that
kind, as first into 3 battallions, then into 5 battallions, as in page 212 may
appear: each battallion is girdled with 3 ranks of shot; the rest of the shot
and short weapon belonging unto the said numbers, may be placed in sundry
small troops, as is in the broad square, trouping round about the same: or as
the Sergeant Mayor shall otherwise think good: or as the ground will permit,
or occasions offered to fight.



The figure of a Broad square Battle, trouped round about with shot.


The figure of 3 Battallions, reduced out of the Broad square.


The figure of five Battallions, reduced out of the Broad square.


The Table of Broad square, or twyfold Battles.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 10082 71 3 3360 2 47 1 71 1 3 1314 5 2016 3 28 2 142 2
5 2230 142 7 1440 3 20 2 142 2 7 3178 9 1120 3 15 7 497 7 9 4158 11 916 7 12 10
710 10 9800 70 3 3266 2 46 2 140 2 3 1296 5 1980 0 28 0 0 0 5 2200 140 7 1400 0
20 0 0 0 7 3136 9 1088 8 15 5 350 5 9 4104 11 890 10 12 8 560 12 9522 69 3 3174
0 46 0 0 0 3 1278 5 1904 2 27 3 207 3 5 2170 138 7 1360 2 19 5 345 5 7 3094 9
1058 0 15 3 207 3 9 4050 11 865 7 12 6 414 6 11 5038 9248 68 3 3082 2 45 1 68 1
3 12^0 5 1849 3 27 1 68 1 5 2140 136 7 1321 1 19 3 204 3 7 3052 9 1027 0 15 1
68 1 9 3996 11 840 8 12 4 272 4 8978 67 3 2992 2 44 2 134 2 3 1242 5 1795 3 26
4 268 4 5 2110 134 7 1282 4 19 1 67 1 7 3010 9 977 5 14 8 546 8 9 3942 11 816 2
12 2 134 2 8712 66 3 2904 0 44 0 0 0 3 1224 5 1742 2 26 2 132 2 5 2080 132 7
1230 2 1^ 6 396 6 7 2968 9 968 0 14 6 396 6 9 3088 11 792 0 12 0 0 0 8450 65 3
2815 2 43 1 65 1 3 1206 5 1690 0 26 0 0 0 5 2050 130 7 1207 1 18 4 260 4 7 2926
9 938 8 14 4 260 4 9 3834 11 768 2 11 9 585 9 8192 64 3 2730 2 42 2 128 2 3
1188 5 1638 2 25 3 192 3 5 2020 128 7 1170 2 18 2 128 2 7 2884 9 910 2 14 2 128
2 9 3780 11 744 8 11 7 449 7 7938 63 3 2646 0 42 0 0 0 3 1170 5 1580 3 25 1 63
1 5 1990 126 7 1134 0 18 0 0 0 7 2842 9 882 0 14 0 0 0 9 2726 11 721 7 11 5 315
5 7688 62 3 2562 2 41 1 62 1 3 1152 5 1537 3 24 4 248 4 5 1960 124 7 1098 2 17
5 310 5 7 2800 9 854 2 13 7 434 7 9 3670 11 698 10 11 3 186 3

The Tables of Battallions reduced out of the Broad squares.
1 2 3 4 2 3 4 10082 3 3362 3362 3362 3 5 1922 1922 1922 1922 2312 83 9800 3
3200 3200 3362 38 5 2048 2048 2048 1800 1800 56 9522 3 3200 3200 3042 78 5 1922
1922 1922 1922 1800 34 9248 3 3042 3042 3200 36 5 1800 1800 1800 1922 1922 4
8978 3 3042 3042 2888 6 5 1922 1922 1922 1922 1250 40 8712 3 2888 2888 2888 48
5 1800 1800 1800 1800 1458 54 8450 3 2888 2738 2738 86 5 1682 1682 1682 1682
1682 40 8192 3 2738 2738 2738 over 22 5 1682 1682 1682 1568 1568 10 7938 3 2738
2592 2592 16 5 1568 1568 1568 1568 1568 16 7688 3 2592 2592 2450 64 5 1568 1568
1568 1568 1352 69

The Table of Broad square of men, or twofold Battles.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 7442 61 3 2480 2 40 2 122 2 3 1134 5 1488 2 24 2 122 2
5 1930 122 7 1063 1 17 3 183 3 7 2758 9 826 8 13 5 305 5 9 3616 11 676 6 11 1
61 1 7200 60 3 2400 0 40 0 0 0 3 1116 5 1440 0 24 0 0 0 5 1900 120 7 1028 4 17
1 60 1 7 2716 9 800 0 13 3 180 3 9 3562 11 654 6 10 10 600 10 6962 59 3 2320 2
39 1 59 1 3 1098 5 1392 2 2^ 3 177 3 5 1870 118 7 994 4 16 6 354 6 7 2674 9 773
5 13 1 59 1 9 3508 11 632 10 10 8 472 8 6728 58 3 2242 2 38 2 116 2 3 1080 5
1345 3 23 1 58 1 5 1840 116 7 961 1 16 4 232 4 7 2632 9 742 5 12 8 464 8 9 3454
11 611 7 10 6 348 6 6498 57 3 2166 0 38 0 0 0 3 1062 5 1299 3 22 4 228 4 5 1810
114 7 928 2 16 2 114 2 7 2590 9 722 0 12 6 342 6 9 3400 11 590 8 10 4 228 4
6272 56 3 2090 2 37 1 56 1 3 1044 5 1254 2 22 2 112 2 5 1780 112 7 896 0 16 0 0
0 7 2548 9 696 8 12 4 224 4 9 3346 11 570 2 10 2 112 2 6050 55 3 2016 2 36 2
110 2 3 1026 5 1210 0 22 0 0 0 5 1750 110 7 864 2 15 5 275 5 7 2506 9 672 2 12
2 110 2 9 3292 11 550 0 10 0 0 0 5832 54 3 1944 0 36 0 0 0 3 1008 5 1166 2 21 3
162 3 5 1720 108 7 833 1 15 3 162 3 7 2464 9 648 0 12 0 0 0 9 3238 11 530 2 9 9
486 9 11 5618 53 3 1872 2 35 1 53 1 3 990 5 1123 3 21 1 53 1 5 1690 106 7 802 4
15 1 53 1 7 2422 9 624 2 11 7 371 7 9 3184 11 510 8 9 7 371 7 5408 52 3 1802 2
34 2 104 2 3 972 5 1081 3 20 4 208 4 5 1660 104 7 727 4 14 6 312 6 7 2380 9 600
8 11 5 260 5 9 3130 11 491 7 9 5 260 5

The Table of Battallions reduced out of Broad squares or hearsts.
1 2 3 4 2 3 4 7442 3 2738 2592 2048 64 5 1458 1458 1458 1458 1568 7200 3 2450
2450 2312 12 5 1458 1458 1458 1458 1352 16 6962 3 2312 2312 2312 26 5 1352 1352
1352 1458 1458 10 6728 3 2312 2312 2178 60 5 1352 1352 1352 1352 1250 70 6498 3
2450 2450 1568 30 5 1352 1352 1250 1250 1250 49 6272 3 2178 2048 2048 2 5 1250
1250 1250 1250 1250 22 6050 3 2048 2048 1920 42 5 1250 1250 1250 1152 1152 4
5832 3 2048 2048 1682 54 5 1152 1152 1152 1152 1152 72 5618 3 2048 2048 1458 64
5 1152 1152 1152 1058 1058 46 5408 3 1800 1800 1800 8 5 1058 1058 1058 1058
1152 27

The Table of Broad squares, or twyfold Battles.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 5202 51 3 1734 0 34 0 0 0 3 954 5 1040 2 20 2 102 2 5
1630 102 7 743 1 14 4 204 4 7 2338 9 578 0 11 3 153 3 9 3076 11 472 10 9 3 153
3 5000 50 3 1666 2 33 1 50 1 3 936 5 1000 0 20 0 0 0 5 1600 100 7 714 2 14 2
100 2 7 2296 9 555 5 11 1 50 1 9 3022 11 490 10 9 1 50 1 4812 49 3 1604 0 32 2
98 2 3 918 5 962 2 19 3 147 3 5 1570 98 7 687 3 14 0 0 0 7 2254 9 534 6 10 8
292 8 9 2964 11 437 5 8 10 390 10 4508 48 3 1502 2 32 0 0 0 3 900 5 901 3 19 1
48 1 5 1540 96 7 644 0 13 5 240 5 7 2212 9 500 8 10 6 288 6 9 2914 11 409 9 8 8
384 8 4418 47 3 1472 2 31 1 47 1 3 882 5 888 3 18 4 188 4 5 1510 94 7 631 1 13
3 141 3 7 2170 9 490 8 10 4 188 4 9 2860 11 401 7 8 6 288 6 4232 46 3 1410 2 30
2 92 2 3 864 5 846 2 18 2 92 2 5 1480 92 7 604 4 13 1 46 1 7 2128 9 470 2 10 2
92 2 9 2806 11 384 8^ 8 4 184 4 4050 45 3 1350 0 30 0 0 0 3 846 5 810 0 18 0 0
0 5 1450 90 7 578 4 12 6 150 6 7 2086 9 450 0 10 0 0 0 9 2752 11 368 2 8 2 90 2
3872 44 3 1290 2 29 1 44 1 3 828 5 774 2 17 3 152 3 5 1420 88 7 553 1 12 4 176
4 7 2044 9 430 2 9 7 298 7 9 2698 11 352 0 8 0 0 0 3698 43 3 1232 2 28 2 86 2 3
810 5 739 3 17 1 43 1 5 1390 86 7 528 2 12 2 86 2 7 2002 9 410 8 9 5 215 5 9
2644 11 336 2 7 9 387 9 3528 42 3 1176 0 28 0 0 0 3 792 5 705 3 16 4 168 4 5
1360 84 7 504 0 12 0 0 0 7 1960 9 393 0 9 3 126 3 9 2590 11 320 8 7 7 294 7

The Table of Battallions reduced out of Broad squares.
1 2 3 4 2 3 4 5202 3 1682 1682 1800 38 5 1058 1058 1058 1058 968 2 5000 3 1800
1800 1352 24 5 1058 968 968 968 968 70 4812 3 1568 1568 1682 6 5 968 968 968
968 882 58 4508 3 1568 1568 1352 20 5 882 882 882 882 968 12 4418 3 1458 1458
1458 18 5 882 882 882 882 882 8 4232 3 1458 1458 1250 66 5 800 800 800 882 882
68 4050 3 1250 1250 1568 18 5 800 800 800 800 800 50 3872 3 1250 1250 1352 20 5
800 800 800 722 722 28 3698 3 1352 1352 968 26 5 722 722 722 720 800 10 3528 3
1250 1250 968 60 5 722 722 722 722 648 8 The Table of Broad squares, or Hearst
Battles.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 3362 41 3 1120 2 27 1 41 1 3 774 5 672 2 16 2 82 2 5
1330 82 7 480 2 11 5 205 5 7 1918 9 372 5 9 1 41 1 9 2536 11 305 7 7 5 205 5
3200 40 3 1066 2 26 2 80 2 3 756 5 640 0 16 0 0 0 5 1300 80 7 457 1 11 3 120 3
7 1876 9 355 5 8 8 320 8 9 2482 11 290 10 7 3 120 3 3042 39 3 1014 0 26 0 0 0 3
738 5 608 2 15 3 117 3 5 1270 78 7 434 4 11 1 39 1 7 1830 9 338 0 8 6 234 6 9
2428 11 276 6 7 1 39 1 2888 38 3 962 2 25 1 38 1 3 720 5 577 3 15 1 38 1 5 1240
76 7 412 4 10 6 468 6 7 1792 9 320 8 8 4 312 4 9 2374 11 262 6 6 10 380 10 2738
37 3 912 2 24 2 74 2 3 702 5 547 3 14 4 148 4 5 1212 74 7 390 8 10 4 148 4 7
1750 ^ 304 2 8 2 74 2 9 2320 11 248 10 6 8 296 8 2592 36 3 864 0 24 0 0 0 3 684
5 518 2 14 2 72 2 5 1180 72 7 372 2 10 2 72 2 7 1708 9 288 0 8 0 0 0 9 2266 11
235 7 6 6 216 6 2450 35 3 810 2 23 1 35 1 3 666 5 490 0 14 0 0 0 5 1150 70 7
350 0 10 0 0 0 7 1666 9 272 2 7 7 245 7 9 2212 11 222 8 6 4 140 4 2312 34 3 770
2 22 2 68 2 3 642 5 462 2 13 3 102 3 5 1120 68 7 330 2 9 5 170 5 7 1624 9 256 8
7 5 170 5 9 2158 11 210 2 6 2 68 2 2178 33 3 726 0 22 0 0 0 3 624 5 437 3 1^ 1
33 1 5 1090 66 7 311 1 9 3 99 3 7 1572 9 248 0 7 3 99 3 9 2104 11 198 0 6 0 0 0
2048 32 3 682 2 21 1 3^ ^ 3 606 5 409 3 12 4 128 4 5 1060 64 7 292 4 9 1 32 1 7
1530 9 227 5 7 1 32 1 9 2050 11 186 2 6 9 288 9

The Table of Battallions reduced out of the Broad squares.
1 2 3 4 2 3 4 3362 3 1058 1058 1250 4 5 722 648 648 648 648 48 3200 3 1058
1058 1058 26 5 648 648 648 648 578 30 3042 3 1058 968 968 42 5 648 648 578 578
578 12 2888 3 968 968 968 16 5 578 578 578 578 578 2 2738 3 968 882 882 6 5 578
578 512 512 512 16 2592 3 968 800 800 24 5 512 512 512 512 512 32 2450 3 800
800 800 50 5 512 512 512 450 450 14 2312 3 800 800 722 over 10 5 450 450 450
400 592 2178 3 722 722 722 12 5 450 450 450 392 392 44 2048 3 722 648 648 30 5
392 392 392 392 450 30

The Table of Broad squares, or Hearst Battles.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 1922 31 3 640 2 20 2 62 2 3 588 5 384 2 12 2 62 2 5
1030 7 274 4 8 6 186 6 7 1488 62 9 214 4 6 8 248 8 9 1996 11 174 8 5 7 217 7
1800 30 3 600 0 20 0 0 0 3 570 5 360 0 12 0 0 0 5 1000 7 257 1 8 4 120 4 7 1446
60 9 200 0 6 6 180 6 9 1942 11 163 7 5 5 150 5 1682 29 3 527 1 19 1 29 1 3 552
5 316 2 11 3 87 3 5 970 58 7 226 0 8 2 58 2 7 1404 1568 2^ 3 522 2 18 2 56 2 3
534 5 313 5 11 1 28 1 5 490 56 7 244 0 8 0 0 0 7 1362 1458 27 3 486 0 18 0 0 0
3 516 5 291 3 10 4 108 4 5 910 54 7 208 2 7 5 135 5 7 1320 1352 26 3 450 2 17 1
26 1 3 498 5 270 2 10 2 52 2 5 880 52 7 193 1 7 3 78 3 7 1278 1250 25 3 416 2
16 2 50 2 3 480 5 250 0 10 0 0 0 5 850 50 7 178 4 7 1 25 1 7 1236 1152 24 3 384
0 16 0 0 0 3 462 5 230 2 9 3 72 3 5 820 48 7 168 4 6 6 144 6 7 1194 1058 23 3
352 2 15 1 23 1 3 444 5 211 3 9 1 23 1 5 790 46 7 151 1 6 4 92 4 7 1152 968 22
3 322 2 14 2 44 2 3 426 5 193 3 8 4 88 4 5 760 44 7 138 2 6 2 44 2 882 21 3 294
0 14 0 0 0 3 408 5 176 2 8 2 42 2 5 730 42 7 126 0 6 0 0 0 800 20 3 266 2 13 1
20 1 3 390 5 160 0 8 0 0 0 5 700 40 7 114 2 ^ 5 100 5 722 19 3 240 2 12 2 38 2
3 372 5 144 2 7 3 57 3 5 670 38 7 103 1 5 3 57 3 648 18 3 212 2 12 0 0 0 3 354
5 192 3 7 1 18 1 5 640 36 7 92 4 5 1 18 1 578 17 3 192 2 11 1 17 1 3 336 5 115
3 6 4 68 4 5 620 34 7 82 4 4 6 102 6

The Table of Battallions reduced out of the Broad squares.
1 2 3 4 2 3 4 1922 3 648 648 578 48 5 392 392 392 392 338 16 1800 3 578 578
648 4 5 392 392 338 338 338 2 1682 3 578 578 512 14 1568 3 512 512 512 32 1458
3 512 450 450 46 1352 3 450 450 450 2 1250 3 450 450 338 12 1152 3 392 392 338
30 1058 3 392 338 338 10 968 3 338 338 288 4 882 3 338 338 200 6 800 3 288 288
200 24 722 3 242 242 242 4 648 3 200 200 242 6 587 3 200 162 200 10 512 3 144
200 162 6 450 3 162 162 98 18 392 3 162 162 72 4

The Table of Broad squares, or two fold Battles.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 512 16 3 170 2 10 2 32 2 3 318 5 102 2 6 2 32 2 22 7
73 1 4 4 64 4 450 15 3 150 0 10 0 0 0 3 300 5 90 0 6 0 0 0 30 7 64 2 4 2 30 2
392 14 3 130 2 9 1 14 1 3 280 5 78 2 5 3 42 5 5 520 28 7 56 0 4 0 0 0 338 13 3
112 2 8 2 26 2 3 264 5 67 3 5 1 13 1 0 490 26 7 48 2 3 5 65 5 288 12 3 9^ 2 8 0
0 0 3 246 5 57 3 4 4 48 4 24 7 41 1 3 3 36 3 242 11 3 80 2 7 1 11 1 3 228 5 48
2 4 2 22 2 22 7 34 4 3 1 11 1 200 10 3 66 2 6 2 20 2 3 210 5 40 0 4 0 0 0 20 7
28 4 2 6 60 6 162 9 3 54 0 6 0 0 0 3 192 5 32 2 3 3 27 3 18 7 23 1 2 4 36 4 128
8 3 48 0 5 1 8 1 3 174 5 28 4 3 1 8 1 16 7 20 4 2 2 16 2 98 7 3 36 0 4 2 14 2 3
156 5 21 3 2 4 28 4 14 7 15 3 2 0 0 0 72 6 3 24 0 4 0 0 0 5 14 2 2 2 12 2 12 7
10 2 1 5 30 5 50 5 3 16 2 3 1 5 1 5 10 0 2 0 0 0 10 7 7 1 1 3 15 3 32 4 3 10 2
2 2 8 2 5 6 2 1 3 12 3 8 7 4 4 1 1 4 1 18 3 3 6 0 2 0 0 6 5 3 1 1 3 1 6 7 2 4 0
0 0 8 2 3 2 2 1 2 4 2 5 1 3 0 0 0 4 7 1 0 0 0 0 The number of pikes to be
imbattailed. The number of me^ in flank and front. How many me^ to march in
rank. The number of ra^ks, how many. The remains of men out of rank. The
Maniples or parts. The remains of maniples or parts. The whole number of
remains of Maniples. The marching of remains of Maniples. The number to
impale or girdle by. The whole number contained in the girdling shot.

Hereafter shall follow the figures and tables of sundry even Battallions, to
sundry uses, etc.
HEre next will I set down the Tables and figures of sundry even Battallions,
as by 3, 5, or 7. even battallio^s: the which are very strong of themselves;
yet nevertheless may you choose whether you will fight in the same order of
battallions, or, by marching them up shoulder to shoulder, bring the^ into a
two, or threefold battle, at your own discretion, or as occasion shall best
serve. The number of which several battallions you shall find (as I said
before) placed in the Tables of squares of men, or battles in proportio^s of
equality, on the right side of every leaf, by drawing your finger down the
first column of the same, and then considering what number of pikes you have
whereof to divide your battallions, you shall find in the 4 column of your
even battallions, the same number set down, or a number under the same, which
(I think good) you rather choose then the just number, because you may then
cast out some remains to employ otherwise; for better it is to leave then to
lack. As for example; here in these Tables of even battallions, first there is
set down 3 even battallions containing in each 49 pikes, which being summed
together do make 174 as appears in page. 225. Now turn unto the first table
of battles in proportion of equality, or even squares of men, and looking in
the first column of the right side thereof, there shall you find in page 207
the said number of 49, whose square root is 7: for 7 multiplied in it self is
49: and 7 men and 7 ra^ks is the square of every of the said 3 Battallio^s. And
in this sort shall you find the order and setting of all the other Battallions,
and of all the other numbers: as in these figures next ensuing of 3
Battallions, co^taining in each 3364 me^, whose square root is 58, so is each
Battallion of 58 ranks, and 58 men per rank: and the whole sum of all these
3 Battallions do amount 10092 pikes, as appears in these Tables following in
page. 225.

The figure of three Battallions.


The Table of three even Battallions.
1 2 3 4 5 7/7 49 3 49 49 49 174 8/8 64 3 64 64 64 192 9/9 81 3 81 81 81 143
10/10 100 3 100 100 100 300 11/11 121 3 121 121 121 363 12/12 144 3 144 144 144
432 13/13 169 3 169 169 169 507 14/14 196 3 196 196 196 588 15/15 225 3 225 225
225 675 16/16 256 3 256 256 256 768 17/17 289 3 289 289 289 867 18/18 324 3 324
324 324 972 19/19 361 3 361 361 361 1083 20/20 400 3 400 400 400 1200 21/21 441
3 441 441 441 1323 22/22 484 3 484 484 484 1442 23/23 529 3 529 529 529 1587
24/24 576 3 576 576 576 1728 25/25 625 3 625 625 625 1875 1 2 3 4 5 26/26 676 3
676 676 676 2028 27/27 739 3 739 739 739 2217 28/28 784 3 784 784 784 2352
29/29 841 3 841 841 841 2523 30/30 900 3 900 900 900 2700 31/31 961 3 961 961
961 2823 32/32 1024 3 1024 1024 1024 3072 33/33 1089 3 1089 1089 1089 3267
34/34 1156 3 1156 1156 1156 3468 35/35 1225 3 1225 1225 1225 3676 36/36 1296 3
1296 1296 1296 3888 37/37 1369 3 1369 1369 1369 4107 38/38 1444 3 1444 1444
1444 4332 39/39 1521 3 1521 1521 1521 4563 40/40 1600 3 1600 1600 1600 4800
41/41 1681 3 1681 1681 1681 5043 42/42 1764 3 1764 1764 1764 5292 43/43 1849 3
1849 1849 1849 5547 44/44 1936 3 1936 1936 1936 5808



The Table of three even Battallions.
1 2 3 4 5 45/45 2025 3 2025 2025 2025 6075 46/46 2116 3 2116 2116 2116 6348
47/47 2209 3 2209 2209 2209 6627 48/48 2304 3 2304 2304 2304 6912 49/49 2401 3
2401 2401 2401 7203 50/50 2500 3 2500 2500 2500 7500 51/51 2601 3 2601 2601
2601 7803 1 2 3 4 5 52/52 2704 3 2704 2704 2704 8112 53/53 2809 3 2809 2809
2809 8427 54/54 2916 3 2916 2916 2916 8748 55/55 3025 3 3025 3025 3025 9075
56/56 3136 3 3136 3136 3136 9408 57/57 3249 3 3249 3249 3249 9747 58/58 3364 3
3364 3364 3364 10092

Here after do ensue the figures and Tables of 5 even Battallions; beginning at
the root of 100, which is 10, and so continuing.

The figure of five Battallions.


The Table of five Battallions.
1 2 3 4 5 10/10 100 5 100 100 100 100 100 500 11/11 121 5 121 121 121 121 121
605 12/12 144 5 144 144 144 144 144 720 13/13 169 5 169 169 169 169 169 845
14/14 196 5 196 196 196 196 196 980 15/15 225 5 225 225 225 225 225 1125 16/16
256 5 256 256 256 256 256 1280 17/17 289 5 289 289 289 289 289 1445 18/18 324
324 324 324 324 324 1620 19/19 361 5 361 361 361 361 361 1805 20/20 400 5 400
400 400 400 400 2000 21/21 441 5 441 441 441 441 441 2205 1 2 3 4 5 22/22 484 5
484 484 484 484 484 2420 23/23 529 5 529 529 529 529 529 2643 24/24 576 5 576
576 576 576 576 2880 25/25 625 5 625 625 625 625 625 3125 26/26 676 5 676 676
676 676 676 3380 27/27 739 5 739 739 739 739 739 3685 28/28 784 5 784 784 784
784 784 3920 29/29 841 5 841 841 841 841 841 4205 30/30 900 5 900 900 900 900
900 4500 31/31 961 5 961 961 961 961 961 4805 32/32 1024 5 1024 1024 1024 1024
1024 5120 33/33 1089 5 1089 1089 1089 1089 1089 5445

The Table of five Battallions.
1 2 3 4 5 34/34 1156 5 1156 1156 1156 1156 1156 5780 35/35 1225 5 1225 1225
1225 1225 1225 6125 36/36 1296 5 1296 1296 1296 1296 1296 6450 37/37 1369 5
1369 1369 1369 1369 1369 6845 38/38 1444 5 1444 1444 1444 1444 1444 7220 39/39
1521 5 1521 1521 1521 1521 1521 7605 1 2 3 4 5 40/40 1600 5 1600 1600 1600 1600
1600 8000 41/41 1681 5 1681 1681 1681 1681 1681 8405 42/42 1764 5 1764 1764
1764 1764 1764 8820 43/43 1849 5 1849 1849 1849 1849 1849 7245 44/44 1936 5
1936 1936 1936 1936 1936 9680 45/45 2025 5 2025 2025 2025 2025 2025 10125

Next after do follow the Tables and figures of 7 even Battallions, beginning
at the root of 100, which is 10, and so continuing unto 10108.

The figures of seven even Battallions.


As for the shot proportionable unto every several Battallion, you may bestow
them in small troops round about every of them, or otherwise as the ground and
occasions shall yield best advantage: the one always to second an other: as
also may the several Battallions by good conduction do the like.

The Table of seven even Battallions.
1 2 3 4 10/10 100 7 700 11/11 121 7 847 12/12 144 7 1008 13/13 169 7 1183
14/14 196 7 1373 15/15 225 7 1575 16/16 256 7 1792 17/17 289 7 1923 18/18 324 7
2268 19/19 361 7 2527 20/20 400 2800 21/21 441 7 3087 22/22 484 7 3388 23/23
529 7 3703 24/24 576 7 4032 The quadrat root. The number of every several
Battallion. B^t^^llions how many. The whole number of the seven Battallions. 1
2 3 4 25/25 625 7 4375 26/26 676 7 4732 27/27 739 7 5173 28/28 784 7 5488 29/29
841 7 5887 30/30 900 7 6300 31/31 961 7 6727 32/32 1024 7 7168 33/33 1089 7
7623 34/34 1156 7 8092 35/35 1225 7 8575 36/36 1296 7 9072 37/37 1369 7 9583
38/38 1444 7 10108 The quadrat root. The number of each Battallion.
Battallions how many. The whole number of the Battallions.

In these Tables of 7 even Battallions, I have not set down the 7 Battallions
severally, as I have done in the Tables of 5 and 3 Battallions: for it were
superfluous; seeing that the several number of every one of them is to be
seen in the 2 Column.

The figures and tables of sundry Battallions for Cross battles.
I Have here ensuing figured and laid down diverse even Battallions, by 4, 8,
12, or 16, to make a Cross battle without filling the center, so as every 4
battallions do make a Cross battle with center vnfilled: 8 makes 2 Cross
battles; 12 makes 3, and 16 makes 4, without filling the center of either of
them. Also there is for 5 battallions, to make a Cross battle with the center
filled, 10 to make 2, and 15 to make 3, and 20 to make 4, even from the root of
5, which multiplied in it self makes 25; and so upwards unto 1000, as by these
figures and tables following may appear. Where in the first column is set
down the square root of every several battallion: in the 2 column, the
number contained in euery-seuerall battallion: in the 3 column, whether they
be set by 4 battallions, with the center vnfilled; or by 5 battallions with the
center filled: and in the 4 column, the whole number contained in the whole
Cross battle. In the 5 column, there is 8 to make 2 Cross battles, with the
center vnfilled; and 10 make 2 Cross battles, with the center filled. In the 6
column, the number contained in the said cross battles. In the 7 column is
12 to make 3, with center vnfilled; and 15 to make 3 with the center filled. In
the 8 column, the number contained in each. And in the 9 column is set down
16 to make 4 Cross battles with center vnfilled; and 20 to make 4 Cross
battles with center filled. The 10 column signifies the number of each of
them Cross battles. Note, that in the said void spaces of the 4 angles of each
of these Cross battles, is to be placed the shot belonging to the said Cross
battles, as in the two other small figures may appear.

The figures of Cross battles, with center vnfilled and filled.


The Table of Battallions for Cross Battles.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 5 25 4 100 8 200 12 300 16 400 5 5 125 10 250 15 375 20
500 6 36 4 144 8 288 12 432 16 576 6 5 180 10 360 15 540 20 720 7 49 4 196 8
392 12 588 16 784 7 5 245 10 490 15 735 20 ^980 8 64 4 256 8 512 12 768 16 1024
8 5 320 10 640 15 960 20 1280 9 81 4 324 8 648 12 972 16 1296 9 5 405 10 810 15
1215 20 1610 10 100 4 400 8 800 12 1200 16 1600 10 5 500 10 1000 15 1500 20
2000 11 121 4 484 8 968 12 1452 16 1936 11 5 605 10 1210 15 1715 20 2420 12 144
4 576 8 1142 12 1618 16 2304 12 5 720 10 1440 15 2160 20 2880 13 169 4 676 8
1352 12 2308 16 2704 13 5 845 10 1690 15 2535 20 3380 14 196 4 784 8 1568 12
2352 16 3136 14 5 980 10 1960 15 2940 20 3920 15 225 4 900 8 1800 12 2700 16
3600 15 5 1125 10 2250 15 3375 20 4500 16 256 4 1284 8 2048 12 3072 16 4096 16
5 1280 10 2560 15 3840 20 5120 17 289 4 1156 8 2312 12 3468 16 4624 17 5 1445
10 2890 15 4335 20 5780 18 324 4 1296 8 2592 12 3888 16 5184 18 5 1620 10 3240
15 4860 20 6480 19 361 4 1444 8 2888 12 4332 16 5776 19 5 1804 10 3610 15 5415
20 7220 20 400 4 1600 8 3200 12 4800 20 5 2000 10 4000 15 6000 21 441 4 1764 8
3528 12 5292 21 5 2205 10 4410 15 6615 22 484 4 1936 8 3872 12 5808 22 5 2420
10 4840 15 7260 23 529 4 2116 8 4232 12 6340 23 5 2645 10 5290 15 7935 24 576 4
2304 8 4608 12 6912 24 5 2880 10 5760 15 8640 25 625 4 2500 8 5000 12 7500 25 5
3125 10 6250 15 9375 26 676 4 2704 8 5408 12 8112 26 5 3380 10 6760 15 10140 27
739 4 2956 8 5912 12 8864 27 5 3695 10 7390 15 10185 28 784 4 3136 8 6272 12
9408 28 5 3920 10 7840 15 11760

The Table of Battallions for Cross Battles.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 29 841 4 3364 8 6728 12 10092 29 5 4205 10 8410 15 30 900
4 3600 8 7200 30 5 4500 10 9000 31 961 4 3844 8 7688 31 5 4805 10 9610 32 1024
4 4096 8 8192 32 5 5120 10 10240 33 1089 4 4356 8 8712 33 5 5445 10 34 1156 4
4624 8 9248 34 5 5780 35 1225 4 4900 8 9800 35 5 6125 36 1296 4 5184 8 10368 36
5 6480 37 1369 4 5476 37 5 6845 38 1444 4 5776 38 5 7220 39 1521 4 6084 39 5
7605 40 1600 4 6400 40 5 8000 41 1681 4 6724 41 5 8405 42 1764 4 7056 42 5 8820
43 1849 4 7396 43 5 9245 44 1936 4 7744 44 5 9680 45 2025 4 8100 45 5 10125 46
2116 4 8464 46 5 47 2209 4 8836 47 5 48 2304 4 9216 48 2401 5 49 4 9604 49 2500
5 50 4 10000 50 5

THE SECOND DIALOGVE.
Wherein is set forth the order and rules by going pases, to know any seat
or piece of ground: and how to embattell men thereupon, either horse or foot,
according to the proportion of the same: with the Arithmeticall rules to the
working thereof: with sundry other martial points.

Captain. NOw have I (Gentlemen) finished the figures and tables of most sorts
of battles and battallions treated of in these our discourses: wherein, No man
but erreth, some more, some less.
if I have erred (for no man but erreth, some more, some less, in most of our
opinions and actions) I submit my labor to the courteous censure and
reformation of all martial men better experimented then my self, craving of
all others an indifferent judgment; considering my intent and purpose herein,
is not to instruct the experimented soldier; but to show unto the unskilled
and willing minded Gentlemen, the most points used (or well wished to be used)
and observed, in these our modern wars; penned like a soldier, and not like
a scholar: and so I pray you accept it.


Gent. Truly (Captain) we are to give you thanks for your great care and
pains taken herein, especially since you have, at our entreatie, and for our
instruction done the same. And surely in mine opinion, these figures and tables
may give a wonderful instruction and perceiuerance unto such, as are not
thoroughly experimented in most of your martial actions: and may also greatly
aid and help all such martial officers as be not perfectly skilled inthe art
of arithmetik; which art I perceive to be more important for a soldier, then
many men would judge or deem. And although you have been a long time busied
in these discourses, at our request, yet let us entreat you to answer some
more questions and demaundes, which yet we have in mind to propound, Our age
inclines to war.
for that we would willingly be instructed, in as much as should seem needful
to a soldier; for we gather by your discourses, that this our age would so
require it.

First, therefore we would gladly know the order to be observed to measure,
only with going pases, a plat or piece of ground to martial your men to fight,
or set a battle thereupon.


Capt. Your demand is good and necessary. To accustom the going pase to the
geometrical pase of 5 foot to the pase.

The foot divided into twelve inches.


Therefore whosoever would with going pases measure a piece of ground to
embattell upon, it is needful that the skillful soldier do acquaint himself
very well with pasing the measure, which is called a geometrical pase: the
which measure is divided into 5 foot of length, and every foot divided into
12 inches, as here is to be seen designed the fourth part of a foot; which is
3 inches (the foot being of 12 inches) as here under appears.



This being done, To practice the geometrical going pases.
the good soldier is to put often such measure in practice, with his ordinary
going pases: for that he may thereby readily know, how many of this pases will
make the length of this pase, after the rate of 5 foot to the pase: and so
shall he easily know, if upon such seat or ground there might be embattailed
such a number of men, or such a number of horse, in squadron; knowing the
length and breadth which is to be allowed to the said men and horse. And I will
suppose to give to every pikeman, Every pikeman in array to fight, will require
3 foot of ground in breadth, and 7 foot for length. Every horseman 5 foot in
breadth, and ten foot in length. The profit to practice the going pases
geometrical.
standing in battle array, three foot of ground (at the least) for breadth,
and 7 foot of ground for length: and unto every horse, 5 foot in breadth,
and 10 foot in length, or more or less, so much as shall seem good to the
skillful soldier. And this practice of going pases shall not only be
available to the good soldier or Sergeant Mayor, for the knowledge of any
seat or piece of ground to embattell any number of men upon; but also to know
how to march through any straights or passages, and also to encampe an Army:
giving unto every regiment of horse and foot their due quarter, with their
proportional places: and to know moreover, the whole compass or circumference
of such encamping; as in our fifth book, folio 155 etc. is at large described.
Now therefore, let us set down, to arm a piece of ground, or to know what
number of men may stand upon the same in battle array, having first made
familiar, and been well practiced with his going pases to the proportion of the
pase of 5 foot of measure; and so that two of his going pases may make one
pase of measure of 5 foot: Two going pases to make a geometrical pase.
and let us suppose, that such a piece of ground does contain in length 100
going pases; which, after two going pases to one pase of measure, do make 50
pases of measure: and is in breadth 80 going pases, which are pases of measure
40, as here in this figure shall appear.

The pase of ground.


And now to arm and embattell the said seat or piece of ground, with pikes
armed, and unarmed. To do this you must first consider how many pikes, armed,
and unarmed, To embattell the said piece of ground.
will serve to arm or embattell upon the said piece of ground, in this sort:
multiply the 50 pases of length, and the 40 pases of breadth, by 5 foot, (the
length of the propounded measure) and there will come forth 250 foot for the
length, The rule arithmeticall.
and 200 for the breadth. And now willing to make the head or front of the
battle, ^
upon the length of the said seat, or piece of ground, divide the 250 by 3
foot, which is supposed to allow to every pikeman for his station in breadth,
and it produces 83 men in rank for breadth, and 1 foot of ground remaining,
the which we make no account of. And of the 200 foot of breadth of ground will
we make the ranks in length, by dividing the said 200 by 7 foot, as is set
down, to give unto every pikeman of the breadth for his station of ground, and
it produces 28 ranks of men. So to arm or embattell the said seat or
ground, it will require 28 ranks, at 83 men by rank, betwixt pikes armed and
unarmed, if you have not all armed pikes (the which were far better if it
might so be) as in this figure here following shall appear.

The embattelling the same with pikes.


And now to know how many pikes, The arithmetical rules. ^
will serve for this piece of ground or how many it will contain in all, you
must multiply the 28 ranks by 83 men, and it amounts unto 2324 pikes, armed
and unarmed: the which number of pikes will serve to embattell upon the said
seat or piece of ground. And in this sort may you work with any other seat
or piece of ground, and number of men.

And now again (not having all your number of pikes with armed corslets) if
you would arm the said seat with an equal proportion of armed pikes, To
empale the battle with armed pikes.

The arithmetical rule.

^
in front, flanks, and rereward: and suppose that in the said number of 2324
pikes, there be 1200 armed pikes: and to arm the front, flanks, and train
proportionally with the said armed pikes, you shall work in this order: sum
together the length and breadth of the said battle, that is, 28 with 83, and
it amounts 111. Now set down your rule in this sort: -- if 1/111 -- 2/28 --
3/1200. And then multiplying the 28 second with 1200 third, and it comes to
33600, and this 33600, shall be divided by 111, prima, and it produces 302
and 78 remaining whereof 100 make noe account. Now this 302 shall be deducted
out of 1200, and there will remain 898 armed pikes; and these 898 shall arm
the front and train of your battle: and the 302 shall serve to arm the two
flanks of the said battle; and then dividing the 302 by 28, the length or
flanks of your battle, and it produces 10 men per rank of armed pikes to
arm the two sides or flanks: of the which 10 there shall be 5 ranks placed
on the one flank, and 5 ranks on the other flank: as in the figure in the
next page appears.

The empalement in flanks. ^


And there remains 22 armed pikes, the which 22 shall be added unto 898, and
it makes 920 armed pikes: and with these 920 armed pikes, you shall arm the
front and train of the said battle, by dividing the 920 by the breadth: but
you must first deduct the 10 men per rank, which served to arm the two
flanks, out of 83 the breadth, and there will remain 73 men per rank for the
inner breadth or front of the battle: now divide the 920 armed pikes by 73,
and it will come to be 12 ranks of armed pikes, The rule.
and 44 remaining: and of these 12 ranks, there shall be set 6 ranks in the
front of the battle, and 6 ranks in the rereward of the battle; as in this
figure you may perceive.

The impalem^^t in fl^^^e, from, and rereward.


And again, if with these 1200 armed pikes, you would arm the one, or two
parts of the battle more strong then the rest, and where you do most suspect
the enemy; and that the other part or parts shall be secure and fenced with the
nature of the seat or ground; The rule.
then the 10 men per rank, which armed the two flanks, shall be placed on the
one side or flank only, where you shall see most occasion: and the like shall
be done with the 12 ranks of armed men, which armed the front and train,
placing them either all in front, or all in train, as shall be found most
needful, where the enemy is most to be suspected, as in the figure following
shall appear.

The empalement in front and on one flank.


And moreover, if with the said 1200 armed pikes, you would arm the front of
your battle only, The rule.
then divide the 1200 pikes by 83, the number of men in front, and there will
come forth to be 14 ranks of armed pikes for the front, or head of the
battle only, as in this figure following may be seen.

The front armed only.


And there remains 38 armed pikes, the which shall be placed, where the
Sergeant Mayor shall think most convenient, within the body of the battle.


Gent. We have sufficiently understood the order how to arm or embattell a
piece of ground with pikes only: wherefore I pray, show us now how to
embattell the same seat or ground with shot or horsemen.


Capt. Sir, to arm or imbattell a seat or piece of ground with shot, or
horse, you must multiply the length of the said seat, To arm the said piece
of ground with shot or horsemen.
and also the breadth of the same by 5 foot: putting down (as is aforesaid)
for the length, 50 pases, and for the ^readth 40 pases: and it produces for
the length 250 foot, and for the breadth, 200 foot. The rule.
And now to know how many ranks, and how many shot per rank will serve for
this ground, you shall divide the 250, and also the 200 foot by 4 foot, as
before is said, 4 foot for length, and 4 foot for breadth to every shot f^r
his station of ground.
to allow for every hargubuzier his station of ground, 4 foot for length, and
4 foot for breadth. Then reparting 250 foot by 4, it produces 50, not
reckening the overplus: and willing to make the head of front or your battle
upon the longest breadth or part of the seat of ground, your front will come
to contain 62 shot in front, and 50 ranks in flank, as here in the figure
following may appear.

Armed with shot.


The number of shot contained.
And now to know how many shot this piece of ground shall contain in this sort,
multiply the 50 ranks by 62 shot, and it makes 3100 shot, which 100 shot, To
embattell the same with troops of horsemen.
serves to arm the said piece of ground, as appears. And again the like is
to be done if you would embattell the said seat or ground with troops of
horsemen: having first reduced the length and breadth of the said seat or
ground into feet, as before I have declared, and this aforesaid seat
contains 250 foot in length, The rule.
and 200 foot in breadth. And now if you will set the front of your horse
battle upon the length of the said ground, which is 250 foot, then divide the
250 by 5 foot of breadth (as before is said to allow for every horse his
station in breadth of ground 5 foot) and it produces 50 horses in rank; and
then to know how many ranks they will be, divide the 20 foot, by 10 foot
(as above is allowed for the length in ground of every horse his station, or
room) and it produces 20 ranks, at 50 horsemen per rank, as in the figure
following shall appear.



And finally to know how many horsemen (after the former calculation) will
serve to imbattell upon the said seat of ground, you shall multiply the 50
horse by 20 ranks, The number of horsemen.
they will make 1000 horse and the said 1000 horse will ariue or imbattel the
said plat or piece of ground, at 20 ranks and 50 horse per rank. And in the
like sort may any other piece of ground be (after this manner) imbattelled or
armed, with either pikes, shot, or horse. And to conclude, having these rules
perfectly in memory, and being well practiced with your going pases, you may
imbattell any number of men according to the seat or ground, with either
foot, or horse; or with both, as occasion shall serve, and the quality of
fight require. And thus I think, I have satisfied your requests, and
answered your demands.


Gent. Truly so you have; to our great contentation, and good instructions; and
to your great travel and pains: for the which we rest greatly beholding and
much bound unto you: but (if I remember my self well) you have over passed
some orders of imbattailings; whereof you made some mention before: as the
Diamant, the Wedge, the Sheeres, and Saw battles: and also of the Snayle form,
the S, D, or G, battles.


Capt. I have abstained to speak much of these sorts of battles, because I
suppose them to be battles of small force for any maine fight, especially as
our wars are now conducted. And for the Diamant, the Wedge, the Sheeres, and
Saw battles, I have said sufficiently of them already in my third book, folio
77, 78, 79, and so continuing: supposing these before set down sufficient. And
if occasion fall out for the use of the others, the very Nouices in military
profession do know, that without any difficulty at all, they may easily be
framed, and that suddenly out of the very order of marching. The benefit of
practice and readiness.
But in the others you may behold how with skillful and orderly practice, the
benefit of this readiness shall quickly distinguish and manifest unto us, the
parts incident unto a right perfect soldier: which for 3 principal reasons I
have the rather deemed to be amongst us most necessarily required. The parts
incident to a perfect soldier, to be most necessary for 3 reasons.
The one is, for that the often exercise thereof inureth a soldier to such
perfection as is required; another is, for that it is not meet the enemy
should at any time stand assured, in what order we will fight, to the end that
he should not reap such advantage from us, as to frame a battle correspondent
to any of our certain proportions: and the third is, that according to the
ground, straights, or passages, we may reduce our battle or battallions to the
convenient proportion thereof.


Gent. These (in mine opinion) are good considerations and reasons; but yet
(good Captain) ere you conclude all, let us understand of you what orders are
observed in Cytadels, Castles, and Forts of defense, having garrisons in the
same.


Capt. What I have seen observed in places of strength in other countries, I
will show you in our next Dialogue following.


The Election, charge, office and duty of a Castellano, or Captain of a
Citadell, Castle, Fortress, or fortified town, or any other such place of
defense.
THE THIRD DIALOGVE.
Wherein is set forth the parts to be required in a Captain of a Castle:
his loyalty, duty, and charge: his care in time convenient, for all necessaries
and munitions: the duty of the soldiers in the defense thereof: the order in
setting the watch, and placing the Sentinels; with relieuing of the same: with
the shutting in of the gates, and their opening again.

Captain. THe guard and keeping of Citadels, Castles, Fortresses, strong
Towns and Fortes, are (or ought to be) bestowed upon such personages, whose
virtue, Upon whom the guard of Castles ought to be bestowed
valor, experience, wisdom, constancy, and (above all) loyalty, shall merit
and best befit the same. And therefore (in mine opinion) the guard and custody
of such places, ought to be bestowed and incommended upon such Captains and
old seruitors, as have in martial affairs and actions, spent the greatest
part of their time: and whose virtue, valor, magnanimity, resolution, and (as
I said) above all, loyalty, has in all the courses of their military life bin
well proved, showed, and made manifest to the world.


Gent. Favor and affecttion in our age carries all.
Truly (in mine opinion) it should be so indeed, but yet we see that in our
age such choyses are not so made, but rather favor and affection commonly
carries all: to the prejudice (no doubt) of many approved old soldiers, and
men best befitting the place.


Capt. Well, how they are bestowed and incommended, I have not now to speak;
but how (in mine opinion) they should be, and upon what sort of men, I have
already said: which would be no small encouragement unto all brave minded men,
Reward for service a great encouragement to soldiers.
which follow wars, to singular themselves therein; seeing and knowing that
their virtues, valor, and good carriage in service, should in the end be
regarded, commended, and rewarded.


Gent. But I pray what particular parts would you wish to be in one chosen to
this charge and office?


Capt. First, I could wish that such should be personages issuing from Gentle
and Noble blood; Parts to be desired in a Captain of a Castle or fortress.
or men whose noble actions, and virtues have enobled themselves: of both the
which sorts, there might be many examples recited, but time permits me not.
And besides the former nobility, the Captain of such a Castle or Fort, ought
to be loyal, valiant, vigilant, ready, resolute, and experimented in all
occurrants of war; whereby he might both foresee the enemies desseignes,
prevent their pretenses, and resolutely resist their attempts, and to be most
valiant, resolute, and constant in the very points and pinches of furious
batteries, fierce assaults, and dangerous mineworkes: whereby the soldiers
imitating their Captain, The soldiers to imitate the Captain.
shall show themselves the like: by the which valor, constancy, and virtue,
both of Captain and soldiers, many places of defense, having bin made open by
battery, The honor of brave men.
and attempted by fierce assaults, have nevertheless been wonderfully and
valiantly defended and kept, to their immortal praise, and their Princes
profit and honor. And on the contrary, if the Captain be careless, The shame
of ^owards.
cowardly, insolent, disloyal, and traiterous, the end of his actions are
dishonor, shame, and confusion unto himself, and great loss and hinderance
unto his Prince; of both which sorts many examples might be produced, to the
praise and honor of the first, and to the dishonor and shame of the last.


Gent. But if the Captain should be disloyal, and practice any secret
treason with the enemy, are the soldiers to obey his orders and commaundes,
perceiving and suspecting the same.


Capt. No, How far the soldier is bound to obey the Captain.
in no manner or sort, for although the soldier be bound to obey his Captain
in all military courses and commaundes (as Lieutenant then to his Prince) so
long as he remains in the fidelity and true loyalty unto his Prince; yet
having once falsified his faith, and lost his loyalty; and thereby turned from
a true subject, The traitor is become soldier to the enemy, and enemy to the
Princes soldiers
a traitor to his Prince and country; they are in no respect, to follow or obey
him: for at the very point of his first conceit of treason, he is no more the
Kings liege officer, nor the true Captain or Commander of his soldiers, but
is become a soldier to the enemy, and an enemy to the Princes soldiers.


Gent. But what are they to do, when they shall see their ensign to march out
before them by their Captains order and command, to surrender up the place.


Capt. As they are not bound to any Captain except they see his authority and
warrant from their Prince or General; The Captain being disloyal what the
soldiers are to do.
so being in garrison in any Castle or place of defense, and their Captain
commanding them to issue out, and so to forsake the place, they are not to obey
him therein, without seeing an express order from their Prince or General to
that effect: for it is no sufficent excuse for them to say, that they were
deceived by him, unto whom they were bound to follow and obey, seeing the place
to be forsaken, without dismantelling and razing down the same; and the enemy
attending his entrance thereinto; then and in such cases should the honest
soldier refuse the same, electing and choosing another chief to govern and
rule them until they have given advise thereof unto their Prince or General;
valiantly resisting all attempts offered by the enemy.


Gent. If by chance upon any battery or assault given, The Captain ^ coward,
what the soldier is to do.
their Captain through pusillanimitie and cowardice, should command the
soldiers to retire, willing them that they should reserve themselves to serve
their Prince in other actions, giving order to withdraw them within the
Citadel, Fort, or Keep, or unto any other place, where they might think to
save their lives without fight or blows; and so yielding in fine to the
enemy: what are they in such case to do?


Capt. When soldiers are to retire.
If the Captain do certainly perceive and see that they stand over any
dangerous mines, or in place over open to the fury of the battring Artillery;
and upon these occasions should command and constrain them to retire and
withdraw themselves, they ought herein to believe, to follow, and to obey him:
but if they should perfectly know and perceive, that, only for cowardice and
baseness of mind, When not to retire.
and not constrained thereunto by force of the enemies weapon, he should
command them to such retiring, in such a case, they ought not only, not to
obey him, but to turn their weapons upon him, as against a bad officer, and an
evil servant of their Prince, and to expect and hope (by valiantly defending
the place or breach, like brave men of war) for better fortune, then they
should find within the Keep of the Castle or such other place of retraite:
and doing otherwise, they are sure to be esteemed infamous, and not worthy to
carry arms. For many times it has been seen, that many batteries, and forts
and many ships and gallions of war, have been lost and taken by the enemies,
thorough only the cold, and fearful fighting of the defendants: and many
again have been as valiantly defended and kept, by a few brave and resolute
defendants; that the enemy has been constrained to retire, with dishonor,
loss, and shame.


Gent. Good Captains and soldiers ought to be esteemed and honored.
Such Captains and soldiers as have thus behaved themselves valiant and
resolute, no doubt but the Prince does, or ought to esteem of them, to honor
them, and to reward them: but the timorous and cowardly Captains, and fainting
defendants, how is the Prince or General to deal with them?


Capt. Mary to dispose of them according to the quality of their offense, at
the least to depose them from their charge and place; How the bad to be dealt
withal.
commanding them to serve as common soldiers, until they attain unto more
valor and skill, fit for a valiant Captain, Examples.
as did the Dictator Lucius Quintius Cincinatus, depose from the Consulship,
Lucius Minutius, for his cold and cowardly carriage against Clodius Gracchus,
Captain of the Egues and Vulcies (a people bordering upon Rome.) For a valiant
and resolute Captain ought never to surrender the place committed unto his
defense and charge, A valiant Captain ought never to yield except all remedies
be past.

Upon honorable conditions.

Sir Roger Williams Sir Thomas Baskeruile.


though thereunto constrained by wounds, wants, or such like cross accidents
of war, except all hope of relief be past, and extremities do abound: no,
nor then neither but with honorable conditions, as did Sir Roger Williams,
and Sir Thomas Baskeruile, with other brave English soldiers and Captains, at
the besieging of Sluys, by the great power of the Prince of Parma.

And it imports much, that the soldiers also, which are to be chosen and
appointed for the guard and defense of any fortress, Soldiers for defense of
a Castle to be men of experience. Disloyal soldiers the loss of many places.
town, or Castle, should be men of good experience in wars, wise, sober,
valiant; and above all, to have no sign nor tatch of disloyalty or treason.
For many times disloyal soldiers have bin cause of the loss and ruin of
many strong places, yea in despite of their Commanders and Captains teeth.

And to the end that his soldiers commit no such foul disloyalties, or any
disordered mutinies, The Captain to entreat his soldiers kindly.
it behooves the Captain to entreat them well, and with all humanity and
kindness; thereby binding them rather to loose their lives in defense of his
reputation and honor, then to commit any vilety or treason, as many times has
bin seen.

Also the Captain of a Castle or Fortress, To be careful for all necessary
provisions.
ought to provide and procure all things necessary and fit for defense of the
place, as well for the munition and artillery, as for all provision of victuals
convenient for their maintenance and food: always soliciting his Prince for
the same; and that in good and convenient times, that nothing be found wanting
in time of need and service: Wants in time of need do hinder great actions.
through which negligence, many times sundry strong Forts have bin lost, and
many brave actions overthrown; whereof we have too many examples extant before
our eyes.

Moreover it behooves the Captain not to be over credulous: Not to be over
credulous. Captain Sansier deceived.
for many have bin deceived by cou^terfeit letters and false messages, as was
Captain Sansier, who being at the guard and defense of San Desire for Francis
the French king, and being beleaguerd by the Emperor Charles the fifth, by
means of counterfeit letters, surrendered up the place, to the damage of his
king, and to his own reproach and dishonor. Marquis de Guasto, to Carolus
Drusio at Mondeuy.
The like stratageme was practiced by the Marquis de Guasto unto Carolus
Drusio, Captain of Mondeuy in Piemont; surrendering thereby the place committed
to his charge.


Gent. If the Captain do chance to die, or be slain in the defense of this
Castle, what orders are the soldiers to observe in their government thereof,
until their Prince do give other order and command?


Capt. The soldiers in garrison within such Fortress or place of defense, are
to elect and choose the most sufficient and principallest man amongst them
(except there be any Lieutenant, The Captain slain or dye, the soldiers what
to do.
son, or other kinsman of the said Captain, unto who^ by right the same does
appertain) and such one preferred before the rest, him to swear, according to
the custom, to be loyal and true, and to do his best to defend the same from
the enemies: and also to render the same again unto the Prince or Lord thereof,
whensoever it shall be demanded. The like order is to be taken by the Captain
of the Castle, town, or Fortress, with his Lieutenant, if at any time, upon
occasion, he is to depart out of his place of charge.


Gent. And if it fortune that the Captain be taken by the enemy at any
sallying forth; and the enemy would constrain him to deliver up the said
place, is the Lieutenant and soldiers bound to obey him, if he require the
same?


Capt. No truly, although they should see the enemies to kill and murder him
for the same: The Captain being taken, the soldiers what to do^.
^or their fidelity and allegiance is no more due unto him, being taken, and
held prisoner, as it was whilst he was free, but unto their Prince, who owes
the Castle.


THE FOVRTH DIALOGVE.
VVherin is declared and recited the orders observed by the Spaniards, in the
Citadels of Millan and Antwerp: their order of watches, guards and Sentinels:
their sundry visitings and reuisitings; and relieuings at sundry times: the
parts and duties of the officers therein: their singular care in the good
guarding thereof, with sundry other Martial points, necessary to be noted.

Gentleman. WHat orders are observed in the guards and keeping of such Castles
Forts, and places of defense?


Capt. They are not alike in every Fort or place; neither is there the like
garrison and places of guard in one, as is in another: therefore I cannot
precisely satisfy you herein: for I have seen very little in any of our
English towns of strength and Fortresses, for that we have very few (
Barwicke only excepted: Barwike.
) but to give you some content, I will declare unto you the orders observed by
the Spaniards in the Castle of Millan, which is one of the principallest Forts
in Europe. The Castle of Millan.



The guardes and order of watches observed in the Castle of Millan.
30 posts, and their orders.
There is ordinarily in the Castle of Millan 30 posts, or places of guard,
whereof the first 15 from 4 to 4 soldiers in each, are in the three Rauellins,
and in the Tenaza or Keep, which stands without the body of the Castle; for
being places of most importance and travails: and the other 15 are within;
from 3 to 3 soldiers, every night dividing every of them into three quarters,
and every day, as hereafter follows.

One soldier at Sentinel. Their order at night.
In these 30 posts does every day remain one soldier at the Sentinel; and
those that do remain over, are reparted and placed into the 3 Corpse de guards
of the gates: every night there enters four Caporals into the watch: the one
goes into the Tenaza, with the soldiers which are to enter into the same; and
there does continue and assist until the next morning, having first the order
given him, what he is to do, if the Alarm be given or stricken.

The other three do remain within the body or place of the Castle, and are
divided into their quarters. The first, in the time of winter makes his Rou^ds
and cou^ter Roundes for six hours, The Rounds and counter Rounds.
with 4 soldiers in Round and contra Round. The second roundeth the Modorra,
or second watch, for five hours; with other 4 soldiers in Round and counter
Round. And the third does Round from that expired time, until day light or
dawning, with other four soldiers in like sort, in Round and contra Round: in
such manner and sort, that the Sentinels, as well within, as without, are
visited at the least, ten or twelve times every hour a piece.

4 Gunners in the Rauellines.
There enters into the Rauellynes 4 Gunners for watch; the rest do remain
within the body of the Castle. Watch upon the wall.
One of the chief officers does keep his watch every night upon the walls,
and there are the Castellane, his Lieutenant, Captain, Alferez and Sergeant.
And nevertheless that which touches them by duty, they do every one give a
turn upon the walls once every night, in such sort, that of all these the
Sentinels are visited ordinarily every night. Two hours before the shutting in
of the evening, Setting of watch.
does the Sergeant set the watch; and until the gates be shut fast, does no
soldier within the Castle know where he is to be placed, or his post; and in
setting the same, he goes with those that are to remain in the Tenaza and
Rauelines: and with these there goes sixteen other soldiers with two
Caporals, Locking of the gates.
accompanying and attending upon the keys wherewith the porter does lock the
gates, and draw-bridges, and the Sergeant does taste and prove with his hand,
every lock so locked and shut.

The principal gates and draw-bridges of the Castle, The principal gates and
draw-bridges shut.
are drawn up, and shut in at the edge of the evening; and the Alferez does
feel and prove them, and the Lieutenant, and Captain stands present to see
the same so done: and having locked and shut all fast and sure, all these three
officers, with the Sergeant and twenty soldiers do go carry the keys unto the
Castellanes lodging, The keys.
or unto the Lieutenants lodging, if the Castellane himself be not within the
Castle. The Sergeant receives and takes the word from the Castellane or his
Lieutenant, The watch word.
and gives the same unto the other officers and Caporals which are of the
watch, and then presently unto all the other Sentinels, which are first upon
the walls within the body of the Castle: To those in the Rauellins the word
not given at all.
and unto those which watch without in the Rauelines and Tenaza, the word is
not given at all. After that the gates of the Castle be shut in, there goes a
Cabo de squadra or Caporal, with two other soldiers round about to view and
reknowledge the same; and to know and see what strangers there remain within;
The gates being shut in, to reknowledge the place.
as in the tauerns and victualing houses, in the butchery, in the bakery, and
among the Gun-makers, the Gun-powder-makers, and Armourers and such like. And
of all such as he finds there, he gives account and notice unto the
Captain, or Alferez, or Sergeant; and these again do advertise the
Castellane, and in his absence the Lieutenant. And in the day time a Gunner
with an other officer, goes to reknowledge and view all the Artillery of the
Castle, as well those within, as those without in the Rauelines.

In the morning after that the drum has stricken the Aluarado, or breaking up
or discharging of the watch, The discharging of the watch in the morning.
the Alferes, with twenty soldiers and four Caporals goes unto the lodging
of the Castellane to receive the keys, and then goes to open the Tenaza, and
Rauelines: and then comes the Corpse de guard of the principal gate, and
ringeth a little bell to call together and assemble those that are at the
watch: and after being together, they do open the Castle gates, with all the
watch and other officers present in this manner.

The Castellanes Lieutenant remains at the first gate, in the inner part
thereof, with one troop or part of the soldiers, and the rest of the guard
being issued out, they shut the same again, and go to open the second gate,
where a Captain and Sergeant with another troop of soldiers do stay and
remain, and then the guard of the third gate being issued out with the
Alferez, they shut also the second; and do open none of these, neither do the
soldiers disarme themselves, until the place of the Castle be very well
reknowledged and thoroughly viewed.

Orders observed in the day time at first gate the.
In the first gate of the principal bridge, there remains in the day time 50
soldiers at the ward, with a Caporall, who takes account and charge of the
opening and shutting thereof; and there is jointly with them the Alferez, who
keeps account and reckening with those which enter in from abroad: and if it
be any stranger that comes for some affairs or business into the Castle,
there goes with every such, one soldier of the guard, notwithstanding that
they have passed thorough the hands of the Lieutenant, or in his absence
through the hands of the Captain of Infantery.

At the middle gate.
At the middle gate there is another Corpse de guard, containing other 30
soldiers, with two Caporals, and with these does continually assist the
Lieutenant of the Castle, a Captain of infantery, and a Sergeant. And there
is the assembly and concourse of all the soldiers; so that besides those which
be of the watch, there is continually 70 or 80 other soldiers, or more.

At the inneo gate.
At the gate within the Castle there is 16 soldiers, and with them one
Capoporall.

Betwixt ten and eleven of the clock in the day time they shut the gates, to
go unto their dinner, Their dinner time.
and then there goes upon the walls, eight soldiers with an officer, which
do go the Round and Contra Round, whilst the rest be at dinner.

The soldiers do remain at their dinner time one hour, and in opening the
Castle gates again, Changing their wards.
they change the posts or wards until three of the clock; and at that
hour again they go and change them a fresh, until it be night.

And in the opening of the gates after dinner, they observe the same order as
they did in the morning. They have a consideration and reguard, if the day do
increase or diminish, Order after dinner.
as concerning the dividing of the hours, and in opening and shutting the
gates, according to the same order.

There hangs at every post or watch turret upon the walls, a little bell at
each, A little bell at every watch turret.
of several soundes, wherewith the Sentinels do answer one another every
quarter or half hour.

All the day there goes continually two soldiers the Round and Contra ^ound;
The order of Round and contra Round in the day.

A regard to the Artillery.


the which do change, and are relieved by their quarters (as are in like sort
the Sentinels upon the walls) having a care and reguard unto the Artillery,
and to see if any persons not belonging to the Castle, does come up upon the
same, without license of the Castellane, or his Lieutenant: and finding any
such person in such manner, they give knowledge thereof unto the Castellane or
unto his officers, to the end that the cause might be known why any such does
mount up unto the walls.

Every one of the Caporals that are within the Castle, has his quarter
assigned him with his squadra, Quarters assigned.
and every night does visit the soldiers in the same; and see whether they
have their bullets, powder, match, and all other arms in a readiness; and
whether any soldier do lodge or sleep without the Castle by night, without
leave and license of his superior officer.

And every morning before the opening of the gates, Before the opening of the
gate, the Caporals duty.
the said Caporals do give an account particularly unto the Captain of all the
faults in this sort committed the which are punished according to the orders
that be provided and made for every matter concerning the said Castle.

Also the higher officers and Caporals have their quarters divided and
appointed, Their order if the Alarm be given.
where every one does know whither to repair with the soldiers of his charge,
if the Alarm be given.

Every Saturday does an officer with six soldiers go and visit and
reknowledge all the Contra Mines. To reknowledge the Contra mines.

The Castellane, one key, the Lieutenant another*




The Castellane has one key of the chest, where all the keys are locked, and
the Lieutenant keeps another, to the end that if any sudden occasion be
offered, repair might be made unto him which is next at hand: these keys are
not the ordinary keys.

And thus, all these things being known and well considered, any Castellane,
or Captain of any Fortress or place of defense, may alter, add, or diminish
that which unto him shall seem good, for the good government and defense of
his place of charge.

The Conclusion.
Thus having finished in fine these Military discourses, wherein I have marched
farther then I meant at the first, drawn on (Gentlemen) by your diverse and
curious demaundes, and what reformations I have herein desired, or what amisses
and errors I have herein committed, I yield the same to be considered and
reformed, by the wisdom of those whose experience, authority, and good
endeavor* may be answerable to the performance thereof: desiring that the same
may be deemed as proceeding from a soldier, who more of zeal then of any
desire to offend, has penned these rough discourses: wishing that himself,
and all others, may take occasion thereby to amend what is in every of us
amiss. Beseeching our heavenly Chieftaine, Jehovah, our heavenly Chieftaine.
Jehovah, thas as herein, so in all other inconveniences, any way hindering
the flourishing state of our Noble Commonweal, the necessity of this, and
every other action may take such root in the beholders thereof, as that, with
such convenient regard as they ought, they will endeavor, every man in his
degree, the redress and wished reformation of the same; with the due regard of
our dangerous times: each honest man (of what degree soever) inuesting
himself with the honorable habit of the true fear of God, unfeigned loyalty
to our good Queen and Prince, perfect fidelity to our country, and sincere
love and affection to our wives, children, and friends: and finally respecting
the general reputation and honor of our Realm and nation.

The end of the sixth and last book.
A Table, shevving the signification of sundry foreign words, used in these
discourses.
GEntle Reader, for as much as in these Military discourses, I have used some
words and terms, somewhat strange unto such as have not frequented foreign
wars, nor have any great insight in foreign languages, I have therefore
thought good both to declare the signification of such words, and also to show
my reasons for using the same.

First you are to understand that most of our terms now used in wars are
derived from strangers; as the French, the Italian, the Spaniard and the
Dutch; wherein every one almost have their several pronuntiation; therefore I
hold it good, to use such war terms and words, as we do borrow from strangers
(as most languages do borrow some, more or less, one of another) near after
the same nature, orthographie and accent, as those nations do, from whom they
are derived: and not to pronounce and use them over corruptly, as we commonly
do. As for example. The word Caporall, which is a mere Italian, and also used
by the French, we corruptly do both write and pronounce Corporal: for Caporall
does signify the head and chief of a squadra, or small company of soldiers:
and is an officer ensigning and governing (in his degree) the said company: and
is in Spanish more aptly called Cabo de esquadra which is the head of a small
squadra of 20 or 25 soldiers. And again, we use both to pronounce and write,
Core de guard; which by the French is written Corpse de guard, and by the
Italian and Spaniard, Corpo de guardia; which signifies the body of a watch:
the which French or Italian word I have rather used in my writing, then our
corrupt English term. Moreover we both pronounce and write the word
Canuasada, the which (in truth) ought to be written and pronounced Camisada,
being a Spanish term; and does signify the inuesting a shirt over the
soldiers apparel or armor; the which is used in the night time when any
sudden exploit or piece of service is to be put in practice upon the enemy,
unexpected or unseen: to the end, that in the darkness of the night, the
attempters may thereby the better one know and discern another. These few
words and terms, I suppose sufficient for my reasons. And for the
signification of all other strange and foreign words by me used, I will here
following particularly set down, in order of alphabet, as I shall call them to
memory.

A
Abanderado, is a soldier which carries the Ensign in steed of the
Ensigne-bearer sometimes. Al'arma, is a word used among men of war, at
times of the enemies sudden approaching, and at their discovery, and does
signify, to arms or weapons. Alferez, is a Spanish word, and signifies the
Ensign bearer. Alguazil, a Spanish word, is an officer attendant on the
Campe-maister General, to apprehend offenders, and to see execution done.
Alerta, an Italian word* used unto the soldiers, when there is any suspicion
of the enemy; and signifies to be vvatchfull, careful and ready Alvarado, a
Spanish word, and is the discharging of the morning vvatch, by the sound of
the drum. Ambuscado, a Spanish word, and signifies any troop or company of
soldiers either foot or horse, lodged secretly in some covert, as in vvoods,
hollow vvayes, behind banks, or such like; to entrappe the enemy secretly
attending his coming. Aquaducts, are conduits to carry or convey water into
any City, Castle, or Citadell. Armada, a Spanish word, is a Navy of ships
for war, or one great ship of war. Artillaria, a foreign word, and is
that which we call the great Ordinance.
B
Bando, a Spanish word, and signifies, an act, or law made by the General
and Counsel of war, in the Camp, and published by sound of the drum or
trumpet unto the soldiers. Bisognio or Bisonnio, a Spanish or Italian word,
and is, as we term it, a raw soldier, inexpert in his weapon, and other
Military points. Burgonet, a French word, is a certain kind of head-peece,
either for foot or horsemen, covering the head, and part of the face and
che^ke.
C
Cabo de esquadra or Caporall, a Spanish word, is the head or chief under the
Captain of a small number of soldiers, in number 20 or 25, or more or less,
according as the company is divided into. Caporal, the Italian word, is as
Cabo de esquadra in Spanish. Cabo de Camara, a Spanish word, is a soldier
under the Caporall, and is the chief over every 10 or 12 soldiers. Camarada,
a Spanish word, is a small number of 11 or 12 soldiers, and is the one half
of a squadra, being united together in their lodging, and diet, and friendship,
the chief man of whom is the Cabo de Camara. Camisada, a Spanish word, and
does signify the inuesting or putting on of a shirt over the soldiers
apparel or armor; the which is used in the night time, when any sudden
exploit or piece of service is to be put in practice upon the enemy, unexpected
or unseen, to the end that the attempters may thereby the better one know and
discern another. Campania, an Italian word, and is a field. Campania Raza, an
open field without hedge, ditch, or other incombrance, razed plain.
Campe-maister, in Spanish Maestro del Campo, is a Colonel: being the chief
Commander or officer over one Regiment or Tertio. Camp master General, in
Spanish, Maestre del Campo General, is a great Commander, and is with us the
high Marshall of the field. Castellano, is the Captain or Commander of a
Citadell, or Castle, as in Millan, Antwerp, Metz, and such other places.
Cannonera, a Spanish word, and is the place or room where the Cannon is placed
in a bulwark. Casamatta, a Spanish word, and does signify a slaughterhouse,
and is a place built low under the wall or bulwark, not arriving unto the
height of the ditch, serving to scowre the ditch, annoying the enemy when he
enters into the ditch to skale the wall. Cauagleria, an Italian word, and is
the Companies of soldiers serving on horseback, of what sort soever.
Cauaglere, an Italian word, and signifies a Gentleman serving on horseback,
but in fortifications, a Caualiere is a mount or platform of earth, built and
raised high, either within or without the wall for to plant great Ordinance
upon. Caualliere a Cauallio, is a high mount or platform of earth raised very
high, so that the Artillery upon the same, may shoot over the walls and
bulwarks, to scour and clear the fields all about. Center, a French word,
is the middle of a battle, or other things. Centinell, a Spanish word, and
signifies the soldier which is set to vvatch at a station or post, a
certain distance from the Corpse de guard, or in a certain little garret or
vvatch house upon the wales, or at certain places in the field without the
ring of the Camp. Centuria, was amongst the Romans, a company of Soldiers
to the number of 100: whose Captain was called Centurio. Cohort, was,
amongst the Romans, the 10 part of a Legion. Chieffront, a French word, is
the arming for the forehead of the horse. Conuoye, a French word, is a
certain guard of soldiers, sent to conduct and guard, victual, victualers,
merchants, munition, and such like, from one place unto another. Contra Round,
an Italian word, is a certain number of commanders and officers going,
visiting the Corpse de guard, watches, Sentinels, and also the Roundes, to see
if they perform their duties and be vigilant and careful. Colonel or
Coronell, a french word, is the commander of a regiment of certain companies
of soldiers, called with the Spaniards Maestre del Campo. Contrafront, or
spur, is the inner part of the wall of a bulwark. Citadella, an Italian
word, is a Castle or spacious fort, built, not only to defend the City, but
also to keep the same in awe and subjection, as that at Antwerp, Millan, and
Naples, etc. Cornet, a French word, is the ensign which is carried by the
Launciers. Corpse de guard, a French word, is the body of a vvatch, of a
certain number of soldiers set for such purposes. Corslet, a French word, is
the armor of a foot soldier, complete. Criniere, a French word, is the
armings of the horse mane or neck. Cuisset, is the armings of a horseman, for
his thigh unto the knees. Cuyratz, a French word, is the arming of the body,
the breast part and back part only, either of horseman or footman. Colors, a
word used by us, for the Ensign, being of variable colors. Curtine, a French
word, is the long wall running level from bulwark to bulwark.
D E
Enginero, a Spanish word, is one skillful in fortifications, and other
machines and stratagems for war. Escalada, a Spanish vocable, and is the
skaling of a wall or fort with ladders. Esquadra, a Spanish word, is a
certain part of a company of soldiers of some 20 or 25 soldiers whose
chief is che Caporall.
F
Fila, an Italian word, is the order, row, or line of all such soldiers as do
stand or march consequently on after another, in ordinance or array of battle,
extending from the front unto the train of the battle. Flancque, a French
word, is the side of any squadron of men. Front, a French word, is the face
or forepart of a squadron or battle. Front, is also the forepart of a wall or
bulwark. Forlorn Sentinel, a compound word of Dutch and French: and is a
soldier either horseman or footeman, set to vvatch and epsy the enemies
desseignes, near unto the enemy, and without the word: for sundry
considerati^ns.
G
Garrita, a Spanish word, is a little vvatch house or tower, for the soldier
to stand in at Sentinel, seated upon the walls. Grueues, a French word, is
the arming for the legs, from the knees downward. Guantlet, a French
vocable, is the arming or glove to the hand. Guidon, a French word, is the
ensign which is borne with the shot on hosebacke.
H
Hargubuzier a French word, and is the soldier, carrying and using a piece
called a calliuer or Hargubuz. Harguluttier, an Italian and French word, and
is the soldier serving on horseback, unarmed, using a calliuer with a snap
hance.
I
Infanteria, an Italian word, is all sort of foot soldiers.
K L
Launcier, a French word, is a soldier on horseback, armed and using a
Lance for his chief vveapon, but not so heavily armed, as is the man at
arms, and therefore of some called a Demilance. Legion, amongst the ancient
Romans, was certain companies of their people of war: consisting of 5 or
6000 footmen, and 300 horsemen.
M
Maniple, is a part of so many ranks and files of soldiers thoroughout a
battle or squadron of pikes, drawn forth to march thorough any straight or
narrow passage. Maestre del Campo, with the Spaniards, is as our Coronell
with us. Mayordome, is with the Italian and Spaniard, the steward of a house;
but in war he is the steward and Guardian of the munition for war. Modern
war, is the new order of war used in our age, Miditerraneall, is Inland
country, or countries distant from the sea. Maritime, is sea coast country,
or countries adjoining unto the sea.
N O
Orecch one, an Italian vocable, is the part of a bulwark which is called by
some, the pome, guard, or shoulder.
P
Parapet, an Italian word, is the upper part of the wall, which shadoweth
the soldiers from the sight and annoyances of the enemy. Pendent, is the
bending or slopenesse of the Parapet outward. Pelmell, a French word, and
signifies the mingling of men together, buckling by the bosom one with
another. Percluis, a French word, is the grate, either of iron or wood, framed
within a gate or port of a city or Castle, to be let fall or slipped down,
to bar the enemies entrance. Pectron, a French word: is the arming of the
breast of the horse. Place of arms general: is the place of assembly, where
the people of war are ranged in order of battle. Phalanx, a Greek word: an
order of imbattelling of men in one graund square, used by the Grecians.
Pietranelli, an Italian word, and is the soldiers serving on horseback, well
armed with a pair of Cuyrasses, and weaponed with a fire-locke piece or
snap-hance. Pistollier, a French word; and is the soldier on horse back,
armed as the Pietranell, weaponed with a pistol. Pouldron, a French word, and
is the shoulder arming. Posta, a Spanish word, and is the place or station
where the Sentinel soldier is set to stand at guard and watch.
Q
Quarter, is the part of a Camp, whereon any companies, or numbers of horsemen
or footmen be quartered and lodged. Quarteret, is the diminutiue of quarter.
R
Rank, is the row, order or array of soldiers standing shoulder by shoulder,
extending from flank to flank throughout the battle or ordinance. Rauelline,
or Tenaza, a Spanish word: and is the uttermost bounds of the walls of the
Castle or skances without the walls. Rampire, a French word, and is a
fortification or wall of earth. Regiment, a Dutch word, is a number of sundry
companies under the charge of a Colonel. Recoia, a Spanish word: and
signifies the call or assembling of the soldiers together into the place of
arms, by the sound of the drum. Ronda, an Italian and Spanish word: and is a
company of certain soldiers and officers, which do go visiting the Corpse de
guards, Sentinels and watches at sundry hours in the night, to cause them
observe order: and to see whether they be vigilant and ready. Roupt, a French
word; and signifies the breaking of a squadron, troop, or battle, and
turning to flight.
S
Sallie, a French word: and is an issuing forth of men to skirmish or fight:
and is also a secret issue for the soldiers to pass out of a wall, bulwark,
or fort. Sreree, a French word: and is when the soldiers in squadron do join
and lock close together, thereby to become the more strong. Serracenesca, a
Spanish word: and is the percluis or grate of a gate. Skance, a Dutch word: and
is a small fortress built of turffe and earth, commonly used in the low
countries. Scalada, a Spanish word, is a skaling of a wall with ladders.
Spontone, an Italian word: is a small long instrument of iron, sharp at the
end, to thrust thorough any load of haie, straw, or such like, to prove if
any soldiers lie hidden within the same. Squadra, a Spanish word: and is a
certain part of a company of some 20, or 25 soldiers, whose chief is the
Caporall. Squadron, a Spanish word, and is a great number of soldiers pikemen
reduced in arraies to march and also is a certain company of musketeers
framed in order to march of fight, and is also a certain number of men,
aranged in order to march, or charge.
T
Taladro, a Spanish word, and is an instrument or engine to mount any piece of
ordinance up into Carriage. Taisses, a French word, and is the arming of the
thighs, annexed unto the forepart of the Corslet. Terraplene, an Italian
word, and is the earth that is rampired and filled up unto the inside of any
wall or bulwark. Tertio, a Spanish word, and is a Regiment of soldiers.
Tertiare, a Spanish word, and is to third the pike, either to bear the same
upon his shoulder, or to charge the same ever hand. Trauessa, a Spanish word,
and is a flanker of a wall. Tragon, is the reareward of the squadron, or
battle. Trench, a French word, is the ditch about the wall. Tenaza, a
Spanish word, is a little hold or Keep made of one Curtine or Bulwark.
V
Vanbraces, a French word, and is the armings for the arm from the pouldrons
downward to the hand wrest, Vanguard, a French word, and signifies the
forepart of the battle. Vollie, a French word, and is when any kind of shot
do discharge altogether.
W
The Word, which we call the vvatch Word, and is by the French called Mot de
guet, and by the Spaniard En nombre: which is a word or name delivered by the
General or other high Commander, to be given unto other officers and
soldiers, standing Sentinel at their posts, whereby their watches are
nightly governed, etc.
Toute Puissance, honneur, glory and louange, so it a nostre bon Dieu eternel.
FINIS.
BARRET
Nella ph. d. ph. n. r. la z.

Nella fidelta finiro la vita.




