STPATIOTIKON. OR A Discourse of Military Discipline. Showing the necessity
thereof according to these perilous TIMES.

VEGET. li. 3. Paucos viros fortes Natura procreat;
Multos bona institutione facit industria.
Printed. 1628.

To the Most worthy and experienced Captain, the Lieutenant and all the well
Disciplined company, Trained up in the Military yard at Norwich.
Noble Captain, Gentlemen and friends.
ACcept ye this small piece, in lieu of the great love, which I have always
borne to your Laudable exercise; which (if I might have my wish) should not
only out line Envy, but many ages also, yea rather end with time then in it.
As for the fortune of this Treatise; I rather aspicate it from your gentle
acceptance, then any worth of itself. Yet I would have the world know, that it
comes from him, that dares as well vindi^ate it from the finister
constructions, of maleuolous Critickes, as gratefully acknowledge the gracious
censure of the courteous Reader. Read iudiciously, judge favorably, and

I am ever yours, unfeignedly. Ra. Kneuet.

To all to whom I write,
Gentlemen,
ALthough I have little, or nothing at all been beholding to Fortune, or to
the times, or to the great men of these times, (whose promises though seeming
very fresh and forward, require more then one year to bring forth any fruits
of performance) yet I would not have you think, that any necessitous regard,
has made my Muse so superstitious, to adore so many rising Suns. No, be ye
assured, that it was a zealous consideration of these perilous times, quickened
by some other more particular and slight respects that moved me to this task;
which I deem no less warrantable by example then reason: for if you please to
cast a long look back to the Troiane war, you shall find Calchas exciting
the disheartened Greeks to prosecute the war. Look an age more backward, and
there you may see Orpheus encouraging the A^gonautes to the Colchian
expedition. As for those detracting Dogs, such as (I am sure) this poor
pamphlet shall meet with all, I would advise them to stand off, and not to be
too hasty to awake a sleeping Lion, least their ears or their tails pay for
their inconsiderate rashness.

But to you (kind Gentlemen) quorum ex meliore luto finxit precordia Titan) to
whom, I hope this simple present shall not be unwelcome, I shall think my
self ever bound in all honest love and service. But if there be any that to
please their fancies, will misconstrue my good meaning, vilysy my labors, and
reject my obsequiousness, it skils not much; for I can as well bear the loss
of a Book as they the want of an understanding.

R A. KNEVET.

To his friend the Author.
BEcause they are few that do things worthy praise,
Free truth is counted flattery now a days:
And though it be our common Poets shame,
Truth cries thy Muse not guilty of that blame.
Thou Orpheus-like our Heroes do incite
To warlike gests, and Mirmidons to fight.
Such success wish I, that this Book may be
As free from Envy, as from flattery.
The most indulgent thought my Pen drops forth
I dare not think can add unto the worth
Of this rare piece; which shall (where it does come)
Strike Envy blind, and base detractors dumb.
And so I wish all cankerd spite may die,
Dispis'd, condemned by noble industry.
And though thou have those which this task better fit
From me much love expect, from them much wit.
TO. WOTTON.

To any to whom I write.
BLame not my Muse, thou that do find thy name
Not Marshaled here, as thou would have the same:
No blemish tu to thy repute: for (know it)
I act no Herald here (Sir) but a Poet.
To the same.
(KInd Gentlemen) Soldiers, or Clerks, or both
My Muse as gentle greetes you well (in troth)
And tells you she cannot woo ye at your tables
By venting fripperies of Jests, or fables
Not worth the Phrygian Princes ears; nor raise
A bare name to her self, by vulgar praise.
No, no: she joys in action: and know that
By the protection of a Beuer Hat,
Or silken outside, she disdaines to force
Your presence, but had rather take a course
To show her self to you in re^all powers
Then bid her welcome, and she is ever yours.
R. K.

To Captain HENRY SHELTON.
IF many years in honors service spent;
If virtues s^^ting with a brave descent,
Can give true luster to a Name; then thine
May seem least to require a Verse of mine.
To give thy worth just height: yet Time displayes
Many sine heads, that ost have earnd the bays
In these and meaner taskes: for fame must know
She cannot pay those glories, she does owe
To great and good deserts, except some aides
Be sent her from the nine Castalian maids.
Had Homer (whom seven Cities strove to own)
Not been; then who had great Achilles known,
Or Hector in these times. Then let none blame
My Muse, although she bears a part with fame
In thy due praise; whether she does commend
Thy truest valor, that did always tend
Thy noblest ends, or praise those honest Arts
With which thou did attract the Soldiers Hearts.
Nor a^t thou less expert to live beloved
In Peace, then War: to love thee all are moved
By thy humanity, and piety.
Then let detraction foul and calumny
Be always Dumb: and let the World know ever,
Thou may be enuy'd much, but flattered never.
To Mr. THOMAS KNEVET of Ashwell Thorpe.
THou, that do know thy Stars, can calculate
Thy geniture, and see to what end fate
Did lend thee to the earth; auspicious be
Thy favors, like thy Stars to mine and me:
Thou know thy Stars (I say) for good men know
Wherefore they are borne, and what to God they owe,
And how far they are engaged to Prince, or state:
For Grace, and Wisdom be the Stars and fate
That govern them: these like those twinne fires bright
Do prosper all those that Sail by their light:
These Steer men safely to the Haven of bliss,
In spite of strongest contrarieties.
These be thy Stars, that set th'aboue thy blood,
True pattern and true patron of what is good:
Thou art the Glass in which the World may see,
What once our Gentry was, and still should be.
A lover of thy Country, and of arts
Art thou; disdaining to make thy good parts
Ambitions Ladder, but had rather stay,
Till time shall see thy merit rise like day
And strike a Rosy blush in Honors face;
'Cause she had mist so long so fit a place
For her best favors, which they shall admit
To great Employments, answering thy wit,
And heroique virtue; such great happiness
I wish to thee, that do deserve no less.
To Sir ROGER TOWNSEND.
I Sent my Muse unto the house of fame,
Of her to enquire out some Honored name
Worthy of my Verse, and she commends to me
A Townsend, then I quickly thought of thee;
Then whom, a wiser he^d, Sold does not see;
Thy actions with such judgment seasond be.
Thou from thy fortunes height dainst to look on
Lowly Parn^ss^s, and Po^^e Helicon;
On humble Helicon, whose withered bays,
Witness the Frostie dullness of these days.
When merit, statue, because they scorn to be
Base fortunes slaves, and fools are raisd (we see)
And Knaves, for now great men make greatest use
Of these to hide, or perpetrate abuse.
We Arts unhappy servants must be glad
To fall before an Ass, in Scarlet clad,
And or like Egypts foolish Priests adore
Monsters, in shapes of men, o'r still be poor.
We sorted are with the Plebeian rout,
And live as men borne only to wear out
Serges, eat off^lls, or to fetch our drink
From the Spring head, or consume Lamps and ink;
When silly Silke-wormes strout in sundry shapes
Like Proteus, when Sycophants and Apes
Baboones, Bussones and sprucer trencher Squires,
Be neatly dressed in Honors richest tires.
But you Sir Roger (on whose honored name,
More noble Virtues are scor'd up by fame,
Then Time has lent you years) an Artist are
And Artist love; then double be your share
In truest happiness, and let your night
Day, morn, and even, on you shine ever bright,
And from your geniall bed let fruits appear,
Worthy your worthy self, and your Bel-vere.
To Sir CHARLES LE-GROSSE.
The Ring of Pyrrhus showed the Muses nine
And Phoebus portraited by sculpture fine:
But thou fair Knight-hoods fairer ornament
Conspicuously do to our eyes present
Phoebus, the Muses nine, the Graces three,
Mercury, and Mars, yea more Gods then be
In Homers Iliads; or at least much greater:
For thy mind's a Pantheon, or a Theater,
Wherein all virtues, and all graces stand,
In decent order linked, with hand in hand.
The amongst the chiefest of the Arts few friends
I list: and so adore thy noble ends,
That if my Quill to virtue can life give,
Thy honored fame shall Nestors age out live.
To Sir JOHN HARE.
Want in a plenty is too rise with us;
So in the stream chin-deepe stands Tantalus
Wooing the coye Apples: and it is often found
That wit is scarce, where riches do abound.
For golden Asses are no dainties here,
They may be daily seen, even every where.
But you (Sir John) whose youth with store is crowned,
Are nothing less to Art, and Nature bound
Then Fortune, yea such is your worth that now,
A Knighthood becomes few so well as you.
To Sir WILLIAM YELVERTON of Ruffham.
It Is meet Virgils Quill should write of thee,
Where such a concurrence of Gaces be;
That were all Gentry out of frame, we might
By thee take pattern, how to set it right.
Thy won habrisker Muse then mine requires;
Then let them sing while mine alone admires.
To Sir MILES HOBART Knights of the Bathe.
Never drank I of Pegasus his well,
Nor in Parnassus dreamed (that I can tell)
Though I write Verse, for I would have men know it,
The Times are good or ill, make me a Poet.
To praise Ulysses wise, as much may care is,
As to condemn Thersites, or vain Paris.
And as sweet Orpheus to his Harp did set
High tuned Ditties, great courages to whet;
So ever be it my task, to move great spirits,
And honorable souls, to brave demerits.
Among whom (Sir Miles) me thinks I see you rise
Like Phosphorus, graced with such qualities,
That they, as well as your high orders rites,
May justly rank you with the best of Knights.
To Sir JOHN HENNINGHAM.
TO praise your lonliu'd, or long honored name,
A wrong were to your virtues ( Hemmingham)
Let those which can afford naught else that is good,
Extol the borrowed honors of their blood.
Your Gentry you may justly call your own.
Although you bought it not, nor from furd-gowne,
It took; nor in Tobacco papers wrapped;
It brought from Spain; nor with a white Coyse capt
It chatting found in that great guilty hall,
Where Cerberus for Golden soppes does baule.
But from your honored virtues the same flows,
And this true Gentry is: the rest are shows.
To Sir HEYMAN LE-STRANGE.
AS does the purple headed rose pricked in
The tender bosom, of the Paphian Queen,
All beauties of the Garden far out shine:
So do those worthy parts, and Arts of thine,
Set thee above most (divine Le-Strange)
That know as well to walk the Muses range,
As thine own groves: and can without a thread,
Find what in learnings Laberynth is hid.
The age discouers few such men alive,
That rich, can also teach their minds to thrive.
To Sir THOMAS SOVTHWELL.
TAblets of Gold, with richest Rubies set
Shine nor so bright, as does the Cabinet
Where in your soul is looked; a Palace sit
For such a noble courage, and a wit.
Ever may thou give Adders audience
Unto tame flattery: nor let sense
With sugared baytes delude thy intellect:
But ever let some noble end direct
Thy good disignes: yea let them always be
Both correspondent to thy stem, and thee.
To Sir THOMAS WOODHOVSE.
YOu are the man, that well descerne what betters
An high fortune, and can prefer good letters
Before those painted plumes, which Crown the crest
Of swelling honor: such great interest
In your most worthy parts possesses art,
That your high wisdom seems to have got the start
Of your great fortunes, though they well befit
Both your thrice worthy Pedigree, and wit.
To Sir THOMAS RICHARDSON.
He, and no judge, that never had the skill
With words, one better then himself to kill:
Nor ere did lay a plot for to oppress
The new made widow, and the fatherless:
Nor ever did Church Lands o^ Commons wring
From God; both dead and living (...):
Certes is clear from many crying crimes;
Yet such, as be, made customs by the times.
But you Sir Thomas 'midst your fortunes must
Regard, that you, and what is yours are dust
That in this world, you have but a short lease,
And may be turned out when your Landlord please.
Know eke that what is yours, is yours to give
And live so well, that you may die to live.
To Sir ROBERT GAVDY.
FIrst, if I might safely crave this worlds pelf;
To be beloved next would I wish my self,
And rather then the first alone I Would choose,
The second I would take and that refuse.
But you Sir Robert have fates bl^ssing got,
You Are wealthy, and beloved, yea and what not
Nor ever were the Stars more just (I swear't)
With such great goods, to trust such good desert.
To Sir DRV DAVRY.
AS did love wounded Echo dote upon
The beautiful Narcissus, that loved none;
So does my Muse affect your worthy parts
Applauded every where, by tongues and hearts.
And though I in your praise come short of many
Yet may my love to you rank me with any.
To Sir JOHN HOBART.
SInce are no thriuing arts: but what is well gained,
May with much comfort, and long be retained,
But Justice often cries the oppressor quit,
By sending his young Heir too scant a wit
For his large means; that soon all goes to pot:
For fools do ill keep, what knaves have ill got.
But you (Sir John) are freed from such black brands,
Both by the cleanness of your fathers hands.
And your own ripeness, who can use your fortune,
Both spend, and spare, as time and cause importune:
Sole master of your self, and pelf, you are,
Which is a freedom among great men rare.
To Sir ROBERT BELL.
TO ring out thy great frame, if I had skill,
The E'cho thereof should our Island fill.
So consonant's thy virtue to thy wit,
And so thy outward feature graceth it,
That my Muse may one syllable add well
Unto thy Surname, and call thee Le-bell.
To Sir WILLIAM DE-GRAY.
I Take thy name on Fames bare word (Sir Knight)
I know thee not; yet swear I think thou art right
Because thou art beloved; then ever be
My Muse obsequious to thy worth, and thee.
He that good store of sincere love has won.
Wisely has played his game, and fairly run.
To Mr. FRAMMINGHAM GAVDY.
GA^dy such store of worth does Crown thy name,
That it like to column st^nds which fame
To lasting memory, and honor builds,
Whereon thy virtues hang like Pensile shields,
As Trophyes of those glorious Victories,
Won from the lesser Worlds great enemies
Then let thy fame with time vie days and years,
Let death be joy to thee; to others tears.
To Mr. SHEPHERD of Kyrby.
OLd Melibee) that have the hearts of all,
Because thy love is likewise general:
Not Time alone, but thy dear Countries cares
Which far exceed thy years, have changed thy hairs
To white: then let thy Silver age thee fold
In more contents, then did thy age of gold.
To Mr. WEB of Breckles.
THat curious Web which proud Arach^e spunne;
Or that which chaste Penelope begun,
Match not this piece whose worth exceedes all choice,
That Pallas to own it may well rejoice
Arachnes silken web descipherd plain
Io^es scapes, and what might thee Olympists stain
But (worthy Web) all beaut'ous graces be
Both morrall, and Divine be discribed in thee.
To Mr. ANTHONY HOBART of Hales.
When the Th^ssalian witches uttered
Their charms to Luna, she wo^t to look red:
So do true virtues blush to hear their praise,
While the praisd Peacocke his gay plumes displayes.
But you may safely hear while safely I
Commend your wisdom, or your honesty:
For he that attributes to merits true
Deserved praise, pays virtue but her due.
To Mr. PHILIP WOODHOVSE.
ME thought I stood that sacred fountain night,
Where high conceits in blessed draughts are lent
Whose cristall breast seemed sudainly to rent
And when a Nymph of rarest majesty.
Whose hair seemed Gold, and skin clear I (...),
Upon her brows an Arch of bays was bent,
Her presence taught even Trees to complement.
For all the Laurells bowed, and modesty,
With a low voice, seemed, to give suffrage free,
To make her Empress of fair Helicon.
With that I heard a groan, which seemed to be
Sent from the vrnes, of Poets dead and gone,
Whose Ghostes enuy'd this peerless Ladies grace.
That should them all in lofty strains surpass,
Mistake me not (I think) your Muse was she,
That like this Syluane Nymphe appeared to me.
To Mr. WILLIM POSTON of Paston.
'YOng hopeful sprigge) that art borne to inherit
Abundant wealth (if thou do not prefer it
Before the freedom) know that thy best use
Of thine; is to be liberal; not profuse.
Know like wise that content is your best store;
And that to covet more, is to be poor.
For Couetise as well wants her own,
As what is not: seek rather to be known
By the great virtues, then thy great estate;
Nor let thy tempting heaps of dross elate
Thy mind above thy self; but still remember
In May, and June, what follows in December.
Mark how thy youth, thy pleasures, and thy wealth,
Yea life and all do flits away by stealth.
Know that it is world is but a Tomb of clay,
To keep thy body till the latter day:
Think ever that thou art near thy day of doom,
And be prepared to wait on the Bridegroom.
Thus may thou be a thrice most happy one
In life, in death, and resurrection.
To Mr PETTY of Morley.
SOme of thy wealth talk, but I praise thy wit,
And many worthy virtues gracing it.
But thy great love to Arts, so make me thine,
That my true heart shall ever be the shrine
Of thy good name, which in the Book of same
I Will register to dull obliuions shame.
And if my pen can add ought to thy worth,
In spite of Enuies throat, it shall come forth:
Till then; accept this my great loves small treasure;
And Hercules his height by his foot measure.
To Mr. JOHN HOLLAND.
THou that art made of better temperd clay,
Then Titan ere made any; who do pay
Thy youth to time, with greater interest
Of virtue, then of years, and promisest.
More goods, then are of fair Pandora feigned;
And hopes more beaut'ous then her box contained.
Be thou like Phoebus, or his bays, and find
The blind God, and blind Goddess ever kind.
Be such that I to take may ever long,
So fair a Theme as Holland for my Song.
To Mr. BARTHOLOMEW COTTON.
ANd here too grows a Tree, that may in time
Bear golden Apples, in a colder clime
Then is Hesperia in; for so presage
Thy blossoms ( ^ottom) and thy spring of age.
Then let kind fortune give thy worth full sails,
Till Honor greet thee with as many hayles,
As ere Sitanus had: and let thy name
Become the example of well gotten fame.
To Mr. THOMAS WARD of Bixley.
IF my devout Muse could ever bring
Ought worth acceptance, or an offering
Unto thy Virtue, justly I might deem
My self thrice happy in so good a theme.
Yet let thy worth vouchlafe to take these lines,
As the pledges of my great Love, and signs
Of true affection, wanting alone
Art to discover that impression,
Which the conceit of thy most high desert
Has Charracterd so deeply in my heart.
And though my pen a pencill be scarce fit
To Paint out to the life thy merit; yet
My heart shall ever be engaged to thee;
Because I think thou love the Arts and me.
To Mr. THOMAS LAYER of Booton.
SHould I forget your name, you well might think
'Twas neither lack of paper, nor of ink,
Not time, but want of good discretion,
That caused the fault: nor is it your place alone;
Not the command of your Horse troop (I mean)
But that more great command, where with you reyne
Hot merrald passions, which does inuit
My Muse these few lines for your sake to write.
Your want of vice, and your attractiue parts,
That force no fears, but bring you loves and hearts
Make me a debtor to your worth: then know you
I pay you this, as part of what I owe you.
To Mr. JAMES CALTHORP.
What May has vowed, if August truly pays
What tongue or pen ( Cal^horp) can reach thy
Then let no harmeful blasts those blossoms kill, (praise
Let no affection ere mis-lead thy will.
Be wise, and good, let death long stand aloose:
And let thy mind be chance, and danger proof.
To Mr. WILLIAM BLADWELL.
Joy be to thee, of thy new place (say I)
That seem to affect noble caualrie,
A glory which France vaunts of, to our shame,
We are become so careless of our fame.
Some tripping Hackney, we had rather back
Or-dastard race-horse, or some snasled Jack,
Then mount the praunsing Courser, by whose pride
The Riders courage might be multipli'de.
And ye our Knights have ye forgot your name,
Or do ye wilfully neglect your fame;
Ye by your Spurs seem to be Cheualiers,
But by your Steedes you are Northern Borderers,
Or some Heath-scourers, fitter far to fly
Then manage combate' against an enemy.
O sleep not still; least ye contend too late,
Your honors from the dust to vindicate.
To Mr. RAPH BLEVER-HASSIT
NOt only thy affection did I prise
Shown to our Military exercise,
When here I wrote thy name (deserving Hassit)
No, no: thy honesty, and virtue was it,
That won me to this task; then here I give
What next high heaven, may make the longest l iue.
I hope youl' kindly take it; for I dare say,
Such presents are not brought you every day.
To Mr. CLEMENT HYRNE.
HOnest, and honored Hyrne; that do enshrine
Such worth, as should Fortune her self resign.
And hers, to thee; none truly might thee call
Her mere favorite; or her, prodigal;
Ever be she (I wish) thy virtues slave,
And readyer far to give, then thou to crave.
To Mr. EDMUND KNEVET.
EXcept thy worthy brother, scarce I find
A Gentleman, more truly mine, in mind
Then thee; nor let opinion so ill see,
To think thy outside makes me honor thee;
I mean thy rank, or state; no let men know;
Nor my thoughts, nor thy merits fly so low:
For thou have my affection nobly bought
At Virtues highest rate, and not for naught.
To Mr. AVSTINE HOLLE.
IF I could hate thee; or of my self so much;
To entertain soul Envy; thy wits such,
I like th'Illyrian Beldames on it should gaze,
Or like Mayes frosts upon the budding maze.
But certes, neither I to envy know,
Nor be thy rare endowments fixed so low,
That Envy can eclipse them: then here see
What love and admiration offers thee.
To Mr. EDWARD WOOTTON.
I Find thee such: so kind, so true to me,
That I must owe both love, and life to thee
Nor was it thy love alone, but thy desert,
That made me in this place thy name insert,
For this I say; and speak but what I know;
Thy mind and body do such rare gifts show,
As scarce are found elsewhere (which used well)
The times will hardly yield thy parallel.
To Mr. EDWARD DOILY.
TO season fresh acquaintance, these lines take
From him, that for his friends, and virtues sake
Dares rather do, then speak: for talk he deemes
Is womanish, but action men beseemes.
If ought abides then in me, or my Muse,
Worth your command; it is ready for your use.
To Mr. JOHN CAVSO.
THou that art far more worthy of the bays,
Daigne to assist my home-spunne untuned lays
With gracious censure; for upon thy tongue,
Depends the grace, and fortune of my song.
So sharp a wit, and judgment dwell in thee,
Refined by such rare knowledge, that I see
Apollo's trees may grow elsewhere, then on
Our green Parnassus, or our Helicon.
A DISCOVRSE OF MILITARY DISCIPLINE.
Lo my Thalia, that was whilome seen,
Frisking among the Nimphs, in Forest green,
To Satyrs pipes; and that did sing (long since)
Her morals smooth, to Pan the Shepherds Prince:
Is now pressed to a far unfitter task;
And like Bellona, armed with steely caske;
Powers warlike accents forth, and numbers meet
For trumpets stern, and stately buskined feet.
Then oh ye thrice three sisters that sit on
Parnassus green, and flowrie Helicon;
Spinning your gentle flax in the cool shade;
Because the Arts are grown too poor a trade,
To find ye smockes withal: and that great Goddess
( Pallas) who (wheresoever thy abode is)
Can scarce discharge th'ey pences of thy lights,
With writing Poems in long Winter nights:
Be ye propicious to your gentle swain;
One draught of pure Castalian juice him daigne;
And with an active surie touch his brain,
That he may set his notes in lostie strain
He that extols the thing, Arbor Vitteriasa ^riumph^^^.
which all men praise,
Shall hardly merit those immortal bays,
That glorious wreath, that Crown which is meet for
(Only) a Poet, Pi^nor ^ imperad^ri and d^ Poeti. Pet. arc^.
and an Emperor.
What need we praise Apollos radiant light:
When dullest Hindes, can apprehend by sight
More luster in his face; then we can Paint,
With best conceits; or numbers nere so quaint.
But so pernicious, are the minds of men:
So sinillen their wills: so fraught with reene;
That things, which always do deserve applause;
Are ost contemnd by some: and hear the cause.
In this worst age; each man extols that thing,
Which does to him much gain, and profit bring:
He only is a friend unto himself:
Devoted only, to his idle pelf.
Religion, and the soucraigntie of Kings,
He deemes to be, but ceremonious things.
That love which he unto his neighbor owes;
He pays in complements, and sained shows,
And as for that respect, which does pertain
Unto his Parents. he accounts it vain:
And while he thriues, and has enough to give;
On parish alms will see his mother live.
Friendship he deemes a foolish fond conceit;
If it brings in no profitable freight.
(Dall Camel) when he see'th the Azure heaven
Full fixed with Stars, and the bright Planets seven,
The Elements; all beasts, all fowls, and fish,
Trees, plants, and herbs, with all that heart can wish,
Created for his use; yet think that he
Is borne, from all exterior duties free.
The co^mmon-wealths deep wounds, pierce not his skin:
He cares not who loose, so he may win.
Not any sad thought would he entertain.
When Fame talked of so many worthies slain,
By adverse Mars, and Fortune (that coye wench)
Maligning English valor, and turned French;
That now with swelling vaunts, they dare report
Their glory equaled our at Agincort.
Nor will he bestow one auspicious thought
Upon the Danes designs; nor cares he ought
Who winnes the day, who conquers, or who falls;
Be they our friends, or proud Imperials.
Thus; (by the deprau'd nature of Man's will)
That worth in others is maligned full;
Which in themselves they want; and only deem
That good, which does in private profit them.
Thus things that merit all respect, and grace,
Are under valued, and accounted base.
All moral, and all martial discipline,
They slight as vain: yea, be the same divine,
They Will censure it: foul shameless brats,
That would seem Eagles, though as blind as ba^s.
But we (that are sent by Apollo bright,
To vindicate all virtue, from the spite
Of foul detraction, whose enuenom'd darts,
With equal rancour wound, both Arms, and Arts
(Alcides-like) whose monsters will expel;
Whose slandrous tongues (as with exorcists spell
Shall by our powerful numbers be coniur'd;
In circles of their mouths to rest immured.
But intermit (my Muse) thy hasty chase;
And give those Harpies leave, to breath a space
Another work does thy assistance ask:
Then (my Virago) take thee to thy task:
And with a pirrhique strain grace every line;
So should thou sing of Martial Discipline
Although we (men) be led by reasons lamp;
Yet ought we go astray; because the dampe
Of gross affections does put out that light,
And from the right way makes us wander quite:
That we, of silly Beasts may learn to tread
The pithes, which to true happiness do lead.
The painful Be does reach us industry.
The Turtle to observe pure chastity.
The Pilmire warnes us to be provident.
The Nightingale shows how we should repent.
The Robin-redbrest learnes us charity.
The Storke how to require a courtesy.
The Cock shows valor who had rather die,
Then yield to his insulting enemy.
By these; we (men) instructed are likewise
In Warlike feats, and Martial policies.
The Gr^ese in loca calidiora pete^ics mae^e ^ran, miliunt ^an^^^ forma^
^ss^^unt. Cic ^ Not.
Cranes (by day) keep order in their flight;
And always one stands Sentinel at night.
When that the Indian I^^ncumon est an mallmag^^nd^n^ (...) lu^^ con^^lu^^, came
^^p^de p^g. (...) (...)
Rat does vodertake,
Against the Aspe, his party good to make;
His body he all over daubes with dirt;
That his foes venom can do him no hurt.
The ^^e^hant^ (...) est (...), ob^d aest^^^erre^ te^a D^a^onioque exp^^^^tur,
etc. P^n.
Dragon far to weak, to maintain sight
Against the Elephant; kills him by sleight:
For in some Thicket, he in ambush lies:
And (ere he be aware) does him surprise.
The In v^n^re moll. t^nuisque c^t^s C^ocoull^: Idiose^t ter^^t^ merquer
Dolphins s^ exit. t^s q^al^um ^^ain secunt spinu. Plin.
Dolphin, not of force, with his sharp sin
To pierce the Crocodiles hard scaly skin,
Seems to retreat, as weary of the fight;
And diuing down, does counterfeit a flight:
Then from the deepes, remounting sudainely,
His foes soft belly wounds, and makes him die.
The Horse, the Bull, and Bore know when and how
Both to assail their foes, and shift a blow.
If these brute creatures (led alone by sense)
Can so expertly make their own defense,
To save that blood, which we account so base
That often we spill it, to enjoy the case;
Then we should be ten thousand times more wise,
To save that life, which we so highly prise.
Nor is the loss of life the greatest ill,
Redounding from the want of warlike skill:
For honors, Granicus Bitbynia f^uu^us pagna que inter P^rsas and Alexandrum
suit nobila. Diod 1, 17
freedom, goods, often go to wrack
In each ill managed state, where that does lack.
Great Alexander, in his growing pride,
Upon the banks of Granicus had di'de:
Or (captine taken) had attended on
His proud foes carre, through streets of Babylon.
If his strong Phalanx, had not calmed the pride,
Of Persian brau'rie, at her highest ride.
This strong Battalion stretched even to the skies
His same; and to both Seas his victories.
So glorious Conquests have been often obtained,
By numbers few, well disciplined, and trained.
But mighty multitudes (where skill does want)
Of good success can very seldom vaunt:
For Victory is coye, and will not be
Forced, by rude multitudes; but rather she
Unto a few well Disciplined, does yield
Her self, with all the Honor of the field.
Proud Xerxes, whose huge troops drank rivers dry
And even with lowly plains, made mountains high,
Did flee from Greece, in a poor fishers boot,
Who whilome had so many Ships a floote,
As made a large Bridge, over Hellespont;
That had Leander lived, he might upon it
Have had a safe recourse, by night, or day,
To that saire Tower, where his sweet mistress lay.
Worth does consist in quality alone;
Not quantity: for the small precious stone,
Is at high rates, and value ever prized;
When greater flints, and pibles are despised.
Even so, the vigor of an Army stands
(Chiefly) in expert, and well ordered bands;
And not in throngs of men; whole force vnskil'd,
Does rather let, then help to win the field.
Old Rome, her Empires Arms had never spread,
From high-brow'd Taurus, to Sols watery bed;
If that her expert Legions (so often tried)
Could have been matched, in all the world beside
Nor did her greatness any whit decrease,
Until that ancient Discipline did cease,
By which she had, to her first height, ascended;
And her wide Empires bounds so long defended.
Her Majesty stood free from all decay,
While she her thirty Legions kept in pay.
But when sweet Asias womanish delights,
Had turned her Captains, into carpet Knights:
Yea when her Soldiers, and Commanders both,
Were wholly given to pleasures, and to sloth;
And when true Discipline was laughed to scorn;
Her naked sides then by her foes were torn.
Great boundles minded Caesar (not content,
With Conquest of the Western continent)
Did pass the Seas, to find our Britains out;
Who entertaind him with such courage stout;
That (if of skill, there had not been a lack)
The haughty Roman had been beaten back.
Nor in those times, when Romes ambition fierce
Did search each corner of the universe;
Stood we in greatest danger; for Romes hate
Is more then trebled toward us, since that.
For now the time, do greatest perils show;
So many foes we'haue, and friends so few.
Needs then must my impartial Muse commend
Those, whom their countries love does move, to spend
Some hours, in Mars his School, where loyal hearts
May learn the rule, of Military arts.
But thou (fair Norwich) by whose stone-rib'd side,
The gentle Y are in sandy path does glide,
Creeping along thy meade with a slow pace,
As ravished with the beauty of thy face:
And parted from thee, still his love does show
With frequent looks, and softly sigh adue.
I praise thy wisdom, and thy prudent care,
That art in Peace, providing against war:
As witness may that warlike practice be,
Which now is so exactly taught in thee.
Oh what a graceful quality it is,
To be expert in Martial properties.
The Tennis-court, and bowling grounds smooth face,
Compared with the Artill'rie yard seem base.
Those great Olimpicke Games, and Isthmian plays
Did never merit such applause, and praise;
As do those Martial gymnickes in our days:
Those games through oftentation were ordained
But ours for public weals sake be maintained.
To know each motion well, and to perform
Each title of command, in truest form.
To do the Muskets Postures dexterously:
And nimbly for to let a Bullet fly:
With aduantageous skill to manage p^ke:
To know to defend, and how to strike,
Does not alone at hand, prevail in fight,
But also does far of the foe affright.
These warlike principles be not obtained
All sudainely; but by long practice gained;
And (being gotten once) are soon forgot;
If often exercise preserues them not.
For frequent use, and action must supply
The habit; least it in a sudaine die.
And like the lamp, be soon extinguished quite,
When th'oyle is gone that should maintain the light.
The ancient French so fierce a people were,
And so great conquest got' they every where,
That mighty Kings in awe of France then stood, (...)

Seeking her friendship not her neighborhood:
When Charles the great in Italy had queld
The Lombards: and the Saracens expeld
From Spain: and when the Saxons were compeld
To the French yoke their stubborn necks to yield,
Dismayed then were the Eastern Emperors:
Yea all the world did then fear Frances force.
Much honor likewise did Christ's zealous Knight
Great Godfrey win for France; when he did fight
His Saviors fields, in those vnchristn'd lands,
Where his chief hopes on frenchmens valor stands
But virtues grown t'extreames, breed worse effects.
Then ere could have been caused by their defects.
For this fierce Nation used to Wars, and spoils,
When foreign foes did fail, broch'd civil broils:
That their Kings (for to remedy these harms)
Were forced to forbid the use of Arms
Unto the vulgar sort, and them compelled
Or to turn up the bowels of the field,
Or for to plie mechanicke faculties;
Debarring them from warlike exercise.
Thus France her ancient reputation lost,
Beaten by Sea, and Land, on every coast.
And few I think but Frenchmen will deny,
That French are Europe basest Infant'rie.
Armor for War, from the Arsenall is brought,
But weapons for the Victory be wrought
In forge of discipline: could furious might,
Or strength of brawnie limbs prevail in fight,
Then who could match those huge Patagones,
Or buckle with those Western Savages
Whom Spain makes slaves: or if actiuitie
Alone could win a glorious Victory,
Then who could match the light Numidians,
That like wild Goats on craggie rocks can dance
Then who could match the Kerne, or Galloglasse,
That on the quaking Boggs as safely pass,
As we on firmest plains: or if the skill
Of mannaging a horse at Riders will,
Could win the day, then had not in such sort
The French been slaughtr'd at their Agincourt.
Or if by number conquest might be won,
Then had the Greeks been foiled in Marathon.
Thus neither horsemanship, nor many hands,
Strength, nor actiuitie, the field commands:
But the well ordered foot that be refined
By exercise, and thoroughly disciplined,
These always win the fortune of the day,
For Fortune does true Fortitude obey.
Nor in those elder times (before the Munke, Bertoidus Swartz invented Gunnes,
Au. Dom. 1; 8c. They were first used by the Venetians. Gord.

Invented had his murther-spitting trunk;
That plague of valor, height of Hels dispite)
Was warlike Discipline so requisite,
As now it is: for there is required more skill,
To handle well a Gunne, then a black bill.
Of Policy, order's the soul alone:
And Natures very life (that being gone)
Things cease to be: for should the golden Sun
Swa^ue from the course, which he has wont to run
Roaming at random up and down in heaven:
Or should the Stars; and those bright Planets seven,
Not walk those rounds, which God has the appointed,
Soon should the worlds great fabric be dis-ioynted
But a great Army (where nor Captains know
What to command, nor silly Soldiers how
To execute) is like a Galeon
Of mighty bulk, ill rig'd, and floating on
The surging maine, without sufficient stores
Oftackling, ballast, and waue-sliceing ores,
With sails vntrimm'd, and wanting at the stern
An expert Pilot, that should well discern
The Channels course; and know each creek and cape,
And by what point, his course he should forth shape.
(Doubtless) if Aeoles ruffling sons should (...)
This forlorn vessel, in so weak plight, then
From their fierce rage, she hardly should escape
To harbor, without peril of rape.
Even so those great Armadoes, that consist
Of huge inexpert troops, and a long lift
Of men's bare names, (...).
do often become a prey
To their fierce foes, and seldom win the day.
That son of Mars, that valiant Epirot,
That matchless Prince, thrice worthy Castriot,
In two and twenty bloody fights, compeld
Huge Turkish Armies, to forsake the field:
Nor ever did his greatest strength, and force,
Exceed five thousand men (both foot and horse)
On order, does eternity depend:
And Victory, is Discip'ines fair end.
Victory, that bliss of Kings, that sole good
Which War affords, whose face besmeard with blood,
More tempting loves does to her darlings offer;
Then Cleopatr'as lip, when she did ptoffer
A courtly Kiss, to great Mark Anthony;
Who with the splendor of her Majesty
Was to a Statue struck, and stood amazed,
As one that on the Gorgons scalpe had gazed,
But some there be (I know) that thus object:
What need we thus our business neglect?
What needs this Stir? this idle exercise?
Secure are we, from sorraine enemies:
Our streets have in these many years not heard
The voice of War, there is nothing to be feared
No inrodes, nor incursions, do affright
Our fearful Hindes: no outcries raised by night
Are (...) of approaching foes: no fires
Do crown our Beacons: and all those are liars,
Which say that Spain, dares venture for to try
Another Voyage, against Britanie.
Let us tend our affairs, confine our selves
Unto our Shops; and while the Peasant delues,
And rips his Mothers womb, to find out wealth,
Let us grow rich by sleight of tongue, and stealth.
While others ply their Military Arts,
We will be sure to learn to play our parts;
To cogge, and foyst, to keep our measures short,
To vent bad Ware, and take good Money for it.
Let Us cocker up our Wives, and keep them neat;
Raise our selves high with sweet lascivious meat
For luxury: Lets cheat, and cosen all;
The pinching Carle, and profuse prodigal.
In truth to cheat the wicked no sin it is;
They must be plagued for their iniquities.
But hear me (friend) thou that have done more ills,
Then ere were punished on those woeful Hills,
Of mournful Magdalene: thou who do thrive
By knauerie, and cous'nage; which can diue
Into the depth of craft, to rake for pelf;
And rob ten thousand, to enrich thy self:
Thou which do mask thy crimes, with gestures pure:
And think thou art safe, so long as thou art secure:
Be not deceived: for know thy sin alone,
Deserves naught less, then an invasion.
But though all foreign enemies should fail;
(As Vengeances too small, to counteruaile
Our wickednsse) the Devil may find out
Some daring Ket, in borroughs here about;
To plague us, and make pillage of our goods,
To fire our houses, and to spill our bloods.
If heavens just wrath, should send such punishments;
Then who should be best able for defense;
But these that be with warlike skill endu'd,
To bring in order the rude multitude.
And while those dolts, that have but skill enough
To weigh their plummes, or measure out their stuff,
Shall be unable to obey command;
These shall be fit, each one, to lead a band.
But suppose that heavens awful ordinance,
Had confined War, to Germany, or France:
Suppose our Land from broils should always be
As safe, as Ireland is from vipers free:
Yet is this exercise, and warlike sport,
Thrice more praiseworthy, then the Tennis court,
Or Bowling Alley, where loss and expenses,
Breed many discontentments, and offenses.
Then (worthy Citizens) into whose hearts
The wise Prometheus, has infused three parts.
Of those pure spritefull flames, which he did steal,
From bright Apollos radiant charret wheel;
Ye that your private cares can intermit,
And spare some hours, for public benefit:
Frequent ye still Bellona's Court, and know
More Postures, then can all the Soldiers show;
That ere Blood thirsty Belgia daign'd to spare
From all the furies of a lingering war
But (that your exercise may ever last)
Ye must be joined all together fast,
Within the Golden cord, of Unity:
All may en^oy the same immunitie,
In (...) nath command: it skils not who
The colors bears (so long as there is no foe)
That place, or grace, which all alike may merit,
(In my conceit) all may by course inherit.
Then let no Envy, nor ambitious thought,
Break that society, which time has wrought
By virtues help: let disagreement never,
The joints of your fraternity disseuer:
But if soul Discord, that Tartarean else,
(Who in eternal darkness, waste her self
With dire imaginations, and damned thought,
To bring each worthy exercise to naught)
Shall fill your hearts, with the Cadmeian seed
Of strife; then let my Muse, with powerful reed,
Those mischiefs charm, and repossesse your minds
With that respect, which lovely concord binds.
So did (of yore) the Thracian Lyrist'swage,
With his concenting notes, the direful rage
Of Greekish youths, when they had forgot quite
The golden steece, for which they went to fight,
Each other seeking to deprive of life,
So fell was their debate, so great their strife.
Discords the bane of things, a poyso'us worm,
That does infest the joints of States, a storm
Which many Common wealths has ruined,
And many hopeful actions frustrated:
Nor can I here, forbear to interpose
Those vnauspicious quarrels, Sa ad^us ^tiam Ni^rosolymam sponte no^bs
reddidiss^, (...). Ex litt^^^^ Rich., ad ^oelest. 2
that arose,
Between stout Cuer de Lion, and his brother
In law, and Arms, who sworn to aid each other,
Yet entertaind (in stead of love) deep hate:
And by a separation, tempted fate
To the defeat, of their great enetrprise:
For which proud Philip Richards worth enuies,
He is required with as deep disdain;
And soon (for spite) returned to France again:
But (if their mutual vows they had not broke)
Christ's City then, had cast off Isma'ls yoke.
But Concord, is the strength of War, in field,
And Camp, more torci^le, then sword, and shield:
Of Conquest, that is the truest augurie;
(...) of hope, portent of victory.
Fair Belgia had long since been de^flowr'd,
By the Hesperian Dragon, and devoured,
Had thee admitted any inbred st^fe:
Concord's her sinews, blood, and very life.
Her sheate of arrows bound together fast, A Lion with a sheafe of Arrows in
his paw; the Arms of Holland.

Are th'auspice of her welfare; which shall last;
So long, as does the rampant Lion hold,
His shafts unbroke: and as (in days of old)
The weary Greeks, at Troy found good success,
When they had got the sha^ts of Hercules:
Even so, Scylurus so li^e os ha^ens, mor^turus ^asciculum.^ ^al^rum stugalis
porrexit, iuss^^^, rumpere, (...) cum n^rp^^ n^^pse singul. ^icult exe^^t;
atque ^^fac^^e co^f^ egit on^ni^. ^ilos dinon^^h^s verbis: Sic^^end^s er^^s,
etc. Plut. Apop.
Scylurus arrows shall maintain
The Netherlands, against the pride of Spain.
Concord's that glolden chain, let down from heaven
On those well ordered linkes, depends even
The worlds stabilitie: it does combine
Both hearts, and hands, and prosper each deligue.
In all (...), sickness breeds,
Which of the d^^proportion'd humors feeds;
For these vneuen'^y mixed, such a (...),
That it the bodies common health decays,
If some Physi^ion ^oth not the^ atone,
And by an ostracisme, expel that one,
Which is predominant: That confused m^sse
Of things (which Chaos hight) maintained was
By Discord, and while she there dominear'd,
No hight, no heaven, no Sea, no earth appeared;
(Thrust thence by Jove) she crept into men's hearts;
Where she began to play her deuilish parts;
For being sirre too weak, to work her ends
Against the greater world, her force she bends
Against the less; Bellum inte^ d^os A^d^on^cost am p^and. (...) p.^^^. (...)
I). ^^. 1321. (...) Ma^^ 4 (...) I^han: ^ ^a^^nt H^ ^^, Va^^., A.D^. 713 N^rse^
(con^^^nclia acc^^^a ab ^n^e^^r^ce Sop ^^) ^cc^rsit Lo^ o^ardos in Italian.
^nno Dom.^^^. Pa^lus Diac
inciting men to iarres,
To murders, ^easons, and to Civil wars.
Fair Greece she first exspos'd to Turkish pride.
The Moors from Afric, she to Spain did guide.
The Lombards she brought into Italy.
And on the cheeks of France, and Germany,
The bloody Characters are to be red,
The balefull sluttes, that Discord there has bred.
Nor does Apollo any Climate see,
That from her malice, has been always free:
Then from your breasts, drive that Echidna dire
(O brave Pretorian band) and wi^h the fire
Of sacred love; do Enuies eyes out-seare:
And from soul Slanders mouth, her tongue out tear
Let friendship b^nish all debate, and strife,
And give your exercise both strength, and life.
Nor let my gentle Muse alone inspire,
Loves sweet consents, but filled with that pure fire.
Which Phoebus lends his impes, let her high fits,
Move noble hearts (as time and place permits)
To learn this Art of order, and to know
Their Ranks, and Postures perfectly; for now
Monstrous abuses routed have the age;
And Knauerie rides in Knight-hoods equipage:
Few keep their Ranks; yet in the front stalkes-pride
And always takes the right hand file beside:
Sheeleadeth on the forlone hope, and will
(Though she to Hell-gate march) be foremost still.
Great evils, with great honors be combined
And ma^ch like Pikes, with Muskets interlin'd.
Our Postures are French conges, and few can:
Know Mounsieur, from an English Gentleman:
So like are we to them, so frenchify'd
In garbes and garment: but great God forbid,
That our new ^angled change should ere declare.
Such sad events, as did the Scimitar,
Or King Darius: for his Sword alone,
A sheath of Greekish fashion, did put on:
And then his Magi cried, it was a sign,
That he to Greece, his Empire should resign:
But we our selves, our gestures, and our swords,
In French are dressed up; yea our very words,
Have put on French dissimulation:
Oh, blind, absurd, fond, foolish nation,
That (light Chamaeleon-like) art what thou see;
A painted Argos, of all gath'rings piec'd.
But are we all transformed to Woolues, and Apes?
Do none retain those old Herculian shapes
Of Virtue? yes: for God defend, that all
Should be Lycanthropiz'd; least heaven should fall,
To stop up with her ruins, Sins blackeiawes,
And crush oppressions unrelenting paws.
No, no: (thanks be to our kinder Stars) yet lives
That Vestall flame in many breasts, which gives
Refreshing heat, to each good enterprise:
These help old Atlas, to proppe up the skies:
These stand (like brazen Colosses) unmoved
By chance, or passion: these never loved
Informing dogs; nor ere (to fill their purses)
Heard Orphans cries, or Widows baleful curses.
These near to any greatness did aspire;
But Virtue: nor ere sought to be higher
In fortunes favor, then in Gods these scan
Worth, by defart, and though they truly can
Make good their Gentry ^m my ways; sach ways,
As now the baseness of the time bewrayes,
As large demeanes, great place, or pedigrees,
Yet these disdainning, that their worth should be
Produced from smokie titles, or base peise,
Or dust, and rotten bones, each from himself
His worship, or his honor, does derive;
And by his proper actions does descriue;
A Gentleman: for Fortune cannot inherit
(By right) those graces, which pertain to merit:
And wretched is that Gentry, which is gotten
From their deeds, that long since be dead and rotten
The savor of the Prince, and Fortune, arts,
And Ancestrie, are but the outward parts
Of true Nobility, for her soul is,
An harmony, of vert'ous qualities:
But should we search the world (may some reply)
From Cales, to Calicut, and sharply pry
Both into University, and court;
Trauerse all Countries, and belay each port,
We hardly should meet with so brave a wight.
Yes, yes; such be they whose names to recite,
My Muse is proud; nor ever shall these want
Room in my Verses (be they nere so scant)
For worth as well deserves a Panegyricke,
As vice does Satyrs, or a Thief a Diricke,
Selfe-wild opinion is, mistaken far
To deem, that noble virtues praises are
Smooth flatteries: and Envy is far wide,
To think that any baser end can guide
A Poets aims. Although we know those walks,
Where Fortune upon heaps of ingots stalks,
And see her golden Temple daily full
O^ sweating Votaries: where Knave, and Gull
Have access free; and though we well descry,
What offerings she accepts most gratefully:
Yet we her Altars shun, because we know,
That many (which her favors buy) do owe
To Justice such hand debts, that mercies bail
Will scarce be found, to save them from hell-Iayle
Vain, foolish Men, although they plainly see
All good is there, where grace and wisdom be,
Yet they of Fortune, do a Goddess make,
Advancing her to heaven, and for her sake,
Dare plunge themselves into a fouler lake;
Then Curtius did Romes pestilence to sl^^ke^
But (noble Gentlemen) ye that do hold
Fair virtue, at a higher rate, then gold:
Ye, whose affections scorn to serve the times,
Whose sleeps rue not the harms, of fore-past crimes,
Whose names were near marked with the privy seal
Of Fame, for p^lling of the common^weale:
Ye, that (from Cities tumult seuerd) know
Those sweet contents, which from retirement flow
Though not Tibe^^^^-like at Capreae:
For priuacies, as often the Midwiues be.
Of ^ls, as good: but ye reserve your leasures
For nobler ends, then vain and flitting pleasures.
Nor do the times bid us securely sleep,
But rather warn us a strong guard to keep.
The East look black with danger, and the South
Seems to invade the North, with open mouth.
Our beaten foes their forces now unite,
Armed with dire misca^fe, rage, and fell despite.
But Spain is poor, and weak (as some reply)
Long War^es exhausted ^aue his treasury.
The Netherlands: have drawn his Coffers dry
Yet Indian mines (we answer) soon supply
Those wants; for from the Western world does come
His Navy duly, fraught with treasure home.
Nor is the War maintained by Austrian purses
Alone: for somewhat beside Bulls and curses
The Pope allows, and to the offering calls
Many fat Priests, and well fed Cardinals,
For whom (though nere so sparing) would stand by
And, not help to root out a her^sie.
Another sort I hear speak better sense:
And th^se rely on Gods omnipotence:
It Is true: his mercy only can us keep;
But if we in our wickedness still sleep,
And yet suppose that he shall us defend,
We miserably err: what do protend
Our foul prodigious sins, but death and war,
Titanicke pride, that God to his face dares.
Ramping Oppression, with her hundredth paws,
Abusing to her private gain the laws.
And Couetise, that with her swinish snout,
Root^s up all goodness, to find money out.
Soft handed sloth, spruce smiling Luxury,
Dull Drunkenness, swolne-bellyd Gluttony,
Unbridled ire, pale Envy, viperous hate;
These are the Comets which do ominate
The scourge of War; then it is t^me to repent,
Least we too late seek to shun the event.
Last night, when sweet repose had closd mine eyes,
Strange thoughts began my fancy to surprise:
For the dull God of sleep, that hates the morn,
And from his gate of Iuorie, and horn,
Sends silent troops of dreams forth every night,
Caused horrid Phobetor me to affright, Quid Meta. l. 1^

In sundry shapes: me thought I was transported
To a strange Land, such as is not reported
By Munster, or old Sir John Mandeuile.
Nor know I (Certes) whether it were an I Will,
Or parcel of the maine; therein appeared
Great Cities, Towns, and Towers, that seemed to beard
The very clouds; and the soil seemed to be
Exceeding fertile: for on every tree
The pendant clustres hung, as fair to sight,
As the Hesperian fruit: Grapes red, and white,
Pomegranates, Limons, Figs, and Oranges,
With wondrous plenty, seemed the field to bless,
Desiring then to see those happy men,
That had so fair a Country, to dwell in,
I to a City went, thinking to find
The beautifullest race, of all mankind.
(But there arrived) most strange it is to be told,
What various forms of beasts, I did behold:
Nothing like Man saw I there, but huge Ap^,
And hayrie Satires, greedy of foul rapes;
Bulls, Buffles, Boores, fierce Tigers, Dragons, Dogs,
Bears, Camels, Woolues, slow Asses, Horses, Hogs,
And Monsters, such as Nilus never bred,
Nor Africas foul deserts nourished,
Iueery street d^d clusters, o^ e^ch han^,
As thick as ^earme^t^d Gallants on the strand.
All Birds of prey, and eke all vacleane fo^les,
Did nestle there; fierce Eagle, Griffons, Owls,
Foul Ostriches, and Bats, I there des^ryd;
And earnestly their new guest all these eyed;
That I sore fe^^'d their entertainment rough,
And often wished my self thence far enough.
While I stood thus amazed an Ape drew ^eare,
Whose age did in his ^u^lld f^^e appear.
This was their Ciues I owne-^a^ke, (...) did seem,
For he their only speak was I deem
He with a low accoast; thus did me ge^te.
Stranger (quoth he) I kiss thy happy teete,
That brought the^ hither, where thou may dr^nke store
Of richest draughts, that shall refresh thee more,
Then strong Nepenthe; and make thy wits quicker
Then can Lyae^^s, or the spiteful licour,
That Jove, and all the Gods so fre^ly swill'd,
The merry night ensuing (...), field.
Nor let our various shapes, make thee disdain
Our kind society (my gentle swain)
For although we* the shapes of beasts do show,
Yet we retain the minds of men, and know
Thrice more content then they: Our Land is clep^t
Fair Polytheria, where great Circe kept
Her count of ^ore: Circe that awful Queen,
The daughter of the Sun^e, who of^ was seen
To change midday, to midnight, and to cause
Aestiuall Snowes and break the vipers jaws.
To drive a river back, to his spring head,
To make Seas stand unmoved, and to strike dead
The harvest ear; her cup and wand so mighty,
Which made the F^ends obey her great Venite,
We stlil reserue^ nor do we deem the race,
Whereof we are derived our meanest grace:
From that victorious ancestrie we grow,
That did fair Asias glory overthrow,
In Troyes great ruins: nor were these (I swear)
The baser sort, but such as consorts were
Of great Ulysses, on whose name still sticks
The honor of Troyes fall, nor need we fix
Our worth aloue on a bare pedigree;
Our actions show what our deseruings be;
Which ye men partly know, and must confess,
That we have sent you succor, in distress.
Here was the Ram bred, that did bring
Great Cum Liber Pater per desertum Libyae excercitum du^eret and sit^ admod^^m
laboraret; implo^ass^ ae Patra anxiliu^ dicatur; Quo sacto app^^uisse e^
e^templ^ Ar^ote^; quidu^ sugientem persequitur, per^enisse ^tl^ duct ^a fontem
amaenissimum. Al^ terraati^t^pedae concussa fomtem exil^sse tradun^ Plin. l. 6.
Liber Paters Army to the spring,
When they in Africkes deserts were tormented
With scortching thirst. Those white A^^eresnon se^ellere, quibus sacr^ Iunoni
^^ summa ^noppa ^ibi tamen abstinebatur, quae ressalut^su^t, ^anque c'angore
^orui^, alar^mque crep^tu ex^^tus. M. Manlius, etc T. ^iu lib ^
Geese the prevented
The Gauls from taking of the Capitol
Were some of us. And that py'd Memphian Vide Alexand a^ Ale^and spar^^am.Marc.
Bull,
For whom the Egyptians fell at deadly iarres
Was ours. Vide ^.Valor, de fic^a^elig.
Sertorius in his Spanish wars,
Sou^ht counsel of our Hind. The Ass
Of Apulciu^; and the Bo^locut^^; Romaca^e ^ibi. Liu. li. 35.
Ox that was
Heard speak at Rome. The Epidaurian Vide Plin. l.^ Ovid Me^. 1^. (...) Sab^^i
ca^i^. Aues a Pjaphone edo^ae ^^qui; Mag^^s Deus ^sapho. M. V^^
Snake;
And Dog that died for his dear Masters sake
Were bred with us. The Cobblers prating Daw;
And Isapho's Birds did here their first air draw;
And so did Mahomets tame Pigeon,
That help to found his new religion.
I could tell later prankes, till I were hoarce,
Of Willoughbbyes black Cat, and Banckes his horse;
This place (I tell thee) is the only Cell,
Where arts enlink'd with rich content do dwell.
And that thi^e eye may witness what I say;
Here follow me: then he leads me away.
Unto a Castle, whose high towred brow
Did check the winds, and seemed to ouer-crow
The clouds: there Lions, Tigers, Panthers sweet,
As tame as fawning Spaniels did us meet.
Then to a spacious Hall we came, that stood
On pillars of tough Brass; nor stone, nor wood
Were seen in it; and there I pleased my sight
With the Picture of the Dulychian Knight:
Eurylochus, and he whose brains were washed
So well with Wine, that life and wits were cash'd
Were Pictured there, and many a Greek beside
That with Ulysses there did long abide.
Fair was the stuff, but thrice more fair the art,
That there was to be seen in every part.
While I admired here what mine eyes beheld,
The Ape brought me a cup with wine up filled
And bids me drink't; that then I might find grace
To see things far more rare, in that fair place.
I in my trembling hand received the cup,
That was of Gold, and drank the licour up:
Then soon the poisons force did touch my brain,
And through my body crept in every vein:
And while my case I thought to have deplo^'d,
Thinking to speak my griefs, aloud I ror'd:
My hands (I saw) were changed to grisly paws,
My clothes to sh^ggie hairs; with yawning jaws
My mouth did gape; and I perceived my shape
Was like a Lions: then began the Ape
With gentle words, to cure my discontent.
Good friend (quoth he) thou shall thee not repent
Of thy arrival here; though thou have lost
Thy former shape, and feature, be not crossed:
For shrouded in this shape, thou shall obtain
More knowledge, then did ever mortal gain.
Then by long winding stayres, and walks he drew me,
Unto a spacious room, where he did show me,
The Vide Art^tel. De Magia.
Book, the Gemme, and Magic horn, all which
If any man can get, he shall be rich,
Long-liu'd, a King, and fortunate,
Yea what he will: the Rings of Polycrate,
Of happy Giges, and wise Vide Cornel^^ Agripp. Deoccult. Philos. li.^. cap.
27.
Iarchas; and
The Sword of Paracelsus, with the wand
Of Circe, and the root Vide C. Plin. secun. l 30. ca. 2.
Osirides,
With Zoroastres his Ephimerides;
And those mysterious books which taught great Romanieux Sibyll^^s libris
edocti se dominos mundi inflituerunt. Arb.
Rome
To make the World obey her awful doom;
These and an hundred things as strange, beside
The Ape did show me; also there I spied
Lopez his poison, in a Glass of Crystal;
Rauillacs bloody Knife, and Parries Pistol:
But looking into a dark hurne aside,
I Mattockes, Spades, and Pick-axes descri'd,
With Powder barrels, heaped up altogether:
Then did the Ape me lead, I know not whether:
But many slayers deep, I am sure we went;
That Hels dark way so steep as this descent,
I ween is not: at last a gloomie cell
We came unto, that seemed as black as Hell,
But for the Torches which there daily burned:
Such is the Cell, where (when the Pope's envrn'd)
The Fathers meet, to find another fool.
Fit for the trial, of the Proph^ria cathedra qu (...) Pontifex continud at
ei^s ^reat^one residet (...) ^edent^^ genitalia ab ^ltimo Discono attrecteniur.
Sab^llicus.
porphyre stool.
This was their Counsell-house, where in they sat
Discussing matters, that belonged to state:
Mischiefs, and treasons, war conspiracies,
False treaties, stratagems, confed'racies,
Were here hatched and now hence was coming forth,
A plot against the Lions of the North,
The subtle Dragon, The Aims of the ancient Kings of France were Trees
crapaux satu^ne, in a Field Sol. Guil.
and the Griffon fierce
That seeks the Empire of the Universe:
The Eagle, and the Toade, were here assembled;
To hear whose bloody proiects, my heart trembled
Against the Northern Lions they were bent,
To use all cruelty, and punishment,
For wrongs late done: the Dragon fell does cry
They Are Heretics, and therefore ought to die.
The Griffon swear, it was not to be allowed,
That Luth'rane should their heads in this world shroud
The Eagle wished, he never might be blist,
If ere he spared a filthy Caluinist.
The spiteful Toad did wish his bones might rot,
If e^e he meant to save a Huguenot.
The Dragon much did praise their readiness,
And promised that the action be would bless,
And vowed he would be lib'rall of his crosses
To those brave souls, that durst adventure losses
Of lives, or limbs, in that designement; and
If any chanced to fall, he would command
The Angels to transport him presently
To heaven, without a Purgatory.
But that the world might not their malice sent,
They meant to cast out tales, that their intent
Was to give to Religion, her first grace
And purity: thus with a painted face
They masked their deuilish end. While I gave ear
To their damned counsels; I felt a new fear:
For from beneath I heard an hideous found,
As it some Earthquake dire had clest the ground
Or Hell her self approach to make one,
In their mischievous consultation.
So Neptune scourged with the Northwind rores:
Such is the clangour, of a thousand ores
Falling at once upon the surging wave:
The Witches in their conuenticles have
Such Music, as was this for it was the noise
Of the infernal powers, that did rejoice,
To see that Hellish-plot contrived, and wrought,
That might bring all the world again to naught.
With such obstrep'rous sounds, my sense they struck,
That I sleeps gentle fetters then off shook.
Nor is our danger but a dream (I fear)
So many signs presaging it, appear.
For what can we expect, but sturdy blows,
From our combined exasperated foes.
Then high time it is freth courage for to broch
When pale-faced death, and ruin seems t'approach.
(Brave Gentlemen) learn to be prodigal
Of blond; fear naught that may befall
But insamie; meet death in any shape,
And grapple with black danger, though he gape
As wide as Hell: know that this life of yours
Is but a breath, or blast, or like Mayes flowers
Yet never is prized at so high a rate;
As when it is nobly lost: then animate
Your selves with brave example, and shanne not
That Fate, which our late worthy heroes got,
With endless fame to boot. Yea let Spain know.
And never think on it, but with horror; how
We children are to those, that did defeat
Their great Armada; and them often beat
A broad, and eke at home, and let proud France
Reueiw those times, when her Wars did advance
Our English Gentlemen. Let that black day
Of Agincourt, Anno Do. 1^87. Charles 6. with a N^uie of ^^ co. sail,
threatened to invade England, having provided such store of Munition and strange
engines, as the like was seldom heard of.
with terror still dismay
Her halfe-dead trembling heart; nor ever let her
Expect success, or any fortune better
Against us: twice with two numerous Armies she
Did England threate; yet durst but once scarce see
Our pale Cliffes, with her paler looks, and then
Turned stern, and cowardly ran home again:
If she the third time, should attempt the like,
Let the like fears her heart appall, and strike.
But (what soever betide) it is meet that we
Should stand upon our guard, Anno Do. 1545. The French with an A^mie of 60000,
men came for England; but (...) their entertainment (...) pr^ue too h^te,
saintly and friendly they went ^ me again.
and ever be
Prepared, both to make good, our own defense,
And strike our foes: but since experience
Is thought our greatest want there must be found
A medicine to apply to that deep wound,
Which Discipline is called; this whole some cure
Ye Gentlemen must often put in ure;
Ye, that have charge of Bands, your duty it is
To train them up, with frequent exercise.
Nor by your Must'ring once, or twice a year,
Do ye discharge your duties, but I fear
If foreign foes should drive us to our fence,
We all should suffer for your negligence.
It Is rather sitting, that each Month should yield
A day, to draw your Soldiers to the field.
For our tough Husbandmen, on whom depends
Our chiefest strength, so mind their proper ends,
That they to weild their Arms have soon forgot,
If often exercise enures them not.
These with their Bows, of stiff, and trusty Eugh
The Caualrie of France often overthrew.
And in one Month more spoil, and Conquest won
Then they had thought could in a year be done.
But now the fiery weapons have cashierd
Those ancient Arms, that made our name so feared
Through all the World, nor has ease so decayed
Our courage, or our nerves, but by the aid
Of Discipline, we may retriue that Fame,
Which we so lately lost; and raise a name,
That may our bragging foes a fresh dismay,
More then the name of Spinola does fray.
Our women, or our women-hearted men.
Nor do I that old Genouese contemn:
He dares do much, where we dare not oppose:
He Conquers all, especially lean foes:
If they be fat, they are not for his diet,
He rather an whole twelue-month had lie quiet;
Till they be famished to his hand: what though,
He to his fellow Genewayes does owe
Large sums; his Master will pay all tick-tacke,
If the Plate fleere comes home without a wrack,
When that the Town is won: what Town? Bred^
By whom wa'st won? by Marquis Spinola.
I scarce beleeue't: then go and see; for there.
Upon the gate in scul'pture does appear
The mem'rie of that famous enterprise.
How wonn't he; by assault or by surprise!
No: by a famine. In what space? a year,
Wanting two months. What force had he there?
Twice twenty thousand men. Then there he spent,
More then he got. I, that is most evident.
Yet much renown he had. I, that or naught,
Though it at a dear rate-King Philip bought.
But if Don Ambrose may of Conquest boast,
For taking in the Town, with so much cost,
And time, and loss; then what did Heraughtere
Deserve; that in one night accomplished clear,
A Conquest more complete, with seventy men;
Then he so strong, and so long space could win.
As when the cunning Forresters have placed
Their wel-wouen toils, and herds of wild beasts chased
Into their snares; yet daring not invade
The furious herds, with bore-speare or with blade,
For fear of their sell ire; with a strong guard
They them surround, and keep them thus vpbarrd,
Till pinching famine makes them faint and weak;
And then at will their teene on them they wreake.
Thus was Breda by Spinola obtained,
Sharp famine, not his force, the City gained.
Oftend to-ruines turned, he won at last
For Phoebus through the Zodiac thrice had past,
Yet still the Town held out: some others prate
Of his Acts done in the Palatinate,
Where few were to resist: yet this is he
That Is thought invincible; although we see
His base retreat from Bergen did well show
That he may meet his match sometimes. It Is true:
Yet it is not good to think our strength so great,
That he dares not against us work some feate.
Our craggie Cliffes, we ought not to trust to;
Whose huge Enclosures bound our Hand so.
Ambition dares the roaring billows pass;
Of force to rain towers of lasting brass;
Whose cankerd rage we must meet face to face
With Spartane hearts (for so requires our case)
Since for defense we have no Walls of stone,
Our surest guard must be our Walls of bone.
And ye, our unkind brethren that affect
The fair term of Catholic in respect
Of your Religion, Apo^ repl^. to our Papists.
and with that name,
Contend in vain, to hide your mothers shame;
Your Mother Rome, that famous Paramore
Of Kings, and Princes, that need Hellebore.
She (like Semiramis) is wont to kill
Her Lovers, when of Lust she has her fill.
Ye that beneath an English face, do hood
A Spanish heart, preferring foreign good,
Before your Englands health; always in hand,
Upon the ruins of your native land,
To build Spaines Monarchy, and make that Prince
A Catholic in Empire, that long since,
Was only feigned in faith to be the same.
But trust ye not the talk of flattering fame.
That tells you Spain is merciful, and just,
Not led by ill desire, or any lust
Of domination, to set footing here,
Least his false play too soon to you appear,
And ye too late your follies see: let not
Vtopian joys your judgments so besot,
To make you think that change of Government, The Duke of M^d^^a General of
the Spanish Forces in 88 said that his sword should not make any difference
between Papist or Protestant, so he could make way for his Master to the
Conquest of the I^and.

Produces the most absolute content:
Trust not Spaines glosses, but rather conceit
What proud Medina said in eighty eight.
Spain for Religion fights (as he pretends)
But spoil, and Conquest, are his mainest ends.
When Paris had stolen his light Minion,
No less then fifty Kings combined in one,
Protested, that for this disgraceful rape,
Troy should not their seuerell vengeance escape:
Yet was not just revenge the chiefest end
Of their design (whats'ere they did pretend)
For each sought to get Helen for a wife,
And this indeed was cause of so much strife.
Even so your Patron of Castile protests,
That he his Arms puts on, for a redress
Of holy Churches wrongs; when he naught less
Intends; setting Religion for a stale,
To catch the Empire of the West withal.
Believe it, Conquest is his certain end;
To which, he does by direst mischiefs tend;
To that through Seas of guiltless blood he wades,
Cutting his passage out with murdering blades:
Or like Amilcars son, S^^at Haniball ^e^ Al^s. L^u.
with fl^mes of fire,
And Vinegar, makes way for his desire.
(England subdued) could ye hope to stand by
Secure spectatours of the Tragedy:
No, no: though for a time ye might be free,
Your lives should make up the Catastrophe.
This p^^^ledge perhaps ye might obtain,
That is, to be the last that should be slain.
Then join with us; be not so impious,
To stand against your Countries Genius,
Let us together join, with hearts upright,
The which shall pray, while our hands ply the fight.
Strive not (like Phartons iades) to overthrow
Your Master, least ye also fall as low.
Attempt not to vnbarre your Countries gate
To foreign foes, least ye repent too late
Your treachery, for be assured that none
Did ever Traitors love (the Treason done.)
A Threnode
Upon the Death of those two Honorable Gentlemen, Sir JOHN BVRROWES, late
Lieutenant of the English Infantrie in the I Will of Ree, and Sir WILLIAM HEYDON,
Leiutenant of the Ordinance.

THe thousand Torch-bearers of Io^e,
Which mightily to his Bed him light,
Where Juno entertaines his love,
With merry glee and sweet delight;
Were scattered all about the sky,
That seemed of a Saphires die.
All Creatures were at silent rest;
Except those wights, whose musing hearts,
Some extreme passion did infest,
And they were playing then their parts.
The Thief was plodding on his way,
But softly; least the Dogs should bay.
True lovers (whom the day diuorc'd
From sweet discourse) now met and kissed:
The Witches on their wands were horst,
And Luna on their Herbs down pist:
Nor had the Cock yet stretched his throat
With his all cheering early note.
But it was the time, when Morpheus dull
From his two Portals, sends out
His dreams, that fill men's fancies full
With fond conceit, and fearful doubt,
Then I upon my Pillow laid,
With drearie thoughts was much dismayed.
A strange appearance my mind struck;
Me thought I was in Forest wide,
And near unto a Crystal brook,
Upon whose green banks I desery'd
A goodly Lady much distressed,
(As by her woeful ^light I ghest)
A Mantle green she seemed to wear,
Which by a curious hand was wrought:
Towns, Rivers, Mountains were seen there,
And what is in a Lan^chap sought:
And all the workmanship most fice,
A wauie border did confine.
Upon her doleful brows was set
A stately Crown, that did appear
Like to that towred Coronet,
Which Cybele was wont to wear.
The Roses from her cheeks were fled,
Her tresses were dish^ue^ed.
With tears her eyes beblubberd were,
Lamenting sat she on the grass^:
And l'gan to approach her near,
To find the cause of her sad pass;
A drearie spectacle then struck
My throbbing neart, that for fear shook.
For by her side there lay two wights,
Whose cheeks were marked with deaths pale brand,
Who seemed to have been right goodly Knights,
Though now they lay low on the Strand,
As if they by (...) fate;
Had been brought to that wretched' state.
For one was gored with grisly wound,
From whence the blood a fresh flowed out,
Which cruddling on the gelid ground,
Did cover all the grass about,
The Lady for him sore did weep,
And with her tears his wound did steep.
The other Knight all wanne and pale,
With water seemed all to besmeared:
The drifting drops full thick did fall,
From his bright locks, and m^nly beard,
As if that Neptune had him (...),
And cast upon the shore again.
Disdain was fixed upon his brow,
As if he yielding up his breath,
Had scornd that fate which made him bow:
But it was his luck to drink his death.
While I beheld this sight forlorn,
The Lady'gan afresh to mourn.
And with Pearle-dropping eyes vp-reard
Unto the glistring sky; thus spoke:
Ye awful Gods that often have heard
The vows, and prayers which I did make,
Upon whose Altars I have left,
The spoils that from my foes were rest.
What great offense of mine has moved
Your hearts to such impatientire,
To kill those Knights, whom I best loved,
Whose service I did most desire.
Oh fading hopes, oh false delights,
Oh joy more swift then Summers nights.
( Burrowes) thy valor was a flower,
Whom lightning dire at length did strike,
Though it had borne off many a shower.
( Heydon) thy worth was Aprill-like,
Which had it a fair May beheld,
Such flowers had showed, as near did field.
Or like a sturdie Ship of War,
(Brave Burrowes) was thy manly might,
Which vessel had been famous far,
For fair success in furious fight,
Whose sides at last a Canon gored,
And then the deepes her bulk devoured.
And to a Ship in all her russe,
New set a floate was Heydon like;
Whose the Tritons took in snuff,
And under Water did her strike.
Thus do the greatest goods slit fast;
Some soon, some late; but all at last.
Ye Sisters that in darkness lie,
Removed far from mortal eyne,
Where ye that fatal distaffe plie,
From whence is drawn Man's vital twine.
What various fates have ye assigned,
To these my Knights, so like in mind.
Sweet honors thirst my Burrowes called
To foreign lands, to seek for fame;
Where he with courage, vnappall'd,
Great toils, and dangers ouer-came.
There vanquished he base fortunes might
Grief, Sickness, Age and all despite.
Himself in Ostend be engaged,
Where Death with Funerals was wearied.
Though Pestilence, and Pellets raged,
Yet he nor wounds nor sickness feared.
The noble heart more constant grows.
When great peril it self shows.
In Frankendale he did oppose
The conquering troops, of Tilly stout
Whom he repulst with bloody blows,
And longer might have kept them out,
If it had been his Sovereigns will
That he the Town should have kept still.
His latter Scenes he played so well,
So sweet was his Catastrophe:
That Fame shall never cease to tell
His worth unto posterity,
Who shall his name among these read,
That for their Countries cause are dead.
At length he fell: so falls at last
The Oak that many storms has stood:
From pain to Paradise h^ past,
And won his bliss with loss of blood.
Then let his bones soft lodging have;
And let sweet flowers spring on his grave.
But my dear Heydon I lament,
As does the tender mother mourn
For her young son, untimely shent,
That was to some great Fortune borne:
The cruel Fates conspired his death,
When first he drew an Infants breath.
Oh, Froward Fate that give good parts,
Yet do envy men should them show.
So chance to many, goods im parts,
But grace to use them, unto few.
(Aye me) that Death the greatest ill,
Should greatest virtues always kill.
Grimme Mars, and Mercury did sit
As Lords, at thy Nativity.
Mars gave the valor, Hermes wit;
But both an woeful destiny.
They at thy worth repined my Knight
And did cut short thy life for spite.
Even as moist Zephyre powers down fast
His showers on the new-sprouted rose,
That it her blossoms soon does cast,
And all her fragrant odor loose:
So Heydon in his prime was struck;
Betimes his vigor him forlooke.
Accursed ever be that I Will
That bears the holy Bishops name,
Which did me of my Knights beguile:
Let war and spoil, nere leave the same
Nor ever let the sorraine yoke
Be from her servile shoulders broke.
Let ghastly Ghosts frequent her plains,
Let night hags there be heard to rore:
Let Sirens dire with drearie streams,
Make Saylors shun that balefull shore.
Let thunder stricke their Vines amain.
By thunder was my Burrowes slain.
And let those deepes, that guilty are
Of Heydons blood, be turned to shelues,
That them t'approach no ships may dare,
For fear to cast away themselves.
O let ten thousand ills betide
Those places, where my worthies di'd.
(This said) a grievous sigh she drew,
As if her heart strings would have split;
And on the earth her-selfe she threw;
That for to see her piteous fit,
The Dryads wept, the Satyrs lowr'd,
And water Nymphs their tears forth powered.
The Trees did sigh, the Hills did groan
The bubling Brook did sobbe a maine,
And Echo made a pitious moan,
That I could not from tears refrain.
The Birds with her incomfort joined,
And sought in vain to ease her mind.
The Nighting-gale, on withered brakes,
These drearie threnodes forth did power:
Wealth, beauty, strength (quoth she) Time takes;
And Death approaches every hour.
But Virtue endless life imparts.
Then live for ever (noble hearts.)
The Swanne moved with her plaints drew near,
And thus began to sing his last:
No settled state of things is here;
Our lives, our joys are but a blast.
But Suns that set fair, so shall rise:
Oh happy Death; and so he dies.
The Turtle true with heavy cheer,
Sob'd forth her mournful Elegies
O Death (said she) that slu'st my dear,
Now bo^st not of thy Victories:
Thy pains are joys, thy darts are cures
Thy wounds are life, that always dures.
I had but heard her dittie out,
When that the Cock whose Sants bell clear
Should call men's hearts to thoughts devout.
Made me from sleep my eyes to rear,
Upon my dream I mused then;
And when day came, it down did pen.
FINIS.
Upon the death of Sir RALPHE SHELTON.
I Am what, passion will: a stone, or tree:
A mad Hercuba, or sad Niobe.
For who can see such ruins, and not feel
A marble chillness creep from bead to heel:
Like sad Electra that could not abide
To see Troy Vrn'd; but her pale face did hide.
Or Phoebus-like that brooks not to behold
The Thyestaean dainties, but did fold
His head in Pitchie clouds, so loathes my eye
To be spectator of this Tragedy;
Wherein, thou Shelton no mean person werst,
And did so to the life well act thy part
That we lament thy exit, and give thee,
Sad sighs, instead of a glad plaudite.
Yet shall not grief so prejudice thy worth,
But same shall sing alowd thy praises forth
To check the pride of France; who in thy fate,
Lost three for one: it at so dear a rate
Thou sold'st; yet was is cheap to them (I swear)
Out valuing more lives, then they bad there.
Thy life, and death were fatal both alike
To France: first in a Duel did thou strike
French bravery down; and boldly trodst upon
The dustie Plumes, of that proud Champion,
That durst thy valor tempt: with thine own hands,
Thou paidst thy own revenge; which ever stands
Huge Columne-like, to counter-checke the pride
Of France, and show how bravely Shelton died.

