Uitis Palatina.

A SERMON APPOINTED TO be preached at WHITEHALL upon the Tuesday after the
marriage of the LADY ELIZABETH her Grace.

By the B. of London.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN BILL. 1614.

TO THE PRINCE HIS MOST excellent Highness.
Most gracious Prince,
AS one not ambitious to preach or print my self, but desirous to preach the
honor of God and publish his mercies, J give light and after-life to this
Sermon. J preached it at the marriage of your peerless sister; not on the day
it self, but before the days of that feast and celebritie were expired. J
publish it at the birth of her son, the first fruits of the riches of God
toward the Christian world from that Princely garden.

My gracious Sovereign who commanded my service at that time, out of his
zealous and religious heart, enioined me likewise my task namely to bless the
marriage, as with Crescite and multiplicamini, (the fundamental blessing of
God) and other such like prayers and prefaces of happy prediction belonging to
marriage: and as often as my matter fitted me, to draw from the hearts of the
people, which sat in the doors of their lips and waited the watchword,
their answers and Amens to those wishes of blessing: that both the Priest and
the people like the voice and echo in the woods, uniting their spirits and
speech together, might sing to the new married pair their ioifull God speed, O
Lord prosper Ps. 129. 8.
them, we wish them good luck in the name of the Lord. Thus having so glorious
a star to point out my way unto me, and the readiest affections of mine heart
lending me wind and sails at will to do what service I might to that wished
conjunction: as Ophir in the days of Solomon was the place for gold, because
the most and best was there; so went I for a marriage text to that golden and
beaten Psalm, as Psalm. 128.
well traveled in this kind as Ophir for gold, because there was the richest
vein to furnish such an occasion. Thence I extracted a small model for my
building: the subject thereof was a wife; the mirror and metaphor of that
wife, a vine; the honor and attribute of that vine, fruit; the marrow and
meaning of that fruit, children, which lay at the next door to my text. But
when I came to the fruit of the vine, J pawsed and withheld my speech, because
the time of her fructifying was not yet come. I went on with my song of the
vine in the words of Esaias, Vinea facta est etc. Es. 5. 1.
hoping there would be a day and days, when we should change our dittie, and
sing as cheerfully of the olive branches in those sweet notes of the Psalm;
Nati Psalm. 45. 8.
sunt tibi filij etc. This day is this word fulfilled in our ears, both in
substance and circumstance. For not only the word and work of God, prophecy
and event, are really met together: but with a reciprocal service, and
reflected aspect of each to other, that work and his word are once more met
again: those very words and syllables of the Psalm, wherein at the first our
hopes were conceived and uttered, not forced from their own rank and station,
but by the monthly order and course of the day, aptly and happily ministering
to the entertainment of that news which by his Majesty's princely care was
conveyed unto us. For at the morning prayer of that day which his Majesty by a
speedy messenger posting upon the wings of the night was zealous to prevent,
it being the day of our Christian Sabbath, whereon the tribes do usually
ascend to the houses of God, the people, J mean, assemble in their great
Congregations to praise his glorious name: J say at the morning prayer of that
day, being the ninth of the month, by the natural use of the Church, was that
Psalm read, wherein was that verse contained of that first dextrous presage,
Nati sunt tibi filij etc. As if from out the whole bunch of that sacred Uolume
a Psalm had been picked of purpose as proper to that day, to yield a consonant
voice and acclamation to that ioifull tidings. J apply the words of that other
Psalm, Dominus dedit verbum, euangelizantiu^ Psalm. 68. 12.
exercitus multus, God gave the word (appointed as it were our text, so just to
the time, so meet for application, that he that ran might have read Gods
meaning therein:) and great was the company (as great as all the Churches of
London could yield) of those that read and pronounced the same, but not many
perhaps that minded it: that joined the text and the gloss together, the body
and the soul, the letter of the book and that instant goodness of God which
that letter imported. Therefore to recall their meditations to that which they
might ouerslip, and to revive mine own, to seal the joy of my heart and my
thankefulnes to God in the presence of all his Saints, and to inflame others
with the like, and to congratulate to your royal house your new titles of
honor and comfort, as of grandfather, grandmother, uncle, which you had not
before; and one line of degree the more to your royal pedigree, which for root
and branch is the most glorious in these Northern parts: to these and the like
ends I send this Sermon abroad, making that the cause of my printing it, which
was the end why I preached it; that as J preached it in honor of a fruitful
vine, so to honor that vine and her fruit I might now publish it.

O Lord of hosts look down from heaven, behold and visit Psalm. 80. 14.
this vine, and the vineyard which thy right hand has planted, and the branch
which thou have made (we trust) so strong for thy self. Let thine hand be
upon the man of thy right hand (the father) and upon the son of man (his
tender babe;) that he may grow up in age and grace to strengthen thy kingdom.
Perfect that good work which thou have begun upon us. Thou have begun it in
the former part of the Psalm, Nati sunt tibi filij etc. (saving for number,
that natus is not nati, which number of years may supply hereafter:) perfect
it in the latter, quos constituas principes. Continue thy covenant with them
for ever, and establish their throne upon earth as the days of heaven.

The prince of the kings of Apoc. 1. 5.
the earth prosper your princely beginnings (the morning of our future hopes)
with length and strength of days, and such accessarie blessings as depend
thereon; that your loins may be as fortunate to your people as your sisters
womb, and both the one and the other redouble and multiply the name of
Grandfather to your happy father; and the fruit of both your fruits improoue
that name to a great grandfather: that he may long and long live, the
firstborn of God, higher Psalm. 89. 27.
then the kings of the earth, to see his childrens children, and leave behind
him a Lawgiver from the midst of his and their feet to sway the scepter of
these kingdoms till Shiloh come again.

By him that serves your Highness with prayer and humble observance, Jo.
London.

PSALM. 28. verse. 3. Thy wife shall be as the fruitful vine by the sides of
thine house.
MY chardge is to bless, a work better beseeming the mouth of a Patriarch, or
some one of the ancient prophets, for the less is blessed by the better. Hebr.
7. 7.
I have therefore chosen to bless by the mouth of David, or rather by the
Spirit of God moving and tuning the harp of David. And whence should I rather
draw my blessing, then from that Psalm (of all others) the promptuary and
storehouse of all blessing? from every corner whereof, as from the mount
Garizim, a blessing resoundeth. Deu. 27. 12.
It blesses in the first verse; Blessed are they that fear the Lord: blesses
in the second; O well to thee, and happy shall thou be: blesses in the
fourth; Lo, thus shall the man be blessed: blesses in the fifth; The Lord
from out of Sion shall bless thee: and concludes in the last with that which
concludes and compendiateth all blessing, peace upon Israel. The subject of
all this blessing is Timentes Dominum, they that fedre the Lord. See how the
Lord loves the man that fears him. In himself, his wife, his children, his
posterity, in the Church, the City, the whole commonwealth, in all that
belongs unto him, or that he belongs unto. Confine him within himself,
take him as a single person; Thou shall eat the labors etc. Divide him into
his other half; Thy wife shall be etc. Multiply him into his issue; Thy
children like the Olive branches. Eternize him in his race; Thou shall see thy
childrens children. Engraffe him into the Church; The Lord out of Sion shall
bless thee. Bestow him in the City; Thou shall see the wealth of Jerusalem.
rank him amongst the people of the whole kingdom; And peace upon Israel.
Whither in resolution, or composition, or multiplication, or propagation and
succession, or the communion of Saints, or corporation of Citizens, or
association into the state, he shall be blessed throughout. You now see, it is
canticum graduum or ascensionum; and you may add, excellentiarum, Title
as the title goes, that is, an excellent song that ascends by degrees.

Amongst other blessings of God, it blesses this very blessing that we have
in hand. It is (...), a Psalm that blesses marriage.

I rest in the second branch of blessing; uxor tua sicut vitis etc. In which
Division
there are two parts. 1 The subject, vxor tua, thy wife: 2 the attribute, sicut
vitis, as a vine etc.

Vxor tua, may well be the subject of Subject.
the proposition, for it is the subject, the prior terminus, the (...), that is
substantial, fundamental term of all mankind, (...), the gate of entrance
into living. Hence began the world; God builds the woman (aedificat costam,
finxit hominem: man was figmentum, woman aedificium, an artificial building)
and from the rafter or planke of this rib is the world built. Therefore was Heua
called matter viuentium, the mother of the living; quia mortali generei
immortalitatem parit, she is the means to continue a kind of immortality
amongst the mortal sons of men. No sooner was man made, but presently also a
woman; (not animal occasionatum, a creature upon occasion, nor mas laesus, a
male with maime and imperfection, (philosophy speaks too dully:) but out of
the counsel and skill and workmanship of almighty God; aedificat, a goodly
frame:) and no sooner a woman, but presently a wife. So that man, and woman,
and wife are simul tempore, of the same standing; and the first vocation of man
was maritari, to be an husband. Mulier propter virum, The woman was made for
the man to be his wife: so that, according to the Hebrew proverb, Cui non est
vxor, is non est vir, A man without a wife is not a man. Vir and vxor, man and
wife, are primum par, fundamentum parium, the first original match of all
others. All other couples and paires, as father and son, master and servant,
king and subject come out of this pair. The beginning of Families, Cities,
Countries, Continents, the whole habitable world, the militant, yea and
triumphant Church, matter matris Ecclesiae, the mother of the mother Church, of
no small part of the kingdom of heaven, is vxor tua, this subject of my text,
out of this combination it all springs. No marriage, no men; no marriage, no
saints. The wife is the mother of virgins that are no wives; ( Laudo connubium
quia generat virgins, says Hierome (...)) no generation, no regeneration; no
multiplying beneath, no multiplying above; no filling the earth, not so much
filling the heavens; if not filij seculi, neither will there be filij coeli.

The parcels in vxor tua, are two, Subdiuision.
societas, society, fellowship, wife; and proprietas, propriety without
copartnership, Thy wife. First, relation, wife, she must be the wife of an
husband. Secondly, possession, thy wife, she must belong to that husband
alone. The one, the margarite or pearl, wife; the other, the cabbinet or arc
to keep this Jewel.

I am sure I abuse not my Wife.
terms. For the spirit of GOD by the mouths of holy men has styled her
donum, and bonum, and Coronam, and gaudium, and gratiam super gratiam, a jewel
of singular estimation. The image and inscription she bears, is donum dei,
The gift of God. She is indeed Gods gift, the first and best that GOD gave to
man, his xenium, new-yeares, new-worlds gift. Adduxit Deus, GOD the pronubus,
Genesis 2. 22.
praesul Coniugij as Ambrose calls him, the author of marriage, presented the
man with this gift, brought it as his present: the riches of the whole earth
yielded not the like. Cast this pearl before swine, let Manichees, and
Marcionites, and Encratites, and Antichrists, those that prefer the doctrines
of men, the doctrines of Devils, before the sacred ordinance of GOD, judge of
it; and they will tread it under their feet, and burden it with whole wagons
and cartlodes of reproaches. I stay not to confute them. Only I say with Saint
Augustine, Bonum nuptiarum semper est bonum, The good of marriage from the
beginning of the world ever was and to the end shall be good. Ante peccatum,
adofficium; post peccatum, ad officium and remedium. Before sin, for the Hag.
Card.
duty of procreation and comfort of life; after sin, both for that duty, and
further for a remedy. And albeit foelicior coelibatus, single life may be more
happy in some respects; yet matrimonium tutius, marriage is more safe. Or to
speak in the highest strain, in virginitate culmen, virginity may have the
top of honor; in Connubio not Crimen, there is no fault in matrimony.
Consider Moses and Elias, the one a married man, the other a virgin. Elias
called down fire from heaven, Moses obtained manna from heaven. Elias, auriga
in aere, was a wagoner in the air, rode in a chariot, through the clouds:
Moses viator in mari, was a passenger, a trauayler through the red sea: GOD
honored them both alike.

We have found the treasure, we Tqy wife.
must add the cabinet to keep the the treasure. Thy wife: not vxor vestra,
one woman to many men, against the doctrine of the Nicolaitans: not vxores
tuae, many women to one man, against the encrochment of Lamech: not vxor tua
and non tua, to take and leave, put on and put off, as thou do thy coat.
Vxor tua, is as much to say, as tu and vxor, vxor and tu, no more, no fewer, no
other: duo in carne vna, two in one flesh, not three, or four; not mulier
multivola, a woman that will Eccles. 9.
have many men, not mulier vniuira, (which was Hieromes term of Hieromes
time) a woman that must have one man besides her husband. The like holds also
for the man. For she that is not tua is aliena, extranea, Genesis 1. 27.
a strange woman. Look to the alpha. masculu^ and faemina^ creauit eos, male
and female created he them. not masculum and masculum, nor faeminam and
faeminam, both males, or both females, for then had there been no procreation;
not masculum and faeminas, nor faeminam and masculos, much less scortatorem
and scortum, those that should live in uncleanness together. Vnus, vnam, vni:
One God has ordained one woman to one man. Let the subject be well weighed,
uxor tua, that is, thou and thy wife; and sustinebitis potius complexus ursorum
and draconum, you will rather endure the embracings of beeres and dragons then
of strange flesh. I add no more, but lament our times. Quo modo quos coniunxit
Ecclesia, disiunxit camera? Bern.
how are we joined together in the face of the Church, and disioyned in private
chambers? more truly, quo modo, quos coniunxit Deus, disiunxit diabolus? how
does the Lord join us and the devil sever us? I have done with the subject.

Sicut vitis abundans. If there were 2 Attribute
nothing more then sicut, that word Sicut
alone might suffice. The woman at her first creation was made to be a sicut.
Sicut is of similitude, so is a woman. Look back to the first institution,
Faciamus adiutorium (not mancipium, she is not a servant, nor iumentum, though
iumenta our cattle in their kind be adiumenta infirmitatis nostrae, helps to
our wants,) but sustentaculum, fulcrum, adminiculum, a support or stay. Of what
quality? simile sui, like to himself: There is the sicut. Simile? what is
that? proportionatum, that holds proportion of sex for generation: that is
not all, but simile, as like as bone may be to bone, flesh to flesh, ISHA to
ISH, that is woman to man. Will you have a fuller commentary? Simile sui, that
which is contra ipsum, not contrary, but e regione, face to face, as the Angels
stood over the mercy-seat; coram ipso, as a glass that reflecteth and
returns upon a man his own image, that is, quasi alter ipse, ipse coram se,
an other self, him self before himself. Or simile, that is, secundum, iuxta,
penes, prope, proxime, ad manum, the next of all others, and at hand to
minister unto him whatsoever is wanting. This is that sicut, which I speak of.
A sicut in mutual love, in natural affection, in the communion of woe, (for
they are (...), yokefellowes; and must remember that bonum coniugium, sed a
iugo tractum, in marriage is an yoke) in the participation of good things, in
society of offices, in conjugal faith, indissoluble covenant, (that is
particeps foederis) in Mal. 2. 14.
parity of religion. They must be (...), coheires of 1. Pet. 3. 7.
the same grace. Si acceperit Jacob vxorem de filiabus Heth, vt quid mihi vita?
If Jacob take a wife of the daughters Genesis 27. 46.
of Heth, what avails it me to live? Numquid non est in filiabus fratrum
tuorum Iud. 14, 3.
and in omni populo tuo mulier? Is there never a wife amongst the daughters of
thy brethren, and amongst all thy people? the one the voice of Rebecca, the
other of the parents of Sampson. Nulla arbor praeter vetitam? Is there no tree
but the forbidden tree? No friend and companion of the life of man but a foe? no
helper but a tempter and moouer to evil? It is a devise of the Rabbis, but
the moral is good, that in the names of ISH and ISHA, is included IAH the name
of God; and that if you take out (...) and (...), jod and He, whereof that name
consists, there remains nothing but (...) ignis, ignis, the fire of
dissension and brawle, which burns and consumes to the fire of hell. The
meaning is, that God must be present at the joining of man and woman, that they
must marry in Domino, in the Lord; not in Pluto the God of riches, nor in
Venere, the goddess of lust: and Christ must be a bidden guest, or else the
wine of this vine will be turned into water, into vinegar, into the wine of
dragons. The sons of God and daughters of men joined together, bring forth
Nephilim a monstrous and misshapen generation.

There is not, neither can be such a sicut upon earth, as betwixt man and wife;
where there are duo in carne vna, (...), one as it were in body and soul, as a
stock and a graffe make but one tree. Nor is there any image to represent this
sicut, but that which the Apostle speaks of, Ephesians. 5. 25.
sicut Christus Ecclesiam, as Christ loved his Church. So that I may truly say,
(...). He that never had experience of wife and children, never tasted what the
truest and natiuest kindness was.

"Foelices ter and amplius Horat.

"quos irrupta tenet copula.
Happy, thrice happy these that keep this bond without breach. Amicus and
socius commode conueniunt, sed Eccl. 40. 23
vtrumque antecessit vxor iuncta viro. A friend and a companion come together
at an opportunity, but above them both is a wife with her husband. And the
whole infelicity of marriage for the most part, that Iliade of evils which
accompanies some matches, is when this sicut is wanting; when men choose not
similes their likes, when matches are made of such as match not; for they
either marry by their eyes for beauty, or by their fingers ends for money, or by
their ears upon hearesay, taking their wives upon trust. And then in all such
matches, sicut is turned into secus, all goes amiss, planets are joined
together of unhappy conjunction, and malignant are the effects which issue from
them. But I must not rest here. I must seek my pattern from abroad, from
some of the parts of nature. where so fitly as amongst trees? Sicut Uitis.
A tree and a man or a woman how nearly do they symbolize? The root of the
tree, is the mouth to convey in nourishment; the pith or heart of the tree, is
the matrice, belly, or bowels; the knots, the nerves; the fissures of
concauities, the ^eines; the rind, the skin; the boughs, the arms and
limbs; the sprigges, the fingers; the leaves, the hair; the fruit, unless
the tree be barren, the children. There is yet a nearer affinity. A tree is a
type not only of man or woman, but of matrimony. Plants are distinguished, say
the writers of nature, by males and females, and have their plain distinctiue
notes of either sex: insomuch that if the leaves of the male and female be
joined together, cohaerebunt invicem and vix separari possint, you can hardly
put them asunder. Yea, if the wind do but carry the sent of the male to the
female, citius matur abitur eius fructus, the fruit thereof will sooner ripen.
We have then found out sicut, our sampler among trees. But what may that tree
be? Not a bramble; it is too sharp, too full of prickles: not an oak; it is
too sturdy. A woman was made of a bone, and but one bone, ne esset ossea, that
she might not be too bony: not a Cedar, it is too high. her place is a middle
and indifferent place, as we shall see hereafter. But what then? Vitis, quia
invitat ad vuas (my grammar tells me;) a vine, which has her name of
invitation to the fruit thereof.

Surely a vine is a noble plant, and an excellent emblem of a wife. First,
there is nothing more flexible and tractable: you may bow it which way you
will. So is it the wisdom of a woman matrimonij legibus obtemperare, to
conform her self to the rules of her husband. Secondly, nothing more tender
and sensible of a wrong: if you cut it, it will weep and bleed it self to
death. Thirdly, it yields as fair a shadow and arbor of leaves as any tree,
that there may be refrigeriu^, a refreshing to the wearied husband. When he
comes from his labor abroad, laetabitur sub vite sua, is his welcome home.
Fourthly, the smell of the vine in the time of her flourishing drives away
serpents and venomous creatures: and the cogitation of a man's own wife,
seasoned with the fear of God, is a supersedeas and bar to all the
temptations of Satan. The worst you can deem of it, is, that it is fragile
lignum, a frail kind of plant. Whereto serves the art of the husband man, I
mean the wisdom of the husband, but to amend that infirmity, according to the
rule of the Scripture, Let him awell 1. Pet. 3. 7.
with the wife as with the weaker vessel (...), according to knowledge and
discretion? Lastly, all this is fully recompensed with the liquor and blood of
the grape, the sweet nectar and comfort of life that flows from it.

Sicut vitis. Will you be pleased to observe by the way what a paradise and
second garden of the Lord the wisdom of God planteth in Economy, in the house
and family of a married man: wherein there are two trees, as in that ancient
garden, of principal note, the vine, and the olive in the words following,
that is, the wife and the children: the one as the tree of knowledge of good
and evil (for I confess both these are in marriage:) the other as the tree of
life, for a man lives in his children. Mortuus est and quasi non est mortuus,
quia reliquit sibi similem: he is dead and not dead, because of his image left
behind him.

The vine, and the olive? Mark them well, their fruit is both alimentum,
nutriment, (wine comfort his heart, and oil gives him a fresh and cheerful
countenance; he shall speak freely with his enemies in the gate that is
environed with children:) and medicamentum, physic; medicamentum Evangelicum,
the physic of that good Samaritan in the Gospel, wherein there was morsus
and mollities, a corrodent and Greg.
lenient, compunction and consolation; a (...), bitter-sweet. I mistake my
self, there is nothing bitter, but rather (...), an oxymel, acetum mulsum,
somewhat pleasant and somewhat tarte. At non est dimittendus favus propter
aculeum, Loose not the honey for the sting of the be, one said in this very
case of marriage.

But of all the properties of a vine, Abundance
I find my self restrained in my text to one alone, and that is fertility.
Sicut vitis abundans; Abounding, with what? not stemmes, nor leaves, nor
gemmes, nor the like; all that comes short. Therefore they render it truly,
fructifera, abounding with fruit, bearing in plenty fructum natiuitatis suae,
the fruit of her kind. The blessing then of the vine in my text, is the fruit
of the womb, children: Liberi not spurij, freely and honestly borne, not an
adulterous generation: semen Dei, a godly seed; vincula, pignora, bonds and
pledges, for ratification of love between man and woman. They are mentioned in
the next words to my text, filij in circuitu mensae, children round about the
table, satellitium filiorum a guard, a garland, a wreath of children about the
board, as angeli in circuitu throni Dei, a garland of Angels about the throne of
God, or stellae in circuitu poli arctici, a garland of stars about the
North Pole.

The end of marriage is proles, issue. Therefore is it called matrimonium,
because they who are married pater and matter esse meditantur, propose to
themselves to become father and mother. To which end serve the proverbs of the
Hebrews, Cui non sunt liberi, is non est aedificatus; and Cui non sunt liberi,
is reputatur tanquam mortuus: He is a man unbuilt, and accounted as dead, who
has not children. Alcibiades asked Socrates how he could endure the skolding
of Xantippe: Socrates asked him again, how he could endure glottientes
gallinas, the noise of his hens. Because, says Alcibiades, gallinae pariunt
mihi pullos, my hens hatch me chickins. Socrates answered, At Xantippe parit
mihi filios, Xantippe bears me* children, which makes amends for all.

It is actio naturae, perfectum opus viuentium, the action of nature, and
perfect work of all that has life, generare, procreare sibi simile, to bring
forth their like. To leave a seed behind, to preserve their species, to
continue their name and posterity upon earth, to represent and shadow in some
sort immortality, by deriuing life from the root into the branches, from the
father unto the son, and sons sons in longinquum, as David spoke, 2. Sam.
7. 19
from one generation to an other for long time to come.

But the time of abounding and fructifying is not yet come. The voice Cant. 2.
12.
of the turtle is not heard, nor the singing of birds. We must awayte the
spring season. Crescite and multiplicamini, is a blessing from him alone that
has the key of the womb, and opens where none can shut, shuts where non
can open. Mean time we sing the song of the Vine: many a cheerful song may
we sing hereafter of the olive branches. Many a welcome messenger be blessed
from God and man, for bringing us tidings, a child is borne. And as now the
matter and ditty of our song is, vinea facta est in cornu filio olei, that is
to say, in colle pingui, our Esa. 5. 1.
vine is planted in a fat and fruitful soil, husbanded and dressed by the hand
of God and man, so may the matter and ditty of our song hereafter be; This
Psalm was the Psalm for the day, being the ninth day of the month, and for
that morning service, wherein our Churches received the first publication of
news. Psalm. 45. 6.
Nati sunt tibi filij quos constituas principes super omnem terram, children
are borne unto thee whom thou may make princes over all lands. God grant the
branches may be suitable to the vine: she comes from a princely stock,
majesty and sovereignty be ever their portion.

By the sides of thine house. How shall our vine abound, or prosper at all
without a stay? Her manner is to grow up by an help. Vae soli, quoniam si
ceciderit, non habet sustentantem se. It is the weakest of all plants, and
must have somewhat to sustain it. Therefore the prime care of the husbandman
is, when his vine is nubilis of ripeness and grows for marriage, (as the
Poet describes it,

"Adulta vitium propagine Horat.

"altas maritat populos)
to marry her to a popler, or elm, or some other tree. Or in steed thereof he
provides maceriam a wall, or pergulam a frame, or capreolos shores to bear it
up. Solitude and celibate, a single monasticke life agrees not to it.

The first thing then required, is, that it must be vitis pergulana or
characata, a vine by some stay. But what stay? It follows in order; Latera
domus, the sides of the house. Where there is a duplex vui, a double site or
position. First, the house, secondly the sides of the house.

The first position of a vine must 1 Domus.
be by an house, not an hedge; the field, the high way, the market place, the
street is no place for this vine. You remember Thamar and Dina; the one sits
by the high-way-side, the other gaddeth in the field, both miscarry.

The station, kingdom, commonwealth of a woman is the house. She is (...),
mistress of the house; vbitu Caius, ego Caia, the husband master, the wife
mistress. Therefore Phidias carved Venus treading upon a tortuis, which is
ever under her shell. The Tortuis and the Snaile are the proper hieroglyphics
of a good huswife, ever bearing her house upon her back.

Provided always, that the house Domus tua.
be domus tua, her husbands house; not the house of any other. Audi Psalm. 45.
10.
filia etc. Hearken o daughter, incline thine ear, forget thy people and thy
fathers house. Thus Sarah ( whose daughters ye 1. Pet. 3. 6.
are if you do well) followed Abraham from Vr to Gerar; Rebecca Isaac from
Mesopotamia to Canaan; Sephorah Moses, and Mary (the mother of our blessed
Savior) Joseph, both of them into Egypt. It skilleth not where the house be,
so it be domus tua, the husbands house. She that is married by a significant
word of art, ducitur, is carried and transported to an other habitation. And
albeit the glory and splendour of the moon be in the furthest distance from the
sun* yet the greatest glory and grace of a woman, is when she is nearest to
her husband. He is velamen oculorum, the veil of her Genesis 20. 16.
eyes, she is not to look to the right hand nor to the left, but forth-right
upon her husband.

The second vbi or situation of this 2 Latera domus.
vine is the sides of the house. We have found already that the vine is
sustentaculum some kind of stay and assistance to the house; 2. vmbraculum, an
arbor or shade unto it; now 3. it is propugnaculum, being spread upon the
sides of the house, a fense against the violence of the weather. Vbi non Eccl.
36. 25.
est sepes, diripitur praedium, where no hedge is, there the possession is
spoiled. I am sure above all the rest, it is 4. ornamentum a beauty to the
house, so you bestow it in the right place. And that is in lateribus, in the
sides, not in fastigio the top, (the woman must not (...), bear rule; Mulier
si primatum 1. Tim. 2. 12
habeat, contraria est viro suo:) not in pauimento, the floor of the house:
Eccl. 25. 30
the one is to high, the other to low, but in a middle and equal place betwixt
both, that is, in lateribus, deuexis, declinationibus, the sides or descents of
the house. The son of Sirach assigns her her right place, when she stands
vt lucerna splendens super candelabrum Eccl. 26. 17
sanctum, as a bright candle upon an holy candlestick. Now no man sets his
candle upon the top of his house; no man upon the ground, but upon the table,
or the like convenient room. So must the place of the wife be, honest and
honorable befitting her condition.

If you call to mind, you shall find that the place of the woman from her
first creation was the sides of the house. 1
First you will not deny unto me, but that she was framed in the house. She
was opus domesticum not peregrinum, a work done at home not abroad. Not as the
temple of Solomon was built; the materials whereof were fitted and prepared a
far of. The woman was built and fashioned in the house of her husband, out of
his very essence and composition; and is some part of him. Secondly, when she 2
was thus made, she became not one of his moueables, to be parted and removed
from him; but was fixed to her house, adhaerebit vir vxori, the house and the
vine must not be sundered. Thirdly, God so ordered the matter 3
betwixt them, that this adhaesion and agglutination of one to the other should
be perpetual. For by taking a bone from the man (who was nimium osseus,
exceeded and was somewhat monstrous by one bone too much,) to strengthen the
woman, and by putting flesh in steed thereof to mollify the man, he made a
sweet complexion and temper betwixt them, like harmony in music, for their
amiable cohabitation. Fourthly, that bone 4
which God took from the man, was from out the midst of him. As Christ wrought
salvation in medio terrae, so God made the woman e medio viri, out of the very
midst of man. The species of the bone is expressed to be costa a rib, a bone of
the side, not of the head, a woman is not domina the ruler; nor of any anterior
part, she is not praelata preferred before the man; not a bone of the foot,
she is not serua, an handmaid; nor of any hinder part, she is not post-posita,
set behind the man; but a bone of the side, of a middle and indifferent part,
to show that she is socia a companion to the husband. For qui iunguntur
lateribus, socij sunt, they that walk side to side, and cheek to cheek,
walk as companions. Fifthly, I mightadde, a bone 5
from under the arm, to put the man in remembrance of protection and defense
to the woman. Sixthly, a bone not 6
far from his heart, to put him in mind of dilection and love to the woman.
Lastly, a bone from the left side, to 7
put the woman in mind that by reason of her frailty and infirmity she
stands in need of both the one and the other, from her husband.

To conclude my discourse; if these things be duly examined, when man takes a
woman to wife, reparat latus suum, what does he else, but remember the maime
that was sometimes made in his side, and desires to repair it? repetit costam
suam, he requires and fetches back the rib that was taken from him. And when
the woman takes an husband, she is but joined again to that side from which
she was first taken. Meanewhile, if aches, or stiches, or plewrisies, or other
the like maladies befall the man by reason of his side; let him remember they
came from himself, thence they had their beginning, and therefore with the
more patience he ought to endure them.

We have at length brought and Application.
fastened our vine to the sides of her house. Viderunt oculi nostri, inviderunt
alieni, Our eyes have seen it done, though the eyes of many others have
maligned the doing; and we bless those eyes of ours, that have so long sitten
and waited in the tabernacles of our heads, as to do us so acceptable a
service. Let the day wherein it was done, be light and not darkness; let God
re guard it from above, and the light of his gracious countenance shine ever
upon it. All the parts of our Land (almost of Christendom) have been full of
rumors; the hearts of all the faithful in the Land full of horror and
mistrust; I am sure the hearts of the Jesuits are full of malice, the heads of
the Jesuits full of devise, the hands of the Jesuits full of practice, the
books of the Jesuits full of principles and bloody persuasions: yea, the
tongue and actions of the Jesuits not void of predictions and
prognostications. But thrice blessed be the name of our gracious God, our vine
is placed by the sides of her house, she is where she should be, vitis
pergulana, a vine upon her frame.

A vine, a most generous vine, of noble condition, the wine that flows from
her gladdeth the heart both of God and man: borne of a regal and religious
Iud. 9. 13.
stem; -- Deus est in vtreque parente. She grew in vinea pacifici, Cant. 8.
11.
in the vineyard of our Solomon: a branch of that true vine, Ioh. 15. 1.
planted and dressed by him that is there the true husbandman, comforted with the
sun and rain of his principal benedictions both from heaven and earth, and
fit to be transplanted hereafter in the fullness of her days into the
paradise of his glorious kingdom.

The sides of the house not unanswerable to the vine. It is not domus
lateritia, but marmorea; not an house but a palace, a princes house; not a
palace, but a sanctuary for piety and religion, a Gods house. So as our vine
is not only vitis pergulana a vine upon a frame or vitis parietaria a vine upon
a wall, but vitis Palatina, a vine ordained by God to grow up by the sides of
an illustrious Palatine.

The Lord uphold for ever and keep from dilapidation and decay these sides of
the house, and make them as an unvanquishable fort against the impressions and
assaults of all adversary forces, that it never be heard of upon the earth,
Posuerunt eam in ruinam and aceruum lapidum, they have laid this house in a
ruin and an heap of stones; as impregnable as the tower of David, Cuius
fundamenta in montibus sanctis, the foundations whereof are upon the two
mountains of the everlasting might and mercy of God. Salvation be for ever the
walls, and praise the Es. 60. 18.
gates unto this house. I am sure it is founded upon the rock, the true faith
and profession of the saving blood of Christ; the sands of the doctrines of
men, and quagmires and bogges of Romish superstition this house was never
acquainted with. Never then may the winds and tempests of foreign
persequutions infest, never the rain and floods of domestical dissension
disquiet this house, never may the gates of hell it self, neither that
nethermost of the devil and his angels, neither this hell upon earth, the
practices and complots of Jesuits and their confederates prevail against it.

And the Lord likewise bless the vine by the sides of this house; the goodwill
of him that dwelt in the bush ever Deu. 33. 16
dwell in this vine, that the sun do not burn her by day, nor the moon by
night; that she be not beaten with the wether of adversity, nor blasted with
the breath of sickness, nor nipt with the frost of an untimely death: that she
may take root in an honorable people, Eccl. 24. 14.
a portion of the Lords inheritance, and be set up as a Cedar in Libanus, as a
Cypress upon the mountains of Hermon, as a Palm Tree in Cades, and as a
rose-tree in Jericho; and as a terebinth stretch forth her branches, and those
branches may be the branches of honor and grace. How do the words of the 80.
Psalm from the 8. verse fit my purpose throughout? Vineam de Aegypto
transtulisti etc. Thou art remoouing a vine out of England. All the blessings
of God pronounced upon that vine, fall upon the head of this. And the blessing
upon Sara be added unto them, that she may be the mother of nations, Genesis 17.
16.
and kings of the people may come of her: and the blessing upon Rebecca make up
the measure, Grow into thousand thousands, Genesis 24. 60.
and thy seed possess the gate of thine enemies. And finally the Lord bless
the root, (both the one and the other) that bare this vine, indeed the root
that bears us all, whereof we say daily, Under his shadow we shall be safe.
The flower of Iesse cause them long to flourish and prosper amongst us. O my
beloved brethren, if ever there were a time of prayers and supplications for
our selves, for all men, especially for kings, if ever for kings, especially
for kings that adore not the beast, especially that king that has angered and
provoked the beast by fighting against him, especially that beast that is
singularis fera, the beast of Psalm. 80. 13.
beasts, the wild boar of the forest, wilder then the wilderness it self,
that will not be held nor emparked within any laws or limits of God or man,
that breaks forth into an unbounded sovereignty and dominion over all the
princes and nations of the earth: these are they, Exurge Deus iudica Psalm. 74.
22.
caussam tuam, Arise o Lord and avenge thine own cause. Give not the soul of
thy turtle-doue unto the multitude of thine enemies, nor into the hands of
this beast. Think upon thy covenant, and forget not the voice of thine
enemies. The earth is full of darkness and of cruel habitations: and the
presumption of them that hate thee, increases daily more and more. Take us
these foxes, these little foxes that destroy this vine. Priests, I mean, and
their proselytes, legions of recusants within this kingdom, neglect them not.
They dig at the very root of sovereignty and regality, the allegiance of your
subjects: they rob you of the hearts of your people. The more proselytes to
Rome, the more aliants from England. The gain of the Pope, is the loss of the
King. Recusants of our Churches for the present, hereafter they will prove
recusants of their sovereign; Nolumus hunc regnare super nos. Nay, recusants
now in their wane, when their strength is not fully ripened; they will prove
rebellants in their full moon. Nae ista vobis mansuetudo and patientia, si
illi arma ceperint, in miseriam vertet. But whatsoever be done with the foxes,
yet from the teeth of that efferous beast, from the tuske of the wild bore,
from the sucking and drawing of Romish horse-leaches, from the bloodthirsty
dropsy of Antichrist and his adherents, from the cursed Assasinates of
Jesuits and their dark disciples, from the peremptory knife of Popish, worse
then paganish, pruners, o thou that art the root and generation of David
preserve our root and all his generation, together with his most glorious
stem. And the vine that is now parting from them, and the sweet olive
branch, that shoots up under them, the eye of thy fatherly providence ever
watch over them. Be they all as dear unto thee as the apple of thine own eye;
as near as the ring that the bride wears upon her finger: and as thou have
married this vine, so marry them all unto thy self in everlasting faithfulness
and compassion. Let all the miscreants, reprobates, Rauaillacs upon the face of
the earth receive their prohibition and charge from thy mouth, Touch not mine
anointed ones, and do my chosen no harm. And let all that hear me this day
(thousands and millions that hear me not do no less) call heaven and earth
to witness, that from the ground of their hearts, in singlenes and vprightnes
of soul, they say and redouble in the ears of God and his holy Angels, Amen,

Amen.

