A SERMON OF PVBLICKE THANKSGIVING for the happy recovery of his MAJESTY
from his late dangerous sickness: Preached at PAVLS-Crosse the 11. of April,
1619. BY The B. of LONDON.

Published by commandment.

LONDON, Printed for THOMAS ADAMS. 1619.

ESAIAS 38. 17. Behold, in my peace I had great bitterness; but thou have, in
love to my soul, delivered it from the pit of corruption: for, thou have cast
all my sins behind thy back.
WHen our SAVIOVR rode into Jerusalem, accompanied with such multitudes of
people, some vnclothing the trees, others their backs, to spread in his way,
all of them shouting up to heaven, with Hosanna, Math. 21.
and Benedictus; it is said in the story, that all the City was moved, and it
gave them occasion to ask, (...), who is this? The representation of such a
person, with such a train, in such a fashion, and with such a dittie, made
them conceive it was some rare and unusual thing.

My message this day is something out of course, and might well require a
preface, (I am sure, Hosanna, and Benedictus, will be the sum of it,) besides
a presence not ordinary, of the heads and corners of the people, and a face of
Solemnity, such as reserueth it self only for festiuals. I think there is
none so insensible, that is not moved hereat, and will ask, (at least) to
himself, (...); Ier. 32.
what means this? Creauit Dominus nouum super terra^: Surely the Lord has
created some new work in the Land, that has produced this new meeting.

The very exhibition of these dumb shows, though they have neither language
nor speech, without the help of the tongue, were sufficient preface.

And yet I have a preface in my text. Ecce.
Ecce, behold, stands at your doors, I mean the ears of your flesh, to
lift up their heads and hatches, I say not, that the King of glory, who is the
King of kings, but yet that a glorious King, and his gracious confession may
enter into your hearts.

It is placed at the gates of my text, and a thousand others in this book, as
Porters at the gates of great men's houses: Strangers and Wanderers, and
Passengers, and Circumforaneos, idle Companions that stand to gaze, they keep
out; admit none but friends and bidden ghests, Math. 22.
such as are worthy to come in, and bring their garment with them; so is the
office of Ecce here.

Those who come to these sacred assemblies, with unsanctified ears and
spirits, only ad augendam turbam, Senec.
to make up number, it repelleth with indignation and disdain, as the Crier in
their gentile sacrifices repelled profane persons, -- (...). Away, away
profane persons; but such as shall lend their ears, and bend their
intentions, and lay up in their hearts, with Marie, that they may bring forth
of their treasuries for their use, with the Scribe; these, and none others it
inuiteth, and pulls after it, as with the cords and cables of the holy Ghost,
as that chain that was tied to the tongue of Mercury, and fastened to the
ears of the people, drew his Auditors. Behold.

And (me thinks,) it is somewhat like the King that uttered it; for the King
is no more then another man, mole, in bulk of body; virtute, in power, he is
more. We say, that a King has long hands, he may sit in Jerusalem, and reach
to the ends of his kingdom; as the body of the Sun is in his sphaere alone,
but his beams upon the earth: and the blaze of a Comet is much farther
extended then the star it self goes: so, though the body of Ecce, be but in
the frontispice, and at the threshold of my text, yet does the hand, the
beams, the blaze, the virtue, and strength of it go into every part. For,
whether you consider his sickness, which he styleth bitterness; and the time
of that sickness, in peace, when he least looked for it; or, whether his
recovery, Eruisti animam meam, and the motive to that recovery, in love to my
soul, perhaps when he least deserved it; or, whether the cause of that
sickness, Sins, and the full remission of those sins, Proiecisti
posttergum, when he did not so much as crave it; Ecce, imparteth it self to
them all alike.

I fell upon the mention of a King. I will set one Ecce more upon the person
from whom this speech came: It was the speech of Hezekiah the King: a great and
magnificent King, both at home and abroad; a virtuous and religious King, which
is the pure gold in the Crown of a King, the rest is but dross; a King of the
holy land, so was not Merodach Baladan in the head of the next Chapter, for he
was the King of Babylon. It will be the more grateful for the authors sake.

Said I, a speech? it is more: Scriptura Hezekiae Regis, the 9. verse, the
writing of Hezekiah the King: the labor, not of his tongue, but of his pen; he
did not fundere, but fingere, pour it forth at adventures, but frame it upon
advice. I put a great difference betwixt speech, and writing. Speech has
wings, volat and auolat, it flies and dies; so does not writing: you must
seek for a word, in aure, in the ear of him that received it, where it has
but slender footing; or in aere, in the air, where it perishes with the
sound. If you will seek for a writing, you shall find it in aere, or in
marmore, in plates of brass, or in tables of stone, where it may be a monument
to after ages: It suruiueth the author, and does good to the living when the
author is gone. In this sense it is true, Surgunt ex mortuis, Luke 16.
they arise from the dead, by whom the succeeding posterity is instructed and
bettered; so said he of his writings, Posterorum negotium ago, Senec.
I provide for the times to come.

Yet there is more: for it is the writing of a King, I say not before his
death, (from which he was newly delivered, as in a parable of the resurrection,
Heb. 11.) but instantly upon that time, wherein he was near to dying: and then
are the words of a man most grateful, vt esse Phoebi dulcius humen solet, iam
iam cadentis, as the light of the Sun, most pleasant about his going down. But
that which is most of all; it is written with the point of a diamond, to
remain for eternity, and is a part of the evidences and muniments of the
Church, laid up amongst her sacred Records, for a memorial of his
thankfulness, offered, and consecrated to God upon that deliverance. Plin. 2.
Beati, quibus, deorum munere, datum est facere scribe^da, aut scribere
legenda: Happy are they, whom God has enabled, either to do things worthy to
be written, or to write things worthy to be read: Hezekiah did both.

This is a part of his writing; the composition whereof is of sundry and
contrary parts: To give you a summary view of all the materials therein, and
their natural consequence:

First, you have Peace, that leads to all Peace had an ill neighbor that
troubled it, Sin, in the hindmost part of bitterness: bitterness added to
bitterness.

Bitterness thus accumulated, must needs have brought to the pit, and the pit,
in the corruption, or consumption.

But then comes the other Hemisphaere of comfort and light; wherein you have,
first, the love and good pleasure of God: secondly, Redemption from the pit of
corruption, as Remission of sins, as mourners go first, like the captives in
their ancient Triumphs; sin, and sickness, and the pit, and corruption; then
come the minstrels and singers, I mean the mercies of God, as in a triumphant
chariot, curing both the body from sickness, and the soul from sins.

The three parts and rooms of my text wherein this whole matter is lodged and
disposed, Division.
are as clearly distinguished, as the three tabernacles of Peter, Matthew. 17.

The first is, In my peace I had great bitterness.

The second, But thou in love to my soul, have delivered it from the pit of
corruption.

The third, For thou have cast all my sins behind thy back.

Let these parts be, as those three tabernacles.

Me thinks I see Moses in the first, of a fearful visage that has need to
be veiled, Bitterness, Bitterness.

Elias in the second, when he is raising the widows son at Zareptha, 1. Reg.
17. Thou have delivered my soul from the pit.

CHRIST in the third, full of grace and truth, casting my sins behind his
back.

Or, if you please, let my text be as the Arc of testimony, wherein there
were kept for store, the tables of the Law, the pot of Manna, and Aarons rod,
Heb. 9. They conceit it well that the Arc is the Church; the Tables, the
word; the Manna, the Sacraments; and the Rod, the discipline.

I am sure in the Arc of my text, there is first a rod, of bitterness,
bitterness; and secondly, the manna of deliverance from the consuming pit; and
thirdly; the tables, not of the Law, but of the Gospel; not of the Old, but
the New covenant; of the Law, not of facts, but of faith; the tender mercies of
God, in absoluing from sin.

In three words, Hezekiah is sick, in the first tabernacle: sound, in the
second, sanus, or sanabilis, onward to his health, as touching his body: safe,
and secure in the third, as concerning his soul. And in every of these three
are two remarkable things.

In the first, 1. sickness with the quality, bitterness; extremity and degree,
bitterness, bitterness. 2. the time and advantage that the sickness took,
In my peace.



In the second 1. deliverance, Eruisti animam meam. 2. the motive that induced
God, thou in thy love, etc.


In the third, 1. the cause of the sickness, Sins. 2. the remove of that
cause, Thou have cast, etc.


rod, Amaritudo amaritudo.
his sickness: In my peace I had great bitterness.

The kind of this sickness is not mentioned till the 21 verse, there it is
called vlcus, a botch; it is thought to have been a plague sore, I dispute it
not, I am sure it was somewhat near; I will but drink of the brook in my
way, and give you a short note. We have known by bitter, bitter experience,
what a plague is; but God took a plaster of figs, of his sweet mercies in
Christ, well-nigh fifteen years sithence; and applied to the botch, and
healed the sores of this land: in the virtue and strength whereof, we have
walked to this present day: and we for the figs of his mercies have returned
him the thistles of our sins, the clusters of Sodom, and the wine of
Dragons; and yet, Ecce in pace, we heal our hurts with sweet words, crying,
peace, peace, all is well, and so shall be; To morrow shall be as this day, and
much better, and this year as the last, and freer.

Deceive not your selves: you have a great and populous City, sown with the
seed of man, as the Prophet speaks; I may say, with the seed, rather the
weed, of building. I say not, that your City may go out at your gates; surely,
it may go out at your Suburbs; the hemme of your garment is more then the
garment it self: the lop, and burden of the tree, more then the stem can
bear, and threatens the ruin of the whole body. To speak plainly, the
regions are white and dry to the harvest; there is matter enough within, in
respect of your sin; without, in respect of your building, for a pestilence
to work upon, unless, as the antidote of the blessed goodness of God, then
cured, so the preservative of his saving grace, now keep you from it. I go on.

Whatsoever were the species, manifest it is what the quality of the sickness
was, bitterness; what the quantity, bitterness, bitterness; some sharp and
wringing disease; as when the Prophet cried out, Ier. 4.
My belly, My belly; the very doubling of the word expressed what his pain
was.

We are always ill, when we are in our best health; August. in Psalm. 102.
Longum languorem trahimus; we live in a long and languishing sickness; our
weariness after labor and travel is a sickness, and sitting, or lying is
physic to cure it: sitting, and lying is a sickness, (we cannot continue
therein;) rising, and walking is the cure of it: hunger, and thirst is
sickness; eating, and drinking is the help to that: Eating, and drinking
sickness; fasting, and abstinencie physic to it. Gregor.
Quotidianus defectus quid aliud est quam prolixitas mortis? Our daily decay in
nature, what is it else, but a lengthning of death? I will say briefly,
triplici morbo laboramus, principio, medio, and fine; We are sick of a
threefold sickness, our beginning, midst, and ending: As Saint Augustine told
the Manichees, of their idle and impious writings; principium truncum, medium
putridum, finis ruinosus; their beginning was naught, their proceeding naught,
their ending naught; So is it with us; Ingressus flebilis, progressus debilis,
egressus horribilis, a mournful nativity, woeful life, dreadful death.

Morbi, citatio ad mortem; sickness is a summons to death: he that is least
sick, may, and in the end must die. Death has ever her arrow in her bow,
though in the prime ages of the world she was sometimes nine hundred years
before she sped, yet now she hitteth quickly; and when God says, shoot, she
shoots; and so long as God says, spare, she spares. For what is thy life?
Breue suspirium, a short panting. Can thou measure the blast of wind? (said
the Angel to Esdras;) can thou measure (say I) the blast of thine own
wind? the breath within thy nostrels? spiras, exspiras, now thou art
breathing, anon thy breath is gone. It deals with the arc of thy body, as
the dove with the Arc of Noah, which goes forth, and comes in, and goes
forth, and never comes back again. So does thy breath.

But, he that is sick of a sickness indeed, a sickness that is mali moris,
as the Physicians speak, such as this sickness of Hezekiah was, bitterness,
bitterness, has but a short reckoning to make to the hour of his dying. For
it fares with the body of man, as with a vessel of wine in a frugall house;
being kept for our selves, and our friends which drink moderately, it is long
in drawing; but, if sponges, Spongiae, Infundibula, Amphorae.
and tunnels, and barrels come to it, such as are mighty to drink, and strong
to pour in, they will spend that in a day, which would have served a long
time. So may the thread of my life be long in spinning, to the fortieth, or
fiftieth year thereof; it may be, ad terminum constitutum, Job 14. unto mine
old age, (for that is the bounder of nature, and, maledictus qui transfert
terminos, Deuteronomy. 27. that thinks, Senec.
being old, to live long; Huic vni aetati non interceditur, there is no
dispensation for this age:) but if such quaffers shall come, as a (...), a
burning fever, or the like malignant diseases, that drink up humidu natural,
all the moisture in my body at once, and dry it up like an harth, or like a
bottle hung up in the smoke; that is done in an hour, a moment, which had not
else been done in many years to come.

Now, but in a word consider the person that is sick; Mihi amar
it is Hezekiah the King.

If any person in the earth be capable of that style, Dan. 3.
Viue in aeternum, live for ever, it is a King. What wants a King, of all the
beasts of the field, or fowls of the air, or fishes of the sea, what either
nature can afford, or Art condite, to the diet of his body, comfort of his
heart, refreshing of his spirits? It seems, by a phrase used by the holy
Ghost, that a King wants nothing. Nabal feasteth like a King, 1. Sam. 25.
Araunah offers to David like a King, 2. Sam. 24. the Corinthians reign like
Kings, 1. Cor. 4. and yet is Hezekiah the King sick vsque ad mortem, verse. 1.
even unto death, that is, bitterly, bitterly: death had stretched forth her
hand against him, as Jeroboam against the Prophet, to have smitten him, 1. Reg.
13. but that the Lord withered it. What is the reason? Sum quidem and ego
mortalis homo, 7. Sap. for I my self (says the King) am also a mortal man.

There is no difference in nature betwixt a King and a meaner person. Quintil.
Interuallis distinguimur, exitu aequamur; we differ in condition, agree in
dissolution. When Diogenes was poring amongst dead men's bones, Alexander asked
him what he did there? he answered, I seek the bones of Philip thy father,
Ossa patris tui Philippi regis Maced. quaero.
King of Macedon, but cannot find them. I may well apply the words of the
Psalm to them, Constitue Domine legislatorem super eos, Psalm. 9.
sciant se esse homines; Set thou o Lord, a Lawgiver, or Ruler over them, that
they may know they are but men. They give laws to the earth; and death to
them, and her law is an even and equal law, to King and people all alike.

It is a problem worthy the inquiring; Homo est animal rationale, mortal.
since other creatures are subject to death no less then man, why Mortale is
placed in the definition of man alone. It is a parallel to this, (and one
answer may serve to both) which the Prophet has, Psalm 82. I have said you
are gods, but ye shall die like men. Why like men rather then other creatures?
I will not give that eminent and conspicuous reason, that when beasts die, by
reason that their souls arise from the matter of their flesh, they die, and
die thoroughly; Moriuntur permoriuntur.
so is it not with man, but first he dies, and ends not there, but after
death, Judgment, Hebrews 9.

I should rather say, that beasts, for the more part, live out their time
determinate by nature, til nature be annihilated, unless violence and
casuality come between: the Elephant lives longer then the Heart, the Heart
then the Lion, the Lion then the Horse, the Horse then the Dog; all to their
full age, unless they be forced out of life: but man dies in his infancy,
and oftener in this then any other age; no sooner saluteth the light of heaven,
but he bids farewell to it; and that which is more, death enters the very
secrets of nature, the vault of the womb, and with her Lynces eyes finds out
the ways which the Eagle and Kite never found out, and kills the babe in the
womb before it comes forth.

You have heard of the sickness: 2. In pace.
Add thereunto the time that his sickness watched; Senec in Agam.
In my peace. Victor timere quid potest? (said he in the Tragedy) and it is
answered with a breath, Quod non timet.

Hezekiah had newly escaped from the jaws of a fearful King, 2. Reg* 18 and
19.
one, that vaunted himself, that with the soles of his feet he had dried up
the rivers of the earth, (and thought (like Leuiathan) to have drunk up him,
and his kingdom) who asked in the pride of his heart, where the Kings of
Arphad, and Hemah, and Zepharuaim were; and, Hezekiah, Let not thy God deceive
thee, in whom thou trustest; and he would make the people to eat their dung,
and drink their water.

Now he is fallen afresh into the hands of the King of fears, Rex terrorum,
terror Regum.
as Job calls him, Job 18. and fear of Kings; who is, Rex super omnes filios
superbiae, Job 41. who may say with much more confidence, then ever Zenacherib
did, Where ever my foot treads, I dry up the rivers; rivers of blood in the
veins, and of milk in the breasts, and of marrow in the bones; and ask for
the Kings, of Arphad, and Hemah, and Zepharuaim, and Zenacherib himself; and
admonish the Kings of the earth, Let not your gods, your Idols of greatness,
and glory, and majesty, deceive you, wherein you trust; and cause them to
eat the dust of the ground, and that the slime of the pit shall be sweet to
them. Ecce, cum dixerint pax, pax, Behold, when men shall cry peace, peace,
sudden destruction shall come upon them. I will use the words of the Prophet,
1. Reg. 14. I will do it in hac die, and in tempore hoc, at that day, and at
that time; Quid? etiam nunc: what? yea, at this very instant; Ecce, in pace, at
this very instant of time, when Hezekiah thought he had clipped the wings of
peace, that it should never fly away again; when strangers from abroad
saluted him, Estne pax frater? is all well? when he did not much less, then
say to his soul, Anima quiesce, Soul take thine ease, Esaias 28.
flagellum transijt, non veniet, the scourge is past, and shall never come
again. Did he then think of a Iebusite in the Land, that should be a thorn
in his eyes, and a prick in his side? of a bosom enemy? a war within his
bones? an army of trouble and temptation in his own bowels? When a foreign
enemy is discovered, the Beacons are fired, and an Ecce is given to the
Country round about. Here is a domesticke, intestine enemy, without Beacon, or
any admonition at all; but whilst he sits in the arms of peace, as Sampson
in the lap of Delilah, a sudden alarm is heard, Up Sampson, the Philistines
are upon thee; Up Hezekiah, bitterness, bitterness is upon thee. This deserves
the Ecce; for bitterness in the time of war is no news, Know thou not that
it will be bitterness in the later end? (Abner to Ioab 2. Sam. 2.) but
bitterness, and doubled bitterness in the midst of peace, this is strange.

An image, a glass, a sea of glass, that all the people of the earth may
stand upon the shore of my text, and see the face of their frail and
unconstant condition. A man, and the best of men, a King, and the best of
Kings; (I speak not of Balthazar, but as he in the midst of his cups, so this)
in the midst of his comforts, seized and surprised at unawares with a grievous
disease that added bitterness unto bitterness; and cut not off the lap of his
coat, (that is) pinched him in a finger or joint, but assaulted the life, in
the inmost and strongest fort it had, and had it in her clutches, to bring it
to the very pit.

One marvelled that men were so hardy to adventure to Seas: why? Cum multi
pereant in aquis, since many miscarried in the waters: He that answered him,
marvelled as much how he durst go to bed, since many die in their beds. Had he
nothing to wonder at but the Sea? I marvel he feared not his own flesh, and
that he durst trust himself with his own body, I am sure, it is as fluide as
the Sea. Liquescimus, we melt, we thaw daily: our life goes away per
stillicidia, as it were by droppings. 2. Sam. 14.
Omnes nos velut aquae dilabimur, we all glide away like water that is spilt,
and cannot be gathered up again. Here he shall find tempests, and gusts, and
surges, and waves, and rocks, and quicksands, and gulfes, and sea monsters,
no less then at Sea.

I wonder that men dare live in such flesh, tam putri, and ruinosa domo, so
rotten and ruinous an house; where, not only the gates, posternes, and
windows, but every little creuis and chinke lets in death: Look how many
members and parcels of the body, so many vessels of sicknesses, receptacles and
harbors of death. Every Apoplexy in the head; Swelling in the ear; Bleeding
at the nose; Canker in the mouth; Squinancy in the throat; Pleurisy in the
side; Stone in the kidney; Cholicke in the belly; may be a means to death.

I marvel again why he comes to his table, to eat and drink there, why?
Cum multi pereant in mensa, since many die at their Tables: Did Tarquinius
Priscus think, that the bone of a fish going cross his throat, should have
choked him? or Sophocles, and Anacreon, that they should have died of a raysin
stone? or Fabius a Senator, that an hair in a draught of milk should have
been his end? or Ruffinus the Consul, that in kembing his head, the tooth of
his Comb entering the flesh, should have been his deaths wound? or Lucia the
daughter of Aurelius, that her Child which she bare in her arms, thrusting a
needle into her breast, should have shortened her days? I could be infinite: So
long as there shall be a man in the world, and mortality, casualtie,
corruption to accompany that man; there shall be occasion for this ecce;
behold in my peace; when I was most secure: to the stupor, and terror of all
those that trust too much to their peace.

It is a singular part of the gracious providence of God upon us, to hide the
hour of our deaths; as Isaac spoke to his son, Genesis 27. Vides quod
senuerim, and ignorem diem mortis meae: Thou see I am old, and yet
notwithstanding, I know not the day of my death: Semper incognitus, vt sit
semper suspectus; that being always unknown, we might always have it in
suspicion: and make that use of our ignorance, that Cassian advises, Omnis
dies, velut vltimus ordinandus est; to dispose of every day, as if it were our
last day. Certain it is, Gregor.
Supremus vitae dies, supremus mundi dies; the last day of my life, is the last
day of the world to me; for qualis hinc quisque egreditur, talis in iudicio
repraesentabitur; such as I am at my death, such shall I be at my judgment. And
as certain again, that it is the greatest work in the world, to die, to
exchange life with death; and the best, to die well; as Anacharsis, being
asked, which was the best ship? That (said he) which is safely arrived. Add
unto these the rule of Saint Angustine, Non potest male mori, qui been vixerit;
and on the otherside; vix been moritur, qui male vixit; He cannot die ill, that
has lived well; and scarcely dies well, that has lived ill. These things
conferred; be ye ready prepared for that day; Exodus 19.
Estote parati in diem tertium; that it may find you in pace, in the peace of
God, and of a good conscience, which passes all understanding.

I told you before, you had three sicknesses, I tell you now, you have but
three days of your lives: the one of your coming into the world; the other, of
your stay; the last of your going out.

Be ready against the third day, the day of your going forth; which you cannot
well be, except you begin to provide on the first, and the second; lest that
should betide you which is bemoned in my text, Ecce, in pace, amaritudo,
amaritudo; Behold, when we dreampt of peace, we awaked to extremity of
bitterness: and being taken in an evil time, you complain, as in that
mimesis of Saint Chrysostom, Valete amici, farewell friends, I must go an
unknown journey, by ways unknown, into Countries far remote: Vbi quale
diuersorium habiturus sum, angelorum an daemonum, ignoro: where what lodging I
shall find, amongst Angels, or Devils, I know not.

Et tu, 2. Part.
complexus amore, eruisti, etc. I am now come to the second Tabernacle of my
text: wherein you have Elias, and the manna I spoke of. It contains two
things: first, the redemption: Eruisti, secondly, the reason or motive,
Complexus amore.

The recovery so much the sweeter, 1. Redemption.
by how much the danger the greater: Transisse de morte ad vitam, Bern.
vitae gratiam duplicat, to pass from death to life is double life: So is the
light more grateful to him that was in the power of darkness; and assurance,
to him that despaired of assurance.

There was danger enough in the former clause, for there it was bitterness,
bitterness, that is, as the Apostle calls it, Act. 8. fell amaritudinis, the
very gall of bitterness: which imports a disease, pessimi generis, of the
worst sort, and in the paroxysme, and very height of it; but now, you have it
amplified by three circumstances more:

First, 1. Ab obiecto.
from the object; it strikes not at a bough, no defluxion in the eye, nor
mutilation of an hand, etc. but is securis ad radicem, the axe laid to the
root, to hew down life it self. Eruisti animam.

Secondly, 2. Atermino.
from the term, or, extent: for it is not the life infested, annoyed,
disquieted alone; but lifted, and heaued at, to be thrown into the pit:
Eruisti e fouea.

Thirdly, 3. Abattributo.
from the attribute of that pit, for it is not fouea refugij, or refrigerij; a
pit of repose or comfort, such as Elias went into, and David, and the Prophets
that Obadiah hid, and the Saints that the world was not worthy of, Hebr. 11.
but fouea corruptionis, consumptionis, putredinis, a pit of corruption,
consumption, and rottenness.

Take it altogether in the mass and lump, and see what it is, (besides the
kind of the sickness, which is not here mentioned.) First, it is bitter:
secondly, bitterness it self: thirdly, bitterness, put to bitterness; fourthly,
against life; fifthly, to thrust it down to the pit: sixthly, the pit of
corruption: this being his case, and then, to be pulled out of the teeth of
death, as David pulled his lamb and his kid out of the mouth of the Lion and
Bear, was the singular mercy of God, worthy another Ecce, as at the first I
declared.

Is it not mercy, (I ask,) to be saved from death? Death, whenever it shall
come unto us, and howsoever qualified, the grimnesse of her visage disguised,
yet will it be fearful enough. It is dissolutio naturae, the dissolution of
nature, and the dissociation of body and soul, ancient friends, and of long
acquaintance: David and Jonathan wept, and kissed when they departed.

When Vzza was smitten dead for putting his hand to the Arc, 2. Sam. 6. David
was (angry, shall I say?) troubled, grieved at it, and called the name of the
place, rupturam vzzae, the breach of Vzzah. I am sure, when body and soul are
sundred, there is ruptura, and cannot be without commotion, and passion, Si
nulla esset mortis amaritudo, non tanta esset martyrum fortitudo; if death were
not bitter, Martyrs should want of their honor.

But what may the motive be that procured this delivery? 2. Motive. Placuit
tibi.
I ask not now, with the blessed Apostle, Vbi conquisitor saeculi? 1. Cor. 1.
where are the wise of the world, Aquilae rationis, Talpae religionis.
Eagles for reason, Mowlewarpes for religion? but Vbi conquisitor Ecclesiae?
the most regenerate, sanctified, illuminate Contemplatiues of the Church; Let
them say to themselves, as the Preacher did, Eccle. 7. I have sought, and
sought, one thing after another, to find out the reason, and adhuc quaeri anima
mea, and yet my soul seeks: I have found a man of a thousand, but not a
woman amongst them all. Give me leave to apply it. If you look on the part of
man which is as it were the weaker sex; no reason can be given of this
goodness of God toward him: but on the part of God, there is, one, for a
thousand, and in stead of all the rest: Quoniam volens misericordiam est, Mich.
7. Because mercy pleases him. Dilexisti, Desiderasti, Coniunxisti Cinxisti,
Complexus es.
So in my text, placuit tibi, etc. God so desired, and knit, and conjoined, and
girt, and embraced, and covered, and took pleasure and liking to the life of
the King, that death could not hurt him: Operuisti.
The very variety of reading may stand for a rich Co^mentarie: but neither
tongues, nor pens, of men, nor Angels can express the riches of grace, when
God is pleased to show mercy upon us. The sweetness of nature brought forth
beneplacitum in him: pleasure, brought forth love; Love, desire; desire, Union;
Union, embracing: embracing girdeth close, like a girdle about the reins; and
covers and keeps from hurt, that, that is beloved: In amore haec insunt
omnia.

Before I forsake this part, Animam eruisti.
I must note unto you two things. First, that in death there Hezekiah: for
anima, in my text, is not the substance, or essential part, (as principally it
signifies,) but an act and effect of that soul, to weet, that life, which it
brought to the body in dowre, and portion when she married with it: and when
she departs from her body, she resumeth, and carries away with her that
portion again. So that, the Soul it self, is no way subject to the pit.

Occidisti and possedisti? 1. Reg. 21.
said Elias to Ahab. So says God unto death, Have thou slain, and gotten
possession too? but of what? the flesh only, not the soul: and that flesh
shall lie as a surfeit in the stomach of death: and as the drunkard, regurgitat
bilem suam, so shall death cast it up again Mors is Morsus, Senec.
death is but biting not a consuming, and utter devouring; as he that biteth,
takes some, and leaves some, so death gets a morsel of flesh, as the Kite
takes garbidge from the dunghill, and the dog offall from the shambles; but
the soul, it medleth not with. I cannot therefore better compare the grave,
then to the honey comb, wherein is both honey and wax. The honey of the soul is
taken out, the wax of the flesh remains behind, till the resurrection of
just men.

But as touching the flesh, the life whereof is properly aimed at, here is her
lot, her end, fouea corruptionis, the pit of corruption. The Rivers haste to
the Seas, Stars to the West, Man to the pit: Job 30.
it is domus constituta omni viuenti, the house appointed to every living man;
domus Conuentionis, the house of Parliament, Eccles. 12.
for all estates to meet in; domus saeculi, the house of perpetuity, till
Christ's second coming. Solum mihi superest sepulchrum, says Job, cap. 17. He
is sure of nothing but his grave. It were a worthy Epitaph, to be set upon the
monument of every man, I have nothing but a grave: or if you will truly read
it, Sepulcra, mea sunt, Graves, are mine. What need more then one? Yes, A Grave
for his body, A Grave for his vanities, A Grave for his riches, A Grave for
his hopes: all is buried with him. He that shall say, I have houses, and lands,
and vineyards, and fields, and gardens, deceives himself, and the truth is
not in him; he has nothing certain but his grave. When Lazarus was raised out
of his grave again, what brought he out with him, saving fascias sepulchrales,
and sudaria, his napkins and Graue-cloathes?

The Astronomers maid laughed at her master, that stood gazing at the stars,
and saw not the ditch that was before his feet. I know not what castles we are
ever building in the air, and we will sail upon the mountains, and make our
nests with the Eagles, and touch the stars with our heads, when there is fouea,
a pit, before our feet, which we never think of. Proud earth and ashes, terra
calcans terram, earth so treading, and ietting upon the earth, as if the earth
should never tread upon us; when notwithstanding, this base and contemptible
element (the sediment and dregs of the world) shall set her foot upon our
faces. Do we remember the pit, the land of forgetfulness, the regions of
darkness, the place of silence, wherein our proud, and pampered, and stall-fed
flesh must lodge? we that eat the fattest, and finest of the earth, and devour
whole Countries, as the Ox licketh up the grass; yea, beasts will not serve
our turns; we eat up Man, devour a man and his heritage, Ecclus. 13.
Mich. 2. pascua diuitum sunt pauperes, the poor are the pasture of the rich;
do we bear in our minds foueam exedentem, consumptionis, the pit that shall
eat, and consume our selves? we that lie and rot in the dung of our sins,
(our flesh indeed is so rotten upon our backs, with foul and loathsome
diseases, that piece will scarce hang unto piece, so as our very bodies are
already become the graves of the living) do we remember foueam putredinis? the
pit of corruption and rottenness, whereinto we are going? when, albeit from
the body of a dead Lion, there came bees and honey: and so from the body of a
dead horse, droanes, (they say) and from the body of a dead ass, hornets; yet
from the body of a dead man, nothing but worms and filthiness. Haereditabit
serpents, bestias, and vermes, Ecclus. 10. he shall inherit serpents, beasts
and worms: nay, haereditabunt, they shall inherit him; the Serpent gapeth for
his soul, Beasts for his substance, that shall revel in his goods, Worms for
his flesh.

Quia proiecisti. 3. Part.
I am now at the last Tabernacle, wherein you have Christ, with his benefits,
and the Tables of the Gospel; and therein, as I told you at the first, are
likewise two things: First, the cause of his bitterness, sins; Secondly, the
discharge of that cause, For thou have cast, etc.

I have been lately upon both these points, At White Hall.
in the hearing of many of this auditorie: I shall say the less now. But
Sin, the sickness of the soul, is the real and radical cause of all
bodily sickness. I allege but one story, from the 1. Reg. 17. The widow of
Zareptha comes to Elias, (her son being then dead) and says unto him: What
have I to do with thee, thou man of God? art thou come unto me to call my
sins to remembrance? She was an excellent woman, and her praise is in the
Gospel: when she had but a little meal, and a little oil in a cruise, and
was gathering two sticks, to make a widows fire, and to dress for her son
and her, that they might eat and die; yet upon the bidding of the Prophet,
bring unto me, and first unto me, such was her faith, that she did it: yet she
imputes the sickness and death of her child, to her sins. Vespasian was of
another mind; being sick, and out of hope to live, he threw the curtains
aside, and spread his hands unto heaven, and complained of his gods, immerenti
sibi vitam eripi, that he deserved not to die; had never committed any thing in
his whole life, whereof he repented, but one; he had so much the more cause to
repent him.

I hope, when Hezekiah prays at the third verse, O Lord, I beseech thee,
remember how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, etc.
He speaks but secundum quid, not simply; and comparate, compared with others,
importing affectum, and profectum, rather desire, and endeavor so to do, then
any perfection; and that he had no meaning, to think that he had no sin; for
it plainly appears in his own speech, by the reason he gives, that he
thought sin to be the cause of his sickness. Eruisti, quia proiecisti, first
he remitteth his sins; (which was the course of our Savior in the Gospel)
and then releeueth him of his sickness. Math. 9.


God spoke unto Abraham, Genesis 15. Ego merces tua magna nimis, I am thine
exceeding great reward: what, unto David, 2. Sam. 12. I have done this, and
that for thee; and si parua sunt ista, and if these things were too small, I
would have added much more. Just as the Apostle writes, Ephesians. 3. abundantly
much more the^ we either ask or think. For did Hezekiah crave the remission
of his sins? In his whole song there is not a word, a syllable of it: You
have heard of his truth and righteousness, and perfect heart, no mention of
sin: and all his petition, and moan, and tears that he spent, was for his
life alone. God grants him that, and aliquid amplius, and somewhat more, and
aliquid melius, something better; for admit he had died, yet had his case been
good enough; Mori non timeo, quia ad bonum Dominum vado, I fear not to die,
because I go to a good Lord. But if I die in my sin, if that circumstans
peccatum, Hebr. 12. cleave to my soul at my going hence, it will be as
millstones unto it, to plunge it into the bottomless pit of eternal
destruction: therefore besides, and before the cure of his sickness, he
pardons his sins.

Wherein he deals with Hezekiah, as he did with Moses, Number. 17. when he bad
him bring twelve rods for the twelve Tribes, and lay them in the Tabernacle
before the testimony; and the rod for that Tribe which the Lord would choose,
should bud. When Moses came to reuiew the rods, the rod of Aaron had not only
budded, that is, chipt, or broken the rind; but the buds were swollen, and
fully brought forth, and after buds, blossoms and flowers, and after these,
ripe Almonds.

So befell it Hezekiah; so shall it all the elect of God, who know no more what
to ask, then Hezekiah did; he thought of no more, but the bud of his bodily
health; but he gives him withal, the ripest, and sweetest fruit of all
others, forgiveness of his sins: and (me thinks) he fulfilleth all the
degrees of that former story; for, let the pardon of sin, be germen, the
bud; and the pardon of all his sins, be gemma, the knot or swelling bud;
Peccata omnia post tergum proiecisti.
and the leaving them behind his back, flos, the blossom; but the casting
them behind his back, as if he were angry that they pressed before his face, is
amygdala, the fruit, more then all the rest. He that will purge the body,
leaves no dregs of the sickness, for fear of relapse: so is the pardon of
God, a plenary pardon of all his sins: and whereas before they were under those
pure eyes that cannot behold wickedness, now they are set behind his back,
that he may not behold them: and not only set, or left, (for then, Clamabunt
post nos; they will follow God again) but thrown, as stones from a sling,
and, with violence offered to his justice, banished in such sort, as that they
may never return again: so speaks he (in effect) Psalm. 103. Quantum distat
ortus ab occasu, Look how far the East is from the West, so far has he
set our sins from us: so Mich. 7. proijcit in profundum mare, he takes our
sins and throws them into the bottom of the sea.

You have heard of Hezekiah the good King of Judah, Application
and his double condition, the one which nature and sin brought upon him,
sickness, and approach to death: the other, what grace and indulgence did for
him: (...) (had I almost said with the Apostle, Galat. 4.) these things were
spoken in an allegory, sure I am they were spoken propter aliud, for another
purpose, not for Hezekiah's sake. But as Ezekiel (Ezech. 4.) lies and sleeps
upon his left and right side, and makes him bread of moulter corn, and baketh
it in bullockes dung, etc. to show the siege and famine to come: So have I
chosen this story of Hezekiah, to be but a model and pattern of those things
which happened to our gracious KING.

Hezekiah our King, Hezekias.
our religious King, who though he restored not religion, as Hezekiah did,
(which he found restored to his hand) yet he maintains, and propugneth
religion, and spared not the high places no more then Hezekiah did, I mean the
throne of Antichrist himself, not that brazen Serpent, pearched upon his pole
of supremacy above all the Kings of the earth, and the whole Church of God:
And as famous to the world, (he will be in succeeding ages) for his miraculous
deliverance from that general gunpowder-massacre, as ever Hezekiah was for his
miraculous deliverance from Zenacherib the King of Assure; in a night, was that
host discomfited, and in a night, the labors and hopes of many months
defeated: I am sure, as renowned as ever Hezekiah was, propter scripturam, for
his books written and published to the world, in defense of the Gospel and
Church of God.

Not to recede from the terms of my Ecce in pace
text, I am sure he is a King of peace. And here you may stand, as at a pillar
or moniment by the highway side, and take a view of it. Ecce, in pace: it is
worthy admiration, that for sixteen years space, (to keep the phrase of this
Story, 2. Reg. 19.) there has not an enemy shot an arrow, nor come with a
shield, nor raised up a rampart, against any City or town of his kingdom:
(in an happy hour be it spoken.) Has your Manna, the mean time, bred
worms? or do the Quails come out of your nostrels? or are you offended with
your peace? Has it made you proud, and petulant, and lascivious, and
improuident, and unprovided against your Enemies? Where is the fault? I must
answer with Christ, Duritia, malitia cordium vestorum, the hardness, the
badnes of your own hearts; The Manna was good, the Quails good, the peace
good, both in him that bestowed it, and in him that procured it; your selves
naught that used it not aright. Cast but your eyes back to the latter part of
the reign of that Maiden Queen, (the maidenhead and honor of whose
government was never stained) whose bones are in peace, her soul in bliss,
and her name in eternal remembrance; think upon one poor and beggarly war,
(as the Apostle named poor and beggarly elements,) vile, servile bellum,
rather rebellion then war; with beasts, rather then men, or men, after the
manner of beasts, earthed in their thickets and bogges, as Foxes in their
holes; (to speak nothing of the treasure it wasted,) how much of our English
blood, of the very flower and prime of our gentry, that one war sucked out:
and then tell me if peace, for her own sake, (without the weeds that grow up
with it,) be to be disliked?

All this while I have been upon the subject of my text alone, Hezekiah our
King, without adding any attribute, or telling you what he has suffered. Now
it follows, Hezekiah our King was sick, and sick as Hezekiah was,
Aegrotauit.
vsque ad mortem, even unto the death; his sickness was bitterness,
bitterness, down to the very side and mouth of the pit, Mark 5.
(...), as Iairus his daughter, he was at the last cast; (...), as Paul spoke
of Epaphroditus, Philip. 2. at the next door, the nearest neighbor to death,
(I may now by the blessing of God speak home; Habet praeteritarum calamitatum
secura recordatio delectationem quandam, when a danger is gone and past, it is
pleasure to repeat it: Libet sinistras res meas percurrere.) I go forward with
that text, the providence of God has even fitted it to my mouth; I say he was
sick to the death, but God had mercy upon him, and not upon him alone, but
also upon us and the whole kingdom, Philip. 2.
(...) lest we should have sorrow upon sorrow; sorrow, for the loss of our
Queen, (like the loss of our eyes, our bowels) his Lady and Consort, as his
rib plucked from his side, the half of his soul torn from him; and sorrow for
the loss of himself.

I am yet in the sickness. It was bitterness, bitterness; and yet to the
children of God, in the fruit and effect of it, dulcedo, dulcedo, sweetness
above the honey and honey comb. It is a paradoxe in nature what I shall deliver:
Would you look for grapes from thorns? or water from a rock? or oil from a
stone? or good out of evil? or sweetness out of bitterness? that is, comfort
out of sickness? Nazianz.
Yet so it is. Morbo crucior, and gaudeo, non quia crucior, sed vt alijs
patientiae sim magister, I am sick and tortured with sickness, yet am I glad,
not for the torture, but for being a pattern of patience to others. Antigonus
made the like use of his sickness, Nihilo peius fuit, hic morbus submonuit ne
animo efferamur, cum simus mortales: I am not the worse for it, my sickness
puts me in mind not to be proud, seeing I am mortal (...), was the saying
of Croesus another king in Herodotus, rich even to a Proverb: My sufferings,
grievous though they are, are my lessonings; which Lipsius well rendered,
nocumenta, documenta; and Gregory not worse then he, detrimenta corporum,
incrementa virtutum, pain to the body, gain to the soul. The bed of a sick
man is as a school, a doctorall chair of learning and discipline; then are
his words written with an adamant claw, and go deep into the minds of them
that hear them; then is his tongue, the tongue of the learned, as touched with
a cole from the altar; and his mouth the vein and fountain of life, when the
soul is weaned from the world, the flesh mortified, the spirit consecrated to
God, and himself rapt up, as it were, into the third heavens, where he sees
and hears those things which he never saw nor heard aforetime.

There are that are able to report his Swans songs, the last before his death,
(for ought appeared to the contrary) how he behaved himself toward God and
man, and acted both King and Priest; and setting himself in articulo mortis,
in the very joint and point of dying: Looking backwards to his life past, and
forwards to the life to come, neglected not any thing, neither of his private
nor of the public State, with many divine meditations, holy professions,
religious promises, prudent instructions, which (for my part) I wish they were
scriptura Hezekiae regis, brought to the light of the world, that all might
understand them.

But what becomes of this sickness? Eruisti.
remains it still? No. For the sweet wood of the mercies of God, was cast
into the waters of Marah, and altered their bitterness.

And so must I alter my text. Jordan is now gone backward. Behold in my peace,
bitterness, bitterness, (said Hezekiah.) Behold in our bitterness,
bitterness, peace, must I say. Ecce euangelizo vobis gaudium magnum quod erit
omni ciuitati, (as the Angel in the Gospel) behold I bring you tidings of great
joy, which shall be to the whole Land; and God say Amen to it; that I may ever
be as Ahimaaz 2. Sam. 18. to bring you good tidings of such things. His soul
is delivered from the pit of corruption. And we trust that God has added to
his years, as he did to the years of Hezekiah, we pray that it may be, and
likely it is, if we add to our prayers, that God will add to his years. If
we ask life for him, God shall give him a long life; and after that long life
ended, A life for ever and ever. Psalm 21.

But of all other things you will ask the means how he was delivered. Placuit
tibi.
He wanted not any thing that the earth could minister unto him, neither the
help of learned and painful Physicians, (benedictio Domini super eos, etc.
Psalm. 129. the Lord prosper them, we wish them good luck in the name of the
Lord,) nor the intercessions of his faithful Subjects, that have bowed the
knees both of their bodies and hearts, and with their prayers, as an incense in
the morning, and the lifting up of their hands as an evening sacrifice, they
have pierced through the clouds, and knocked at the gate of his mercy at
midnight, and given him no rest on behalf of their King, 2. Reg. 2.
Our father, our father, the Chariots and horsemen of Israel, is going from us,
O Lord spare him.

Ariston was a good King, but wanted Issue: and the people desirous to have one
of his race to govern after him, begged him Issue of their gods. That son so
obtained they named Demaratus, (...). Votis populi expetitus.
because the people had gained him by their prayers. I doubt not but our King
was another Demaratus, begged by his people at the hands of God; or rather
(according to his own name) that our Jacob was another Israel, and that he and
his people wrestled with God by their earnest supplications, to gain a
blessing of health from him: and although, as to Israel, a sinew of his thigh
be yet shrunk, Genes. 32.
that is, the ability and strength of his body somewhat abated; we trust that in
time God will also restore that. But whatsoever I have yet named, is but a
second and subordinate means: and vain (we know) is the help of man, our
help must stand in the name of the Lord which has made heaven and earth, or
we shall never be helped; therefore the prime, predominant, and supreme cause,
that our King was delivered, was the same that Hezekiah found, Placuit tibi,
dilexisti, etc. the good pleasure and love of God.

Now the good will of him that dwelt in the bush, ever dwell with our King, and
marry him unto him with everlasting mercy and compassion. The covenant of day
and night be broken, but the covenant of his peace with our King and his
kingdoms be never broken. Fathers forget their sons, and nurses their
sucking babes, and mothers the fruit of their wombes. The Lord never forget
our King, nor his seed after him, nor the people committed to their charge.

By this time you may guess at the reason of our meeting (so many thousand of
souls together in one place:) though not in the house of the Lord, I grant,
yet in the courts of the Lords house, even in the midst of thee o Jerusalem, in
the fairest and fittest theater we have for such purposes, to make it like
Araunah his threshing floor, a place for an altar of our thankfulness,
whereon we are to offer the Calves of our lips; our reasonable service; an
Eucharisticall sacrifice for the life of our King, whom God has so lately
rescued from the fangs and throat of destruction: Sueton.
that as when the tidings came to Rome of Germanicus his better amendment,
(they had news before of his desperate sickness, which struck them all to
the heart; and Germanicus was an excellent Prince, beloved of the people, and
one that said of himself afterward at the time of his death, Flebunt
Germanicum etiam ignoti, Strangers will miss and bewail Germanicus,) they ran
into their Capitol, men, women and children, and rent open the doors thereof,
and offered their votes, and filled the whole City with the noise of their
congratulation, Salua Ciuitas, salua Patria, saluus Germanicus, the City is
safe, the country safe, Germanicus safe: So come we into this our Capitol, our
greatest Panegyris, inured with the like meetings, (hither came that Lady of
euer-blessed memory, Ann. 1588.
to give thanks unto God for her victory over the Spaniard) with such
frequency of people as you see, with such feruencie of heart to bless the name
of our God, and congratulate our selves, because Salua Ciuitas, salua Patria,
saluus Iacobus, the City is safe, the kingdom safe, our King safe. And as
before that, when Augustus was likewise recovered, (whom they styled Patrem
patriae, the Father of the country) to show their love to their Emperor, Aere
collato.
they laid their purses together, and set up a Statue to Antonius Musas the
Physician that recovered him, and placed it by the Image of Aesculapius: So we
in affection and love to our King, though we give not titles to men, and honor
the Physician but with that honor that is due unto him, yet, Aere collato,
joining our hearts and souls together, as if we were all but one man, we set
up our Statue, and (if it be possible) raise our Colossus of thankfulness,
that may reach up to the heaven of heavens, unto that great God that has
created the Physician, and taught him his wisdom, and made the medicines of the
earth to take away the pains of men. Ecclesiasticus 38.

There is but one word more in my text, Peccata.
and so an end. But as it stands in the hindmost and dishonourablest part of
my text, as the lees lie in the bottom of the vessel, the sting in the tail
of the Scorpion, so it is the worst word. It is that, that troubles Israel (as
Ahab asked Elias, but Elias charged upon him) and vtinam ascindantur (say I,
Gal. 5.
) I would they were cut off that trouble us. Estne pax Iehu? 2. Reg. 9.
(said Iehoram unto him:) Is it peace Iehu? What peace, so long as thy mothers
fornications and her witchcrafts are yet in force? It is Doeg the Edomite that
killed the Prophets of the Lord. 1. Sam. 22.
I knew it (said David) when Doeg the Edomite was there. It is Judas at the
board. Will you know the Judas, the Doeg, the Iezabel, the Ahab, the mischief,
the bane, the ruin, the wrecke of a kingdom? It is sin: that which brought
sickness upon Hezekiah, and will bring it again; that which God pardoned to
Hezekiah (proiecisti post tergum;) and the Lord be so merciful to us as to
grant us our pardon. But it is a fearful doom which is pronounced, Proverb.
8. Propter peccata terrae, erunt multi Principes eius: For the sins of the
Land, there shall be many Princes thereof. Many in the cluster, and at once; as
they cry in the Gospel, Here is Christ, and there Christ, we know not where;
so, this your King, and that your King, we know not who: Many in the change and
succession; Hos. 13.
Dabo Regem in furore meo, and auferam in indignatione mea: I will give a King
in my rage, and take him away in my wrath, giving and taking both in
displeasure: either of both were bad enough, and our sins are accommodated to
bear either judgment, for they are peccata terrae, not the sins of single
souls, but the sins of the Land. Our Sacrilege, not the Sacrilege of
Achan; our oppression, of Ahab; our adultery, of an Israelite with a
Madianitish-woman; our pride, of Iesabel which painted alone; our
effeminatenesse, of Absolon which set more by the hair of his head, then his
whole body was worth; our drunkenesse, of Nabal; our usury, of whom shall I
say? (I mistake my self: there is not an Usurer named in person in the whole
book of God: their names are written in the earth, and hardly will they find
them written in the book of life. The Lord be merciful to them:) these were
the sins of private souls, and have borne their vengeance. Anima quae
peccauerit ipsa morietur. Ours are common, Epidemicall, popular and populous
sins, Senec.
both in number and measure, peccant, and publicant, we sin and delight to
sin, sin and declare our sins as Sodom. Fear we not the sequel? The
year has been fatal already for the death of an Archduke, an Empress, and
an Emperor (they say;) and to look nearer home, of a great, and glorious
Queen, since the days of our Deborah which ruled in Israel 44. years, not
her like so far as the world is Christian; Great by Parentage, Great by
Marriage, Greater by her Graces, the beloved and honored of God and Man, and
my most gracious Mistress. Nescis quid serus vesper ferat: we are not yet come
to the evening of the year; we have had rumors of wars and commotions, and
Earthquakes; one the most prodigious birth that these latter ages of the world
have brought forth; and a sign from heaven that dazeled our eyes, and might
have daunted our hearts, but slighted in such sort, as if we had seen but the
shining of a Glow-worme: I fear not the events, what has been, nor the
portents, what may be; I fear our portentuous and prodigious sins, which are
as significant and prognosticant of the wrath of God, as any of these wonders.

We have yet our King, Serus in coelum redeat, long and long may we have him:
who may say upon better ground then ever Nerua did, Dion.
Se nihil fecisse in regni administratione, quo minus possit, deposito imperio,
tuto priuatus viuere; that he has not done any thing sithence he came to the
government, but laying his Scepter and Crown aside, he might live as a private
man without controlement: I will not ouerflow. But may I without piacle forget
in the very last scaene of one of his latest actions amongst us before his
departure hence, (which might have been his last, if God had not favored us)
what he then did? I say not that he rose early, and sat long in a Court of
honor and justice, (yet give me a King upon the earth, that ever with so much
solicitude and zeal, spent so many days, and so many hours in a day in the
hearing and examining of one cause. Of one of their Lewesses in France, they
write, that he sat in a Cloister from morning to evening, and lost his dinner
to hear the quarrels of his Monks,) of this I speak not; nor that he added in
the close of his business, that he would make it his study night and day, and
neither slumber nor sleep till he had brought to light the Non constats, as he
termed them, which were not so liquid and clear as the rest: I mean of a
speech of his during the time that that cause was in hearing, (I report it in
the presence of many and matchless witnesses) when taking his hat from his
head, that he might do it not without ceremony, remembering that tribunal
seat whereat he must one day stand, turning to his son who sat by his side,
and out of regard to him, that it might not be said hereafter, he had been the
child of an ignoble parent; whatsoever his other sins were, wherewith he
confessed he was fraught as the vilest caytiffe upon earth, yet for doing of
justice, his mind and purpose therein, (pardon the zeal and exuberancie of
the speech) he needed not the mercy of God. Claud.
En Princeps, en orbis apex, Show me his like again.

I say, we have yet our King, and adolescentem secundum, Eccles. 4. a Prince by
his side, quasi florem rosarum in diebus vernis, Ecclus. 50. as a prime-rose in
the Spring season, sprowting and spreading himself under his boughs. Accipiat
patris exemplum; Idem.
we have root and branch, rem and spem, a morning and a midday Sun, the first
and the latter rain, or (to keep to the story which I have in hand) as
Zenacherib told Hezekiah, 2. Reg* 18.
Thou say thou have eloquence, but counsel and strength are for the war.
We have a King for counsel, and a Prince (if God bless him) for strength, a
King to instruct, and a Prince to execute: Only beware of your sins, peccata
terrae, the sins of the Land; break them off with repentance, lament them
betimes, that they make not you to lament, when it is too late: when the
lamentation shall be, not of private souls, but like that of Hadadrimmon in
the fields of Megiddon, Zach. 12. when lugebunt familiae, familiae seorsim, all
the families of the Land shall mourn, the family of the house of David apart,
and of Nathan apart, and of Leui apart, etc. But whither am I going? We came
to rejoice in the safety of our King, and in the name of our God to set up our
banners of joy, as in the 20. Psalm. and we pray for our King, as that people
did for theirs, in the words of the same Psalm, that God will continue his
blessing, and perfect that good work which he has begun upon him. Psalm. 20.
1.
The Lord hear thee in the day of thy trouble, the name of the God of Jacob
defend thee. Send thee help from his Sanctuary, and strengthen thee out of
Sion. Remember all thy offerings, and accept thy burnt sacrifices. Grant thee
according to thy hearts desire, and fulfill all thy petitions.

AMEN.

