VIVAT SERENISsima Regina. TO THE MOST MIGHTY, IMPERIAL, AND Virtuous
Princess, The Lords Anointed, Queen Elizabeth, by the grace of God of
England, France, and Irelande, Queen, Defendresse of the faith, etc. *
Seeing that your Royal seat and Scepter (most mighty and Imperial
Princess) is clothed with Salomons heavenly gifts, and does hold up the
golden rod of wisdom, which leads to the euerlas ting kingdom. I hope
therefore (by the goodness of God) that it shall please your Highness to
admit this Garlande of man's glorification to come into your sweet gracious
hands: prefixed with the bright beams of your Majesty's princely glorious
Name, under the high precious Cedar, and sweet Libanus of your heavenly goodne
sse of mercy and pardon: That though I be troubled in heart with(...) ^eare of
your supers plendent personage, (being a mighty princes of power) to dedicate
this Pamphlet to your most excellent Majesty: yet the singular clearenesse of
your spiritual treasures of goodness, does prevail over my dutiful mind
and faithful allegiance in such sort, as if the precious pearl of your
virtues did shine into my heart, not forbidding this little Pamphlet to come
unto your Highness: trusting that the pureness of the matter will increase your
MAJESTY'S dear soul, to an exceeding consolation touching your body to be
glorified. In consideration whereof, when I did behold the goodly order of the
bright glistering stars, which the omnipotent Creator has placed in the
firmament of the heavens: (there seeing the resplendent star, Corona lucida)
I was stirred up with the joyful remembrance of your Majesty's incomparable
personage, being the Lords Anointed: knowing that your Highness, being
virtuous, meek, and merciful, is equal with the good Kings of Judah, (with
Asa, Ezechias, Iehos aphat, and Josias,) in embracing all godly virtues to the
aduauncing of the honor and glory of God: that as your Majesty in all points
do hold your scepter linked to the Scepter of Judah, (being an unfeigned
friend to the holy one of Israel) so your highness subjects in great
consolation of heart, do pray sincerely (in all humbleness of duty) unto God
for the preservation of your Majesty long to reign over us: And that at the
appearance of Christ you may be a glorious Saint in the kingdom of God. And
now considering how much Israel rejoiced of Solomon, and how greatly it
lamented after his departure: Am persuaded how much all true Protestants do
pray that the Lord may be your shield as he was to Abraham and that your
blessed personage (may by the great mercy and s ingular goodness of God)
govern this Realm as happily and as many years (and more) as good king Asa
king of Judah did, to the glory of God, and salvation of souls. Wherefore
(most Mighty and Renowned Sovereign) when I, (an inferior, unworthy to
touch the ground that your Majesty do walk on) had finished this Beautiful
garland of man's glorification, expressing the mystery of new Jerusalem, with
her golden crowns and diademes I thought it so much to represent the heavenly
joys and happiness of our everlasting glory: as that it was a matter meet
to be dedicated to your most excellent Majesty, showing how your Highness,
being an Anointed and blessed Princess of power under God, upon the earth,
shall meet (at the great day of resurrection) the King of al kings coming in
his triumphant progress from heaven, with the glorious company of his holy
Angels: when your pure personage shall behold that incomprehensible Scepter of
the everlasting kingdom of David: That as your Majesty in your progress upon
the earth, has highly preferred your faithful subjects in Christ to honor
and dignity: so now that glorious King of eternity and everlasting glory
will fashion your body to be like his own glorious body: for that, your
blessed power has set forth the true Religion, worship, and honor of God,
to a lively hope among your Highness subjects to obtain the eternal
garlande of glory. Thus humbly committing this little Pamphlet of man's
glorification unto your Princely magnificence, and godly wisdom, do beseech
your Highness in your tender mind of mercy, to receive it under your sweet
gracious man's ion of goodness: among your spiritual treasures of heavenly
solace and joy: thereby daily remembering how your God and Savior Jesus
Christ, shall clothe your Majesty with an everlasting garment of glory,
shining upon you with the light of his own countenance, there sitting with
Christ in his own seat of heauenlinesse, tasting the unspeakable joys of
eternal blessedness, where you shall glister as the shining of heaven world
without end, beholding the beauty of God for ever, in new Jerusalem. Thus
hoping that your Majesty's mercy will be as a veil to my boldness, do
trust that as your Highness has truly touched the hemme of Christ's garment,
whereby you have partaken the heavenly sparks of the virtues of Christ: that
it would please your goodness to admit one spark toward the acceptance of
this glorious garlande: And so I pray God with all instance, that it may please
him of his abundant mercy, to preserve you our Sweet beloved Queen, and
true branch of Christ, long to reign over us in tranquillity and peace, to
the setting forth of Gods honor, and spreading abroad of his glory, that
your MAJESTY may joyfully appear before Christ, and be crowned with the
Crowns and Diademes of everlasting glorification: which (O Lord) so let it be.

Your Majesty's most humble Subject, and faithful Orator, FRANCIS KETT.

THE GLORIOUS and beautiful garland of man's glorification.
CAP. 1. How Christ was ordained, before the world was made, to our glory; and
promised of God, in his holy Scriptures, to come in the humanity and humility
of flesh, to taste of death for all men: whereby is justified the righteousness
of God, to the confirmation of our belief, touching our election and
glorification.
Seeing that our glorification and heavenly mansion (wherewith we desire to be
clothed, and which we hope after this life to enjoy) does come by Jesus Christ,
sealed with the holy spirit of Gods true promise, we ought then to stablish
our hearts in the consolation of good hope and faith, to obtain the glory that
thus comes, by Christ, by considering the faithfulness of God, who performs
all that he has promised, and is able to do exceeding abundantly above all
that we can ask or think, who so loved the world that he spared not his own
son, but gave him a reconciliation for our sins: The mystery of whom was
hid, since the world began, and since the beginning of generations, but now is
opened, and declared openly, to have brought to us life and immortality,
through his Gospel: to the justifying of the righteousness of Gods true
promise: to be the glorious riches of our eternal glory, by the shedding of
his blood upon the Cross. That whereas through the sins, and disobedience of
one man, sin reigned unto death: So by the obedience of one man Christ, might
grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life: That all that believe in
him (walking after the spirit and not after the flesh) might be pertakers of
his heavenly kingdom, and made the sons of God.

For which cause to the better confirmation of our faith and hope of salvation:
It is requisite to show the ordenance and promise of God from the beginning
touching our justification in his son Jesus Christ: that thereby we may be
stirred up (by the great goodness of god) for to seek by Christ, Cor. 1.2.
the riches of his glorious inheritance upon the Saints, Ephe. 11.
he being ordained thereto of God before the beginning of the world was
made unto our glory. Touching whom, (in this Book of man's glorification) we
must especially look unto Christ's two co^mings seeing that he is the Author
and finisher of our redemption and has adopted us to be the sons of glory:
by appearing once in the flesh to put sin to flight, by the offering up of
him self to death, whom the Father raised up to life, and is entered into
heaven, to appear now in the sight of God for us, and shall come again to
change our vile bodies, Phil. 3.
to be facyoned like to his glorious body. Wherefore in that we have such an
high Advocate in heaven, by whom we have an incorruptible crown of
blessedness propounded and set before us: Let us walk worthy and laudable unto
God, according to the grace given us in Jesus Christ, that we may obtain the
reward thereof.

And now to consider the purpose of the heavenly Father, how he has blessed
us in all manner of heavenly things by Chris te: (according as he has chosen
us that we should be Saints through the beloved Jesus) It follows, that we
keep always a joyful remembrance that as the glory of the last house or
teastament of God, was greater then the first: so is it, in the manner, of the
two commings of Christ: for first he came in the humility of the flesh, to
be to us a saving health: being borne of the Virgin Mary by the woorking of
the holy Ghost, very man and mortal and yet the same very GOD and immortal,
who being in the shape of God and equal with God, Collos s. ^. Phil. 2.
in whom dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodyly: yet did he
nevertheless make him self of no reputation, taking upon him the shape of a
servant, and became like unto man, and was found in his apparel as a man,
humbling him self to all obedience: for though he e were Gods son yet learned
he obedyence, Heb. 5.
by those things which he suffered, and was made perfect, Ihon. 1.
and the cau se of eternal salvation unto all that obey him, according to John.
In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the word was
God, and this word was made flesh, being the life and light of men, giving
power to all that believe in him to be the sons of God: for it pleased the
father to send his son in the sinful flesh (being without sin) and by
sin dampened sin in the flesh, and loused the works of the devil. Romans ^.


Whom he makes heir of all things, being the brightness of him self, bearing
up all things with the word of his power, for so it was the will of the
Father that in him should all fulness dwell, Heb. 1.
and that in him all things should have their being, that he might be all in
all.

Thus the Almighty Creator has performed his blessed promise, Collossians. ^.
when he said that the seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head: and
when long after, he said unto Abraham, unto thy seed will I give this land,
Genesis 3.
for one that come out of thine own body shall be thine heir, and thy seed
shall be as the stars in number: And Abraham believed the Lord and it was
imputed to him for righteousness: Genesis 15.
And also the Lord said again to Abraham, when he was 89, year old: I will
make my covenant between me and thee, and will multiply the e exceedingly, for
behold my testament is with thee yt thou shall be a father of many nations, and
my bond between me and thee and thy seed after thee shall be an everlasting
testament, Genesis 17.
and I will be good to the^, and give the^ the land wherein thou art a stranger,
even all the land of Canaan for an everlasting possession, and will be their
God: for Sa^a shall bear a son, and thou shall call his Name Isac, and she
bare Abraham a son even the same season, which the Lord had appointed. Thus
it pleased the Almighty God to choose us, and not we him, showing forth
hereby the abundancie of his love, and mercy, in that he has mercy upon the^
which are not yet in the world, and in that he declares his great goodness, in
multiplying his loving kindness toward those that are present, and to them
that are past, and to them that are to come: for after that Adam thorough
sin, brought in the corruption of nature, that the evil seed of wickedness
was sown in all men's hearts, whereby death reigned by means of sin: then
this darnell and cockle of vice and iniquity did grow ripe in the first
generations of Adam, that they walked after their own stubborn and fleshly
will neglecting Gods goodness: That the Lord was thereby provoked, to bring his
water flood upon the world and destroy all mankind, except Noye and his
household. And then after that the offspring of Noye was again multiplied to a
great people by process of time: they waxed also ungodly and wicked: but the
Lord had given his rain bow for a covenant, that he would never destroy the
world with watermore. And then the most highest did choose him a man from among
them, whose name was Abraham, whom he loved, and to him only God showed his
will, and made an everlasting covenant with him, promising him (as is aforesaid)
that he will never forsake his seed, and so in his old age gave him Isaac, the
first testimony of Gods promise, and covenant begun, and so faithfully
performed in Christ Jesus, to the joy and comfort of man, in that we see
evidently that God is righteous and true and has given us an assured hope of
our election, that by that only seed of Abraham, we shall enjoy the
everlasting possession of that new blessed land of Canaan the first land of
promise. Therefore this record we must bear in our selves that God is true,
and that what he do or say can no man change and what he promises he can not
but perform: And now the more to confirm this joy, faith, and hope: which
Abraham (our first father of belief) had to God in respect of the birth of
Isac and prosperity of his seed) The Lord to our example tried whether
righteous Abraham would bear an immutable mind toward his God, to love him
above all the dearest things which he had, yea above his sweet son Isac,
whom he loved as his own life, notwithstanding faithfully did Abraham
prefer the love of his almighty God and maker, above the life of Isac,
offering him in sacrifice to the Lord: for which cause the eternal creator
to make his promise more certainly to stick fast in Abraham and in all his
posterity, swear by him self, showing that there was no God but him self,
saying in Genesis, Genesis 22. ^
Because thou have not spared thy only son Isaac to offer him a sacrifice to
me, I will bless thee and multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven, and as
the sand upon the sea side, and in thy seed shall all the nations of the
earth be blessed, because thou have obeyed my voice. And thus ye most merciful
god, although he cast Adam for his transgression out of Paradise, and also
destroyed the world for sin: yet he shows again the voice and promise of
comfort, (that he has not cast us off) but has given his gracious goodness to
the world, that all nations through the seed of Abraham should be blessed:
(according to that of the prophet) Them I have created, facioned, Esaias. 43.
and made for mine honor. And now the more to justify his true promise, it
is apparent that he establishes the foresaid testament to Is aac, the first
figure of Christ, Genesis ^6.
by whom all nations are sanctified: Saying to Isac, I will be with thee, and
bless thee, The promise.
for unto thee and to thy seed will I give all these countries, and through
thy seed shall all nations of the earth be blessed: because e that Abraham
harkened to my voice, and kept my ordinances, commandments, statutes and
laws: wherein we are to learn, how al our blessedness came of God, the father
of al goodness, to whom we ought always to be thankful, framing our selves
through his grace to be like Abraham in believing, and equal with him in
obedience, and joined with him in righteousness, that we may receive the like
praise and honor, as God makes mention of him to Isaac, thereby to obtain as
Paul promises the eternal joy, the praise honor and immortality that is
due to them that continue in good doing and seek eternal life. Romans 2.
And finally God to seal up the fulness of his covenant the more and more, to
help and strengthen our weak hearts of belief, and to allure the children of
promise to a fixed hope of his grace and goodness, The promise to Jacob.
does reiterate his testament to Jacob, that he being the seed of Abraham and
Isaac, that he shall be the well of living waters, and that out of his loins
shall come the fountain of all heavenly blessedness, and the water of life,
grace and goodness (saying.) The land which thou sleep upon, Genesis 26.
will I give thee and thy seed, and thy seed shall be as the du st of the
earth, and thou shall spread abroad, west, east, north, and south and through
thee and thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed, according to
Esaias. E say. 43.
I will bring thy seed from the east, and gather them together from the west,
I will say to the north let go, and to the south keep not back, but bring
me my sons from far, and my daughters from the ends of the world, for all
nations shall came in one and be gathered in one people, Genesis 35.
for the Lord said again unto Jacob, thou shall be called Israel, grow and
multiply, for people and a multitude of people shall spring of thee yea and
kings s hall come out of thy loins, and the land which I gave Abraham and
Isaac, will I give unto thee, and unto thy seed after thee.

Thus the almighty God of our fathers Abraham Isaac and Jacob, did seal the
earnest of the inheritance of his everlasting blessedness and kingdom in
Christ, with his holy spirit of promise made to our first fathers, that he
should come of the seed of Abraham according to the flesh, by whom we should
receive redemption and salvation, thereby to be made partakers of Gods glory.

And now furthermore, after the proceedins of time, that the seed of Jacob
called Israel, was increased to a great kindred of people, and holden in
bondage in the land of Egypt. The Lord most merciful and mindful of his
promise made to our forefathers Abraham Isaac and Jacob, that he would be good
unto their seed: raised up among them Moses a captain and prophet, that
should deliver, and lead his people Israel out of Egypt, into the land of
Canaan, which before he had given to Abraham and his seed for an everlasting
possession: and this through Gods mighty hand, who made a way in the sea, and
a foot path in the mighty waters, which brought forth the chariots and
horses, the host and power, and drowned the^ in the red sea. And then brought
his people unto mount Synay, in the wilderness, where he gave them the law
figured in s tones, showing forth his wonderful power, that they did all
tremble for fear and could not abide it, for the people stood under the hill,
and the hill burnt with fire even unto the mids of heaven, and there was the
sound of a troump, voice of words, tempest, Deu. 4.
darkness, clouds and mist, and the Lord spoke out of fire and declared his
covenant and ordinance, Exodus 19.
and so terrible was the sight that appeared, that Moses said I fear and
quake. And thus the law was given with great fear, Exodus 34;
and with great glory, for the children of Israel could not behold the face
of Moses for the glory of his countenance, with out a veil, which in Christ
is put away, for if the ministration of the law which is to condemnation be
glorious, Cor. 2.3.
much more does the ministration of the spirit of promise unto righteousness
exceed in glory: And thus the law which began many hundred years after the
promis e, was added because of transgression as a schoolemaister to teach what
sin meant: and not that it could give life, Gal. 3.
or disanull the promise made to Abraham, for the promise by faith in Jesus
does bring the inheritance, and not the law which does conclude all things
under sin: for by the deeds of the law shall no man be justified before God,
Romans 3.
but are justified freely by grace through the redemption that is in Christ
Jesus, who is the iustifier of them that believe in him, after the example of
righteous Abraham.

Wherefore the Lord to discover our filthy nakedness and corruption brought by
the sins of Adam, did give us the law, that thereby we should come to the
knowledge of our infirmities, vices, and wretchedness, which reigns in our
earthly members, thereby knowing our state by the first Adam to be miserable,
and fallen into the dangerous house and prison of al uncleanness: being most
wretched without hope, unless God of his mercy had made his promise to
Abraham that we should be bles sed in his seed, through a redeemer. Whereupon
the Lord to show the imperfection of the law touching the giving of life and
salvation: The imperfection of the law and perfection of promise.
And the more to declare the perfection and power of his promise in Christ, yt
in it consists the gift of power to obtain the inheritance of everlasting
life and blessedness, does confirm (many years after the law given) his
foresaid testament, unto Moses, saying: Deu. 18. The promise made to Moises.
I will raise them up a prophet from among their brethren like unto thee, and I
will put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I shall
command him, and whosoever will not hearken unto the words which he shall
speak in my name, I will require it of him: according to John, he that hears
my words says Christ, and believes John 5.
on him that sent me, has everlasting life, Luk ^
and who soever stumbleth at that s tone shall be broken, for says Christ, John
10.
I am the good s hepheard, that gave his life for the sheep, and my sheep
hear my voice.

And moreover after a long distinction of time the Lord not unmindful of his
testament, raised up his faithful servant David to be king over Israel, being
of the loins of Abraham, of whose seed he promised that a branch of
righteousness should arise and sit in his seat, The promise to David.
s aying to David by the prophet Nathan, Kings 2.7
Thy house and thy kingdom shall endure without end, after thee: and thy seat
shall be stablished for ever, according to Esaias, Esaias 9.
unto us a child shall be borne and a son given, upon whose shoulder the
kingdom s hall lie, and he shall sit upon the seat of David: Esaias. 11.
for, there shall come a rod forth of the kindred of Iesse, and a blossom out
of his root, the spirit of the Lord shall light on it, he shall smite the
world with the sword of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall slay
the wicked: Righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, truth and
faithfulness the girding of his reins: Ezech. 17.
for I will take s aith the Lord, a branch from an high Cedar tree, and will set
it, and take the uppermost twigg, and yet is but tender, and plant it upon an
high hill, that it may bring forth twigges and be a great Cedar tree, so that
all manner of fowls may abide in it, and make their nests under the shadow of
his branches. And out of this branch came the virgin Marie springing out of
the Cedar tree which is the tribe of Judah, and the uttermost twigg is Christ,
who upon the hill of Sion did bring forth twigs, his twelve apostles, and
disciples, which became a great Cedar tree that is a mighty congregation of
the faithful church of Christ, ye al manner of fowls which is that there should
be of all sorts of people ye should abide in Christ's doctrine, and build their
nest of salvation on him, according to Esaias, Kings and Princes shall arise, and
worship the holy one of Israel, who is a pledge for the people, and help up
the earth again, and challenge the scattered heritage, and shall say to them
that are in darkness come into the light, and to the prisoners go forth, and
shall gather to his kingdom all nations be they never so far: whereby does
appear that such is the gift of the promise, that all nations shall be blessed
thereby, and that such is Christ's calling that the people of all lands where
soever, shall partake of the faith of the Gospel, so that it is apparent that
every inhabited corner of the world shall receive the doctrine of the faith,
before the end of the world, according to Matthew, Math. 24.
this glad tidings of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a
witness unto all nations, and then shall the end come, for says Esaias the people
that dwell in darkness shall see a great light, and upon them that dwell in the
land of the shadow of death shall it shine, that the knowledge of the Lord
shall be full upon the earth, as the water of the sea flows over the earth:
for the Gentiles shall inquire after the root of Iesse, and the Lord shall
gather together the dispersed of Israel, and the outcastes of Judah, and then
shall men rejoice before God as men make merry in harvest. for says he, I will
stretch out my hand to the Gentiles and set up my token to the people, for
Kings shall be thy nurcing fathers and Queens thy nurcing mothers, Esaias. 9.
and all they that think a scorn of him shall be confounded, for behold he
brings his treasure with him, and his works goes before him, he shall feed
his flock like and heardman, Esaias, 49.
he shall gather the lambs together with his arm and carry them in his bosom
and kindly entreat them that bear young, wherein the prophet foretells the
power, virtue and excellency of Christ, that though he came in the humility
of the flesh, yet such was his miracles, his works and his treasures of
goodness, as would allure, animate, and inflame al men toward him: and besides
that so precious was his conversation, so pure his demenure, so loving his
humanity, so excellent his disposition, so good in his doings, and so flowing
in wholesome doctrine, as that he is a most amiable and precious Adamant to draw
men to his kingdom, yea and in manner to constrain them to love him which
never knew him: yea such is his gentle entreating, like a loving father to his
son, like a careful shephard over his sheep, like a good hen that
gathers her chickens under her wings, so he is tender over man. And therefore
beware that we show not our selves unthankful. For when the children of
Israel, were clean gone astray from God, as sheep without a shepherd, then
the Lord mindful of his promise to Jacob, said: Esaias. 27.
I will root Jacob again, and Israel shall be green and bear flowers, and
fill the whole world with her fruit, Esaias 35.
then shall the desert and wilderness rejoice, and the wast grounds flourish
like a lilie: Esaias. 44.
And I will power waters upon the dry ground, and rivers upon the thirsty,
and shall give waters in the wilderness and streams in the desert, that I may
give drink to my people whom I have chosen to praise me. By this we see des
cribed (as in a metaphor) how far the spiritual water of Christ's doctrine
shall extend it self, in all bountifulnes over all the world, that the
wilderness, deserts, and dry grounds, being the barbarous, rude and savage
people of all places, shall have offered unto them the water of the streams of
the fountain of Jacob, the gospel of Christ to wash away there uncleanness and
wickedness, so that it is manifest, that the Church of Christ is tied to no
particular place or kingdom, but is freely dispersed throughout the whole
world, whereby it appears that the Papists do work against the streams of
Jacob, to stop the rivers from the thirsty. And now again, the Lord says:
Esaias. 43, 44
I will power (O Jacob) my spirit upon thy seed, and mine increase upon thy
stock, they shall grow together like as the grass, for there shall spring
out of them a captain, and prince which the Lord shall challenge to him self,
Iere. 30. E^ay, 6. Iere. 33. Es ay. 49.
who shall open the prison to them that are bound, and he is the glad tidings
to the poor, who shall bring redemption to the captive, and res tore Israel,
and set up his honor in Judah, and in David's stool, that all nations shall
honor him: yea kings and princes shall arise and worship this holy one of
Ifraell. By which the prophets conclude, that although we know all the law of
Moses, and be careful in keeping it, yet we are in prison and bondage to
death, without we embrace Christ, and prefer him above the law, and above all
works, as the only door to enter into Gods rest: for he does open the
prison, wherein we were tied to damnation by the fetters of Adams corruption,
who has the keys of hell and death, according to Esaias: unto Sion shall come a
redeemer, yea the Lord said I will lay a stone in Sion a costly corner stone,
Esaias. 59. Esaias. 28. Zach. Dan. 2.
a sure foundation, that who so put his trust in hem shall not be confounded.
And says he, behold I will hew him out, and take away the sin of the land in
one day. As says Daniel: there was hewn a stone without hands, that smote
the image, and became a great mountain, which fulfilleth the whole earth: so
that it is impossible to obtain glorification, unless we embrace this
precious stone of Sion: neither is it possible for the great Image of the first
or last monarchy of Babylon to withstand or hold back the power of this stone
of Sion, by whose force the pomp of the Image of Rome shall be broken like an
earthen pot that flies in many pieces, although it please the Lord to suffer
that romish beast still to bear a sway among those children, which be as Esaw,
that make light of the birthright of the eternal kingdom given only by
Christ's gospel: and not by the traditions and fancies of men: And therefore
that last Image of Babylon must be shaken a sunder, that promises other
means, and more ways to win everlasting life, then only by this corner
stone. Wherefore as pure gold is tried from counterfect, by the touch, so all
ye that fear damnation, try the traditions of that Image of Rome by reading
the pure gospel, with fear and reverence to God, and with care of your souls
health: and you shall find that the gospel which is the true touch of truth
will bring thee home again from the dark dales of Rome, to the bright
mountain of Sion: of whom the Lord said by Jeremy, I will set up the
righteous branch of David, that shall set up equity in the earth, that Judah
shall be saved, Iere. 23.
and Israel dwell without fear, and they shall call him the Lord our righteous
maker, for says the Lord: I will give you an heardman, Iere. 3.
after my own mind, which shall feed you with wisdom, that Jerusalem shall
be called the Lords seat: Esaias. 2.
for the law shall come out of Syon and the word of God from Iesalem.

And therefore we must desire only to be fed with the wisdom that proceed
from this our heavenly heardman, embracing no other word of doctrine but that
which he gave us from Jerusalem, being his pure gospel, builded upon the
Apostles and prophets, for says Paul, the holy Scripture is able to make the
wise to salvation through the faith which is in Christ Jesus. Timoth. ^.^.
And therefore beware least you be spoiled through Philosophy and deceitful
vanity, and through the traditions of men, Col. 2.
and ordinances, after the world and not after Christ: for the Lord said by
Jeremy. I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, that is, Iere.
31.
I will plant my laws in their inward parts, even in their hearts, and will be
their God, and from thence forth shall no man teach his brother or neighbor
saying, know God, for they shall all know me, from the lowest to the highest,
according to Joel: Joel. 2.
I will power out my spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and daughters
shall prophecy, your old men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall
see vis ions yea upon those days I will power out my spreit upon s eruants
and Maids. Whereby we may gather, that such is the power of the Gospel of
Christ, and promise of our redemption and salvation, that neither the contrary
powers of Satan, nor the obstinat malicious or barbarous tyranie of men has
power to withholde it, (at the time appointed) from the people of God: for the
Lord has spoken it, that it shall spread over the world, and that his spyrit
shall enter into all flesh: It is against the prophecy of Joel to hold the
Scripture in an unknow on language.
So that it is great repugnauce to the ordena^ce of God to hold back the fruit
and sweet taste of the Gospel from the people by concealing it under a cloak
of an unknown language and strange tongue, which is a veil that hydes the
face and brightness of the glory of the Gospel of our salvation, from the
people that desire to know it, and see it, and ought to come unto it: as the
veil did hang before Moses face, because the children could not behold the
glory of his countenance which God gave, by giving the law: but now we are able
through the gift of the spreit of Christ, who has taken away ye veil from
Moses, and given an open fountain of cleernes to behold ye truth of his
gospel of salvation in yt it is ye Lords bountiful blessing yt all flesh
should feel the operation of ye holy spreit: and to come to to his waters and
buy his milk and wine witout money and money worth (which is his gospel yt
feeds and nuris heth like milk, and gladdeth and cheareth ye heart like wine:
so that heerby is clearly condemned and cast to the ground the traditions of
papistrie, yt lock up ye word of God in an unknown language, yt none can come
to Gods holy water without money or money worth: such is ye darnel and cockel of
their traditions, as to worrow Chris tes sheep and to wrap the^ in blindness,
when notwtstanding it ought to be yt the gospel should be opened plain,
manifest and and vnclocked, yt the saying of ye prophet may be fulfilled both
sons and daughters, maids and servants to prophecy, which is with vnders
tanding to offer unto God by Christ the sacrifice of land, the fruit of those
lips which confess his name.

Wherefore it is apparent, that it is the duty and part of princes and
governors, to follow herein the example of Iehosaphat, causting the word of
god plainly to be taught among their subjects in the mother language (as Moses
law was to the children of Israel. And it is the duty and charge of the
pastors and ministers to employ al their diligence to manifest the holy will of
God according to the scriptures, by teaching and instructing that every where
the scripture may be fulfilled according to the prophecy of Joel and Jeremy,
that sons and daughters can prophecy, and the law written in their hearts:
so that it stands you upon to have care of your souls, Coloss. 2. Mich. 3.
that no man make you shoot at a wrong mark.

Wherefore Micheas thus prophecieth of the dew of the gospel of Christ,
saying: In the latter days the hill of the Lords house, shall be set up higher
then any mountains, and the people shall prease unto it, and the multitude of
gentiles have to it, for the law shall come out of Syon and the word of God from
Jerusalem and reform the people of far countries, Nath. ^^.
for out of Bethlem shall come the captain which shall be the gouernar in
Israel, whose out going has been from the beginning and from everlasting, he
shall stand fast and give food in the strength of the Lord, and in the victory
of the name of the Lord his god, and when they be converted, he shall be
magnified, to the farthest parts of the world. Whereby it is declared that in
spite of all the adversaries, ye tread down the holy sanctuary of true
righteousness, (will they nill they) ye promise which God gave to Abraham yt all
nations should be blessed in his s eede, shall by Christ's passion extend to all
parts of the world, to the praising and glorifying of god. And likewise Esoras
does plainly foretell the ioyfulnesse of Christ's coming in his humanity,
saying: O ye heathen, Esdr. 4.^
look for your shepherd, he shall give you everlasting rest, for he is nighe
at hand, that shall come in the end of the world, be ready to the reward of
thy kingdom, for the everlasting light shall shine upon you for evermore. Fly
the shadow of this world, receive the ioyfulnes of your glory, I testify my
savior openly, O receive the gift that is given you, and be glad, giving
thanks unto him that has called you to the heavenly kingdom. In this he
shows how much he is inflamed with the glad foresight of the savior that
should come, kindlyng the hearts of the Gentiles to the expectation of heavenly
rewards. Wherein he is able to ravish all men's hearts with exceeding joy, in
pronouncing the glad tidinges of such a blessed savior coming, that brings
the rewards of glory and everlasting life to all that will receive and embrace
his gospel: And seeing the coming of Christ in the flesh was joyful, and
filled the world with the oil of gladness, and treasures of grace and goodness:
how much more, (we now looking for him to come in the end of the world in the
glory of his father in all power, to give the rewards of glorification and
eternal life,) ought to awake and arise up, from all worldly and fleshly
vanities, and prepare our hearts to holiness, and righteousness, that with the
abundant joy of a pure faith, and a clear and a steadfast hope, we may meet
our savior coming in the clouds.

And touching Christ's coming in his humanity, it pleased God that he should
appear in the flesh, in all meeknes, Zach. 9. John 12. Luke 9. Math. 21. Mark.
11.
lowlines, and humblenes of obedience to teach us the will of his father in all
truth of righteousness, according to Zachary: Rejoice O Syon, and be glad O
daughter Jerusalem, for lo thy king comes unto thee, even the righteous and
savior, lowly and simple is he, he rydeth upon an Ass, he will give doctrine
of peace unto the heathen, and his dominion shall be from the floudes to the
end of the world, and shall be a saving health to all nations: by this consider
ye men upon the earth, how worthy Chris t is, and how precious a pearl he is
in all men's hearts, and yet to show the contempt of this transitory world and
the vanity thereof, and to teach us the true path steps of virtue and
holiness: does he ere make him self to the eyes of all Jerusalem a looking
glass of all low lines and humblenes of heart, ryding into the City in all
plains and simplenes sitting upon an ass, as one of no reputation and
nothing esteemed, but like an inferior, and yet an eternal king, a captain,
an heavenly Father and savior of the world: by who^e we are to note that the
true path to virtue and holiness, is humility, obedience, and lowlynes: for
among the conferences of men, it is a most accepted thing to common rea son, to
have our governor, our captain, our master, or teacher, of whom we are to
be governed, guided or instructed, to be gentle, humble, me ek, loving,
tractable, courteous and mercifull-by that means, winning and drawing our hearts
volu^tarily, to love him, follow him and embrace his will: then how much more
are we bound to god, (yt all the world sleping in their sin, and wallowing in
their wickedness) that it pleased him not to come unto us with the sharp rod, or
with the naked or scored sword to the s laughter: but to send his dear son
Christ in ye humility of ye flesh to be like unto us: being such a true and
gentle captain and guide: so loving and bountiful a redemer: so humble and
lowly a tearher, so pure of demenor and conversation, as yt he is the only and
true lodesto^e of love, to draw all men (which are of them selves stubburn,
froward, disdainful and wilful) to ye loving and embracing of him, thereby the
redier to follow his doctrine of eternal peace and salvation to us ward: And
therefore behold ye abunda^t love and mercy of god, (who thus after so
excellent a means) seeks to draw us from our earthly corroptio^ and from the
bdo^age of death to his heuinly grace and eternal kingdom) we being of our
selves a froward generation touching goodness, in ye sin did dwell in us as a
common rotto all mankind if the God of mercies had not sent this our redeemer
to cleanse and wash away our filth and foulenes: and therefore let no man boaste
of him self any thing, for we have nothing which we have not received of
Christ, neither according to the saying of Jeremy.

Let not the wise man rejoice in his wisdom, nor the strong in his strength:
Jeremy. 9.
nor the rich man in his riches, but who will rejoice let him rejoice in
Christ, who is our only salvation: Wherefore o ye sovereign Kings and Queens
ye sweet Lords and Ladies: ye loouing Fathers and mothers, ye wise Masters
and mistresses, ye obedient sons and daughters, ye diligent and dutiefull
servants and maids? rejoice and be glad and behold your king and precious
Savior Christ ryding into Jerusalem lowly and humbly? and now arise and lift
up your eyes of repentance, to heaven: and rejoice and behold how he is ready
to come in all glory and majesty with all the powers of heaven, to crown you
with glorious and heavenly glorification.

Therefore cast of from your hearts the evil mantell of pride, disdain,
arrogancy, haughtines, unmercifulness, frowardnes, sin and unrighteousness:
and put on the mantel of Christ's humblenes, lowlynes, mercifullnes, goodness,
holiness and righteousness, that you may me ete Christ with joy and receive the
incorruptible crown of eternal glory: for thus says the Lord: I will set
his dominion in the sea, and his right hand in the floodes, he shall call me:
Psalm. 89.
thou art my Father, my God and my strong salvation, and I will make him my
first borne, higher then the Kings of the earth, Esaias. 55.
my mercy will I keep for him for evermore, and my couenance shall stand fast
with him, his seed also will I make to endure for ever, and his throne as the
days of heaven: of whom he says, My servant whom I will give for a
witness, Esaias 52.
prince and captain to the people will I keep to my self, he is mine elect,
in whom my soul is pacified: I will give him my spirit, that he may show
forth judgment and equity among the Gentiles: he shall not be an outcryer,
nor high minded, his voice shall not be heard in the streates, a bruised ^eede
shall he not break, and the s moking flackes shall he not quench, but
faithfully and truly shall he give judgment, he shall neither be over
seen nor hasty, that he may restore righteousness to the earth, for I the
Lord has called the in righteousness and do lead the by thee hand: therefore
will I also defend and give thee for a covenant of the people and to be the
light of the Gentiles, that thou may open the eyes of the blind, let out
the prisoders, and them that fit in darkness out of the doungeon house.

In this the Prophet foretelling that Christ should come in the flesh death
show that by his means only we shall be brought to an attonment and peace
with GOD the Father: expressing the perfectionn of love and pleasure which GOD
the Father has in his son Christ, being one self same nature in another:
according to Matthew. Math. 3.17.


This is that belooued Son in whom is my delight: and according to the
saying of the Prophet David in the second Psalm: Thou art my son this day
have I begotten thee: and heerin we e learn that if Christ is so beeloued of
God, being God, according to the forty nine Psalm, the Father of heaven
says to his son: God: Thy seat shall be for ever and ever: then how much
are we bound to love, so beloved a God and Savior to us, giving him all the
praise, honor and thanks, evermore lifting up pure hands: for so great
treasures of virtue and goodness, for his cleernes of troth and judgment, for
the light and brightness of his most holy and blessed doctrine for his
abundant sweetness of his exceeding and bountiful loone toward us most
miserable sinners, in that he of his mere mercy and goodness has brought
unto us redemption and delyuerance out of the bondage of satan, sin and
death, calling us to holiness of life thereby by imitating him, to be made by
righteousness the sons of God, and pertakers of the everlasting kingdom:
And further, the Lord says, My servant shall deal wis ely therefore shall he
be magnified, exalted and greatly honored, like as the multitude shall marvel
at him, because his cou^tena^ce shall be so deformed and hard favored above the
sons of men: yea, he shall have neither beauty nor favor, when we look upon
him, there shall be no fairnes in him, we shall have no lust unto him, he shall
be the most simple and despised of all, (which yet has good experience in
sorrows and in firmities) but we shall reckon him so vile and base that we
shall not regard him: how be it of a truth he only takes away our infirmitees.

Whereupon consider according to Paul that Christ does make him self of no
reputation and takes upon him the shape of a servant, and became like unto man
and was found in his apparel as a man: and that he abasing him self (in
respect of all worldly wisdom) was of the wis e according to the wisdom of
this world despised, scoffed and s corned at he being him self verry wisdom
it self and the fountain thereof: and he being beauty it self and the Author
of all beauty and fairnes, would show him self without beauty and favor:
to condemn the vanity of fleshly beautfe, and extol the excellency and
woorthines of the spiritual and heavenly beauty of the soul: wherefore O ye
Children and Daughters of men, ye are become so nyce, so arogant and coy
because of your faces and so proud of your beauties: Come from your vain
looking glasses: The contempt of fleshly beauty.
and behold, here, I offer unto you the bright shyning glass of all
excellency, euin Christ your King and Savior the Author and Giver of all
beauties and godliness: to behold him, being without favor and fairness,
being lowely, me eke, and most humble, being simple and not gorgeous: how he
condemned and despised your vain fleshly pleasure and gaynes: even in the
clear example of his own person, giving you himself, for a rule: that you
rejoice not in apparel, nor vainly conceive of your vain flesh, and outward
comlines of nature, but only in the beauty of your souls, by adorning and
decking your inward man with all spiritual rayments of holiness and precious
ornaments of righteousness, which will never decay: whereas the flesh and all
that pertain to his furniture, is (as S. Peter says) as grass, and all the
glory of man is as the flower of grass: Pet. 1.1.
the grass thereof withers, and the flower fades away, but the word of God
endures for ever.

Moreover the prophet says, that we shall despise him, and yet he bears our
pain, Esaias. 53.
and we shall so contemtuously think of him, as that we shall judge him, as
though he were plagned and cast down of God, whereas he notwiths tanding shall
be wounded for our offenses, and smitten for our wickedness, for the pain of
our punishment, shall be laid upon him, and with his stripes shall we be
healed, he shall be pained and troubled and shall not open his mouth he shall
be led as a sheep to be slain, The prophecy of Christ's death.
yet shall he be as still as a lamb, before the shearers and not open his
mouth, he s hall be had away, his cause not heard, and without any judgment,
whose generation yet no man may number, when he shall be cut off from the
ground of the living, which punishment shall go upon him for the transgression
of my people, his grave shall be given with the condemned, and his crucifying
with the thieves, whereas he did never violence nor unright, neither has
there been any deceitfulnes in his mouth, yet has it pleased the Lord to
smite him, with infirmity, that when he had made his soul an offering for
sin, he might see long lasting seed, and my righteous servant says the
Lord: shall with his wisdom, justify and deliver the multitude, for he shall
bear away their sins, therefore will I give him the multitude for his part,
and he shall divide the strong spoil, because he shall give over his soul
unto death, and shall be reckoned among the transgressors, which nevertheless
shall take away the sins of the multitude and make intercession for the
misdoers: here it is plain and manifest to be seen, of all Jews, and
Gentiles, Heathen, and Turks, how evidently Christ was prophesied of, by Esaias:
that all men may well know (that has desire of eternal life) that he it is
in all tokens whom the Jews have put to death (being the first promised seed
to Abraham) for the prophet declares the order of his judgment, the manner of
his death, even to be crucified with thieves: in all points as his persecutors
and Jews did handle and entreat him most barbarously and hardly, being an
innocent lamb.

Wherefore touching the contemtuous disdainful and reproachful handling of
Christ unto death, Of Christ's death.
they came to apprehend him in the garden (like furious enemies) with clubs and
staves: they rent and teared his clothes, he was tossed among the high priests
and scornful pharasies, Math. 26.
then hasted away to the judge, there beset with false accusers, hudling up
false witness against him: Luke 23.
then posted over to king Herod, there dispited in most abject manner of him and
his soldiers: Mark. 15.
then brought again before Pilate, and heuily reviled, and oppressed with the
spite and hatred of ye Jews, crying: crucefige, crucefige, then (like
barbarous tyrants, and savage beasts) void of all mercy and humanity, spitted
on his face, and buffeted him with fistes, with railing, raging, mocking and
disdaining him with scoffs, griping him with bonds: scurging him with many
stripes, crowning him with sharp thorns, John ^9.
putting a reed for a scorn in his hand: thus compa ssing him about with all
reproach, then hasting him to his death, making him to bear his cross, nailed
his tender flesh, wounded and pierced him and crucified him between two
thieves, wagging their heads at him in mo st dispiteful manner. And thus was the
king of glory crucified, being obedient to ye cross, and humble unto death,
and pacient to endure the hard speakinges of sinners against him, and yet
praying to god for them, and thus was he a pure undefiled lamb, wounded for
our offenses, his precious blood shed for our sins, by which he took away the
curse of the law from us, and made us at an atonement with God, and brought
redemption to the world. Wherefore al ye people of the earth, I call you here to
the presence of Christ's death, to behold what he has suffered for you upon
his great love. Therefore let your eyes gush out with tears, and let your hearts
make inward sorrow and lamentation for your sins, repenting, for his kingdom
again is ready at hand: therefore examine thy heart, where, and what is, and
ought to be thy love again to Christt, hat has thus bought thee with his
tender blood and prepared for thee everlasting life: so that look into thy
self, how faithful, thankful, and loving thou ought to be for such his
goodness toward thee: for scarce will any dye for a good man, but Christ dyed
for thee, Romans 5.
being both ungodly, a sinner and an enemy: to purchase to thee everlasting
life: (O) what abundant love is this? And will thou be therefore unthankful?
Then woe be to thee that art (more) then unnatural, more then unkind, and more
the^ hard hearted. Alas where art thou, thou froward Jew? that upon obstinate
envy, wilful blindness, and of an unmerciful mind, did despise ye king of
glory? And will not you, now, (ye people) from age to age, take example to
beware how you seal your hearts with the hard ware of a Jews wilfulnes,
hardness and blindness again? Now then, that this day you hear his voice, (the
very voice of your good shepherd that gave his life for his sheep) harden not
your hearts (as your fathers did in ye wilderness) and so could not enter ye land
of rest and promise: no more shall you enter Christ's kingdom, unless ye receive
his gospel with true love and faith toward him. Wherefore do not crucify
Christ again in thy heart by obstinate sin, by wilful blindness, and
carelessenes: like a Jew and Turk, despising the humanity of Christ that was
so humble: by being malicious and unkind to him that is so good: by being
cruel and froward to him that is so merciful: by envying and persecuting him
that is a pure innocent, when as (in man's wisdom) it is wickedness to scorn
the good, cruelty to deal hardly with the simple and innocent: foolishnes to
jest with holy things: madness to hate him that loves: lewdnes to refuse good
doctrine: and wicked furiousnes to reject and make light of s aluation:
therefore awake, and beat down thy churlish heart, thy pernicious nature, and
stiff conceit, and put on loving kindness and mercy, faith and hope, and be
quick in will and mind to receive Christ, and be constant in retaining him: and
so let thy love be sure and stable toward him, Reu. 5.
for no treasure is of so great certainty as the perfect and immouable love of
Christ, who stands at the door of thy heart and knocks, and if thou will
hear his voice and open thy heart to receive his words, he will come in and
sup with thee, and thou shall for so entertaining him and his righteous
doctrine, sup with him at his heavenly table of everlasting benediction and
blessedness.

Thus persuade thy self, that no man loves thee more entirely, nor regards
thy salvation more tenderly then Christ does, and seeing we confess by nature,
that love is allured by nothing so much as by love, The love of Christ passes
all things.
then O thou earthly man and unthankful heart, love Christ again (for thy
souls health) that so aboundantlye loves thee. So that let neither the pomp
of this world, nor pleasure of fleshly delights, nor kindred, nor countries,
or nations, nor profession, nor condition of living, nor causes diminish thy
love from Christ, and from thy brother or neighbor for Christ's sake: Seeing
there is one father of all whom we are tauht of Christ, to call father
daily, which will acknowledge thee to be his child, if thou like wise
acknowledge all his children to be thy brethren.

Therefore learn love, patience and mercy by Christ, that in whatsoever
estate you be, to be therewith contented, holding fast the faith and patience
of Christ, Phil. 4.
being assuredlye persuaded that the ready and compendious way to come unto
Gods favor, is to love and embrace Christ and his word with a pure and
faithful heart, and to love one an other, for if we love one an other says
John: God dwells in us and his love is perfect in us, John. 14.
for he that loves God mu st love his brother also, though he be an enemy:
for says Christ, love your enemies, bliss them that curse you, do good
to the^ that hate you. Math. 5.
and in so doing, we shall follow the example of our savior Christ and be
Gods Children in conversation of holiness and goodness. And thus Christ the
Author and finisher of our redemption, having performed his Fathers will by
preaching first him self the Commandments of his Father, and by diverse
signs, wounders and miraclrs done according to his will to confirm the power
of his Father, Heb. 5.
did in his flesh offer up prayers and supplications with strong crying and
tears, unto him that was able to save him from death, and was also heard
because of his godlynes, and now upon the Cross yielded up his soul into the
hands of his Father, who raised him from death, and he is ascended up to
heaven, and is set on the right hand of the Majesty of the Father, according
to the saying of the Prophet.

The Lord said unto my Lord, sit on my right hand till I make thy enemies thy
footestoole: Whereby conceive how Christ being promised before by God and his
holy Prophets in the holy Scriptures to come of the seed of Abraham as
perteining to the flesh, Psalm. 19^.
and declared to be ye son of God with power of the holy Ghost that
sanctifies, was borne of the Virgin Mary by the embracing of the holy Ghos te,
(the holy Virgin being eternally appointed to this great mystery to be the
Mother of Jesus: for the invisible power of the Godhed did over s hadowe the
whole body and mind of the most holy Virgin without any hurt or detriment of
her chastity) so that the work of his conception, was not of man but of the
holy Ghost) by the in comprihensble power of insperation, for says the Lord
by Esaias: Esaias. 7
Behold a Virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they
shall call his name Emanuel God with us: and so the Angel said to Joseph, that
which is conceived in her, is of the holy Ghost, she shall bring forth a
son and thou shall call his name Jesus, Math. 1.
for he shall save his people from their sins, he shall be great and called
the son of the highest, and son of God, and the Lord shall give unto him
the seat of his father David, and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for
ever and of his kingdom shall be no end, Luke 1.
even as he promised to our fathers Abraham and his seed for ever.

So that we have such an Advocate with the Father, (Jesus Christ the
merciful) as has put down through his death and passion the devil that has
the Lordship over death, and has s poyled rule and power and triumphs over
them in his own person, and has nailed the curse of the law to his cross
and has carried captivity captive up to heaven being their set down on the
right hand of God, Colloss. 2.
being able to save them that come to God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for us, Heb. 7.
who with one offering made perfect for ever the^ that are sanctified:

Heb. 10.
Wherefore we may clearly as by the light of the Sun beams see and conceive
that they do lay another foundation (then the Apostle Paul does here lay)
that teach the people to use any other Aduocat or intercessor then Chist, or
to use intercessors to Christ, which evermore is him self an intercessor for
us: who^e we know apparently by evident scriptures, that he lives and is with
God in glory their making intercession for us, and able to do it by power of
his victory, and because he ever lives and was ordained to that eternal
mystery, for it is written, that ye whole kingdom do lie on his shoulders,
the pains of our sins rest upon his wounds and stripes, and our whole
redemption is only by him, so that it repugneth against Christ's glory, (who is
crowned with glory and honor for suffering death for us) to offer intercession
and meditation to Saints, to pray to Ladies and Churrh-roodes and to wa^der a
pilgrimage to offer to picturde images of Saints, which is strong delusion
and horrible abomination, and verry stubble and straws of a strauge foundation
of erroneous doctrine, perniciously sown among the people which the Lord in one
day shall consume with fire.

And besides seeing we are made perfect with one only offering made by Christ
him self through the spirit that sanctifies, Heb. 10.
then consider from what foundation those vain erroneous masses do come and be
not deceived with the^: for Christ has once offered him self a sufficient
sacrifice for us the just, for the unjust, for to bring us to God whose blood
cleanses us from all sin, for Christ has delivered us from the curse of
the law, and was made accursed for us, that the blessing of Abraham might come
upon the Gentles: Gal.^.
Therefore let us be thankful and pray only unto God by Christ and use no
other intercessors of our own conceits imagined: Pet. 13.
but let us consider how much God sets out unto us his abundant love that
while we were enemies and sinners, his only begotten son Jesus should dye
for us, being killed as perteining to the flesh and quickened in the spirit,
who thus suffered for us (to reconcile us to God) and yet did no sin, neither
was there guyle found in his mouth, who when he was reviled, Pet ^.
reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatened not, but patiently
committed and delivered the only cause unto him that judges righteously, and
thus his own self bare our sins in his body on the tree* yt we should be
delivered from s inn and live in righteousness, Esaias. 53.
for whosoever does truly and purely love Christ and embrace the faith of
his Gos pell can not but do the works of righteousness, and obedyence (like
to righteous Abraham) otherwise persuade thy conscience and be not deceived in
thy conceit but that thy love to Christ is cold, faint and brickle, if thou
have embraced the knowledge and faith of the Gospel and yet do not the
works of righteousness and holiness: for then thou art yet carnal and not
spiritual, having not yet crucified the old Adam: wherefore consider that by
grace we are made safe, through faith, and that not of our selves, for it is
the gift of God and comes not of works, Ephe. 2.
least any should boa st him self, for we are his woormanship created in Christ
Jesus unto good woorks that we should walk in them, so that none can love
Christ in pureness of heart, but that of verry force he will walk in good
woorks as things that are impossible to be separated from him that is
sanctified with the spirit of adoption and grace, for as Christ is the
fountain of all holiness and righteousness, and of all grace and goodness: so it
must needs follow that whom Christ has sanctified with his Spirit, that
they must of necessity do the works of grace and righteousness: so long as
they labor and endeavor to be renewed and confirmed in the spirit of grace,
which we receiving and taking of Christ, must of force confess, that
without it we have no power to crucify our flesh and to resist sin: and
therefore by it, we have power to mortify our earthly members and to do the
works of righteousness: whereby it is most evident and plain, that by the
grace given by Christ through faith, we may assuredly and boldly persuade
our s elues that we are only justified and saved.

Therefore says Peter, Pet. 1.1.
blessed be God the father of our Lord Jesus, which through his abundant
mercy, begat us again, to a lively hope, by the resurrection of Christ from
death, to enjoy an inheritance immortal and undefiled, reserved in heaven for
us, after which the prophets inquired and searched, prophesying of the grace
that should come unto us, by the spirit of of Christ which testified before, of
the passions that should come unto him and the glory that should follow after,
for by Christ we are made spiritual and not carnal, whose spirit does
certify our spirit, that we are the sons of God, and heirs annexed with
him, who was ordained before the world was made that by him our faith and hope
might be in God, so that our justification come not by the deeds of the law,
but by the faith of Jesus Christ according to Paul, These.^^
God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation through sanctifying of the
spirit, and through the believing of the truth, whereunto he called you by the
gospel, for Christ is the end of the law, to justify all that believe, Romans
8 Gal. 6.
walking not after the flesh, but after the spirit, for what soever a man
sows that shall he reap: if he sow in the flesh, he shall of the flesh
reap corruption: but if he sow in the spirit, he shall of the spirit reap
life everlasting: for they that are Christ's, Gal. 5.
have crucified the flesh with the appetites and lusts thereof, for Christ
has called us to holiness, and not to uncleanness, and has called us out of
bondage into liberty: from ye curse of the law unto grace: from darkness to
light: from death to life, from the spirit of fear to a lively hope: from a
earthly mansion to an heavenly kingdom, from transitory glory, to everlasting
glorification: therefore stand grounded and established in faith, not moved
away from the gospel, but stand fa st in the lively hope to obtain the glory
that comes by Christ, Romans 8.
being unfeignedly pers waded that there is no damnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus, walking after the spirit, and having their conservation in
heaven. For Christ our savior sitting now in the right hand of God in his
majesty, Ephe. 1.
was before the world was, by whom we are predestined heirs, according to
the purpose of him that works all things, after the purpose of his own will,
that through his gospel, should be brought life and immortality, to all that
do believe in his son Jesus Christ the seed of promise to Abraham, who now
is declared openly: whom we look for to come shortly in the glory of his
Father and all holy Angels with him, in all power and majesty. And that all
eyes shall see him, and they also that pearsed him so that al kindreds of the
earth shall mourn when they behold Christ coming in the clouds, Reu. 1.
to reward every man according to his deeds: therefore it behooves us to watch
and pray, and to become new creatures, thereby making our election sure, by
holding fast his gospel in a steadfast faith by walking after righteousness,
that we may overcome and be found faithful at the appearance of Christ coming
in glory, that we also may be crowned with glory joyfully, saying: Blessed is
the kingdom that comes in the name of him, Mark. 11.
that is Lord of our Father David, Hosanna, in the highest.

Ephe. 1.
BLessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ which has blessed us, with
all manner of spiritual blessings in heavenly things by Christ, (according as
he had chosen us, before the foundation of the world was laid, that we should
be Saints through love, who ordained us before through Christ, to be heirs
unto him self, according to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of
the glory of his grace, wherewith he has made us accepted through the
beloved Jesus, by whom we have redemption through his blood even the
forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace. Therefore to him be
all honor and glory world without end,

Amen.
THE GLORIOUS and beautiful garland of man's glorification.
CAP. 2. How man shall be changed at the sound of the last troump, from
mortality to immortality, and from an erthly nature to an everlasting nature:
and appear before the judgment seat of Chris t, to be rewarded according to
his deeds, either with eternal reproufe: or, else with everlasting
glorification.
SVch is the eternal ordenance of the Almighty God touching our salvation, in
his Son Jesus Christ: that all men ought too know that as by a man came
death, so by a man come the resurrection of the dead: for as by Adam all dye,
so by Christ shall all be made alive: according to John. John. 5.


The hour shall come in ye, which all yt are in their graves shall hear
Christ's voice, and shall come forth, they that have done good to the
resurrection of life, and they yt have done evil to the resurrection of
dampnation: Esdras. 22.
as the Lord said by the Prophet: Those that be dead will I raise up again
from their places, Daniell. 12.
and bring them out of their graves and they that sleep in the dust of the
earth shall awake some to everlasting life, Acts. 17.
some to perpetual shame and reproufe: as it is in the Acts, that the Lord
has appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world according to
righteousness, by that man Christ, whom he has appointed and has offered
faith to all men, after that raised him from death: to whom (says John) the
Father has committed all judgment, because that all men should honor the
son even as they honor the Father, that who soever hears Christ's wo^des
and believe on him that sent him, Ihon. 5.
has everlasting life, and shall not come to damnation, but is escaped from
death unto life, for he only has the keys of hell and death and shall judge
the quick, Reave. 1.
and the dead at the appearing of his kingdom, were all shall be brought
before the judgment seat of Christ, Tim. 2.4.
and every one give accountes of him self to God: for the time is come that
judgment must begin at the house of the Lord consider therefore, what kind of
people we ought to be in conversation of life, Pet. 14.
seeing the righteous judgment of God, shall be opened, which will reward
every man with praise, honor and immortality, that has cu^tinued in good
doing: Romans 2.
and unto them which has been sinful, disobeying the trenth and following
iniquity, shall come indignation, and wrath, tribulation and anguish, upon the
soul of every man yt do evil: for there is no parcialitie with God, but
does judge without respect of persons according to every man's works as
shall appeir at ye great day of the Lord when God shall judge the secrets of
men by Jesus Christ according to the Gospel: when we must appeir ^e before
his glorious and shining majesty, that every man may reap according as he
has sown: Heb. 4.
whereupon we are most carefully to look into our own selves, knowing that
our souls shall be ways upon the balance, by that most true and righteous
Judge, whose eyes are as a flame of fire, that sercheth out the ground of our
hearts, and knows the seceret mouings of our minds, and judges all the
thoughts and intentes of man, to whom all things are naked and bare, neither
is there any creature invisible in the sight of him* who will not fail to to
recompense every man according to his ways and according to the fruits of his
counsels and imaginations: Now then that this general cytation of our
infallible appera^ce before that Court regal, which God will hold with all
flesh is so apparent, we should persuade yt the knoweledge heerof, is most
forcible, to strike into our hearts a trembling fear and dread of our Lord
God: who is a consuming fire to all that do continue in wickedness: so that it
behooves us, not to make light account of so great and fearful a matter and
it stands us upon, not to be necligente and careless of the order and
manner of our lives, seeing it touches our Souls so near the quick, as that
by the conversation of life in this world (the mark and garland is so set
before us) that if we run the race of this life, Math. 2.5.
like to the five good Virgins having prepared in our selves (in ye grace of
Christ) yt lamps of righteousness, sanctifying the Lord God in our hearts by good
conversation in Christ: then we shall accompanye Christ or bridegroom in
the great day of his coming and shall go in, with him to the wedding, and to
the inioying of our new heavenly Jerusalem which is to come down from God from
heaven, preparhd as a Bryde for her husband, Roue. 19.
being rays with the goodly raines of the righteousness, of Saints for the
marriage of the undefiled Lamb, and for the glorious company of the holy elect,
who then are happy that they are called unto the lambs supper, there crowned
with the garland of glorification: Otherwise if we run the race of this life,
like the five foolish Virgins not respecting the rule of righteousness, nor
embracing the Oil of gladness brought to us by Christ's Gospel, but wallowing
in wickedness and so seek after our fleshly lusts and warldly vanities, then we
must be shut out from this heavenly wedding and thrown down from ye face of
God, and from his Sanctes, into that dreadful darcknes where all are wrapped in
sorrow and wot made ye dampened children of cursed s^^ha^: Phil. 2.
for which cause we ought to watch and pray knowing not what day or hours the
son of man shall come: and therefore we ought to watch and pray: woorking out
our sal^^^^^^ (...) ^^^^es t yt our misdeeds separate us from our God and our
sins hide his face (for ^^er) from us. Wherefore ye Prachers, cry out the
voice of heaviness and the lamenting cries of dolefulnes, which shall come unto
the wicked lyuers unless they repent: and ye Preachers, sound out the voice
of joy, of mirth and gladness that shall come unto the godly people: and thou
heart faint not, and thou hand slack not to utter forth and wri^^, how the
gates of heaven stand open, night and day for penitent sinners, for the
faithful, godly and righteous people to receive them into blessedness and show
thy self a watchman to awake with this voice all the people round about out of
the sleeping bed of sin, blowing into the ears of deaf sinners, wretched
worldlings, fleshly lyuers, vicious walkers and wicked dooers: how hell gates
do gape very wide ^n most dreadful manner, to swallowe up ungodly and wicked
men: Number. 16.
(O how did the Isralites tremble and quake when they did se the earth open and
s wallow up Corath, Leui. 10.
Dathan and Abyron with all that they had, that they went down quick to hell: O
how did the Isralites tremble and shake when a consuming fire came out from the
Lord and cons umed Nadab, and Abihu the sons of Aaron: Number. 11.
then come hither ye Inhabiters of the earth and behold with gushing tears
with sorrow and terror, with sobbes and sighs the day of vengeance, with much
more terror of the gates of hell: gaping and gas ping in most hydious,
monsterous and horrible manner, to swallow by(...) diffent (...): and again con
sider how the Isralites did sa^^^^or ^^are when ^^^re of the Lord did burn
among them and consumed the utter mo ste of the host: Exo. 19.
Deuteronomy. 4.
and how again they shaked for dread when the Lord came down upon mount Sinay
with tempest and sound of ye trump speaking out of fire: ba^nnow come hither
all ye people of ye Lord and behold the day of ye Lord, for he comes to take
vengeance and reward: yea he comes him self like a goldsmiths are (...) ye
heavens shall perish the elements melt, ye earth and all the (...) with^^^^^e:
according to Paul who says that, These. 2.^.
He shall come with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, rendering vengeance
unto them that know not God, and to them that obey not the gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which shall be punished with everlasting damnation from the
presence of the Lord and from the glory of his power, when he shall come to be
glorified in his saints and made marvelous in all them that believe: therefore
harken unto this voice, with sorrow of thy sins, and remember this day with
trembling and repenting: knowing how miserable those sinners were, that
continued in wickedness, and drove off from day to day, till the flood came
unawares upon them, and over whelmed, and gulled into their throts: Genesis 7.
and how lamentable the Sodomites were, that abode in sin, and wallowed in
the lusts of the flesh, and pleasure of the world, and in the lusts of eating
and drinking, and vicious life, even till the fire and brimstone came down
from heaven and consumed and burnt them up, mo st ^ufully and heavily: but now
behold, Genesis 19.
there is coming a thousand fold more, of fire and brimstone, of flames of
we, of floods of sorrow, and burning plagues of pain, at this day when all
the frame of this world shall fly on a fire, and the Lord shall say, depart ye
cursed into everlasting woe, the before turn unto me (says the Lord) and I
will turn unto you, and have to come away (ye people) from slumbring in
sin, Zach. 1.
and tarry no longer in your carnal lusts, and worldly desires, walking with
old Adam in filthy and vain conversation: but awake, and rise up to Christ in
holiness of life, knowing that you are redeemed with his precious blood (as of a
lamb undefiled and without spot) that you may be found unto laud honor and
glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ: Pet. 1.1.
when ye shall give accoumptes to him who shall come with all power, Pet. 1.4.
to judge the a^icke and dead: for which cause ye ought to awake out of sin,
and sit down upon the lap of repentance, there making you ready daily and
hourly, with the garments of righteousness, the breast plate of faith and love:
and putting on the golden helmet of hope, the precious badge of your salvation,
thereby making your calling and election sure, that when his glory appears,
you may be merry and glad, and not ashamed.

Wherefore consider this dreadful day: in which, behold how woeful, how
trembling and fearful it shall be: to see all the borders of the heavens, and
earth, in a raging bla^^ng and consuming fire: that we shall cry unto the
hills and rocks to fall on us, and how pitiful shall this day be, in which
all the kindreds of the earth shall mourn with grievous lamentings and
weepings: therefore let this consideration enter into the ears of thy heart,
as the sound of a terrible trumpet ^^uddering and shaking thy fleshly man;
with the remembrance of the groaning cries of the w^es in hell: and a^^mating
thy inward man with the joyful voices of blessedness in heaven, considering
that such is the glory, that the gospel propound, of the one side: and such
is the dreadful damnation which it threateneth of the other si^e: as that the
one, is an eternal kingdom of glory, prepared for the good and godly people,
the joy whereof surpasses the other is a place of horror and a furnace of
unquenchable pains, ordained for the wicked: into the which they shall be
damned, and cast from the face of their G^^^, there remaining, swallowed up,
into the dreadful and arc gulphes of hell, for ever and ever: and there shall
continue tormented with fire and brimstone for ever: where every place and
corner is filled with curses and woes, and with most heavy lamentations and
bewaylinges: where (alas) the heaps of woes, the storms of punishments, the
raging of spirits, the horror of Satan, and the crying of souls, may pearce
your hearts with the wounds of sorrow, to think of the griefs that shall be
accompanied with ye lamentable damnation of departing from god, and from his
kingdom of heaven: whereby it shall make that day of sentence and judgment of
death, given by Christ, to be most trembling, dreadful and fearful.

Notwithstanding, there is no cause why any man should fear himself, so that
he persevere in the christian faith, and good life, as a sure refuge and anchor:
He that believes need not fear.
although great shall be the fear of ye dreadful day of dome, when Christ
shall show himself suddenly and unlooked for, from an high, after ye manner of a
flash of lightening: dreadful to ye wicked, who shall be cast into everlasting
fire: and uost amiable and lovely to ye godly persons which shall be called to
the feloship of ye heavenly kingdom: for the Lord will let none of his chosen
be away, but be shrouded under the protection of his Angels, for it is written,
Psalm. 34.
the angel of the Lord tarrieth about them that fear him, and delivers them,
yea he will comfort them, even when that sudden and sore perplexity of mind
and earnest des peration, shall go as a quauie and wind over all nations, yt
the people of the earth shall consume and pine away as people of an other world,
for fear of beholding the terrible stroke of God: the powers of heaven to move
contrary to their creation, and the earth shake and reele: and the sea boil
and swel with most dreadful roaring noise, to the dismaing of al men's hearts to
behold the whole universal world and all the nature of things ready to be
shaken in sunder like an earthen pot, when ye bright shining s un being the
fountain of the light of the earth and heavens, shall with sudden darkness cover
his face, imbraiding the ungodly with their blindness, because they would not
see, follow, and embrace ye everlasting s on and lantern of ye world Jesus
Christ: and the moon shall give no light, and ye stars fall, which has been so
many hundred years fastened to the firmament: Then ye glory of ye Lord shall
come, and his face burn that no man can abide it, Esaias. 3.
and shall set up the power of his voice, an angry countenance with a
consuming fire: then the kings shall vani sh as the scums of the water and
shall say to the mountains cover us, Ose. 9.
and to the hills fall on us: fearing the fire of Gods indignation now kindled
over the whole world, doubting to be girded in the flame thereof: whereat all
the nations of the world shall strike their breasts, beholding the sign of the
son of man: which being s^ne a universal trepidation shall come unto all
men's hearts, when the Jews shall see whom they have offended, and the Gentiles
s hal see the majesty of the cross which they laughed to scorn for they
shall see the son of man whom they despised, coming on high in the clouds
of the air with a great army of Angels: Esaias. 26.
who comes out of his place to visit the wickedness of them that dwell upon
the earth, and who shall abide it: for then shall the axe be put to the root
of the trees, so that every tree that has not brought forth good fruit, shall
be hewn down and cast into the fire: when fire and brimstone, storm and
tempest, shall be their portion to drink: which obstinate sinners have heaped
to them selves, despising the goodness, patience and long suffering of God,
which means he used in their life time to call them continually to repentance:
but then shall it be to late to knock, when the door shall be shut, and to
late to cry for mercy, when it is the time of justice: for he shall thus
come (according to Matthew Math. 25.
) in his glory and all the holy Angels with him, and then sit upon his seat
of judgment, and all nations gathered before him, seperating the one from the
other, (as a shepherd divides the sheep from the gotes) and shall set the
sheep on the right hand, and the gotes on the left: and then shall he
joyfully say to them on the right hand* Come ye blessed children of my father,
inherit the kingdom, prepared for you, from the beginning of the world. And
then he shall say to them of the left hand, depart from me ye cursed, into
everlasting fire which is prepared for the devils and his angels: wherein the
Apostle setting before our eyes the glorious majesty of Christ's coming, and
the effect of his coming may seem to prick all men's hearts even to bleed for
sorrow of their sins, to think upon this fearful sentence of Christ who thus
comes as says John Baptist, with the fan in his hand, Matthew. 5.
and will purge his flower and gather the wheat into his barn, being the
righteous and the chafe which are the wicked, he will burn with vnquechable
fire: by which we plainly see the separation of the good from the ill: with
the deserts and rewards of both parties, Ephe. ^.
and with the whole manner of the latter judgment which no people high or low
shall escape: for all things in heaven and in earth, (according to Paul to ye
Ephesians) shall be gathered together in Christ: and Christ as a just judge
shall divide them into two parties and will show unto both a just cause of
his judgment: Math. 25.
that the just may know with what well dooinges, they have attained so great
felicity and joy: and the ill may know with what offenses they have deserved
everlasting punishment: for Christ shall say with a mylde and merry cheer, to
them which has done the deeds of righteousness and mercy, for his name sake.
Come ye blessed of the Lord inherit the kingdom, and be clothed with your
heauinly mansion.

Wherefore stir up your hearts to embrace this joyful voice of voices, which
has power to kendle and inflame all humble hearts to run after godliness, with
all love power and might of the soul, (without wearynes) to obtain the joy
of Christ's kingdom: for which cause, stop not your ears, harden not your
hearts, follow not your lusts, Ephesians. 1.
hunt not after worldlynes, but thrist after righteousness, and walk in the
narrow way: and guide the feet of thy conscience in the holy path that leads
and conducteth to this eternal salvation and most blessed City, the joy
whereof is so superabundant, the glory so triumphant: the blessedness so
heavenly: the pleasure so sweet, the treasure so exceeding, Cor 1.2.
the place so incomparable: that the eye has not seen, nor the ear ever
heard, nor the heart could ever think the joy which is prepared in heaven for
us: for such is the inheritance as to be made the glorious Sons of GOD,
crowned with glory and immortality for ever: Cor. 2.5.
where death is changed to euelasting life: nakedness clothed with Gods
brightness, sorrows turned to perpetual joy and all our infirmities are
changed into to eternal and incorruptible happiness. In respect whereof seeing
we know of a certainty, that if our earthlye mansion or corporal presence,
wherein we now dwell were destroyed, that we have a building or City
ordained of GOD, being an habitation not made with hands, but eternal in
heaven: the verry kingdom of Christ and re st of GOD, for which we should
sigthe and groan, desiring to be clothed with our mansio^ which is from
heaven: but yet we must be here clothed, and not naked as men without good
life, for as long as we are in this tabernacle and world, we should sigth
with the s obbes of true repentance and groan with the grief of godly sorrow,
abhorring sin and wickedness: in that we would not be found unclothed, but
would be clothed upon with the garment of righteousness, that mortality might
be swallowed up of life: Reave. 3.
To the obtaining whereof Christ counsel us to buy of him gold tried in the
fire, that we may be rich, and to buy of him white raiment that we may be
clothed (which is treuth and righteousness) that our filthy nakedness do not
appear, as if we were sotted in the corruption and lusts of the old Adam:
thereby indaungering our selves because we neither seek for the garments of
Godlynes with pure diligence and love: nor knock with the hand of steadfast and
unfeigned faith: nor ask with devotion of sincere prayers, the gifts of his
grace to be found at the great marriage, of the Kings son, without our
wedding garments, and so s ubiect to the Ministers of Gods wrath, who shall be
commanded and charged to bind us hand and foot, and to cast us most
dreadfully into utter darkness.

Wheruppon print and establishe this for evermore in thy heart, how grievous and
lamentable it shall be, abooue all greefes and s orrowes, when Christ shall
say to his Reapers, or ministering Angels. Take those cursed, bind them like
tares in sheaues, to be brent: And al so print it in thy heart and mind (as in
a remembering Book) or looking glass e how heavy and lamentable a case it
shall be to behold the look of Christ, Math. 1^.
when his lips shall wagge with fury and indignation, and his tongue sparkle
out, the fiery streams of a wasting and consuming fire when he turns to
them that stand on the left hand with dyrefull and terrible voice, saying, Go
away from me you cursed and execrable of my Father, which are woorkers of
iniquity and regarded not righteousness, depart you to fire which never shall
be quenched, Math. 25.
which is prepared for the devil and his Angels. (Oh) consider how sorrowful
and heavy shall this departure be, into all heaviness from whence, you shall
never be redeemed, nor pitied, how bitter and grievous shall that sentence
be, how lamentable shall those cursed souls be, which shall never again be
comforted: that must forsake the presence and sight of Christ for ever: that
must be deprived from heaven from joy, from all pleasure for ever: that has
lost the glorious and renowned inheritance of new Jerusalem for ever, yt has
lost ye hapines which others enjoy for euer-and now are departed into bitter
torments greeuouslye to be vexed for ever, what a loss is that (O wretched
people) and what a pain is this, you may faint to think it. And therefore
awake up ye drunkards and weep: mourn and howl all ye gluttons and wine
sippers: least you go with Esau, from your byrthright, and s up the pottage,
and wine dregs of hell fire: and ye unclean persons come to the waters of
life and wash you clean, and cleanse your corrupted hearts, by washing away
your evil thoughts, wicked lusts and sinful deeds in the blood of Christ,
by true repentance and newnes of life, least you be cast hedlong from the
inheritance of heauinly pleasure, into the filthy lake of perpetual sorrow
and misery: and all ye Inhabiters of the earth strive against sin, and cast
from you the fellowship of Ipocrisie, envy, pride, covetousness, with all other
sins, and cut of from your hearts the cloisters of evil thoughts and the
branches of wicked imaginations, that you may be found worthy at the great
day of the LORD, to be translated into the kingdom of glory.

Wherefore consider the terror of the day of judgment and behold how all
kyndreds does stand shaking and be wailing before the high Judge: that it may
enforce us to tears, for to think on that day, when shall be seen that
most great, lamentable and everlasting separation and departing of the elect
from the dampened: and this departing shall be such, as that the one part shall
be cast into hell, Mark. 9.
into the fire that never shall be quenched, out of which no weeping tears can
restore us, where (says Mark) that the worm dies not, and the fire never
goes out: when shall be fulfilled that heavy voice. Woe be to you that are
rich, Luke. 6.
for you have therein your consolation: woe be to you that are full, for you
shall hunger: woe be to you that now laugthe, Math. 11.
for ye shall wail and weep: and the^ shall be heard that voice of terror
and wretchedness, saying: Woe be unto thee Ch^rasin, Woe be to thee
Bethsaida, which so little regarded and esteemed the Miracles and the Doctrine
done in thee, which if they had been done in Tire and Sydon, they would have
repented in sackcloth and ashes. Therefore I say to thee, it shall be easier
for Tire and Sydon at the day of judgment, then for you. And woe be to thee
Capernaum, which art lift up even to heaven, (being so proud) thou shall be
brought down into hell, for if the miracles and doctrine done in thee, had
been done in Zodome they had remained undestroyed till this day: therefore it
shall be easier for the land of Zodome in the day of judgment then for thee:
wherefore beware ye careless people how you refuse the doctrine of Christ,
least you heap to your selves an hard judgment at the day of the Lord: make
ye ready that you may go up to the house of the Lord, Esaias. 2.
and to the house of the God of Jacob, and walk in his paths for Christ has
told signs, wonders, and tokens of his coming. And he has sent you many a
Jonas, to recall you to repentance, and to teach you his doctrine of salvation
therefore turn to God, least that Nyniuie rise in judgment against you, and
the woe of Bethsaida overtake you for as it happened in the time of Noye, so
shall the coming of the son of man be, they eat, they drank they married
wives and were married, Luke 17.
even unto the same day that the flood came and destroyed them all: like wise
also as it chanced in the days of Lot, they eat they drank, they bought they
sold, they planted, they bilt, and even the same day, that Lot went out of
Zodome, it rayned fire and brimstone from heaven and destroyed them all: And
after these examples, shall it be in the day. when the son of man eppeareth,
and then two shall be in bed, the one received, the other forsaken, two
grinding at the mill, the one received, the other forsaken. Therefore harken, O
earth, and ye indwellers of the earth, to this terrible day of the Lord, yea
cast off your mantle of security, and slacknes, and open your blunt hearts,
and dull ears, giving a careful ear to the sentence, which the Apostles do
give, Matthew. 19. Matthew. 25.
(that shall sit with Christ in judgment) saying, take and cast the
unprofitable servant into utter darkness. And John and Paul says, That all
unclean persons that work abominations, Revel. 21. 1. Cor. 6.
and lies, the fearful unbelieving murderers, whoremongers, sorcerers,
Idolaters, covetous, drunkardes, extortioners, thieves, weakelens, cursed
speakers, and envious persons, continuing to death without repentance from the
bottom of the heart shall have their part in the lake, which burns with fire
and brimstone, which is the second death, for as the tree falls, so does it
lie: whereupon beware ye wicked worldlings and sinners, ye delay and hold off
from time to time, and drive off from true repentance and amendment of life:
least your sins lie heavy upon you, and your heart grow hard in these
sins, and can not repent, and so heap to your selves ye treasure of wrath
against the day of vengeance, according to the prophecy of Enoch, Saint Jude.
saying, behold the Lord shall come, with thousands of saints, to give
judgment against all me^, and to rebuke all that are ungodly among them, of
all their ungodly deeds which they have committed, and of all the cruel
speakings which ungodly sinners have spoken against him: The^ shall the Lord cry
with a loud voice, Revel. 14.
(like a lion that roareth) unto his angels, to thrust in the sharp sicle, and
gather the clusters of ye earth, and to cut down ye grapes of ye earth, (the
wicked and sinful people) and cast the^ into the great winefat of his wrath,
and ye winefat is trodden without the city of new Jerusalem, yea it is trode^ in
ye place of extreme darkness, in ye hideous dungen of hell in all horror of bloody
sorrows: for the reward of sin is death and hell, where it stincke with
brimstone that cannot be abodden, where behold with piteous eyes how the souls
of the dampened bewail in woe, where all mirth and joy are turned to woes,
where all songs and music are wooes, where feasting and banketting be woes,
where daunsing and love toys be wooes, plays and pastimes be woes, and where
gold and silver and all gay things of this world are changed into
wretchedness and woes. And of all other this is the most dreadful woe,
E^trense^^^
which is the deprivation of hope from coming out of those wooes. And thus the
miserable dampened souls, are evermore, tormented with fire and brimstone, and
the smoke of their torments ascends up for ever and ever. And never have
rest day and night, and they cry piteously to the Lord, and he hears not,
and though they never cease from tears, yet the Lord regards them not: And
then they know (when it is too late,) that all worldly things are vanities
and miseries, and they would repent and it helps not: and thus they weep
and wayls in dolourouse torments, and gnawe their tongues in most rigorous
pain. And so in great burning they drink of the cup of Gods intolerable wrath
and heavy displeasure and indignation: and they still burn and never are
burned, they seek death, and death flies from them, and yet are they still in
death and shall be for ever and ever: and thus they still die and never give
over unto death, therefore (thou sinner) amend thy ways and be obedient unto
God, considering these dreadful torments to be the reward of sinners, for
which cause lie down upon the bed of weeping and waling, wrapping thee in the
clean and new ayred sheets of true and pure repentance, and cover thee with
the fair couerlet of true amendment of life: considering that all the
afflictions and miseries of this world are nothing in comparison to the least
that they shall feel in hell, for which cause we ought to tremble from the
top to the toe, saying Woe unto us, because of offenses and sin, if we
repent not, and amend our lives: therefore let us turn unto the Lord our God
without any tarrying, being sore afraid of the shrill sound of the trumpet,
that sounds out the fearful Alaran. of the wooes of hell, And being
terrified with the sound of the la st trump that shall make all things suddenly
to fall down as the walls of Ierico and shall make men's hearts to fail them
forfeare: knowing what Saint Peter says) that if the righteous shall scarsely
be saved, Pet. ^.4.
where then shall the ungodly and sinners appear: for if God, spared not the
Angels that sinned, but cast them down into hell, and delivered them, into
chains of darkness to be kept unto judgment, then must we look for the wrath
of God, with swift damnation to be showed upon all the unrighteous and
unpenitent: which thing, does call us home, to examine our conscience (seeing we
cannot halt with God, though we dissemble to the world) taking that for a
fair lesson, Iere. 8.
of remembering our duty to God, Esaias. 1*
which he says by Jeremy, that the storke knows his appointed time, but my
people will not know the time of the punishment of their Lord. And again in
Esaias he says: that the ass will know his masters stall, but my people will
not know their duty to me their God, which examples do condemn us of
unkindness and disobedience to our Lord, and shall be witness against us of our
want of duty, and cold love, as Dives dog licking Lazarus sores, was a
witness against his masters unkindness and want of mercy.

And now let us turn to the Lord seeing we cannot escape the judgment of God,
who will come as a thief in the night, when men shall say, peace and no
danger, then comes on them sudden des truction: yea he shall come
suddenly as the lightning shines out of the east in to the west, so shall the
coming of the son of man be, yea he s hall tread upon the high mountains,
things shall melt under him, Math. 24.
and all and who can abide it? yea he shall come as a goldsmithes fire to
cleanse the silver from the dross, Mich. 1.
and who can endure it? Therefore all hard hearts, Zach. 3.
froward s tomackes, proud looks, stubborn wills and hye minds: shall then
weep and mourn when they see the sign of the son man: and all lofty,
glorious rich or high shall be brought low and fall down: according to the
Prophet. The day of the Lord comes that shall go over all pride and
presumption and bring them all down who casts down the high looks of the
presumptuous persons and brings low the pride of man. Esaias. 2.
and all glorious things shall be brought down that day.

Oh therefore where will thou be? to get into any rock, or to hyde thee in the
ground from the sight of the fearful Judge and from the glory of his Majesty
will not serve, when behold the day does come in which all shall burn whereat
thou shall wring thy hands, with an heavy look and quake and shake like an
aspen leaf: and weep and wail like a silly wretch, and smite thy breast
with pitious groans and watery che ekes to see the dreadful day, of dread and
the fearful Judge of Judges: Wherefore O ye covetous men, ye usurers,
extortioners, and unmerciful people, hear the voice of your watchman: what
are ye as blocks, that hear not? are ye as stones yt feel not? are ye as
moules that see not? or are ye as Images that fear not? behold the fearful
day of vengeance? what do thou say tush? where and where is it? behold it
comes as a thief: yea it cu^meth like a swift cloud when you shall say
peace and no danger, then is ye judge at the door: and then of force because
ye would not hear in prosperity (says Jeremy) you shall weep in
adversity: whereat, Ierem. 22.
(Oh how) is your countenance changed which did look so stout: puffing
against your silly poor neighbor and brother, but lo the day is? and I see
how bitterly you do weep, but why weep ye? what for your goodly houses and
gay garments, for your grounds, your goods, your evidences, your gold and
your silver? Alas it is turned to fire: for behold says Peeter, James and
Esaias, you are enforced now to leave them, for they burn and are turned to fire
to eat and consume you, for now your case is pleaded before all the Angels in
the presence of the high Judge, how you have made you friends of the wicked
mammon, where it stands upon most manifest evidence, Luke. 16.
and plain confession guilty or not guilty of an unpenitent conscience: where
if you be found gultie of ill life you are turned of the ladder of heaven, and
shall fall into the second death of everlasting fire, swallowed into hell, as
the earth swallowed up Cor^th, D^than and Abyron.

And ye proud and laciuious, ye gluttons, ye belly and back pleasers and ye
d^lcious children of wantonness, who counted it pleasure to live diliciously for
a season what is the world changed? that I see you so forlorn and naked,
hanging down your lips and eyes with such ^^^full looks, what, do you want
your musical pleas ures your bankets and chamberings? alas, they are
woormewood and gall: for your mirth is turned into heaviness, and why? because
the day is come that the powers of heaven does move, the frame thereof is
cracked, and the (...) watters make an intolerable noise (...) of all plagues
are ready to be (...) the day of fearfulnes) in which, see and behold, how
your chambers of pleasure, your soft and sweet beds of lust, your tables of
bankets, your gardens of delight, your gorgious apparel, with all your wanton
delights: are turned to fire and brimstone, yea, they are gargl^d and fupped up
into the hollow throat and gulf of hell, with Lucifer the father of pride,
gluttony, vanity, concupisence and s^^^e.

Besides, ye Antechrist, ye sorcerers, witches, Idolaters, falfe teachers and
Ipocrites, where is your goodness? where is your skill and boast? that ye look
so fearfully up to heaven: what is the day come upon you unawares? that the
sun look black, the mo^^ has lo st (...) ^ight, the stars of heaven did
fall and the (...) ^oor the your spirits, ^ring but your (...) men and come
^oorth you Astrologers and cast your figures, look to the houses of heavens
to^^ther the detriments and degrees of the planets and stars* what are you
now confounded? (then behold says the Prophet) the Lord will destroy the
tokens of witches, and make the southsayers go wrong, Esaias. 44.
and make the cunning of the wise foolishnes and bring the council of ye
Magitioners to naught, for says the Lord, I will destroy the wisdom of their
wife and the understanding of their learned shall perish: so yt now ye fall to
the ground quaking to se the sign of the son of man appearing, to se the day
of fire, that is come to try every man's woork: whereat, O how ye lament and
cry: but what for your spirits and familiars? which made you to be counted
cunning men, which promised you dreams and showed you vi sions which served
your pleasure to vex men and to bewitche with* O behold says Christ many
shall say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, Math 7.
have we not in thy name prophisied and in thy name have cast out devils and in
thy name have done many miracles but says the Lord, I will knoweledge to them
yt I never knew the^: depart from me ye workers of iniquity. And now ye
Idolaters, false woorshpers and Apocrites see how you do nothing but we epe?
and what for your pictures, your ceremonies, your offerings, your golden
Ladies, your wooden saints, and for want of your masses to eas e you, or of
bulls, from Room to pardon and preserve you this day? behold says Esaias,
they are the straw and you are the fire, you shall burn and never be
quenched: Esaias. 33.
yea all yt you have thus conceived is stubble and straw, and your spirit
shall be the fire that it shall consume you and shall be burnt like lime and
thorns, for now confounded shall be all woork masters of errors, and shall be
turned to fire and smoke and shall burn for ever with that great beast and
false prophet which shall be cast into a ponde of burning brimstone. Esaias. 45.
Esaias. 65.
Therefore let s uddain fearfulnes run through you to consider the terror and
vengeance of this heavy and ferefull day of bitter wrath and indignation: and
who shall be able to endure it, wherefore away with all vanities and so run
your race of life that you may find mercy at the great day of the Lord, so
that cleanse your consciences from sin and filthiness and buy ye milk of
heavenly nurishment, the wine of heavenly gladness and hope, and the garments of
righteousness, that you may be filled and clothed with all godly life and
conversation, that you may be bold and and not affeard at the appearing of the
Lord in the dreadful day of judgment.

Moreover ye envious men, revenger, thief, murderer, blasphemer, liar,
quariler and deceiuer, why dooest thou now shake for fear? that wunt to be so
lusty a thretner so feirce and stout a revenger, against thy poor neighbor or
enemy: Deuteronomy. 32.
what art thou become a lump of fear? and is the day come that has shaken a
sunder thy joints and heart stringes that thou so wretchedly do weep? Romans
12.
or why weepest thou? because thou can have no more thy mind to hurt and
sting thy neighbor and enemy, and so backbyte him? alas wretch the direful
day is come, that the Lord says vengeance is mine and I will revenge, yea
the time is come ye he will spend all his arrows upon thee and will reward
thy envious and revenging heart, even into thy bosom, except thou have embraced
repentance in time, for behold God says, ye fire is kindled in his wrath and
shall burn unto the bottom of hell, Zache, 5.
for the flying book of curse which was entered into the houses of thieves,
swearers, murderers, liars, reuengers, quarrellers and malicious sinners, is
brought forth, that they may be judged, and thereby consumed: being adjudged
to be s ectered with chains of fire, and led through the gates of hell to be
brent in the pit of burning brimsto^e for ever. Wherefore awake quickly out of
your s lumbring ^e^ of sin, and turn unto ye Lord your God for he is gracious
and merciful and ready to pardon wickedness: so that you ^^cuse your hart^and
become (...) creatures in holiness and pureness working out your salvation with
earnest devotion: for consider the dreadefull voice which the watchemen
sounds of the day of the Lord saying that it shall come as a snare to all
them, that sit on the face of the earth: whereby ye ought to take heed to your
selves, lest your hearts be overcome with surfeiting and drunkenness, with
lus^es and cares of the world: and so have your hearts (as it were) giued to
sin: Therefore repent, for the kingdom of God is at hand: Matthew. 13.
which (as the Apostle says) is like to a net cast into the sea, that
gathers of all kind of fishes, which when it is full men do draw to land,
and sit and gather the good into vessels, and cast the bad away: and so shall it
be at the end of the world, the son of man shall send forth his angels, and
they shall sever the good from the bad, and gather out of his kingdom all that
offend and does iniquity, and shall cast them into a furnace of fire, there
shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth: and then shall the just man shine as
bright as the Son in the kingdom of the Father: wherein ye are warned
carefully to watch and abide in Christ, least you be found cursed children,
forsaking ye right way: for which cause arm your selves with goodness of
life, Matthew. 2.^.
that when he shall s end his angels with great voice of trumpet, to gather
together, his chosen from the four winds, and from the one end of the world
to the other, you may be found profitable servants and well doing: Peter. 2.3.
For it is written that the heavens shall perish with fire, and the elements
consume with heart, and the earth burn with all that is therein. And seeing
that all these things shall thus undoubtedly perish, what manner of persons
ought we to be in conversation and godliness, in righteousness and holiness,
looking for the coming of that day, in which the whole world shall be utterly
burnt up and consumed: no doubt, seeing that such things are most assuredly to
be looked for: we ought to be diligent, so to live as to be found true
children of the light: sprinkled in our hearts with the blood of Christ, Heb.
10.
from an evil conscience: knowing that every (...) that brings not forth
good fruit shall be ^ewen down and cas t into the fire: Matthew. 7.
for Chri st says, That not all that say to me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into
the kingdom of heaven, but he that does my Fathers will which is in heaven:
whereupon take warning (O all ye people of the Lords) and consider, that
narrow is the way that leads to salvation, and broad the way that leads
to destruction, for which cause be vigilant in all good conversation and well
doing, that you may keep your selves in the narrow path of Christ, that you
may find grace and mercy in time of need, that when his glory appears you
may be merry and glad: touching the which, remember among many examples, the
forcible example of D^^es, who being puffed up with all wealthy provision of
lands and goods, living in the pleasure and security of this world, Luke 16.
regarded not goodness, righteousness, and mercy, but contemned the poor:
and so lived according to his own froward thoughts and ^^^^eites; showing no
pity and that (...) to poor Lazarus ^^^^ning to his gate for (...), who had a
true and patient heart to (...) and misery of life in this world. And (...)
how this poor wretches(...) to God, was carried into Abraham(...) rich man for
his wicked life and (...) heart, is adjudged to hell torments, and that he
being in the burning (...) of tortures and (...), and beholding Lazarus as joy
^^d never after(...) so much as one drop of (...) scalding in the breaking
(...) take he is to your selile^, ye wealthy citizens, ye rich gluttons,
voluptuous livers, covetous worldlings, uncharitable hearts, stiffs stomachs,
and unmerciful people, knowing that after that day, repentance is too late: so
that be mindful to lay up treasures in heaven where neither thieves break in,
nor mothes corrupt, Matthew. 6.
that when the day of the Lord comes, thou may find favor to be in the
bosom of Abraham with Lazarus in the everlasting habitatio^s: and escape the
danger of Dives torments, where it is impossible ever to come out again, or
ever to be released from the horror of woes: therefore deceive not thy self
with the (...) of a counterfeit, faint and cold repentance, but put on true,
sineers and faithful repentance with a steadfast amendment of life: making no
longer delay, least the arrows of death, or the sudden coming of the day of
the Lord, does come upon thee unawares, and so be found unprovided, like an
unprofitable servant, deserving to be cast into darkness: to whom the Lord shall
say in his wrath, Esaias 3.1
it is ye ye have burnt up my vineyard, and therefore depart from me ye wicked:
whereby be ye moved and stirred up inwardly in your hearts, knowing that it is
a terrible thing to fall into the hands of the living God to sup the cup of
his indignation, when he shall say, woe be to their souls, which shall be
heavily rewarded. Esaias 31.
For the Lord comes says Esaias with ^^^e and his charet shall be like a whirle
wind, that he may recompense his vengeance in his wrath, and his indignation in
the flame of fire, Esaias 66.
for the Lord shall judge all flesh with the fire and with his sword, for the
hand of the Lord shall be known among his servants, and his indignation among
his enemies: and I will (says the Lord) gather all people and tongues with
their works and imaginations, and they shall see my glory, for the Lord will
hold his court regal with all flesh, and then it shall be said, Happy are the
godly for they shall enjoy the fruits of their works, and labors, but woe to
the ungodly, for they shall be recompens es after their evil deeds: Oseas 7.
and then at that day the Lord shall say (as in Oseas) woe be do them for they
have forsaken me, they have sown winds, therefore they shall reap a storm,
they must be destroyed for they have set me at naught, they have plowed
wickedness, and therefore shall reap the fruit of sin, which at that day
of judgment is the bitter pains of hell and damnation. wherefore crucify
your earthly and fleshly members, and s eeke for grace to replenish your
hearts with heavenly thoughts and deeds, saying with Saint John, Revel. 1.
He comes, and all eyes shall see him, and they that pierced him and then all
kindreds shall wayle. Revel. 6.
And heaven shall vanish away like a scroule, when it ^^^olled together, and
all mountains and Isles shall be moved out of their places, and the Kings of
the earth and the great men, and the mighty men, and the rich men, and the
captains, and every bond man and every free man, shall hide them selves in
dens and rocks of the hills, and say to the rocks and the hills fall on
us, and hide us from the presence of him that sits in the seat, and from the
wrath of the Lamb, for the great day of his wrath is come and who can endure
it. Esaias. 2.
For then says Esaias, shall men creep into the holes of stoue, and into the
caves of the earth from the sight of the fearful Judge, and from the glory
of his Majesty, when he shall make him up to shake the earth: Now see what a
dreadful day of trembling this is, and how fear shall overtake all men high
and low even with utter lamentation and despair, when the Lord at that day
(which is at hand) shall according to Micheas, Mich. 1.
come down and tread upon the high things of the earth, and cleave the
heavens asunder, that the mountains shall consume under him, These. 1.4.
and the valleys rent in pieces, according to Paul, The Lord shall discende
from heaven with a shoute and the voice of the Archaungel and trumpe of God and
the dead in Christ shall rise first, and then shall we which remain be caught
up with them also in the clouds, Cor. 1.15.
to meet the Lord in the air, for the trumpet shall blow, and the dead shall
rise incorruptible, and we shall be changed in a moment and in the twinckeling
of an eye, at the sound of the last trumpet, for this corruptibilitie must put
on corruptibiltie and this mortality, must put on immortality and then death
shall be consumed into victory for now the time is, ye though you be scattered to
dust and ashes, or in the waves of the sea, and wrapped in the corners of the
earth and dens of hell, yet can you not escape from God, for every place
shall give up all their dead at the voice of Christ the iudger of the quick
and the dead: Reave. ^0.
and then shall the books be opuned and the dead judged of those things
which are written in the books according to their deeds.

When according to the Scripture, shall the names of the righteous be manifest,
and also the names of the ungodly with their woorks be declared: wherefore put
on the garmnets of God, that ye may be found to praise and honor (when
Christ our high king of kings, comes to judgment) when all knees shall
bow and give acco^ptes to God: John. 5.
for which cause it nearly behooves us to walk in the way of godliness and to
follow Christ, setting our affection in heaven, that according to Paul, when
Christ which is our life shall show him self that we also may appear with
him in glory, therefore says James: Coloss. 3.
be ye patient unto the coming of the Lord: and settle your hearts in goodness,
Ieames. 5.
for the coming of the Lord draws nigh, when we shall see him as he is,
and be like him. made by him the sons of God, who shall change our vile
bodies to be facioned like to his glorious body: yt we shall enjoy the fruition
of his everlasting tabernacle and heavenly Jerusalem: at his apperance again
to s aluation: whereunto, he called us by the Gospel to obtain the glory
that comes of our Lord Jesus Christ, for Christ dyed for us that we should
be partakers of his kingdom and have our names in the book of life: as s
ayeth the Apostle, we shall be delivered from this bondage of corruption, into
the glorious liberty of the sons of God, Romans 8.
according to Christ s aying, I am the resurrection and life, he that John. 12.
believes in me, yea though he were dead, yet shall he live, and whosoever ever
lives, and believes in me shall not dye for ever. according to Luke, Luke.
20.
They which be made worthy to enjoy the kingdom of the world to come, and the
resurrection from death, can dye no more, for they are equal to the Angels
and are the sons of God: for says Christ, Reave. 2, 3.
He that overcomes and is faithful to the end, I will give him to eat of
the tree of life which is in the midst of the Paradise of God: and he shall
have a crown of life and shall not be hurt of the second death, but have his
name in the book of life, and be a pillar in the temple of my God, and shall
sit with me in my seat: and this is the victory that overcomes the world,
even our steadfast and unfeigned faith in Jesus Christ, by whom GOD has given
unto us eternal life, and to be glorified by him, at the day of his
appearance, when the mystery of Gods will shall be opened in his son Jesus
Christ, at his coming at the end of the world: at which time shall be
performed, that all that have done well shall go into everlasting life, and all
that has done evil into everlasting dampnation: Therefore let us fight the
good fight of faith, and walk as children of the day, waiting with steadfast
hope for the adoption and fruition of ye heavenly kingdom, that we may meet
him joyfully coming in the clouds, and receive the garland of glorification,
and crown of eternal life: John. 1.5.
and so be clothed with our heavenly mansion and translated into his kingdom,
there receiving the glorious garments of immortality and the blessedness of our
new Jerusalem, where behold, and lo we shall shine as bright as the sun
beams, being in all glory, in ye presence of the brightness of our omnipotent
and resplendant GOD. To the obtaining of the high reward whereof, watch and
pray that your conversation may be according to the Gospel, and therefore let
this be your watchman, while you hear do live, to think (...) Saint Jerome:
that whether you eat or drink, or what so ever else you do, that most
dreadful Troumpet sounds in your ears: Arise you dead, and come unto
Judgment: (:)

O Lord God almighty, which art and wast, and art to come, who art Alpha and
Omega, to thee be all praise, Reave. 7.
honor and glory, and all power and dignity be ascribed to the almighty
maker sitting upon the seat, and unto the Lamb for evermore: for now all thy
people are gathered together in thy son Jesus Christ, that the mystery of
thy holy will may be declared: Ephe. 1.
being called by the troump of the Arch-angell to come unto the mount Sio^,
and to the city of the living God, the celestial Jerusalem and to an
innumerable sight of Angels, Heb. 12.
and unto the congrogation of the first borne sons, which are written in
heaven, and to God the judge of all, and to the spirits of just and perfect
men, and to Jesus the mediator of the new Testament, Phil. 3.
who does change our vile bodies to be facioned like to his glorious body:
therefore to thee be praise, honor and power, world with out end.

AMEN.
THE GLORIOUS AND BEAVTIFVL GARlande of man's glorification.
CAP. 3. The mystery of the glorious coming of Christ at the end of the
world, and how he shall sit in his glittering seat of Majesty in all
brightness of glory, power, and dominion. And where, and how all things
both in heaven and earth shall be gathered together in Christ, and see his
glory and in him our glorification.
EXcellent was the coming of God, when in his glory like shining fire he came
down upon mount Sinai: where Moses brought the people out of the tents to
meet the Lord, so marueilously descending down upon the hill: which burnt
with fire eue^ unto the mids of heaven, Exodus 19.
and the Lord spoke unto them with his mighty thundering voice out of fire,
Deuteronomy. 4.
that it was exceeding fearful, and also so wonderful glorious, that when
Moses had talked with God, the people were not able to behold the glistering
beauty and brightness of Moses face: Exodus 34.
But now how shall his glory be exalted in the highest, what time he shall
make him up, to shake the earth in the end of the world, when the appearance
of his coming shall exceed in all greatness of power and might, according to
Micheas, Micheas ^.
The Lord shall come out of his holy place, Micheas 1.
and come down, and ^^eade upon the high things of the earth, that the
mountains shall consume under him and the valleys cleave asunder. And then
the Sun^^e and Moon shall be ashamed at his glorious face of incomparable
clearenesse and brightness, from which all the beauty, glory and pomp of this
world shall flee away into rebuke and dishonor, not able to endure the
perfection of his beauty and incomprehensible pureness e: before whom it
consumes to naught and perish and vanish away for ever and th^^ (O how Christ)
shall glister in the magnificence of his omnipotent kingly majesty: and in the
pre-eminence noe of dignity above dignities, that all the glory of kings and
kingdoms shall give place and vanish at his mighty appearance, not worthy to
endure the glory of his coming, before which they waste and fall into
emptines: and he shall show him self from the top of the high heavens, with
such triumphant power of unspeakable glory, dominion, and might that from his
presence shall ^^^^away ^e^rth and heavens, and their place no more sound: for
he shall shake ye earth again, and remove ^^^ne away those things which have
ended their course, when ye powers of heaven and the universe al frame of this
world shall rent in pieces* and ^^me in a consuming (...). Now the truth hereof
i^ so (...) and ^laine, that there need no great circumstance to prove with
many witnesses out of the holy scriptures, any so ignorant as to doubt hereof:
although says Micheas, Micheas 1.
the rebellious people hope that it shall not be so ill, Peter. 2.3.
and says Peter, in the latter days shall come mockers, that will say ^^^h,
where is the promise of his coming? But now that you may behold as in a
looking glass, the glorious coming of Christ as from a far, and yet use
wtin the compass of our hearts, John 11.
as Christ said to Martha. If thou beleeuest, thou shall see the glory of
God: I will place therefore your soul in the spirit of heavenly meditation,
fixing your feet in the path of righteousness, and standing immovable at the
^indow of Gods promises, beholding in the gla^^e^ of t^neth (with the steadfast
eyes of faith, Jesus the King of glory, coming in a wonderful, glorious, and
magnificall progress from heaven, to visit the kingdoms and Lordshippes of
the earth, and the inhabiters thereof with power of mercy and judgment:
touching the which; the messengers of this glad tidings have flow^^ through the
midst of heaven, and gone through all the world with the joyful sound of
trumpet, signifying the joy of redemption to be come, and the day of glory to
be^^ie at hand, and the kingdom of everlasting rest to draw near* therefore
lift up your heads, Matthew. 16.
and be ready to the reward of your kingdom and make haste to meet the king
of glory, coming in the glory of his Father with all his holy angels: set
(...) his glorious throne of all majesty, there shining in his everlasting
clearnes: glittering in his eternal brightness* appearing in his preciousnes:
exceeding in his righteousness: exalted in his highness: magnified in his
worthiness; sanctified in his holiness* triumphing in his gloriousnes* when the
puisance, strength, and power of his omnipotent majesty, shall lighten into
all the secret places of world, and his voice imperial shall pearce through ye
unspeakable borders of all places, to raise from death to life all humane
creatures that ever had being, wheresoever* and to gather them together before
his eternal excellency, where, all things, in heaven and earth shall stand
before his presence and all knees shall bow, and all tongues (...) and
knowledge to the glory of God: Romans 14.
and then shall take performed that Christ said to the high priests (that were
offended at him when he was come in his ^owle humanity) saying, Matthew. 26.
You shall see the Son of man sitting on the right hand^ of power and coming
in the clouds of the sky whereof the two Angels testified to the Disciples at
the ascension of our Savior Christ, Acts 1.
saying, Ye^ men of Galilee, why stand ye gasing up into heaven, This sa^^e
Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, is returned to the Father whence
he came, as he has told you before and shall s^^^^e again even as you have s
eene him god into heaven: and that (according to Matthewe) accompanied with all
the godly Angels, Matthew. 25.
Jude.
and says ^^och, with thousands of blessed Saints with him* and according
((...) John) In a white cloud sitting in his fear of dominion and dignity,
Revel. 14.
and in his glorious throne of wonderful g^^^nes se, (which is according to
Daniel) as the (...) flame, Daniel 7.
and his wheels as the burning fire, and there went out from him a fiery
stream:as glorious sparks of eternal heauenlinesse, like glisterings of
perpetual beams of (...), proceeding from the glory of his Godhead, and (...)
out (...) him, and yet ever in him showing the (...) treasure of his grace and
goodness, ^he ^^^d ^^prehensible (...) out of his right clear Majesty: the
infinite and unsearchable virtues and gifts of glory, which issues eternally
from his divine Godhead and ^^nipotent power: And thus he shall appear most
marvelous and all eyes see him, and all nations gathered before him, Daniel. 7.
(as says Daniel) A thousand times a thousand served him, a thous and times
ten thousand stood before him. And theerfore, Blessed be the kingdom that
comes in the Name of him, that i^ Lord of our Father David, Mark 11.
Hos anna: Praising him in his holiness, praising him in the ^^rmament of his
power, praising him in his (...) Acts, praising him according to his excellent
greatness. For now is the full time, when the mystery of the will of the
Father shall be opened in his Son Jesus Christ, coming in the glory of the
father, when shall be opened the endless clearenesse of divinity: the
incomprehensible ^^^^our of Gods Majesty: the glorious riches of everlasting
glory: the incomparable profoundnesse of Gods wis edome, the flowing
fountains of Gods goodness: the shining light of all truth, the glorious
kingdom whereto we are called: and the tresures of rewards to men with glory
and dishonor: and then the brightness and sight of all things shall be apparent,
and all things past shall be as one thing present, according to Matthew, there
is nothing so close that shall not be opened and nothing so hyd that shall not
be known, Math. 1^
such s halbe the omnipotent, potentiall and in comprhenssble clearnes of God,
that before him all that were in power in spirit, in act in thought, in intent
in heaven, in earth or in hell, from the beginning: shall there show it self
present, apparent, clear and manifest by the endless brightness of God: that
all the nature of satan and the power of hell, shall be made manifest for ever:
and the nature of man as it was and now is and shall be in glory or dishonor,
shall be expressed for ever: and all the great works of GOD and beauty of
Angels, Cherubins and Seraphins, shall there be known for ever, and all the
goodly mansions of God shall then be revealed mo ste evident, and the eternal
shine of Gods majesty shall then be universal transparent: for says Paul,
Ephe. 1.
The whole mystery of the will of the Father, shall then be declared,
according to the purpose of his own will: therefore most blessed shall you
be, that shall be found watching and waiting for his coming looking up to heaven
with pure eyes of faith, and lifting up clean hands of righteousness, well
washed at the fountain of penance, that you may be found at his appeara^ce to
laud, glory and honor, pertaking with the treasures of the heavenly mystery
of the will of the father ordained in Christ Jesus: who being the Author of
our glory. whereunto he has called us by his Gospel: by shedding of his
own most precious blood, to bring us to GOD, and to make us heirs of his
kingdom: Did not omit ye least godly means of all to draw us and quicken us
by his spirit diligently and with all our endeavors to seek after his kingdom.

And therefore to annymate us in spirit, he confirmed the assured certainty of
his glory and our glory, and of his glorious coming in the end of the world,
when he said to his Apostles that some there were among them that should not
taste of death till they saw the son of man, Math. 17.
come in his kingdom: and so in a vision or spiritual dream by transfiguring
him self upon mount Tabor (before Peeter, James and John) he showed the vision
of his own glory and of our glorification by Moses and Helyas appearing also
with garments of immortality.

And thus he presented to their spiritual sight the excellency of his coming
again at the latter day, when his face did shine as the sun and his clothes
as white as ye light and so pure in all whitnes, as no Fuller can make upon
the earth.

Peter. 2.1.
Wherefore Peeter the cheef beholder thereof does testify, saying: With our
eyes we saw his majesty, even then verily when he received of God the Father
honor and glory, and when there came such a voice to him from the excellent
glory: John. 1.
This is my dear beloved son in who^e I delight: And John witnesses also
the s ame: That he saw the glory of him, as the glory, of the only begotten
son of the Father: and the great shine of his glory appeared unto Paul
after his assention, Acts. 9.26.
above the brightness of the sun, by which he stirs us to expect his
glorious coming in the end of the world and inflame us with the desire of
glorifying: that we might walk as Children of the light and sons of God in
all righteousness of conversation according to his Gospel: that we may be
heirs of his glorious kingdom of eternal joy: when he shall appear to
salvation, to change our vile and corrupt earthly bodies to be facioned and
made like to his glorious body, Phil. 13.


Moreover our blessed Savior does give us great consolation and hope by such
Revelations of heavenly expectation of blessedness to come: when he presented
to John, the vision of his most wunderfull brightness and preciousnes of glory
(being entered into heaven and set down on the right hand of the majesty on
high) by shyning and showing forth the spiritual semblance of his
pre-excellent beutie, power and glory, in which he is Alpha and Omega. the
first and the last, and was dead and is alive for evermore, and shall come
again quickly and will not tarry, any longer then till his Father has made
his enemies his foote-stoole: Cor. 1.15.
And now he appeared in the pre-eminence of exceeding and incomparable glory
and power, in as much as he has by inheritance obtained a more excellent name
then the Angels and creatures, Heb. 10.
seeing by him all things were created, things that are in heaven, Colloss. 1
and things that are in earth, things visible and things inuisisible,
whether they be majesty, lordship, rule or power, all things has their
creation and being by him and in him and that he is the first begotten of all
Creatures, the head of the congregation and first beginning and begoten of the
dead, that in all things he mihght have the prehemine^ce being the only
begotten son of GOD.

So that according to his most excellent worthiness of pre-eminence, he being
the chief living corner stone of the whole buylding, and the eternal head of
the Temple of his Father, did appear to John, sitting according to his hye
diguitie, in the chief and most royal seat of the Temple: in the midst of
the seven Candlestickes: Esdras. 4.^.
according to the vision of Esoras: He was in the midst of the multitude upon
mount Sion, being a condign place for him having the goulden and heavenly
censour to offer up the swette cense and odoures of the prayers and petitions
of the whole Saints and congregation (whereof he is the head) through his own
hands up before the glorious presence of the heavenly Father up upon the
golden Alter of GOD. Reave 8,^


being clothed with a linning garment down to the feet as white as snow:
Daniel. 10.
(arcocding to the said vision to Daniell answering heerto) being his robes of
the eternal purity and of his everlasting and royal preesthood for ever:
according to the order of Melchesedech, representing the sanctifying of his
precious and eternal holiness and godlynes, in prays ing the omnipotent Father
of glory for ever in his holy Jerusalem or Temple of glorified Saints: and
he was girded about the breast or paps with a golden girdell, reprsenting the
pure and approved confirmation of eternal verity, vndfiled chastity and
sincerity, perfect obedience and eternal wisdom, righteousness and treuth to
be conjoined to his glorious body: and his head and his hear were most amiable
white like pure wool or snow: showing thereby a settled gravity of all true
godlynes, a modest reverence of all true honor, a confirmed experience of all
divine patience and the only coullor of pureness and clearnes of mind without
change for ever: and on his head a golden Crown, showing that he was the
glorious king of kings: Heb. 4.
and his eyes as clear lamps and clear flames of fire: showing yt all things
were naked to his fight, and that he was the only light of all things: and his
arms and feet like fine polished brass, burning bright in the furnace, or
like pillars of fire: showing that he had a sure strength and stedfastnes in
all his ways, be eing tried faithful in doing the will of his Father and in
performing all his promises, and so tried pure therein as brass in the furnace:
and his body was like a Crisolite: transparent with the beautiful sintillation
of gold and fire, showing forth the absolute mirror of his glorious beauty,
in all soundnes, of one self same in him self eternal clearenes of glory and
majesty, and his voice as the voice of a multitude or sound of many waters:
showing yt he was ye head and cheeif of the multitude of his people, that all
voices and languages wear as one voice and as one language unto him, and in
his, and that they should do all things by the direction of his voice, for they
that be his do hear his voice. John 10.
And now he shall lead the glorified saints unto fountains of living water:
And on his right hand seven stars, showing that as he doing his Fathers will
does sit on the right hand of ye Father in heaven, so his stars, which are
the ministers of his word (being contained under the figure 7. the Sabbath day
number, of perpetual rest and holiness, feeding his sheep, setting forth
his glory, and doing by him and in him the will of his father) shall sit with
him in his seat, even on his right hand, as he has done with his Father,
according to Daniel, They that have taught other, shall shine as the stars,
and glister like the shining of heaven, Daniel. 12.
And out of his mouth proceeds a sharp two edged sword, showing that all
power, Majesty imperial, and judgment was given him of his father, according
to that of the Revel out of his mouth went a sharp sword, that with it he
should smite the heathen, which was his word, which (according to Paul) is
sharper then a two edged sword, being quick and mighty in operation, Heb. 4.
and enters through to the dividing of the soul and spirit, and of the joints
and the marow, and judges the thoughts and intentes of the heart: and the
Rain bow about his head, showing the undoubted sign of his true covenant and
promise, in all things to be performed according as he had promised touching
salvation: even as the Rainbow was a true sign and witness of Gods just word,
never to destroy the world by water again: And his face did shine as the sun
in his strength, and has the keys of hell and death, showing the shining
light of the incomprehensible brightness of his glorious majesty, and his
triumphant power over all his enemies, and over al powers of hell and death,
having the keys of the kingdom, even the keys of David, which opens and no
man shuts, which shuts and no man opens, and thus to the Prophets and
Apostles Chri st did show a consembable vision of his glorious majesty, and
glorious mirror of coming again at the latter day: therein expressing the
self same Symbolicall glory to be to us, if we be found worthy at his
appearance to be heirs of his Kingdom, thorough righteous life: according as
the Angel showed the vision of Christ upon mount Sion how there stood before
him a great people that could not be nombred, Esdras 4.2.
praising the Lord with songs and thanksgiving, and he in the midst of
them, being of an high st^^^e^ most goodly, most glorious, and most excellent
above them all, appearing always higher and higher, more glorious and
glorious, in the incomprehensible shining, and vnmeasurarable riches of all
brightness, clearenesse, beauty, gif^es, treasures, and nobleness, and in
the infinite and endelesse power, might, and omnipotency of his divine
Majesty, and Godheade: setting crowns upon their heads, there crowning them
with the golden Diademes of eternal glory, and palms of everlasting joy,
for that they had truly walked in his ways, and knowledged (...) ^efect^
faith his holy Name* even to the death: Therefore seeing by Christ we have
there arrest of our salvation, and the promise to be made partakers of his
godly nature, and the power by his Gospel to be made the sons of God: let us
use all diligence toward good life, to make our calling to mount Sion, to be
to our joy, that when we there appear before our eternal king of glory, we
may be found to be of that holy multitude, that Christ with his heavenly and
unspeakable sweet hand may set the unspeakable crown of glory upon our
heads: for which cause let us now stir up our hearts with the quick eye of
faith and behold him as if he were present: whom shortly we shall see with our
outward and inward eyes face to face, in his Godhead and glorious humanity: as
before he was seen in his lowliness of his humane nature: And then we shall
behold him in his excellency and in all marueilousnesse, being exalted and
advanced in the high glory of his Father, and beautified with all the
everlasting ornaments of wisdom, beauty, goodness, and glory: And then (O
how joyfully shall we see him, how intyrely shall we love him) how with
burning flames of exceeding desire shall we covet him, and what wonderful
zeal and affection shall we have to embrace him so most amiable a god and
savior: when we shall thus look upon him, how in stead of his crown of
thorns, he is extolled to the endless mirror of Majesty, triumphing in all ye
great shining dignity of God, and in the Royal power over all powers, King of
kings, to whom all kings and powers shall yield up their glory and power,
ashamed of so mighty majesty: and in s teade of a Reed, he has now the
bright everlasting Scepter of the kingdom, and the omnipotent and eternal
sentence of judgment: and in stead of rebukes and reproaches, he is magnifies
with all goodly and glorious names of God, with all the words, voices, and
songs of praise, laud, honor, and glory for ever: and in stead of his cross
and nails, he is exalted in the wonderful, bright, and glorious shining throne
and seat of power and domination: and in stead of his simple garments, and
rent clothes, and purple gown, with which they clothed and mocked him: he is
now arrayed with the everlasting heavenly Robes of glory and honor, of
Justice and Kingly dignity for ever: And where his enemies did boast over him,
and mocked him, now he has reigned till his enemies be made his footestoole,
and has triumphed over death the last enemy, Oseas 13.
that the saying of the Prophet may be fulfilled, O death I will be thy death, O
hell I will be thy sting. And thus our Savior Christ has performed the
everlasting tryumphe over all his enemies, they now bowing their knees,
attributing all honor and glory unto him, and with most dreadful fear
falling flat an their faces before his shining face and high power: And because
he yielded him self to death, he has now the victory over death and hell
for evermore. And in this sort he comes in the most magnifical glory of his
Father, prepared to the marriage of new Jerusalem, which comes down also
from heaven from God, garnis head with the reins of the righteousness of
Saints: prepared as a bride mos t beautiful and glorious, fit and
convenient for a precious and glorious husband, and worthy to receive and
welcome all the excellent guestes that are called to this marriage: where the
joy of the godly shall be made perfect and complete. receiving the marriage
gift, the palms of immortality and honor, and the garland of everlasting
glorification. Wherefore to consider of this our heavenly hope, and joyful
expectation of blessedness, let us be faithful unto death and overcome, and
Chri st has promised to give us this crown of life, at his coming, These.
1.4.
which shall be with Imperial might and greatness, (according to Paul) with a
shout and the voice of the Archangel and troumpe of God, that the heavens and
earth, and all powers shall quake withal, and according to John, He shall
come down from the high heavens, clothed with a clear white splendent cloud:
and the Rain bow upon his head, the sign of Justice, promise, mercy, and
judgment, and his face as it were the sun, and his feet as it were pillars
of fire, glistering in the most endless pureness of the glory of his father,
like shining fire, These s. 1.4.
most incomparable: And then lift up your heads to see his superexcellent
gloriousness, (when you shall immediately be changed to immortality) and
meet him in the air, Acts 1.
when he shall according to the first of the Acts come again down upon mount
Oliuet: Zachary 14.
and according to Zachary, He shall stand upon mount Oliuet, (the mount of
the eternal light) that lies upon the East side of Jerusalem, Place of
Judgment.
And the mount Oliuete shall cleave in two, eastward and was tward, so that
there shall be a great valley, and the half mount shall remove toward the
north, and the other toward the south: and thither we shall fly into the
valley of the Lords hills, where the Lord shall be and all his Saints with him,
and this is the valley of Iosaphat, which Joel speaks of, saying: Let the
people rise, and get them to the valley of Iosaphat, Joel. 3.
for there will I set (says the Lord) and judge all heathen round about, and
there shall be many people in that day of the Lord in the same valley
appointed, when the Lord shall roar out of Sion. and cry out of Jerusalem,
that the heavens and earth shall quake withal: and the sun and moon shall be
darkened and the stars withdraw their light, and then shall we know that
the Lord our God dwells upon the holy mount Sion and that Jerusalem is holy
inhabited for ever more.

And thus says Esaias, the sun and moon shall be ashamed, Esaias. 24.
when the Lord of hoastes shall come with his hie heavenly host from abooue,
to rule the people at Jerusalem upon mount Syon.

And now behold how Jesus our eternal king and judge, being thus come down
from the top of all heavens, with an heavenly company of beautiful bright
Angels, and goodly creatures triumphing with the glory of all celestial
pomp: Reave. 20.
Is sitting (according to John) in the great white seat, from whose face flies
away both the earth and heaven and their place no more found: And there both
great and small stand before GOD, ready to be rewarded with his glorious and
everlasting kingdom, saying blessing, honor, glory and power, be unto him
that sits on the seat and to the Lamb for evermore.

And thus our omnipotent and glorious King our merciful Savior and Judge,
has stretched forth his glorious and omnipotent throne and seat of majesty
upon the valley of Iosaphat, the blessed valley of GOD, where all things in
heaven and in earth are gathered before him to judgment: where he openly
shows forth his woorthines and pretiousnes glittering like to a Jasper or
Sardine stone, (which stones are most clear and of a most flourishing pureness
without corruption) being of property and nature of so excellent a virtue,
Reave. 4.
as to kindle ye hearts and minds of the beholders to joy and also to animat
and stir up their spirits to delight, mirth and gladness: and so in
superabundant measure of vnspeakablenes doothe Christ appear unto us most
graciously: sitting upon his tribunal seat (houlding his court regal with
all flesh) there glistering so with incomparable endless brightness and
pureness of glory, as to kendle all hearts excedingly and abooue all that may be
thought, to the praising, lauding and magnifying his most excellent and
renowned majesty.

And there was about his seat thousand thousands, saying with a loud voice,
worthy is the Lamb that was killed. to receive power and riches, and wisdom
and strength, and honor, and glory and blessing: And this seat was bordred
about with a goodly and heauinly Rainbow like a Smaradge, as with a most
precious ring: representing ye riches of Gods promises to be performed, and the
blessedness of his promises touching election, and his judgments touching
destruction to be like, (as the rainbow is round and with out end) so them to
be without end for ever, and as the Smaradge is durable, Esdras. 4.5.
so the promises and judgment of God shall endure for ever: according to
Esdras, God lykneth his judgment to a ring. And now ahout the seat are twenty
and four seats and upon the seat twenty and four Elders, sitting clothed in
amiable white Garments: being the raines of righteousness, and robes of iuss
tice, having on their heads crouwnes of gold, being made kings and royal
priests unto God, and Judges of the trybes, being the Patriarchs and twelve
Apostles, according to Daniell, I looked till the seats were prepared till the
old aged set them down: and according to Matthew, Matthew. 1^.
Christ said unto his Apostles, ye shall sit upon twelve seats, and judge
the twelve trybes of Israel: whereby we see the great glory, power and
dignity with which the Lord does adorn his messengers and Apostles withal,
that they shall accompany our eternal God and king Jesus Christ upon his
maiesticall throne of Judgment, to manifest the excellency of Gods treuth in
open judgment, iudgeing the enemies of Christ: Whereby we may well perceive
the woorthines of our glory to be great if we so live that we may be found
acceptable in the sight of God, thereby to be made the sons of God, glorified
with glorious bodies like the Apostles, evermore accompaning with Christ him
self in his new City of Jerusalem, his most blessed kingdom: And now out
of the seat proceeded lightnings and thundrings and voices: the first being
the glistering and lightning streams of Gods mercy toward the godly the
second being the dreadful and thundering fearful s ound of Gods judgment
toward ye wicked: and the third being the heavenly voices of the Angels and
Saints praising, lawding and magnifying God in his omnipotent goodness and
glory, (as at the birth of Christ) the Angels and multitude of heavenly
soldiers stood before Christ (in vision to the Sheep-heards) according to
Luke, lawding God and saying: Luke. 2.


Glory be to God on high, and peace on the earth, and with men rejoicing.

And the glorious Throne of GOD is full of all power, glory and honor:
according to the saying of Jeremy, Whose Throne is most glorious, excellent
and of most antiquity, which dwell in the place of our most holy and
blessed rest.

And according to the saying of the Prophet Danyell. His Throne was like unto
the fiery flame, and his wheales as the burning fire, and there drew forth a
fiery stream and went out from him: being the mighty and eternal blases of
Gods goodness, Daniell. 7.
mercy and judgment, to the great joy and gladness of the righteous to behold:
and to the wunderfull terror, fear and dread of ye wicked to see, abide and
endure: and thus replenished with all excelle^ncie and gloriousnes, is this
seat of judgment: That there are seven shyning Lamps of fire burning before
the seat: being the seven spirits of God, showing a goodly fair and clear
light and a pure clear expressing of the clearnes of almighty GOD, being the
heavenly witness of the everlasting treuth of God, and being for ever present
before his Throne, there giving heavenly honor and praise to our omnipotent
God sitting in his glorious throne of majesty: and before the seat is a sea of
glass like throwgh shyning crystal, being ye appointed place for all the new
changed creatures from corruption to immortality, to stand upon: before the
glory of God: and it is so translucident as yt it seems that the eternal
power of Gods eternal remembrance and omnipotent might, has fixed it with the
virtue of such a marvelous co^prehension, ye like as a a glass e expresses ye
vision of a man's face and shape: so this expresses ye apperance of every man's
deeds, words, thoughts and imaginations, in showing ye verry face of every
man's conscience, even in the very circute he stands upon so yt the power of
God, shall make all things yt were since ye beginning to be as present, in most
manife st manner showing ye treuth of all things before his Angels and saints:
therefore ought we to be careful to keep a good conscience, Reave. 4.
seeing nothing is so hid yt shall not be revealed: and in the midst of the seat
and round about the seat are four beasts: being the four goodly cherubins of
God, full of eyes before and behind represe^ting the state of our new Jerusalem
and of all the elect of God: the first beast being like a Lion: signifiing
glory to those which been valiant to fight with stout faith and courage in the
defense of the Lamb and his Gospel: The second was like a calfe, which
prefigured a crown of glory to them which lived a sincere life, and offered
them selves to the sacrifice of martyrdom and death for the Lambs sake. The
third had the face of a man, showing the token of glory to all them which
openly with voice and tongue, by preaching, teaching, and writing had
performed the will of God to his praise and glory. The fourth beast was like
an Eagle, which ever sets her face to the Sun, and has pure eyes to
behold the brightness thereof: and this represented an assured sign of bles
sed life to all them that have lived in true penance of heart, lifting up ye
pure eyes of faith to God, and placing their conscience in true righteousness
and pureness of heart evermore toward Jesus Chri st: and thus the good people
(are at that dreadful appearance to judgment) comforted in hope and gladness
by beholding these Cherubims, representing the signs of happiness, Revel 4.
And these beautiful beasts had no rest day and night, saying, Holy, Holy,
Holy is the Lord God Almighty: And when those beasts (or goodly Cherubims)
gave honor, glory, and thanks to him that sat on the seat: which lives
for ever and ever) the twenty and four Elders, (that sit in judgment with
Christ,) fell down before him that sat in the throne, worshipping him that
lives for evermore, and cast their crowns before the throne: yielding to him
all honor to whom it is due, knowing that they have nothing but that they
have received, Saying, Thou art worthy Lord to receive glory, and honor, and
power, for thou have created all things, and for thy wills sake they are and
were created. And about the throne was the voice of many angels, praising and
magnifying the Lord with most heavenly melody, in all excellency and
sweetness. Reu. 4.
And the twenty and four Elders fell upon their faces, and worshipped him
that lives for evermore: showing thereby that when the Lord s hineth forth
the exceeding highness and greatness of his glorious face and majesty, that
all his goodly creatures do cast down them selves, as not able to abide the
brightness thereof. And thus consists the mystery of the royal majesty of
Jesus Christ coming to judgment at the latter day, and of his most glorious
sitting in his puisance, power, and glory in his seat regal, having all
things (according to the will of the Father) gathered before him: The
similitude of whose glory appeared to Ezechiel, Ezech. 1. and 10.
appearing in a great cloud full of fire, which with his glistering lightened
round about, and in the mids of the fire all clear: And now after that the
Lord has opened the whole mystery of the will of the heavenly father, and set
the elect upon his right hand, and the wicked and cursed on his left, having
sealed up the whole number of his chosen, then (according to John, Revel. 7.
) the four Angels which he saw stand on the four corners of the earth,
holding the four winds, shall blow and consume this universal world with
consuming fire, (which then was disfigured at the coming of Christ) that there
shall be no more of the first heaven, Revel. 21.
earth, and sea: and then at that blast shall the cursed fall with the Devil
and his Angels into hell: (the Lord saying) depart ye cursed: and on the other
side shall be a new heaven, and a new earth, even new Jerusalem, the
glorious kingdom of God, prepared for the elect before the beginning of the
world, (come down from God) when he shall say, Come ye blessed, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you of my father. O how joyful shall then the s aints be
with Christ in Sion, to whom paradise is thus opened, plenteousnesse of
heavenly benediction made ready, the tree of life granted, the joy of
immortality embraced, and the Garlandes of glorification enjoyed, when the
Lord shall so lovingly say to his righteous people (that have run the race in
this life in the path of godliness, saying, Come ye blessed, be ye clothed
with your heavenly mansion: come take the freedom of your new eternal city,
your glorious habitation: And behold for evermore your God of glory, and
partake the incomprehensible shining of his everlasting beauty and
brightness: and now take the freedom of all inestimable joys, with the
unspeakable abundance of all sweet rejoicing for ever. Therefore let this
animate thee to heavenly conversation of life, that thou may make thy
election sure, whereby thou may be crowned with this glorious garlande of
everlasting felicity, joy and blessedness, world without end,

AMEN.
Ephesians 1. ALlaude and praise be unto the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
father of glory, who has given unto us the spirit of wisdom, and has
lightened the eyes of our minds that we may know what the hope is whereunto
he has called us, and how rich the glory is of his inheritance upon the
Saints, and what is the exceeding greatness of his power to us ward, which
believe according to the working of that his mighty power which he wrought in
Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and set him on his right hand in
heavenly things, above all rule, and power, and might, and dominion, and above
every name that is named, not in this world only, but also in the world to
come, and has put all things under his feet, and has made him above all
things the head of the congregation, which is his body, and the fulness of him
self that fills all in all things, to whom be all honor and glory,

Amen.
THE GLORIOUS AND BEAVTIFVL GARlande of man's glorification.
CAP. 4. Of the everlasting joy of our glorification given us by the
inheritance of Christ his Kingdom: And the excellent mystery of our eternal
Mansion, and new glorious Jerusalem in which we shall dwell the Sons and
Saints of GOD for ever. (:)
THE time being come that the Lord, even the most might God, does dissend
from the hye top of the heavens, Psalm. 50.
to call the world together, not mynding to keep, silence: then shall go
before him a consuming fire, and a mighty tempest shall be stirred up round
about him: when he thus shall come to call the heavens from above, and the
earth that he may judge his people: at which time shall God appear out of Sion
in perfect beauty in the high glory of his Godhed.

And then shall be performed that all things in heaven and earth shall be
gathered together in Christ, Ephe.^.
and the mystery of the will of the Father declared: that Christ our
triumphant King and Judge, having reigned until his enemies be put under his
feet, and having put down all rule, authority and power, that death the last
enemy is consumed into victory: shall deliver up the kingdom to GOD the
Father, and become him self, subject to God that puts all things under
his feet: Cor. 1.15.
that God may be in all things: and then the holy City new Jerusalem,
comes down from God out of heaven, prepared as a Bryde garnished for her
husband, that the Tabernacle of God, is now with his elect, and he him self
does dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God him felf shall be
with them and shall be their God: for Christ the king of kings, will suffer none
of his chosen to be away, but gather all his Saints together, and so enter
with triumphing Joy into new Jerusalem: Therefore lift up your heads O ye gates
and be lift up ye everlasting doors that the king of glory may come in with
his holy people: having the palms of victory, crowns of life and Garlands
of glory in their hands.

Math. 21.
And thus, in stead of his humble ryding upon an ass, he with all gloriousnes
is accompaned into new Jerusalem, with the eternal Crown and Scepter of
heavenly majesty taking possession of Abraham's new land of promise the
everlasting kingdom and inheritance of Gods rest: saying to his righteous
people; come taste the cup of your salvation: and embrace the joys, the
happiness, the bessednes and unspeakable glory which the Father of heaven has
(of his great love) here prepared for you, in his palace: where now you are
fully and absolutely come to the new land of Canaan the everlasting
inheritance, and to holy mount Sion and to the City of the living GOD, the
celestial Jerusalem, and to the enumerable fight of Angels, and unto the
congregation of the first borne sons which are written in heaven, Cor. 1, 3.
and to God the Judge of all and to Jesus the mediator of the new Testament, and
to a kingdom immovable for ever: where they are clothed with their heavenly
mansion, replenished with the glory joy and blessedness which neither tung can
utter, eye has seen, or heart has thought: and thus Christ has made them
the glorified sons of God, and holy and peculiar people, a congregation
triumphant, a kingly preesthoode and a perfect communion of Saints, assembled
together in all pureness and precious nes with God, before the presence of the
almighty and eternal Father: who now shows forth to you the light of his
countenace that you shall behold with joy unspeakable his most glorious
godhead, his most resplendent countenance and incomprehensible majesty:
synging to him with an heavenly voice and blessed harmony, (in all abundancie
of joy) the songs of praising God for ever: for that he has geuin us the
crown of everlasting life: and ye freedom of his etrenall kingdom of glory:
where now we hunger no more, nor feel infirmities: neither does the sun
and moon give light to us any more: for our precious Lamb does dwell with
us, Reu. 7.
and feed us, and lead us unto fountains of living water: and our God wypeth
all tears from our eyes: clothing us with the plentious joy of our heavenly
mansion, new Jerusalem, being full of mellifluous pleasures, where all things
are so heavenly that nothing can be better, for there dwells everlasting life,
there grows the tree of joy, there runs the waters of health, there is the
hidden ma^na of heavenly consolation, the white stone of gladness, and the new
names of happiness, and there is the beauty of ye Godhed glory of saints and
incomparable blessedness for ever.

So that the GOD of all treuth has performed that which he spoke by Esaias the
Prophet being most favorable and gracious unto Sion, saying.

There shall thine eyes see new Jerusalem, that glorious Habitation the
Tabernacle that never shall remove, whose nails shall never be taken out
world without end and her cords shall never corrupt, Esaias. 33.
for the eternal majesty of the Lord shall there be present among us, and he
shall be our Captain and king, that we shall walk upon fair and beautiful
Ryuers, and pleasant Streams of life where neither galleys row nor great
ships sail, neither any man there lies that says I am sick, but all evil
is taken away from us: who therefore desires not to dwell in the house of the
Lord, and to behold the fair beauty of God and to visit his Temple, and to be
in his city: in which says Zachary, The waters of life run out of
Jerusalem, and the Lord him self s halbe king over all the earth, Zacha. 14.
and there shall be but one Lord only and his name shall be but one: for then
shall he set up him self above the heavens and his glory shall be above all:
when he shall make a new heaven and a new earth, that men shall go about the
earth as about a golden Paradise or pleasant flourishing feeld: For now Jerusalem
shall be saifly inhabited which was forsaken: and is made according to the
saying of Esaias: The City of the Lord, most glorious through all posterities,
Esaias. 60.
being inhabited without any wall, yea the Lord him self is to her a wall of
fire round about, and will be honored evermore in her.

Where all things are full of the shine of the Lords glory, so that O behold
this phenicall Cittie^Ierusalem, how she shall rejoice in her Children, and
her Children shall be full glad of her: whose gates are buylt with Sapphire and
Smaradge, and all the walls with precious stones, Toble. 13.
and in all her streates shall Aleluia be sung, where Gods kngdome shall be
upon her world without end.

Therefore O children of men so do that you may be Citizens in this city of
incomparable blessedness: for ye obtaining whereof, Ephesians. 6.
it behooves you to walk as the children of ye day light, striving to overcome
all the lusts of the flesh, the world and the devil, as might hinder you from
entering in to so heavenly a City: And therefore gird up the loins of your
minds with verity, and put on the breast plate of righteousness, and be shod
with the shoes of peace, and take to you ye shield of faith, arming your
selves with the word of God, that you may be pertakers of his unsearchable
treasures of happiness, there tasting the abundant sweetness of the tree of
joy and life: which shall be to us a sweet smelling ointment for ever: for
then we shall be called the heavenly citizens of new Jerusalem, the holy
household of God, and glorified sons of the Father: being according to Paul,
an holy body in Christ, made a glorious congregation without spotte or
wrinckle: placed in his own kingdom, and sabbath of everlasting rest, (like
shining lights) in the presence of God world without end. Therefore consider
what happiness is this, to enjoy the ineffable brightness and unsearchable
plenteousnesse of Gods goodne sse, with the joyful presence of God his own
self: whereat the zeal of gods house should eat us up, and ravish our hearts
with flaming feruencie to Godward: desiring to be clothed with our heavenly
mansion from heaven, by waiting with a lively hope in the way of
righteousness, to be delivered from this body and fleshly fellowship, that we
may go to have the pure heavenly company of God our maker: the precious
fountain of all heauenlinesse, joy and happiness: there with him to remain
in his own kingdom, where all things shall be to us pleasant, and full of
contentation for ever: where perpetual joy and gladness shall abide for ever:
Esaias 54.
for says God, Behold, O Jerusalem, I will make thy walls of precious
stones, and thy foundation of saphyrs: thy windows of Crystal, thy gates of
fine clear stone, and thy borders of pleasant stones: Es ay 62.
for I will (says God) marry my self to thy sons, and as a bridegroom glad
of his bride, so I the Lord shall rejoice over thee: So that praise the Lord
O Jerusalem, praise thy God O Sion: for he has made fast the heavenly bars
of thy gates and has blessed thy children within thee, that we shall dwell in
thy palaces, made the elect Saints and sons of God, in all plenteousnesse
of joy and peace: rejoicing in his holy sanctuary of euerlastingnesse, where we
shall walk in the court and palace of our God, ascribing praise and honor to
him in his places of eternity: and there we shall sing merrily unto our God,
lauding and worshipping him in the beauty of his holiness: for the spirit of
joy shall there be triumphing among us in his glorious chariot of
heauenlinesse, in that we shall behold the face of God, whose Majesty
endures visibly with us for ever: showing upon us the light of his
countenance, and filling us round about with the incomprehensible sweetness,
goodness, ioyfulnesse and excellentnesse of his own self: shining, flowing,
and streaming forth to us the beams of beauty, the brightness of glory,
the fountains of joy, the rivers of life, the paradise of pleasure, the
freedom of delights, the ornaments of honor, the plenteousnes of relief,
the pleasantnes of all heavenly savors, the sweet smelles of all redolent
odours: and thus he shall rejoice his glorified Saints eternally, who shall be
ravished with endless mirth and gladness to behold with their eyes the infinite
and inexpressible excellency and splendencie of the beauty of their maker,
and to hear the great power, might, and majesty of his omnipotent voice: And
thus the chosen of God, being endued with the ornaments of immortality,
garlandes of glory, crowns of life, and palms of joy and victory, are in
their heavenly clothing in new Jerusalem, in the sight of the glorious throne
of the most highest, being consembable to God in pureness and clearnes, enjoying
the freedom of eternal blessedness: therefore (O swe ete people) repent, for
this kingdom is at hand, and come to the waters of life, and stir up your
minds to holiness that you may enjoy this blessed City. For Christ after
his ascension, to stir up and win a fervent desire to our hearts (toward
the seeking after this his kingdom) does show a glistering vision of new
Jerusalem, to the spiritual eyes of John, that he being upon an high mountain,
did see in Ghostly comprehension the cons emblance of this holy Jerusalem:
descending out of heaven from God, having the brightness of God: shining like
to a stone most precious, Revel. 21.
even a Jasper, clear as Crystal: being thereby a most flourishing City,
translucident in all heavenly pleasantness, most plentiful with all
goodness, most beautiful to behold, and most glorious to enjoy: and this
City is more precious then pearls, an habitation so amiable, so lovely, so
dear and desirefull, that it includes in it self the unmeasurable and
endless fullness of heavenly riches, eternal felicity and happiness,
unspeakable pleasures, joys, and gladness, ordained eternally unto the elect
and glorified people: That who would not (O Lord) love the habitation of this
thy house, and the place where thine honor dwells: which thou have made a
most sure and safe City, impugnable for ever, being bordered and compassed
round about with the walls of eternity, great, high, and strong, which
stand fast for ever: And her walls (says Esaias) shall be called health: Esaias
60. Zacha. 2.
And the Lord (says Zachary) will be unto her a wall of shining fire round
about: And yet the entrance into this City, shall be by twelve gates, kept by
the goodly Porters and Angels, the twelve tribes of Israel, that the gates of
new Jerusalem (according to the saying of the Prophet Esaias) shall be called
the praise of God: Esaias 60.
being agreeable in every part, in, with, and to it self: in perfect number of
equality and sympathy, concording every side together in one conclusion in
the whole: As Alpha and Omega is the first and the last, as one perfect number
of eternity in many: The lively description of new Jerusalem*
and the same many concluded in, of, and by that one: And thus consymbolicall
in divine mystery, has Jerusalem a quadrate and equilateral form, with three
gates on the North side: three on the East: three on the South: and three on
the West side: founded with twelve foundations, even (the holy Apostles) of
whom the walls conflict: even the great high number of the elect. And thus
there being in new Jerusalem many gates and many heavenly openings to go in
at to praise the Lord: yet are they one in many, and many in one cohering in
the same: like a radical root, out of which springs a radical number: and
yet that number so rising out of his root to an high and great number, as that
it has a true and perfect conjunction of unity, The mys terie of a Radical
root and radical number to Christ and his elect.
simpathie, and concordance, of, with, and in his radical root: whereby it is
one of it self: and of that same one, rising out many, and (that many) still
abiding inseparably, in one concordance, of, with, and in that one: as a thing
impossible, that, that great radical number should consist, or be found without
his root radical: neither also is it possible to be thought, a root radical
to be: but that in his own nature and power, (of force) are many nombers
radical, inclusiuely contained in this his root, as in a privy seal of most
heavenly comprehension: so that the number of twelve is a radical number,
which by virtue and power of it self, multiplied in it self, does of it
self produce a greater number, as an hundred forty and four: and so the
heavenly harmony increases by consent and agreement of radical production:
and yet this high number does concord, unite, and knit it self in, of, and
with this radical number of twelve: So that the twelve apostles being the
twelve foundations, (raised out of one corner stone) whereof the walls of
Jerusalem do stand: are the radical root, whereof the great number of the
elect, in one symbolicall conformity, and concordance of unity, does agree in
perfect harmony of coniuction, as ever abiding in, of, and with his foundation
or radical root: and so by virtue and power (of perfect production,
conjunction, concordance and harmony) is one in many, and many in one,
contained in perfection of heavenly mystery. Whereby this Radical foundation
and root (twelve, Apostles) springing out of that only root of Iesse: does
contain his measure of Jerusalem, so under the virtue figurative of twelfe, as
the number of the whole elect and of the twelve trybes: that the heigh, length
breadth is equalll, and the measure of the walls is a perfect radical number,
of the radical root of twelf multiplied in him self, which in his own
strength and power produces and hundredth forty and four, a figurative sign
of the unity and consent of the mystical number of the whole congregation of
the elect number of the Saints: for as twelve augmented in it self does
thereof concur a certain true perfect radical number, consemblably agreeing
to, in and with the root twelf whereof it ryseth: so in like consent, unity,
harmony, perfect number and true increase of production and concordance, is ye
universal Church triumphant to the radical root of the twelve Apostles, and
their doctrine: so knyt all in one root of Iesse inseperably: as one in many
and many in one, in ghostly harmony evermore abiding.

And thus in like manner, is this everlasting habitation or new Jerusalem, so
absolute in all true perfection and just proportion of heavenly consent, as
nothing can be better, nothing purer, nothing excellenter, and nothing more
woorthyer to the everlasting rejoicing of the elect saints of God: cohering
in one self same perfection of one consent, peace and unity for ever.

And now the vision of this glorious City, wherein the glorified people shall
dwell, did glister in the spiritual eyes of John in such transparent manner, as
may animate all hearts to the earnest love and desire of inioying so beautiful
an habitation, Reave. 4.
and so precious a City of blessedness For the buylding of the walls was of
Jasper and the City of pure gold, like to the clear glass, and the
foundation of the walls were garnished with all manner of precious stones: as
of Jasper, Saphir, Calcydon, Smaradge, Sardonix, Sardeos, Crisolitie, Byrrall,
Topas, Crisoprassos Iacynt and Amatist: whereby appear the abundant riches of
all virtues the innumerable treasures of all heauenlynes, the exceeding joys
of all ioyfulnes, the unspeakable sweetness of all blessedness, the most
precious felicity of all happynes: to be always there contained to the
perpetual gladding and rejoicing of the hearts of the elect of GOD: for the
City in every part with the whole, and of the whole with every part, is
without spotte and dymnes, without blemish and wryncle for ever: being in
every part the self perfection for ever: that in her compass, ever, is the
excelleecie of all excellentnes, that nothing can be added.

Otherfore that the power, glory and mightines of this kingdom of Jerusalem
might be known to all men whose glory is everlasting, and her dominion
indureth through all ages: for she has her gates wrought without hands: and
yet graue^ by high ministry, being of twelve beauties like incomparable
pearls, and yet by heavenly virtue, Reave. 4.
they shine as many, yet still in one: And the streat of the City was most
goodly, conssisting of pure gold, as a through shyning glass. Showing that it
is most rich with all fulness of riches, the mightiest Kingdom of all
incomparable treasures: Reave. 12.
the phenicall City of all inestimable heavenly merchandise: being most
delectable abooue all delights, most beautiful abooue all fairnes: most
clear above all clearnes, and most of all resple^ding, yt the night is as
clear as the day, and the darkness and light both a like abooue all brightness:
in which we shall reign with the Father of all brightness, greatness, beauty
and glory: who evermore holds the Saints and Citizens there, in perpetual
blyss e and joy, touching such an heavenly mansion, wherewith they are clothed:
For that the Lord God almighty and the Lamb are the Temple of it, and the
brightness of God do lighten it and the Lamb is the light of it, that there is
never night, never need of sun or moon, neither shall the gates ever be
shut, for the seat of God and the Lamb shall be there, Reave. 22.
and they shall see his face, and his names shall be upon their Foreheades.

And then they are a most blessed People having the Lord for their God, that
insomuch it is a thing beyond all measure, a place of joy beyond all thoughts,
where we shall have the freedom of Angels, the paradise of ghostly
delights, the incomprehensible brightness of Gods con^tenance satisfied with
the pleasures of his house and kingdom, in the abundant and bountiful
refreshinges of all sweet and delectable gladness: by beholding our GOD in his
greatness, being the Creator of all creatures, the giver of all blessedness and
Author of all heauenlines, the omnipotent maker of kingdoms, powers and
dignity, that all things shall yield up their glory to this City of his
Saints, both kings and powers, and whatsoever has been created shall yield
up his honor and virtue to this City: both waters and stones fruits and
leaves. Reave. 2^.


For out of the seat of God and of the Lamb proceeds pure Rivers of water of
life: having on eueerie side wood of eternal life, and fruits and leaves of
everlasting health, (according to the saying of the Prophet Esaias) There lies no
man that says (I am sick) for all evil is clearly taken away from the holy
and blessed Citizens that dwell and inhabit there.

And thus the glorified and blessed People of GOD, shall continue and ever
remain in the glorious presence of Gods most excellent majesty: in the
everlasting and eternal state of unspeakable joys and hapines, evermore
walkeing in the purity of the shyning and most clear light and brightness of
GOD. Therefore ascribe power unto our Lord and rejoice in him, who is so
wunderfull in his holy places, where he will deck his people with his own
beauty, and crown them with the glory of an everlasting kingly preesthood
extolling and prays ing God eternally in the highest, according to his
woorthynes: and thus they taste perpetually of the infallable sweetness, of all
flowing goodness incessantly proceeding from God his own self: there making
merry in all heauenlynes of mirth, and rejoicing continually before God, by
embracing the excellent shine and blessed beams of the most splendent and
glorious brightness of the omnipotent Father: O therefore come hither (all good
people) that you may taste the sweetness of the Lord, for the which lift up your
hearts to heaven and so run your race, as that you may be received in to that
heavenly habitation with God and his Saints. And besides touching ye heavenly
mystery of this our eternal Jerusalem and blessed mansion discending down,
from God: the vision of the glory of the Lord appearing to Ezechiell, Ezeche.
1. and 10.
does in ghostly co^prehension (as in a clear glass) represent the figurative
mystery thereof, under the semblance of the goodly Cherubins: for our holy and
euerla sting City shall evermore appear full of the glistering of Gods
majesty, lightning round about: whereby ye twelve trybes or universal number
of the elect, possessing Jerusalem: according to a quadrate or equilaterall
triplicitie of every side of the City, containing three gates, having the
names of the trybes in order of heavenly division: which sides represent the
four goodly beasts under the quadrat form of this City, containing, The
mysterye of the four beasts 4. and wheels which Ezechiell saw.
as under four faces of beautiful beasts or wheels: the whole congregation
of ye elect, as under the face of three gates on every side, making the
radical number of twelve trybes or twelve Apostels multiplied in the virtue of
it self, to a perfect number radical the harmony of the elect: and thus these
goodly faces of the four beasts, being each side of the City with his
blessed saints, shall shine as burning Cressets, giving a continual glister
as it were a lightning, for out of their bodies shall proceed the flaming zeal
of praising and magnifying the God of glory for ever: and thus on the four
sides round about, (the similitude of new Jerusalem, shall be as a glassie sea
mingled with fire shining with the superexcellent glistering of heavenly
beauty, like the shining of precious stones) carved out without hand, by the
omnipotency of God: that the twelve tribes, or whole congregation of the
elect, being evermore in the city: that howsoever the blessed Lamb and
glorious host of Saints move upward or downward, to the magnifying of the
Majesty of God, or falling upon their faces at the high glistring of the most
incomprehensible brightness of God: the tabernacle or heavenly Jerusalem does
the same also: as an heavenly clothing immovable from them, but still
conformed in all godly perfection to every harmony of consent of the glorious
Saints: that if the holy Saints do move or go, by the guiding of the
spirit or Lamb, the blessed City or tabernacle goes also: for the spirit
of life is in the City: So that the elect are so clothed with their heavenly
habitation, that neither can they any way be separated from it, nor that from
them, as a kingdom of glory, ins eparable and immovable from a glorious
body: And this eternal City is framed with four equilaterall sides, (like
the form of the Quier and altar of the Temple of old Jerusalem) and that in
most true perfection of just harmony and absolute proportion, having to look
upon every side mos t excellently cohering and according: as if one were in
another: that when one side of the glorified saints went forward, they went
all four and turned them not about: according to the dignity of true
perfection: for such is the concording of every part with the whole, and of the
whole city with every part, that if any part moved, all moved: and that,
with such a motion, as the spirit of life did give, which was in the whole
City or tabernacle, and in every part of the tabernacle a like and the self
s ame: So that this motion was ever, as the sweet voice of Gods own mouth did
breath, being the perfect motion of Gods holy will: (accordingly as the
children of Israel did never move forth in passing the wilderness, but by
the mouth of God, as the cloudie pillar did move or stand still before the
tabernacle:) So in most heavenly manner shall it be in our glorified tabernacle
or city, that God shall be our Captain and King, leading us to fountains of
water of life: Ezech. 1.
And the streets and wings of this our City, are so framed without hand, by
mighty power, that one never touch another, and yet when they move they turn
them not about, but each go straight forward: showing that it contains one
only way and motion of most perfect truth and perfection with all harmonicall
concordance of heavenly agree ement. And these goodly beasts do represent the
Godly livers which are accepted before the goodness of God: and now the manner
of their dwelling within their new Jerusalem, is prefigured by the face of a
man and Lion, Ezech. 1.
appearing on ye right side of the squared City: and the face of an ox and an
Eagle on the left side: signifying a consimilar expectation, that those godly
people, which like a lion have been vigilant, stout, strong, and bold in
faith, to fight and war in defense of the Lamb: and the face of a man
shows that those which truly and faithfully by confession, teaching, and
preaching, have set forth the glory of the Lamb, shall possess the right
side of Jerusalem: And tho se which like an ox to sacrifice, have yielded them
selves to martyrdom, to death, or torments for the Lambs sake: and those
which like an Eagle have turned their hearts to God, as the Eagle does always
turn her self to the Son, to behold it, shall posses se the left side of
new heavenly Jerusalem being now glorified: whose feet shines like
glistering scoured metal, full of beauty, evermore continuing in one self
same joy and glory: And now the wings and borders are spredde out most
beautifully, (according to Esaias) the cords are so laid abroad as that they
can not be better, Esaias 33.
and the ma st set up of such a fashion that no banner or sail hangs
thereon. Esaias 40.
As also Esaias says, The Lord sits upon the Circle of the world, and
spreads out the heavens as a covering, and stretches them out as a tent to
dwell in: For now every part in the whole, and the whole with every part
does evermore agree in the self same, so knit in unity and everlasting
peace, in one consent of melody, that for ever one part and every part does
the self same thing: as the Spirit and Lamb does lead them, Coloss. 1.
having the pre-eminence: so that for evermore they remain glorified with
euerlas ting life, peace, unity, and purity of all perfection and brightness
in the sight of the Almighty: for all things with them are Symbolicall to
Gods Majesty: That as Jesus Christ our Lord and Redeemer is the Son of God,
begotten of God, God of God, and God in God: that their insearchable nature is
such, that they are both one in it self: And the Holy Ghost from them
proceeding, being the everlasting Spirit of the everlasting Father and Son,
being of inseparable nature all together in it self: so that being three
persons in Trinity, yet is it one everlasting unity: for in them is one
Communion of Godhead, that the fullness of the Godhead dwells in the three
persons Almighty, both bodily and Substantially: And now as this everlasting
power and Godhead is coadvnited a perfect Trinity in Unity, and Unity in
Trinity: So we of God, to God, and in God, are adopted Saints of holiness by
Jesus Christ our Savior, the eternal word and son of God: by whom we are
made in most excellent and true resemblance of Godly nature, partakers of Gods
glory and pureness: Phil. 3.
being ordained of God to be fashioned like the Son of God: Ephe. 1.
That what perfect conjunction of Godhead, is between the trinity and the
unity. The like heavenly harmony by adoption shall be for ever, of the
Saints of new Jerusalem, adopted true sons of God by the Son of God, so
fashioned like to his glorious body. Phil. 3.
So that as the everlasting seat of Gods majesty, his eternal and
incomprehensible place of power, does ever remain with the Godhead, as an
eternal brightness of the most holiest seat of all holiness: that where the
Godhead is, there is the s hining of his incomprehensible seat of brightness,
as a place eternal and incomprehensible, agreeing to an Almighty and
incomprehensible god: and so an Almighty God with an incomprehensible place of
glory, as one in a seat everlasting, unsearchable and unmeasurable of all
omnipotent Majesty: being an eternal creator and maker of a universal seat
of glory, never departing from the same, as an immutable God, in an immutable,
universal, and incomprehensible seat of honor and power: So the Saints and
blessed elect have a new mansion and glorious City descended from god, in
which they abide a kingly Priesthood for ever: And they shall never go out of
it, but shall sit therein with Christ the Son of God, being his seat of
glory given of the Father, Revel. 3.
where the elect shall s it with the Son of God in his kingdom, as the Son
did sit in his fathers seat of incomprehensible Majesty: And now such is the
heavenly s ympathie and consembable resemblance of our heavenly mansion or new
Ierus alem, answering to the incomprehensible seat of the glory of the
eternal majesty: That as the incomprehensible seat of glory is ever with
God, so our new Jerusalem is ever with the saints: being an everlasting and
heavenly clothing, Cor. 2.5.
with which the elect are evermore clothed: That where the first begotten Son
of God, and by him the adopted sons of God do go, move, or alleuate them
selves toward the omnipotent God: in like sort does the eternal tabernacle or
seat, as a glorious clothing or everlasting garment with a glorified body
continuing inseperably for ever:

And thus we are conjoined as one harmony and perfect consent of many, united
in one communion with Gods holiness so glorified in the Author and Father of
glory, and clothed with the substanciall pertakeing of his goodly seat of
glory (according to Esaias) I will make a new Jerusalem (says the Lord) that
shall be glorious through all posterities: Esaias. 4.^.
Peace shall be the ruler, and Righteousness the officer: the walls shall be
called health and the gates the praise of God, and God shall be thy everlasting
light, and thy God shall be thy glory: And she shall be a crown in the hand
of the Lord, and a glorious garland in the hand of her God: and shall be called
a new name, the pleasure of God in her, and God loves her and god shall marry
him self to her sons. and as a brydegrome glad of his bryde, so god of her.

Whereby appear the infinite love of God to his saints and of them to God: the
inseparable conjunction of ye glory of God to new Jerusalem and to her sons:
and the reciprocate conjunction and everlasting confirmation of them to him in
substantial glorification: so that we shall be (in mystery) as one pure
unspotted people, sanctified in the participiation of the holiness of God: being
a multitude and yet one heavenly body united to one only holy and omnipotent
God: and thus the Saints shall be joyful with glory behoulding the most
resplendent beauty of God over their heads, lifting to him with one consent of
heavenly melody all praise and honor everlastingly,

Otherfore ye heavenly Congregation of saints sing praises night and day to
your God of glory that you may dwell before God for ever. And thus it is
infinite to express and most joyful to behold the admirable treasures and
riches laid up for us in Christ to come, and it is exceeding gladsome to think
what a plenteous, costly, pleas ant and glorious feast the Lord has prepared
by Christ for us:

And let it rejoice you to the ground of your hearts, to consider how the Lord
shall deck you like Bridegromes, with the garments of heavenly health, and high
blessedness and let your souls leap within you and dance for joy, to think how
you shall be decked with the garments of Gods beauty, and be you merry in
righteousness and run cheerfully to, godlynes of life, that you may partake with
this everlasting happiness of new Jerusalem, the glory whereof is so exceeding,
that the high amplitude thereof cannot be expressed, unto which the spirit of
God says to thee come, and your bryde her self (even Jerusalem) says come
Therefore so run the race of your life that thou may go into her, and taste
her water of life, there beholding the majesty of GOD, with all abundant
ioyfulnes: and so remaining in everlasting glorification with Christ for ever
and ever. *

ALleluia, salvation and glory and honor and power and might: Reu. 19.
be as crybed to the Lord our God: for true and righteous are his judgments,
therefore praise the Lord God all ye that are his servants, and ye that fear
him both small and great: for the Lord our God omnipotent reigns: so that let
us rejoice and be glad and give honor to him for the marriage of the Lamb is
come, and his wife made her self ready, and to her was granted that she
should be arrayed with pure and goodly raynes: (and the raines be the
righteousness of Saints, and now happy are they which are called unto the
supper of the Lambs marriage, for they shall dwell with him in his everlasting
Tabernacle and Temple, and God will dwell among them, Reu. 22.
and they shall see Gods face and his name shall be in their forheads and God him
self shall be their light, and shall reign for evermore: therefore to him sing
praises world with out end,

AMEN.
Esdras 4.2.
Take thy number (O Sion) and shut up thy purified, for the number of thy
Children whom thou lo^gedst for is fulfilled, and sealed in the feast of the
Lamb receiving glorious garments of the Lord, therefore O glorious mother
Jerusalem embrace thy glorified Children with all tryumphing gladness.

THE GLORIOUS AND BEAVTIFVL GARlande of man's glorification.
CAP. 5. Of the pure Crystal and glassie Sea, on which the Elect shall stand
before Christ: and in this glassie sea, true godliness and righteousness give the
crowns of glory: according to who^ every man must be directed, that desire to
stand joyfully before Christ to be crowned with the Garlande of glorification. *
THE Lord God Almighty who went before his people thorough the wilderness,
that ye earth shook, and the heavens dropped at his presence: Psalm. 68.
who se glory Moses might not behold: neither any earthly and corruptible
eye can see his face, and live: Exodus 33.
has promi sed of his great goodness and love, that he will have the
righteous in everlasting remembrance: and will be to them a joyful crown and
glorious Garlande. Therefore rejoice in the Lord and be glad, Es ay 28.
that he may put upon you the garments of health, and cover you with the
mantell of righteousness: ^ho says that he will deck you like a bridegroom,
and as a bride that has her apparel upon her, so he will clothe you with the
shining robes of glorification. For which cause ye ought to show your selves
excellent in righteousness, a planting of the Lord, for him to rejoice in:
evermore walking in pureness of conversation, and so holding out to the end:
thereby to win the glorious palm of victory, Esaias. 62.
and eternal kingdom of blessedness: Tim. 2 2.
for be it, that a man strive for a maisterie, yet he is not crowned with the
victory, except he strive lawfully and so ouerrommeth. And also they that
prove maisteries to obtain a corruptible crown, Cor. 1, 9.
abstain from all things that should hurt them, and hinder them in their
enterprise: but now to you an incorruptible crown is propounded, the joy of
everlasting life and blessedness: for which cause you ought so much the rather
to abstain from all things that should let you thereto: And so run, that
you may obtain the garland of victory and palms of glory, for Christ has
not called you unto uncleanness of life, but unto holiness, accordingly as it
is written, Pet. 1.1.
be ye holy, because I am holy: wherein it is the will of God, that you should
increase more and more in all righteousness of conversation according to his
Gospel. For pure devotion before God, is to keep your selves unspotted of the
world, and to cleanse your selves from all filthiness of the flesh, and grow up
to full holiness in the fear of God: for great is the mystery of godliness:
whereunto you ought to stir up the gift of God which is in you, to perfection
of righteousness, walking as obedient children ought to do, to the pleasing
of God. Wherefore to bring thee into the right way that leads to this pure
glassie sea of righteousness, thereby to enjoy the treasure of eternal life,
you must walk in the path that leads to the house of Jacob, in whose seed
all the kinreds of the earth are blessed: John 10.
and there, by the holy one of Israel, who is the door, you may go in, and be
guyded in the right pathe to the heavenly City new Jerusalem, in a clear
way of godly conversation, accompanied with true Christianity: Golden stayr
and at your coming to this door, you shall behold with the eye of faith
four golden stairs decked with many goodly precious stones of virtue, being
very fair gryces to go upon, one higher then another: and when you are at the
fourth stayre, you are come fully into this pure glassie Sea of holiness,
godliness and righteousness: and besides when you are come to the end of the
fourth stayre, you shall behold the fifth golden stayre more goodly then all
the rest, most beautiful, transfulgent, and glorious, which brings you
presently into the Crystal Sea of glory, to stand joyfully in the sight of
Christ, with a palm of victory and a garlande of glory in your hand:
Whereof the first golden stayre of Christianity, is To believe the holy
Scriptures and Gospel of God, simply, syncerely, and truly: And this is the
first step of Christian wisdom: The s econd staire is, to reverence the
word of God, with a pure heart in all obedience and diligence to taste how
sweet the Lord is: and this is the grice of true Religion: The third staire
is, to go forward by the word of God, unto the meditation of heavenly life,
having your conversation in heaven, from whence you look for a savior to deck
and beutifie you with glory: And this is true holiness and godliness: The fourth
goodly stayre is to continue and persevere in ye word of God and treuth of the
Gospel in all stedfastnes, of faith, love hope and patience immovable unto
the end And this is perfect constancy to obtein ye victory, and the^ the fifth
transfulgent and high s tayre of beauty to enter into the Crystal sea of
glory, (to stand in the number of the elect that has got ye victory of the
beast, of his image, of his mark and of the number of his name) having the
Harppes of God, and singing the song of Moses the servant of GOD and the song
of the Lamb, who has made us meet for his most glorious and everlasting
kingdom: Is, by grace in Christ, to overcome and vanquishe the world and
lusts of the flesh and spiritual powers by the faith of the Gospel and
armor of God, and so to depart with the victory. 1. The light of the Gospel
and truth.
And now at the entering up upon this golden grite of Christianity, there
stands a fair virgin, of a very pure and clear countenance, clothed with
garments of shining light endewed with unsearchable virtues: and she speaks
nothing to them, that would come up, but as the holy one of Israel has taught
her, (because upon his shoulders the whole kingdom does lie.) Esaias 9.
And she is crowned with a crown, beset with the pearls of doctrine, truth,
knowledge, discipline, prophesying, and preaching: And she is called the light
of the Gospel: John 1.
And she is always pronouncing a sweet and heavenly exhortation, desiring
every man to hear the truth of the Gospel. and the way to their salvation,
saying, Ye men and brethren, girde you with the girdle of Gods verity: for
through his abu^dant mercy he has begotten you again, Peter. 1.1.
not with gold and silver, but with the precious blood of his own dear Son
Jesus Chris t, as of a Lamb undefiled and without spot: that ye should enjoy
an inheritance immortal and glorious, prepared in heaven for you. Therefore
trust perfectly to the grace that is brought by Jesus Christ, walking after the
spirit, abstaining from fleshly lusts and fighting against the works of
darkness: that your conversation may be holy in the grace of Christ, whereto
he has called you through faith to salvation: thus she never cease, making
such godly persuasions to allure men to win the glory of Christ's kingdom.

2. True Religion.
And then preasing forward to come to the second staire, after the verity of
the truth received, there stood another beautiful Lady, arrayed with all the
shining garments that the first lady contained in her treasure house of
truth: Revel. 12.
for she was clothes with the brightness of the Son, the clear word of
God, and the moon under her feet, the righteous life of the true congregation
and Church of Christ, was her foote-stoole: and the glory of twelve stars
over her head, the doctrine of the Apostles and the righteousness of their life
was her glory: wherewith she decked and that came up to her upon this staire,
for she was the nurcing mother of Christ's little Children, her name was true
Religion, John 6.
whom the righteous branch of David, did hold fast by the hand, and lynked
her with a chain of gold of inseparable love, unto the first virgin her
sister called the light of the Gospel: that whosoever came to embrace the
first Lady, with true sincere love: mu st also by the golden chain of fervent
love, come up higher unto this sweet virgin of true Religion, Heb.^.
to embrace her gifts of grace, hope and peace to profess steadfastly the true
profession of Christ with all humblenes, reverence and obediynce unto God:
then these being not all the stayres that confirmed a verteous man, in the way
to everlasting life. 4. Godlynes and perfect Righteousness.
These Ladies pointed him to look up to the third golden stayre, and there was
a trym meek virgin very demure and humble (even as white and as meek as a
dooue) being rayed and clothed with pure and goodly raines of silk the
garments of righteousness down to the ground, and she stood upon the corner
stone of Sion, and she was rich and had no end of her treasures, Reave. 22.
Pet. 1.1.
and she was fast linked with the golden chain of inseparable love to the
other two virgins her sisters: that who so came up to them, she (for her goodly
raines and treasures sake) stirred them up with fervent spirit to come up
higher, to s tandde with her and walk upon the corner stone of Sion, where she
by name, being true godliness, did set up righteousness, in the balance and
filled all comers to her with ye fruit thereof: for she was as the shining
light and her beauty as the burning lamp, and did give them the rich garments
of righteousness which the two first Ladies had made ready for them to wear:
which notwithstanding without this virgins asistance did show in them naked and
bare: for she being by name true and pure Godlynes, did deck all men that had
received the light of the Gospel, and the profession of true Religion,with the
garments of health, and precious armor of God, Ephe. 6.
putting upon them the breast plate of righteous nes, the sandalles of peace,
the sheeld of faith, the helmet of salvation, the bond of love, and swoorde of
the spirit, saying: Now walk ye as Children of the light, These. 1.5.
and Children of the day, for they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh
with the appetites and lusts thereof: Gal. 5.
and so walk in the spirit and do the fruits thereof, and be not weary of well
doing but tread down the lusts of the flesh which woorketh contrary to the
spirit to keep you back from this golden staire unto which you are come,
wherein shine as lights in the world, John. 1 5.
holding fast the word of life, and then ask any thing at Gods hand, according
to his will and he hears your petitions: Phil. 2.
thus she rejoiced all comers with the abundant sweetness of heavenly
conversation: 4. Constancy and perseverance in righteousness to the end
And now preasting up to the mark appointed, the high calling in Christ, these
Virgins appointed a righteous man to go up to the fourth golden stayr, where was
a pure, modest and meek Virgin, clothed with a garment dipped in blood, setting
her feet very fast upon the precious corner stone of Sion, being lynked with
the inseparable and invincible golden chain of perfect love, stedfastnes of
faith, Reave. 19
impugnable patience unto the other three Ladies her Sisters, and her name was
called Constancy and perseverance in the troth unto the end. And then you
might see many come running feircely out of the house of Esaw, Pet. 1 1. James.
1.4.
to make sharp battles and ass aultes against this virgin, shooting many
arrows of persecutions, afflictions, temptations and tribulations to beat her
of that golden stair, and to kill her, and there you might see that she was
sore wounded that her garments were blooddie for the Lambs sake, ^^pe. 3. Rom
8. Heb. 12. Cor. 2.1.52.
and she did hold fast the treuth and her, faith did continue unshaken of all
the darts of persecutions: and she had a great Adamant in her hand, and upon
it was written the words which the Lamb of glory spoke to John from heaven,
to draw thereby all them that were come by grace in Christ to the other three
stayres to come up to her, Reave. 23
to walk with constant faith and patience upon the glaciall sea of
perseruerance to the end: and then she said to them that were below come up
hither boldly and fear none of those things which you shall suffer for
behold the holy one of Israel that set upon David's stool, byddeth you be of
good cheer for I am with you says he, to the end of the world, and he
says unto John, Fear not, I am the first and the last, Reu. 1.
and am alive and was dead, and behold I am a live for evermore, and have the
keys of hell and death: Hold therefore fast the patience of my words to the
end and thou shall be safe, Reu. 2.
for whosoever overcomes and is faithful to me unto death, I will give him a
crown of life and will make him a glorious pillar in the Temple of my God,
Reu. 3.
and shall sit for ever with me in my seat in new Jerusalem: and thus this
goodly Lady did comfort all comers with such heavenly consoation of Christ's
own words, who is faithful and true that it would move any heart willingly to
die for ye Lambs sake and to suffer all afflictions rather then declyne from
the company of these heavenly Ladies, which leads to eternal salvation:
Then these virgins pointed a righteous man farther to the top of Sion, and
there he might see and come to the company of them that were got up to this
fourth golden staire in Jacobs house walking boldly in perfect stablenes of
all righteousness upon the pure glaciall sea of perseverance, patience long
suffering and immutablenes: as men s hewing them selves able to stand (by the
grace which was now given them) and to abide the batell to the end, obteining
ye victory: then were they ready joyfully to enter to ye high golden stair,
there to stand with the elect before Christ, having garlands and palms of
victory in their hands: for a most beautiful and glorious 5. Victory by faith.
and bright Queen did sit upon that transfulgent stayre, thrusting out her
heavenly hand (being godly victory) accompaned with eternal gladness drawing
them up that had perseuered to the end into the glaciall sea of glory before
the Lamb: Saying now come see with Esaias, GOD sitting in his glorious seat and
also Esdras vision performed: Esaias. 6.
When Esdras saw upon the mount Sion, a great People whom he could not
number and they praised the Lord with songs of thanksgeuing, and in the mid st
of them, Esdras. 4.2.
there was a young man of an high stature more excellent then all they, and
upon every one of their heads, he set a crown, and was ever higher and
higher, and the Angel said to Esdras that they were those that have put of the
mortal clothing and have testified and knowledged the name of God unto death,
and therefore are now crowned and receive the reward of immortality: and he
which crowns them and gives them the palms in their hands is the son of
God, whom they have knowledged in the world, and therefore they receive
glorious garments of ye Lord, which now behold how Christ does perform it,
saying to you all that has ouercum and been faithful unto death in his name,
Reave. 3.
come take you the crown of life, and sit with me in my seat of glory.

And thus these Princes of Righteousness does perswad every man by godly
conversation of life, to preace forward to obtain the mark appointed, the high
calling in Christ even the very beautiful reward of eternal glorification.

For which cause that goodly Virgin and undefiled Lady called the light of the
Gospel, came forth in her golden Chariot to pass through out all the world,
saying I must go gather all Nations be they never so far unto Christ And
then she said, Ary se ye Kings and Princes, and worship the holy one of
Israel, who bids you that be in darkness to come into ye light, yt you may
se glorious Jerusalem the Tabernacle that never shall remove, for the glorious
majesty shall there be present among us. Therefore up and come to the hill of
the Lord, Esaias 35.
and to the house of the God of Jacob, that you may walk in the light of the
Lord: And then she passed through the mids of heaven with an euerlas ting
testament, preaching to all the inhabiters of the earth, saying, Seek the
Lord, all ye meek hearted, Sophon. 1.
ye that work after his iudgoment seek righteousness, s eeke lowlines that
ye may be defended in the wrathful day of the Lord: Esaias 66.
for the hand of the Lord shall be knowrn among his servants, and his
indignation among his enemies. For which cause walk as it becomes you,
according to the Gospel of Christ, in true holiness and pureness of
conversation, that you may be found to laud, honor, and glory, at the great
day of resurrection. And then she did set up righteousness in the balance, and
judgment in the weightes, saying, Thus stands it between the righteous
people, and the ungodly as follows, and therefore be careful to make your
election sure.

Esaias 3. THe righteous shall enjoy the fruits of their labors and studyes:
but woo be to the ungodly and unrighteous for they shall be heavily rewarded
after their works.

Psalm 1. Blessed is the righteous man, whose delight and exercise is in the
Law of the Lord, for he is like a tree planted by the water side, whose leaf
shall never wither, for the Lord dwells among them that are righteous: But
as for the ungodly they are as chafe that shall not be able to stand in the
judgment, neither the sinners in the Congregation of the righteous, for the
way of the ungodly shall peri^h.

Psalm 11. The Lord loves the righteous, and his countenance beholds the
Just: but the ungodly and him that delights in wickedness, does his soul
abhor: yea, upon the ungodly and the unrighteous persons he will rain fire
and brimstone, storm and tempest, this shall be their portion to drink.

Psalm 34. The eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are
open unto their prayers, and though great be the troubles of the righteous, yet
the Lord delivers them out of all: But the countenance of the Lord is
against the wicked, and he will destroy the ungodly and unrighteous man.

Psalm 37. The Lord knows the days of the righteous and their inheritance
shall endure for ever, but as for the ungodly, they shall perish, for the
arms and power of the ungodly shall be broken: but the Lord vpholdeth the
righteous.

Psalm 37. The Lord loves the thing that is right, and never forsakes the
godly, but will have them kept and preserved for evermore: but the unrighteous
shall be punished, and the seed of the ungodly shall be rooted out.

Galathians 6. The Righteous does walk after the spirit, and therefore shall
reap life everlasting: but the wicked do fulfill the lusts of the flesh, and
sow carnally, and therefore shall reap destruction.

Psalm 112. The Righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance, he shall
not be afraid for any evil tidinges, his heart stands fast, and believes
in the Lord: but the wicked shall consume away, and the des ire of the ungodly
shall perish.

Esaias 28. The Lord of hosts shall be a joyful crown and glorious Garlande
to the remnant of his righteous people: Esaias 14.
but he shall make the generation of the wicked to be without honor for ever.

Malachie 4 The day comes that shall burn as an Oven, and all that do
wickedness shall be as the straw: but unto them that fear God, and seek
righteousness shall be health and salvation, and they shall be preserved under
the wings of the Son of righteousness.

Revel. 22. Blessed are the righteous, for they shall taste of the wood of
life, and enter the gates of the holy City of new glorious Jerusalem: but the
wicked and evil dooers shall be shut out, and not suffered to come to the holy
City.

Matthewe 25. Unto the Righteous the Lord shall say. Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the kingdom, prepared for you from the beginning of the
world: But unto the ungodly he shall say, Depart from me ye cursed, into
everlasting fire, which is prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

And now seeing it is so between the righteous and the ungodly, it behooves
every man to set his affection upon righteousness, and so seek the Lord in
the singleness of heart: knowing that he is full gracious and merciful to all
that put their trust in him, but to the wicked he is a consuming fire: and
therefore prease forward with all diligence to get up to the golden stayres of
victory, that you may receive at the appearing of Christ, the end of your
faith, even the salvation of your souls, and so be translated into Christ's
kingdom of glory, where you shall dwell, accompanied with the blessed Saints
in all heavenly joys everlastingly. Moreover this godly virgin (called the
light of the Gospel) pronounced the sweet sentence of Christ, Matthew. 11.
s aying, Come unto me all ye that are laden, and I will refresh you: for if
you desire to be Christ's sheep, John 10.
you will hear my voice. And therefore all ye Incommers into this world, both
little laddes and pretty virgins Come hither, and I will show you two great
houses and buildinges of much admiration, which you must know because they yt
walk in the narrow way, which leads to everlasting life: or that go ye broad
way unto distructio^ do walk by one of these houses: Math. 7
between which there is great discord, contrariety and disagreement, that no
man can live in this world but that he is in continual battle by reason of
these two house es which were never friends since the beginning. And behold do
you not see upon the right hand a goodly hill very pleasant and beautiful to
look upon: (that is mount Sion, Esaias. ^.
) a most fair place and the joy of the whole earth where GOD is well known in
her Palaces and honored in her Temples, (as a sure refuge) therefore come one
and walk about Sion and go round about her, and tell the Towers thereof,
Psalm. 48.
mark well her bulwarks and consider the riches and treasures with in her, for
there has God chosen an heritage for us even the woorship of Jacob.

The HABITATION of Jacobs house of Righteousness, and fruits of the Spirit
containing the narrow way to salvation.
CHRIST is the Door.

Light of the Gospel. Treuth. Verity. Grace. Peace. Love. Joy. True professi
Knowledge. godly desire. spiritual thrist good will godly sorrow. Repentance.
Diligence. comfort. consolation. satisfacti^n. Godlynes. Goodness, holiness.
Righteousness, Virtue. Temperance, Faithfulness Humblenes. Meeknes. Gentleness.
good works kyndnes. Constancy. Perseverance fervent love lively hope.
Patience. Perfectnes. instant praers long suffering forbearing. forgiving.
blessing. charity mercy. Thankfullnes Graciousnes. Tenderness Pureness. good
thought. rendri^g good ferill. verteous mind Faith. Victory Q.
All those that are borne into the world that will purchase heaven must enter
into Jacobs house and walk according to those virtues and fruits of the
Spirit, which that house conteines, evermore resisting and fighting against ye
house of Esau, which is an adversary and leads to destruction, whose great
and huge house stands on the contrary hill upon mount Seir, Genesis 36.
and has many wide gates and open windows to go in at: and is full of
unrighteousness, sin and wickedness, that he that walks in this house and is
a friend heerto, is an enemy to God, and goes the way to perdition. Abdy. 1.


Esaus house, the fruits of the flesh, and old ADAM.
The broad way.

Flesh. World. Devil.
Sin. wickedness. Lust. worldly love. Vanities. mischief. malice. il-thought.
il-deeds. adultery. fornication. hatred. variance. disobedience: ambi^ion.
arrogancy. sloth. flattery. Ipocrisie. Idolatry. Ielosie. wrath. sorcerie.
witchcraft, murder. theft. disceit. treason. strife. usury. covetousness.
extortion. vnpurenes. drunkenness. fleshlines. uncleanness. Idleness. wantonness.
frowardnes. unkindness. sturdines feircenes. cruelnes. rashness. slacknes.
heresies. erors. sects. sedition. filthy talk. brawlings. rebukes. grudgings.
mockings. iestings. floutings. perverse. proud. high-minded unnatural.
concupisence. unbelief. unconstant. ignorance. ungodliness. backbiting.
blaspheming. swearing. bosting. uncharitable impenitent. obstinate. il-mindes
and inventions fruits of darkness.
And now whosoever walks in Esaus house according to his fruits, is in the
broad way to destruction:

So that he which walks according to Jacobs house is spiritually minded,
which is life and peace: Romans 8
and he that follows the fruits of Esau is fleshly minded and that is death.
Therefore if you will live with Christ crucify the works of Esau, by
wrestling against flesh and blood, worldly vanities and spiritual wickedness,
that you may overcome the world and enjoy the crown of victory.

Then after that the light of the Gospel had thus showed the difference
between the righteous and ungodly, and had declared the ways of Jacob, and the
ways of Esau,and what is the end of him that sows spiritually, and of him
that sows fleshly: then did that pure Virgin Constancy and perseverance to
the end, say that the bare knowledge hereof was not sufficient but that it was
required at all men's hands to hold fast the treuth and not be remooved away
from the Gospel. Ieames. ^.
and s o to be doers and not only hearers, wheruppon she pronounced a sweet
exhortation to all people that desire to come to the supper of the blessed
Lamb. saying:

O ye humble Sheep of god follow your Leader, go on with your guide, behold
it is your LORD and Savior Christ, who is the sweet Savior of life, unto
life, the Author and finisher of your salvation: be willing to follow him, and
walk in his paths and you shall find all the grices, steps and stairs
whereby to clime up to us in heavenly Jerusalem. Therefore stretch and prease
forward to obtain the mark appointed the reward of the high calling of god in
Christ: which to obtain you must strive to overcome in this world many great
battles, wild beasts and strange locustes which will come upon you: but faint
not, for behold he sits in heaven and holds the garlands of glory in his
hand to deck you with the Diadems of glorificatio^, if you stand steadfast.

for that cause abide all sorrows and persecutions with boldenes of faith and
immovable patience se eing it prepare such an exceeding and eternal weighte
of glory for you: But what? (O ye men) you seem to be perfect in ye
profession of the Gospel, Cor. 1.10.
then beware you that seem to stand that you fall not, for behold the great
day of tribulation is yonder coming, what are you now afraid? does t thou
shrink? do thou go backward from the profession of the pure Gospel of
Christ? fear not says Christ, him that kills the body, but fear him that
destroys soul and body into hell fire: yea hold fast says he the
patience of my name, Math. 10.
and thou shall have a crown of everlasting life: for he that confesses the
treuth of me before men, Reu^. 3.
I will confess his name before God and the holy Angels, and he that denies
the treuth of me I will deny him. O therefore beware, and be not feeble minded
and dismayed at yonder tempest of persecution, for why, has not Christ most
lovingly told thee that such extreme dangers shall come to pass, and says
to the fear none of those e things, but hold out to the end, and thou shall
be saved and crowned with eternal glory: why then? wilt y^ yield? will thou
now be shaken down like a fig, from his fig tree: O man remember thy self,
consider whereto, thou dooest fall, what? art thou so nyce of thy flesh, so
tender of thy skyn, Be not removed from the Gospel.
so fervent to Wife and Children, so given to worldly riches and delights, so
bent to promotions, so hasty to please men, so adict to this World, so
foolish and mad to run with the multitude, so ready to yield to the
persecutors, as to forget the day of the Lord, when thou shall altogether
tremble and quake and give an account of thy doings: what? I say to thee with
heavy greef, will thou abide no perrils no torments, no imprisonment, no
affliction, no hunger nor shame, no wearines, no loss of goods, no departing
from fre ends, no loss of life for Christ's Gospel? then thou may say, woe
is my vntrutefulnes. Wherefore pray with all instance that God may strengthen
thy faith, and that thou may be endued with patience against all
tribulations: and that you may be preserved from dogs, from Locustes, and
unreasonable men: And now while the door of the Gos pell is open, stablishe
your hearts in the everlasting consolation of faith, hope, love, and patience
in Christ: Dan. 12.
And suffer adversity with him and with his Gospel, through the power of God,
who has given you the gift of grace: For it is written, that the days shall
come, in which you shall be purifyed, cleansed and tried, as gold in the
fire: Wherefore hold fast the patience of his name in all storms of
persecutions by looking up joyfully to heaven, when thou art in the hands of
the persecuters, Reu. 6.
and fettered to the stake of torments: then to behold the golden altar, and
see there the souls of them under the hand of Christ, which has suffered
before you in the testimony of Jesus Christ: whether (now) thy soul skipping
joyfully out of thy body (as one loosed out of bondage and prison) do go,
accompanied with Gods holy angel to those blessed souls there meeting
together, with praising and magnifying God under the golden altar: for blessed
are those that suffer for righteousness sake. An acceptable sacrfice to GOD
And therefore consider what an acceptable sacrifice thou shall be to God, when
thou shall breath forth the sweet odours of prayers through the flaming fire,
or tortures of death, up before the face of God, by yielding thy life for his
cause: so that be assured that thy inward joy shall quench and eat up the
outward pains and torments of death: for it is written the Angel of the Lord
tarrieth round about them that fear God, Psalm. 3.
and delivers the^, therefore fear not death for the gospels sake, but
suffer with christ that you may be glorified with him, and so be of the number
of them to who^ he shall s ay, Come ye blessed, inherit the kingdom, and be
crowned with the glorious garland of your glorification: and so to conclude,
Luke. ^^
Rejoice that your names are written in heaven.

TO THE Reader.
LIft up your heads, Christ is at hand,
Hosanna in the highest.
Receive the gift, the kingdom come,
from heaven which is most purest:
The Lord does com him self from heaven:
who is the king of kings.
Arise you dead and put you on.
your new immortal wings:
At Sion he will show him self,
prepare you to be there.
Where crowns of life and palms of joy,
the chosen then shall wear:
Arise therefore receive the gift,
of Gods eternal light.
Embrace the joys, behold the face
of God in open sight:
The holy City, gloriously
in brightness which excel.
Descends down from God above,
wherein the Saints shall dwell.
The wicked then shall stand without.
an heavy woo to see:
The Lord shall say, Depart ye hence*
you shall not be with me.
Arise therefore, as true right heirs
Of that most blessed land:
Sing out Hosanna in the highest,
Christ's kingdom is at hand.
F. K.

A PRAYER OF THANKESGIVING TO GOD, THAT IT MAY PLEASE HIM TO sanctify us with
his holy grace that we may dwell in New Jerusalem: with a petition for our
Sovereign Queen, that it may please God that she may reign over us many
years, and after this life be crowned with the heavenly clothing of
glorification.
WE most heartily thank thee, (O Lord God our heavenly Father) for thy
manifold and inestimable benefits which thou have given unto us, both for our
souls and bodies, and that freely of thine own goodness without our
deserts: we thank thee, that it has pleased thee of thy great mercy, to
create and make us to thine own Image and Likeness: and being lost through ye
sin of our first father Adam, thou vouchsafedst of thy endless pity to s
aue us and redeem us again, by the death and passion of thy well-beloved Son
Jesus Christ, our sweet Mediator and Advocate: whom we look for to come
again at the day of judgment, as a most loving Lord and Savior, to carry us
with him into everlasting glory, there to remain with him world without end.
Therefore grant us, sweet Lord God, the riches of thy grace, that we may have
the fruition of thy joys in thy heavenly kingdom of everlasting blessedness.
And we beseech thee O Lord Jesus Christ, which art the health of al me^ living,
and the everlasting life to the^ that die in thy faith, to preserve (...) thy
servant our Queen and Gouernes, and so with thy blessed hand to fe ede ^^^speede
(...), lead (...), and keep (...)under thy holy wings, that she may evermore
fast the sweetness of thy rich mercy and great love to the praise of thy
holy Name, and glory of the Gospel: and also to his glorification in the
eternal kingdom of glory: And we thy servants and children by grace, being
ordained by thee, to be her faithful subjects, do beseech thee of thy great
goodness, so to increase her with thy blessings, that we may enjoy him sweet
gouerne^^e to reign over this Realm many years more in peace and
tranquillity: and after this life to partake the everlasting glory of Christ,
to whom be all glory, honor, and praise world without end,

Amen.
GOD SAVE the (...)

