AN Halfe-penny-worth of Wit, in a Pennyworth of Paper. OR, The Hermites Tale.

The third Impression.

LONDON Printed for Thomas Thorp, by the Assignement of Edw: Blount. 1613.

To the Right Honorable the Countess of Sussex.
IN times of former ages (honorable fair Lady) I have often heard, that
Usury, Lying, and Flattery, were worse excommunicate out of Court and
Commonwealth, then threadbare cloakes or greasy boots out of the Presence. O
they were virtuous men in those days, and would give the devil his due, if it
were but in wearing devils breeches. Surely I am grown into such infinite
amors of their honest packe-staffe plainness, that sincerely and verily, I
do mean, as it were, to imitate it. First, for Usury, I hate it worse then any
empty purse, and you shall have none of me, I beseech God to inspire me but
with half so many good words, as may counteruaile the hundredth part of the
principal of your gracious favors toward me. Next for lying, in no line of
this Book shall you find me liable, (if I be not condemned for too much
speaking the troth, I care not) and to make you know, that I am old
Tom-tel-troth indeed, I will give you a taste whereby you may judge of the rest.
Item. I say I am no Scholar, if that be a lie I refer me to the judgment of
the learned, who if they but pose me in the petigree of a Noune and Pronoune, I
straight cross and bless my self, and think they begin to conjure. Again,
I affirm that thus being no Scholar, but a simple honest Dunce, as I am, that
cannot say B to a Battledore, it is very presumptuously done of me, to offer to
hey-passe and repasse it in Print so, when my Ancestors scarce ever heard of a
Pen and Inke-horne, and much more presumptuously, it being such a course
homespun linsey woolsey web of wit as it is, to shroude it under the
protection of so high a personage, who are more worthy to patronize the divine
Muse of Apollo, or the thundering spirit of Homer, then this Country dance of
the worlds end, or harsh Lancashire Hornepipe. Tax me who dare, or who can,
that herein my tongue doubles one syllable. Marry some excuse would do well, for
this my Eagle-soaring, and too too foreward attempting, and yet I need not
neither, for out of your own super-abounding good nature you would supply it
though I let it alone; and yet I will not let it alone, but throw some light
veil, of spotless pretended wel-meaning, over it, to huke and mask it from
public shame and obloquy: Faith, no more but this, I see my inferiors in the
gifts of learning, wisdom, and understanding, torment the Print daily with
lighter trifles and Iiggalorums, then my russet Hermit is, which has made me
the bolder to shoulder in amongst the^. They clap a pair of French spurs on
the heels of Vice to rowell open the womb of that resty Jade Iniquity, and let
all the loath-some guts and garbidge of his panch issue out to putrify and
infect the fresh air of Paul's Churchyard; I curb sin with a double snaffle
of reprehensio^, and turn and wind him with my smart wand of correction to
what virtuous manage I please. Therefore for my good meaning, not Art, am I to
be seen and allowed. For my insolence in presenting this homely bundle of
Hermits wands to so sacred a Madam, under this covert barron it shall march,
that weak houses require the strongest props, and the poor must pay their
fines to their Lord or Lady whatsoever, be it but in pepper-cornes, or single
halfe-pence. My Book I entitle, A halfe-peny worth of wit in a peny-worth of
paper, whereby it draws somewhat nere to the matter and the purpose. If you
accept it well, there is no man that will accept it ill, and except you stray
from the worlds ordinary custom (that take Vintners leaden halfe-peny tokens
for sound payment) you cannot accept of it amiss. Imagine this one of the^,
for either it will pass for a halfpenny or nothing. But soft I have let pass
my last relic of antiquity, which is there horrible and terrible detestatio^
of flattery, and my religious co^formation thereunto. I have proved my self
guiltles of lying and usury, and if my Book will not save me from being haltred
for flatery, I would it were treason to write and read, or Gal, Gum, and
Copperis whereof Ink is made, were held more odious the^ poiso^: all the
flattery that I will use (if it be flattery to speak truth) shall be to pronounce
that you are truly virtuous, fair, wise, and honorable: and so I leave you,
desiring pardon for my boldness, and praying for your increase of felicity to
your dying day.

Your Honors most zealous devoted humble Servant. Humphrey King.

To all his Honorable Friends, or Honest dispersed Wel-wishers whereso-euer.
IT would well become a deuote Hermit to begin with Grace and Peace unto you,
but that I hold frivolous, since if you want Grace, go by Ieronimo, you are no
friends for me: and if you be not men of Peace, it is not my Hermites Staff,
and my little bucker-clapdish, that will appease you, wherefore Shokkatorum,
that which will be shall be. If you will be quiet and leave your mocking
tongue you may, if not, floute on by leave, the more sport it breeds you, the
gladder I am (as the Scotchman says) that I have it for you. Cunning Lawyers,
upon the false mistaking of a T. or an N. or putting in a dash ouer-plus (if
the Debtor be rich and able roundly to fee them) will make a Writ of Error of
any thing: do not so by me I beseech you, for I am a very bad writer of
Orthography, and can scarce spell my Abcie if it were laid before me. The
Printer may help me to deliver to you true English, but as I am a true man to
God and the King, he finds it not in my Copy. I mean well, that I am sure,
and if I had better means to express, I would make you better understand it:
in the mean time, what is but mean, take it in as good part, as if it were
the highest treble that the cleerest Poetical warbling throat could shrill or
quauer forth. Dangerous misinterpreting I fear not, Since Envy, that black
venomed To ad swollen Elfe,
Nere slanders a clear conscience to it self.


Only if you could a little dispense here and there with a hard Rhyme or two,
(in which yet you shall not say but there is some reason) and my verses that
are like Cheaters false Dice of high-men and low-men, one while eights, now
tennes, another while foure-teenes, and sometimes sixes, I will number you,
(though I keep no numbers) in the fore-most rank of my benefactors and
favorers. Me thinks a King by birth as I am, should not debase himself to
entreat so much. And yet I remember an old schooleboyes game of King by your
leave (ever since I was a boy my self) and so I am afraid you will cry, King
by your leave, we are to have about with you, bear it off with the head and
shoulders how you can. But if you do, upon all the Cannes and quart-pots about
London I will be sworn, (all Wine-pots from this general rule excepted, for
them I have for-sworne till Michelmas, unless the new wine of Peru, that is
made of no Grape, but a strange fruit in the West Indies, and is more
comfortable to the brain and the stomach, then any restoratiue or cordial
whatsoever) upon them I say I will abjure and renounce, all claim or interest
I have had in that wicked word of Poetry, and bind my self and my heirs,
never more to be publicans and sinners, (or sinners in public) in that
unfortunate Art of Printing. It has been told me, that those that are slain
with the Indians poisoned arrows, die with their mouths shut, and how the
Butchers in Germany, kill their sheep after the selfsame order, by tying a
cord about their mouths, and so strangling them, that their flesh may be more
swollen and puffed up: so would I die, by my good will, if this my labor
mis-carry, and have my mouth closed up from ever speaking or writing
hence-forward. Had I had learning enough, I would have framed an inuectiue
against learning, because, I know, none save the learned will find fault with
me: but seeing I have it not, I must here end my Epistle, and desire such as
descend to deeply into my shallowness, no otherwise to esteem of my writings
then of Drums and Trumpets in war: which are not used so much to stir up
men to fury, as to teach them to march in measure.

Yours, as you conceit me, HVMPHREY KING.

HOW dares the Author pass unto the Press,
Where Satyrs, Essays, Epigrams do swarm,
The Comicke, and the stately Tragic verse,
And Caltha metamorphos'd with a charm?
A strong imagination wrought this thing,
His name being King, he thinks himself a King.
In discommendation of the Author.
IT is no Tale, the Hermit is beli'd,
The Author ouer-aw'd, or much beguild.
Time past spoke plain, and did no vices hide,
Time present must be pleased like a child.
Christen thy book anew, then do thou well,
And call it Truth, a Tale's an Infidel.
KIng never proved more King in any thing,
Then in this plaine-song, freedom of a King:
Plain unaffected style, yet vices sting;
Why (King) I see y faith thou wilt needs be King.
Conueniunt rebus nomina saepe suis.
TO grace the man whom all the Graces favor,
Lies not within the compass of my quill,
Suffice it his most plausible behavior,
Draws all the happy choice of wits, and skill,
To love, admire, affect, and dignifie,
Himself, and these his labors pleasing lines.
Among whom my zeal presumes to signify
Some love to him, in whom such virtue shines.
An Hermits Tale, an Hermits Heart declares;
Sincere the one, so spotless pure the other,
That with the virtues evermore it shareth,
By no means suffering ill the good to smother.
Go then sweet Hermits Tale, and tell the wisest,
Perfection lives not still in the precisest.
Vincor, non vinco.
THat I have loved, and most respected thee,
True-honest Humphrey: I do here protest,
And that the world shall witness it with me,
Embrace this sign of love amongst the rest;
Will thou have more? my word I will engage:
Nay further yet: I Will take a solemn oath,
By the Red-herring thy true Patronage,
And famous Nash, so dear unto us both:
By all the Bowers that we have reueld in,
Our merry times, that gallop hence so fast,
By all the hours we have together bin,
By all our vows of friendship that have past:
By these I swear my love, and thy work graced,
On her rich worth, and honored Titles placed.
LAtely the Muses from their forked hill
Descending down into our humbler vale,
To taste the fruits of Industry and Skill
In makers of this time: Beheld thy Tale.
Which, though it did appear empty of Art,
(As that thy modesty has still professed)
Yet this fair censure they did all impart:
Thy love to Arts therein was well expressed.
But when they saw to whom it was designed,
(A Lady of her graces; so inspired
With every bounty both of form and mind,
As of the Muses selves, she is admired)
They vowed, thy work should live; and with one voice,
Approved thy Judgment in so sweet a choice.
Suus cuique mos.
AN Halfe-peny-worth of Wit, in a Peny-worth of Paper. ALIAS. The Hermites Tale.
VVAlking by a Forest side,
An ancient Hermit I espide,
White was his head, old was his face,
Pale were his looks, obscure his place,
And in his hand I might behold
A book all torn and very old;
I willing both to see and know
His place, and why he lived so,
Went to salute him, as unknown,
To be a partner of his moan,
He being of an humble spirit,
As one that heaven would inherit,
A friendly welcome to me gave,
And brought me to his homely Cave,
Where he had lived full twenty years,
And for his sins shed many tears;
Thinking every hour to die,
Knowing the worlds inconstancy.
Then sat he down, and to me told:
I once was young, but now am old,
And welcome is mine age to me,
That no more changes I may see;
For I have seen from time to time,
The highest fall, the lowest clime:
Contray to that we expect,
To make us know the worlds defect,
How time and death does still presage
The fickleness of every age
Like to the Moon that has no power,
Loving to change, both day and hour.
Unhappy men that live therein,
Where naught is found but death and sin.
Then gentle youth, if you would know
Heavens delight, the world forgo,
For wordlings, very seldom can
Two Masters serve, both God and man.
For if a man your Master be,
You then must sin as well as he,
To smooth his taste, and please his vain,
How much so ere the sin contain.
If he a Tyrant do profess,
Then must his servant be no less;
Or if an Athiest he be known,
So must you be, or else be gone:
For I have heard a proverb old,
Be ruled by him that has the gold.
Such are the errors of our age,
When souls for gold are laid to gage:
A substance that wise men besot,
A pleasure full of pain, God wot.
When I was young, as you are now,
I spent my youth, I know not how,
Rating my pleasure at such a price,
More worth, then Heavens Paradise.
These worldly pleasures are but toies
Unto the high celestial joys,
Where God does sit on Syon hill
To give the doom of good and ill,
Then if you knew how sweet it is
To meditate on heavens bliss,
You sure would leave all worldly strife
And live with me, an Hermites life.
Answer.
FAther or friend, what ere you be,
A happy man you seem to me,
The happiest man this day on earth,
Blessed in your age, and at your birth;
Whose heavenly words my heart has won,
To live with you, and be your son:
Leaving the world, too full of woes,
Where sins and errors daily flows,
And take me to your homely Cell,
Where sweet content does ever dwell;
Then if you please to take the pain,
For Christ's sake, a soul to gain,
Your counsel grave on me bestow,
That true religion I may know:
For all Kings Christened are at wars
For Conscience, and religious iarres;
And controversies now have made
One King on other to invade,
With war, with death, and famishment,
Each other still they do torment;
With Christians blood they die the ground,
Piercing sweet babes with many a wound,
And aged men with siluer'd hairs,
There groueling lie, in blood and tears;
What sin, what death, so-ere befall,
They make Religion cause of all.
A grievous thing, when they shall come
To give account for all and some
Before that God that knows their thought,
If they for true Religion fought:
Or whether for ambitious pride
They meant Religion to divide;
And so to kindle Gods displeasure
For Kingdoms, Crowns, and worldly Treasure;
Knowing them all to be illusions,
To bring our souls into confusions,
And make us wish, ere we have done,
Such wars had never been begun.
Where Christians seek each others blood,
Their meaning seldom can be good.
But if our wars were like to them
Which were before Jerusalem,
Against the Turks, which there abod,
Sworn enemies unto our God,
What happy men then had we bin,
So to have died, and cleared our sin?
Whereas (God wot) we now do go
To seat our Brothers overthrow.
Alas! if they in wars that die,
Did not confess a Trinity:
Or if that Heathen men they were,
Without all knowledge, faith or fear
Of Christ that died to save mankind
From death and hell, to him assigned;
Then without any offense at all,
They might take pleasure in our fall.
Hermit.
MY son of wars you have complained,
Which is a plague for sin ordained;
A plague that God himself has chose,
His wrath and justice to disclose:
And for my part, I must confess,
Our sins (my son) deserve no less.
Christ knows we have deserved more
Then ever our fathers did before:
And yet we say, they never knew
Where true Religion ever grew.
For they were still instructed then
By Friars and Monks, old ancient men,
Such as did then attribute all
Unto Saint Peter, not to Paul.
Saying that Christ had chose alone,
Him for the Rock, and corner stone,
And unto him the keys resigned,
To open, shut, to loose and bind.
Taking the word as it was spoken,
And not the sense it did betoken:
And so by Peter's superiority,
The Pope does challenge his authority.
But come my son, time does us call.
We Will leave our Christ to judge of all.
And go with me, I Will teach thee how to spend
The Summer day in solace with thy friend,
Where thou shall see the pleasure of this wood,
Exceeds all other, were they nere so good.
Here dwells poor men that never use to swear,
But yea and nay, and by the weeds they wear.
Far be it from them to wrong his holy Name
That gave them life, and leave to use the same.
To him they call; and still for mercy cry,
Because they know in justice all must die;
They live secure, and free from any strife,
And think Content to be the sweetest life:
And so it is, to such poor men as these,
That look for naught, but how their God to please.
See how they labor all day till they sweat,
And take great pains, and all to get them meat.
Saving your Tale, good Father, what be those,
That in their looks decipher many woes,
And many times they seem to make a show
As though from whence they came, they feign would go,
Impatient of the crosses God has sent
Them for their good, because they should repent.
Well said (my son) thy judgment I commend,
For Man has crosses to none other end,
And he is happiest that can suffer any
For his sake, that for us has suffered many.
Have thou not heard a song of Phillida,
Of Herpilus, and eke Coren?
why these, my son, be they.
The one is Coren, that once took
delight his Hawks to lure,
The Other Herpilus, (poor man)
that all pain did endure
For Phillida, and that is she,
which often did flowers twine,
And Garlands make of Violets,
to please her Corens mind.
But he regarded not her love,
nor when she frownd or smild
It moved not him, he never cared,
for once he was beguild.
And yet she was the fairest Maid
that ever nature framed,
And all the Shepherds would rejoice
when Phillida was named.
But Time, the enemy to Youth,
sent Sickness, Beauties cross,
As messenger, to tell her now
she is not as she was:
Her golden hair, her for-head smooth
her quick full speaking eye,
Her comely nose, her lips
where love did banquet royally,
Have changed their hue, for what can last,
or hold that will away?
Like Judas fatal Elder-tree,
so looks poor Phillida.
Her hair with Daffadillies dight
Ewreth'd with purple-silke,
Is now within a nightcap tide,
vnkemb'd, as white as milk.
Her forehead all with furrows filled
that was so smoth and white,
Her eyes (the Cabinets of love)
have lost their wonted sight;
Her nose is sharp, her jaws are fallen,
her lips that were so red,
Now looks like Siluer-ore untried,
and no teeth in her head.
Ah son, if they in Court that live
did once but think of this,
They soon would find amongst themselves
how they had done amiss,
In pampring up their filthy flesh
which is a slave to time,
An enemy unto the soul,
a mass of filth and slime.
But come my son, we will now go home
unto our homely Cave,
And leave poor Phillida to mourn
that wishes for her grave.
For Herpilus, and eke Coren,
of whom the Muses song,
They vowed to die with Phillida,
because they loved so long.
Father, I never heard a Tale
to move a man to ruth,
And make him think of all his sins
committed in his youth
As this which you have told;
A terror unto those
Which in their beauty, wit, or strength,
do confidence repose.
It is no terror (son) to those
which mean not to repent,
They never think of crooked age,
nor of their youth misspent;
But headlong run from sin to sin,
like sheep that go astray,
Yet now and then for fashion sake
they make a show to pray;
And come to Church, and knock and kneel,
because they may be taken
For honest, good, and godly men,
that have the world forsaken.
It Is true Sir, I have heard of those
that under show of zeal;
Would hate the time, and curse the state,
and at the Clergy rail;
Ill minded men, envious, and proud,
discentious, full of wroth,
Monstrous dissemblers, filled with sin,
in whom there is no troth;
These zealous men, mean to erect
a Church, ere it be long,
Where Papist never set his foot,
nor never Dirge was song;
Mean while, for fear their faction break,
they think it best behoues them,
To meet in Barnes, and there to Preach,
even as the Spirit moves them,
And there they pray, before they Preach,
in heart, with one accord,
That they may never laugh, for fear
they do offend the Lord;
Then starteth up a brother straight
upon a wicker Chair,
And talks of sin, and how it reigns
amongst us every where;
How every state is discontent,
How many sin, how few repent:
What May-poles, and what Whitson-ales,
What ringing, and what old-wiues tales,
Are now believed to be the way
To save us all another day.
My son, these men will nere endure the touch,
They know too little, and they speak too much,
Their looks are smoth, like Silver purifide,
They will prove Copper, when they shall be tried.
I never heard of these which seem so pure,
Which for Christ's sake would Martirdom endure,
And yet no doubt, as long as peace remains,
Their conscience will endure any pains.
But if the God of war abroad should range,
And catch these men that long to see a change,
You then should see them all within one day,
For very fear of death, to turn Turke-way.
But come my son, sit down and let us eat
These homely cates, in steed of better meat,
And leave these men that envy so the state,
To die like dogs, that can do naught but prate.
I Will tell you, Father, of a Tale
that is in Skeltons rhyme,
A foolish Tale, but yet a Tale
to drive away the time;
Of a very pleasant lad
my Tale I must begin,
That came into a house, by chance,
where Sectaries did Inn,
And being in their company,
not knowing what they were,
He was as merry as a Pie,
still skypping here and there,
Till at the last a civil Sire
came mildly toward him,
And like a man of God, rebuked
this yong-man for his sin.
This merry Lad, mused at the man,
as one loath to offend,
Saying, if he had done amiss,
he would be glad to mend.
Night drew on, Supper came in,
they all with one consent
Desired this yong-mans company,
and he was well content.
He sadly sat all Supper while,
and not a word he said:
And as they did, so would he do.
They after supper prayed,
And Chapters read, and sung a Psalm
all to instruct the youth,
What great delight he ought to have
in reading of the truth.
When that the Lord was served thus,
they called a reckning presently,
And would not let this young man pay,
but thanked him for his company.
This pleasant Lad muz'd at the men,
yet being far from scorning,
Entreated them to break their fast
with him the next day morning.
They thanked him all with one consent,
but especially Master Powes,
Desired him to bestow no cost,
but only Beef and Brows.
You shall have nothing ese (quoth he)
welcome shall be your chief,
And so goodnight, until we meet
all at a piece of biefe,
The morning came, and there they met,
the boy that knew his time,
Set them down to breakefast straight,
and then began his rhyme.
You are welcome heartily, unto lusty Humphrey,
VVelcome here must be your chief
To a friendly piece of Biefe,
Such as was used in ancient time
When housekeeping was in prime;
When the Biefe and Brewes flourisht,
When the silly souls were nourisht,
Then 'twas a wonder to the poor
To see a Porter keep the door,
Then were silly harmless folks,
Plain chimneyes then were full of smoakes:
Every table then was spread,
And furnished out with Biefe and bread,
Every man then took a pleasure
In his house to spend his treasure.
Who was then the Gentries Guest?
The Widow poor, that is often oppressed,
The Soldiers with their wounds and skarres
Bleeding for their Countries wars.
Then in the Country dwelt true pity,
Now Christmas is but for the City;
A Gentleman of small reuenew,
Had then the poor for his retinew.
Wast not then a merry time
When thy neighbor came to mine,
Can thou lend me twenty pound
For to buy a piece of ground?
Without statute, or a bond
Their word as good as any hand.
Then men of ancient calling
Loved no pride for fear of falling,
Country Russet was their wearing,
And Kendall green, for fear of tearing.
The Clothier scarce the Mercer knew,
Now Silke-wormes make the Sheep to rue,
The Plough-man lived, sweet was his pain,
The Tailor now sweepes up his gain.
If any now do take compassion,
It Is to check the oldest fashion;
Yet paying for new fashions gold,
In spite of all, the new is old.
But what mean I to run so far?
My foolish words may breed a skarre,
Let us talk of Robin Hoode,
And little John in merry Shirewood,
Of Poet Skeleton with his pen,
And many other merry men,
Of May Game Lords, and Summer Queens,
With Milke-maides, dancing over the Greenes,
Of merry Tarlton in our time,
Whose conceit was very fine,
Whom Death has wounded with his Dart,
That loved a May Pole with his heart.
His humor was to please all them
That seem no Gods, but mortal men,
For (says he) in these our days,
The Cobbler now his Last down lays,
And if he can but read, (God wot)
He talks and prates he knows not what,
Of May-poles, and of merriments
That have no spot of ill pretense.
But I wonder now and then,
To see the wise and learned men,
With countenance grim, and many a frown
Cries, Masters, pluck the May Pole down.
To hear this news, the Milke-maide cries,
To see the sight, the Plough-man dies.
It Is a jest to see when they begin
For to pluck down such wodden sin.
Foolish men, and faith-lesse too,
That still profess, and nothing do.
The Sectaries were in a rage,
and knew not what to say,
They spit, and chafd, and stamped amain,
and would have gone away.
This merry Lad began to laugh,
and to them thus replide,
You see it stands not with my youth
from pleasure to be tide,
I love to sit and laugh,
not to offend the wise,
I care not for their company
that honest mirth despise:
Those that be Saints abroad,
whose substance shadows be,
Let them go seek Precisian-sects,
they are no mates for me.
And when you are at home,
think of this proverb told,
The Tree is still known by his fruit,
if it be nere so old.
The poor men went away,
all discontent in mind,
And had no pleasure to their meat,
but left it all behind.
Now, Father, be you judge
who played the better part,
They with their zeal, or else the boy
that spoke with all his heart.
In sadness my good son,
I never yet did hear,
A Tale to that effect,
so much to please mine ear;
My judgment I will stay,
until our better leisure,
I Will show thee here a book my son,
wherein thou may take pleasure:
Here shall thou read my son
a volume of despair,
The death of many a conquering king,
their lives, and what they were,
The wisdom of this world,
the frailty of our age,
Our present time now acting sin
like Players on a stage.
I writ it with this hand
that once could guide a pen,
And set my Lance into my rest
as well as other men.
But (oh) those days are past,
and now I wish to have
For all my service done,
a white sheet and a grave.
My Caske of steel is to a nightcap turned,
My shining Armor to a gown of gray,
My youthful heart, which once with beauty burned
Like dreams illusions, vading pass away,
Even as the night does from the glorious day.
My Naples Courser is a bank of earth,
Whereon I sit to manage all my sins,
Twixt life and death, which are borne mortal twins.
My bridle now must be my Beads,
The golden bosses books,
And all my Sonnets must be prayers
VVhereon devotion looks,
My Lance turned to a Palmers staff
Which once was painted brave,
And all my followers be my sins,
To bring me to my grave.
The shield which now my Page
Unto my Prince must give,
Is (time misspent) An aged man.
that can no longer live.
Believe me son, I would not live
For to be young again,
To be great Emperor of the world
The world I so disdain.
Judge you if I say true,
Read this, and know my mind,
They that have eyes, may see the world,
Or else they are borne blind:
It is a world of care,
The greatest Prince that reigns
Has not half pleasure in his Crown
To equal all his pains.
And he that lives in Court,
And can but favor win,
What ere he was, he may be sure
That all will follow him.
The surly Vshers then
Will do him any grace,
That told him but a week before
He did not know his place;
His fellows of the Guard,
When he comes to the door,
Will all stand up and make a leg,
That would sit down before.
But if this man be proud,
And full of high disdain,
Caring for nothing else at all
But for his private gain.
Then Envy moved in heart,
A Jury straight does call,
Inditing that usurping man
Conspiring his downe-fall.
And straight he does inform
The Jury what he was,
That now usurps, and hates the poor
And does his betters cross.
The Poet hearing this,
Pulls forth a book of Tables,
And makes a subtle rhyme,
Much like to Esops fables;
Then being foreman, tells a Tale
That was not much regarded,
How men of virtue and of worth,
Did wander unrewarded:
So he that lives in Court,
And does not seek to have
The love of every private man,
And of the poorest slave,
Let him be sure of this,
If Fortune chance to frown,
Envy in time will turn the wheel
And throw him headlong down.
Who would be such a man
When Time his fortune reads,
That he must leave his Offices,
And take him to his beads,
And in a shirt of hair,
Repent his time misled,
And give his treasure to the poor,
Whom he has injured.
This were the way to go
In peace unto his grave,
For none without they do repent,
Can any mercy have.
But lives there such a man?
No sure there can be none,
We all are Lambs, no Foxes now,
The deuil's dead and gone,
No sure: if he were dead,
The Poets then would leave
To write of those that follow him,
And all the world deceive.
But farewell to the world
Unless I come by stealth,
It never cares to grace such men
As want both wit and wealth.
I cannot kiss my hand
Nor lout below the knee,
Nor take a feather from your gown,
You know such men there be.
In world one undermines
another to no end,
And worst they speed,
who most in hope do spend,
Enuide they are,
on whom but Fortune smiles,
Though those smiles turn
to nothing other-whiles.
The mighty, seeking
to enlarge their might,
Into contempt often tumble
down outright.
The Lawyers Clyent
crouching on his knees,
Prevails naught,
except he bring large fees.
The Citizen, the Scholar,
and the Boore,
Without a largess,
are thrust out of door.
Bravery, the gallant nouice
thinks does all,
When it consumed,
his credit is but small.
Valor and Wit,
proud on their tip-toes stand,
And think chief dignities
they may command.
When that a fool,
a Parasite, a Pander,
Betwixt them steps,
and they are set to wander.
So from the head
unto the foot it fares,
Each one supplanteth
other unawares.
The wisest builders,
against after storms,
Fishing for honor,
bait their hooks with worms;
Worms that do dig
and delue for them all day,
Yet to all ravenous birds
are left a pray.
In Commonwealth
how many vainly dream
Of Indian Mines,
that fish against the stream?
How many, that but having
one good bite,
A nodde, or least glaunce
from their Mistres sight,
Cost upon cost, clap thick
and threefold on,
And never cease,
till they be quite undone.
How many that do fish before the Net,
Who offices before they fall do get,
And count all fish into their Net does chance,
Whom naught so vile, but serves to advance.
All these pursuing gain, not true content,
Fish for their bane, their toil is fruitless spent.
This is the world my son,
Then now some comfort give
To me poor man, my time is come
I can no longer live
Mine age, my blessed age,
Wherein I do rejoice,
Has lent me time for to repent,
And sing with Angels voice,
Hymns, Anthems, Laud, and Praise
Unto the King of Kings,
Which out of this vilde wretched world
Poor souls to heaven brings.
You Poets all and some
That write of Esops fables,
Conceiting plots to please the world
Notes from your book of Tables;
Me thinks that A-iax should you call,
To make wast-paper of you all
That spend your time to please the time,
With fictions, tales, and idle rhyme,
Leaving the mark that should be hit,
To praise Gods glory, and your wit.
Oxford and Cambridge was erected
For Virtue, not for vice protected.
Ah, son, I faint, mine age and I
Are striving now who first should die:
My will is made, I have no wealth,
But wishes, prayers, content, and health,
To thee my son, and all my friends
That credit to this vain world lends.
My swolne-sicke heart, with death is tossed,
Like to a foote-ball in a frost;
God bless thee son, now close mine eyes,
I hope my soul to heaven flies.
And thus I end my Hermites Tale
Which is of mickle ruth,
It proves there is no hope in age,
Nor certainty in youth.
As for this homely Tale,
And he that made the same,
Has neither learning, wealth, nor wit,
And scarce can write his name.
FINIS.

