An answer at large, to a most heretical, traiterous, and Papisticall Byll, in
English verse, which was cast abroad in the streets of Northamton, and brought
before the Judges at the last Assizes there. 1570.

Imprinted at London by John Awdelye.

An answer at large to a most heretical, traiterous, and papisticall Byll,
written in English verse.
The papisticall verse.
1
How now my Masters married Priests, how like you of these news?
You must forsake your wicked synes, your wives must to the stews.
The Christian answer.
Such thoughts, such words, such men, such deeds such faith, such fruits
appear:
Such mind, such mood, such hearts, such feats as Papists show you hear.
The filthye image of their minds, their poisoned tongues bewray:
As Gospel gets good success, and Popery does decay.
Still spuing out the spirit of spite, whose love Gods laws defies:
Which hate the thing that God does love, and what God does despise,
That they maintain against his word, by Canons of the Pope:
For whose behoof some have of late, been sensed in a rope.
Because Gods word has cast a down, their Priests of Romish Ball:
With whom the vice of whoredom is esteemd no vice at all.
But Marriage (which God has made for man to live well in:
Which also he has sanctified) they do condemn as sin.
They spit out spiteful rage at this, as all men now may see:
For that that Christ does make his Church, from popish bondage free.
His Ministers and Preachers true, have liberty no less:
Then other men to take them wives, as Paul does well express.
But they of Ministers make scorn, resemblyng Aarons breed:
Though Christ becam the final Priest by shedding of his blood.
And brought that office to an end, appointing others just:
To serve him in his ministry, such as his Church might trust.
Not Balams brood of Judas sect, not Romish shauelinges sure:
Which unto vile Sodomitrie, do all men so alure.
Whose Gotish church is common Stews, of Fornication vile:
In which who seeks Gods laws to keep, can tarry but a while.
But Ministers of Mysteries, no Sacrifice to give:
But such as seek by Gods true hestes most holylye to live.
Not like to Priests, but like to men, so mortified by grace:
That Romish boarish lechery, in them can take no place.
Which have each one his married wife, with bed most undefiled:
As Paul does teach, to every man, which whoredom has exiled.
And therefore Popish Sicophant, that news do spread a pace:
That Christian men must virtue leave and honesty deface.
All men do see your beastly lives, which you were best forsake:
Least that your portion be full sore, amydst the fiery lake.
You that like double Traitors gasp for time of your return:
And gape for breath, and hope for change that you the truth might spurn.
How like you this, your knavery is in every cost espide:
You romish Priests which have no wives, all Christians you deride.
And these be news for you, take heed, leave of, repent, amend:
God has disclosed your vilanie, and hastened has your end.
Now must you leave the Romish stews, and eke your God the Pope:
Or else prepare your selves to win, a gybbet with a rope
Now take you wives, leave romish stews, and learn to live well.
For why adulterous whoremongers, for aye shall hang in hell.
The papisticall verse.
2
What need our women now take care, what life they go or lead:
Sith every preaching knave must have a whore in house to tread?
The Christian answer.
Such heart still see, such study bent, such study, such devise:
Such thought, such mocion of the mind such question does arise.
All Papists shame at this demand, which have the spark of grace:
To hear such heinous words blown out, from such a shameless face.
When ever was there less regard of chaste life, then was then:
When Dispensatio^s made the Priests live more like beasts, then men?
When every Priest had not his wife* but many Priests ten whoores:
When priestly lechery did defile their honest neighbors doors.
When neither maid nor married wife in honest life could stand:
If shorn shaueling might devise, to have them under hand.
When one Priest had two dosen of whoores, to use them at his will:
And scotfree escaped in Boners days, and kept his living still.
Then where was care? oh where was grace? surely they were exiled:
And that made many a virgin then, by Priests to be defiled.
Remember well this old proverb, of Shauelings great abuses:
That Priests and Doves where ever they come make very filthy houses.
But beastly man what words be these? what monstrous heart or mind:
To cast out such inhumaine speech, so far beyond all kind.
Are Preachers now with you but knaves? fie Papists, blush at this:
The Preacher is the Trumpe of God, this sure is spoke amiss.
A lying knave, a brauling knave, a romish knave more fyt:
But sure this Epithet thou adst without reason or wit.
For Epithites we add to show the nature, force, and kind:
Of men, of things, and words as we in Rethoricke rules do find.
But contraries for Epithites, wise men do never place:
Epithetons of like must be, to show of words the grace.
Preaching a word of Majesty, and Knave, do disagree:
Although a Knave has joined them thus, from wit and learning free.
A sclaunderous knave, a foolish knave, a foul malicious knave:
These Epithites may sound more fyt, for him that thus does rave.
Which does envy Gods preached word a blind erroneous elfe:
Which has with that vile hoore of Rome, no dout bewitch him self.
Which flattering whore that Serpentine, full often has been trod:
Whose fruits and brood throughout the world, are now dispersed abroad.
Mark these news then, ye popish brood, fear God, repent I say:
Dread Christ, and leave your trade in time* least halter be your pay.
The papisticall verse.
3
Here is not now a strumpet whore, in all the land to have:
They are so suddenly snatched up, with some Geneua Knave.
The Christian answer.
The lying tongue does slay the soul, says Solomon the wise:
Shall Papists then escape trow you, which all delight in lies?
There is not now a strumpet whore, (says he) in all the land:
Which f^lse reproach from whence it comes, all men may understand.
Of proposicion false, proceeds conclusion must vile:
Which Papists sclau^ders would maintain, but Papist stay a while.
To many whoores are yet to find, if Gods will were not so:
Although when Popery raignd, there were ten times as many mo.
It is no shame that whores decrease, but shame it is to see:
All Papists have such whoorish hearts, as now appears in thee.
When Pope bare rule, whoores were mayntaynd then whoores did much augment:
But now I trust that Christ bears rule, all whoores will soon be spent.
Though Papists more delight in whoores, like knaves mere bestiall:
Then in the married Matrons life, which virtue passes all.
And though the Pope, and Romish filthes, in Rome have open Stews:
If in Geneua Pope should dwell, he should hear other news.
His gotish heart would right soon ache, there whooredome for to use:
Their heads there from their shoulders leap which so them selves abuse.
But Pope receaues the golden rent, of whooredomes filthy sin:
To deck his crown, for whoores do bring him mickle treasure in.
Geneuian men that there have seen, true discipline take place:
Hold Rome sink of Sodomitrie, and Papists past all grace.
They seek no whore, though Romans do, it is their common trade,
As may appear by such a Knave, as this complaynt has made.
For sure a merry day it was, when whoores in every street:
The Papists might obtain to have, an act adjudged meet.
But since Geneua gave us light, whoores Priests and whoores are fled
And so will Papists soon I hope, when gallows has them sped.
The papisticall verse.
4
Master Wyborne, alias tiburne tyke, here dwells in this town:
Which sought by all the means he could, the Easter to pluck down.
5
But I of him dare well pronounce, and time the truth shall try:
That he shall trust unto his heels, or else in Smithfield fry.
6
Not he, but thousands of his sect, must to Geneua seek:
The wrestlyng of the Gospel wrong, preuayles them not a lecke.
The Christian answer.
These be the fruits of Papists blind, lo here the hearts of those:
Whose traitrous slaundring tongues do show they are prefest Gods foes.
Of Satan's seed, which loves lies and sclaunders to blase out:
Against the truth, and Church of God, I put you out of dout.
Whose eyes do weere, and teeth do gnashe at sincere Preachers true:
Because they see what good success, does after them ensue.
This Master VVyborne well is known, thou Papist to thy shame:
(And all the rabble of thy rout,) that seek him to defame,
To ^e a man of learning grave, of judgment sound and right:
A married Minister he is, of living most upright.
A worthy Pastor of Gods flock, a zealous teacher known:
Which has in deed by studious pain much popery overthrown.
A modest man and courteous, of gentle sprits, and milds:
Who seeks the hurt I dare well vouch of neither man nor child.
No sclaunderer is he no dout, but one that means good:
Yea if it were to such as he might know to seek his blood.
A reverend man for knowledge sake, thou do thy wit abuse:
With such a name him to reproach, and so him to misuse.
But what is sclaunder thine, thou fool, thou traiterous tiburne tike?
The gallows groans for thee no dout, the rope will break thy neck.
For where thou say he sought to pull the Easter down to ground:
His doctrine tended your abuse of Easter to confound.
Which feast no dout you much poluts, but he sought to erect,
The simple sincere truth of Christ, which you do all reject.
Like Romish Rebels, hopyng still, the darkning of this day:
But first I trust all popish knaves shall be the gallows pray.
And where thou say thou dare pronounce, that time the truth shall try:
That VVyborne must trust to his heels, or else in Smithfielde fry.
This happy time has tried in deed, out truth to your decay:
And to the ruin of your rout, which hope but for a day.
Your sack of lies is ransackt now, your ware appears dross:
You lean upon a broken staff, Gods truth bringes you to loss.
And time has lent by Gods good grace, such comfort for the nonce:
That all Gods Preachers shall not need, abroad to lay their bones.
Their safegarde sure in England is, they need not fear the fire:
Although the Papists do begin to hang a little hyer.
God has reueald your counsels, fools, God has laid open now
Your traitrous hearts, which unto God and Queen will never bow.
Dare thou pronounce thou traitor hold that VVyborne hence must flee?
Is neither godly fear at all, nor Subjects love in thee?
What should him move to step one foot? your hope is surely spoyld:
God has himself your poysnous pride in open battle foyld*
Shall Smithfield be your shambles yet Gods Saints to kill and slay?
Stay Papist, pack up Holburne hill, for you the fitter way.
Shall VVyborne trust unto his heels? No, VVyborne trust in God:
And Carts shall trusse up these in time to Tyburne load by load.
Shall thousands pack for fear of you, thou Traitor, dare thou say:
When thou and thine have well obtaynd old Saturnes second day?
There is no cause, God have the praise but thousands of his sect:
Of other lands that worship Christ may here themselves protect.
And boldness more increases still, through Gods almighty grace:
When traitrous Papists dare not once to show their double face.
For every one that thou do meet, thou thynkst will thee betray:
Thy wits be breetch, thy brains all duld: thy heart has never stay.
If worst should fall, that God for sin, and for our negligence:
Should plague us so to give you power, and us to drive from hence:
God has that happy City made, Geneua of great fame,
For his poor peoples safe defense, to shroud them in the same.
But when your Pope shall down be cast and hence now you must flee:
Like vacabondes or Foxes whelps you know not where to be.
Your stay is gone, a Papist, fie, all men do you detest:
He stays not here, says every man, so you shall have no rest.
And this is true, the time is come, I Will tell you truer news:
Al Papists which have traitrous hearts and do their Prince refuse,
Must now relent, and turn forthwith, and true become God knows:
Or else prepare to give their flesh, at once to feed the Crows.
Or else if that their hearts will not, be true to Princely state:
Get hence to Alba, there lie safe as Story did of late.
And if you get in his sure court, God cannot find you there:
Dalba shall keep Story in store, his Queen he needs not fear.
Your wresting long of Gods true wor^ can nothing you prevail:
Have done I say, dispatch therefore, pluck down your Pecocks tail.
Down on your knees you Asses stout, pray God and Queen for grace:
You can no longer now prevail, your practice takes no place.
It boots you not to Pius now for mercy for to seek:
For you be traitors proud at home, his Bull is not worth a leeke.
Therefore as thousands traitors are, by thousands all agree:
To turn to God, or else make have, to scale the gallow tree.
The papisticall verse.
7
The Devil when he would Christ tempt in Scripture seemed wise:
And for him they do Scripture take, to maintain all their lies.
8
Therefore be packyng pratlyng knaves* your railing is to plain:
Commy^ your Baltacos to the bag, and hye you hence again.
The Christian answer.
Goliath brought a sword to field, which cut his throat in fine:
And wherewith all may thou be beat, but with this rod of thine?
The Devil when he tempted Christ, in Scripture seemed wise:
And therefore thou and Papists all, do Scripture clean despise.
An argument right strong no doubt, Christ was ^diudgd to dye:
No judgment therefore must be used, fie, fie, blind Papists, fie.
Because the Devil falsified the Scripture at his will:
The Papists w^^l no Scripture have, it does their market spyll.
But now in earnest we or you, the ^^uth is tried or this:
Who have the Scriptures most abusd and taken them amiss.
You like to Satan prove I may, c^^se out what serves your turn:
And all the rest that you confoundes, you ^o condemn and burn.
We for tr^t^es sake true scripture use you wrest with staring eyes:
All our to ^u^^^e for JESUS CHRIST, but yours for popish lies.
Therefore to you I say pack hence, your glosing will not stand:
Go practice now your popery out of our Christian land.
Your whispering, your privy prates, like Knaves where as you lie:
Preuailes no more in Christian ears, it is not worth a Fly.
Your fained fables false are found, your tales of little John:
Your pagents played of Robin Hood, are known to every one.
And where thou bidst them to commit, their Bastards to the bag:
All men do see how on your part, the world now does wag*
God be the judge twixt time and time, when Bastards hye did sit:
Your Popes own Bastards, for whom sure the gallows was more fit.
Bastards of Bishops, ye Cardinals brood, Priests Bastards every where:
The Votaries compilde by Bale, can tell you then and there.
Commit remembrance to your hearts, you Papists yet in time:
And hye you from your Romish ways, yet do forsake your crime.
Bid Basans Bulls, and Bastards theirs hye hence and get the bag:
Their pomp decays, and on their parts the world will not wag.
Bid Pope come down that sits so hye above all Princes thrones:
And set his hands to hold the plough, these news are for the nonce.
And if his traitorous idle bones, will not so fadge to work:
Let him go get into the field, and sue to serve the Turk.
If that him not will satisfy, now that he is down cast:
Let him go learn to clout old shoes, and that in all the have.
For his revenues will be spent, to begging he must trudge:
Or else go learn to be hangde, full like the Devils drudge.
The papisticall verse.
9
And where I told you of your wives, take you for them no care:
Shift for your selves, and trudge with speed lest halter be your share.
The Christian answer.
Like matter, like conclusion. a monishing he geues:
Who warning less leads all his life, as he at randon lives.
I might no less give warning to, to you of Baalams sort,
Which do belie Gods little flock to make your selves a sport.
That you would have some more regard, both for you and your wives:
Which live now most laciuiously, and lead most wicked lives.
And some which most unwisely leave, their Children, wives and all:
And run like traitors from the land, to serve the Romish Ball.
But of your wives I do not speak, your lives I touch in deed:
Whom I do wish in JESUS CHRIST repentant faith with speed.
Or else to shift and leave this soil, it is no place for such:
As do at Christ's Gospel kick, and at Gods truth so grutch.
Your time is come, I warn you now, most friendly to beware:
Least that you find it come to pass, when halter is your share.
And when we see your days prevail, as here tofore it was:
Which day shall be even shortly now, Post calendas graecas.
That Papists rule, and popery reigns and truth is laid in dust:
Then we will begin still come the time, your warning for to trust.
And leave our wives at your curtsy, and shift our selves to save:
But till that day, I leave thee still, a very traitrous knave.
And God preserve our noble Queen Elizabeth each hour:
That she by drawn sharp sword may quite cut down the Papists power.
And GOD enlarge her noble reign like heavens days to be:
That all the Papists hope by her, clean spoiled we may see.
That Gods true word she may defend* and all her foes deface:
Which enmies be to Christ's truth. and traitors to her Grace.
AMEN.
The Papist.

FINIS.
quod Non est inuentus.

The answer.
Non est inuentus made this sclaunder so bold,
But Est inuentus took in hand it to unfold.
Veritas non quaerit angulos, Show thy face:
Non audeo dixit, For my deeds deserve no grace.
Tunc desine, Thou Fool, leave of thy works, dispatch
Aut prode mendax That straight the gallows may thee catch.
FINIS.
Tho. Knell. Iu.

(...) upon two kind of people, ^a^ke Popish priests, repynynge against the
kings wholesome doctrine, or upon the common runne-gates, seedme^ of sedicion,
of the which we have plentye here, against whom. If the martial law were
executed, and were currante quoyne in every shyre, as I here say, there is a
Proclamation for the same (which I have not yet seen, but by your next
letters trust to receive) I think there would be as few runners abroad, as
now there be many. You must give me leave to talk a little more after my wounted
manner, which is to sai my mind fra^kly unto you without offense. Now me
thinks the end is such of your matters there, as every state of people will be
content therewith, and so the most trouble will rest with these traitors. For
with you, the kings people which deserved death, be by mercy preserved, and
the things evil used (as in deed disceases there be in the commonwealth)
shall be now well ordered by Parliament. And if the common people shall be eased of
their griefs, the gentelmen shall also be relieved of them, for se how much
the fermour cries out of his rent, so may the gentelman well cry out of the
market, the one as much grieved as the other, and one remedy I trust shall
serve both. For me thinks it is no more difference for me, to have.xx. pound,
spe^dyng.xx. pound, then to have xx. mark, spendinge.xx. mark, so that my
estate be kept like with both, you will think I write now at my will, because if
ye remember the last y^re in the park at Wynsour when the Court was there,
this question made great argument betwyxte you and me, whether for the
amendment of things in the common wealth the fermour should first abate his
price, and then the Landed man, his rent, or in contrary order, at which time,
I remember you stood upon one point, which I could not deny, that the
Gentylman by dear byeng, was driven to let dear, and I upon an other point
(not al untrue) that the dear hyrynge made dear ^ellynge, But where the
fault first began, neither of us would grant to the other, nevertheless,
so wayghty a matter it is, as no ways to be discussed but by Parliament. Where
when the argument is at an end, it may be establyshed by a law, whereof there
was never more lykelyhood, because the amendment thereof, will help so many as
well Lords and Gentilme^, as al other Commoners, no man having cause to repyne
against it, but such as gather, not to spend and improve their lyuinges not
for their charges, as many Gentilmen have done, but for their coffers. So that
to conclude, improueme^t alone makes no man rich, but improuement and
sparynge. But what meddle I with this matter and yet what dare I net to you my
fryende, by Sayncte G^orge I say to you merely out of bourde, no one thing
makes me more angry with these rebels then one article, which touches me on
the quick, and I believe, there be few in the realm, but it will make them
smart, to forgo his Abbey and Chauntrye lands wherein I for my part am so
heated, that if I should fight with those traitors, I would for every two
strokes to be stricken for treason strike on to keep my land, the which I
bought to suerlye, to deliver it at a papists appoyntement. Thus I have
exceded in words, and yet you shall count it littel, because the matter is
large, and thereby you must measure me, and not by my lines, One thing I will ye
shall mark and then I end, the matter of Cardynal Pole (as in this case) of
great importance, like as I am sure my Lord Protector is advertised, for
emonges these rebels, the chief Captain of all, sauinge one, was the
Marquis of Excetters man, and sets forth the matter of the Cardinal so
much, as in deed, he makes no other matter. His name is Berry, one of them
which subscrybed the Articles. If ye can conuenientlye send me* a Dagg when
the kings Maiestyes ordynance comes down. Ye shall receive money for the
same of my Brother Henry. Ye shall take pain to do my humble commendacyons to
mine old Master (good Sir Anthonye Dennye knight) and especyally to my Coosyn
Master John Peers of the Guard, who I would were here with one or two
hundredth of ye Guard, to knec^e these knaves with their Palo^rr^s. Thus f^re ye
most her^elye well, and pr^^^ you, as I do, that w^ may mete merelye.

The Articles of us the Commoners of Deuonshyre and Cornwall in diverse Camps
by East and West of Excettor.
First we will have all the general counsel and holy decrees of our for
fathers observed, kept and performed, and who so ever shall again say them, we
hold them as Heretics.

Ite^ we will have the Law^s of our Sovereign Lord King Henry the.viii.
concerning the six articles, to be in use again, as in his time they were.

Item we will have the ma^^e in Latten, as was before, and celebrated by the
Pryest wythoure my man or woman co^munycatyng with him.

Item we will have the Sacrament hang over the hyeghe altar, and there to be
worshypped as it was wount to be, and they which will not thereto consent, we
will have them dye like heretykes against the holy Catholyque faith.

Item we will have the Sacrament of ye altar but at Easter delivered to the
lay people, and then but in one kind.

Item we will that our Curattes shall minister the Sacrament of Baptism at all
times as well in the weke day as on the holy day.

Ite^ we will have holy bread and holy water made every sunday, Palms and
ashes at the times accustomed, Images to be set up again in every church, and
all other ancient old Ceremonies used heretofore, by our mother the holy
Church.

Item we will not receive the new service because it is but like a Christmas
ga^me, but we will have our old service of Mattens, mass, Even song and
procession in Latten as it was before. And so we the Cornyshe men (whereof
certain of us understand no Englysh) utterly refuse this new Englysh.

Item we will have every preacher in his sermon, and every Pryest at his
mass, pray specially by name for the souls in purgatory, as our forefathers
did.

Item we will have the Bible and al books of scripture in Englysh to be called
in again, for we be informed that otherwise the Clergy, shall not of long time
confound the heretykes.

Item we will have Doctor Moreman and Doctor Crispin which hold our opinions
to be sauely sent unto us and to them we require the Kings majesty, to give
some certain liuinges, to preach among us our Catholycke faith.

Item we think it very mete because the lord Cardinal Pole is of the kings
blood, should not only have his pardon, but also sent for to Rome, and
promoted to be of the kings cou^sayl.

Item we will that no Gentylman shall have any more servants then one to
wait upon him except he may dispende one hundredth mark land and for every
hundredth mark we think it reasonable he should have a man.

Item we will that the half part of the Abbey lands and Chauntrye lands, in
every man's possessions, how so ever he came by them, be given again to two
places, where two of the chief Abbeis was with in every Countye, where such
half part shall be taken out, and there to be establyshed a place for devout
persons, which shall pray for the King and the common wealth, and to the same
we will have all the alms of the Church box given for these seven years.

Ite^ for the particular grieffes of our Countreye. We will have them so
ordered, as Humfreye Arundell, and Henry Braye the Kings Mayor of Bodma^,
shall inform the Kings Majesty, if they may have salueco^duct under the
Kings great Seal, to pass and repasse, with an Heroalde at Arms.

By us Chief Capytaynes.
Humfrey Arundell. Berry Thomas Underhyll. John Sloeman. Wyllyam Segar.
The four Governors of the Camps.
John Tompson Pryeste. Henry Bray Mayor of Bodma^ Henry Lee Mayor of Torriton
Roger Barret Priest.




