THE STRAIGHT GATE TO Heaven.

A Sermon preached before the poor distressed Prisoners in the Kings Bench
common Jail, to their Heavenly comfort.

Luke 13.23.

By William King Preacher of the word of God.

The Afflictions of this present time are not worthy of the glory which shall
be showed unto us.

Romans 8.18. AT LONDON. Printed by G. ELD, and are to be sold by Thomas Langley
at his shop over against the Sarazens head without Newgate. 1617.

The Straight Gate to Heaven.
Strive to enter in at the straight Gate: for many (I say unto you) will seek
to enter in and shall not be able.

Luke 13.24.
OUr Lord Jesus Christ says in the 20. of Math. Many are called, but few are
chosen. In the 7. of Math verse. 13. he bids us Enter in at the strait gate:
Via lata et spaciosa.
for it is the wide gate and broad way that leads to destruction: many there
be that go in thereat: because the Gate is straight and the way narrow that
leads unto life, Luk 3.23.
and few there be that find it

In this place of Saint Luke we read of a certain man which came to our
Savior Christ and asked him of purpose, whether few should be saved. To whom
our Lord Jesus answered thus Strive to enter in at the straight Gate for many
(I say unto you) will seek to enter in and shall not be able In which Answer
albeit our Savior does not answer directly to his question, Via arcta. quae
ducit ad vitam.
either negatiuely, or affirmatively: yet does he plainly insinuate by his
speeches, that few shall be saved.

Reverend regarded in Christ Jesus: this is a sufficient motive whereby our
Savior Christ forewarneth us, that if we do not in time repent, forsake our
sins and seek after God: both the ancient Christian Fathers, (whose eyes saw
not that we see, nor their ears heard not that we hear) yea the very Heathen
also shall rise up in judgment against us. For it is good counsel which Saint
Augustine gives. Quid prodest si omnia habes, eam tamen qui omnia dedit non
habere? What is a man the better though he have all things, and be without him
which is the Author of all things.

Let none therefore stumble at it: but if any do, let them remember the charge
that we have also from God. Oh (says one) consideret periculum meum. He that
is displeased with me, let him consider my danger: for says not God to Jeremy,
Ier. 1.17
that he would destroy him before his face if he held his peace? S. Augustine
says very well, Quid tu succenses mortalis, sub iussione Christi mare audit,
et tu sur^ens es? O worm of the earth why do thou storm? the sea heard and
obeyed the voice of Christ: and do thou stop thy ears? Mare audit, ventus
cessat, et tu suflas? The sea waxed calm, the wind was still, and do thou
begin to bluster and swel? Do not we speak from the mouth of God? Does not the
holy Ghost gain us lofty and glorious titles? Tit. 1.7* 1 Cor. 4.1* Ma. 16.19
20. Apo. 3.7* 24. 2. Cor. 8.23.
as the Stewards of Gods own house, Disposers of his secrets, Disbursers of
his treasures, Keepers of the broad seal, Keepers of the keys of heaven, Gods
Secretaries, Gods Ambassadors, Angels, yea the very glory of Christ: and all
this to express the excellency of our calling: yet the vild varlets and
venomous vermin of the Earth dare call us proud Prelates, pild Parsons and
pelting Priests* O monstrous and intolerable impiety: I speak to all sorts,
not to some few of one sort. Act. 7.
But that which herein I speak is not much more then that of the Apostle Paul
(as some of your own Poets have said) which is warrantable.

One thing therefore dear Christians let me beg of you: to wit that you would
hear diligently, receive zealously, and judge soberly and discreetly. Non mea
verba sunt, sed verba vitae eternae, They are not my words but the words of
eternal life. Mat. 10. Mat. 13. Mat 4. Luke 8.
For the word of God has sundry hearers: some receive it, some receive it not.
Note the Parable of the seed: the seed of the word of God when it was sowed:
some fell by the high way side, some upon stony ground, some upon thorns, and
some in good ground, etc. But more briefly and strictly the word of God has
two sorts of hearers: Ioh. 6.
Elect and Reprobate. The Elect say with Peter. Domine ad quem ibimus? verba
vitae eternae habes: Master to whom shall we go? thou have the words of
eternal life. The Reprobate say, Durus est hic sermo: this is a hard saying,
who can hear it? can mortality put on immortality? can this corruption put on
incorruption? can Christ be God and man? can God beget a Son? Fox in the Book
of Mart.
as of late the Devil of Norwich diuelishly said? yea worse then a Devil was
he: For the Devils in the 4. of Luke acknowledged Christ, Luke 4.
crying and saying thou art Christ the son of God, but this devil denied Christ.

The word of God is preached in vain to many: the honey is lost that is put
into vessels of gall: the fish is cast away that is put into dry pooles: and
the seed perishes that is sowed upon the sand. Ciprian cont. Them. Tract. 1.
page
Saint Cyprian says Certe labor irritus est, et nullus effectus offerre, lumen
caeco, sermonem surdo, sapientiam bruto: cum nec sentire brutus possit, nec
caecus lumen admittere, nec surdus audire^ Truly it is lost labor and to no
purpose, to offer light to a blind man, speech to a deaf man, wisdom to a
gross head: seeing yt a gross head cannot perceive, a blind man cannot see,
and a deaf man cannot hear. The ancient Father Origin says: Quanto melius
esset nonnullis omnino non audire verbum Dei, quam audire cum malitia, vel
audire cum hipocrisi: melius autem dicimus ad comparationem malorum. How much
better were it for some not to hear the word of God at all, then to hear with
malice, or to hear it with hippocrisie, we say, better in respect of evils.

Therefore my dear brethren and fellow Prisoners, your friendly censure I
humbly desire, to gather with your diligent attention, a due regard of the
matter ensuing: In the opening and explication of these words of our Savior
Christ: wherein, I do you, I meddle not at all with any controversies in the
Church, or any thing in the state Ecclesiastical, but only enter into a
controversy with Satan and sin. It is contrived into three principal
heads: wherein our Savior Christ declares how hard a thing it is to enter into
life, and how few shall enter. In the first our Lord Jesus bids us strive
earnestly. Luke 13.23.
In the second he affirms that the gate is very straight. In the third he
says many which seek to enter in* shall not be able.

The particulers that occur (as many there are) they shall be touched rather
then handled in their place.

As touching the first head, where he bids us strive earnestly, 1. Cap.
noting thereby that it is a matter of great strife against the World, the
Flesh, and the Devil: And therefore we may rather wonder that any shall be
saved, then so few shall be saved. For we have all the lets and hindrances
that may be, both within us and without us: we have (as they say) the Sun,
Moon, and seven stars against us: we have all the Devils in hell against
us, with all their horns, heads, marvelous strength, infinite wiles, cunning
devises, deep flights, and methodicall temptations. Here raues a sore stream
against us: then have we this present evil world against us with his
innumerable baits, snares, nets, ginnes grins, etc. to catch us, fetter us,
and entangle us. Here have we both profits and pleasures, riches and honor,
wealth and preferment, ambition and covetousness. Here comes a camp royal of
spiritual and invisible enemies. Lastly, we have our flesh, that is our
corrupted nature against us: we have our selves against our selves: For we our
selves are as great enemies to our salvation as either the world or the Devil:
For our understanding, reason, will and affections are altogether against us.
Our natural wisdom is an enemy unto us: our concupiscences and lusts do
minister strength to Satan's temptations, they are all in league with Satan
against us, They take part with him in every thing against us and our
salvation, they fight all under his standerd and receive their pay of him: This
then goes hard on our side, that the Devil has an inward party against us,
and we carry always within us our greatest enemy, which is ever ready night
and day to betray us into the hands of Satan: yea to vnboult the door to let
him in to cut our throats. Here then we see an huge army of dreadful enemies,
and a very legion of Devils lying in ambush against our souls: are not we
therefore, poor wretches, in a most pitiful case, which are thus bessedged
and betrayed on every side? All things then duly considered, may not we
justly marvel that any shall be saved? For who sees not, who knows not,
that thousand thousands are carried headlong to destruction (without the great
mercy of God?) either with the temptations of the world, the flesh, or the
Devil. But yet further I will show you, by other apparent and evident reasons,
that the number of Gods Elect upon the face of the earth are very few in
comparison, which may thus be considered. First let there be taken away from
amongst us the Papists, Atheists, and Heretics. Secondly, let there be
shouelled out all vicious and notorious evil livers as swearers, drunkards,
whoremongers, carnal worldlings, deceivers, cosoners, proud men, riotors,
gamesters, and the profane multitude. Thirdly, let there be refused and sorted
out all hippocrites, carnal Protestants, vain professors backe-sliders,
decliners and cold Christians. Let all these (I say) be separated and then tell
me how many sound, sincere, faithful, and zealous worshippers of God will be
found amongst us? I suppose we should not need the Art of Arithmeticke to
number them, for I think there would be very few in every village, town and
City, I doubt they would walk very thinly in the street, so as a man might
easily tell them as they go. Our Lord Jesus asks a question in the Gospel of
S. Luke, saying, Luke 18.8.
Do you think when the son of man comes, that he shall find faith on the
earth? to the which we may answer, surely very little.

To make it more clearly manifest that few shall be saved: Genesis.
in the first age of the world, all flesh had so corrupted their ways that God
could no longer bear them, but even vowed their destruction by ouerflowing of
waters: when the flood came how few were found faithful? eight persons were
only saved by the Arc. How few righteous found in Sodom, and the Cities
adjoining? but one poor Lot and his family. How few believers were found in
Jericho? but one Rahab. How few of the old Israelites entered into the Land of
promise? but two, Caleb and Iosuah: the rest could not enter in because of
unbelief. The true and invisible Church was small, during the government of ye
Judges, as apeareth plentifully in that book. In Elias time the Church was so
small that it did appear weak. 1. Kin. 17.
In the reign of the Kings of Israel and Judah, the sincere worshippers were
very few, as appears by the complaint of all the Prophets. During the
captivity, the Church was as the moon under a cloud: she was driven into a
wilderness, where she did hide herself. During the persecution of the Greek
Empire by Gog and Magog, and Egypt, they were fewest of all. In Christ's time,
with what silly company did he begin withal? How were all things corrupted by
the Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees preaching there were few believers. After
the first six hundredth years, what an eclipse was in the Church, during the
height of Antichrists reign? How few true worshippers of God were in the world
for the space of almost nine hundredth years? Since the Gospel was preached
and spread abroad how few do believe* And as the Prophet Esaias says, Domine
quis credidit auditui nostro? Esa. 53.1.
Lord who has believed our report? Thus then you see, it does appear (both by
Scripture, reason, and examples of all ages) that the number of the elect is
very small, and when when all comes to all few shall be saved. Therefore let us
strive earnestly to go in at the straight gate, for the small number of those
that shall be saved ought to thrust us forward to enter in thereat. Christ says
Contendite intrare per angustam portam, Luke 13.24.
quia multi (dico vobis) studebunt intrare, et non poterunt. Strive to enter in
at the narrow gate, for many (I say unto you) will seek to enter in and shall
not be able. And in an other place, he says, The gate is straight and the way
narrow that leads unto life, and few there be that find it. Mat. 14.
If men would consider of this, and try with themselves whether they be of that
small number or no; it would make them look better about them, etc. Death
threatens us, who is very terrible to the flesh, and the remembrance, of it
very bitter to a man that is sowced, soaked and settled in the pleasures of this
world. It flattereth no man, it regards not persons, it waigheth not
friendship, it cares not for rewards, it is very grim, ugly, and cruel, and
kills down right where it hitteth. Bernard sermon* 7 de aduent domini.
Therefore Christ bids us strive earnestly. To knit up this point, S. Bernard
says, there is none of us all which stands not in need of council, propes,
and help. The general misery of mankind is triple, etc. For both we are easy
to be seduced, and unable to do well, and very weak to resist. If we would
discern between good and evil, we are deceived: if we go about to do good,
we quickly faint: if we endeavor to resist evil, we cannot endure, but are
easily overcome. The tyranny and rage of Satan is unspeakable, and his power
mighty: the baytes of the world be innumerable, and our flesh frail and weak:
They are three deadly enemies to our salvation, against whom we must al jointly
fight.

Our adversary the Devil is a roaring Lion, 1. Pet. 5.8.6 12. 1. Ioh. 5.16. 1.
Ioh. 2.16.
rangeth about, seeking whom he may devour, and inuenteth a thousand ways to
entrap us, and bring us to everlasting shame and destruction. For S. Paul
says, we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against rule, against
powers, against worldly governors of the darkness of this world, against
spiritual wickedness in all spiritual places. Our second enemy is the world,
the whole world is altogether set on wickedness, Gal. 5.
there is nothing in the world but the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes,
and the pride of life.

The third, our flesh, 1. Pet. 2 11
our flesh which rebelleth, and lusts contrary to the spirit, fleshly lusts
fight against the soul: Here you see what enemies they be to our salvation.

How then shall we strive to enter in at the strait gate and narrow way
leading to everlasting life? The ways and means of striving
First resist the Devil and he will fly from you. Resist him in faith, in
Prayer, and in the word. Secondly, be crucified to the world even as strangers,
which are not of the World. Luke 4. 2. Tim. 4.
For we have no abiding City here: but we seek one to come, says the
Apostle. Lastly, chastise thy body with watchings with labor, with fastings:
Gal. 6.14 He. 13.14.
it is a great victory to over come the Devil, a greater to overcome the
world, and the greatest of all to overcome thy flesh and fleshly unruly
affections. To him that overcomes shall begiuen a crown: But he that is
overcome shall be the continual bondsman of Satan, our vild and cruel enemy.
2. Tim. 4
Let us so strive that we may overcome: he only that strives lawfully shall
be crowned. Let every man therefore keep his stand or station in all obedience
and readiness. Stoutly must we fight under Christ's victorious Banner. They are
not trifles for which we strive: therefore let us not shrink nor cowardly
run away: but with an invincible courage in an assured hope of victory, abide
all warlike miseries sustained with the comfort of that reward: which no man
shall receive except he strive lawfully. 2. Tim. 2
No man that puts his hand to the plow and looks backwards is worthy of
the kingdom of heaven: Mat. 10.
but he that endures to the end shall be saved.

Now we strive for Christ and not for Antichrist; 1 Cor. 13.
for the truth, and not against it. I can do nothing against the truth but for
the truth, says Saint Paul: for the Gospel, and not for the doctrine of men:
for true religion, not for superstition must we strive. But our striving for
the most part is all awry and wicked: we strive who may be the proudest,
pretending equality: we strive indeed for superiority, neither equal nor
superior can we abide: we strive how to supplant and overthrow one another:
envy has made men impudent, striving to undermine and cast down the walls of
innocence: striving how to place and displace; how to disgrace, and how to
bring into favor; how to set up and how to throw down. And in so doing we
strive against our selves, and for the advantage of our deadly foes. This war
is not Christian, this is not to strive lawfully: this is not to fight a good
fight: this Uictory shall not be crowned.

Behold in a word, I speak unto you all: how many are there amongst you (a
shame to speak it) that seek to strive against your selves and follow the
example of the multitude: namely in swearing* blasphemy, cursed speaking,
railing, backbiting slandering, chiding, quarrelling, contention, jesting,
mocking, flattering, lying, dissembling, etc. These things do ouerflow in all
places, so as men which fear God, had better be any where then in company
with such men.

Lactantius Firmianus speaking of the end of the world, says: Si erunt boni,
Lactant. Acephali c. 11
praede ac ludibrio habebuntur. If there remain any good men at that time,
they shall be counted a pray, a booty, a mocking stock. Can thou not
flatter? Can thou not lie? Can thou not play the Hyppocrite? Can thou not
follow the fashion, and serve the stage? No, then thou art no meet man to live
in this world: choose a few companions. But I say unto you as Nestor did unto
his children; pray, for unless God help us, we all perish.

Now I beseech you brethren and fellow Prisoners, even for jesus Christ's sake
do not as the multitude does, which we see daily before our eyes to wallow in
wickedness: but keep your selves from the broad way and wide gate, leading unto
everlasting damnation.

Strive earnestly. The Almighty God of his ineffable goodness, when he saw the
weakness of our flesh by nature prone to evil, and therefore unable to
withstand the Devil, who is called a Dragon with seven heads for his
subtilty, and ten horns for his cruelty) even then most lovingly showed an
excellent remedy whereby we migh preserve our selves from injury, and that is
prayer. It behooves us to take it for our weapon, that we may keep our selves
from the invasion of Satan. For as the Lion (at the sight of a Cock) is
discomforted, and at his crowing betaketh himself to his heels: Gaudetius
Merula de merorabilibus l 20.9 Lactant de error. ca. 10.
So does Satan both stand in fear of a godly man, and fly at his prayer. And
Lactantius notes, Devils do hurt but the faint hearted: such as the great and
mighty hand of God does not protect, which are profane from the sacrament of
truth: but the (...), that is the true worshippers of God, do the Devils
fear.

Let us valiantly take this weapon in hand and manfully fight with Satan and
sin* let us try our combat in the field of the holy Scriptures; let us begin
to trauerse the way of Gods commandments, and break into these words. The
afflictions of this present time are not worthy of the glory that shall be
showed unto us. To. 8.19*
Let us strive to enter in at the straight Gate and narrow way leading unto
eternal salvation: to wit charity, which is the root and mother of all good
works: joy in serving of God, Gal. 5.22*
peace or tranquillity of mind in the storms of this world: patience in
adversity, longanimity in expecting our reward: bonity in hurting no man:
benignity in sweet behavior: gentleness in occasion given of anger: faithfulness
in performance of our promises: modesty without arrogance: continence from all
kind of wickedness: chastity in conseruing a pure mind in a clean and
unspotted body.. Against these, says Saint Paul, there is no law: contrarily,
Gal. 5.20.21.
let us shun and avoid the broad way and wide gate leading unto everlasting
destruction: namely fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, letchery, idolatry,
poysonings, enmities, contentions, emulations, wrath, strife, dissension,
sects, envy, murder, drunkenness, gluttony, and such like, of which I foretell
you as I have told you before, that those men which do such things shall never
obtain the kingdom of heaven.

Here then you see how hard a thing it is to strive to enter into the kingdom
of heaven, and how few shall enter, therefore some because it is difficult to
strive, strive not at all. But Chist bids us strive earnestly, and promises
everlasting peace and comfort unto him. Contendenti et vincenti, that strives
and overcomes, saying, though in the world ye have no peace, John. 16.33.
but tribulations and afflictions, yet be of good cheer. Ego vici mundum et
omnia in hoc mundo. I have overcome the world, and all things in this world,
and therefore in me you shall have peace eternally.

2. Cap.
In the second head our Lord Jesus Christ affirms that the gate is very
straight, noting that none can enter in, without vehement crowding, and almost
breaking their shoulder bones: that is, none can enter into eternal life
without vehement suit, earnest prayer and supplication unto God for the
forgiveness of their sins, wrought by the spirit of all Christians with an
inward and true repentance: and God shall derect all thy ways and appoint thee
how to go either hither or thither as the Prophet Esaias says* Though the
Lord give thee bread of trouble, and the water of affliction and adversity,
Esa. 30.20.21. penis arcta breuis.
thy rain shall be no more scant: but thine eyes see the rain: yea and thine
ear shall hear the talking of him that speaks behind thee. This is the way,
walk therein, turn not aside neither to the right hand nor to the left.
Wherefore: hoc opus, hic labor: endeavor we, and let our chiefest care, yea our
greatest endeavor be: for the virtue of his grace the antecedent to glory, both
which are his free gift. The Lord will give grace and glory, and no good thing
will he withheld from them that walk uprightly.

As I have showed you of sundry lets both within us and without us which do
keep us back from God and hold us fast in our sins: Psalm. 84.11
so now unto all that has been said before, I will lay forth unto your view
seven especial lets and hindrances unto eternal life: which may not unfitly
be termed seven bars out of Heaven, and seven gates into Hell: and thereby
you shall perceive that the gate is very straight that leads unto life, and
few there be that find it.

The first which is infidelity is proved out of the fourth Chapter to the
Hebrews where it is thus written: Heb. 4.
Unto us was the Gospel preached as unto them: but the word which they heard
profited them not, because it was not mixed with faith in those that heard it.
And again they could not enter in because of unbelief. Here we see that
unbelief did bar out the old people from entering into the land of promise:
which was a figure of Gods eternal Kingdom. And sure it is that the same
unbelief does bar out thousands of us. For many will believe nothing but
their own fantasies: they will not believe the word of God; especially when it
is contrary to their lust and likings, profits and pleasures. Though things be
manifestly proved to their faces, and the Chapter and verse showed them: yet
will they not believe: or though they say they will believe, yet will they
never go about the practice of any thing, but reply against God in all their
actions. And for the most part when God says one thing, they will either say
or do another: when God says yea, they will say no, and so give God the lie.
Some again will say, if all be true that the Preachers say* then God help us.
Thus you see how infidelity does bar men out of Heaven and cast them into hell.

The second gate, which is the presumption of Gods mercy: for if men be sharply
reproved for their sins, and exhorted unto repentance by and by they take
covert saying God is merciful, as though God were made all of mercy and that
there were no justice in him at all: and thus the wicked make Gods mercy an
occasion, which though the Prophet Nahum in the first Chapter of his prophecy
does sharply reprove: The Lord (says he) is slow to anger, but he is great in
power, and will not surely clear the wicked. Here we see that God will not
surely spare such as go on in their sins presuming of his mercy, and saying
in their hearts, If I may but have a Lord of mercy upon me three hours before
my death, I care not. But it is just with God when those three hours come to
shut them up in blindness, and hardness of heart as a just plague for their
presumption. Therefore the Prophet David, seeing the greeuousnes of this sin,
prays to be delivered from it. Keep me O Lord from presuptuous sins, let
them not reign over me. Let all men therefore take heed of presumptious
sins, which is the only cause that sin does so mightily abound in our age:
and let us not continue in sin presume of Gods mercy, but let us come unto God
for mercy, while the gates of mercy are opened unto us: For though God be full
of mercy, yet will he show no mercy to them that presume of his mercy, but
they shall once know to their cost, that Justice goes from him as well as
mercy. And therefore it may well be called the strait gate to heaven and the wide
gate to Hell.

Let us come to the third gate, which is the example of the multitude, for that
does harden and imbolden men unto sin: As when many birds do flicker and flock
together, they fall upon the net without any fear, but one or two alone will be
afraid. Even so the example of many sin companions do imbolden men to run
through the snares of Satan without any mistrust. This is proved in the 23. of
Ex. where the Lord says flatly, Thou shall not follow a multitude to do
evil. This is a thing that hinders a great number from God, for they never
look up unto God, or to his word, but stare upon the common multitude and
doings of most men, and examples of the world, thinking that if they do as the
most men do, as their forefathers have done before them, they are cockesure
and of an even ground. And hereupon rises their devilish Proverb, Do as the
most men do, and the fewest will speak of you, which is a very wicked speech
But they have forgotten S. Paul's rule: Ne configuremini seculo isto, etc.
Fashion not your selves like unto this world. These fellows that stand upon
the multitude will reason thus, we see none of these great ones of the world,
none of the noble, none of the rich, none of the wise and prudent receive this
doctrine, but only a few Shackragges and beggarly rascals, and therefore it
is a token that it is nothing worth and that it is doubtful, and not for us to
meddle withal. Lo what thoughts may creep into our hearts, and how slily
Satan may trumpe in our way and blindfold us, and lead us away in the dark by
doting and dorring us with the example of the multitude. Let us therefore take
heed, of these pitfalls which Satan lays in the way and not be carried away
with these thoughts and reasons. The wicked bear themselves in hand that they
shall win the game, and that the goal goes on their side, and there is
nothing but crowing long before it be day, and great triumphing among them
before any stroke be stricken: and that because we be but a handful of
people, and they a great multitude: and that in a manner the whole world
agreeeth with them to practice our death. Thus the Devil does cast a mist
before their eyes, and leads them away from the straight Gate to heaven, and
brings them into the broad way, which leads them to the bottomless pit of
hell. Therefore my dear Brethren, let us stand fast in the word of the Lord,
and take heed of bending with the way that we be not carried away, or bowed
quite down with the raging stream of the multitude for the sway of the world
does way down all things that can be spoken out of the word of God, and
opens a very wide passage into Hell.

Now let us proceed to the fourth Gate into hell, which is the long custom of
sin, for that takes away all sense and feeling of sin, and making it as it
were an other nature unto us,, so that we may as well alter nature as shake it
off, when it is thus soldered unto us through long custom, this is noted by
the Prophet Jeremy to be a very dangerous thing. For he says, Ier. 13.23.
Can the black Moore change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may ye
also do good, which are accustomed to do evil. Here the Prophet affirms
that it is as hard to cure an old disease that is bred in the bone, or to
remedy a sin that has been hatched and brought up with us, as to wash a
black Moore white, or to change the spots of a Leopard, which cannot be
without the destroying of nature. And surely, try it who will, he shall find
it as hard a matter to leave an old custom, whether it be of swearing, gaming*
lying, whoring, evil company, or any other sin, as to wash an Ethiopian.
Therefore it is written, Pro. 27. Though thou should bray a fool in a
mortar among wheat brayed with a pestle yet will not his foolishnes depart
from him: Prou. 27.
So that as long as we are in custom with sin, the door of Heaven is barred
up against us.

Now let us hear of the fifth gate, which is the long escaping of punishment
this is avouched by the wise man in these words. Because sentence against an
evil work is not executed speedily, Eccl. 8.11*
therefore the hearts of the children of men, have set them to do evil. Where he
shows that one cause why men are so hardened in their sins is because God
wincketh at them and lets them alone, not punishing them immediately after
they have sinned: For if God should forthwith strike down one, and reign
down fire and brimstone upon another and cause the earth to swallow up the
third, then men would fear indeed. But God takes not that course, for though
he meets with some in this life, yet he lets thousands escape, and that makes
them more bold, thinking they shall never come to their answer Even as an old
Thief, which has a long time escaped both prison and gallows, thinks he
shall always escape, and therefore goes bouldly on in his thefts. But let men
take heed for as the proverb says, though the pitcher goes long to the well,
yet at last it comes broken home: so though men escape long unpunished for
sin, yet shall they not always be freed: for there will come a day of revenge,
a day that will pay the^ home for all. Thus you see that impunity leads
numbers to destruction: that is, when men are let alone, and not smitten by the
hand of God, nor punished by law of the Magistrate.

The sixth Gate is the beholding of other men's deeds: for when some men, that
have a wicked and ungracious life, and have been notorious sinners even to the
world ward, so that every man could point at them, if upon their deathbed,
they say a few good words, and cry God mercy, and say their prayers, and
forgive all the world, and so dye quietly, it is marvelous to hear how the
foolish people of the world will exalt them, and justify them saying, He made
a very good end as any man could make, and dyed as quietly as a lamb, and set
all things in good order before he dyed. Heerevpon an other wicked and
monstrous varlet is encouraged to sin: for thinks he, such a man lived as
wickedly and loosely as I, or any man else, and yet he made a very good end and
why may not I do so too? But alas, these men's eyes are bleared: for to dye
quietly, is not to dye godly, to cry God mercy for fashion sake, is not to
have God merciful, to say a few prayers with teeth outward is not to dye in
the faith of Christ, for many do this and yet dye miserably.

The last gate is hope of long life: this is affirmed by our Lord concerning
the rich worldling, who when he felt the world come in upon him, with full
stream; said he would pull down his Barnes and build greater, and say to his
soul: Soul habes multa bona reposita in annos multos: Luke 12.19
requiesce, comede bibe, oblectare. Thou have much goods laid up for many
years, live at ease, eat, drink, and take thy pastime. But our Savior
calls him fool for flattering himself in security, and promising unto
himself long life: moreover he plainly tells him that the same night he
should make a hellish and miserable end. Note I pray you how Jesus Christ the
fountain of all wisdom calls this man a fool, and yields a reason
thereof, to wit, because he gathered riches to himself, and was not rich in
God he had great care for this life and none at all for that which is to come.
So then it follows that all such are mere fools indeed, and may be
Chronicled for fools, (howsoever they be taken and reputed in the world) which
have much care for their bodies and none for their souls: great care for this
life: and none at all for that which is to come. Well, let all such profane
worldlings as dream and dote of long life (and therefore defer the day of
their repentance unto God) take heed by this man's example that they reckon not
without their host, and be suddenly snatched away in the midst of all their
pleasures and iollities as Job says, Job. ^1 24.
Some dye in their full strength being in all ease and prosperity: their breasts
are full of marrow. We see therefore how dangerous a thing it is for men to
flatter and soothvp themselves with hope of a long life.

Via arctissima the way is very straight, Esa. 2.3. Mich 4 2. Al^uding to mount
Sion where the visible Church then was.
my little flock speak thus one to another: Come let us go up to the
mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob. Et docebit nos vias
suas: and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths for we
will no longer follow the multitude: nor walk in the ways of the wicked: but
we will visit the true Church whereas the people are taught by Gods pure word.
The Prophet Hoseas says the ways of the Lord are straight and the just shall
walk in them: Oseas vlt. Cap. vlt, ver.
but the wicked shall fall therein. So says the Prophet David. The Scriptures
are a guide to our feet. Psalm. 118.
So says the old father Origin. Clausum est negligentibus, inuenitur
querentibus. Orig Ex, Hom 9.
It is shut from the negligent: but it is open to them that seek and knock for
it. Saint Clemens Alexandrinus says also. Audite qui estis long, audite qui
prope: nullis celatum est verbum, lux est communis omnibus illucesscit
hominibus: nullus est in verbo cimerius, festinemus ad salutem, ad
regenerationem. Hearken ye that be far off, harken ye that be near, the word
of God is hid from no man; it is a light common to all men, there is no darkness
in Gods word: let us make have to salvation, to regeneration. Fulgent. in
sermo. de confessoribus.
Fulgentius (...), in Scripturis diuinis abundat, et quod robustus comedat, et
quod paruulus ^^gat. In the Scriptures of God there is plenty sufficient, both
for the strong to eat and the little one to suck. So says Irenaeus,
Scripturae in aperto sunt et sine ambiguitate: et similiter ab omnibus audiri
possunt. The Scriptures are plain and without doubtfulnes, and may be heard
indifferently of all men. Chrisost. in 2 Thessalonians. Hom. 3.
So says Chrysostom. Omnia clara et plana sunt in Scripturis diuinis, quaecunque
necessaria sunt, manifesta sunt: whatsoever thing is necessary for us, is
always manifest. So says Epiphanius li. 2. So says S. Jerome in Psalm. 86.
Greg. in Epist. ad Leandrum. Psalm. 24.
So to conclude says S. Gregory. It is a stream wherein the little Lamb may
wade, and the great Elephants may swim. Therefore lift up your heads ye gates,
and lift up your selves you everlasting doors, Eleuatae porta aeternales.
and the King of glory shall come in. For the Lord has chosen Syon, and loved
to dwell in it; saying, this is my rest for ever: here will I dwell for I have
a delight therein. Psalm. 132.13.14. Tertiu^ cap.


Lastly our Savior Christ says, that many that seek to enter in shall not be
able: noting thereby, that even of them that seek many shall step short,
because they seek him not aright. Esaias also says: Except the Lord of hosts
had left us a seed, Esaias 1.9.
we had bin as Sodom, and like to Gomorrah. The Apostle alleges out of the
Prophets, Es. 10.22. To. 9.28.
that the Lord will make a short account in the earth, and gather it into a
short sum with righteousness. The Prophet Amos gives good counsel, saying,
seek the Lord, Am. 5.14.
and ye shall live: seek good and not evil: hate the evil and love the
good, and establish judgment in the gate. It may be that the Lord of hosts
will be merciful unto the remna^t of Joseph.

The reason why many which seek to enter into eternal life shall not be able.
God has appointed unto every man that lives in the Church a certain time of
repentance, and of coming to Christ, and he which mispendeth that time and is
not made Christian then, can never be saved. This made our Savior Christ to
weep for Jerusalem, and say. Oh if thou had known at the least in this thy
day, Verse. 44.
those things which belong to thy peace, but now are they hidden from thine
eyes. And he further signifies the destruction of Jerusalem: because she knew
not the time of her visitation. Luke 9.42.
Here we learn that the neglecting of this time is one cause why not one or
two, but many shall seek to enter into the kingdowe of Heaven, and yet shall
not be able. It is a marvelous thing that they which seek to be saved should
perish: but the fault is theirs which seek when it is too late.

There are nine things required of all that shall be saved by Christ. 9.
things required.


1. He must be a new creature. 1. Cor. 5.17. 2. He must live, not after the
lusts of men but after the will of God. 1 Pet. 4.2. 3. He must be zealous of
good works. Ti. 2.14 4. He must dye to sin, and live to righteousness. Romans
6.14. 5 He must be holy and unblameable. Col. 2 6. 6. He must so walk as
Christ has walked John 2.6. 7. He must crucify the flesh with the affections
and Lusts. Gal. 5 24. 8. He must walk, not after the flesh but after the
Spirit. Romans 8.1. Last of all he must serve God in holiness and righteousness
all the days of his life. Luke 1.75.
If these things be in you in some measure of truth, then your hope is current,
sound, and good, otherwise it is nothing worth. For in vain do men say they
hope to be saved by Christ, when as they walk wickedly and dissolutely: The
reason hereof is, because the members must be suitable to the head: But Christ
our head is holy, therefore we his members must be holy also: as it as written,
1. Pet. 1.16.
Be ye holy, for I am holy. Otherwise if we will join profane and unholy
members to our holy head Christ, then we make Christ a monster: As if we should
ioyn swearers, drunkards whoremongers and such like to be the members of
Christ, and to have life and salvation by him. But the case is far otherwise:
For first of all before a Christian can come to have an inward feeling and true
understanding of these things, there are five other especial things to be
required of every true Christian which lives in the Church.

First, the acknowledgment of sins committed against the law of the Lord.

Secondly, the acknowledgment of Gods angry countenance to be most justly bent
against him for his sins.

Thirdly, an inward sorrow and pain of the heart and soul for sin.

But here we are most warily to take heed that we content not our selves with
these three former points, for if we do, the vilest firebrands in hell, Judas,
Phatao, Saul, Herod Achitophell, and such like, shall go before us, or be our
equals in the profession of repentance.

There are two manner of repentances, the one a true repentance to life, the
other a false repentance to death: as we may see by Judas, who is said to have
repented, and which is more, to have confessed his fault, and which is most of
all, to have made restitution: and yet it was a false repentance, and why?
because it sprang not of a true faith, but as before.

Peter repented and wept bitterly, and was saved thereby, though he never made
confession nor satisfaction: And why? because it sprang of a true and lively
faith in Christ.

Quid ergo est? What is it then that is required at our hands? these two things
subsequent most chiefly and principally, which may be well called, Vltima est
summa, the last and highest of all: that is, a perfect hatred, loathing and
detesting of sin. For such only begin to cease from sin.

Lastly, the acknowledgment of the mercy of God offered in that one redeemer,
and only mediator between God and man, 1. Tim. 2.5
the man Christ Jesus, with a full persuasion of the heart, a sure confidence of
an assured rest of conscience grounded upon the promise of Gods mercy, that we
shall be freely accepted with God in Christ: for that.

First our sins are purged in his blood. 1. Ioh. 1.2. Esa. 53.

Secondly, his righteousness is imputed unto us. Romans 4.1. 1 Cor. 1.30.

The fathers looked for none other righteousness the^ this righteousness of
Christ: as the Apostle Paul proves sufficiently by that one example of
Abraham, who is said to rest himself upon that righteounesse of faith, which
is the righteousness which God gives us in Christ, apprehended by faith only.

The Apostle S. Peter which fell most dangerously, 1. Pet. 18.19.
comforted himself with this righteousness, and all men that will believe his
doctrine, affirming yt we cannot be saved with silver or gold, but with the
precious blood of Jesus Christ, as of a Lamb undefiled:

Here then we see what is required of all that shall be saved by Christ: which
things, if we do believe with a lively faith, planted and grounded upon the
sure promises of Gods mercy offered unto us in Christ, and not doubting
thereof, but with all diligence keep and perform the premises aforesaid, then
we shall be assured to enter in at the straight gate, and narrow way leading
unto eternal life. Salvation is he gift of God, which he freely bestows upon
all that seek him aright. John. 17.3
This is eternal life to know the Father, and him whom he has sent, Jesus
Christ. We must seek God aright. But some perhaps will say, how shall we
seek him aright? I answer, Dilige Deum and mandata eius obserua: Ioh. 14 15
Love God and keep his commandments. Heerby shall all men know that you seek
him as you ought. S. Augustine speaking of this matter, says, Da amantem et
sentit quid dico si autem frigido loquor, nescit quid loquar. Give me a man
that is in love with God, and he sees this to be true which I say, but if I
talk to a cold Christian, he understands not what I say.

And this is the cause why Christ, talking of the keeping his commandments,
repeateth so often this word love, as the surest cause of keeping the same: for
want whereof in the world, the world keeps them not, as there he shows. If
you love me keep my commandments. Ioh. 14. Romans 13.15.
Again, He that has my commandments and keeps them, he is he that loves
me. And again, He which loves me will keep my commandments. See what S.
Austen exhorts us unto, Ama amorem illius, Love this his love: His deserves and
requires love. O love the Lord says the Prophet David all his saints. psa. 32
25 psalm. 57. Io
If no love, no saints: and yet no true love unless fath. Ye that love the
Lord see that you hate evil and do good, seek the Lord and ye shall live
for evermore.

Can God bestow better things upon his children then eternal life? who is the
efficient cause of salvation by the working of the holy Ghost in the hearts of
his children, through faith in Christ Jesus. For faith is the testimony of Gods
spirit: which spirrit does not only speak within us, Romans 8.16
but also persuades us of the good grace of God toward us by arguments drawn
from our free redemption in Christ.

Lastly, the same spirit mortifieth sin in us, and quickens our mortal
bodies, to bring forth most sweet and pleasant fruits unto God. Romans 8.11. Gal.
5.22.


This breeds that inward solace joy and peace which the mind and conscience
has with God, because it is freed from the bondage of sin the curse of the
law, etc. and restores to grace again.

This joy and solace of a good conscience, the Apostle calls it the kingdom
of God. To. 14.17. And an especial fruit of the holy Ghost* Gal, 5, 22. And a
sure consequent of our justification by faith. pro. 25.15
To. 5.1. and the child of God in all his troubles comfort himself therewith
as with a feast. David longed for this joy, as appeaeth in his earnest prayer
for it, where he cries, saying, ps. 51.12.
Restore to me the joy of thy salvation, and stablish me with thy free spirit.
Many which seek to enter in at the straight gate shall not be able. Wherefore
thou secure worldling, thy conscience tells thee that thou have not yet
sought the Lord aright: thou have not yet repented, and thou art not yet a
lively member of Jesus Christ. And further thou know that, howsoever thou
art alive at this time, yet thou have no lease of thy life. God may call thee
forth of the world the next year, the next hour: yea he may strike thee with
a sudden death at this very present And in very truth if thou go forth of
this world being no repentant sinner, thou go damned to hell. Therefore delay
not one minut of an hour longer, but with all speed repent and turn unto God,
and bring forth fruits worthy amendment of life, Mat. 3.8.
that all thy sins may be done away, when the day of death or the day of
judgment shall be. And do not think with thy self it shall be sufficient to
defer thy turning unto God till the last day, for late repentance is seldom
true repentance. And he which continues long in any sin, is in a dangerous
case. If a man lie long sick in any disease, he will scarce recover his former
health: and he which is grown in the custom of any sin, and the sin is become
ripe in him, it is a thousand to one he is never saved, according to that of S.
James, Iam^ 1.15^
Sin being perfitted brings forth death.

Let us therefore without any delay repent and turn unto God: Tit. 2.10.
for if we live in this world not being true Christians, we are far more vile
then the basest Creatures of all even the dog or toad. For first we are nothing
else but a filthy dunghill of all abomination and uncleanness, Romans 8.10
the stink whereof has infected heaven and earth, and no perfumes could ever
delay it in the nostrils of God: but only the suffering of Christ being a
sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God: Ephe. 5.2.
we make it very dainty to come near a lazer man full of botches, blaines and
sores: but much more are these me^ to be abhorred, which have lien many years
stark dead in sins and trespasses: and therefore now do nothing else but rot and
stink in them like ugly loathsome carrions. Ephesians. 2.3.


Again if we live as secure worldlings and carnal Ghospellers, and not as
true Christians, we are in danger of all the judgments of God, so that every
moment some of the^ may befall vs^ We may perish suddenly by water, with the
old world, we may be consumed with fire and brimstone with Sodom and Gomorrah:
we may be swallowed up of the earth with Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, we may hang
our selves with Judas, we may have our brains dashed out against the ground
and be eaten up of dogs with Iesabel, we may die in hardness of heart with
Pharaoh, we may despair with Caine and Judas, we may be stricken with sudden
death with Annanias and Saphira his wife: we may be eaten of worms with Herod:
we may be smitten that we cannot hear Gods word with Foelix: we may void our
guts at the stool with Arrius: we may cry at our death yt we are damned with
Latomus: we may be left unto our selves to mock, blaspheme, and renownce
Christ with Julian the Apostata, Deuteronomy. 34.
and we may suffer many more fearful judgments whereof the Lord has great
store, and tend to the confounding of them yt will not be humbled under his
hand. Esaias 4.
Contrariwise the true Christian is so far out of the reach of Gods judgments,
that they cannot hurt him. Christ is a covering and a cloud unto thee against
the heat and tempest of Gods judgment, when a man's heart is sprinkled with
the blood of this immaculate lamb, E^. 12.22.
all the plagues of God pass over him. In the destruction of Jerusalem the
righteous bear a mark in their forehead and are saved. Therefore let him that
regards his own safety become a Christian. Zach. 9.4.


Now because you see that there be many strong bars and stops out of heaven,
and a very wide passage into hell: the best counsel therefore I can give you, if
it were for my life, is to be much exercised in the word of God, both in the
hearing reading and meditation thereof: and also to purchase unto your selves
the sincere ministry of the Gospel, and to make conscience to live under it,
esteeming your selves happy if you have it, though you want all other things:
and unhappy if you have it not, though you have all other things. For it is a
peerless pearl, and an incomparable Jewel: Mat. 13.44*
for the purchasing whereof we are advised by our Lord Jesus to sell all that
we have rather then to go without it. Again our Savior Christ gives the
same counsel to the Church of Laodicea in these words. I counsel thee to buy
of me gold tried by the fire, Apo. 3.18
that thou may be rich, and white raiment that thou may be clothed, and
that thy filthy nakedness do not appear: and anoint thine eyes with
eye-salue, that thou may see: where you see the word of God is compared to
most precious gold, whereby we are made spiritually rich: and to glittering
attire, wherewith our naked souls are clothed, and to an eye-salue, wherewith
our spiritual blindness is cured. We are advertised also by Jesus Christ,
whose counsel is ever the best, that we should buy these things whatsoever
they cost us. The same counsel also gives wise Solomon, pro. 23.23.
saying buy the truth but sell it not. So the^ we see the counsel which
herein I give thee is not mine own, but the counsel of Jesus Christ
himself, and Solomon the wise. Ego fidenter dico I speak boldly: and who can
or who dare speak against their counsel.

Now as I have advised you to be much exercised in the hearing, reading and
meditation of the word of God, which is indeed good, profitable and necessary:
yet you must of necessity frequent preaching of the word, the sound preaching
of the Gospel: which is the cheifest and most principal means which God has
ordained and sanctified and for the saving of men's souls: as it is plainly set
down. When the world (by wisdom) knew not God, 1. Cor. 1.21.
in the wisdom of God, it pleased God by the foolishnes of preaching to save
them that believe. For the word preached is the ordinary means to work faith,
which indeed is confirmed by hearinng, reading, meditation in the word, prayer,
etc. As it is written. To. 10.14.
How shall they call on him, on whom they have not believed? and how shall they
believe in him whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a
Preacher.

For that Niniuie repented at the preaching of Jonas. 2 Samuel 12
It was therefore the word of the Lord preached by the ministry of Nathan, that
was the isntrumental cause of King David's hearty repentance, as Samuel
recorded it, and he confesses it in the 51. Psalm.

Here then you see, that the chiefest and most principal means which God
has ordained and sanctified for the saving of souls, is the word of God
preached* and faith is thereby increased and wrought in the hearts of the
hearers: As Saint Paul says: Romans 10.14.
Faith is wrought by the word of God preached.

Faith does not only hear the word, receive the word, understand the word,
rejoice in the word for thus far many hipocrites have gone in the profession of
faith, as appears by the seed sown in the stony grownd, he hears the
word, Ma. 13.20 21.
and incontinently with joy receives it, yet has he no root in himself, and
dureth but for a season, for as soon as tribulation or persecution comes,
because of the word by and by he is offended. But faith also opens the most
secret part of the heart, and therein hides the word of God as a most precious
Jewel, in a treasure house, for the good uses which God has appointed. And of
this keeping of the word in the secret of the heart these places do testify.

Pro 4.20. My son hearken unto my words, incline thine ear unto my sayings:
let them not depart from thine eyes, but keep them in the midst of thine heart.

Psalm. 119.11. I have hid thy promises in mine heart that I might not sin
against thee.

Psalm. 51. Behold thou love truth in the inward affections, therefore have
thou taught me wisdom in the secret of my heart.

Luke 2.19. But Mary kept all these sayings and pondered them in her heart.
Again, verse 51. His mother kept all these sayings in her heart.

For if the word of God be not well wrapped in the heart* it shall be soon
uncovered, discryed and devoured of some adversary, Ma. 13.22
or some evil weed will grow therewithal and choke it as appears in the
evil hearers who are compared to the seed which was sowed among thorns: Ier.
20.9.10.
He hears the word, but the care of this world, and the deceiptfulnes of
riches choke the word, and he is made unfruitful.

But the immortal and everlasting seed, which was sowed in the good grownd, was
so deeply rooted in the heart of S. Jeremy, yt he cried out against such
evil hearers, saying, His word was in my heart as a burning fire shut up in my
bones: and I was weary with forbearing, and I could not stay, for I had heard
the railing of many, and fear on every side. and Cap. 23.9. Mine heart
breaks within me because of the Prophets, all my bones shake. I am like a
drunken man and like a man whom wine has overcome; for the presence of the
Lord, and for his holy words. ver 29. psalm 19.7.
Is not my word like fire (says the Lord) and like a hammer that breaks the
heard stone?

Now dearly beloved, this doctrine which I teach you is not mine own, it is
the doctrine of Jesus Christ, which conuerteth the soul: which teaches the
word of God truly, and guides the hearts of every true Christian, the plain
man's pathway in at the strait gate, leading to everlasting salvation.

A wake thou therefore that sleep in the bed of sin, and make thy flinty
heart to bleed and shed rivers of tears betimes in beewailng of thy sins:
and be heartily sorry for them, and stand up from the dead and Christ shall give
thee light: open thine heart without any further delay to receive Christ, and
then he will come and bind the strong man satan, and cast him out, and dwell
in thee himself. Then the gates of hell shall never prevail against thee; then
shall thou enter with Christ in at the straight gate and narrow way, which
leads unto eternal life, and there dwell with him for ever.

Open therefore unto us O Lord, the gates of righteousness that we may go into
them and praise thy holy name. psalm. 118.19.20.
This is the gate of the Lord, the righteous shall enter into it and praise him
for evermore.

The God of peace, which brought again from the dead, the Lord Jesus, the great
Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make us
perfect in all good works, cut of all lets and hindrances both within us, and
without us: sanctify us throughout, amend all our imperfections, and keep us
blameless until the day of his most glorious appearing, that we may enter
with him into his heavenly kingdom: to whom with the Father and holy Spirit,
one God in Trinity, and trinity in unity, be all blessing and glory world with
out end. Soli Deo gloria.


