TWO SERMONS. UPON THE ACT SUNDAY, BEING the 10th of July. 1625. Delivered at
St MARY'S in Oxford.

PSALM. 133. 1. Behold how good, and how pleasant it is, for brethren to dwell
together in unity.

OXFORD, Printed by I. L. and W. T. for WILLIAM TVRNER. Anno Dom. 1625.

DAVID'S ENLARGEMENT. THE MORNING SERMON ON THE ACT SUNDAY.

Preached by HENRY KING, Inceptor in Divinity, one of his MAJESTY'S Chaplains
in Ordinary.

PSALM. 18. 36. Thou have enlarged my steps under me, that my feet did not slip.

DAVID'S ENLARGEMENT.
PSALM. 32. VERSE. 5. I said I will confess my sins [or transgressions] unto
the Lord. And thou forgauest the iniquity of my sin.
THis Text has two general parts. The first records David's Repentance. The
second, Gods mercy to him.

The former part contains these several circumstances: 1 A resolution, I
said. 2 The Act resolved upon, Confession. I will confess. 3 The Subject, of
that confession; Sins, or transgressions. 4 Their plurality, or the Extent
of his confession; not sin, but sins. A term implying both their
generality and number. For although the Septuagint read (...), the Hebrew is,
sins. 5 Their propriety, which he assumes to himself; Mea, my sins. 6 He
specifies the Confessor, unto the Lord.

In the latter part, I only observe two circumstances. 1 the Readiness, and
Propension, and speed of Gods mercy. He says he will confess, etc. and
presently, Tu remisisti, Thou forgauest. 2 his Bounty set down in such terms,
as may convey unto him the most liberal pardon: Iniquitatem peccati, the very
formality of the Sin: not my sin, but the Iniquity of my sin too; both the
Act, and the Obliquity; both the Guilt of the sin, and the Punishment due
unto it.

I said.
and howsoever the Act only crowns him, yet the purpose delights him. I was
glad (says David) when men said unto me, we will go into the house of the
Lord. See with what pious Alacrity he vtters his intentions to an Act of
Religion; it does him good but to speak of it. And here you may discern as
much Alacrity in his intended repentance, when he records the very
determination, that which at first was either barely designed by his thoughts,
or at most but said, I said.

Words in Gods Method are the Introduction to Deeds; His Fiat, was the Seminary
of all being; for he said only, and it was done. That man who says well, is
engaged to equal his words; else like a Bankrupt, he forfaits that good
opinion, his pretenses and speeches had won. Aug. Sermon. 5. de verb D^^.
St. Augustine says, Verba sunt folia: Words are as leaves; and in good trees,
leaves are the pledges of fruit that ensues. He that only speaks, and does
not, is not a fruitful Christian; rather he is like a Sycomor, whose issue is
nothing but a lease. This is not enough. Ibid.
Fructus quaeritur (says the same Father) God expects from us what David here
exhibites; fruit, not leaf, or not leaf without fruit. He says devoutly, and
from those seeds, a repentance to a new life springs: I said, I will confess,
etc.

Istud di^ere nihil aliud est, Marlorat.
quam secum deliberare; It is a Deliberation, L^rin^^.
or it signifies as much as Decernere, Constituere, to purpose, or to resolve.
Resolutions are the Moulds wherein Actions are cast; and no man can define a
Deed better, then to call it the effect of what our purpose had contrived. And
every purpose is a silent Dialogue, betwixt the Soul and her Faculties, by
whose consent, that which we resolve, is established. For man is a Theater,
wherein are many subtle spectators, waiting upon every action; He is a short
Model of a Commonwealth. Each Sense is an Agent, each Faculty an Officer; He
has his Common Pleas in his Common sense; his Chancery in the Conscience; he
has his Proiectors, and those as busy, as the State has any; Thought and
Fantasy, and the quick Imagination. The Memory is his Recorder; and lastly,
the Tongue is the Speaker in this Assembly, who reports those Acts which which
are designed: I said.

But our Intents do not always come to publication, nay they do not always
need it; and then the office of the tongue is not required. A resolution may
sometimes speak without the Organs of utterance; Ambros. offic. lib. 1: cap. 3.
it may be intelligible, it may be audible, and yet not vocal: As Saint
Ambrose speaks of Susanna, Conscientia loquebatur vbi vox non audiebatur. In
religious purposes that determine in God; and in which there is no parties
interested but God, and the soul; there is no necessity to use words. Words
are but the Interpreters of our minds one to another, but as Midwiues that
deliver our thoughts; and howeuer betwixt Man and Man this verbal traffic be
necessary: yet betwixt us and God that sees our thoughts before the tongue has
formed them into syllables, or set the stamp of language upon them, it is not
so. He reads us in the power of speech, and not only in the Organs which
actuate that power: He is the (...), so well acquainted with the heart, that
he dictates to it, as it does to the tongue. And therefore he that understand
our words whilst they are in Principijs, in their concepon and parentage;
whilst they are yet Intra causas, lodged and couched within their causes, (as
Saint Augustine expresses it; Vox mea nondom in ore erat, and auris Dei iam in
Cord erat. He, I say, that knows our thoughts, not only before we utter them
in words, but before we our selves know what we shall next think, cannot need
a Dixi (I said) to inform him of our purposes: since his intelligence precedes
our thoughts, he cannot but take his information from them, better then from
our words; and so the sense of the Text will hold as well in a Cogitavi (as one
Translation of ours reads it) I thought I will confess, as in a Dixi, I said.
For in Gods apprehension they are all one, and no way distinguished, save in a
little Priority of time; for thoughts are words elder Brothers: and the Dialect
they speak, is our Mother tongue, the original language of Mankind which
never yet suffered confusion. When the tongues were dispersed at Babel, the
thoughts were not; and howsoever each Nation be distinguished in his peculiar
speech, we all think alike; even as anger and laughter have the same ways of
expression in all parts of the world. So that this Dixi was not so much the
language of David's Tongue, as of his Heart; Aug. in Psalm. 32.
Cord pronunciare erat, He spoke unto God in his Thoughts, which are the most
constant, most unalterable dialect, and therefore most proper to express the
certainty of that Act, which follows upon this Resolution in the next part,
His confession, I said I will confess, etc.

2 Sin is the weightiest of all sorrows, the I will confess.
The thing that presses down. Heb. 12. 1.
It Is the heauiest calamity man can suffer under: Psalm. 33.
Iniquitates meae grauatae sunt super me, cries the Psalmist. Mine iniquities
ouer-burden me; Our blessed Savior was so sensible of this weight, that in his
fearful conflict in the garden he professed. His soul was heavy unto death.
They were our sins, which so deprest his invincible patience, that he sweats,
and that unnaturally, in the bearing of them. And in his complaint, where he
puts the sorrows of the whole world in balance against his own, Lament. 1.
12.
See all ye that pass by, if ever sorrow were like my sorrow; the reason of
that Non sicut, which turned the balance on his side, was, because the sin
of Mankind lay in his scale, which like a Mine of Lead (or as Zachary styles
it, Zach. 5. 7.
Talentum plumbi) out-weighed all the rest. Now as sometimes a sad story
lightens the heart of him that told it, and sorrows find ease by the
relation; so do sins.

Est aliquid, fatale malum per verba levare. He that has opportunity to unfold
his grief, has made the first approach to comfort; and he that has the Grace
to acknowledge his fault, is in a ready way to pardon: There is no affliction
so great as his, that wants a tongue to utter it; and there is no sin of such
a desperate malignity, as the silent sin; when the Offender is dumb and
speechless. A misery lodged in the heart, is like an Exhalation enclosed
within the Earth, which shakes the foundation of Reason, and Patience; or like
a dampe, it ouerlayes the Spirits, Strangulat inclusus dolor: but when it has
found an issue by the Eye, to weep out at, or a vent by the tongue, straight
it grows tamer. When once a window is opened to give it Air, that fume which
would have stifled us, breathes out, and cleares the room. Such a Meteore,
such a boisterous Exhalation is sin. What strange convulsions does it cause
within the soul? How does it contract our hopes of Mercy; and like an
East-winde dry up, and wither our comforts? what storms, what guilty
conflicts, what black clouds of despair does it raise in the Conscience? but
so soon as a sinner recollects himself, is brought to a remorse, how calmely
is the storm allayed, by a religious contrition? how sweetly does this cloud
discharge it self, when it relents into a shower of penitent tears? For it is
the most natural way for sin to evaporate by the eye, (as Elias Cretensis
says) Ex peccati fumo ortae sunt la chrymae: Lastly, how gently does this
dangerous vapor breathe out by a devout confession? I said I will confess.

Our Laws so far prejudicate silence in a malefactor, that waves the
ordinary and open way of trial, that they account him a Fellon against
himself, a conspiratour against his own life, and guilty of his own blood;
holding him worthy of no death, but such an one, as like a monument of shame,
serves to object his silent contumacy. As if it meant to crush out, and by
weighty expressions force the confession of that fact, from the dead body;
which no per^wasion could win from the conscience, whilst the party yet lived.

David himself professes, that whilst the remained speechless, he found a
great abatement in his comforts, a general consumption, wasting both his body
and mind too; when I held my tongue, my bones consumed. verse. 3.
Quoniam non protuli ore confessionem ad salutem, omnis ^^rmit as mea, Aug. in
Psalm. 32. 3.
in infirmitate consenuit (so Saint Augustine paraphrases him.) Thus you see
his silence corrodes and inacerates him even to the bone; but so soon as he
opens his mouth, and disguises not his sin, straight he finds a spacious
enlargement, in the forgiveness of all his sins.

One says righly, that sin is (...), the disease of the soul; an
Epedemicall sickness whereof the whole world labors. Ambrosius.
Magnus per totum mundun iacebat aegrotus. There is nothing so pernicious to
this Malady (says another Father) as silence, (...), Silence soments and
cherishes the infirmity. Therefore by the rules of cure, Origin.
nothing can be more medicinable then Confession. Which (in Origens phrase) is
vomitus sordium, a clearing the Conscience of those vicious obstructions, which
nourish the souls diseases: distempering the Complexion of our Faith, so as we
grow cold in Religion; and either want appetite, to serve God; or capacity to
learn his Law; or heat of zeal, to concoct what we have learned; or palate
to taste the comforts, which we should find in applying Gods mercy unto us.

So that there is not such a speedy redress of Sin, as a penitent
confession. Yet not such a Confession as the Church of Rome would submit us to:
which is (to use Cassanders words) Conscientiae Carnificina, Cassand. Consult.
art. 11.
quam nemo moderatus approbat; a racking or torturing the Conscience, which no
wise man would endure, no reasonable man approve. Indeed those on that side,
have made this, which Christ intended the happy instrument of our peace with
God, as the Master-key to open into all the secrets of Christendom: as a
Picklock to possess them of those mysteries of State, whose knowledge has
troubled, nay endangered all parts of the World, where the Romish colors have
bin advanced. A tyrannical way of knowledge, to make the Practitioners feared,
and hated at once. It Is justly theirs.

-- Iuvenal.
Scire volunt secreta domus, atque inde timeri. A curious Engine, wherewith
they wring out any small design, that may make against them, under pain of
Damnation, if it be not declared: but take a liberty to seal up in secrecy
any Deed, though never so horrid (be it Murder or Treason) so advantageous to
their cause. And this, though the Confessor knows, being put to his Oathe, he
may lawfully swear he does not; since he knows it only as a secret, but not
to reveal, Intelligitur se nescire ad revelandum, aut taliter quod possit
dicere. They are the very words of Sed quid faciet Confess^r cum interrogatur
de pe^cato, quod au dierit in confessione, an possit dicere se nescire?
Respond. Se^cundum omnes quod sic. Sed quid si cogat^r iurare? Dico quod potest
and debet i^rare se ^^scire, quia intelligitur s^ nesciro extra confessionem,
and sic (...). Sed fac quod iudex vel prealatus ex ^^alitia exigat a me (...),
an sciam in confessione? Respond, quod coactus inret se nescire in confessione,
quia intelligitur se ^escire ad rev^l^ndum aut taliter quod ^ossit dicere.
(...): saeramen: Artic: 184 Page 96. b.
Franciscus a Victoria, I do not here derogate from the use of Confession; for
by the Churches appointment, we practice a form of public Confession in our
Liturgy. Nay in this place we find a Private Confession, made by David unto
the Lord, which is no less necessary for us then him. It Is against that
Auricular Confession of Rome I here speak, which so clogges our Christian
Liberty, that it lays a necessity upon us, to confess unto the Priest, or
else denies us our salvation. And besides the necessity laid upon us, it ties
us ^o an impossibility; exacting the particular enumeratio^ of all the Sins
and several sorts of Offenses whereof we are guilty. A task which the Prophet
David utterly declines, appealing from this unjust imposition, in the words of
the Psalm, Who knows how often he offends? Psalm. 19. 12.
Lord cleanse me from my secret sins.

Let the otherside then for the countenance of their way of Confession, urge
that Embassy addressed to Charles the Fifth, from the Governors of Norimberg,
touching the reviving and re-establishing of Auricular Confession amongst them:
upon a pretense, that since that custom was left off, their Commonwealth
swarmed with sin much more then formerly. Which proposition of theirs the
Emperor in effect did but scoff at, and deride, (even by the Confession of
Lorinus the Jesuit, Lorinus com. in Psalm. 32.
who reports it,) Intimating unto them, that they would never have sought so
much at his hands, but that, it seemed, they wanted a sufficient engine to
examine Malefactors: supposing that the Ecclesiastical Rack, when the Priest
should undertake them in an Auricular Confession, would make them discover
more, the^ the politic Rack, or all the tortures, the public Executioner
could give them.

Let them object to us, as Eugenius the Fourth, in the Council at Florence,
did to the Greeks: ur vestri sacerdotes and Pontifices non confitentur? Why
do not your Priests exact this Confession? As we refuse not private Confession
made to God, nay sometimes, a private Confession to our ghostly Father, the
Minister: who has authority to divest us of any scruples, which may arise in
our Consciences, and to pronounce an Absolution upon our hearty Repentance: Yet
we will not loose, or betray our Freedom so much, as to do that Act by
Constraint, which ought to be as free and voluntary, as David's resolution in
this place. I said, I will confess. We have no reason to stand to the
courtesy of Rome for that Pardon, which Christ has freely given us; nor yet
to suffer her Mercha^ts to erect a new Staple, or put an Impost upon our
salvation, which is exempt from all Custom, from any acknowledgment, save
only to Christ, whose work it was. We have no cause but to be very well
assured, that we may be saved without Auricular Coufession; since in that
sacred Book, which, we believe, contains all that may conduce to our
salvation, we find no tracke or mention of it.

Bonaventure grants, Ad sentent. lib. 4. quest. 17. distinct. 3.
that howeuer the Formal part of Confession, (i.) the power of Absolution,
were instituted by Christ; yet the Material part, which is the Detection of
the sin, and the necessity of disclosing it, was not so. For at the most, it
was only insinuated by Christ, Ia. 5. 16.
but promulgated by St James. Confess your sins one to another. In which
place, (as Bullinger well inferres) they that understand aright, Bullinger
Dec^d. 4. ser. 2. de ^^^^tent.
will find a reciprocal obligation laid upon the Priest, to confess to the
People, as well as the People to the Priest. And for any better Evidence then
this, to confirm their opinion, out of the Gospel, I am confident they have
none. We find when our Savior cleansed the Leper, he bad him go and show
himself to the Priest, and offer the gift which Moses commanded: Mat. 8. 4.
but he bad him not confess to the Priest. And to the adulterous woman, he
gives a Vade. Go, but not to any Confessor: Nay, we find no Confession taken
from her by himself: the whole Condition of her Absolution in that place is,
Vade, and noli amplius peccare. Go, and sin no more. But Eckius and others
answer, that the power of Absolution was not as yet assigned over by Christ;
unto his Church; and therefore our Savior neither practiced it himself, nor
sent them unto any Priest: which had it been, it is likely he would have done.
Well then, grant him as much as he alleges, that the Commission to Absolve,
was not as yet given to the Apostles; and it shall appear, that in those very
words, wherein Christ conveyes this Authority to them, Auricular Confession
receives it is deaths wound.

In the Gospel of St. John, John 20. 21.
when he tells them, As my Father sent me, so send I you. He there gives them
authority to remit, or to retain sins, but not to exact any Auricular
Confession; He does not there erect any Tribunal for the Priests; where they
should sit as Judges over men's Consciences, to acquit or condemn at their
pleasure. This is not the meaning of, to Remit and to Retain. They do not
import a Judiciary power (as the Church of Rome vnwarrantably assumes,) but a
Ministerial power, to publish the mercies of God to repentant Sinners, and to
denounce his vengeance against the obstinate and impenitent. Hieron in Mat. 16.
19.
This is St. Ieromes Interpretation upon those words; Quicquid ligaveris in
terris, etc. whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, shall be bound in Heaven, and
whatsoever thou shall loose, etc. Where he says, that as the Leviticall Priest
is said to make the Leper clean, or unclean, because he pronounced him so;
even thus, the Evangelicall Priests in the Gospel, Remit or Retain sins,
because in their preachings they declare, which sins are remitted, and which
retained by God. Pro offcio suo, cum peccatorum audierit varietates, scit qui
ligandus, quique solvendus. Even thus Peter Lombard, Pet. Lombard. lib. 4.
Did. 18.
distinguishing Gods way of Binding and Loosing, from the Churches, says, that
God by himself remits sins, who cleanses the Soul from all spots, and
loses it from the Debt of eternal Damnation: but he has not granted this to
his Priests; to whom notwithstanding, he has given power of Binding and
loosing, that is, of showing men to be bound, or loosed.

Thus you may see, by how unjust a Title the Church of Rome would usurp a
Dominion over men's Consciences (as she pretends a Sovereignty over the world;)
aiming at Supremacy in all: Either wilfully, or ignorantly, mistaking our
Saviors Commission for Binding and Loosing* Loco citato.
(as Hierome complains,) Istum locum Episcopi and Presbyteri non
intelligentes, aliquid si^i de Pharisaeoorum assumunt supercilio, etc.

Let me but mention to you likewise, upon what slight pretenses, they ground
their necessity of Auricular Confession: cosening the ignorant people; with
that smooth and plausible imposture, wherein they say the Priest cannot remit
sins, unless he know them; and he cannot know them, unless men w^ll
confess them unto him. Then which Proposition, nothing can be more false. For
the Priest may Preach and Publish Remission, or Retention of sins to those,
whose faults he knows not: And those men by a faithful application of what
they hear, may receive the Remission of their sins, who never revealed them
to the Minister, but confessed them unto God alone. Sola enim cordis confessio,
Richardus a Sancto victore de Clauibus. Cap. 7.
poenitenti ad salutem animae sufficit veraciter: which way of Confession, is
truly and only necessary unto Salvation: I said I will confess my sins
unto the Lord.

But I urge this point no farther: Cassanders temperate conclusion shall bring
me off; I am of opinion (says he) There had been no Controversy about this
point of Confession, had not some ignorant and importunate Physicians corrupted
this wholesome Medicine, Cassand. Consult: Act. 11:
with their drugges of Tradition. Est enim multis invtilibus traditiunculis
infecta etc. quibus, conscientijs quas extricare and levare debebant, laqueos
iniecerunt, and tanquam tormentis quibusdam excarnificarunt. By which means
they have made it only a snare to entangle and involue the simple; and an
Engine to torment, not to ease the Conscience of those that seek unto them.
We, for our parts, hold Confession necessary, though we lay no necessity upon
men to confess to the Priest; nor do we prohibit that in some cases. Nay, we
account it an happy discharge of a troubled soul, to impart it self to the
Minister of Christ, from whose lips he may receive such spiritual Comforts,
as his Office can minister, and the Scripture allows. Ever provided, that this
be left indifferent to the penitent, to do, or not to do, as he thinks good,
that it be not a constrained, but a voluntary Act; as David's here, freely
arising from his own inclination: I said I will confess.

The Greek is, (...), I will declare or confess against my self. ^spsn
So that this Act is an Accusation rather then a Confession. It Is true, that
every confession of a sin, is an Indictment of the Sinner; and yet is this
such a kind of trial, as serves to acquire, Aug. Ser. 8. de Verb. Dom:
not to condemn. In Confessione, sui accusatio, Deilaudatio est. In the course
of our Law, the Malefactors Confession is the strongest evidence, and casts him
without any other verdict: but in Gods Courts, to plead guilty, is the way to
procure an Absolution. He that at the Bar of his own Conscience, arraignes
himself in this world, 1 Cor. 11. 31.
shall never be arraigned at the Tribunal of the Great Judge, in the next. If
we would Judge our selves, we should not be judged. Dorotheus writes of a
devout man, that being ^skt which was the best course to come unto God,
replied, (...), Dor^t^^us Doctrine. 7.
ever to accuse ones self. Let me therefore use the Prophet Esayes words.
(...); Do thou first declare thine iniquities, Esaias 43. 26.
that thou may be justified. He bids thee be so early in the acknowledgement
of thy faults, Origin. Homil. 3. in Leuit.
Vt Ostendat tibi, quod praevenire illum debeas, qui paratus est ad accusandum,
(says Origin:) Id.
that thou may prevent the Devil, who is ever ready to accuse thee:
Praeventus enim Diabolus, vltra nos accusare non poterit, and si ipsi nostri
simus accusatores, proficit nobis ad salutem: In doing thus, we disarme our
old Enemy, and take away the sting of his malicious accusations, which have no
power to hurt us: since by condemning our selves, we have saved our selves. I
end in Saint Augustines words, Aug. in Psalm. 29.
Confitere quod tu fecisti in Deum, and confiteberis quid tibi fecerit Deus.
Confess what thou have done against God, and then thou shall, to thy comfort,
confess, what God has done for thee. Thou shall have cause with David,
thankefullie to commemorate Gods favor, in a Turemisisti, in the forgiveness
of thy sins. I said I will confess my sins.

loud argument: which if it want other tongues, Sins.
will relate it self. Should a man be silent, it would by guilty confessions,
betray it self. Sin is the worst secret that can be. I know no bosom where
it is safe. There is no creature, no element, no privation, night, nor silence,
Iuvenal.
but is able to pursue, and detect a sinner: -- Serui vt taceant, iument^
loquentur. Beasts have a verdict to pass upon wicked men; Ecclesiast. 10. 20.
A bird of the air shall carry the voice, Genesis 4. 10.
and tell the matter. Earth will cry Cain guilty, Ierem. 20. 27.
or if earth do not, Heaven will reveal the iniquity. Habac. 2. 10.
If both be silent, yet the very stones out of the wall (within which the sin
was acted) shall cry against him, and the beam out of the Timber (like a
double witness) shall answer it.

Do not therefore flatter thy self, in the closenes of thy transgressions:
What ever disguises night, complying with thy dark purposes, may put upon
thee; there is nothing can disguise thee from thy Maker. Can thou be so
stupefied, so besotted in thy sin, as to suppose, when other eyes behold thee
not, God does not? Think thou, by drawing a Curtain about thy Bed, or by
putting out a candle in thy Chamber, to hide thine incontinencie from God, or
darken his knowledge? Fool thou can not! Thou bear a Lamp in thine own
breast, Nil^^ Martyr. Paraenes. 199.
thy conscience; that is (...) (says Nilus) a watching Candle, that burns at
midnight: and will light the Judge to descry thee. Or if that taper burn
dimmely, if it have wasted into a snuff, so that thou have no Conscience, or
but a seared one, which lies smothering in the socket; and can only glimmer,
not shine; why yet, God is (as Basil: Basil.
says) (...), all eye, to survey thee. Or if thy transgressions have made thee
so loathed an Object, that he will not look upon thee; should he examine thy
cabinet friends, upon whose secrecy thou relyest, the silence, and the darkness
of the night; they would turn Traitors to thee, (...) de Quadrag^s.
and discover thee to him. Cui obscura ^larent, muta respondent, silentium
confitetur. Night would convert it self into a Noone, and Silence prove a
speaking evidence against thee. Since therefore thou can lurk under no
concealment, why do thou not confess that, which it is impossible for thee
to hide? Why deferrest thou to resolve with David, I will confess my sins?
If thou confess not thy sins, they will confess thee the greater sinner:
And if thou will not own them here, in a religious acknowledgment; they will
own thee hereafter, in a final Condemnation.

plural, sins or transgressions, as it implies our many alliances to sin,
Their plurality; Sins.
and the multiplicitie of our sins, Actual and Intentionall: so it
admonishes us, to confess them all. God, as he is a franck pardone^, so he
loves a liberal confession, wherein nothing should be kept back. Yet (not to
perplex any man with the strict enumeration of every crime as the Papists
require) I confess, Act. 5. 3.
the wilful keeping back of sins, may be as dangerous, as Ananias his
deteining part of the price; But for all that, thy condition is not damnable,
(as Rome persuades) though thou have forgot some sins which thou have done,
if so be thou slightest none of those which thou remembrest.

It is the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, that some sins are such
diminutiues, such Peccadill^s, so small, so venial, they are not worth a
mention, nor do they need a pardon; But do not thou believe so. This
negligent extenuation of faults, is as pernicious a sin as any. A presumption
unheard of amongst the Fathers of the (...) Church: Who (if we will credit
Dorothe^^) were wont to keep a reckoning, (...).
Tanquam ephemeriden Deo tradituri: and to ask God pardon, for the very least
and slightest offenses, of which they were at any time conscious, Dorotheus
doctrine. 7.
(...). David in this Psalm, in the preceding words, frees himself of all
suspicion of concealment, Verse. 5.
or palli^tion of his faults. Mine iniquity I have not hid. Psa. 61. 9.
And Psalm the 61: he summons all in a general exhortation, to power out, and
empty their souls before God. (...), And because he would be sure not to be
vnderstoood here short of his meaning, he puts sins in the plural, which
enwraps all, greater, and lesser. For so Marlorat in his Ecclesiastical
Exposition, renders the word Praevaricationes, Praeuarications: which are not
only facts of malice, but collusions too: and may contain our intended
sins, as well as committed: For so he explicates himself; Marlorat.
David eoram Deo se sistens, sensus omnes suos effudit.

Wilt not thou confess thy riots, as well as thy Murders? the pollution of
thy thoughts, as well as of thy Actions? Christ thy Savior suffered for both;
he bled for both. Though thy great sins opened the wide River in his side,
and the curre^ts in his hands and feet: thy smallest sins scracht him in the
thorns, which he wore upon his head, or at least opened a Pore in his sacred
Body. For how know thou, Esa. 1. 18.
but that, as he bled for thy crimson sins (as Esaias calls them) through those
larger wounds: so he sweat blood for the sins of thy thoughts; that, as he
suffered for thy great offenses upon the Cross, so he suffered for thy lesser
crimes in the Garden: that, as he did undergo a public passion for the one;
so he had an antepassion for the other in his Agony: that, as for thy foulest
transgressions he became a red Sea, a true Jordan, a sanguine River the head of
which stream began at Mount Caluary; So before his Ascent thither, in a lower
place, Ioh. 18. 1.
not far from the Brook Cedron, he suffered his body to become a Marish,
when for thy sake the blood wept out at every Pore. Take heed therefore, how
thou vnderratest any sin, since in the Inuentory of thy Saviors passion,
they were all rated; He dyed for all. And do not neglect those faults, which
are the smallest in thy Catalogue. For even that sin which whispers now; and
is only peccatum susurrans, carried about in a still report, and in the common
fame, wounds and traduces thee but closely; will in a little time become
Peccatum clamans a shrill and crying sin. That which is now a Grane in
weight, may prove a Pound; and that which was but a single fault at first, by
an unblessed faecundity may multiply into Sins. For culpa culpa^ excutit, one
sin is struck out of another; like sparks they convey fire one to the
other. Do not suffer therefore the Embers of sin, any loose thoughts, or
vicious Imaginations, to lurk within thy bosom; least at length those
subterraneous fires break out like Aet^^, and burn thee in their hot Flames.

Minutae guttae pluuiae, Aug. citat. a Biel Lest. 72. de Missa.
nonne flumina implent and domos deijciunt? Thou see the rain which causes
the land flood, at first only distills in small drops, take heed then how thou
let any vice drop in upon thy senses. If a temptation insinuate into thine
ears, or only beat in at the casements of thy eyes; those little flawes, those
cranies, if not stopped betimes, will make way for the ruin of the whole
Fabr^ke. Bibli^th. Parum Gra Lat. To. 1.
Marcus Eremita excellently says, that Sin is (...), like a subtle net,
consisting of many foulds: which if not warily avoided, will entangle the whole
body. Whenever therefore that Fowler, whose task has bin to ensnare souls,
offers his Net at thee, seeks to fasten a small sin upon thee; quit thy
self betimes, by a Repentance, and in a true confession discharge thy self of
all thou know; even to thy smallest trespass. Remembering that wise saying
in Ecclesiasticus; Ecclesiastic. 19. 1.
Qui spernit modica, paulatim decidet; he that contemnes small faults shall
fall insensibly. And to make this confession of thine more perfect, as thou
acknowledgest the Offense, so acknowledge the Offender. Senee.
Qui rem non tacuerit, non tacebit authorem. If thou confess the Fact, and yet
deny the Author; say thou have sinned, but blame some others, as an Occasion or
Accessory to thy sin; thou do not then accuse thy self, but endite
another; thou do not make a just confession, but by a Recrimination seek to
excuse thy self. David here makes no such (...) or faint confession; He does
not say only what was done, but who did it: co^fesses a Propri^ty, My sins.
and makes title to those sins, My sins.

We are all naturally prone to transfer our sins upon others. Adam cries, The
woman which thou gave me. And Gabriel Biel mentions some, that used to blame
the Planets which reigned at their Natiuities, Genesis 3. 12. Lect. 72. de Missa.
for the sins unto which they were inclined. If they had ill dispositions,
Satarne was in fault; if they were Thieves, Mercury made them so; if
incontinent, and amorous Venus was to be blamed, not they. A folly worthy of no
refutation, but laughter, did I not see it possessed some in that high nature;
that they do not only accuse the Influences of Heaven, but pronounce God
himself, who gave motion to those stars, as the Author of their sin. Most
strange and fearful illusion! that any should imagine God a Plotter for
Damnation; that he should combine with the Devil to s^pplant souls; that he
should make a Prison, and then make Offenders for that prison; that he should
build a Hell, and cause men to sin, that they might be condemned unto that
place of Torment* O far be the thought of this from our hearts! Let God be
glorified and all men reputed blasphemous Liars, that speak or imagine thus:
Let us say with the Psalmist: I have sinned, and I alone; Psalm. 51. 4.
and in these words acknowledge, I will confess against myself, those sins
which I have committed against thee; resting upon that excellent conclusion of
Fulgentius; Non potest esse illius Author, Fulg^^^.
cujas est (...). It is impossible that God should be an Agent in sin, whose
office is to avenge sin, and to punish the sinner. For if thou say, or think
otherwise, thou will prove a devil to thy God; slander and accuse him to his
face of sin, who is the Confessor to receive the acknowledgement of thy
sin, The Lord. I said I will confess my sins unto the Lord.

We take a liberty to tell God those things which for Multi quod scire homine^
nolunt, Unto the Lord.
De^ mirrant (says Seneca.) He spoke in the worst sense; it is true in the
best. We need not be ashamed to discover our selves, our Actions, our Thoughts,
to God; who, as he delights not in the death of a sinner, so neither glories he
in the shame of a sinner. When we shrift our selves to men, we adventure our
credits upon their secrecy; and confess to our own disadvantage, since it is
in their power to betray us.

If the Conclaue of Cardinals would have suffered S. Chrysostomes Cauear to
have bin entered amongst them, they never would in the Laterane Council have
decreed a necessity of Auricular Confession: Council. Trident. Sess. 4. ^^n. 5.
nor in the Trent Council have established that former Decree. Take heed how
thou tellest thy defects to a man, (says Chrysostom) least he cast thee in the
teeth with them: Homil. 4. de Lazaro.
and in the very next words he ^^atly prohibits the necessity of such private
confession; leaving (...) upon the scope of this text.

Thou art not to confess to thy fellow servant, least he may divulge it,
Chrysost^m. ib.
but to him that is thy Lord, that cares for thy soul; to him, that is most
mild and courteous; to him, that is thy Physician. I said, I will confess my
sins unto the Lord.

But does God need an informer? Did he not know Dauid's sin before his
confession? or cannot he know mine, unless I tell him? Yes surely, he knew
them before: But he knew them as my Judge, not as my Confessor: He knew them,
but not that way which most delights him, and is best for me, in a
repentance: In a word he knew them before, but he knew them to my Condemnation:
He knew them not to my Comfort, so as to forgive them; till he received them
from mine own mouth; 2 Part.
I said, I will confess my sins, and thou forgauest. Thou forgauest.


Like the tidings of release unto a Captive, or a repriue unto a condemned man:
so is the sound of this word Tu remisisti, thou forgauest. It is the savor of
life unto life; a reviving or recovery from the death of the soul, Sin; and
an earnest of a new-life, both in the Body and the Soul, in the new Jerusalem.
It Is the voice of the Turtle, the true language of the Gospel derived from his
lips, that left the blessing of his peace upon all, that love the Peace of
his Church; that legend of mercy, which Christ commanded his Apostles to
divulge in all parts of the world, for the remission of sins. This was the
end of Christ's coming into the world, to save sinners, his own peculiar
work, who alone as he has the property to have mercy, so has he the sole
power to forgive, Mar^. 2. 7.
Quis potest peeca^ae dimittere nisi solus Deus?

That the Church has a power to remit sins also is true in a subordinate
sense, that is a Ministerial, a Declaratory power, as our Liturgy fully
expresses it; and has given power and commandment to his Ministers, to
Declare and Pronounce to his people being penitent, the Absolution and
remission of their sins, etc. But he has given them no Judiciary or
Authoritatiue power, to pardon absolutely of themselves. This is Gods
prerogative, he alone does that act; the Church but reports it: he signs the
deed; the Church as a witness testifies it: he has the original power to
absolve, the Church has power, not to dispense, but to pronounce his
absolution; he grantes and seals the pardon; the Church conveyes and publishes
it: he has the possession, the true inheritance as of the Throne, so of the
keys of David; the Church has but the use, and custody of those keys: by
which she opens and shuts, yet not at her own pleasure, as if she could hang
new locks where she listed, or make new doors for sinners to go out at, but
with a limitation: She must not presume to go farther, then those Keys lead
her: So many rooms as Christ has opened by those keys, she may open, or she
may shut. The Ministers who are his Dorekeepers should take too much upon them,
if they should presume beyond this. Mistake me not, I do not in any sense of
diminution call the Ministers Dorekeepers, as if I would infer their office
determined at the Church-doore: No, their keys open farther then so; and by
virtue of them they may go as high, as Gods Presence Chamber, the Church
there; to receive* and to deliver his messages to his people; to signify his
pleasure to them, either for the Remission, or Reteining of their sins* but
beyond this their keys will not lead them. They cannot open Gods Privy
Chamber, where all his secret Counsell^* ^his Acts of mercy or of judgment, of
Pardon or Condemnation are concluded; this is accessible to none, but God
himself. They are not able with any key in their bunche, to open that door.
And if by violence they shall attempt to break it open* as the Successors of
Peter have done for many years, sitting there as Counselors (...) in
Commission with God, nay sitting (...) God^ ^aith* St. Paul* 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
to condemn or to absolve (...) him; let them know, in this they have
committed a Riot, not less then Lucifers; and their aspiring insolence mu^t
expect a Praecipitation as violent and deep as his.

I have almost lost my self in this Labyrinth of P^p^ll usurpation; I retrait
to my te^t in S. Ambrose his words* who has briefly stated and limited the
Power of Priests Absolution. In the forgiveness of sins (says he) men use
their Ministry; but exercise no right of any Authority: men ask* an men
pronounce; but the Deity graunts, Tu remisisti, Thou forgauest.

Which speech does not only intimate his Power, but his readiness to forgive*
See in what a forward term David expresses Gods alacri^^ and propension to
mercy, setting it down in the Pr^terperfect tense, (...) thou have forgiven;
as a thing past in grant, before the suit was commenced Seneca spoke it of the
Court, (...) praecip^^s, beneficia lenta sunt. They were prone and speedy to
do injuries, but their benefit^ came slowly from them, and with difficulty:
'^is otherwise with God, he is of no (...) Power, nor does he for slow his
fauc^^s (...) price upon them by delay* 2 Pet. 3. 9.
God is not slow or (...) concerning his promise, says S. Peter: Or if he be
slow, Psalm. 86. 15.
he is slow to nothing but to wrath only. In that Act, which was the swif^est
exclusion of his vengeance, the Flood, howsoever the^ that sudden Inundation
surprised the World, came upon it unawares, whilst they were eating and
drinking; (as our Savior says) yet when it was done, Mat. 24. 38.
He is sorry. Though he repented he had made man, and from that repentance put
on a resolution to destroy him; Yet after his destruction he relents into
mercy, he is sorry he had demolished and annihilated his creature by water,
though most deservedly; and then makes a Promise and Covenant, Genesis 9. 15.
never to destroy him so again. Did he not give Abraham leave to dispute, Genesis
18.
and argue Sodom's reprieue, to plead a Pardon for it, after his sentence was
past* and the Executioner ready to give fire? Yet for all that, he heard him
cut, till ha^^ said all he could say; till he had made all his Abatements, from
Fifty even to the last Ten. And when he sat down before Niniveh, and had
beleaguered it with his Judgments; yet you see he gives them fair Quarter,
Ion. 3. 4.
Forty Days to parley, and to make their Composition with Him. Nay he allowed
Rebellious Israel Forty years; Psalm. 95. 10.
Forty years long was I grieved with this generation: so slow is he to wrath,
so loath to execute his vengeance.

And yet He is not so slow to punish, but he is by many degrees swifter to show
mercy, and to forgive: Ambros:
Nescit tarda molimi^a spiritus sancti gratia (says S. Ambrose) He that knows
all things, is ignorant only of ways to delay his Mercies; which are as
instant as his work was in the first Creation, Said and Done at once. How do
his winged blessings out-flie our suites? chiding our sluggishnes* in that no
diligence we can use is able to keep pace with him; nor our earliest
importunity speedy enough to overtake his bounty: who gives oftener then we can
ask, and more then we have capacity to apprehend. It Is not enough, that he
tarry till we come unto him, unless he prevent us by coming unto us, ere we
set out: that he suspends his blessings till we seek him, unless he first
seek and call upon us, as he did upon Eliah. 1 King. 19 9.
What do thou here Eliah? that he stay till our petitions woo him, unless
his favors first solicit us, and give us cause to thank him, not to ask.
He thinks his goodness has no advantage, no victory over our necessities, if
he should only hear us when we call; unless, as he prophesses by his Prophet
Esaias, Esa. 65. 24.
Antequam clametis ego exaudio, he begin to us, and make our answer before we
speak. He thinks his mercy would prove tardy, if it expected our suit; unless
he granted it before our motion. Therefore in the 2 Samuel: 12. when Nathan
admonishes David of two great sins; he no sooner in a religious humiliation
deiects himself crying, He had offended; but the Prophet speedily raises him
with the comfortable tidings of his Absolution; and in such a Phrase, as if God
had antedated the pardon, 2 Samuel 12. 13.
before the sin was committed. For he tells him the Lord has also put away
thy sin. Not he will, or does, but already he has put away thy sin. You
may perceive a gracious have too in the remission of his sin in this place:
he but confesses and God forgiues him; nay (says S. Austin) he makes no
confession, but a promise only; Non iam pronunciat, sed promittit se
pronunciaturum, and ille iam dimittit. He says he will confess, and upon that
promise, God immediately grants him a large pardon. Turemisisti, Thou forgauest
the iniquity of my sin.

The extent of his grace is as large, The iniquiry of my sin.
as unlimited, mercy is sudden. God as he is no slow, dilatory God: so neither
is he a sparing close-handed God; as he does not suspend his favors, or hang
long in the deliberation of his pardon to sinners: so neither does he give them
in a lame, imperfect fashion; but large, and full, and ample as is himself. In
quo omnis plenit^do who is the spring of all bounty.

He does not veniam dimi^iare, distribute his mercy by halfes, keep men
betwixt life and death, panting betwixt hopes and fears, as if he should send
a pardon, when the prisoner is half hanged; no, Marlorat.
Non de dimidia, sed perfecta remissione hic disserit Propheta.

God does not lease his pardons for life only, adiourning the short punishment
in this world, with a purpose to inflict it aeternally in the next. His hand is
not so scant, Bernard.
non arctatur, non clauditur fine, nullas habet met^s Diuina clementia (says
Bernard.) And Hierome in his translation, dates this remission with a semper to
signify the duration, the continuance of it, which is as long, and lasting, as
his goodness that has none end.

Nor yet does he remit the Eternal punishment and retain a Temporal to be
paid in this world, in an imposed pilgrimage, or a purgatory hereafter Non
solum excluditur satisfactio sed Purgatori^m, boldly says a writer. Therefore
one of our English Translations reads, Thou forgauest the punishment of my
sin.

Let those then that list to be abused, commute or sine for their release at
Rome, suffer the Pope to pare their salvation, and take fees out of Gods
Pardons, which he bestows freely; we will receive our Absolution nearer hand,
and less wasted in the carriage: Psalm. 130. 7.
Let our Israel trust in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy, and with
him is plenteous Redemption: Copiosa Redemptio a bounteous remission; for he
shall wipe out all our sins, neither take vengeance on us in this life, nor in
the life to come.

If he do lay a cross, a calamity upon us in this life, as he did upon David,
for the scandal he brought upon Israel by Vriahs death, 2 Samuel 12. 14.
and the adulterating of his wife; afflict us, as he did him in the loss of a
child; or send a Pestilence to scour the land, as he did his; In which sense
Euthymius says of him, Euthymius in Psalm. 32.
Mors remissa est, sed noxa vel damnum exigebatur per subsecutas calamitates:
Yet for all this, God does not inflict this, Sub ratione poenae, as a
vengeance, but a chastisement; not as a punishment, but a fatherly Correction;
not as a Minister of his wrath, but an evidence of his love. For he chasteneth
the Children, whom he best loves. And so you see he corrects the bitterness of
his Judgments, with intermingling mercy amongst them; Pellit pestem apeste,
(says one) he takes out all malignity from his judgments; (as S, Paul says)
he plucked out the sting of death. 1 Cor. 15. 55.
O mors vbi aculeus tuus?

Last of all, he does not only remit the punishment of the sin, and retain
the Guilt, treasuring up that in diem irae, to press against us in the last
day: but he forgiues that too; he does not quench the flame, and leave a spark
behind to kindle his wrath, or to incense him hereafter; no, Tu remisisti
iniquitatem peccati mei, Thou forgauest the very iniquity of my sin, the
enormity, the Obliquity (as Aquinas calls it:) So that Intempestiu^ est hic
Poenae and Culpae distinctio, that distinction of the punishment and of the
guilt is frivolous and out of season here: God forgiues the sin at the very
root. And as Elisha, when he cured the waters, 2 King. 2. ^1.
cast salt into the springs: so God to make a perfect cure by his Absolution,
heales us at the heart; because that is the root of sin. (...), says the
Septuagint; thou forgauest the iniquity, the impurity of my heart.

Thus you may perceive, there are no Arrerages left in Gods Audit; he forgiues
both the Guilt of the sin, and the punishment; both the suit and the damages.
for he requires nothing but a true confession: If we confess, 1 Ioh. 1. 9.
he is faithful and just to forgive us. This makes a full expiation and
atonement for all our sins. Therefore he that confesses and repents, as it
were Levies a fine with God, to cut off all punishment in the present, or in
the world to come. For this Remisisti, Chald^^ Paraphras.
is ^ remisisti in aeternum, our everlasting quietus est; a general
acquittancc, for the breadth and extent of it like his mercy, which is
exceeding broad, exceeding large; and again like unto his mercy for the
duration and date of it which endures for ever.

I am at my farthest, even lost and confounded in the vast subject of Gods
mercy; which like a deep sea, through which I cannot wade, stops my passage;
so that here I can only stand upon the banck, and cry with S. Paul, O
altitudo, O the depth of his mercy.

In which devout ecstasy I will end; only borrowing a short Gloria Patri, and
some sounds, like those which environ the mercy Seat, from the Prophet David's
song of thanksgiving. Psalm. 103. 2. 3. 4.
My soul praise thou the Lord, and forget not all his benefits: which
forgiueth all thy sins, and heals all thine infirmties; which redeemeth thy
life from the grave, V. ^.
and crowns thee with mercy and compassion. To this glorious God, full of
compassion, who crowns us here with mercy, and will crown us hereafter with
glory, be ascribed all honor and thanksgiving for ever. Amen.

DAVID'S STRAIT. THE AFTER-NOONES SERMON UPON THE ACT SUNDAY.

Delivered by JOHN KING, Inceptor in Divinity, one of the Praebendaries of
Christ-church. in Oxford.

PSALM. 71. 20. Thou which have showed me great, and sore troubles, shall
quicken me again, etc.

DAVID'S STRAIT.
2 Samuel* 24. 14. And David said unto Gad, I am in a great strait: Let us fall
now into the hand of the Lord (for his mercies are great) and let me not fall
into the hand of man.
THat Caution given heretofore by the Crier, to those that were to speak at
Athens, that they should presently fall to their matter (...), without Preface
or Passion; shall serve me for a Preface to to my ensuing discourse. My subject
being so full of straitnes, if I would hold proportion with it, will not give
me the liberty of a larger introduction. Yet before I take the words asunder,
you must take along with you, some Praecognita, some presuppositions, by which
you may look back from my Text, to the beginning of this Chapter, and have
therein a brief Epitome of the History here contained. Israel had again
provoked the Lord to anger, Connection.
notwithstanding his former chastisements for their sins. Now sin seldom
goes without some punishment attending on it. God was in their debt, and again
his anger was kindled against them. V. 1.
In this anger, he permits David their King to add his sin to theirs; and so
to fill up the measure and number of their transgressions, by his own, in
numbering the people unnecessarily and unlawfully. David commands and preuailes
against Ioab and the Princes, that gainesayed it at the first; but afterward,
lest they should loose his favor, they execute his commands. His sin was 9
months and odd days old, before he saw it: and the Lord let him see the
deformity of it, at this growth, by some visitation different from the great
pestilence he afterward offered him; as some collect out of 1 Chronicles. 27. 24.
whereupon he recalled Ioab, (he finished not the numbering, because there fell
wrath for it against Israel.) His own heart hereupon smote him first, and he
acknowledged his folly: and presently Gad his Seer was sent to let him know,
that God would also smite him for this folly: yet with such a merciful hand,
David might conceive, it was rather for discipline, then destruction, and upon
as easy terms as might stand with his justice. Strike he would; yet so, that
David should prescribe in what kind: whether by famine, sword, or pestilence.
And although these conditions seem hard on man's part, who is the delinquent,
because they are all rather to be avoided, then chosen: yet they are easy and
moderate, on God the Judges part: who needed not to have given any at all. Nay
any one of them, or all at once, and thousands more, he might without injustice
have inflicted. Therefore David thought himself mercifully dealt with, and
upon his second wiser thoughts, professes as much in my text. Dixit autem
David ad Gad: Coarctor, etc.

The Text you see is Responsorie; and the Speakers David and Gad. Gad had
delivered his message; and it was now Dauid's turn, being instantly urged to
it, to give him an answer. Here it is specified, to whom, and by whom, and
what it was. So that you may consider here the Words of the Historian. Division.
And David said unto Gad. and the Words of the History, in the rest. The words
of him that compiled this book, and his words that are here recorded, the
words of King David. The former show the connection, and the distinction of
persons, and the Form only: these latter prefent unto us the Substance and
matter of the Annals.

In the words of the Historian, Subdivision.
though they are only (...), I shall make some short observations about the
Persons of David and Gad, and some other circumstances. In the words of the
History, which make up Dauid's answer, there is 1. His Deliberatio^, I am in
a great strait. 2 His Resolution, and this twofold: Positive, Let us fall now
into the hand of the Lord: with a Reason, for His mercies are great. Negative
or Exclusive, and let me not fall into the hand of man. According to this
order, your patience and attention is desired: First to the words of the
Historian, 1. General part.
the Penman of the holy Ghost: The words of the Historian.
Dixit autem David ad Gad.

David is here the Delinquent, arraigned a little before, v. 12. but by none of
his glorious titles: as they are given him in the precedent chap. v. 1. The
anointed of the God of Jacob: the sweet Psalmist of Israel, etc. But as the
Lord instructed Gad, Go and say unto David: plain David. It was the King when
he commanded Ioab, to go and number the people: but it is now David, when he
is convented and under discipline. But whether we have him by the title of the
King, we are sure it is the Person of the King. And when Great ones sin, they
commonly do it, according to the eminency of their place, with authority,
with a high hand. In this particular the King would satisfy his curiosity,
and that merely, in having the sum of the people taken; Vt sciam, V. 2.
that I may know the number of the people. A knowledge unfruitful at the best,
and sauouring of infidelity also; being he had a promise from the Lord, that
his people should be as the stars for number, or the sands on the sea shore.
Yet he was so transported with this humor, that say what Ioab and all the
Captains would, the King's word prevailed. Quod libet, licet. There needs no
other warrant to justify great Potentates bad actions, but their will. Bar
them of this liberty, or rather licentiousnes, this were to streighten their
Dominions. For greatness for the most part sweyes more with them then goodness.
Therefore when at any time this goes to curb or oppose that, they will
presently shake hands with virtue, and banish out of their actions Optimus, so
they may but retain Maximus in their titles. Let a suit be never so unjust,
yet if it be commenced in a great man's name, it were his disgrace to take the
foil in it. Sen. l. 3. de ira, c. 4.
In magnis magnae fortunae bonis ponunt vltionem. No Court of justice but shall
ring of his injustice; and whatsoever his reputation be with God, what cares
he, so he may but keep his reputation amongst men. The ground of all is this.
Those Mighties of the earth, that harbor an vnmastered Appetite, an unruly
will in their bosoms, and are wedded to it, unless they have from above, a
special restraining and directing Grace, shall ever find it suggesting to
them as Iezebel to her husband Ahab (when he was sad because he might not have
Naboth's vineyard) Do thou now govern Israel? 1 King. 21. 7.
Arise and be merry, I will give thee the vineyard. And she carried it with the
Kings letter and seal, though the lines were, like Draco's Laws, written in
Naboth's blood.

But do the sins of Princes keep within their own private threshold's? It
were well, i^ so: Nay, they are of a diffusiue, and spreading nature; to the
hurt of others also: either by Imitation, or Imputation. How by Imitation is
evident enough. Quo grandius nomen, Be^^.
eo grandius scandalum. The vices of Rulers are made the rules of vices to
inferiors. And as they are soonest discerned in eminent persons; so are they
soonest followed from their examples. Plato's crum^-shoulder, and Aristotle's
lisping, and Portius^Latro's sallow complexion, made sects of their
imperfections, as well as their opinions. And never was there a wider gate set
open to all villainy, then when Jupiter, Mercury, and Venus, and the rest of
that rabble of Heathen Gods, were made the Authors and Actors of wickedness.

The Romanists are but little behind the Heathe^s, in some of their Canonized
Saints. And if stabbing, massacring, blowing up, and the like virtues, for
which they are deified, bring to Heaven; the Lord keep us all from that
Heaven, which these deserve. Did not these Politicians perceive, that many
times, the persons of men have a greater attractiue virtue to their
superstition, then their strongest persuasions: they would not so often attempt
to raise up children to their Father the Pope, out of our deceased Orthodox
Prelates and Professors of best note. They would certainly ere this have
recalled that Lying Legacy; Legatum Peregre missum mentiendi causa: which of
late the envious man sowed upon stall's and shop-boardes in this place, and
elsewhere in gardens and orchards, whilst men slept. But the Author has long
since bequeathed himself with his Legacy, to notable Imposture, and frontles
Impudence; In which I leave him; who I presume made that the Motive to set
forth his Motives, in an assumed person and name: as well knowing that the
greatness of Ieroboams place, makes his name draw a long train after it, when
he is mentioned in the holy Scripture. 1 King. 14. 16.
Jeroboam who did sin, and who made Israel to sin.

Neither does this observation hold only in the highest Offices, but also in
the highest Graces. A Pagan life may suit well with a Pagan profession; but sub
nomine Christiano vitam agere Gentilem. Hieron.
If the life and actions of a Pagan lurk under the mask and visor of a
Christian name, (...). Apol. 2. pro Christian.
the bad example may possess very many. (...), says Iustine Martyr, from the
Heathens own mouths: and therefore goodness was expected from the very name.
Let them look to answer for it, that answer not that name.

Among Christians also, the sins of the Clergy do far sooner and more
dangerously infect then the same in the Laity. And their offenses are reckoned
according to the measure of the Sanctuary, double to the ordinary account; so
shall their punishments be too. Only in paying Tithes, that double honor due
to them, which the Apostle speaks of, men are content to reduce to single pay.
To both I say only this: majus peccatum habent. And I would we did not give
the occasion. I would it were not too justly taken up by way of complaint, that
Holy Orders of the Church, and Degrees of the Schools, do too often invest
many; who are more guilty of being Corrupters then Leaders (unless it be in the
worst sense, such as the Pharisees were, blind Leaders of the blind, and both
fall into the pit, a Tavern or a Tap-house.) May we not fear, that these are
the last and worst times, when some that should be the Heads of the people, are
become the worst Members? We have lost the distinction of Degrees, since there
has bin brought in a Confusion of ill Manners. And the highest Graduat's are
scarcely to be discerned by any other Habit, then a Habit of vice; that dares
obtrude and justify to the face of Authority, the most malapert misdemeanour,
because it is -- facinus maioris Abollae. Iuv.


Mistake me not. I defile not my own nest: but would let strangers know (for
I am not ignorant how we are taxed abroad) if any such rowst amongst us, they
are not of us. But I have stoup't to those, that are far inferior to King
David; yet to such as have sinned (...), To. 5. 14.
after the similitude of his trangression; not for the matter of it, but the
danger. Though some may ask what danger here from this particular sin of
King David? who was moved by it to do the like?

But say nothing were to be feared from the Imitation of this his offense,
there was eminent peril from the Imputation of it, to no less then 70000.
men: V. 15.
that partly for this were cut off by the sword of the Lord, even the
Pestilence. So true is that of the Poets oftentimes. -- Delirant Reges
plectuntur Achivi. It is not the least punishment to a commonwealth, when
Princes and Rulers transgress the Royal Law. They neither stand nor fall to
themselves alone. I will give children to be their Princes, Isa. 3. 4.
says the Lord, by way of commination upon Judah and Jerusalem. Such a child
was David here, who in his old age did childishly, and the people smarted for
it. Facit regnare hominem Hypocritam propter peccata populi. Job 34. 30.
So the Vulgar read it. Our last English with a little difference: That the
Hypocrite reign not, least the people be ensnared. Both look one way, that
the subjects have the worst it, when the go^ernors are bad which the Lord sets
over them.

Neither are the ways of the Lord herein unequal, to inflict any thing upon
the members of a Politic body, though the Head were in fault; more then if
the Judge should do wrong, in making the back pay for the theft which the hand
committed: It is Just: Resp. 138. ad Orthodox.
Martyrs comparison: such a union there is between the Prince and the people.

What evil the people of Israel had here done, it will not much profit us to
know: but in the general, this we may be assured of. Ezekiel. 18.
The Soul that sins, it shall dye. God strikes not an innocent party: and
therefore we must be persuaded with St Aug: whenever and how soever he visits,
occulta esse Possunt iudicia dei, iniusta nunquam. As for King David did he
not think ye, bear his own burden; Did not the hand of the Lord find him
out, as well as the people? If we believe Greg: and Just. Martyr, he had his
share of punishment, though in another kind. Greg. (...). li. 25. cap. 14.
Ira saeviens, quae corporaliter populum perculit, rectorem quoque populi
intimo cordis dolor prostravit. The people were stricken outwardly with the
Pestilence; the King inwardly with sorrow, that his transgression should draw,
after it, the loss of so many subjects, Just. Mar. ibid.
*(...). That Kingdom must needs be much shaken, where the number of the
subjects is shortened: and it is (...). Else King David would never have wished
so much hurt to those to near him. Ver. 17.
Let thine hand be against me, and against my Fathers house.

But this diminution of the people, might be more tolerable to King David,
because it came not upon him as a theife in the night, suddenly, without any
praemonition. The Lord sent one of his Prophets rising up early to give him
notice of his purpose. And David was early up also, either to go to hear the
word of the Lord, or to have it come home to him. Ver. 11.
For when David was up in the morning, instructions came from the Lord to Gad
to repair to him.

A thing it seems not so rare in those days, as now, for great Personages to
rise early; especially upon such an occasion, to hear a Prophet or a Preacher.
This were fit for meaner souls: but Great ones will keep their state toward
God himself. Amos. 6. 4.
They lie upon beds of Ivorie and stretch them selves upon their couches, and
that even till No one day many times: not with fewer sins then David, but
with smaller sense of them, with greater security; and therefore the greater
danger. The gentle voice of a prophet will not be sufficient to rowse or
star^^e such from their ease, but it must be the voice of thunder; and then
perhaps they would be glad, with Caligula, to leave their beds, and creep
under them, for affrightment.

It is likely David slept but little that night. For he had within him the
alarm of a troubled conscience still beating. Ver. 10.
Percussit cor David eum. He punished himself with numbering the hours, or
rather the four watches of the night, for his numbering the people. And we may
believe, that this night among the rest, Ps* 6. 6.
he watered his couch with tears, and spent the better part of it, in
meditations and confessions of his folly. Then (and not til then) when he had
his eyes thus open upon his own transgressions, was his Seer, the Prophet Gad,
sent in the morning. which is an argument of the Lords singular benignity, who
uses not to send his Prophets, but either to invite sinners to repentance, or
to confirm them that have begun it (as David here did) in so good and
acceptable a work.

And for what are his denunciations and threatenings added to his messages, but
to set an edge as it were upon our turning to him; to be as pricks and
goades, to make us the more eager to desire that we may decline them. Isa. 3.
8.
Thus was Isaiah sent to King Hezekiah; Ion. 3. 4,
to bid him set his house in order. Thus also was Jonah sent to Nineveh. Yet 40
days and Niniveh shall be ouerthrown. And in my Text (that I may not multiply
examples) Gad unto David. That Avenger bears no hostile mind, who gives
warning to his Adversary, where and how he intendes to wound him. And that
party must be very negligent of his own safety, who labors not either to
guard, or to prevent the blow he sees coming. The Lord therefore herein
dealt with David (and David made that good use of a praemonition) as sometime
he did with Abraham, when he intended to destroy Sodom, Genesis 18. 17.
shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do? to the end that Abraham
might make intercession for Sodom, and David for himself and his people, as we
read both of them did; and we may go and do the like. For this farther
favor holy David found in the sight of the Lord, that he sent the same
prophet the second time, who at the first was a messenger of death, to be a
director and a counsailor to him, and the paenitent Elders, 1. Chron. 21. 16.
who were clad in sackcloth, and fell upon their faces, what course they should
take, to stay the hand of the Angel from striking, and to stopp the jaws of
death. It was Gad which came to him both times. To show, that he who is the
minister of the Law, should be the minister of the Gospel also: as he breaks,
so he should bind up again. An observation which I make the rather, against
those indiscrete Teachers, that speak still from mount Sinai, in thunder and
lightening: not at all from mount Sion, in the mild tones of mercy. They are
like those Boanerges, Mar. 3. 17.
sons of thunder calling down fire from heaven, and calling it up from hell
too, to affright distressed consciences; but they have no portion of the spirit
of Barnabas, Act. 4. 36.
to be the sons of consolation. Thus are they far more terrible
Instructers, then the Law itself. For Lex paedagogus, Gal. 3, 24.
ad Christum: But these bring not their Auditors so far on their way. They
only show the Law holding out the rod unto them, as their adversary; but they
show not how they must agree with this adversary in the way, (that is) in
Chrst, who has styled himself the way, the mediating way between God and
men, who has taken away the curse of the Law.

But there is another extreme, as much to be avoided by those that will take
the prophet Gad for their pattern. As they may not power into wounded
consciences altogether vinegar: so ought they not to use nothing but oil to
smooth and supple. That same, Ps. 141. 5.
oleum impinguans caput, precious oil that breaks the head, is far more
dangerous then the friendly smiting of the righteous by reproof. And that
precious oil of palpable flattery, or silent conniuence, is too often used,
to the hurt of those that are the heads of the people. But Gad was armed from
above with boldness; and feared o^ the face of the best man, to acquaint him
with the worst of his message. He durst come home to the King's bedchamber,
and tell him that which might make his ears tingle. And happy are those
Princes and Nobles, before whom such Prophets dare discharge that part of their
thanklesse office.

Gad was said to be David's Seer; because he saw that which was hidden from
David, till he revealed it to him. Kings in their affairs of state, are forced
to see many things through other men's eyes; but in their spiritual state, they
have more need of their Seers eyes, by which they may look upon both their
sins and punishments. Now David's Seer was no other then David's Chaplain,
says Pet. Martyr; but of a far different strain from those Trencher
Chaplains of Great men in our times; whose office consists chiefly in reading
prayers and saying grace* As for their preaching, unless they speak placentia,
they were better ^eepe in their words. Iam. 3. 2.
Their Patrones have a curb for their mouths, by which they are able (...) to
rule both their tongues, and their whole bodies. And as Balaam said to Balak,
Number. 14. 13.
They can not go beyond the commandment of their Lords, to do either good or
evil after their own minds, but must only speak, what they have put into
their mouths. If they exceed this commission, they must expect no other then
to be degraded from the honor of sitting at the lower end of the Table. But
there are enough of Ieroboams Preist's, 1 King 13. 33.
of the lowest of the people; that will be ready enough to take their rooms.
Many a Micah gets him such a Leuite (but I am sorry so many such Levites to the
disgrace of our Ministry, and Universities, are to be found) for ten shekels
of silver by the year, a suit of apparel and his victuals; and then vaunts,
as Micah did. Iud. 17.
Now know I that the Lord will do me good, seeing I have a Lev^te in my house.
But such a Seer as Gad, that knows the dignity of his office, and discharges
the duty of it, boldly and freely, shall stay for praeferment, till he has
learned better ma^ners, then to tell his betters any thing they would be loath
to hea^e. Yet King David here kept a better temper toward his Seer. It was but
a harsh message that Gad brought him; you have your choice, of sword,
pestilence or famine: all so full of horror, that they might seem not only
to perplex, but withal to exasperate David against his person, that was to
convey such an vnwel^come option: (as we use to malign a Bay^iue, that serves
us with a sub paena, or other citation to the bar.) But the King laid his
own gui^tines against the Prophets words: and his godly sorrow for his error,
2 Cor. 7. 11.
wrought in him St Paul's (...), indignation and revenge against himself, not
against the Prophet. Therefore he neither excuses, nor exten^ates, nor
justifies his fault, nor falls foul upon Gad, 1 King 18. 17.
as Ahab did upon Eliah. Art thou he that troublest Israel? nor puts him in
durance to try whether his words would come to pass; 1 King 22. 72.
as the same Ahab used the Prophet Michaiah. But contrary to the ordinary
deportment of those that are faulty, who are commonly Monitoribus asperi; the
Mountains and high ones especially, that will smoke and rea^e and fret, and
fume, when they are touched near the quick, Ps. 144. 5.
Tange montes and fumigabunt. It is only, Dixit David ad Gad. David said, and
he said mildly, he did not storm, nor swear, nor rave: and he said to the
purpose, to the matter that was in hand, punctually and precisely, in answer
to that which Gad proposed before, Coarctor etc. Iam in a great strait. And so
are we fallen upon my 2d General* The words of the History i^ self: 2
General (...)
and the^ein, First David's Deliberation, Iam in a great strait.

This straitning proceeded from Gads prop^sa^^ in the precedent verse. One of
the 3. must come, but it was in David's choice. Either 7. years famine, or 3.
months flight in persecution, or 3. days the fury of the Pestilence. These
are the 3. chained judgments of the Lord, that go for the most part linked
together in the holy Scripture. They are his 3. arrows, which he usually
draws out of his quiver, to shoot at the children of men; like those 3. which
Jonathan shot, to be Hieroglyphikes to David, 1. Sam. 20.
of his safety or danger. But we will take no warning, neither by those, he
has shot beyond us in the times past: nor by those that fall short of us in
neighboring countries: nay scarcely now, when they even hit us, and stick in
our own borders and bosoms. Thus you shall find them joined like inseparable
companions in a league of vengeance as it were. Ier. 34. 17.
Ye would not proclaim a liberty every one to his brother, says the Lord.
Therefore behold I proclaim a liberty for you, to the Sword, to the Pestilence
and to the Famine. So also Ier. 29. 17. and many places of that Prophecy. and
Ezech: 14. 21. These are 3. of those which the Lord calls there Quatuor iudicia
pessima, L. de anim^ ^. 4.
his 4. sore judgments. and Tertull: calls them Tonsuras insolescentis generis
humani, lopping, and pruning of proud mankind, that it grow not too rank.

Had David bin confined in his choice only to one of these, it had been no
election. They are but mock-elections, or rather approbations only, when
Titius is absolutely designed to such, or such a place: yet under color, the
choice is devolued upon Sempronius and his associates, in whose power it is not
left to refuse. There must be somewhat taken and somewhat left, which cannot be
in unity but necessarily requires variety of 2. at the least. Yet such was the
variety here presented to David: all evils of punishment, all harbingers for
death, but under diverse shapes: all distasteful to flesh and blood, that it
wonderfully poses and puzzles him upon which he should determine. And variety
of objects distracts even in good things. We have St Paul's (...), Phil. 1. 23.
strait between two, and which to choose, he knew not. He saw it was so happy
for his own good to be with Christ, yet so needful for the good of others to
have his dissolution differd. We may commonly observe there are the worst
stomachs at the best furnished tables. When it is Coena dubia, the Guests know
not what to taste first, and so omit all, having full eyes, but empty panches.
Thus also are many Students more posed with the multitude of books, then the
difficulty of their matter. The Authors of Method are so numerous, that they
become to some the Authors of Confusion, who cannot discern amongst so many
paths, what tract is best to follow. It was therefore a judicious observation
of a grave professor, (though it may seem a Paradoxe in our Universities,)
that our rich Libraries, made but mean Scholars. Upon this ground: because
either out of their greedines of knowledge, and inconstant curiosity, they
will taste of all Authors, and digest none, Sen.
for varia lectio delectat, Eccles. 12. 12.
certa prodest: or oppressed with such variety (because much reading is
wearines to the flesh) and they think it too long a task for so short a life,
to turn over so much as the Indexes of all, they grow oscitant, and will
peruse none. This is like the turning off a Greyhound at the whole Heard: where
his game is so plentiful, and he has so many in chase, that he pinches none.

Now where there is variety, but all are mala culpae, the diverse ways on the
right hand and the left, that lead to destruction, the number may admit of
election, but not the matter. Though all sins be not aequall, yet all are
aequally to be avoided and declined. For there are some things of that nature,
that a man must not yield to, though the Rack, or other most exquisite torments
should be used, to extort his consent. Therefore it was a noble resolution of
one of the Princes of Condee, to whom the French King Charles the 9th made this
offer, and bid him make his choice; whether he would hear a Mass, or suffer
present death, or perpetual Imprisonment. He was as sudden, as religious and
zealous in his answer, Primum Deo juuante nunquam eligam. As to the first, I
detest the Idolatrous Mass: and for the other 2. I leave them and my self to
the will of the King; yet hope the Lord will order and dispose these also to
the best. With such courage did that mother, happy in the number and constancy
of her 7. children, choose rather to undergo all torments, Macc: 7.
then to prolong their lives by eating swines flesh. And the fervent zeal of
Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, for the true and living Lord, burned within
them, so much hotter then the fiery furnace, Nebuchadnezzar threatened them
with; that his golden image wanted worship from them, and himself wanted their
obedience in his unlawful commands: Dan. 3: 16.
Non oportet nos hac de re respondere: We are not careful to answer thee in
this matter. For in all such cases, we are to hold that principle, out of which
Peter and John framed their answer to the Jews. Act. 4. 19.
Whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto you, more then unto
God, judge ye. We may not hearken to men nor Angels; nor suffer friends to
have any interest in us, but with subordination to the Laws of God. (...). Nay
we must not hearken to ourselves, when our own lusts would tempt us, and draw
us away from the Lord, though they whisper in our ears, never so many apparent
goods, that may accrue unto us, for our private ends and commodities. But in
these, what strait can there be, where it is (...): the broad way, Matt. 7. 13.
into which we should not so much as enter our foot, our affections, our
sensitive appetite, which are the feet, as it were, and the inferior part of
our souls?

There are some, that put themselves upon straits, where there are none: Gal. 3.
such as with those foolish Galatians, are bewitched to make question of the
well settled truth, and to perplexe themselves, whether they are in the truth
or no, and to call Father Lessius into consultation with them; quae sides
capessenda, whether they should more safely live still Protestants, or be
reconciled to the Church of Rome, and dye Papists. I may use to them the words
of Eliah, upon the like occasion, 1. King. 8. 21.
Vsque quo claudicatis? How long halt ye between two opinions? If the Lord be
God, follow him; and follow him there, where he is worshipped as God, in spirit
and truth, without that will worship of carnal, delightful, pompous
ceremonies; which through the eyes of the simpler sort steal away their
hearts, to believe any thing which is imposd upon them. Follow him there, where
he is still a God, and nothing detracted or derogated from him. Where true
Faith, and good works as the fruits of faith are preached, yet no merit
pleaded in either. Where thou art taught, that thou do but thy duty, and
receiuest above thy reward. Where Christ's satisfaction is thought to be so
full, for the co^ering of all thy sins, that it needs not to be peiced out
with any of thi^e own, to help the scantines of it. But on the other side, if
Baal be God, or God be in that part of the Baalitish religion, that teaches me
to fall down before stocks and stones, that are so much my inferiors,
because insensible, and my self in doing so, degenerate, and become as
insensible as they: or that teaches me to adore my aequals and fellow servants,
Angels or Saints: or that teaches me to nullify him that is so much above me,
to eat my God, (nay to give this privilege to a mouse, that shall nibble at the
Sacrame^tal bread) to deface his Image there, with my Canniball like teeth,
crucifying him as it were afresh: again to deface his Image in the King, with
a murtherous Assasinate's hand, or bu^ a bloud^e and treacherous heart I say,
if God be in such superstition, or rather sacrilege, or such a seditious sect,
follow him there.

There is also another strain of strait-lac'd brethren, that think the
comely garments of our Church, are too full and flaring, and come too near
the meretricious attire of the Whore of Babylon: and therefore they are in a
strait, whether they should reach their consciences so far, as to a
conformity and subscription; or suffer a proscription, or suspension, or
deprivation to pass upon them. But David did not unnecessarily put himself
upon any such straites as these. In things absolutely evil, or in things
indifferent, he might soon have quitted himself of all distraction and
anxietie of mind. But here, there was an inevitable necessity, of choosing
one of the three, which were all mala poenae. As the Angel took Bala^m in a
narrow place, Number. 23. 26.
where he could not turn to the right hand or the left.

But you will ask me, what choice can be of those things, of which there can
be no desire? And who ever hated himself so much, that he should have any
inclination to undergo his punishment? Here then must that Vulgar Maxim take
place; Emalis minimum. If I must needs smart, that which is least pain^full,
is most welcome. I would rather be chastised with whips, then (as Rehoboam
threatened) with scorpions. 1. King. 12. 11.
And our great Master Aristotle, could answer, that the lighter and more
tolerable evils compared with the greater, have the semblance and appearance
of good, and therefore may he the objects of election. Greg. L. 8. ep. cap: 41.
Plerumque genus mortis, in alterius mortis consideratione, levamen est. So did
David in his resolution, cast himself into the hands of the Lord, rather then
into the hands of men; As thinking it his best and safest way: For the Vulgar
translation reads it comparatively. Melius est vt incidam, etc. it is better
for me to fall into the hand of the Lord, etc. Although he would by his good
will have escaped the hands of both.

Secondly, these three punishments, proposed to King David, howso^uer no way
pleasing to flesh and blood (for no chastening for the present seems to be
joyous, but grievous, says the Apostle) yet because they belonged to the
discipline, Hebr. 12. 11.
which the Lord uses over men, and were works of his justice, therefore in
themselves good; and good for us also, whenever the Lord inflicts any such
upon us, had we that good consideration of them, which this Kingly Prophet
elsewhere professes. Bonum mihi quia humiliatus: Ps: 119. 71.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy
statutes: amongst which, this is one: Statutum omnibus semel mori. Hebr. 9. 27.
It is a poenall statute, enacted by that high court of Parliament, which made
man, that death and the accomitants thereof, should be the wages of sin which
man made.

And I pray observe here the deceitfullnes of sin. To: 6. 23.
It promises freedom and liberty, but concludes us in a prison, in little ^ase.
David's heart was pricked at first, and puffed up with a desire of vain
knowledge, but in the end his heart sm^te him ^onit* Thus has sin, before it
be committed, a comely visage to allure unto it, Reu. 9. 8.
like those Locusts, with men's faces and women's hair, but a tail like a
Scorpion and a sting in it; that is, in the end, anguish and anxietie. And
Abaddon the King of the Locusts there, is ready to suggest unto us with his
temptations, that God is merciful and long suffering, so to make us run into
praesumption: but afterward he is as ready to drive us upon the rock of
despair. He labors to keep from us the still voice, wherein God is a God of
mercy, with the loud noise of blustering winds and earthquakes, and fire;
still sounding in our ears terror and judgment, To. 2. 9.
Tribulation and anguish upon every Soul that does evil. These are dangerous
straites, when, as in a piece of prospectiue, the nearer the eye, the broader
do things appear, but the farther off they are represented, the more
contracted: so when the longer we look upon our sins, the greater strait,
the greater perplexity shows it self. When we cannot see the end of those
fears, that draw all our hopes of pardon narrower and narrower, till they
leaueus in the end, in the disconsolate thoughts of blacknes and utter
darkness, where there is no glimpse of of light to be seen. But on the
contrary, if it be, as we see in a calm water, when a stone, or the like, is
cast in to move it, it makes a small and narrow entrance, but from that
impression, the circles are multiplied bigger and bigger, till they come to the
banks: so, if amongst all those contractions of heart, and distractions too,
unto which our sins have brought us; when the waters come up even unto our
souls -- Et vnda supervenit vndae: and hemme us in on every side, we can but
perceive a dilatation and extension of mercy, one mercy ouertaking another,
and our hearts enlarged in the apprehension of those mercies: If when we pass
here, through the red sea of many tribulations, where the path is narrow and
dangerous, we can but see the land of Promise, abroad and spacious and pleasant
place to entertain us, at our jorneys end; we may be assured that this is the
way of salvation. For (...), strait is the gate, and narrow is the way which
leads to aeternall life: Mat. 7. 14.
strait and narrow in the beginning, but fair and capacious the farther we
project our sight. Straitnes for a short time, for a moment: but the largenes
and uncircumcised freedom of joy, shall know no limits of time, Ps: 90. 15.
but endure for all aeternity. Not only, as the sweet singer of Israel prays,
Make us glad according to the days, wherein thou have afflicted us, and the
years wherein we have seen evil: but without and beyond all comparison with
former times, Rev. 21. 4.
gladness for ever. No sorrow, no crying, no pain, no straitnes, God shall wipe
away all tears from all eyes. Who sees not that it is a far more blessed
thing, to go on our way weeping here, which, Ps. 126. 6.
although we tread upon thorns, and with much difficulty get through, brings
us to a caelestiall Paradise; then to walk in a broadway, strewe^ with roses
and other delicacies, to de^^ruction and the place of torment: like the fool
in the Prou. that goes laughing to the stocks.

Certainly King David was in a better estate, when his way was thus hedged up
with thorns, Hos. 2. 6.
that he could not readily find his paths, then when he walked at liberty
upon his tarras; from whence he had so pleasant and free a prospect upon a
fair woman, that it gave occasion of that foul sin with the wife of Vriah.
2. Sam. 11.
(Mulier long, libido prope*) a sin so soul, Aug. in Ps. 50.
that it clouds and overshadowes all the rest he committed; as if he had been
innocent in other transgressions. 1. King. 15. 5.
He turned not a side save only in the matter of Vriah the Hittite. When Nathan
was sent to him for that, and God for this, he called himself to a strict
account, and imitated that part of the Serpents wisdom: who draws herself
through a narrow place, that she may put off her old skin. Such wisdom was
David brought unto by these straits, to strip himself of his former folly, to
put off the old man by repentance, which is (...), and Resipiscentia, an after
wisdom. And from him may we take a pattern, though we cannot be innocent as
doves, yet in this manner, to be wise as serpents. Nevertheless in his
straites he found the Liberty of the sons of God* 2. Cor. 4. 8.
That I may use the Apostles words. He was troubled on every side, but not
distressed, (...) perplexed but not in despair. For his Resolution in the next
words was clear, and free David's RESOLVTION.
Let us fall now into the hands of the Lord etc. 1 Positive.
Therein first consider the positive Part and the Reason annexed, and you shall
find in it that same (...), his singular dexterity in aduising and counsailing
himself for the best, in so difficult a case, which is the infallible child of
eminent wisdom.

Incida^ in manus Domini. Whereas otherwise wisdom dictates to the innocent,
not to draw so much suspicion upon themselves, as voluntarily to undergo what
they deserve not.

punishment, fitly answer to the circumstances of the transgression, like
Elisha upon the Shunammites child, he applies mouth to mouth, 2. King. 4.
eyes to eyes, and hands to hands, and stretches the one upon the other.

Pride was the mother of his sin; and in my Text their is a fall for that,
Incidamus, a posture of humiliation, he desires to be humbled under the mighty
hand of God.

Again this pride and glorying of his, was in the number of his subjects:
Therefore he thought it but just and agreeable to the law of Retaliation which
the Lord holds: Per quae quis peccat, per ^apunitur; that he should suffer by
number; not by the increase but the diminution of that number, he so much
vaunted of. Prou. 13. 28.
According to that: In the multitude of people is the Kings honor; but in the
want of people is the destruction of the prince. For Pagnine, Arias Montanus,
Iunius, and Tremellius read it plurally, as we in our last English tranflate
it, Incidamus. Let us fall.

And this intimates with all, his impartiallity even to himself and his owue
house. He would not lay a grievous burden of punishment upon his peoples
shoulders (as our Savior taxes the Lawyers) and himself not touchit with one
of his fingers; Lu. 11. 46.
but submits himself to hold aequall proportion with the lowest of his people,
who partly drew it all upon their heads. And Josephus is of opinion, that for
this reason he chose the Pestilence (howsoever we have another expressed in the
Text, from the Lords mercies) Because had it been a Famine, he might have made
provision before hand against that. Had it been the Enemies invasion, he might
hauh secured himself in his Forts and strong holds. But the Plague is the
Lords besome of destruction, which may sweep away the King as soon as the
Peasant; and therefore Incidamus, Let us fall, I with the rest. I exempt not my
self from the common calamity.

Yet their is a particle more, which I may not omit. It is good to see the
bottom of a danger at the first, and to know the continuance of it. A long and
lingering expectation of the worst that may befall, perplexes more oftentimes,
then if it came upon us presently. The shape of death represented to our
fantasies, is more terrible, then the experience of it to the sense. But when
we know the heat of an affliction will be soon past over, it adds comfort and
courage and resolution to the patients, who hope for release, at the expiration
of that short time. It was King David's discretion here, since he could not
resolve, which was the most grievous, to choose that which was least tedious.
He cast with himself, that he had but three days to reckon upon, for the
fury of the pestilence: whereas he must have told many long and irksome hours
in the seven years famine; or but the three monet'hs pursuit of his enemies;
and therefore he makes it his request to the Lord, as the son of David
hastens Judas in his treacherous design, that he might instantly enter upon his
passion, Ioh. 13. 27.
(...). Let us now fall into the hand of the Lord. Now presently, without
further delay.

And he had his wish: for immediately the Lord sent a pestilence upon Israel,
Ver. 15.
from the morning (that very morning in which Gad and he had this conference)
even to the time appointed. Which appointed time; whither it were only (...),
from the morning till dinner time, as the Septuagint render it, Qu. 37. in 2
Reg.
and Theodoret and St. Ambrose follow that opinion: In Psalm. 37.
or till the time of the continual evening sacrifice: (so the Chaldee
Paraphase explaines it, and St. Hierome and other modern interpreters:) or
till the time that David sacrificed upon Araunahs threshing flower; or till the
whole three days in the letter of the Scripture, were expired; I may not stand
to discuss. But it is very probable, that David was in hope, by the reason he
gives of his choice, (Multae misericordiae Domini;) that the Lord in his great
mercy, might contract and shorten, even that short time of three days.

But before I come to recount those consolations and advantages which David
forecast, by falling into the hand of the Lord; I must explicate the term,
what is meant here by the hand of the Lord. Some think that David excepted
only against the Sword of the Enemy, the hand of man, and left it to the
disposition of the Almighty, to inflict either the Pestilence, or Famine: which
come both more immediately from the hand of the Lord. Or that he did
determinately make choice of the Pestilence, but in some other words, which are
not expressed in the text; as if it could not be euinced sufficiently out of
the text: yet, that he must fix upon; because the Prophet Gad, urged him still
to a definite answer. V. 12. and 13.
Choose thee one of them, that I may do it unto thee. So Tostatus inferres.
But some later Commentators, could see a determinate choice of the Pestilence,
in the very Phrase of the hand of the Lord, here used. For in many other places
of holy writ, this is more peculiarly called the hand of the Lord. As Exodus 9.
3. Behold the Hand of the Lord is upon thy cattle etc. and v. 15. I will
strech forth my hand that I may smite thee and thy people with Pestilence. So
also we find it Ier. 21. 5. 6. I my self will fight against you, manu
extenta, with an out stretched hand, and smite the inhabitants, they shall die
of a great Pestilence. Hab: 3. 4.
And thus does the Prophet Habb: describe the awful Matie of God. He had
horns coming out of his hand what were those? Before him went the Pestilence,
and burning coals (or burning diseases) went forth at his feet. Nay. 1 Chronicles.
21. 12. there is a sword put into the hand of the Lord. Gladius Domini and
Pestilentia; the Sword of the Lord even the Pestilence. For albeit all the
creatures are as arms and instruments of vengeance in the hand of the Lord
(the stars in their courses fought against Sisera: Iud. 5. 20.
Fire came down from heaven at Eliah's prayers: the Earth swallowed up Core
and his accomplices: Bears devoured the 42 children, in Bethel, that mocked
Elisha) yet where we cannot discern the hand of nature, nor the hand of man,
as in the Pestilence; of which we cannot give any natural cause, neither can
humane counsels or remedies prevent, or remove it (and such was this here,
which after so strange a manner, and in so short a space, swept away so many
thousands, 7o Antiq: c. 10
as Josephus excellently describes it,) there we attribute it to a supreme and
spiritual and invisible cause, to the hand, or sword of the Lord. As those
Magicians before Pharaoh, when their Art failed them in producing lice, Exodus
8. 19.
were forced to acknowledge, Digitus Dei est hic. Thus did David make his
choice of the Pestilence, ageeable to that denunciation of the Lord; Exodus 30.
12.
where it is intimated, that if they did not pay the half shekell there
commanded, at the taking the sum of the people, there should come a plague
upon them. And the Rabbis (though it be but a fond, and too subtle a conceit
of theirs) affirm that Gad pro^pted David to this particular choice: and
according to his ministerial function, helped to extricate him out of his
perplexity; in that, at the end of the praecedent verse, where Gad bids him,
advise and see what answer I shall return: In the Hebrew it is (...) Dabar,
quod verbum: from whence comes (...) Deber, which signifies the Pestilence,
and is the word used both before and after my text. But without the help of
such vain curiosities, David's refusal of the Famine, and the Sword, may be
both implied in the negative part of his resolution: non in manus hominum.
Because many times there may be a Famine caused by the help of man; when
neither the Heavens are made iron, nor the Earth brass unto us. As when the
enemies set fire on the fruits of the land, which was Sampsons stratagem with
foxes and firebrandes to burn the Philistimes corn. Or when they cut off the
convoies and block up a beleaguered town, so that it cannot take in, new
provisions: (which is the new military discipline of these times, when by
breaking the staff of bread, and causing cleannes of teeth, the enemies
prevail more, then by their own courage and force of arms.) Or else, when in
times of peace and plenty, our great Corne-masters will make a dearth, by
hoording up their grain, that they may the better enhance the price of it.
Suffering the bowels of the poor to be empty, while their storehouses are
full; and with a pittiles eye beholding their needy brethren, whilst they
cannot but know, that mise and ratts and other vermin revell in their
garners. There are other ways, in which the hand of man may concur to a
famine. Therefore David refusing those two, under that phrase, submits himself
here to the Pestilence, by submitting himself to the hand of the Lord. And of
the Lord alone; that he would visit immediately, without deputing or
substituting any unmerciful creatures to that work of vengeance. For he is
facile and exorable, slow to conceive a wrath, and loath to execute it, when it
is conceived, Reason of Dav. choice.
in rigor and strictnes. For his mercies are great. Which is the strong
Inducement and Reason of David's choice, to cast himself upon the Lord. And
observe his emphaticall expressions. He does not say mercy, but mercies in the
plural, more then one. Not few mercies but many mercies; nor many little, but
many and great mercies: nor there a stop; but (...), very many in their
number, very great in their dimensions. Nay they are not only many and great,
but (...), very many, great, and tender mercies; as the Septuagint well render
the Original; (Not by (...);) The very bowels of motherly compassion; for
which the Evangelist's oftimes use (...), and (...).

His mercies are extended according to the extension of all our miseries; and
elevated according to the elevation of our sins. Ps. 145. 9.
Be they never so many, never so weighty, yet the mercies of the Lord are over
all his works, and over all those which we may most properly call our works.
It is a high degree Lord, who spared not the Angels which kept not their first
estate, but presently cast them down from Heaven, is long suffering toward
me, and expects my return to him, Ber^. de 7. Pani^. s^r. 2.
almost at mine own leisure. Non continebam a sceleribus, and tu a verberibus
abstinebas. He farther enlarges his mercy, long expectation and forbearance
brings me to repentance, Romans 2. 4.
and that he touches my heart with compunction and remorse. Again Lam. 3. 23.
but new every morning, nay every moment and minute in that he gives me
constancy and perseverance, that I fall not into a recidiuation, a relapse.
Lastly, there is the height of who am not worthy so much as to lift up mine
eyes to heaven, an assured hope of obtaining heaven.

Here are seven degrees of mercy, like those seven loau^s, Mat. 15. 32.
wherewith thousands were refreshed. Loco cita^.
And I might with St Bernard gather up many baskets full of the fragments of
each of them. But what heart can comprehend, what discourse can contain those
many, very great and tender mercies, that know no other bounds but aeternitie.
The mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting: Psalm. 103. 17.
ab aeterno per praedestinationem, in aeternum per glorificationem.

Great are the mercies of the Lord even in his executions of Justice 1 That he
will at all show us so great a testimony of his love, as to correct us. Quos
amo, Reu. 3. 19.
arguo. That, Ezech. 16. 42. I will be no more angry, is an evident token of
the Lords greatest anger. Bern in Cant.
Tunc magis irascitur, cum no^ irascitur. Sermon. 42.
Let favor be showed to the wicked he will not learn righteousness, says the
Prophet Isa. 26. 10. The presumption of impunity will breed impudence, in
sinning: and that not stay, till it have brought in most fearful impenitency.
Super omnem irammiseratio ista, as St. Bernard exclames; such forbearance, such
conniuence, is beyond all vengeance. Let then this mercy of the Lord first show
it self, that he will be pleased to disciplinate and correct us: and not leave
us to our own corrupt imaginations: not give us over to the inventions our
own hearts: and in the second place he will not forget to be a Father of
mercies toward us, Heb. 10. 31.
in the measure of his corrections. It is a fearful thing indeed to fall
into the hand of the Lord: but it is then only, when his left hand of
Clemency does not know, what his right hand of justice and severity purposes
to inflict. But such justice without mercy, only attendes those, that have
rejected and conte^ned both. Otherwise, there is ever a hand of mercy, either
ready, to stay the hand of the Lords severity toward the paenitent, as the
Angel held Abraham's hand, when he was striking; or at the least to break the
force of the blows; to moderate and temper them according to our patience. As
the Prophet Habbakuk makes it his petition. Habb. 3. 2.
In wrath remember mercy (so our last translation has it) but the vulgar makes
it a confident persuasion. Cum iratus fueris, misericordiae recordaberis.
Indeed we have Gods own word, nay his oath for it, as David had: Once have I
sworn by my holiness that I will not lie unto David. Psalm. 89. 32.
If his children forsake my law, I will visit their iniquity, with the rod and
with stripes. (but it shall be In Plag^s filiorum hominum, with no more cruel
stripes then humane infirmity can bear; 2 Samuel 7. 14.
as we read the same promise repeated.) Misericordiam autem non auferam.
Nevertheless my mercy and loving kindness shall not depart from them.

Behold then what consolations David had in the many mercies of the Lord: and
the same are still stretched out over us; if as he was a man after Gods heart,
we be after David's. What ever calamity or pressure be upon us, we must keep
holy Jobs aequanimitie and good temper, to receive evil, as well as good from
the hand of the Lord. But when the visitation is particularly discerned to be
the Plague, as David here desired: when we see that the hand of the Lord is
upon those houses, where Domine miserere is set to keep the door:
Nevertheless as in Samsons riddle, Iud. 14.
Out of the eater came meat, out of the strong came sweetness: so from the
greatest terrors of this devouring disease, much honey and sweetness and
comfort may be extracted; if we first know the causes of the Pestilence. The
Physicians of the body seek the causes in nature, and assign two. An outward,
from the contagion of the air; An inward, from the constitution of our bodies.
But the Physicians of the Soul, make their search beyond nature: and for the
true outward cause, look above nature, to the will and Providence of
Almighty God; for the inward cause, look below nature, upon the corrupt
will and Sin of man. Both these David here acknowledged: within him,
Peccauivalde; without him and above him, it was Manus Domini. Both which he
comprehendes Ps. 38. 2. 3. Thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand
presses me sore: there is no soundness in my flesh, nor rest in my bones.
Why? because of my sin. And from both these, we may take many sovereign
Praeseruatiues. time of Pestilence, comes from the hand of the Lord, by his
will and permission. Let us not therefore, like angry dogs, which run after
the stone that is thrown at them, behold with impatience and murmr, Ps. 91.
the prints of Gods arrow which ^lyes by day: but look to that hand, that sent
it, and be humbled under Gods hand. And in the 2d. place, let us persuade our
selves, that whatsoever comes from Lord, shall tend to our good and salvation.
All things work together for the good of them that fear him. Romans 8.
Peccata quoque says St. Aug. Our sins wrought that unspeakable good, To: 8.
when they occasioned the coming of a Redeemer, who wrought the good of our
salvation 30 and odd years here upon earth. And they still work for our good,
in calling for chastisements, which are good for us. But in the 3d. place. The
deserts of our sins do far go Father of mercies; that never deals with
his children according to the proportion of their transgressions: And if that
God of pure eyes did not behold iniquity in us, his hand would never be heavy
upon us. Therefore 4thly. If we desire to prevent the infection of Pestilence,
we mnst fly the nfection of our own concupiscence, and purify our hearts by
faith and unfeigned repentance. For it is the first degree of madness: Greg. ep:
Lib. 8. c. 41.
Nolle quempiam a malis suis just quiescere, and Deu^ unjust a sua velle
vltione cessare. To expect that the Lord should rest from his most just work
of punishing us, if we will not rest from our own unjust works of provoking
him. Thus perhaps we may divert the Pestilence from our persons. And as our
Kingly Prophet co^forts himself, and all the godly. Ps. 91.
A thousand may fall at our side, and ten thousand at our right hand, yet it
shall not come near us. But if it be approch't so near, that we are not
nearer to our selves; that it is even upon us: there is nevertheless balm in
Gilead, there are remedies at hand. Job praescribes a cordial: Hope even above
hope. Job 13. 15.
Though he slay me, yet I will trust in him. St Luke, (himself being a
Physician, but from the mouth of a greater,) praescribes an excellent diet,
Luc. 21: 17.
which is Patience. In your patience possess ye your Souls. St James,
Prayer, which is a medicine both purgative and praeseruatiue. Iam. 5. 13.
Is any among you afflicted, let him pray; Is any sick, let him call others to
pray with him. This will either remove the Plague from us, or us from the
Plague.

What then do thou fear, O man of little faith? Does solitariness affright
thee, because thou art an unwilling Heremite in a peopled city: shut up from
the society of friends and acquaintance? Thou fool! Angels will be thy
Guardians, and the Lord himself thy Keeper, to make thy bed in all thy sickness.
Does Death appale thee? Aristotle's (...), and Bildad's, Job 18. 14
King of Terrors. Why this is thy Debt to Nature, and thy Passage to Glory. And
what though the Pestilence be appointed one of Death's Collectors, and
Tole-gatherers, to gather thee to the rest of thy Fathers? This may separate
thy soul from thy body; To. 8. 34.
but in S. Paul's confidence, What shall be able to separate thee from the
love of God in Christ Jesus? Let us therefore willingly and cheerfully, with
holy David, submit our bodies to fall into the hand of the Lord, and to fall by
his hand, into the mouth of the grave: so long as we may securely with David,
commend our spirits into the hands of the same Lord. Ps. 31. 4.
But let me not fall into the hand of man.

I shall give you this Negative part of his Resolution in few words. Negative
part of Resolution.
The hand of man is his power; and his power becomes formidable by his Malice.
Why boastest thou in mischief, Ps. 52. 1.
O mighty man? David had oftentimes the experience of this malicious power of
men as in that Psalm he co^plains of Doeg's ealumnies: and elsewhere of Readiness
fury, and Sheba's treachery, nay his own son Absalom's conspiracy,
Shimei's cursing and railing, and the like. No wonder then, if he so feelingly
except against the hand of man. For in the Original it is set down by way of
petition with vehemence and importunity. Incidamus obsecro. Let us I pray. It
shall be a great courtesy, and happiness, to fall into the hand of the Lord,
but by no means into man's hand. Albeit he puts them into the balance, and
this be but the hand of Adam (which is the word in the Original) weak, (...).
frail, corruptible, contemptible, vain man, nay, vanity it self: that,
(...).
the hand of Iehova, the Lord of power and strength. But the goodness of the
Lord endures continually, as it follows in that before-alleaged 52. Ps. This
goes hand in hand, as an inseparable companion with his power: whereas man's
power is seldom seen in so good company. And did not the Lord set limits to
the malice of man, like to the raging sea: thus far shall thou go, and no
farther: did not he shorten and direct the power of man, better then he intends
it; No flesh could be saved. Do not we hear S. Paul speak of one man biting
and devouring another? Gal. 5. 15.
Does there not stand upon record, an encounter of his with beasts at Ephesus?
1. Cor. 15. 32.
Homo homini lupus. Man is a Wolf, a Panther, a Tiger, most unnatural to his
own kind: Plutarch:
(...). When he is once flesht with blood, he becomes as insatiable as the
Horseleech. He was at the first created mild and gentle, but afterward he
took this ill quality from him, who was (...). a manslayer from the beginning.

There is manus Linguae, Prou. 18. 21.
the hand, or power of the tongue. Let me not fall into the power of man's
tongue. It is a shop, an armorie of hurtful instruments. There are swords, and
arrows, and razours, and poison of Aspes. He that detracts or backbites, kills
three at once; himself, his auditors that credit his false calumnies, and
their good names, who are traduced. Libels, and that late new way of reducing
the most serious matters to ridiculous Ballads, and Rimes, are the issues of
the power of man's tongue. Bern:
Facile volant, non facile violant. Their words are light of wing, but deeply
wounding.

And if the power of man's tongue be so pernicious, much more then shall I
desire not to fall into the hand or power of man, in his executions. His hatred
is immortal, his revenge barbarous, and not only cruel, but full of
opprobrious insultations. As I have read of an Italian, whose malice was like
the Elephant, Bichteri Axi^^. Polit:
ten years in bringing forth; and see the monstrous birth. He fained a
reconciliation with that party that had offended him: Takes advantage of his
credulous simplicity, and when he had him at his mercy, promises to spare
his life, if he would renounce his Faith, and deny his God. This was no sooner
yielded to, but lest that word might be recalled, he makes it his last word:
and glories of the sweetness of this revenge, that he had taken it both upon
body and soul.

Neither does the hand of m^n extend it self only to the persons of men: but
proceeds farther, to lay waste whole countries, to pervert whole sates and
commonwealths, to demolish amongst other houses, the houses of God, to deface
Religion. And this was it which David here feared, lest the enemies might take
the Ark of the Lord, as formerly they had often done, and so interrupt the
service, and worship due unto his holy Name: therefore, not into the hand of
man.

Simeon and Levi brethren and instruments of cruelty; Genesis 49. 5.
In their anger they slew a man, and dug down a wall: (that is) the Scribes
and Priests being of both those Tribes, slew the Man Christ Jesus: and dug
down the walls of that Temple, John: 2. 19.
which he promised to build up in three days. And again, Simeon and Levi;
Iesuited Laymen, and Jesuitical Priests, sworn brethren in that devilish
conspiracy of the Powder Plot: They slew a man, 2 Christ, an anointed of the
Lord, (in their design and attempt at least) and not only the head, but the
representative body of this whole land. They dug down a wall too, Isa. 19.
15.
and dug deep to hide their counsels from the Lord. Cursed be their anger
for it was fierce: But blessed be the God of Jacob that defeated their anger.
L^^vs never fall into the barbarous hands of such men: such unfortunate
gentlemen, (as they are termed by soe^ of their adhaere^ts;) Unfortunate in
nothing, but that they gave not the blow. Nor into the more merciless hands
of such men, who can slay a man after he is dead; and kill him in his Faith:
Make him a (...) Reneg ado, an Apostate, a miraculous Proselyte, a Convert in
the grave. So that, it is not without reason, that the Preacher, after long
search and diligent enquiry, returns this verdict. Eccles. 7. 28.
One man amongst a thousand have I found; but a woman among all those have I
not found. There is then neither man, nor woman, not any of all mankind, of
either sex, in whose hands I may ^^cnrely trust my self, but in the hands of
that One man, who knew no sin: yet was made man, nay sin for me, nay for us
all. His hands were stretched out upon the cross, to receive us: his hands are
still open, to receive our prayers, and to offer them up to his Father on our
behalfes: and himself ready at the right hand of his Father, to make
intercession for us, that his hand may be stayed, which is against us.

We are already in Araunahs threshing floor, under the flail, under the rod,
and heavy visitation of the Lord. Here then erect an Altar, and praepare a
Sacrifice. If they be not ready, we need not be at any greater expense to
purchase them, then our Prayers. Deus providebit, God must, and will provide
himself a sacrifice. Nay Prouidit; I presume he has provided both. And that,
not Araunah as a King, but the King of Kings, has furnished us with that, which
cost us nothing, of our own; Hearts for Altars, and (I doubt not) contrite
hearts for Sacrifices. Sacrificia Domini Spiritus contribulatus: Ps. 51. 17.
which he will not, nay which he cannot despise. We have the Place, the Altar,
the Sacrifice, the Priest. What remains then? but that we should, V. 25.
with our Kingly Prophet David, First offer up our burnt offerings, the incense
of our prayers and supplications, with fervent devotion; and pray, that they
may be accepted in that propitiatory sacrifice Christ Jesus: and next, our
Peace offerings, our praises and thanksgiuings, when we shall perceive, that
the Lord is entreated for the Land, by our Prayers and Fastings: and the
Plague, with all other his visitations, stayed in our Israel. He hear us, in
that name above all names, of his blessed son Jesus Christ, in whom he is
well pleased. To which Father, and Son, with the holy Spirit, God aeternall,
be ascribed all honor, and power, by the whole Quire of Angels, and Men, now
and ever; Amen.

FINIS.

