To the Kings most excellent Majesty: the honorable Lords, Knights and
Burgesses assembled in Parliament.
The humble Petition for your Majesty's most miserable (yet most loyal
subjects) the Prisoners for debt in the Kings Bench.
IN all humility show, that they understanding that many Usurers and other
unconscionable men (under the color of Creditors in London) have combined
together to frame a Complaint into this Parliament against all Prisoners for
debt: And that their petition might the better be heard, they have of late (by
way of preparation and cunning) preferred a Petition (to the Commissioners for
Grieuances and decay of Trade,) which Petition as yet your poor subjects have
not seen.

Humbly therefore beseech your most sacred Majesty and Parliament, if any such
Bill or Complaint happen to be preferred, that you would graciously be pleased
to hear your poor subjects answer, before ought be concluded against them.

And in the mean time that your Majesty and Parliament would be pleased to
take into your wise and Christian consideration these brief notes following.

Reasonable Considerations, touching imprisonment for Debt, Penal Bonds, and
Vsuries.
1. That by the ancient Common laws of this Kingdom, no man free borne ought
to be imprisoned for debt.

It is one of the great fundamental Laws in force to this day.

It is the common Birthright of every man. For life, liberty and dower are
the maine and principal things which the Law of the Kingdom does chiefly and
absolutely intend to preserve and maintain above all other.

2. The body of every subject is the Kings, for his own and the Commonwealths
service; not only in the right of the absolute and transcendent power of his
Majesty's Crown, but by the very Law it self.

The Statute by which men's bodies are imprisoned for debt, is short and
obscure, without cause, circumstance or reason expressed for the same. And
there were no penal Bonds or Vsuries known or practiced by Christians in
those times.

Nor does it any way appear that these two so great and maine rights of the
King and Subject, were had in thought or consideration at the making hereof.

It may be doubted therefore whether that Statute be of power and value to
destroy so great rights, against the ancient fundamental Law, and against the
ancient Crown Rights, without mention, repeal, or reason alleged.

3. That nine in ten parts of all the debts for which men are kept staruing in
prison, are usurious and corrupt loanes and contracts, or forfeitures upon
penal bonds and engagements, which are things pronounced extortions, odious
and detestable sins, forbidden by the laws of God and man, as the Statute de
Iudaismo and diverse others do show.

4. Nor is the tenth part of the sums; recovered by Judgments at Law (and
for which men are kept staruing and perishing in prisons) just or due debts,
but are in truth small principal debts, or small remainders of great
principal debts, multiplied to incredible height by forfeitures of penal
bonds, counterbonds, counter-securities, etc. all which yet the prisoner must
pay, or starve in prison for. Here are very many strange and incredible
examples of this kind.

5. That the Law it self seems too hard, in that it judges and strikes with
the sword of execution, upon hearing the actual parts only of men's causes,
and rejects the equitable parts (which yet is one half of the cause.)

The other ear of Justice for hearing the other half, is in the Courts of
Equity, which are far off, and so full of trouble, charge and delay, as the
remedy commonly proves worse then the disease, as many men (who are no
prisoners) know by experience. For the Law is sent and ministered in every
County, but there is no Court of Equity for the Defendant but in London only.

6. That no Christian Country imprisoneth the body for debt, but England only:
but as soon as the Debtor does relinquish all his estate to the Creditors, his
body is free from imprisonment, and he stands liberatus a debito. And yet he
shall be restored back his wives Dower for her and her childrens liuelihood,
and the necessary means or instruments of his profession, trade or quality.

Nay, this our imprisoning Statute exceeds the Turks and Mahometans, where the
Creditor may imprison the Debtor, but then he must keep the Debtor and all
his family with sufficient maintenance, lest any be starued by reason of the
Debtors imprisonment.

All which reasonable and charitable considerations the Statutes of England
have not hitherto provided for.

7. That this practice of imprisoning men's bodies for debt, tends not to the
good of the Commonwealth, but to the advancement and increase of Usurers and
unconscionable dealing men in an unlawful calling, who (as the ancient Jews of
this Kingdom) have gotten so great a portion of the maine stock and common
moneys of the Kingdom into their hands, that upon any extraordinary chance or
occasion that discourageth or displeases them, they make a dearth of money at
their pleasure, to the infinite hurt and prejudice of the Commonwealth and
common commerce.

And who sees not, that if there were no gain by loan of moneys, there would
be free and friendly lending and borrowing, to the increase of love and
charity amongst all, and of freer and more gainful trading: but this gain by
usury, shuts up the hand of all good and Christian offices amongst men.

And it is not to be doubted, but that the great usury which is gotten in
England out of all sorts of trades, is the true and real cause that the Low
Countries and other Kingdoms and Commonwealths thrive, advance, and outstrip
us in trade and navigations, though we abound and exceed all the world with the
best matter, means and place, for both.

8. That prisoners for debt are willing and desire with the Usurers, that fraud
and cozenage may be made fellonie, not only for the future, but for the past
and present times also, so as the Usurer or Creditor may lose his debt, and pay
costs and damages for the slander (according to the quality of the Debtor) if
he fail in proof.

9. That imprisonment of the body is needless; for it neither is or can give
satisfaction to the Creditor, though he starve it by imprisonment.

Besides, it destroys the Debtor in his credit, friends, quality and trade,
in his rights and suites; it consumes all his means to keep himself in
life; and to pay fees and unconscionable pretenses, for favorable usage of
Bailiffes, prison-keepers, and such as live upon the extremities and
necessities of prisoners.

Nay more, it destroys the Debtor his wife, children, and all that is dear
unto him; yea commonly his life and all: for there have died within these
twelve months above lxxx persons in this prison alone, by want and infection;
besides many then preserved by the use of the writ of Habeas Corpus. So that it
is hereby manifest, that life, liberty and dower, which the law intends
chiefly to preserve, is by imprisoning the body for debt, overthrown and
destroyed. And yet after ten or twenty years imprisonment, in which the
prisoner has suffered more misery then the highest criminal offender, there
is not come one penny thereby into the Creditors purse, nor one penny
discounted of the Debtors debt.

10. If Creditors were to take their satisfaction upon all the Debtors estate,
without imprisonment of the body, (as by the ancient fundamental laws and
practice of other Countries,) then it would follow that the Debtor, though he
had departed all his estate to the Creditor or Usurer, yet having his person,
qualities and endeavors free, his friends constant, and his credit unstained
with the prison, would still be able, ready, and fit, to do honor and service
to his King and Country, and to win and purchase to himself a new estate, to
the advancement of his own and his posterities fortunes.

In all humility therefore, they pray your most sacred Majesty and Parliament
to take the premises into consideration, that satisfaction of all just debts
may be taken upon all the Debtors estate, as a thing most just and proper; and
that men's bodies may be set free, as a thing most agreeable to the laws of God
and man, to Christian charity, and to the advancement, good and honor of this
Kingdom, and to the preservation of the lives of thousands of able and well
qualified subjects, which yearly pine and perish in the Prisons of England
only.

That your subjects and all posterities may ever bless and pray for the
increase of your Majesty's health and happiness, and the prosperity of this
most hopeful Parliament.


