COCHIN-CHINA Containing many admirable Rarities and Singularities of that
Country.

Extracted out of an Italian Relation, lately presented to the POPE, by
CHRISTOPHORO BORRI, that lived certain years there.

And published by ROBERT ASHLEY.

Cum hac persuasione viuendum est; Non sum vni angulo natus: Patria mea totus
hic mundus est. Seneca.

LONDON.

Printed by Robert Raworth; for Richard Clutterbuck, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Ball in Little-Brittaine. 1633.

To the Right worthy Knight Sir Maurice Ahbot, Governor of the Honorable
Company of Merchants, trading to the East Indies; and the rest of that renowned
Society.
Having of late years addicted my self, especially amongst other Studies, to
a more curious search and inquisition of this glorious and wondrous
workmanship of the World, (whereof the one moity is in a manner unknown to the
other) endeavoring to give my self some satisfaction, by all such Relations
and Discoueries as I could procure, of those Conntreys least known unto us;
whether described by our Countrymen or by other foreign Travelers* I became
so affected with the following Relation of Cochin-China by an Italian Jesuit,
(who as it seems had been resident there some years) that I conceived the
description he makes of the Country, and the Commodities thereof, would not
only give some contentment to the curiosity of others; but might also happily
be useful to our Countrymen that trade and traffic in those Eastern parts:
If not to open a traffic to China it self, on which it confineth; yet at the
least to give occasion of further enquiry and discovery; whether the
Commodities of the Country be such as are pretended, and the access of all
Strangers so freely invited, as is here insinuated.

I am not ignorant that your trading into these remote parts of the East Indies
has had many opposers, especially of the ignorant and weaker sort; who suppose
the Treasure of the Realm to be exhausted thereby, in regard that they have
heard of much Money carried thither as well as other Commodities, and some late
disasterous events and accidents: as if it were no good husbandry to cast seed
into the ground, because we are not always assured to have a happy Harvest.
But this must not make any wise man impatient in his expectation of better
success; which commonly comes by a constant continuance of all so well
grounded proceedings. For (the case having been well canuased and every
objection discussed) your experience has taught, and your remonstrance to the
Parliament has manifested; that as the public profit by foreign Trade, is
the only means whereby we gain Treasure, (for Mines we have none which do
afford it) So the remotest traffic is always most beneficial to the public
Stock; and the Trade to the East Indies does far excel all others.

I shall not need to enter into particulars, how many brave Ships are by this
Trade yearly builded, rigged and furnished; how many good Mariners made and
employed; how many Artificers and handicrafts men set on work; how many idle
persons are taught to be serviceable Seamen; how our Enemies are affronted,
and our Concurrents counter poised, which with many other obseruatious have
been by sundry of your selves very evidently declared.

I will only conclude, that seeing it is so many ways apparent, that the
Kings Customs are so much by your trading into these remotest regions
increased; His Fame thereby spread into Persia, India, Iapan, China, Iaua, and
even to the ends of the world dispersed; His whole Realm and Kingdom thereby
so much strengthened, safegarded and enriched; with the Renown Honor and
reputation thereof so much raised end enlarged. I could wish, that as the
remote Navigations published by the Venetian Rhamusius, awakened the Industry of
M^. Hakluyt, and happily of Mr. Purchase after him, to their diligent gatherings
of the most remarkable Voyages of our Nation: so some other able person (of
which our Country has good store) were encouraged and stirred up, to continue
such Collections: Yet not only to the recording the exploits of our own
Nation; but also to collect and publish what they find worth the regarding
amongst Forreiners, that may any way be serviceable for the instruction of ours.

To such end this Relation is addressed unto you, that if you find ought that
may be useful therein, you may make your benefit thereof; (as it seems
others of our neighbor Nations have in some sort sought and attempted) or at
least by your own farther experience, control and rectify their mistakings:
To which purpose I cast this poor Mite into your rich Treasury; and remain,

a well wisher to your worthy endeauours. Robert Ashley.

The Preface Apologeticall.
TWo sorts there are most like among others to be least satisfied with the
Publication of this Relation: Whereof the one may suppose the Countries of
China and Cochin-China so far distant, and with which we have no Commerce, to
concern us so little, that it is but lost labor, to be curious or inquisitiue
how Men live there; or what commodities those Countries yield, and that
therefore it were more safely and more wisely done, to look nearer home to our
own; and to our Neighbouring-Countreyes, with whom we have more to do.

Another sort there is, that suddenly censure all strange Reports of things
which they have not seen at home, or are not common in the Countries next
consining, to be leasings and lies: Condemning not only our Countryman Sir
John Mandeuile, and with him Paulus Venetus, and other modern Authors of fables
and fictions, but even Pliny, Solinus, Strabo, and that ancient Historian
Herodotus; whose incredible seeming narrations the Frenchman Henery Stephens
in his Apology has made more credible by modern examples; which, work the
Translater of it into English has entitled, A World of Wonders.

To this latter sort (who would be thought wise, because they are not given to
be credulous) I answer first: That albeit credulity be an Argument of too
much facility, yet the way to the discovery of Truth is not in the other
extremity.

Stulti dum vitant vitia, in contraria currunt: We must therefore learn to
doubt and suspend our Judgment in things not yet thoroughly discovered, and
hearken to that of the great Philosopher Theophrastus, which he had from
Heraclitus, Res Mundi pulcherrimae ob arrogantiam hominum ignorantur dum nihil
statuunt credere, nisi humana Men's rationem illius perceperit. Let us also
consider, that if Columbus had obtained no credit with any in his strange
undertakings (as indeed he had none with the Multitude, nor with many of the
wiser sort) so great a part of the World as America is found to be (whose
furthest extent toward the North is not yet known) had been undiscovered.

To the first sort, who would not have us too curiously inquisitiue of such
remote Countries as China, and Cochin-China, where we have no Commerce, I
answer, that howsoever China gives no easy access unto Strangers; who
knows what alteration of time may breed? seeing we find sundry Relations of
Portugals that have penetrated into it? And diverse Jesuits, forty or fifty
years resident in it? Besides that, yearly there is a Fair held at Canton,
where there is free access to Strangers of all Nations for certain months?

But by this present Relation, it appears to be clean contrary in
Cochin-China, where they admit all Strangers of what Nation soever, to have
Trade and Traffic, which being so, I find not our own Nation excluded.

Yet admit that there were no likelihood of access: How sweet and pleasant,
how ingenious and ingenuous, is the curious Inquisition and speculation of this
admirable workmanship of the World, and the nobler parts thereof? I will take a
Testimony or two, both of Ancient and Modern Authors.

Seneca, enquiring after Happiness, affirms, Curiosum De beata vita.
nobis Natura Ingenium dedit, and Artis sibi and pulchritudinis suae conscia
spectatores nos tantis rerum spectaculis genuit; fructum sui perditura, si tam
magna, tam clara, tam subtiliter ducta, tam nitida, et non vno genere formosa
Solitudini oftenderet: Vt scias illam spectari voluisse; non tantum aspici. And
again, Ego terras omnes tanquam meas videbo; meas tanquam omnium. Ego sic
viuam tanquam sciam alijs me natum: and Naturae rerum hoc nomine gratias agam.
Quo enim melius genere negotium meum agere potuit? vnum me donauit omnibus; vni
mihi omnes.

Amongst other Modern Authors Postellus, (himself De orbis conc. lib. 3. cap.
25.
a great Traveler) says, Homo Natura, praeter proprium loquendi munus quo
differt a caeteris animantibus, id etiam habet, quod peregrina omnia admiratur
and ad insolita obstupescit, atque externis potius quam domesticis capitur. And
another industrious Author of latter time, Ingenium humanum Kekerm. phys. lib.
2. cap. 3.
est curiosum, and nouitatis atque varietatis auidum, semper desiderat aliud
genus remotum. And a little after, Quae noua quae rara vndeas Ingenium humanum
afficiunt; vt stolidus videri debeat, qui de his talibus non aueat disserere,
neque secum ipse meditetur ea, and solicitet cum cura pernoscendi. I have
therefore thought, that happily there may be many others, which finding the
like affections in themselves, may make use of what is here presented.

The Contents of the Book.
CHAP. I. OF the Name, Situation, and Greatness of this Kingdom. CHAP. II. Of
the Climate, and quality of the Country of Cochin-China. CHAP. III. Of the
Fertillity of the Land. CHAP. IIII. Of the Elephants and Rhinoceros. CHAP. V.
Of the Temperament, Manners, and Customs of the Cochin-Chinois, Of their
manner of Living, Clothing, and Medicines. CHAP. VI. Of the Civil and
Politic Government of Cochin-China. CHAP. VII. Of the Forces of the King of
Cochin-China, and of the Wars he has within his Kingdom. CHAP. VIII. Of the
Commerce, Ports, and Havens, of Cochin-China.
A Relation of the Kingdom of COCHIN-CHINA.
CHAP. I. Of the Name, Situation and Greatness of this Kingdom.
COchin-China being so named by the Portugals, is called in the language of the
Originarie inhabitants Anam, which is the West, in regard it is situate on the
West of China; in respect whereof the Iapaneses called it by the name of Coci,
which in their tongue has the same signification that Anam has with the
Cochin-Chineses: But the Portugals which trafique in Anam, are they which of
the Iaponian word Coci and of China, have made and compounded this word
Cochin-China, being as much to say, as Cochin of China, to distinguish it from
Cochin a City of India frequented by them. And whereas in many Mapps
Cochin-China is commonly called or designed by the name of Cauchin-China, or
Cauchine, or some other; It proceeds either of their (...)apting the proper
name, or else because the makers of the Mapps would signify, that this
Kingdom is the entrance and beginning of China.

Cochin-China on the South, confines with the kingdom of Chiampa, about the
11. degree of Northerly Latitude, on the North side; yet somewhat Eastward, it
bordereth on Tunchim* on the East side it has the Sea of China; and on the
West Northwest the kingdom of Lays.

In length Cochin-China is held to extend above an hundred Leagues on the Sea
coast; from the kingdom of Chiampa, in 11. degrees of Northerly Latitude,
reaching to the gulf of Anam in the elevation of about 17. degrees of the
same, where the estate of the King of Tunchim begins. In breadth it is of no
great extent, being straightened within the space of twenty Italian miles, all a
plain country, bounded on the one side with the Sea; and hemmed in on the
other with a great rank of mountains inhabited by the Kemois, which
signifies Saluages; for although they be Cochin-Chineses, they will not
acknowledge the King, nor obey him in any thing, cantoning and fortifying
themselves in those mountains, almost inaccessible.

Cochin-China is divided into five Provinces: The first where the King makes
his abode, joins upon Tunchim, and is called Sinuua: The second is named
Cacciam, in which the Prince the Kings son does reside as governor: The name
of the third is Quamguia: The fourth Quignim, to which the Portugals have given
the name of Pulucambis: The fifth which bordereth on the Kingdom of Champa, is
called Renram.

CHAP. II. Of the Climate and quality of the Country of Cochin-China.
THis Kingdom being (as has been said) between the 11. and 17. degree of
Northerly latitude, it follows consequently that the Country is rather hot
then cold: Yet it is not so hot as India, though it have the same elevation of
the Pole, and be likewise under the Torrid Zone. The reason of which
difference is, because that in India there is no distinction of the four
Seasons of the Year: In regard that there their Summer continues for the
space of nine Months together, during which no cloud appears in the sky,
neither by day nor night; in such sort that the Air is always scorched by
reuerberation of the Sunbeams. The other three Months they call Winter, not
because they are without heat; but by reason of the continual raines which
are ordinary there both night and day at that season. And notwithstanding it
naturally seems that such continual rain should somewhat refresh the Air*
Yet the same falling in the Months of May, June, and July, when the Sun is at
his highest in the Zenith of India, no winds then stirring but those that are
very hot, the Air is thereby so stuffed and thickened, that the heat is then
sometimes less tolerable then in the midst of Summer it self: during which
there commonly come from the sea, some gentle cooling winds to refresh the
Land; without which gracious particular Providence of God, those Countries
would be inhabitable.

This is not so in Cochin-China, which enjoying the four seasons of the Year
(howsoever not so exactly distinguished as in Europe) is much better tempered
thereby. For notwithstanding that in their Summer which comprehends the three
Months, June, July, and August, it be there very hot as in a Country seated
under the Torrid Zone, and having the Sun in those months, in the highest
point of elevation over their heads: Yet in September, October, and November,
being their Autumn the heat cease, and the Air is very temperate by reason
of the continual raines which do ordinarily fall at those times on the
Mountains of the Kemois; from whence there come waters in such abundance, that
they ouerflow all the Country, and joining themselves with the sea they seem
to be one self thing therewith. Moreover these Inundations of waters come
commonly once in a fortnight, continuing about three days together* The
benefit that comes thereby, is not only the refreshing of the Air, but also
the fatning of the earth, making it more fruitful and abundant in all things,
and especially in Rice, which is the best Manna, and the commonest nourishment
of all the Kingdom. In the other three months of Winter, which are December,
January and February, the Northerly winds bring such cold raines, that thereby
they sufficiently distinguish Winter from their other seasons of the year.
Finally in the Months of March, April and May, there are seen the effects of
a pleasant springtime, all being green and flourishing amongst them.

Having thus declared these Inundations; I must also acquaint you* with some
particular curiosities, and remarkable observations thereof, before I conclude
this Chapter.

The first shall be, that they are generally desired of all men, nor only
because the Air is refreshed by them, beco^ming more ^^de^ and pleasant, but
much more in regard of the fruitfulness which they cause in the Earth:
Whereupon as soon as they see them, the pleasure and contentment they have, is
such and so great, that they make it sufficiently appear by their visiting,
feasting and presenting one the other, crying often for joy, and all repeating
and reiterating Daden Lut* Daden Lut, which signifies, the Water is come* the
Water is already come: Insomuch that there is none amongst them of what degree
or quality soever but Feasteth and rejoices: Yea, even the King himself.

Yet in as much as these inundations come so suddenly, and sometime so
unexpected, that when in the Evening they thought not of them, they find
themselves in the Morning invested on all sides, and shut up in their houses,
and that throughout all the Country it falls out now and then, that they loose
their Cattle, that have not had the leisure to retire and withdraw them for
refuge into the hills, and higher places: In regard whereof there is a
constitution in the Kingdom, that those Beeues, Goats, Hoggs, and other beasts
which are drowned in these deluges, shall no longer belong to the proprietarie
and owner of them, but shall be his that first seifeth on them: which custom
occasioneth good sport amongst them, in regard that when the water comes,
they betake themselves to their Boats, in quest of such drowned cattle, with
which they afterward make merry, and feast their friends.

The young Children have also their plays and pastimes according to their age;
by reason that these great plains covered over with Rice, abounding likewise
with Rats, and Mice, they are forced by the water which has filled their
holes, to save themselves by swimming, and to climb upon the tres for refuge,
by means whereof the trees are laden with Rats and Mice, in lieu of leaves and
fruits: Thereupon the boys get themselves into boats by bands, betaking
themselves to the shaking of the trees, dismounting those Rats and Mice,
drowning them in the water; of which their childish disport, there comes a
great good to the Land, which by such means remains the more cleared and
freed of this vermin; which otherwise by little and little, would much waste
and spoil their fields.

The last commodity yet not the least which the Lut brings, is, that every
one thereby furnishes and provides his house the better of all necessaries;
for in three days it makes all the country nauigable every where, with such
ease and facility, that there is nothing but may easily be conveyed from one
Town to another: in regard whereof they keep all their Faires and great
Markets at these times, when the concourse is always greater then at any other
time of the year. In those days also they make their provision of wood for
their firing and for Building, which they bring from the Mountains in their
Boats, that pass easily through the streets, even into their Houses, which
for the purpose are mounted on ranckes of pillars, raised very high to give the
water a free entrance and issue; every one retiring mean time into the
uppermost story of his House* Unto which the water (which cannot be
sufficiently admired) the Lut or Inundation never mounteth; for they take their
measure, so well, through long experience of the height of the waters, that
they have no fear thereof, being well assured that the waters will always
remain below their Buildings.

CHAP. III. Of the Fertility of the Land.
ALbeit one may easily judge of the fruitfulnes of Cochin-China, by the profit
which the Lut brings (as has been said) yet somewhat may be said in
particular.

The Land becomes so fat and so fruitful by this Lut or ouerflowing, that
thrice every year they gather their Rice, and that in such great quantity and
abundance, that there is none will labor for his living, every one having
plentiously whereon to live.

The plenty and the variety of fruits is great all the year long, of as many
several sorts as there are in India; for Cochin-China lies in the same
Climate: Yet in particular it has fairer and greater Oranges then we have in
Europe, and those very succulent; the rind of them being so soft, so tender
and so sauoury, that it is as usually eaten as the inside, which is of as
pleasing a relish and taste, as the Limons of Italy: There are also certain
fruits which the Portugals call Bananes, and others term them Indian Figgs,
but with no great reason in my opinion, seeing neither the tree which in India
is called the figtree, nor yet that of Cochin-China has any resemblance of our
figtree, either in the wood or in the fruit: The tree is like that plant which
we call Turkie-wheat, though much higher, and the leaves so long and broad,
that two of them will serve to cover a man from the top to the toe, and so
compass him round about; which happily made some to be of opinion, that this was
the tree of the terrestrial Paradise, with the leaves whereof Adam sought to
cover his nakedness: This tree bears a grape at the top, of twenty, thirty
or forty together in a cluster, every of which in his shape, as also in his
length and greatness, resembles the common Citrons of Italy: When the fruit
is not ripe, the rind is green of color, and grows yellow afterward as the
Citrons do: One shall not need a knife to open and to pill this fruit, for
the rind thereof comes away as easily as the husk of young Beans; It has a
pleasing smell, and the yellow flesh or marrow within, is as firm as that of a
ripe pear which will melt in the mouth; Whence it appears that this tree
has nothing common to the Fig Tree, but the taste and sweetness.

There is also another sort of these Fruits, which is not eaten, but roasted and
put in Wine. This plant is dried up every year when it has yielded his fruit,
having at his foot a tender sprout for the next year. Moreover* that which in
Italy they call the fig tree of India, has no resemblance either with the
plant or with the fruit of this Bananes: This fruit is also common to all the
Provinces of India.

But in Cochin-China there is another sort which is neither found in China, nor
in all India; It is equal in greatness to the greatest Citrons of Italy, and is
so substantial, that one of them will satisfy a man, the flesh within is very
white* they are of a pleasing taste, and exceeding good against the loosenes of
the belly.

There is also in Cochin-China another fruit, which I have not seen elsewhere;
in India it is called Can, and resembles in shape and fashion, the outside of
the Pomegranate: But the Marrow within is more liquid to be taken and eaten
with a Spoone, having an aromaticke taste, and is for color not unlike to a
ripe Medlar.

They have also a fruit like unto our Cherries, but their taste is more like
that of the Raisin: In their language they call them Gnoo. Neither are they
without Melons, yet not so good as those of Italy; nor are they usually eaten
but with Sugar, or Honey. But their Cucumbers or Water-Melons, as others term
them, are exceeding great, and most excellent.

There grows also a fruit called Gyaque, which is common also elsewhere in
India, but not so fair by much, as in Cochin-China, growing on a tree as high
as the Wall-nut or Chess-nut tree, with much longer prickels: This fruit is as
great as the greatest Cabbage, for one of them is as much as one man can carry
at one time. It is like a Pineapple in the outside, but the inside is tender
and soft; full of yellow ears or cloves, whose graynes are flat and round as a
Iulio of Italy, or a Teston; and in the midst of each grain is found a bone,
which they cast away when they eat the fruit. There are two sorts, those which
the Portugals call Giaca-barca, whose meat is firm when the kernel is cast
away: The other is not so firm, but rather soft as glue; the taste of either
of them is much resembling that of the delicious fruit called Durion, which we
are now to describe.

The Durion is one of the most excellent fruits in the World, which grows not
elsewhere but at Malacca, Borneo, or some Isles thereabouts: There is no great
difference between the tree that bears it, and the Gyaque; the fruit
thereof, as well as that of the Gyaque, resembling the Pineapple outwardly,
both in the shape, and hardness of his rind: The meat is close to the bone,
as in the other, being marvelous white, and in taste and sweetness like the
Mangiarbianco, a delicate dish of the Italians. This meat, and this liquor
within the Apple, is in ten or twelve little cells, every of which has his
white meat about the bone as big as a Chess-nut: When you break or open it,
there comes out a very unpleasing smell, like that of a rotten Onion; yet
that which is within has no taste thereof at all, but is sweet and most
delitious. Whereupon I will relate a History of what happened where I was
present: One being desirous to give a taste of this fruit to a Prelate that was
newly come to Malacca, opened it before him, not thinking thereof, whence there
came so strong and so unpleasing a savor, that the Prelate became so distasted
therewith, that he could not possibly be persuaded to taste thereof: But being
set at the Table to his Dinner, amongst other services, there was presented to
him a dish containing nothing but the inside of this fruit, which in savor and
taste is so like to the Mangiar-bianco, that it was easy to make the Prelate
or any other to mistake it, that had not seen it dressed or prepared. He had
no sooner put his hand to it, but at the very first morsel which he took, he
found the taste so exquisite, that with astonishment he enquired, who was the
Cook that had prepared such a delicious white meat; whereunto he that
feasted him in his House, made answer smiling, that no other Cook had meddled
therewith, but the great GOD, who had furnished this Country with so rare a
fruit; which was no other but the Durion which he had in so great horror at the
first: Wherewith the Prelate was much astonished, eating thereof with so good
an appetite, as if he could not have too much of it. This fruit is held so
excellent, that even at Malacca where it grows, the same is sometimes sold
for a Crown a piece.

In Cochin-China also there is great plenty of another fruit, which the
Portugals call Ananes. And albeit there be nothing more common throughout India
and in Brazil; yet because I do not find them so well discribed to my mind, by
such as have made mention of them, I will add a word or two concerning the
same. This fruit grows not on any tree, neither comes it of any seed, but
of a root, as our Artichockes do: The stalk and leaf is very like those of
the Carduus-thistles and Artichoks: It is round like a colomne or pillar of 9.
inches in length, and of such a greatness, that one can scarcely clip it with
both his hands. The meat thereof is closed within like as in the Radish: But
it has a harder rind, which is fashioned in resemblance like to the scales of
Fishes. It is yellow within when it is ripe, and then the outside being pared
away with a Knife, it is usually eaten raw, being of a sharp and sweet
relish, when it comes to his naturity, not unlike to a delicate Pear.

There is also found in Cochin-China another fruit, peculiar to that Country:
It is called of the Portugals, Areca, which grows on a tree of as straight a
body as the Palm Tree; hollow within, and has no leaves but at the top only,
as the Palm Tree leaves are: In the midst of which there are little boughs on
which the fruit hangs, in bigness and shape like the wall-nut, having also a
green husk like unto it, and the meat within as white and hard as a
Chess-nut; yet has no taste nor savor at all: Therefore it is not eaten
alone, but covered with leaves of Betle, being a plant well known in all
India, whose leaves are like Iuie leaves, and the plant it self climbing on
trees as our Iuie in Europe. They cut their leaves into small pieces, and in
every piece they put a morsel of Areca, so that of one fruit, they make four
or five morsells: They use also to put Lime to their Areca; such as they make
in that country of Oyster-shells, and not of Lime-stones as they do in
Europe. And as with us there are commonly some appointed to dress the Meat, to
provide Cates and to perform other offices: So in Cochin-China there is in
every house some or other appointed to no other office, but only to infold
these morsels of Areca in the Betle, and the officers that are so employed, who
most commonly are women, be called the Betleres. These morsels thus prepared
are put into boxes, and they usually go chewing on them all day long, not
only within doors, but even when they go up and down the streets, or
speak with any, in all places and at all times; But after they have long
chewed it and kept it in their mouths without swallowing of it, they spit it
out; contenting themselves with the odor and quality which does maruellously
comfort the stomach. This fruit thus prepared, is in such request among them,
that when any goes to the house of another to visit him, he carries with him
a box thereof, presenting it unto him, which he presently puts in his
mouth; and before he take his leave, he that is so visited, commands the
Betlere of the house to bring him a box thereof, which he offers to him
that came to him that came to see him, in requital of his courtesy. In such
sort that they must always have it prepared in a readiness; and so great is
the profit thereof, that the greatest revenue of the Country, consists in
possessing fields well planted with Areca, as in Europe with Vines and Olives.
Tobacco is also used there, though not so frequently as their Betle. There are
also Cabbages of all sorts in great abundance, as well as Sugarcanes. Our
fruits of Europe are not yet come to Cochin-China; howbeit I am of opinion that
the Vine and Fig Tree would prosper well there. Our herbs, as Lettice,
Succory, Coleworts and such other are growing in Cochin-China, and all over
India; yet they bear leaves only without any seed: so that when they would
have any new, they are feign to have the seed out of Europe.

Flesh is also there in great plenty, by reason of the abundance of four
footed beasts which they nourish there in their houses, as Kine, Goats, Swine,
Buffles, and such other. Of wild beasts, as Hearts, they have many greater then
those of Europe; Wild Bores and diverse others. They have great store of Fowls,
tame Hens and wild, with which their fields are covered; Turtle-Doues, Pigeons,
Duckes, Geese and Cranes, which are very sauoury meat; besides many others
which we have not here in Europe.

There is also great store of Fish, and that of so exquisite relish and taste,
that having crossed so many Seas, and traveled through so many Countries as I
have done, methinkes I have not found the Fish of any other place, comparable
to that of Cochin-China. And by reason that the whole length of the country
lies on the Sea, as I have said, there is such a multitude of Fisher-boates,
and Fish-takers, and Fish-carriers throughout the Kingdom, that it is a pretty
spectacle to behold so many ranks of men, carrying Fish from the Sea side,
even up to the Mountains; in which exercise they employ twenty of the four
and twenty hours of the day. And although it be true, that they like better
of Fish then of Flesh, yet the chief cause why they are so much given to
Fishing is, the desire they have to provide themselves a Sauce which they call
Balaciam, that is made of a salted Fish mollified and dissolved in water;
whereof they make a biting liquor, not unlike unto Mustard, with which they
furnish their Houses in so great a quantity, that they fill Tons and
Hogsheads therewith, as in many places of Europe men do with wines* yet they
use it not for meat by it self, but for sauce only to quicken their appetite
in eating of their Rice, which they suppose would otherwise be unsavory.

They abound also with Shel-fish, with Oysters, and other fruits of the Sea;
especially with one kind which they call Cameron.

But beyond all that has been said, Gods Providence has privileged them
with a rare and exquisite kind of food, which in my opinion cannot be better
likened or compared, then to that Manna with which the chosen people of God
were fed in the Desert. This kind of food is so peculiar to Cochin-China, that
it is not any where else. That which I will say thereof shall not be by
hearesay, or by report of any other, but by mine own experience, who have
seen and eaten of it often. There is a little Bird in this Country, like unto
a Swallow, which fasteneth his nest to the rocks, on which the waves of the Sea
do beat, and are broken. This little creature takes with her bill some of
the froth of the Sea, and with a certain humor which she draws out of her
stomach, mingling the one with the other, makes I know not what clay-like
bituminous matter, wherewith she after builds her nest; which when it is
grown to be dry and hard, becomes transparent, and of a mingled color,
betwixt yellow and green. These nests are gathered by those of the Country,
and being softened and dissolved in water, serve to season all their Meats,
either Flesh, or Fish, Herbs or any thing else; giving such a diversity of
relish, and so proper to every of them, that one would think they were
prepared with Pepper, Cinamom, Cloves, and all manner of Spices: in such sort,
that this little nest is sufficient to season all sorts of Viands without Salt,
Oil or Lard, or any other thing: Which made me say that indeed it resembled
the Manna, which had in it self the taste of all the most fauourie kinds of
food; but that this is only the work of a little Bird, whereas the other was
prepared by the Angels of God. And of this there is such store, that I have
seen ten little boats laden with these nests, gathered along the Rocks within
the space of half a League. But because it is such an exquisite thing, none
but the King does traffic therewith, they are all reserved for him, and the
greatest utterance he makes of them, is for the King of China, who has them
in great esteem.

They eat not any Milk nor ought made thereof, holding it for a great offense
to draw milk from Kine or any other creatures: and their reason for such their
scrupulosity is, that they say, the milk was ordained by Nature, for the
nourishment of the young ones: As if he to whom the little ones appertain,
could not dispose of the nutriment due unto them.

They eat certain things which we loathe and abhor as venomous; namely the
Camelions, which are greater there, then those which being dried, are brought
out of strange Countries oftentimes into Italy. I have seen some brought by a
friend of mine, bound, and packed up, which he cast upon the burning coals,
and as soon as their bands were burnt, they marched fair and softly after
their manner, on the live coals, till such time as they felt the force of the
fire, which they endured for a while, being of a very cold constitution; but in
the end they were roasted and broiled, whereupon this friend of mine, drew them
to him, and scraping away the burnt skin with a Knife, found their flesh to be
exceeding white, which he brayed and sod with a little sauce like unto Butter,
and eat them as a most excellent meat, inuiting me thereunto: But I was
contented with the sight of it.

Of all other things requisite for the intertainement of a man's life,
Cochin-China is also very sufficiently provided. As first for apparel, there
is such abundance of Silk, that the handy-craft men, and the baser sort of
people wear it daily. By occasion whereof, I have diverse times taken pleasure
to see the men and women travel in carrying Stones, Earth, Lime and other like
things, without any regard taken of the tearing or fouling their fair and rich
apparel which they wear. Yet this will not seem strange to any, that shall
know how these high Mulberry trees, by whose leaves the Silke-wormes are
nourished, are as plentiful here in these large plains, as Hemp is with us,
and no longer time in growing. In such sort, that in a few Months the Worms
come forth of them, and nourish themselves in the Air* spinne out their Silk
in due time, and make their Codds, Bladders and Bottomes, in so great a
quantity and abundance, that not only the Inhabitants have enough fot their
own necessary uses and occasions; but they furnish Iapan also, and send Silk
to the Kingdom of Lais, wherehence it is also carried into the Kingdom of
Thibet: For albeit the Silk be not so fine and delicate, yet it is stronger
and more substantial then that of China.

Their Buildings and Houses are all of wood* yet in regard thereof they need
not envy any other Province; because that without any exaggeration, the Wood
and Timber of this country is the best of all the world, by the judgment of
those that have been in many places. Amongst that great number and exceeding
great diversity of trees which they have, there are two sorts most commonly
employed in their Buildings, which are so incorruptible, that they are not
endammaged by being in the water, or under the earth: They be so sollid also
and so weighty, that they will not swim on the water, but serve for Anchors.
One of these kinds of wood is black, yet not so black as the Ebeny: The other
is red; being both of them so smooth and even, that when the Bark is taken
away, they need no plaining or smoothing. These trees are called Tin, and happily
he should not much be deceived, that should be of opinion that the trees which
Solomon used in the building of the Temple, were of the same incorruptible
Timber; seeing we know already by the Scripture, that those which he employed
were called Ligna Thyine, 2. Chro. 9. 10. 11. which approaches very near
their name. The mountains of Cochin-China are covered all over with these
trees which are exceeding straight, and of such unmeasurable height, that they
seem to touch the clouds with their tops; and therewith so thick, that two
men cannot circle them about. With these trees do the inhabitants of
Cochin-China build their houses; of which it is lawful for every one to take
on the mountains as many as he will. Their houses are built upon pillars that
are very high and sound, and well vnderlaid; unto which they join boards and
plankes, which they can take off and lay on again, as they list to change them
with Grates or Lattices of Canes and Reeds, which they interlace curiously to
let in the Air in times of heat; partly also to give the water free passage in
and out, and that their boats may have egresse and regresse in the time of
inundations. They use also a thousand devises and inventions to beautify and
adorn their houses; caruing their boards and planks with curious workmanship,
and making their habitations delightful with variety of garnishment.

Now whiles we are discoursing of Trees, I will add somewhat as concerning
another kind of wood which is their most precious merchandise: This is that
renowned wood called Aquila and Calamba, which are the same in regard of the
wood, yet much different in the reckoning made of them, as also in their virtue
and efficacy. There is good store of these trees, especially on the mountains
of the Kemois, which are very great and very high. If this wood be cut from a
young trunk or stock, then they call it Aquila; whereof there is such plenty,
that every one may take as much as he will: But when this wood is taken from an
old tree, this is the Calamba, which were exceeding hard to be gotten, if
Nature had not helped in that behalf, placing these trees at the top of the
highest, steep, and craggie mountains, where they may quietly grow without
any wrong or violence done them. There are falling from them from time to time,
some branches which break of themselves from the body of the tree; either by
becoming blasted and withered, or by extremity of old age, which are found to
be rotten and worme-eaten. This is the high-prised and renowned Calamba, which
far surpasses the common Aquila, in efficacy and sweetness of scent. Every
one may sell of the Aquila at his pleasure; but the traffic of the Calamba is
reserved to the King alone, for the excellent odor and sovereign virtue
thereof. And certainly in those places where it is gathered, it is so sweet,
and so odoriferous, that proving certain pieces of it, which had been given
me, I buried them more then five foot under ground; yet notwithstanding they
betrayed themselves by their sweet smell. This Calamba where it is gathered, is
valued at five Ducats the pound; yet at the Port of Cochin-China it yields
more; and scarcely to be had under sixteen Ducats the pound: And being
transported to Iapan, it is valued at two hundred Ducats the pound: But if one
meet with a piece of such greatness that a man may lay his head on it, as on a
pillow; the Iaponeses will give three or four hundred Ducats the pound for it:
because they find by experiment (as they say) that it is better for health, to
have some hard thing under ones head when he sleeps, then a soft pillow of
feathers: which because they hold to be unwholesome, they use ordinarily a piece
of wood for a Boulster to rest their head on; which every one according to his
ability, will have as costly as he can get. And if it be made of Calamba, they
account it a pillow for a Prince. Now the Aquila, howsoever it be of less
estimation and value then the Calamba; yet it is of such account and worth,
that one Ships lading of Aquila is sufficient to enrich a Merchant all his
life. And the best recompense that the King can give to a Captain of Malacca,
is, to trade and traffic with this Aquila: by reason that the Brachmans and
Banians of India, being accustomed to burn the bodies of the dead with this
odoriferous wood, will quickly dispatch and rid him of an infinite quantity
thereof.

In conclusion, there are also in Cochin-China, many Mines of the preciousest
Metalls, and of Gold especially. So to comprehend in few words the fertility of
this country, which meriteth a more larger discourse; I will conclude this
Chapter with that which the Merchants of Europe that trade thither commonly
say, That the riches of Cochin-China are greater then those of China it self;
which is known to be so exceeding rich and plentiful in all good things.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Eelphants and Rhinoceros.
THere are many Elephants in the woods of Cochin-China; of which they make no
use, because they have not the skill to catch them and to make them tame, but
they have some brought unto them from a neighboring country called Cambogia,
which are instructed and disciplined before. These are as great again as the
Indian Elephants, the print of their foot which they leave behind them, is a
foot and half in the Diameter: The teeth which come out of their mouths, of
which Iuorie is made, are often times thirteen, sometimes fourteen foot in
length; but those of the female Elephants are much shorter: Whence may easily
be coniectured, how much greater the Elephants of Cochin-China are, then those
which are brought into Europe, whose teeth are not above two foot and a half
in length.

They are long lived; and thereupon when I once demanded how old one of them
was, his Conductor answered me, that he was threescore years old when he was
brought out of Cambogia, and had lived forty years in Cochin-China.

And because I have traveled many times on Elephants in this Kingdom, I can
report many things of them which will seem very strange, but are nevertheless
true.

The Elephant does ordinarily carry thirteen or fourteen persons, who are
thus in this manner accommodated; Even as we put Saddles on our Horses, so do
they put upon their Elephants, a kind of Engine fashioned like unto a great
Hors-Litter, within the which there are four seats; and it is fastened and
tied with chains under the belly of the Elephant, in like manner as the Saddle
is with the Girthes to the Horse. This Litter has two entries or open places
on each side, in which are bestowed six persons, being ranked by three and
three; and another behind, wherein two persons are placed; and then the Nayre,
(who is as the Coachman or Conductor) placing himself on the Head of the
Elephant, that he may guide and govern him. It has not only happened unto me
to travel by Land in this manner, but many times also by Water, passing in
this sort over some arm of the Sea, sometimes more then half a league from
the Land* And to speak truth, it is a marvelous thing to him that never saw
it; to see such a great and huge mass of flesh, laden with so heavy a burden,
to go swimming and crossing the waters like a Boat with Oars. True it is,
that he made it sufficiently appear, that he suffered much, as well in the
pains he took to carry the great mass of his body, as for his difficulty of
breathing; Insomuch that to ease and refresh himself in this great travel, he
took up the water in his trunk, and cast it up so high in the air, that one
might have thought it had been some Whale of the Sea.

By reason of his great corpulency, it is an extreme difficulty for him to bow
down; and although he must needs do it, for the commodity of those that are
to go out or enter into the Litter, yet he never does it but when the Nayre
commands him; and if whiles he is so bowed down, any make too long stay,
either in complying with friends or otherwise; he raises himself on his feet,
with impatience to remain so long in such a violent posture.

It is no less wonder, to see how at the commandment of the Nayre, he makes
his body in manner of a Ladder, for the greater commodity of those that are to
enter into the Litter: For the first step, he offers his Foot, which is
distant enough from ground; for the second he presents his Pasterne, at a
convenient distance from the first; and for the third, he boweth his Knee* the
fourth step, is on the bone of his Flank which is cast somewhat outward for
the purpose; and from thence he receives you on his trunk, and carries you
to a chain fastened to his Litter.

Hereby evidently appears, how much they have bin deceived who have written,
that the Elefant could neither bow himself nor lie down, and that the only
way to take him, was to cut the tree against which he was to lean when he went
to sleep: because that by the fall of that tree which was to sustain and
support him, he must of force fall down without any ability to raise himself
again: by which means, he should be an assured prey to the Hunter that
pursued him. All this is but a fable; although it be out of doubt, that he
never lies down to sleep: that Situation being so incommodious and violent
for him, as has been expressed: and therefore he sleeps always standing,
with a continual agitation of his head.

In occasion of War and Battle, they take off the covering of the Litter,
wherehence, as out of a Tower, the Soldiers fight with Arrows and Muskets,
and sometimes also with Fieldpieces; the Elephant having strength enough to
carry them: For this beast is exceeding strong, and has not his like. I have
seen one my self, carry excessive burdens on his trunk: Another that lifted up
a great piece of Artillery: Another alone to draw ten small Boats one after
another, taking them between his Teeth, with great dexterity, and casting them
into the Sea. I have seen others, pull up great Trees by the roots, as easily
as a man would pull up a Colewort or a Lettice: With as much facility they
will throw down and ouerturne Houses, beat down whole Streets, when they are
commanded in the Wars, to endammage the enemy, and in Peace, when a House is
on fire, that it take not hold of the rest.

The trunk of the Elephant is long, proportionally to the rest of his body, so
that without stooping or bowing down, he can easily reach from the ground,
what he list: It is composed of many little nerves, bound, and linked one unto
the other, in such sort, that on the one side, it is so flexible and maniable,
that he extends and turns it as he list, to receive any the least things;
and on the other side, it is therewithal, as hard and strong as we have said.

His whole body is covered with a hard and rough ash*coloured skin: His
ordinary travel, is 12. leagues a day. His motion to those that are not used
unto it; brings the like incommoditie as they find in the Ship, that are not
accustomed to Sea-voyages.

For the Docilitie of the Elephant, I shall say more marvelous things, then
those which are ordinarily rehearsed: Which will make it manifest, that with
great reason it was said by one, Elephanto belluarum nulla prudentior; seeing
he does such things as will give men just cause to believe, that they cannot
see how they should be done, without Intelligence and Prudence.

First then, the Nayre uses an Instrument of Iron about the length of four
hands breadth, with which he does sometimes beat or prick him, with a sharp
crook which is in the end thereof, to awaken him, and make him attentive to
what is commanded him, yet notwithstanding he does ordinarily rule and direct
him with words, in such sort, that he seems to understand his language: And
there are of them, that understand three or four, according to the Countries
where they have lived. So it seemed that he on which I traveled, understood
the Language of Cambogia, whence he was brought, and that of Cochin-China,
where he served. But who would not wonder to see the Nayre talking to his
Elephant, informing him of his voyage, of the ways he is to go, in what Inn
he intends to lodge, what provision he shall find there, and to tell him
particularly what he is to do in all that Journey thorowout; and that the
Elephant performs all with as much punctuality, as a man of sound Judgment.
In such sort, that having understood whither he is to go, he goes straight
directly thither, without seeking of a beaten way, and without any
astonishment, if he meet with rivers, Woods, or Mountains, but imagining that
he shall every where make his passage, he passes through all difficulties:
For if there be a River in his way, he either wadeth, or swimmeth through it;
If he be to pass through a Wood, he breaks the branches that hinder him,
pulls up whole Trees with his trunk, and cutteth off others with a sharp
Iron, made like unto a Sith, which for such purposes is fastened unto the
forepart of the Litter; and when occasion serves, he draws first the
branches and boughs to him, then he takes this Iron and cutteth them away;
making himself an open passage through the thickest Forests whatsoever,
whereby men perceive that the Elephant has been there and opened the way. All
this he does easily, and readily to execute the commandments of the Nayre.
One only thing this beast finds incommodious and grievous, which is, when
any thorn or other sharp thing pricketh the soles of his feet, which he has
very tender and sensible; going therefore but softly, and with great
circumspection, when he is to pass through such dangerous places. I was once
on a Journey, in which there were seven or eight Elephants in company, when I
hard the Nayres each of them aduertising his beast to take heed to their
footing, because they were to go for the space of half a League, through
certain sandy places, in which there were commonly some Thorns growing: At
which warning the Elephants bowed down their heads, and looking attentively
with their eyes, as men commonly do when they seek after somewhat that is
lost, they went fair and softly, with great heedfulnesse, whiles they were in
that danger, till such time as being told that they were past fear, they
lifted up their heads, and continued their pace as before. In the evening,
being come to their Inn, the Nayres bid the Elephants go to pasture in a
Wood, without taking their Litters from their backs: And when I questioned
them why they did not discharge them of that burden, they answered me, that the
Elephants were to feed on the boughs, and bodies of trees, and therefore that
they might cut them down at their pleasure, with the sharp Iron we speak of,
they were to keep on their Litters. The next day, being to lodge in a place
where there was no Wood, the Nayres brrought each of them a great faggot of
green trees for their Elephants, I took great delight to observe how one of
them with his trunk took these boughs more nimbly then the rest, pulled them
with his teeth, and did eat them after with as good an appetite as we would
eat a fig, or any other fruit. The next day discoursing with the other
travelers, being about some twenty persons, I told them what pleasure I took
in beholding how handsomely this Elephant did make shift to feed on those
boughs. Whereupon the Nayre by commandment of the owner of this Elephant,
called him aloud by his name, which was Gnin, who being gone a little aside,
presently lifted up his head, as harkening what he would say to him: Remember
says the Nayre the father the passenger, that was pleased* yesterday to see
thee eat: Take presently a truncheon such as thou had then; and come into
his presence, doing as thou did: No sooner had the Nayre spoken, but the
Elephant holding a Truncheon in his mouth, comes before me, and finding me
out amongst the rest, presents it unto me; then peeleth and eats it, and
doing me a profound reverence, retireth himself as it were laughing, with
signs of gladness and rejoicing: And I remained astonished, to see in a beast
so much aptness to understand and to do what was commanded him. Yet is he
obedient to none but to the Nayre or to his Master, and endures not to see any
other get upon him; which if any attempt to do, and he see it, they doubt he
would cast down his Litter, and kill him with his trunk. Therefore when any
are to get up on him, the Nayre covers his eyes with his ears, which are
very huge and unhandsome. When he shows himself resty in doing what is
commanded him, and does it not so readily as he ought, the Nayre having both
his feet upon his head, beats and chastises him soundly, giving great blows
with a staff, in the midst of his forehead. Once we being many in a company on
an Elephant that carried us, and the Nayre beating him in such sort as we have
said, we expected at every blow he received, that he would have cast us down.
They give him ordinarily six or seven blows on hisforehead, but with such
vehemence, that the Elephant trembles every Limb and Joint; yet endures it
with much patience.

There is only one occasion wherein he will not be ruled by the Nayre nor by
any man, which is, when on the sudden he enters into Rut: for then being
beside himself, as if he were mad, he endures no body; but takes his Litter
with his trunk, battering and breaking all to pieces. Yet ordinarily the Nayre
perceiving it a little before, by certain signs, alighteth off him, and
likewise the company; and taking off the Litter from his back, leaves him in
some close corner alone till his heat be ouerpassed: after which, as if he were
ashamed of his disorder, he goes holding down his head, submitting himself
to the blows and bastinadoes which he seems to himself to have well
deserved.

These beasts in former times have been of great use in the Wars, and such
Armies as came into the field with great bands of them, were much feared. But
since the Portugals found out the invention to encounter them with Torches and
Firebrarnds, they have rather been hurtful then profitable, because being not
able to abide those fiery flames before their eyes, they furiously fled away,
putting their own Armies in disaray, killing and overthrowing all that stood
in their way.

The tame Elephant fights only with two sorts of beasts, which are the Wild
Elephant, and the Abade or Rinoceros; for this latter he is commonly two hard,
but by the former he is ordinarily overcome.

The Abade is a beast which has some resemblance of the Ox, and somewhat of
the Horse; and is of the bigness of a little Elephant: He is covered all over
with Scales, which is to him as an armor; he has but one horn in the midst
of his forehead, which grows straight, being formed like a Pyramide: his
feet and hoofes like those of an Ox. Whiles I was at Nouoemon a Town in the
Province of Pulucambes, the Governor went out once to hunt an Abade, which was
in a Wood not far from our dwelling: He was accompanied with more then a
hundred, some on foot, others on horseback, with eight or ten Elephants. The
Abade comes out of the Wood, and at the sight of so many enemies, not only
shows no sign of fear, but furiously goes against them all; thereupon the
company dividing themselves into two wings, the Abade runs through the midst
of them, and came to the rereward where the Governor was mounted on an
Elephant, which sought to take hold on the Abade with his trunk, but could
not, by reason that the other made so many leapes and friskoles, seeking to
pierce the Elephant with his horn. The Governor knowing well that this beast
could not be wounded, but where he had no Scales, which was only in his
flank, watched when in his leaping his belly was toward him; and taking his
advantage, threw a dart at him, with which he pierced him through, which caused
great acclamations and shoutings of joy throughout all his troop; who there
presently in the field made a great bonfire of wood, wherein whiles the Scales
of the beast were a burning, they daunced and leaped about it; and when, as by
degrees, the flesh came to be roasted, they cut out every one his Carbonado, and
merrily eat it. Then they opened the Abade to take out his Heart, his Liver
and his Brain, whereof they made a delicate dish, which they presented to the
Governor, who had retired himself somewhat aside to a higher place, where he
sollased himself with their iollity. I being present at this piece of service,
obtained of the Governor, the Nails or Hoofes for my share, which are
esteemed to have the like virtue and property, that the Hoof of the Elk has.
The Horn also is thought to be as sovereign against poison, as the Unicorns
Horn is held to be.

CHAP. V. Of the Temperament Manners and Customs of the Cochin-Chinois, Of
their manner of Living, Clothing, and Medicines.
THe Cochin-Chinois are little differing from the Chinois in their Countenance,
being all of Olive colors; those I mean that are toward the Sea: for the
others which are farther into the Land toward Tunchim, are as white as those
of Europe. In the lineaments of their faces they are like the Inhabitants of
China; flat nosed as they are, with little eyes. They are of a mean stature;
neither so little as the Iaponois, nor yet so tall as the Chinois; but in
strength and agility of body, they exceed them both: They surpass the Chinois
also in courage and valor: only the Iaponois surmount them in one thing,
which is, their contempt of life in perils and conflicts: for these Iaponois
seem to make no account thereof, and to have no fear of death at all. The
Cochin-Chinois is more gentle and courteous in conversation, then any other
nation of the East: and albeit on the one side they stand much upon their
valor; yet on the other side, they hold it as infamous to be transported with
choler. And whereas all the other Eastern nations hold the Europeans for
profane people, and have them naturally in horror; in such sort, that when we
land in any of their Countries, they betake themselves to flight. In
Cochin-China on the contrary, they contend who shall converse with us most;
they ask us many questions, they inuit us to eat with them, using all kind
of Courtesy, Ciuility, and Familiarity. So it happened with me and my
companions at our first arrival there; where it seemed unto us, as if we were
amongst our ancient acquaintance. By which occasion, there is a fare Gate
opened for the Preaching of the Gospel of Jesus Christ amongst them..

Of this gentle and pleasing disposition, and of this facility of manners,
there comes that great union, and good intelligence, which they have amongst
themselves, conuersing together one with the other, as openly, with as much
Candor, as if they were all brethren, bred, and brought up together in the
same House, though they never saw each other before. And it would be held a
great baseness amongst them, if any should eat any thing, were it never so
little, without imparting it to those that are with him, and giving to every
one his morsel. They are of a liberal inclination, and beneficent to the
poor, never refusing their alms to those that ask it, and would think they
had failed much in their duty, if they had denied them, as holding themselves
bound in justice to relieve those that are in want. By means whereof, it
happened that some strangers making ship-wrackein one of the ports of
Cochin-China, and having no knowledge of the tongue, by which they might beg
what they needed, holp their necessity sufficiently by learning this one word,
Doij, which signifies, I am hungry: For as soon as they perceived strangers
complaining in such a manner, and crying Doij at their doors, they went out
all auie, being touched with compassion, and gave them somewhat to eat, whereby
they got suddenly so much provision, that the King having granted them a Ship,
to carry them into their Country, there was not one of them willing to take
that opportunity, they were become so affected to that Country, where they had
found such as would liberally furnish them wherewith to sustain themselves
without working* Insomuch that the Captain of the Ship was driven to
constrain them with a good cudgel, and with the flat of his Sword, to embarke
themselves, as they did with good store of Rice which they had gathered, going
but from door to to door, and crying, I am hungry.

But as these Cochin-Chinois do show themselves prompt and liberal in giving,
so are they as much or more in requesting whatsoever they see to their liking;
for they no sooner can cast their eye on any thing which they think rare and
curious, but they are desirous thereof, and will say unto you Sin Mocaij, which
signifies, give me one of those: and they hold it a great discourtesie to deny
them any thing, though it be rare and precious, or no more such to be had; and
account him base that refuses them, whereby men are driven either to hide what
they have, or to be ready to bestow it on him that shall ask it.

A Portugal Merchant, nothing liking this strange custom (as indeed there are
few that like well of it) seeing himself every day importuned to give
whatsoever good thing he had, was one day disposed to carry himself in like
manner toward them; and so coming to a poor Fisher-mans boat, and laying
hands on a great panier full of Fish, he says unto him in the language of
that Country, Sin Mocaij, Give me this; the good man without further discourse
gave him the panier as it was, to carry away, which the Portugal carried to his
House accordingly, wondering at the liberality of the poor man. But having
consideration of his poverty, he paid him afterward the value.

Their terms of Ciuillity, Courtesy, and Entertainment, are very near those
which are used in China, the inferiors using great respect toward their
superiors, as also those of the same rank, practicing one toward another
all those petty punctualities, and complements, which are peculiar to the
Chinois: Especially the great reverence they bear to the aged; always
preferring the ancientest, of what degree or condition soever they are; and
giving to the aged all kind of preeminence above the younger. And so some of
these Lords coming often to visit us in our House, though they had been
sufficiently advertised by the Interpreter, that a certain Father being more
aged then the rest was not our superior, they could not possibly forbear to
salute him that was old before the superior, being much younger.

In all the Houses of Cochin-China, be they never so poor, three sorts of
sitting are used. The first, and least of all is* on a Matt stretched out on
the ground; whereon all do sit, that are of the like quality and degree. The
second is on certain Coards or Girts, stretched out and covered with a finer
kind of Matts then the former, where those of the better rank place
themselves. The third is on a Tent which is raised from the ground, about some
two foot and a half, made in manner of a Bed, which is reserved only for the
Governors, or Lords of the place, or for such as are dedicated to the Service
of God: On which they always make our Fathers to sit.

Of this gentle and agreeable humor of the Cochin-Chinois comes; the account
they make of Strangers, giving them liberty to live according to their own
law, and to apparel themselves as they think good, commending their course
of living, admiring their Learning, and frankly preferring it before their
own; contrary to the Chinois, which make no reckoning, but of their own
Country, their own fashions, and their own Doctrine.

Concerning their Apparel and Clothing, we have already said, that Silk is
so common in Cochin-China, that all are clad therewith. It only remains to
speak of the Fashions which they use: And to begin with the Women, I must
confess, that their habit has always seemed unto me, to be the most Modest
of all India, for they cannot endure any part of their bodies to be uncovered;
no not in the greatest heates. They wear five or six Taffeties, one upon
another, all of several colors. The first reaches down to the ground, which
they make train along, with such Gravity, Decency, and Majesty, that one
cannot discern so much as the end of their feet; the next is four or five
fingers breadth shorter; the third comes short of the second; and so are the
rest, the one shorter then the other; in such sort, that all the colors are
discerned. This is their Habit ftom the Girdle downwards. Their bodies they
cover with certain curious Stuffes, which are wrought Eschecquer-wise of
sundry colors, casting over it so fine and thin a veil, that all this
diversity, and variety may easily be perceived through it, like a pleasant and
gracious Springtime, accompanied with great Gravity, and Modesty. They wear
their hair loosely, hanging on their shoulders, which they suffer to grow so
long, that it reaches to the ground, and the longer it is, the fairer it is
accounted. They wear a great Hat on their Heads, with such broad brims that
they cover all their Faces, and suffer them not to see more then three or four
paces before them; and these Hats are wouen or interlaced with Silk, and Gold,
according to the quality of the persons: The Women are not bound to any further
courtesy in the Saluting of any whom they meet, then to lift up their Hats so
far that their Faces may be seen.

The men in stead of Breeches wrap themselves with a whole piece of Stuff,
clothing themselves over it in the like manner, with five or six garments
which are long and large, all of fine Silk, of sundry colors, with great
large Sleeves, not unlike those that the Benedictines use to wear. These
garments of theirs, from the girdle downwards, are all becut and slashed with
curious devises; in such sort that as they go through the Town, they make
such a show of all these colors mingled together, that if never so little a
wind should happen to blow upon their garments, one might say they were so many
Peacocks going about showing the variety of their plumes.

They let their Hair grow as the women do theirs, even down to their heels,
and wear their Hatts in like manner. They which have any Beard, of which their
are but few, do neuervse to cut it, conforming themselves therein with the
Chinois; as also in letting the Nails of their fingers grow, which the Gentry
do not use to have cut, keeping them as tokens of Nobility, to distinguish
them from the Common people and the Artificers; who may not wear them long,
lest they should be hindered by them in their work: whereas the Gentlemen
have such long ones, that they cannot gripe any thing in their hands. They
cannot relish our fashion of cutting our Hair and our Nails, because they
suppose them to have been given by Nature for an ornament. When we were once
in discourse about the Hair, they made an objection* to which it was not very
easy to make answer on the sudden: If, said they, the Savior of the world,
(to whom ye profess that ye seek to conform your selves in all your actions)
did wear his Hair long after the manner of the Nazarites, as ye assure your
selves, and as appears in the Pictures of him which ye have shown us, why
do ye not the like? adding thereunto, for more force of argument, that the
Savior of the world, wearing his Hair at the full length, gave us to
understand it was the best fashion: Yet notwithstanding they contented
themselves, when we told them that our imitation did not consist in the
exterior man or in the outward habit.

The Learned sort and the Doctors, apparel themselves somewhat more gravely,
without so many colors and cuttings; covering the rest of their garments with
a Gown of black Damask: they wear also a kind of Stole, hanging about their
Neck, and a Maniple of blue Silk on their Arm, covering their heads commonly
with a Cap, not unlike to a Bishops Mitre. The men as well as the women, have
ever a Fan in their hands very like ours here in Europe; which they carry
more for countenance then otherwise. But whereas we in Europe use to be clad in
blackes, during our mourning, they use the white on like occasion: when they
salute any, they never uncover their head, holding that for a discourtesie and
full of irreuerence, unbefitting; wherein they agree in opinion with those of
China.

The Cochin-Chinois use neither Hose nor Shoes, but only take at the most, to
keep the soles of their feet from what might offend them, a sole of Leather,
made fast and tied upon the foot with some buttons and ribbands of Silk, after
the manner of Sandales: not accounting it any way indecent to go without
Stockens or Hose and Shoes. And albeit, going after such a manner shod or
unshod, they often times find their feet very dirty, they reckon little of it,
having for the purpose in every house, at the entry of the Hall, a Basin of
fair water in which they wash their feet; and such of them as use to wear
Sandals, leave them there to put on again when they go forth, having no need
to use them within doors, where the ground being covered with Matts, they
fear no fouling of them.

The ordinary food of the Cochin-Chinois is Rice, and it seems a strange
thing, that this Country being so plentiful in all kinds of Flesh, Foul,
Fish and Fruits, that nevertheless, they feed still on Rice; wherewith they
commonly fill themselves at the beginning of their repast, and then by way of
ceremony, do but assay and taste of all the other Viands. So that Rice is to
them the principal and chief, as bread is with us, which they eat alone
without sauce or mixture, either of Butter, Oil or Suggar, but only seething
of it in water; whereof they use no more then will serve to keep it from
sticking to the Pot, and so from being burnt; by reason whereof the grains
remain still entire, being only a little mollified, and moystned. They find
moreover by experience, that the not using to season the Rice makes it digest
the more easily; whence it is, that throughout all the East they accustom
themselves to eat four times a day at the least, and that plentifully, to
supply the necessity of Nature.

The Cochin-Chinois eat sitting crosse-legd on the ground, having a round
Table before them, bresthigh, curiously wrought, and the edge or border about
it gilded with Silver or Gold, according to the quality of the persons. This
Table is not very great, the custom being, that every one have a several
Table; and that as many guests as are invited or expected, so many Tables be
prepared for them* which is also observed when they eat in private, unless
happily the Husband and Wife, or the Father and the Son be contented with one
Table. They have neither knives nor forkes at the Table, not needing any. They
have no need of knives, because their morsells are before cut out in the
Kitchen; and in lieu of forkes they have little sticks finely polished which
they put betwixt their fingers in such sort, that with their dexterity they can
take up any thing therewith. They have as little need of table Napkins, seeing
they never foul their hands, but always take up their meat with those sticks.

They inuit one another often to Feasts and Banquets, in which they serve many
other sorts of Cates besides those I have mentioned: Yet therein they serve no
Rice, because they suppose that every one has enough at home. And how poor
soever he be that gives entertainment, they think he has not done fairly,
if every of the guests have not his Table served with an hundred dishes at
least. Also, because they use to inuit all their Friends, Kinsefolke and
Neighbors to these feasts, there is seldom any such meeting, at which there
are not thirty, forty, or fifty, and sometimes an hundred, or two hundred
persons. I was once my self at one of these Sollemne-Feasts, in which the
Guests were no less then two thousand. Therefore such Feasts are made in the
open fields, that there may be room enough to place so many Tables: Neither
ought it to be found strange, that these Tables being not great, there should
be an hundred Dishes served thereon at once; because at such times by a
marvelous pretty device, they place a little castle on the Table, having sundry
Stages made of Sugercanes, on which they bestow in very good order, all these
Dishes, in which also there is contained whatsoever the Country yields, as
well of Flesh, Fish, Foul, Fourefooted-beasts, both wild and tame, as also all
sorts of fruits which the season afordeth: For if there be any one wanting, it
is very disgraceful to the entertainment; and they will scarce vouchsafe it
the name of a Feast. The Masters are first served, by their principal
attendants, who eat in their Masters places when they are risen; being served
by inferior servants, which succeed them in their turn. And because they
cannot devour all that is prepared, and the custom is to make a clean
riddance of all, as soon as these are satisfied, there comes yet a baser
sort of followers, who when they have also eaten their fill, use to put up the
remnant in bags which they bear for that purpose, and carry it home to feast
the Lackies and Scullions of the Kitchen, who make good cheer with it; and
then the Ceremony ends.

They have no Grapes in Cochin-China, therefore in stead of wine they use a
kind of drink made of Rice distilled in a Limbicke, which has the taste of
Aquavitae, and resembles it in color, being also of like Acrimony, Subtillity
and Viuacity. They have such abundance thereof, that every one drinks
commonly as much as he list; and are no less drunken therewith, then others
are with wine in these parts. Yet those of the better sort, use to allay it
with another drink made of Calamba distilled, which gives it a pleasant
savor and acceptable odor, being an excellent composition.

They use also to drink a days, of a certain warm water, in which the root
of an herb which they call Chia has sod, of which this drink takes the
name, being very cordial, and not a little helpful to disperse the noisome
humors of the stomach, and to facilitate the digestion. The like is used in
Iapan and China also; saving that in China, in lieu of the root, they sees
only the leaves of the tree, and in Iapan they take them in powder, but the
effects are the same; and they all call it Chia.

Concerning their Phisicians, and manner of curing their diseases, I can say
there are many, as well Portugals as natives of the Country; and it is often
seen, that many unknown maladies, for which the Phisicians of Europe know no
remedies, have been discovered and cured easily by those of that Country. And
it happens sometimes, that the Portugal Phisicians give over a diseased person,
supposing him in a desperate estate, who is afterward easily cured by a
Phisician of that Country, if they send for him.

The Method used by them is this, that as soon as they enter into the sick
persons chamber, they sit down a whiles near unto his bed, to settle the
stirring of their spirit, which they have contracted in their coming; then
they feel the parties pulse with much attention and circumspection, saying
afterward unto him, you have such a Sickness; and if it be incurable they say
unto him sincerely, I have no Medicine for this Malady: which is a shrewd
sign that the sick person will not escape. But if they judge the Malady to
be such as may be healed by their Remedies, they will say, I have that which
will heal you, and by such a time I will set you on your feet. Then they agree
upon the Salary that the Phisician shall have, in case he cure the disease;
which they measure and proportion according to the quality of the disease, and
so make the contract. The Phisician afterward composeth his Medicine himself,
without any Apothecary, for they have none there for fear of disclosing the
secret of their Medicines, which they conceal as much as they also can; partly
because they dare not trust any other with the Ingredients they prescribe. If
the sick person recover his health by the time prefixed, he is to give the
price agreed on: If he fail of his cure, the Physician loses both his
labor, and his charge.

The Medicines which they use to give, are not like unto ours, which are
distasteful, mollifiing and loosening the belly; but are as pleasing as their
Pottage, and nourishing withal, so that they need no other aliment: Whence it
comes that they give of it oftentimes a day, as we would give broth to the
diseased from time to time. And their Medicines do not alter Nature, but
assist it in her ordinary functions, drying up the peccant humors, without any
trouble to the sick person at all.

Here is offered me a thing worth the relation: A Portugal falling sick
there, called unto him the Phisicians of Europe, who after they had visited him
a while, gave him over for a dead man, and came no more at him. A Phisician of
that Country being sent for, undertakes to cure him within a certain time,
charging him straitely, that whiles he had him in cure, he should not meddle
with Women: Otherwise there was no hope. The sick man takes the Medicines
appointed, and within few days he finddeth himself so well recovered, that
he took no great care of performing what the Phisician had enjoined.
Thereupon the Phisician coming to visit his Patient, and perceiving his
Incontinencie by the change of his pulse, advises him to dispose himself to
death, because he was past all hope, for he knew no remedy now to save his
life: And that nevertheless he was to pay him the Money agreed on between
them; because if he died, it was his own fault. Sentence was given for the
Physician, the Patient Died.

They have also the use of Blood-letting by Phlebotomie; yet are they more
sparing thereof, then with us in Europe; neither do they use Lancets, but have
many Goose-quills, into which they fasten diverse little pieces of Porcelane
that are very sharp, fashioned and placed like the teeth of a Saw, some
greater, and some less. And when they are to open a Vein, they apply one of
these quills thereunto, and giving a little stroke thereon with their finger,
they open the Vein with the Porcelane, which enters no further then is
requisite. But that which is yet more strange, is, that when they have drawn
Blood sufficiently, they use no band, nor Ligature about it: but only wetting
their thumb with a little spittle, they press it on the wound, and make the
skin return to his place, the Blood suddenly stanching, and the ouerture
closing together: Which I attribute to their opening of it with the Porcelane,
which makes the Vein to close up, and to heal so easily.

They are not without Chirurgions, that have wonderful secrets; I bring no
other proof, but what they have practiced on my self, and one of our Brethren
my Companion. Having fallen from a very high place, I fell on my stomach,
against the edge of Stone, in such sort, that I began to spit blood, and my
Breast was sorely bruised and hurt, some of our Europian remedies were used, but
I found no help nor ease, until a Surgeon of that Country, taking a
quantity of a certain Herb, like unto the Herb Mercury, and making a
Plaster thereof, applied it to my Stomach; then boiled some of the same herb
with water, for me to drink, and made me eat of the same raw, as it was: And
in few days, I was perfectly healed. To make trial thereof again, I caused
the leg of a Hen to be broken in many places, and a Plaster of this Herb
to be applied thereunto, and within few days, the Hens leg was made whole and
entire again.

A Scorpion had bit one of our Brethren on the Neck, (who was my Companion)
such biting being held to be deadly in this Kingdom, for his throat began to
swell in such sort, that we were about to have administered unto him the
extreme Unction, but a Surgeon causing presently a pot of Rice to be
boiled with fair water, and setting the same at his feet, he compassed him
about with clothes, that the hot vapor and fume thereof might not be
dispersed: whereof it followed, that as soon as the fume had gotten up to the
wounded place, he found his grief assuaged, the swelling of his throat
vanished, and himself in as good plight as before.

Many more such like might be added; but I will only affirm, that their
Medicines are of much more force in those parts, then they are with us. And I
can say this in particular, that I brought with me therehence a little barrel
of Rubarb, being esteemed to be of the best; but when I came into Europe, after
two years voyage, I found my Rubarb so altered, that I could not know it for
the same. So much do the Simples lose of their virtue, by being transported
out of those Count(...)s into ours.

CHAP. VI. Of the Civil and Politic Government of Cochin-China.
THeir Government in General, has some affinity with that which is used in
Iapan and in China. But as the Iaponians account of Arms, much more then of
Sciences, and the Chinois on the contrary esteems highly of the Siences, and
makes no great reckoning of Arms: The Cochin-Chinois not following the course
of either of these nations, do not reject or abandon the one, as if they were
wholly addicted to the other; but are indifferently affected to either,
according to their occasions. And accordingly do recompense and prefer,
sometimes the Doctors, and sometimes the Soldiers, to the offices and
dignities of their Kingdom.

Cochin-China has many Universities, in which there be Readers and Schools
and Degrees; to which their Scholars are advanced by examination, as they are
in China; teaching the same Sciences, using the same Books and Authors;
namely, Zinfa or Confus, as the Portugals call him; being an Author of as
sublime and profound Learning and Authority with them, as Aristotle amongst us,
and indeed more ancient. These books are full of Erudition, of rare Histories,
of grave Sentences, of Proverbs and such like, all concerning good manners;
such as Seneca, Cato, or Cicero here with us. Many years labor is spent in
learning the propriety of the Phrase, Characters and Hieroglyphikes in which
they are written. But that part which they account most of, and have in
greatest estimation, is Moral Philosophy; comprehending the Ethik, Oeconomik
and Politic. And it is a goodly sight to see and understand them in their
Halls, when they read and pronounce their Lectures aloud as if they sang:
which they do, to accustom themselves, and to get a habit, to give to every
word his proper accent; of which they have a great number that signify many
several different things: whereby may be gathered, that to converse with them,
it is requisite to know the principles of Music and the Counter-point.

The Language which they use in common speech, is much differing from that in
which they teach and read in their Studies, and in which their Books are
written. Even as amongst us our vulgar Languages, common to all, differ much
from the Latin which is used in the Schools. Wherein also there is a
difference between them and the Chinois, who if they be Learned or Noble,
never speak but in one kind of Language, which they call that of the
Mandarins, who are their Doctors, Judges and Governors. And the Characters
which they use in their writing and in their printed books, are above
fourscore thousand, diffring one from the other. Whence it comes to pass,
that the Fathers of the society of Jesus, are eight or ten years studying of
these books, before they become able to treat, or capable to converse with
them. But the Cochin-Chinois have reduced this great multitude of Characters,
to the number of three thousand at the most, which they use in their ordinary
Discourse, in their Letters, in their Supplications, Memorialls and other such
things as have not respect to their printed books: which must of necessity be
composed in the Characters of China. The Iaponians have yet been more
ingenious, who albeit they endeavor in whatsoever concerning their written and
printed books, to conform themselves to the Chinois; have notwithstanding
handled the matter so well, that for dispatch of their ordinary affairs, they
have invented eight and forty Letters, by the combination of which, they
express and declare what they will, even as well as we do with our A. B. C.
Yet are the Characters of China, still in such request, and so great estimation
in Iapan, that those forty and eight Letters, howsoever they be more commodious
to express their Conceits, are little regarded in comparison, but by way of
contempt, are accounted and called the Women's Letters.

That most Ingenious and Exellent Invention of Printing, was practiced in
China, and Cochin-China, before we had the knowledge thereof in Europe; yet
not in such perfection: In regard that they do not join Letters with Letters,
or Characters with Characters; but with a Punchion, or Grauing-iron, they
grave, and cut their Forms on a board, or plancke, even as they intend to
Print them in their Books: Then they apply their Paper upon the board that is
so graued and cut, putting it under the Press, in like manner as we do in
Europe, when we Print on a copper Plate, or other such thing.

Besides those Books which treat of Moral Philosophy, they have also of
Sacred matters, as they call them, concerning the Creation, and beginning of
the World, of reasonable Souls, of the Demons, of Idols, and of their
different Sects; these Books they call Sayc Kim, to distinguish them from the
profane, which they term Sayc Chiu.

Now albeit the Language of the Cochin-Chinois be therein like to that of the
Chinois, that they use only words of one Syllable, pronounced with diversity of
tones and accents; yet they differ much in this, that the Cochin-Chinois are
more fruitful and abounding in Vowells, and therefore more sweet and pleasing:
richer in accents and in tones, and so more melodious and harmonious: in such
sort that they have their ear made for Music, proper and apt to distinguish
the variety of tones and accents.

The language of Cochin-China is to my seeming the most easy of all; because
it has neither coniugations Verbes, nor Declining of Nounes: but with one only
word, adding thereunto an aduerbe or a pronoune, makes known the time passed,
the time present, and to come; the singular number and the plural, and
supplieth all the Moodes, Tenses and persons, as also the diversity of Numbers
and of Cases. As for example, this word Have (which in the Cochin-Chinois
tongue is expressed by Co) without other variation but adding a Pronoune, will
serve all occasions: and so that whereas we should say by Conjugation, I have,
thou have, he has; they contenting themselves with the Pronoune, without
varying the Verb, would say, I have, you have, he have: In like manner to
supply the diversity of the Tenses, they will say in the Present, I now have;
for the passed, I heretofore have; and for the future, I hereafter, or in time
to come have; and so from one to the other, without ever changing their Co;
whence it easily appears, how easy this tongue is to be learned, as indeed,
in six Months whiles I was there; I learned as much as was sufficient to
treat with them, and to understand their Confessions; though I had not the
perfect knowledge thereof; for to say the truth, four whole years were no
more then requisite to make one exact, and excellent therein.

But to return to the course of my History: I said the custom of the
Cochin-Chinois was not only to regard men of Learning, recompencing their
great knowledge, by advancing them to high and honorable degrees of dignity,
and assigning to them good rents and reuennues; but that they had also in great
estimation, those that were Courageous, Valorous and excellent in Arms. Yet
do they govern themselves therein, after another manner then is accustomed
amongst us. For in stead of giving to their great and generous Captains, as
they do in these parts, some Lordship, Earldom or Marquisate, in
acknowledgment of their deserts; they reward them by subiecting so many persons
unto them, as a certain number of the Kings subjects and vassalls, who in what
part of the Kingdom soever they be, are bound to acknowledge him for their
Lord, to whom the King has given them, to serve him with their Arms when he
shall be occasioned to use them; as also to pay him all such duties as they
paid before to the King: And so as we say such a one is Lord of such a place,
Earldom or Marquisate; they say, such a one has the command of five hundred
men, this other of a thousand; the King has increased this man's command to a
thousand more, and of the other to two thousand: so augmenting their
greatness, their dignities, riches and commodities, by giving of them more
vassalls.

Of their Wars, we shall speak in the next Chapter. There remains yet
somewhat to be said concerning their Civil Government. First they dispatch
all their affairs more readily, rather according to the Martial Law More
belli, then by pleadings at the Bar with Judges, Notaries and Procttors with
their dilatory proceedings. The Vice-Royes and Governors of Provinces,
supplying all those offices, and giving public audience four hours every day
in a fair large Court within their Palace; two hours in the forenoone, and
two hours in the afternoon. Thither go all that have controversy, to
represent their pretensions and their plaints; and the Viceroy or Governor
leaning on a window, understands the grieuances of each one after the other.
And because the Governors are ordinarily men of good judgment and experience
in affairs, questioning the parties to good purpose, and observing also the
apprehension of the assistants, which they conjecture by their countenance, and
the approbation which they have of the demandant or defendant, they discover
easily the truth of the business forthwith, and pronounce their sentence
aloud without delay, which is presently executed, without appeal or any other
formality; whether it be death or banishment, or whipping, or pecuniary
amends; chastising every offense as the Law requires.

The crimes whereof they are most commonly accused, which are severely
chastised among them, are many: But above all, they punish rigorously the false
accusers, Thieves, and Adulterers. When the first are convicted to have charged
any falsely with a crime, whereof he was not guilty, he is condemned, without
mercy, to endure the same punishment which the other should have suffered, if
he had committed that whereof he was accused. And indeed experience has made
it appear, to be the best course of sifting out the truth. Their thieves are
punished according to the proportion of the theft: If they have stolen any
thing of great value, they cut of their heads: If of less consequence, as a
Hen, they lose only a finger; and for the second offense they cut off another:
If they be taken with a third, they must loose an ear; and for the fourth
offense they cut off the neck.

The adulterers, be they men or women, are exposed to the Elephants, who kill
them in the manner ensuing. The offender is conducted out of the Town into a
Plain, where in the presence of an infinite number of people, he is brought
into the midst of the place, with his hands and feet tied near unto the
Elephant, unto whom the sentence of the party that is to be put to death is
read, that he may execute it from point to point. The order being this: That
first he shall seize on him, take him and strain him with his trunk, and hold
him so suspended in the air, showing him to all the world; then that he cast
him up with violence, and receive him again on the point of his teeth, that by
the heavy fall of his weight he may gage himself thereon, and that then he
dash him against the ground, and that in the end he tread him under his feet.
All which the Elephant does, without failing in any one point, to the great
astonishment and terror of all that are present, who by the punishment which
they see inflicted on another, do learn, that fidelity is to be kept between
those that are married.

It will not be amiss, being now discoursing of married folks, to relate some
particularities concerning the marriages of that Country. It has not been
seen that the Cochin-Chinois, though they be Gentiles, have contracted
marriages within the degrees forbidden by Gods Law, or the Law of Nature;
neither within the first degree of the collateral Line of Brothers and
sisters. But in the other degrees marriage is permitted, so that he have but
one wife. It is true, that the richer sort under the title of their greatness
and liberality, are accustomed to have many Concubines; taxing them with
avarice and miserableness, that do not keep as many as their revenues will
maintain. These are called their second, third and fourth wives, which they
took after the first which is accounted, and is truly and really their wife,
and to her it appertains to choose the rest according to her liking, and to
give them to her husband. Yet their marriages are not indissoluble, their Laws
permitting a divorce, though not altogether at the will of either party: for
they must first prove the suggestion for which they would leave one the other;
which being auerred it is lawful for them to withdraw themselves from the
first, and to marry again. The husbands bring the Dowries, and relinquish
their own houses to dwell with their wives, by whose means they are
maintained, and by whom all the household affairs are managed: for there they
bear the charge and government of the Family, whiles the husband keeps
himself within doors, not putting himself to any pain, contenting himself
to be provided of what is needful for his food and raiment.

CHAP. VII. Of the Forces of the King of Cochin-China, and of the Wars he
has within his Kingdom.
IT has been touched already, in the beginning of this History, how that
Cochin-China being a Province, dismembered from the great Kingdom of Tunchim,
was usurped unjustly by the Grandfather of the King that now reigns, who
having the Government, rebelled against the King of Tunchim: Whereunto he was
not a little emboldened, when he saw himself suddenly furnished with diverse
Pieces of Artillery, recovered and gotten out of the Ship-wracke of sundry
Ships of the Portugals, and Hollanders against the Rocks, which men afterward
gathered up by those of the Country. Whereof there are to be seen at this
day, threescore of the greatest in the Kings palace alone yet remaining. The
Cochin-Chinois being now become so expert in the managing of them, that they
surpass our Europeans: For indeed they did little else every day, but exercise
themselves in Shooting at a Mark: Whereupon they became so fierce, and so
glorious, and to have so great an opinion of their own valor, that as soon
as they perceived any of our Ships of Europe to come toward their Ports, the
Kings Cannoniers presently presented them with defiance: But ours understanding
now that they were not comparable unto them, avoided the Trial as much as they
could, knowing well by experience, they were grown more certain to hit where
they would with their Artillary, then others are with the Harquebusse; which
also they are ready and well practiced in, going out daily by troops into the
Field, to exercise it. Moreover, that which further encouraged him much to that
resolution of reuoulting, and banding himself against his Prince, was the
sight of a hundred Galleys, and more of his own; by which means, being become
to be powerful at Sea, as well as he was by his Artillary at Land, it was
easy for him to accomplish his design against the King of Tunchim his Lord.
Seeing also that his continual commerce with Iapan had brought into his
Country, great store of Swords and Cemiters of that Country, which are of an
excellent temper. He was also provided with a great number of Horses, which
though they be but little, are very serviceable and generous, on which they
fight with darts, and exercise themselves daily therein. The power of this King
is such, that he is able to bring threescore thousand men into the field.
Which notwithstanding, he is not without fear of the King of Tunchim, whose
forces are four times more: Therefore to keep him in good terms, and to
maintain good Intelligence with him, he pays him a Tribute of all his
Kingdom does yield, that may be acceptable to him; particularly of Gold, and
Silver, of Rice, and further furnishing him with Boardes, and other wood,
wherewith to build his Galleries. Now the only occasion that made him resolve
to make League with the Son of the late King, who at this day has the
Gonernment of the last Province of Tunchim, bordering upon China, was that he
remaining Vanquisher, and making himself Master of all Tunchim, Cochin-China
might be discharged of the Tribute.

To understand the same the better, it must be known, that whiles I was in
Cochin-China, it was not the Son of the late King of Tunchim, that took
possession of the Kingdom, but his Uncle, out of whose hands the Young Prince
escaped to save his life, into the last Province of that Kingdom, confining
upon China; where being acknowledged to be the Son of the King disceased,
the people chose him to be their Prince; and by his good Government, he wan
their hearts, in such sort that the King of Tunchim his Uncle entered into great
apprehension, lest he should join in League with the King of Cochin-China, who
possessed the other end of his Country, and enclosing him between them,
dispossess him of the Kingdom usurped: For preventing whereof, he sent year
by year a great and puissant Army against this Prince, to defeat him: But all
in vain, for the Army being of necessity to pass five or six days Journey
through ways where there was no other water to drink, but of certain Rivers
which descended out of the enemies Country; they found those waters poisoned
by the Prince his people; with a certain Herb; in such sort, that as well
men as Horses that drank thereof dyed: Whereby the Army was enforced to
retire after much expense, and great pains taken to little purpose.

Their Millitary discipline, and manner of governing themselves in the Wars,
is much like that of Europe. They observe the same order in making their
S^uadrons, in going to Skirmishes, in Assaults, and in Retreatings. And this
King has War ordinarily in two places of his Kingdom. For first it stands
him upon, to stand always on his guard; on that side next to the King of
Tunchim, who does menace him incessantly, and always makes some onsets on his
Confines. Therefore the King of Cochin-China keeps his residence in Sinuua,
being the furthest and last province of his Kingdom, that he may be ever in
readiness, with his Forces on the frontiers of Tunchim, which is the entry to
a very puissant Province, that is ordinarily provided of Governors of great
experience and knowledge in the Wars.

Secondly he is kept in continual Alarmes on the West Side in the last
Province of his Kingdom called Renram, by the king of Chiampa, whose assaults
he does easily repel, in regard he is not so mighty as himself, and needs
no other forces thereunto but those of the same Province, the Governor whereof
with his Soldiers, is sufficient to defend it.

Moreover, he is continually leuying and raising of armies to succor the King
of Cambogia, who has married a natural daughter of his; furnishing him with
Galleys and with men against the King of Siam. In such sort, that on all sides,
as well by sea as by land, he makes the glorious name and reputation of the
Arms of the Cochin-Chinois to be renowned.

On the Sea he makes war with his Galleys, each of which has six pieces of
Cannon, and is also well furnished with Musket Shot. And it will not be found
strange, that the King of Cochin-China has always more then an hundred
Galleys well furnished in good readiness, if one know in what manner he
provides for it: For the Cochin-Chinois use not to make Galli-slaues of their
delinquents or others; but when they are to put themselves to fight at Sea,
they furnish their Galleys with as many men as are requisite in this manner.
They send out secretly and suddenly many Seriants and Commissioners, who going
throughout all the Kingdom ere men are aware with the Kings authority, do
seize and press all such as they find fit to handle an Oar, and bestow them
in the Galleys, unless by reason of their birth and extraction, or for some
other consideration, they be exempted and priuilidged. And that course must not
be thought so hard and difficult, as at first it may seem, because, they are
as well entreated in the Galleys as any where else: And yet better paid: and
besides, their Wives, their Children, and all their Family, is maintained at
the Kings charge, with whatsoever is needful, according to their rank and
condition, during all the time that their Husbands are thus absent. And they
serve not only to tug at the Oar, but also to fight upon occasion: To which
purpose they have every one his Harquebusse and Musket given him, with Darts,
Coutelasse, and Cemeters: and as the Cochin-Chinois are hardy and valiant in
their approaches, with their Oars, and with their Muskets and Iauelins, they
are no less in the encounter and close medly; where they make rare proofs of
their valor. Their Galleys are not so great nor so large as ours, but they are
so bravely bedecked with Gold and Silver, that they are a glorious spectacle to
behold. The Fore-castle, namely which they account the most honorable place,
is all of Gold. This is the Captains place, and the chief of his company: The
reason they give for it is, that the Captain being to be the foremost upon all
occasions, ought therefore to be in the most hazardous place of all the Gallie.

Amongst other defensive Arms, they use little Bucklers or Targets, of an
Ouall form, of such a length, that they will commonly cover the whole Man,
being so light also, that they are nothing cumbersome.

In their Towns in this Kingdom, their Houses being built but of boards, as I
have said, and supported with Pillars of Wood, they have this advantage* that
if the Enemy come with such Forces, as they find themselves unable to resist,
every one takes his household stuff and flies to the Mountains, setting
their Houses on fire, and leaving nothing of value therein. In such sort that
the Enemy finding no place wherein he may sortifie and maintain himself, is
forced to retire out of the Country, and they returning again, do soon
build themselves other Houses as good, and restore their Towns in as good
plight as they were before.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Commerce, Ports and Havens of Cochin-China.
THe Realm of Cochin-China being so abundant in all sorts of Commodities, as
we have said, for the life of man; the people are the less addicted to travel
abroad, and to traffic elsewhere: They do never therefore make further
Voyages by Sea, then within the view of the Coasts and banks of their
well-beloved Country. Yet are they nevertheless willing to give all Strangers
free access into their Ports, and take a singular pleasure to see others come
to Trade and traffic in their Country, not only out of their Neighbor
Provinces and Kingdoms, but also from remote Countries. To which end they
need not use much Art, seeing that Strangers are allured thither fast enough
by the fruitfulness of the Country, and the riches ouerflowing therein. And
therefore not only those of Tunchim, of Cambogia, of Cinceos, and others their
Neighbors do traffic there, but every day there arrive Merchants of
Countries further distant; and from China, Macao, Iapan, Manilla, and Malacca,
which bring Silver into Cochin-China, for the merchandise of the Country:
Which are not bought, but exchanged with the same Silver which is sold there as
Merchandise, the price thereof being raised or diminished according to the
great or little plenty thereof, even like Silk and other Wares.

The Money with which all things are bought, is of Letton, of the like Value as
a French Double, or a Stiuer of the Netherlands. This Money is exactly round,
Printed and marked with the Kings Arms, every Piece having a hole in the
midst, through which they are filed by thousands, every file or string of them
worth about two crowns.

The Chinois and the Iaponois are they that make the chief negotiation of
Cochin-China, in a Fair which is yearly held in one of their Ports, for some
four months together: the one bring on their Ionks, the value of four or
five millions in silver; and the other upon certain vessels which they call
Somes, an infinite quantity of fine silk, with other of their country
merchandise. The King receives a great revenue out of this Fair, by his
duties and imposts, and the Country an unspeakable gain. And as on the one
side the Cochin-Chinois have no wrought Stuffes nor Manufactures, because they
do not apply themselves to Manuary trades, by reason of that idleness into
which their plenty has plunged them: and that on the other side they are
easily inueigled with the curiosities coming from other places, which they
higly esteem; they will buy them at what price soever they be set, and do not
spare for money, to have such things which of themselves are of little worth;
such as Combs, Needles, Bracelets, Beads of glass to hang in their ears,
and such other trifles and womanish curiosities. And I remember that a Portugal
having brought from Macao into Cochin-China a box full of Needles, which could
not cost him above thirty Ducats, got above a thousand; selling them for a
Riall a piece in Cochin-China, which had not cost him above pence a piece in
Macao. In conclusion, they vie one with the other in buying whatsoever they
see, so it be new and brought from far: for which they disburse their silver
without difficulty. They are very desirous of our Hatts, our Caps, Girdles,
Shirts and all our other garments, because they differ from theirs. But above
all, they make most esteem of Coral.

Concerning their Ports; It is certainly a thing worthy admiration, that
within the space of little more then an hundred leagues, there are reckoned
above threescore places fit and apt to land in: which comes of this, that
there are in that Coast many great Arms of the Sea. The goodliest Port where
all the strangers ariue, and where that famous Fair is kept which we have
mentioned, is that of the Province Cacciam. Men do enter thereinto by two
mouths of the Sea; the one is called Puluciambello, and the other Turon. These
mouths are distant three or four leagues asunder, by which, after that the
Sea thus divided in two Arms, has extended it self seven or eight Leagues
within the Land, as two Rivers that are disioyned; It reioyneth in the end, and
casts it self into a great River, where the Vessels also meet, that come in
on either side.

The King of Cochin-China permitted the Iaponians and Chinois to make choice of
a commodious place to build them a City in, for the more Commodity of the
Fair, whereof we have spoken. This City is called Faiso, which is so great,
that one may well say, that there are two Towns; the one of the Chinois, and
the other of the Iaponois: Each of them having his Quarter apart, and their
several Governors, and living after their own manner: That is the Chinois
according to their own particular Laws, and Customs of China, and the
Iaponians according to theirs.

And because as we have said the King of Cochin-China does refuse no Nation to
enter, but leaves it free for all sorts of Strangers, the Hollanders came
thither also as well as the rest, with their Ships laden with diverse kinds of
Merchandise: Whereupon the Portugals of Macao designed to send an Ambassador
to the King, to entreat him that the Hollanders as their sworn enemies, might
be excluded out of Cochin-China: Wherein they employed a brave Captain, called
Ferdinand de Costa, who effected it with good success, yet not without much
difficulty; prevailing so far, that the King by his Edict or Proclamation,
forbad the Hollanders to approach the Countries under his obedience, or pain
of their lives. But those of Macao apprehending afterward, that the said Edict
was not well observed, thought good to send a new Embassage into Cochin-China,
to obtain a Confirmation thereof; and charged their Deputies to make the King
understand, that the affair concerned his own Interest, and that if he did
not prevent it, he might have cause to fear that the Hollanders in time (being
so crafty and cunning as they are) would assay to invade some part of his
Kingdom of Cochin-China, as they had already some other places of the Indies.
But certain Persons of good understanding in that Country, advised them not
to speak in that sort to the King; because that would be the very way to make
the Hollanders have permission to come to Traffic in that Country, and to
inuit all Holland thither: The Maxim of the Cochin-Chinois being, not to
acknowledge ever any the least apprehension of any Nation in the World. Clean
contrary to the King of China, who fearing all, shuts the Gate against
Strangers, permitting no traffic in his Kingdom.

This is that little which I have thought good to relate concerning the
Temporal estate of Cochin-China; according to that knowledge I could get
during the space of some years whiles I remained there: the Air being so
benign, that they never have any Pestilence, neither do the people know what
kind of thing it is, or what it means.

FINIS.

