A SERMON PREACHED IN SAINT MARY'S CHVRCH IN OXFORD March 26. 1612. at the
funeral of THOMAS HOLLAND, Doctor of the Chair in Divinity, and Rector of
Exceter College, BY RICHARD KILBIE Doctor of Divinity, Rector of Lincoln
College.

AC: OX


Printed at Oxford by Joseph Barnes, and are to be sold by John Barnes dwelling
near Holborne Conduit. 1613.

1. COR. 15. 55 O death where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?

56 The sting of death is sin: and the strength of sin is the law.

57 But thanks be unto God, which has given us victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ.


THese parcels of holy Scripture naturally divide and branch themselves into
these four head-streams.

1 The joyful Exultation and Triumphant insultation of all the godly, in the
person of St Paul, over Death and the Grave [O death, where is thy sting? O
grave where is thy victory?] 2 The original Cause of Death; which is sin.
[The sting of death is sin.] 3 The Power and life (as it were) of Sin;
which is the Law [The strength of sin is the law.] 4 And last, The Victory
and conquest of Christians in their head and Captain Christ Jesus over Sin,
and Death [Thankes be unto God, which has given us victory through our Lord
Jesus Christ.]
Of all these by Gods gracious assistance etc. But first of the cause of Death,
which is Sin, and so of the rest; and in the last place of the triumphant
Insultation over death, which will best befit the present occasion.

It was the error, or heresy rather, of the Pelagians (as St. Augustine
writes) that whether Adam had sinned or no, Augustine. lib. 1. Hypognost contra
Art. 1.
yet he should surely have dyed; because God had created him mortal, and was
the author of death as well as of life: so that Adam was the immediate subject
both of life and death in Gods first intention, and institution of mankind.
Whereas the truth is, that man before his fall was neither mortal nor
immortal (Necessitate) by any necessity of creation and institution from God:
Hugo de Sto Victore de sacramentis legis nature. and script. in. dialog.
and yet he was both mortal and immortal (Potestate,) by his own power;
because then indeed life and death were both in his power. For although, in
regard of the contrary principles whereof man consisted, he had in himself a
natural propension to corruption; inasmuch as contrarieties both in bodies
natural and politic, always breed destruction of those bodies: yet God in
the first creation had given that special and celestial power and virtue unto
the soul, that it was ever able to have preserved the body from sickness, and
from death, and to have perpetuated the same throughout all generations. So
that the God of Nature in the beginning never intended that Mo^ster of Death,
as the Pelagians and Celestians did erroneously conceive but when the soul by
her divorce and separation from God through sin lost her life, both Passive,
which she received from God, and Active which she infused to the body, then the
soul lost all power and ability of perpetuating the life of the body. For
what is more just then the law of Retaliation with God, even to punish like
with like? and therefore (as St Bernard says) Anima volens perdidit vivere,
Bernard. in sermon. ad milites Templi. Cap. 11.
nolens ergo perdat and vivificare, The soul of her own accord lost the life
which she had in God; and therefore now will she, nill she, she must loose
the life, which she gives unto the body. And so indeed man is now become
mortal by necessity; partly, by the frail condition of the body, Th. Aquin.
in lib. 3. sentent. distinct. 16. artic. 1
vt a causa disponente as the disposing cause (as the Schoolmen speak)
always tending to corruption: but especially by sin, vt a causa removente
prohibens, which did remove the original justice of the soul, which was the
obstacle and bar of death; Math. 7.13.
and so let open the door and wide gate to hell and destruction. Wherefore God
is not the cause of Death, Sap. 1.13.
Deus enim mortem non fecit, God made not death, but Satan, by suggestion; and
Adam, by sinful action: the one moving to sin, the other committing sin.
Wherefore as the thief or malefactor is the author of his own death, and the
just Judge no cause thereof; albeit he pronounce the sentence of death against
him: In like manner, sinful man is the cause of his own death both of body
and soul, and God is but the just Judge to pronounce the sentence of death,
Morte morieris; Genesis 2.17.
Thou have sinned, and therefore thou shall surely die. For sin is indeed
that sting of the serpent, that stingeth man to death: Augustine. lib. 1. Hypogu.
it is not the biting of the serpent only, as S. Augustine deriues the Latin
word Mors a morsu serpentis, as if death had its name of the biting of the
serpent; but it is more, even the sting of the serpent, because as the poison
of the serpent is collected and united in a small sting, as the fittest
instrument of deadly poison: so all the venom and poison of Death is in the
sting of sin. For sin is the Father of Death, By one man sin entered into
the world, Romans 5.12.
and death by sin: Iam. 1.15.
and it is the Mother of Death, When lust has conceived, it brings forth
sin, and sin brings forth death. Let none then make God the author of death,
because by his just sentence he condemns man to die for sins sake, and the
trespassing of his law, as the Judge the malefactor for offending against the
laws of God and man: Neither let any think Satan the author of death or of
punishments Propria potestate, as by his own power; sed permissione divina and
propria suggestione, but as of Gods permissio^, and of his own suggestion: And
let every one of us say unto another, 2. Sam. 12.7.
as Nathan said to David, Thou art the man, Thou art the cause of thine own
death. For it is sin as a viper in the bowels of man, which eats out the
bowels of man; it is the canker of sin in the heart of man, that devoureth
the heart of man: Hos. 13.8.
and as God said to Israel, Perditio tua ex te o Israel, O Israel thy
destruction comes of thy self; the like may God say to every man, O sinful
man, thy death and thy destruction comes of thy self. For as the heathen
Orator said of the privilege of a Citizen of Rome, Cic. prodomo sua ad Pontif
Nemo Civis Romanus aut libertatem aut civitate^ amittere potest nisi ipse
author factus sit, No citize^ of Rome could have his freedom taken from him,
or loose the privileges and immunities of his City, except himself was the
author thereof: the same may truly be spoken of the excellent Privileges
and Prerogatives of Paradise, the City of God, wherein Adam was first
enfranchised, that none could take away Adams freedom from him, or banish him
from that heavenly City, except himself had been the first cause thereof,
except himself had disfranchised himself. For it was Adams sin, that brought
him death; and the stinge of his sin has stung all mankind to death:
through the offense of one, death passed upon all me^, Romans 5.12.
for as much as all have sinned in him. Romans 5. Yea the little children, who
die so soon as they are newborn, are stung to death through sin; not because
they committed sin, but because they were conceived in sin: Augustine Hypognost.
lib. 5.
as S. Augustine does well distinguish their sin to be vterina conceptione, non
personali action, through their sinful conception, and not through any
personal action. Parvuli enim non actu, August. Ibid.
sed ortu sunt peccatores, Infants are sinners, not for any fact, Psalm. 51 5.
but for birth sake, they are conceived in sin, and borne in iniquity. For if
they had been free from all original sin, as they were from actual sin, they
should not so soon have died, because the wages of sin is death; and where is
no sin, Romans 6.23.
there is no death; to wit Necessary and Poenall. For albeit Christ died, who
did no sin, yet his death was Voluntary, 1. Pet. 2.22.
Tradidit in mortem animam suam, Esaias. 53 12. John 10.18.
he offered himself of his own will to die; he powered out his soul unto
death; he laid down his life of himself: But all other men die necessarily;
Statutum est omnibus semel mori, Heb. 9.27.
It is appointed to all men that they should once die; it was the decree of God
for sins sake that every man should die, and that decree of God was not,
Respectu naturae institutae, in regard of the first created nature of man, sed
respectu naturae destitutae, in respect of the depraved and corrupted nature of
man through sin. Again, Christ's death was Expiatory, but man's Poenall:
Christ's death was not the sting of sin Passiuely, to be stung to death by
sin, as man's was; but it was the sting of sin Actiuely, to sting sin to
death; for his death was the death of death. Thus then you have heard the cause
of death to be sin, according to these words of my Text [ The sting of death
is sin.

The second thing which I noted is the Life and Power of Sin, which is the
Law [The strength of sin is the law.] Whereas sin in the time of the Law of
Nature in many did seem dead, or at least senseless, and to lie as in a
transe, so that it did not manifestly appear what was sin, and what was not,
the eyes of men's minds and understandings being darkened and overcast with
gross mists of ignorance and error; then the law of Moses brought sin to
life again. Romans 7 9.
Quando enim venit mandatum, revixit peccatum, when the commandment came,
sin reviued. The bright sunshine of Moses Law made sin shine clear in its
perfect colors; and then the darkness and confusion of the differences of
sins was taken away, that every one might run and read what sin was: Rom
7.13.
Et supra modum peccatum erat peccatum per mandatum, sin was grown out of
measure sinful by the commandment. For the law made the full tide of sin;
which grew by these degrees. First, in his being: for sin had his beginning,
and being as it were from the Law; Romans 4.15.
because where no law is, there is no transgression, Romans 4. Secondly in the
knowledge of sin: as St Paul says, Romans 7.7.
I knew not sin but by the Law; for how should I have known lust, except
the Law had said, Thou shall not lust? Wherefore knowledge hoysseth up the
waves of sin: for where the greatest knowledge is, there the greatest sin is,
if virtue and godliness be not the handmaids of knowledge, and that it be not
seasoned with grace, according as our Savior says, Luke 12 47.
Luke 12. That man who knows his masters will, and does it not, shall be
beaten with many stripes. And therefore says St Paul, Tribulation and anguish,
and indignation, Rom 2 9.
and wrath shall be upon the soul of every man that does evil, of the Jew
first, and also of the Gentile. Romans 2. Why upon the Jew first, but because he
knew most, and therefore is first and most punished? Theophilact. in cap. 2.
ad Romans
as Theophylact on that place says, Iudaeus plus divinae susceperat
disciplinae, vnde erat dignus maiore supplicio; The Jew had received a greater
measure of knowledge, and therefore receives a greater measure of punishment;
because he knew the Law of the Lord but did not keep it. Thirdly, the Law
increases sin by forbidding sin: for the more the Law forbids sin, the
more does the wicked man covet sin. Ruimus in vetitum, we run with all
might and main to that which is forbidden us, August. in lib. de speritu and
litera cap 4.
Quod enim concupiscitur fit iucundius dum vetatur; The prohibitio^ of any
thing to be done is as sugar to sweeten the appetite thereof: as the forbidding
of meats many times by the Physician needs no further sauce to provoke
appetite in the patient most of all to desire those meats. And as swelling
waters, the more they are barred their course and flow by floodgates, and
locks, and wheires, the more they rage and swell and overflowe: so the more
the Law does seem to bolt and bar men from sin, and to set them their
bounds which they should not pass, the more is sinful man's nature enraged,
and the more the swelling waves of wickedness do overflowe, and make their
full tide. All which comes to pass, not because the law is sin, for it is
holy, just, and good: Romans 7.12.
but because the Law is as a by-occasion, and not any just cause to increase
sin, and to give vigor and strength thereunto. For the law is the strength
of sin, not of it self, but by accident; not directly, but indirectly; as
appears by the three former degrees of being, knowing, and forbidding: as
also by the great industry and policy of Satan, who seeing God to have made
the Law as a bar to keep men from sin, does therefore labor the more to
tempt men thereby, and to make the Law as a snare to catch men. Wherefore for
conclusion of this point, the Law is no more in fault that man grows more
sinful thereby, then the sune in the firmament is in fault, because sore and
bleare eyes become sorer and blind thereby. For as the Physician is not to be
blamed, or his physic in fault, because the sick patient does ill apply it,
and by his distemperature in diet turns wholesome physic and medicine to the
increase of his malady and disease: In like manner, God the Physician of men's
souls, who gave his law as a sovereign medicine to preserve them from
sickness and from sin, is not to be blamed, or his law in fault; but sinful
man, who makes that sovereign medicine as poison unto his soul to increase
his sin. Thus you have heard how the Law is the strength of sin: I come now
to the victory and conquest of Christians in their head and Captain Christ
Jesus over sin and death [ Thanks be unto God, which has given us victory
tbrough our Lord Jesus Christ.

When mankind was not able to encounter with Death that great Giant, which did
overcome all people by his power, and did trample upon Kings and Princes,
tyrannizing over all at his pleasure; for indeed death was like that mighty
King Prove. 39. who had his name of a compound Hebrew word (...) Alkum, Prove. 30
31.
and is as much to say as none is able to stand or rise up against him; like
Joshua the Captain of Israel: for as he shut Kings and Princes in caves of the
earth, Ios. 10 18.
and roaled great stoces upon the mouths of the caves, Ios. 10.50. So death
shuts the greatest Emperors and Kings in caves and in graves, and rowleth
great stones upon the mouths thereof, and makes great tombs over them:) I
say, when mankind was not able to enter listes and combat with this potent
tyrant, but was forced to yield and lie down at his feet: Then Christ Jesus
that blessed son of God, and son of David, 1. Sam. 17.
encountreth like his father David with this great Goliath, and with a strong
manner of fight overcommeth him; not with any instrument and weapon of war, or
by fighting, but by dying. He slays death as David did Goliath, with his own
sword: 1 Samuel 17.51.
He overcommeth Death with death. Dum occiditur, occidit, Hieronym. lib. 2.
Epist. 24.
as St Hierome speaks; whilst Satan and death sought to kill him, he kills
them both, and makes his death their death: as it was prophesied of him Hos.
13. O Death, Hos. 13.14.
I will be thy death! O grave I will be thy destruction! Christi enim morte
mors mortua est; by Christ's death, Death died: Devorauit, Hieronym. vbi. supra.
and devorata est, it sought to devour, and it self was devoured; for whereas
it sought to catch at man's humanity, it was devoured of his deity. And even
therefore, according to the Apostle Heb. 2. Heb. 2.14.
did Christ take flesh and blood upon him, that so he might die in his flesh,
and through death destroy Death, and him that has the power of Death, that is,
the Devil. So that Christ has carried away the gates of death, Judge. 16.3.
Judge. 16.30.
as Samson sometimes did the gates of Azza: and has, like another Samson, by
his death slain the great Philistines, even sin and death, and the Devil.
But some peradventure will say, how has Christ overcome death how has his
death taken away death; seeing death reigns and rules now as much in men's
bodies since Christ's death as before, and men die as fast as before? For answer
hereunto, you must consider that there be two manners of death: the one of the
body, the other of the soul; the one temporal, the other eternal. Now this
eternal and spiritual death of the soul Christ has already taken away In re,
indeed, actually destroying that in all the faithful through remission of
their sins in his blood: But the temporal death of the body he has only
taken away In spe, in hope of the glorious resurrection of the body at the last
day, when death shall be swallowed up into victory, 1. Cor. 15.54. Revel 21.4.
and when there shall be no more death. For this corporal death, which is a
temporal punishment of original sin, Alex. ab Alex. part. 4. qu 8. membr.
8. Artic. 2.
Christ has not taken away Simpliciter, simply and altogether; but quoad
dominium only, as the Schoolmen speak: that is, the power and dominion of
death is taken away by Christ, as appears, Romans 5. where it is said that
death reigned from Adam to Moses, Romans 5.14.
that is, all the time of the Law inclusiuely; Psalm. 68.18.
eve^ until Christ, who by his death has destroyed the kingdom of death, and
has led captivity captive. And therefore this tyrant Death (whose kingdom is
already actually destroyed, though it self shall not be fully destroyed
until the end of the world, for the last enemy that shall be destroyed is
Death) I say, 1. Cor. 15.26.
this tyrant Death, being thus depulsed and driven out of his kingdom, Origin.
in c. 5. ad Romans
No^ tam regnare, quam latrocinari videtur, does not so much seem to reign
and play the Tyrant, as to play the thief and murderer to kill men. And this
power of death Christ has not taken away, August. lib 13. de Civit. Dei. Cap.
4.
Ne fides enervaretur, quae corporis immortalitatem in spe exspectat, quam in
re nondum habet, as St. Augustine gives the reason; namely for the further
exercise of that part of a Christian man's faith, whereby he constantly believes
the immortality of the body hereafter, which in this life it cannot have. Yea
Christ may be said in some manner already to have taken away even the
corporal death also in the godly, inas much as he has taken away sin which
is the sting of death, and as it were the form and life of death. So that as
honey is not truly honey, when it has lost its sweetness; nor Vinegar truly
vinegar, when it has lost its tartness and sharpness; nor Aloes and Gall
truly so, when they have lost their bitterness: no more is the death of the
righteous truly death, having lost its bitterness, Psalm. 69.21.
and fearfulness and terrors in the godly. The gall and vinegar, which
Christ drank a little before his death, has taken away the gall and
bitterness of the death of the faithful, in whom death, has lost as the
greatest part of its nature, so even the very name of it too, it being in them
no more but a sleep, as it is called in diverse places of holy Scripture, 1 Thessalonians. 4.15.
whereof for brevitie sake I will name but one. 1 Thessalonians. 4. where it is said
that they which live and are remaining at the coming of the Lord, in the
resurrection shall not prevent those that sleep, that is all those that are
dead before. Wherefore to draw toward a conclusion of this point, it does
appear how the faithful are conquerours in Christ their head and Captain
over sin and death; for Christ's victory is their victory, because all his
fighting with sin and death and the Devil, the great and capital enemies of
mankind, was only to make men his faithful members Conquerours: so that they
may say with St Paul in my Text, that God has given them victory over sin
and death through his son Christ Jesus. Numb. 21.9.
Now is their death become like the brazen serpent in the wilderness, which
had indeed the shape and form of a Serpent, but nothing else of a serpent, nec
motum, nec morsum, nec venenum; neither life, nor motion, nor tongue, nor
sting, nor poison of a serpent: In like manner the death of the godly in the
wilderness of this world has the likeness and semblance of death; but it
has no sting, it has no venom, it has no poison. But, whereas it is to the
wicked and ungodly the beginning of sorrow and everlasting torments, it is to
the godly and righteous the end of sorrows, but the beginning of everlasting
joys: to the wicked it is the gate of hell; but to the godly the gate to
heaven: in a word, to the wicked it is death indeed even death of body and
soul, but to the righteous rather a life then a death, even the entrance and
passage to everlasting life. So that when they lie on their deathbeds, and are
even at their last gasp, when they are ready to give up the ghost, and death
seems to have gotten the upper hand of them, and brought them almost as low
as the dust; Theod. lib. 1. Eccl. Hist. cap 20.
yet even then as Julian said to Christ Vicisti Galilaee, O Galilean, thou have
overcome me, so may death say to them Vicisti Christian, O Christian, thou
have overcome me. No marvel then if our blessed Apostle here in my Text, in
the person of all the godly, burst forth into that joyful (...) and triumphant
song, [O death, where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory?] which now
follows in the last place to be considered, containing the joyful
exultation, and triumphant insultation of the godly over Death, and Hell, and
the Grave.

The Heathens and Pagans, says St Origin, were wont to celebrate the day of
their birth and nativitie, Orig. lib. 3. in Job.
as only loving this, and looking for none after this: but Christians must not
so much celebrate and solemnize the day of their birth as of their death;
because albeit they loose this life, yet they must look for, and more love
another life. And the dying out of this world is not a death, but a life
rather, Quia non moriuntur siqui mori videntur, Orig. vt supr
because they, says the same St Origin, who here seem to die, do not die
indeed; for albeit they seem to flesh and blood to die, yet in truth and
indeed they live eternally. And as Jacob after his wrestling with the Angel was
sinew shrunk, and had his thigh out of joint, and went halting; but had his
name changed, and was no more called Jacob, Genesis 32.28.31
but Israel, because he prevailed with God and did see God: Semblably, the
godly after they have wrestled with the Angel of death on their deathbeds,
may have the sinews of their bodies shru^k up, and all the parts and members
thereof out of joint (for death indeed disiointeth all) so that they are not
able to go upright, but are carried on men's shoulders unto their graves; yet
the Angel of death in the end cannot but confess, that they have power with
God, and that God will bless the^, and give the^ a new name, Revel. 2.17.
so that they shall no more be called Jacobs, mortal me^, supplanting one
another here on earth, but Isreal's, prevailers with God, seers of God, and
blessed Saints of God in the kingdom of heaven. The godly then have great
cause to rejoice, and insult over death, saying, O Death, where is thy sting?
Thou may indeed sting our bodies unto death; but thou haste lost thy great
string, thou can not now any more sting our souls to death. O Tyrant, thou
may kill our bodies for a time, but thou can not kill our souls for ever.
So that they may say with S. Bernard; O mors, Bern. sermon. 26 sup. Cantic.
stimulus tuus non est stimulus, sed iubilus, O Death, thy sting is no sting
unto us, but our jubilee, and crown of reioicing: 1 Thessalonians. 2.19
thou think to send us quick unto hell, Greg. Nyssen
but thou sendest us quickly to heaven; thou art as a midwife (as Gregory
Nyssene speaks,) to help to bring us out of the womb of this world into a
better world, Psalm. 27.13.
and into the land of the living; thou art the ship, wherein we sail unto the
haven of our happiness, whilst we are here almost drowned in the deluge of
this miserable and wretched life. Genesis 5.29.
And therefore as Lamech called his son Noah, because he should comfort him
and make all his labor and sorrow to cease and rest: in like manner all just
and righteous men may call death their Noah, the son of their rest and
comfort from all their labors and sorrows and sicknesses and diseases and
pains; for then all these things and all such like miseries shall be done
away, and shall never be again. When Vrbicius Governor under the persecuting
Emperor Aurelius Verus, Eusebius. l 4 hist Eccles. cap. 16
would needs put Lucius to death for the profession of Christianity, Lucius
scorned him, saying, O wicked Tyrant, will thou put me to death? thou do me a
great favor, and a great kindness, for thou sendest me from the tyranny of a
cruel Lord and Governor ad bonum patre^ and clementem Regem Deum, to a good
Father and a merciful King, even God my Christ and my Lord. So when death that
Tyrant, to whom every knee must bend, and bow at his presence, threatens
Christians, they may justly answer him, as Lucius there did Vrbicius; O Tyrant,
do thou threaten to kill us? thou do us a great kindness; thou freest us
from the tyranny of wicked men here on earth, and sendest us to a loving
father and a merciful Lord in the heavens: thou freest us from the stinking
prison of this world, to send us to sweet and pleasant palaces in the world to
come. And that they may likewise say as St Basil said to Modestus Governor
under Valens the Emperor, Greg. Naz. in orat 30 in laudem Basil.
when he threate^d his death, mors mihi beneficij loco erit, quia cito me ad
Deu^ mittit, cui vivo, and ad quem propero; Oh welcome Death, thou art a great
benefit, a great advantage unto me, for thou sends me quickly to God to whom I
live, and to whom I long to go. And therefore O Death, where is thy sting? O
Grave where is thy victory.

And now (Beloved) lest the stream of discourse should carry me beyond the
compass of the time, Application.
and I should tire out both my weak spirits and your Christian patience; I
come briefly to some short application, as the present occasion and your
expectation requires: that as I have hither to spoken of death, so now I may
say something also of this dead subject presented here before your eyes. And
albeit it be too hard a matter for me either by speech or action sufficiently
to commend his excellent worth, all that I can say being far too little, and
no way answerable thereunto: yet because, Hermol. Barbarus in epist ad Ioh.
Picum Mirandul.
as Hermolaus said of a great learned man. Quia talem non laudat, propriae
existimationi detrahit, so may I say of him, that if J should not somewhat
honor him with just commendation, I should much wrong my self, and wrong you
all; I beseech you therefore lend me your favorable patience but a while,
whilst I speak briefly of his Learning, Life, and Death. That so both I may
faithfully repay some part of that I owe him, (for deserved praise is tanquam
aes alienum, Greg. Naz. orat. 25. in laudem Gorgoniae.
as due debt, says Greg. Nazianzen, and is to be paid even to the dead) and
others also thereby may be the more incited to emulate, and follow his steps.

First, as touching his Learning; such was his skill in the tongues, and his
multiplicitie of knowledge in all Arts and Sciences both divine and humane,
Mantuan. in Epist. ad Ioh. Picum Mirandul.
that as Baptista Mantuanus spoke of Picus Mirandula, in vno eode^que homine
videri Hieronymum and Augustinum revixisse; so it should seem that both these
learned Fathers did live in him again. Act. 18.24.
He was an Apollos, mighty in the Scriptures; he was familiarly conversant
amongst the Fathers, and as a father amongst them; and amongst the Schoolmen
tanquam Seraphicus Doctor, at whose mouth, as at an oracle, men might be
resolved in matters of doubt. And therefore most worthy was he of that chief
place of the Doctor of the Chair in Divinity, which he with so great
applause and approbation, I had almost said admiration, so long (even about
twenty years) bare amongst us: out of whose School have proceeded so many
light stars of our Church, Greg Naz. orat. 25. in laudem Gorgoniae.
that as Greg. Nazianzen compared his father, so might this our Reverend Father
be well compared to Abraham. For he was an Abraham indeed, Pater multorum
filiorum, a father of many sons, by scholasticall creation of them in the
highest degrees of Learning: and that I may speak the more to his honor, and
to the honor of our Mother the University, a great part of the Reverend
Bishops of the Land were thus his sons; whereof The Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Bishop of London.
two at this day very worthily sit at the stern of our Church, and are chief
pillars thereof. But I will say no more of his learning, lest my praise should
but eclipse his fame, who was so much renowned for his preaching, reading,
disputing, moderating, that all mouths commended him, and strangers admired
him; so that his fame was spread abroad, and that in foreign countries as well
as at home: and therefore it were sore to be lamented, were it not that the
good pleasure of Almighty God was such, that so much learning should go to
the grave, and be buried in the bowels of the earth.

And so I hasten to speak of his Life; which was so answerable to his
learning, that it is hard to say which was more commendable and admirable to
him, the one or the other; his Learning, or his life: they did both so equally
meet and kiss each other in him. And surely, they are an happy couple where
they meet together; Plin. lib. 2. Not. Hist. cap. 37.
Geminae salutares, like Castor and Pollux: when they both appear together,
they portend much good, and betoken a happy arrival in heaven. He had as well
tasted of the tree of life, I mean of good living in the world, as of the tree
of knowledge. He was not like those of whom Seneca speaks, Sen. Ep. 95. ad
Lucil.
Qui postquam docti prodierunt, boni esse desierunt; quique disputare norunt,
non vivere, who after they became learned began then to leave of to do well.
Neither was he like those of whom Alvarus complains, Alvarus lib. 2. Artic.
74.
who had rather apparentem, quam existentem scientiam; rather an apparent and
seeming knowledge unto the world, thereby to clime to riches, and promotions,
and honors here on earth, then scientiam donum Spiritus sancti, true and
sanctified knowledge which is the gift of the holy Ghost, whereby they might
climb up to the kingdom of heaven. But he had otherwise and far better
learned Christ then so: and was so holy, and upright, and sanctified in his
life and conversation, that, as Alexander de Ales (as Trithemius reports) was
wont to say of Bonaventure, Trithemius.
quod in eo non videbatur Adam peccasse, that it did scarce seem that Adam had
sinned in him; so it might in some sort be said of him also in the very like
manner, at least in comparison of many in this wicked generation: so spotless
was he and blameless from all great enormous and scandalous offenses: being
full of the works of the Spirit, as love, peace, gentleness, meekness
temperance; full of tender mercy and brotherly compassion; full of alms deeds
and mercifulness unto the poor. So that as he was a shining bright lamp for
his learning and lightning others unto the knowledge of the truth: so was he a
shining bright star too in his life, enlightening others in the pathway to
heaven. He was praeco veritatis, a preacher of the truth; and he was factor
veritatis, a doer of the truth, he was an earnest professor of the Orthodoxe
faith, zealous of true religion; and did hate with a perfect hatred al
Idolatry, and superstition, and false religion. The relation of the fellows
His common farewell to the Fellows of his College, when he took any longer
journey was this Co^mendo vos dilectioni Dei, and odio Papatus and
superstitionis, I commend you to the love of God and to the hatred of all
Popery and superstition. And as he was a great Champio^ for the defense and
maintenance of true Religion, so of al piety and godliness, Ephesians. 6.
having on the whole armor of God: for as he had the shield of faith, so he
had the brestplate of righteousness; and as he had his loins girt with
verity, and with the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God, so has he
now the helmet of salvation, which is set on his head as a Diadem and Crown
of glory in the heavens. He was meek and humble as Moses: Exodus 34.29.
and as Moses wist not that the skin of his face shone bright, which the
children of Israel saw and admired; no more did he see and know how his
knowledge and virtues did shine unto the world, but was meek and lowly in his
own eyes.

I will not presume too much of your patience to speak any further of his life,
albeit I verily assure my self you would think nothing too much and too long
which should be spoken of him: and for my self I could not want matter of
discourse in so worthy a subject. Wherefore considering how much time has
been already spent in the solemnizing of his funerals, I am willing to yield
unto the time, and to mine own and others weakness; and and therefore
hastening to an end, I come in a word or two to speak of his end and Death,
leaving the manner and circumstances of his sickness, and the name and nature of
his disease, which is unto me altogether unknown, and no more then conjectural
with Physicians; art and the knowledge of man being unable to comprehend all
that infinite variety of particular diseases, whereby God at his good pleasure
brings men unto their ends. Now what end and death can be judged of him, but
a good end, and a good death? For a good life is the forerunner of a good
death, according as S. Hierome says, I have not read or heard, Hieronym.
but that he who lived well, died well. And as the whole time of his sickness
was accompanied with holy Prayers and devout meditations, so toward his end
especially he did even seem to power out his soul in prayer; breathing out
(as his short breath would give him leave) these and such like heavenly songs,
a little before day the same morning that he died, Come, oh come Lord Jesus the
bright morning star; Come Lord Jesus; I desire to be dissolved, and to be
with thee: as, if he had fully conquered death, and had said in his soul, O
Death, where is thy sting? O Grave? Where is thy Victory? The Lord has given
me victory over you through his son Jesus Christ. And so when his voice
began to fail him, that he could pray no longer with his tongue, lifting up
his hands unto heaven, Psalm. 121.1.
and his eyes unto the hills from whence comes salvation, Deuteronomy. 34 5.
he shortly after died a most sweet and a quiet death: like unto Moses, who
died (...) by the mouth of the Lord; that is, as some of the Rabbines and
Hebrew Doctors interpret it (...) with a kiss of Gods mouth: for so indeed
death is to the godly sweet as a kiss: Rabbi Isaak n Deuteronomy. 34.
and therefore when they are ready to commend their souls unto God, they may
say with the Spowse in the Canticles, Cant. 1.1.
Osculetur me osculo oris sui, Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth.
And thus this reverend man has left us, and has left the world; and surely
he had little cause to love the world, and it should seem the world did as
little love him: so that as it was said of Othniel, a good Judge in Israel, that
he died, Glossa in Iud. cap. 3.
quia indignus erat populus habere talem iudicem, because the people were not
worthy to have such a Judge; the like may be said of him, Hollandus mortuus
est, quia mu^dus indignus erat habere talem virum; I name him for love and
honors sake, HOLLAND is dead, because the world was not worthy of him: for it
did not reward him according to his worth; but the greater is his reward with
the Lord to whom he is gone. Now the Lord grant us grace to live all our days
in his fear, that at length we may die in his favor, and receive the reward
of everlasting life. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

