A Relation of the second Voyage to Guiana.

Performed and written in the year 1596.

By Lawrence Kemys, Gent.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Dawson, dwelling at the three Cranes in the
Vintree, and are there to be sold.

1596.

AMORE ET VIRTVTE


TO THE APPROOVED, right valorous, and worthy Knight, Sir Walter Ralegh, Lord
Warden of the Stanneries, Captain of her Majesty's Guard and her Highness
Lieutenant general of the County of Cornwall.
I Have here briefly set down the effect of this your second Discovery,
without any enlargement of made words: for in this argument, single speech
best besemeth a simple truth. Where the affinity of the matter with your
person, leads me to write of your self, unto your self: that small liberty
which I have therein used, shall, I doubt not, without offense, or sinister
construction, be given to the cause in hand: which whether it suffer not
detriment, by attributing less, then of right belongs: the judgment be
theirs, that uprightly and indifferently shall weigh the consequentes of their
evil purpose, who in seeking to detract from the Author of these Discoueries,
do so much as in them lies, wound, deface, and tread under foot the thing it
self. But this is no novelty, nor proper only to these our days. For long
since it has been said. Pericles.
Lauds eo vsque sunt tolerabiles, donec ea dicuntur, quae auditores se quoque
facere posse existimant: si maiora proferantur: Inuident, non credunt. The
fervent zeal and loyalty of your mind in labor with this birth of so
honorable expectation, as it has deserved a recompense far different so
needs it not my poor suffrage to endeare the toil, care, and danger, that
you have willingly undergone for the good and advancement of our weal
public. The praise-worthines thereof does approve it self, and is better
read in your living doings, then in my dead unregarded papers. All that I can
wish, is that my life were a sufficient pledge, to justify, how much more
easy, and more material, the course for the Guiana would be the^ others: which
requiring greater charge, yield not so large benefit, and are subject to more
doubtful events. If unto their wisdoms, who sit in place and authority, it
shall appear otherwise, and that in following of other attempts there is less
difficulty, certainer profit, and needfuller offense unto the enemy: the cost
and travail, which you have bestowed, shall not, I hope, be altogether lost:
if unto your Honor, I can well prove, how, and where the amends is to be
had, maugre the force and prevention of all Spaniardes.

Your Lordships to be commanded in all service: Law: Kemys.

To the Favorers of the Voyage for Guiana.
IN things earnestly desired, though never so likely, we are still
suspicious: thinking it more credit to our common wisdom, to discredit most
noble and profitable endeavors with distrust; then touch to our valures and
safeties to lie wilfully idle. So that howsoever an action well and
iudiciallie attempted, be esteemed half performed: yet, is this my jealous
conceit concerning the Guiana, that nothing is begun, before all be ended. In
this regard (gentle Reader) I have presumed to burden thine ears, with the
weak plea of a good cause, and in steed of opening it thoroughly, to thy
prudent consideration, to note only mine own unsatisfied affection: hoping
that because I do name the Guiana unto thee, thou will vouchsafe, hoc nomine,
to veil and cover all other my defectes in the deserte of a good meaning. In
publishing this treatise, my labor principally tends to this end: to
remove all fig-leaues from our unbelief; that either it may have cause to
shake off the colorable pretenses of ignorance: or, if we will not be
persuaded; that our selfe-wil may rest inexcusable. They that shall apply, and
construe this my doing, to serve the Spaniard his turn so well as our own; in
so much as it may seem to instruct, warn, and arm him: for their
satisfaction herein, they must not be ignorant, that his eyes in seeing our
shipping there, do as effectually inform him, that many of our hearts are
toward that place: as if it should be credibly advertised, by some corrupt
hireling that we think, write and discourse of nothing else. Neither can I
imagine, that to conceal our knowledge herein (which to conceal may perhaps
prove, and be hereafter taken for worse then paricide) would be of better
purpose, then to hoodwincke our selves, as who would say, no man shall see us.
Besides: if the action were wholly to be effected at her Majesty's charge:
then might it at her Highneesse pleasure, be shadowed with some other drift,
and never be discovered, until it were acted: But since it craves the
approbation and purses of many Adventurers: who cannot be so prodigal, both
of their possessions and lives as voluntarily to run themselves out of breath,
in pursuing they know not what: great reason it is, that where assistance is
to be asked, due causes be yielded, to persuade and induce them unto it. The
Spaniard is not so simple, unsettled, and uncertain in his determinations; as
to build them on our breath, or to make our papers his Bulwarks; nor so slow,
as to expect a president of our forwardness. His proceedings are sufficiently
strengthened with the travails, reports, and substanciall proofs of his own
men, that have above 60. years beaten round about this bush. And, to say a
truth, the expedition that he has used, in sending so many ships in February
last, to people this country, and disappoint us: as it does consequently
show, that he finds his chiefest force and sinews to consist in gold: so
does he thereby plainly to our faces exprobate our remissness and long
deliberations, that in twelve months space have done, or sought to do
nothing worthy the ancient fame, and reputation of our English nation,
interressed in so weighty business In June last
His late provision of a new supply of whole familes to the number of six
hundred persons, bound for Guiana, but that it pleased God, that by means of
that right honorable service most resolutelie performed in the sea fight, and
sacking of Cades, the ships, wherein they should have been conveyed, were
converted into ashes: what might it signify? Certes, as it does evidently
prove, that El Dorado has undoubted credit and account in their judgments:
so points it at us, whilst we only to entertain idle time, sit listening
for Guiana news, and instantly forget it, as if it were naught else, but a
pleasing dream of a golden fancy. If we with our selves shall expostulate,
how this comes to pass that the advantage wholly resting on our side, in
respect that Berrec was this last year beaten out, the country thoroughly
discovered and the Inhabitants made desirous of her sacred Majesty's happy
government; they notwithstanding by entering before us: have now gotten the
start of us: what may we think? shall we judge that their native country is
less dear, or more wearisome unto them, then ours is unto us? Their Peruleri
who going bare and empty out of Spain, do again within three or four years
return from Peru, rich and in good estate, do apparantlie disprooue all such
conceits of them. Shall we say that they have more spare men to be employed in
such actions? It is no secret to know the contrary. Are they subject to
penury? In all parts of Christendom, where money is not scant, all other
things are plentiful. Or is their land not able to sustain their numbers of
people? They buy many slaves to follow their husbandry, and themselves
disdaining base idleness, and beggerie, do all honor military profession,
highly esteeming it, in their mercenaries and strangers. Is it then want of
ability, in those that are willing? lack of encouragement. Or default of
speedy order and direction for those that do voluntarile offer themselves,
their substance, and best endeavor to further this cause; that makes us to be
thus coated by the Spaniard? The first is no question. The latter needs no
answer. The profit then by their example to be gathered, is, not to loose
opportunity by delay, or to seem fearful and dismayed, where there is no
cause of doubt. For as yet their post have does no way prejudice our advised
leisure in setting forward, since their preparations of Negroes to work in the
mines, their horses, cattle, and other necessaries, may, (by the favor of God)
at our first coming, both store us with quantities of gold oar, and ease us
of much trouble, pains, and travail. If we should suppose our selves now to
live in the days of King Henry the seventh of famous memory and the strange
report of a West Indies, or new world abounding with great treasure should
entice us to believe it: perhaps it might be imputed for some blame to the
gravity of wise men, lightly to be carried with the persuasion and hope of a
new found Vtopia, by such a one as Columbus was being an alien and many ways
subject to suspicion. But since the penance of that incredulity lies even now
heavy on out shoulders; the example forethreatning. I know not what;
repentance: and that we have the personal trial of so honorable and
sufficient a Reporter, our own Countriman: let it be far from us to
condemn our selves in that, which so worthily we reprove in our
predecessors; and to let our idle knowledge content it self with naked
contemplation like a barren womb in a Monastery. We cannot deny that the
chief commendation of virtue does consist in action: we truly say that Otium
is animae viuae sepultura: we believe, that perfect wisdom in this mobility of
al humain affairs refuses not with any price to purchase safety: and we
justly do acknowledge that the Castilians from barelegged mounteyners have
attained to their greatness, by labor and industry: To sleep then, because
it costeth nothing, to embrace the present time, because it flattereth us with
deceitful contentment, and to kiss security saying what evil happens unto
us? is the plain highway to a fearful downfall: from which the Lord in his
mercy deliver us, and give us an understanding heart, in time to see, and to
seek that, which belongs unto our peace.

De Guiana, carmen Epicum.
What work of honor and eternal name,
For all the world t'enuie and us t'atchieue,
Filles me with fury, and gives armed hands
To my hearts peace, that else would gladly turn
My limbs and every sense into my thoughts
Rapt with the thirsted action of my mind?
O Clio, Honors Muse, sing in my voice,
Tell the attempt, and prophecy th'exploit
Of his Eliza-consecrated sword,
That in this peaceful charm of Englands sleep,
Opens most tenderly her aged throat,
Offering to pour fresh youth through all her veins,
That flesh of brass, and ribs of steel retains.
Riches, and Conquest, and Renown I sing,
Riches with honor, Conquest without blood,
Enough to seat the Monarchy of earth,
Like to Jove's Eagle, on Elizas hand.
Guiana, whose rich feet are mines of gold,
Whose forehead knockes against the roof of Stars,
Stands on her tip-toes at fair England looking,
Kissing her hand, bowing her mighty breast,
And every sign of all submission making,
To be her sister, and the daughter both
Of our most sacred Maid: whose barrenness
Is the true fruit of virtue, that may get,
Bear and bring forth anew in all perfection,
What heretofore savage corruption held
In barbarous Chaos; and in this affair
Become her father, mother, and her heir.
Then most admired Sovereign, let your breath
Go forth upon the waters, and create
A golden world in this our iron age,
And be the prosperous forewind to a Fleet,
That seconding your last, may go before it
In all success of profit and renown:
Doubt not but your election was divine,
(As Well by Fate as your high judgment ordered)
To raise him with choice Bounties, that could add
Height to his height; and like a liberal vine,
Not only bear his virtuous fruit aloft,
Free from the Press of squint-eyd Enuies feet,
But deck his gracious Proppe with golden bunches,
And shroude it with broad leaves of Rule oregrowne
From all black tempests of invasion.
Those Conquests that like general earthquakes shook
The solid world, and made it fall before them,
Built all their brave attemptes on weaker grounds,
And less persuasiue likelihoods then this;
Nor was there ever princely Fount so long
Powered forth a sea of Rule with so free course,
And such ascending Majesty as you:
Then be not like a rough and violent wind,
That in the morning rends the Forrestes down,
Shoues up the seas to heaven, makes earth to tremble,
And toombes his wastfull bravery in the Even:
But as a river from a mountain running,
The further he extends, the greater grows,
And by his thriftie race strengthens his stream,
Even to join battale with the imperious sea
Disdaining his repulse, and in despite
Of his proud fury, mixeth with his maine,
Taking on him his titles and commandes:
So let thy sovereign Empire be encreast,
And with Iberian Neptune part the stake,
Whose Trident he the triple world would make.
You then that would be wise in Wisdoms spite,
Directing with discredit of direction,
And hunt for honor, hunting him to death.
With whom before you will inherit gold,
You will loose gold, for which you loose your souls;
You that choose naught for right, but certainty,
And fear that value will get only blows,
Placing your faith in Incredulity.
Sit till you see a wonder, Virtue rich:
Till Honor having gold, rob gold of honor,
Till as men hate desert that gets naught,
They loath all getting that deserves not ought;
And use you gold-made men, as dregs of men;
And till your poisoned souls, like Spiders lurking
In sluttish chinckes, in mystes of Cobwebs hide
Your foggie bodies, and your dunghill pride.
O Incredulity, the wit of Fools,
That slovenly will spit on all things fair,
The Cowards castle and the Sluggards cradle
How easy it is to be an Infidel?
But you Patrician Spirits that refine
Your flesh to fire, and issue like a flame
On brave endeavors, knowing that in them
The t^act of heaven in morne-like glory opens,
That know you cannot be the Kings of earth,
(Claiming the Rightes of your creation)
And let the Mines of earth be Kings of you;
That are so far from doubting likely driftes,
That in things hardest you are most confident.
You that know death lives, where power lives vnusde,
Ioying to shine in waves that bury you,
And so make way for life even through your graves;
That will not be content like horse to hold
A threadbare beaten way to home affairs:
But where the sea in envy of your reign,
Closes her womb, as fast as it is disclosde,
That she like Avarice might swallowe all,
And let none find right passage through her rage:
There your wise souls as swift as Eurus lead
Your Bodies through, to profit and renown,
And skorne to let your bodies chooke your souls,
In the rude breath and prisoned life of beasts:
You that herein renounce the course of earth,
And lift your eyes for guidance to the stars,
That live not for your selves, but to possess
Your honored country of a general store;
In pity of the spoil rude self-love makes,
Of them whose lives and yours one air does feed,
One soil does nourish, and one strength combine;
You that are blessed with sense of all things noble
In this attempt your complete vvoorthes redouble.
But how is Nature at her heart corrupted,
((...) even in her most ennobled birth?)
How in excess of Sense is Sense bereft her?
That her most lightening-like effects of lust
Wound through her flesh, her soul, her flesh unwounded;
And she must need incitements to her good,
Even from that part she hurtes. O how most like
Art thou (heroike Author of this Act)
To this wronged soul of Nature that sustainst
Pain, charge, and peril for thy countries good,
And she much like a body numbed with surfets,
Feels not thy gentle applications
For the health, use, and honor of her powers.
Yet shall my verse through all her ease-lockt ears
Trumpet the Noblesse of thy high intent,
And if it cannot into act proceed,
The fault and bitter penance of the fault
Make red some others eyes with penitence,
For thine are clear; and what more nimble spirits
Apter to byte at such vnhooked baytes,
Gain by our loss; that must we needs confess
Thy princely valor would have purchased us.
Which shall be fame eternal to thy name,
Though thy contentment in thy grave desires,
Of our advancement, fail deserved effect,
O how I fear thy glory which I love,
Least it should dearly grow by our decrease.
Natures that stick in golden-graueld springs,
In mucke-pits cannot escape their swallowings.
But we shall forth I know; Gold is our Fate,
Which all our acts does fashion and create.
Then in the Thespiads bright Propheticke Fount,
Me thinks I see our Liege rise from her throne,
Her ears and thoughts in steep amaze erected,
At the most rare endeavor of her power.
And now she blesses with her woonted Graces
The Industrious Knight, the soul of this exploit,
Dismissing him to conuoy of his stars.
And now for love and honor of his worth,
Our twise-borne Nobles bring him Bridegroome-like,
That is espousde for virtue to his love
With feasts and music, rauishing the air,
To his Argolian Fleet, where round about
His bating Colors English valor swarms
In haste, as if Guianian Orenoque
With his Fell waters fell upon our shore.
And now a wind as forward as their spirits,
Sets their glad feet on smooth Guianas breast,
Where (as if each man were an Orpheus)
A world of Sauadges fall came before them,
Storing their theft-free treasuries with gold,
And there does plenty crown their wealthy fields,
There Learning eats no more his thriftlesse books,
Nor Valor Estridge-like his iron arms.
There Beauty is no strumpet for her wantes,
Nor Gallique humors putrify her blood:
But all our Youth take Hymen's lights in hand,
And fill each roof with honored progeny.
There makes Society Adamantine chains,
And ioins their hearts with wealth, who^ wealth disioyn'd.
There healthful Recreations strowe their meades,
And make their mansions dance with neighborhood,
That here were drowned in churlish Avarice.
And there do Palaces and temples rise
Out of the earth, and kiss th'enamored skies,
Where new Britania, humbly kneeles to heaven,
The world to her, and both at her blessed feet,
In whom the Circles of all Empire meet.
G C.

Ad Thomam Hariotum Matheseos, and vniuersae Philosophiae peritissimum, de
Guiana Carmen.
Dat. Anno. 1595.
MOntibus est Regio, quasimuris, obsita, multis:
Circumsaepit aquis quos Raleana suis.
Intus habet largos Guaiana beata recessus:
hostili gestans libera colla ^^go.
Hispanus cliuis illis sudauit, and alsit
septem annos, nouies: nec tamen inualuit.
(Numen, and omen inest numeris. Fatale sit ^^^i:
Et nobis vertus sit recidiua, precor)
Gualtero, patefacta via est duce and auspice Ralegh
Mense vno: o factum hoc nomine quo celebrem?
Nocte dieque, datis velis, remisque laborans,
Exegit summae dexteritatis opus.
Scilicet expensis magnis non ille pepercit,
Communi natus consuluisse bono.
Prouidus excubuit simili discrimine Joseph:
Sic fratres, fratrem deseruere suum:
Fama coloratam designet si bona, vestem:
Vestis scissa malis sic fuit illa modis.
Mira leges. Auresque animumque tuum arrige. Tellus
Haec aurum, and gemmas graminis instar, habet.
V'er ibi perpetuum est: ibi prodiga terra quotannis
Luxuriat, sola fertilitate nocens.
Anglia nostra licer dives sit, and vndique foelix:
Anglia, si confers, indiga frugis erit.
Expertes capitum, volucres, piscesque ferasque
Praetereo: haud prosunt, quae nouitate, placent.
Est ibi, vel nusquam, quod quaerimus. Ergo petamus:
Det Deus, hanc Canaan possideamus. Amen.
Tui Amantiss. L. K.

The second Voyage to Guiana.
Monday, the 26. of January, in the year of our Lord 1595 we departed from
Portland road, in the Darling of London, having in company the Discouerer, a
small Pynnace, whom we lost at sea, in foul weather, the Thursday night next
following. Friday, the 13. of February, we fell with the Canarie Islands, where
we expected our pynnace, according to our appointment, seven or eight days.
Here we took two boats, the one a passenger, we bulged, the other we towed at
our ship stern, steering south south west for the Islands of Gap. de Verd.
There hence we set sail the 28. of February, keeping a west south west
course. In this passage we found very smooth seas, fair weather, and steddie
winds, blowing ordinarily between the East, and North east points. Near 300.
leagues from these Islands, we came into a grown sea, the swollen waters making
a strange noise and hurtling together, as if it might be two strong currentes
encountering each other. The 12. of March we sounded, and had sandy ground in
47. fadam. At midnight in twelve fadam we came to an ancor, the ground sandy
oase. Sunday the 14. toward night, about some six leagues from the shore, we
descried a low land in the bottom of a bay. From the 9 of March until this
time, we kept for the most part a south south west course. The water in this
place is smooth, but muddie, and the color red or Tawny. From the westermost
of the Cap. de Verd. Islands unto this bay I do estimat the distance to be near
550. leagues. It seemed to most of our seamen to be the very bank of a shoald
upon a leigh shore: the rather because without it, in the clean green sea we
had but 7. fadam depth: but after by proof finding that there is no sudden
alteration in any part of the coast and that the sea is smoothest nere the
land, we always at night sought to ancor in three or four fadam. And
doubtless as the hand of God is wonderful in all his works: so heerin his
merciful providence is most admirable, that upon a leigh shore, subject to a
perpetual easterlie g^le, neither much wind can endanger shipping by reason
that the foul heavy water is not capable of vehement motion, and the soft
light oase, if they touch, cannot bruise them: nor is there any ieopardie in
being wind-bound or imbayed: for the most forcible winds make the greatest
floud-tydes, whereby the freshets, when they take their ordinary course of
ebb, do grow strong and swift, setting directly off to sea against the wind.
We by turning went clear of all bays: howbeit in this case, as also in the
rivers, the use of a drove sail seems a good and ready help. The first
place wherein we ancored, was in the mouth of Arrowa^^, a fair and great river.
It stands in one degree and forty minutes: for we fell so far to the
southwards by your Lordships direction. The bar without has at the least three
fadam, at the sholdest place, when it is low ebb The depth within is eight and
ten fadam. The water always brackish. We found not any inhabitants in this
place near the sea coast. I omit here to recite the names of the nations that
are borderers, their towns, Captains and commodities that their countries do
yield, as also the soundinges, tides, and how the coast lies etc. thinking it
fittest to reduce these disioyned and scattered remembrances to one place. As
we passed we always kept the shore within view and stopped the floods, still
ancoring at night in three or four fadam. When we came to the north-hed la^d
of this bay (which we named Cape Cecyl^) we saw two high mountains like two
Islands but they join with the main. In this tract lying north north-west
near 60. leagues, there fall into the sea, these several great rivers
Arrowari, Iwaripoco, Maipari, Coanawini, Caipurogh. We ancored in two fadam not
far from these hills and filled all our caske with fresh water by the ship
side for in the sea 30. miles from the mouth of any river it is fresh and good
This second bay extends it self above 30. leagues to the westward, and
contains within it these rivers Arcooa, Wiapoco, wanari, Caparwacka, Cawo,
Carare, wia, Macuria Cawroor Curassawini. Here leaving the ship at ancor, I
took into the boat John Provost, my Indian Interpreter, John Lynser, and 8. or
nine others, intending to search some of these rivers, and to seek speech with
the Indians. In Wiapoco at the foot of the Eastermost mountain, where the
river falls into the sea, we found twenty or thirty houses, but not
inhabited. We stayed there but one night. Wanari we ouerpassed, because the
entrance is rockie and not deep. In Capperwacka we sailed some forty miles
but could see no Indian. At one of their ports under the side of a hill, we
took in so much Brafill wood as our boat could carry. Amongst other trees we
cut down one for an example, which I do verily believe to be the same sort
of Sinamon, which is found in the streightes of Magellane. From Capurwacka we
passed to Cawo, and there met with a Canoa, wherein were two Indians. It was
long time before we could procure them to come near us, for they doubted least
we were Spanish. When my interpreter had persuaded them the contrary, and that
we came from England, they without farther speech or delay, brought us to
Wareo their Captain, who entertained us most friendly: and then at large
declared unto us, that he was lately chased by the Spaniard from Moruga, one
of the neighbor rivers to Raleana, or Orenoque: and that having burnt his own
houses, and destroyed his fruits and gardens, he had left his country and
towns to be possessed by the Arwaccas; who are a vagabound nation of Indians,
which finding no certain place of abode of their own, do for the most part
serve and follow the Spaniardes. He showed me that he was of the nation of the
Iaos, who are a mighty people, and of late time were Lords of all the sea
coast so far as Trinidado, which they likewise possessed. Howbeit, that with
a general consent, when the Spaniardes first began to borrow some of their
wives: they all agreed to change their habitation, and do now live united for
the most part toward the river of Amazones. But the especial cause of his
present remove was, because two or three years past, twenty Spaniardes came
to his town, and sought to take his best wife from him: but before they carried
her away, he at time and place of advantage killed half of them: the rest
fled, most of them sore hurt. Now in this case he thought it best to dwell far
enough from them. Your Indian Pilot Ferdinando, who conducted you by Amana, and
now abides near the head of Dessekeebe, is one of this man's subjects: By whom
(as it may seem) he has taken good notice of our Princess and country. For
he descended more particularly to inquire what forces were come with us,
assuring me of the Spaniards being in Trinidado, and that the Indians our
friends betwixt hope and fear, have earnestly expected our return from
England these four or five months. When I had answered him, that at our
departure we left no Spaniards alive to annoy them; that we now came only to
discover, and trade with them; and that if her Majesty should have sent a
power of men, where no enemy was to resist, the Indians might perhaps imagine,
that we came rather to invade, then to defend them. He replied, that this
course very well sorted with the report, which they had heard of our Princess
Justice, rare graces, and virtues: the fame of whose power in being able to
vanquish the Spaniards, and singular goodness in undertaking to succor and
defend the afflicted Indians, was now so general that the nations far and
near were all agreed to join with us and by all means possible to assist us
in expelling and rooting out the Spaniards from all parts of the land: and
that we were deceived, if we thought this country not large enough to receive
us, without molestation or intrusion upon the Indians, who wanted not choice of
dwelling places, if they forsook one to live in another: but stood in need of
our presence at all times to aid them, and maintain their liberty, which to
them is dearer then land or living. He then farther desired, that he with his
people might have our favor against the Arwaccas, who not being content to
enjoy their grounds and houses, had taken from them many of their wives and
children, the best of whose fortune was, if they lived, to live in perpetual
slavery under the Spaniardes. We put him in good hope and comfort thereof.
And he to deserve some part of this friendship, commended unto us an elderlie
man to be our Pilot in bringing us to Raleana. When we were ready to depart,
Brasil wood
he demanded whether we wanted any Vrapo which is the wood, that is usually
carried from these parts to Trinidado in Canoas, and is there sold to the
French for trade: he offered, if we would bring our ship near his Port; to put
in her lading thereof. But because most of our caske was not iron bound, and in
making stoage way to remove it, would have been the loss of our Syder and
other drink; I therefore referred the taking of any quantity to fitter
opportunity: thinking it sufficient at this time, to have only my boats
lading thereof: which afterward in extremity of foul weather before we could
get aboard our ship, we were enforced in a dark nigh to heave al ouerbord:
thinking our selves happy, to have recovered thither at seven days end, with
safety of life only. All which time we could no where set foot on shore, but
rested day and night wet and weather beaten in our couertles boat which was
sometimes ready to sink under us. For we had in this place without comparison
more rain, wind, and gustes then else where at any time. To be brief, my men
became weak and sick, and if we had stayed any longer time out, I doubt
whether the greatest part of us had ever come abord again. I afterward
understood by my Indian Pilot, that this weather is for most part of the year
usual near the Island Oncaiarie, which lies North from the river Capurwacka
some six leagues into the sea: and that they hold opinion this Island to be
kept by some evil spirit: for they verily believe, that to sleep in the day
time near it (except it be after much drink) is present death. The only
season wherein little rain does fall there, is (as I gathered by their speech
they dividing all times by their moons) at our winter Solstice. The mother
wind of this coast is for the most part to the Northwarde of the East, except
when the Sun is on this side of the Equinoctial, for then it often years
Southerly, but most in the night. This our guide is of the Iaos, who do all
mark themselves, thereby to be known from other nations after this manner.
With the tooth of a small beast like a Rat, they race some their faces, some
their bodies, after diverse forms, as if it were with the scratch of a pin, the
print of which rasure, can never be done away again during life. When he had
some time conuersed with our Indians, that went from England with us he became
willing of himself to see our country. His sufficiency, trustines, and
knowledge is such, that if the pretended voyage for the Guiana do take place,
you shall (I doubt not) find him many ways able to steed your Lordsh. in your
designs and purposes. For besides his precise knowledge of all the coast, of
the Indian towns and dwellings, he speaks all their languages, was bred in
Guiana, is a sworn brother to Putima, who slew the Spaniards in their return
from Manoa, can direct us to many Gold mines and in nothing will undertake
more, then he assuredly will perform.

To the Westward this bay has many good roades under small Islands, whereof
the greatest, named Gowateri, is inhabited by the Shebatos: and besides the
plenty of foul, fish fruits wild Porkes and Dear, which are there to be
had: where Caiane falls into the sea, (for it stands in the mouths of Wia
and Caiane) it yeeldes say and good harbor in four and five fadam for ships
of great burden. On all that coast we found not any like it: we therefore
honored this place by the name of Port Howard. The road under Triangle Islands;
which are the Westermost from the rest and stand in 5. degrees which have also
store of fish foul, Dear and Iwanas is good, but not comparable with this
other, where in all winds and weather ships though they be many, may all
ride securely. The hills and high lands are limits to this bay on each side:
for to the Eastward beyond it appear none at all, and to the Westward of Mount
Hobbeigh very few. Where the mountains fail, there Brasill wood is no farther
to be sought for: but in all parts cotton, pepper, silk, and Balsamum trees
do grow in abundance. The roots of the herb Wiapassa are here most
plentiful: I find them in taste nothing different from good Ginger, and in
operation very medicinable against the flixe and headache. These rivers, as
also others nearer Raleana, do al fall out of the plains of the Empire over
rocks, as the river Caroli does into Raleana: and in most places within the
utmost hedge of woods, the land within is plain, void of trees; and bears
short grass like Arromaiaries country.

Next adjoining unto these, are the rivers Cunanamma, Vracco, Mawari,
Mawarparo, Amonna, Marawini, Oncowi, Wiawiami, Aramatappo, Camaiwini,
Shurinama, Shurama, Cupanamma, Inana, Curitini, Winitwari, Berbice, Wapari,
Maicaiwini, Mahawaica, Wappari, Lemerare, Dessekebe, Caopui, Pawrooma, Moruga,
Waini, Barima, Amacur, Aratoori, Raleana. From Cape Cecyll to Raleana, the
coast trendeth 200. leagues next hand West north west. In this variety of
goodly rivers, Amonna amongst the rest pours himself into the sea in a large
and deep channel: his swiftnes suffers no bar, nor refuses any shipping
of what burden soever they be: within his mouth for good and hopeful
respects is port Burley placed. The inhabitants that dwell Eastward, do never
pass lower then Berbice to trade. Above Curitini in the woods they gather
great quantities of honey. Farther to the Eastward then Dessekebe, no Spaniard
ever traveled. In which respect, and that no sea-card that I have seen at
any time, does in any sort near a truth, describe this coast: I thought the
liberty of imposing English names to certain places of note, of right to
belong unto our labors; the rather because occasion thereby offers it self,
gratefully to acknowledge the honor due unto them that have been, and I hope
will still continue, favorers of this enterprise. The Indians to show the
worthiness of Dessekeebe (for it is very large and full of Islands in the mouth)
do call it the brother of Orenoque. It lies Southerly into the land, and from
the mouth of it unto the head, they pass in twenty days: then taking their
provision they carry it on their shoulders one days journey: afterward they
return for their Canoas, and bear them likewise to the side of a lake, which
the Iaos call Roponowini, the Charibes, Parime: which is of such bigness, that
they know no difference between it and the maine sea. There be infinite numbers
of Canoas in this lake, and (as I suppose) it is no other then that, whereon
Manoa stands: In this river, which we now call Deuoritia, the Spaniards do
intend to build them a town. In Moruga it was, that they hunted Wareo and his
people, In September.
about half a year since. Arromaiarie, who wan so great credit by
overthrowing the Tiuitiuas of Amana, and making free the passage of that river,
but now again lives in disgrace, by reason that the Charibes of Guanipa, have
killed most of his followers, and burnt his towns, was present with them, and
took away many of the women of that place. Arracurri, another Indian of the
nation of the Arwaccas inhabiting in Barima, was likewise present, and
conducted the Spaniards to all the Indian dwellings. They were not of Anthony
de Berreo his company, that followed this chase, but were the Spaniardes of
Marguerita, This Spaniard understands the Guiana language, and is reputed a
very sufficient man.
and the Caraccas, with whom Santiago, forsaking his governor Berreo, joined
himself. For which fact he now lies in fetters at Trinidado, every day
expecting sentence of death. The occasion hereof grew as follows.

When Berreo, having lost his men, was left with Fasshardo at Cumanaw all
alone, as forlorn, and never likely to compass his intended conquest of
Guiana: the Governors of the Caraccas and Marguerita consulting together, sent
with all speed into Spain, to advertise their king, that Berreo was utterly
unable to follow this enterprise, that he had given it over, and did now
soiorne in his old days at Fasshardo his house, minding nothing else but his
solace, and recreation. they farther declared, of how great importance this
matter was: and that an English Gentleman of such reckoning, as they named your
Lordship to be, having been in the Guiana, and understanding so much of the
state thereof, and the nations thereunto adjoining, as Topiawarie, being both
old and wise, could inform you of, who also in confirmation of friendship,
had given you his only son, to whom the inheritance of the country did
belong after him: there was no other likelihood, but that you, who adventured
so far, and in such sort as you did, only to see, and know a certenty, would
leave nothing unattempted to possess so rich a country, and without all doubt
would return presently. That mean time, you had left this aged Sire alive,
to be a block in their way, to whom after his decease, this enterprise by
patent did belong, and to be a weak adversary against your self, whom at all
times, you knew easily how to distress: and that therefore it might be
behoouefull for his majesty to revoke Berreo his grant, and to use their
service, who were ready and willing without any delay to undertake the
charge. These news being at large amplified, and delivered to the king:
Domingo de Vera, Bereo his Camp. master, who was sent into Spain, five
months before your arriual to Trinidado, with a sufficient quantity of
gold, gotten out of Guiana, to levy and furnish 500. men, having gotten
knowledge of this practice so solicited this cause in Bereo his behalf, that
present order was given for the victualing and manning of ten ships to be sent
to Bereo: and farther, this gold bore such weight, that the king commanded
other 18. of his ships to stop at Trinidado, and not to follow their other
directions, before they saw that place secured from enemies.

Berreo supposing that these Governors in sending with such speed into Spain,
meant him no good: to approve his care and constancy, and that he never would
yield under the burden of his adverse fortune; giving no time or breath to his
adversaries, nor himself; returned forthwith to Carapana his port, only with
fifteen men, being the scattered remnant of those, who^ you lately
dispossessed of Trinidado. These Governors followed him, and assuring
themselves of present employment from their king, preoccupating the time of
their directions to be returned from Spain, entered the Guiana with their men,
with full determination to murder Bereo, and to dispatch all his company.
They indeed killed two or three, but Bereo fled toward Caroli, where he stayed
hoping for succor from his son Anthony de Cemenes, to come down the river
from Nueuo Reyno de Granado. The Margueritanes with their accomplices busied
themselves, some in searching the country, others in purueying of victuals out
of the rivers that do lie Eastward, of which number these were, that entered
into Moruga with 20. Canoas. Santiago passed up into Topiawaries country, and
there took Francis Sparrowes Sir George Gifford his man prisoner, who with
plenty of gold ransomed his life, and is now abiding in Cumanaw. This done,
they all returned to Trinidado, and began to build their town there, when
vnhaphappilie to their small comfort the 28. sails arrived, and took Santiago
prisoner. The other Actors in this Interlude vanished, and in Canoas recovered
Marguerita and Cumanaw again. Eighteen of the said ships leaving all things
in good order, departed from Trinidado to follow their other directions: ten
do yet remain fortifying at Conquerabia, and expecting our coming.

This particular relation I had from an Indian, servant to Berreo, that could
speak Spanish, whom I took in the river. He is of the nation of the Iaos, and
from a child bred up with Berreo. I gave him trade to buy him a Canoa to
return into his country, and so left him glad, that he had met with us.

Now the Indians of Moruga being chased from their dwellings, do seek by all
means possible, to accord all the Nations in one, so to invade the Arwaccas,
who were guides to the Spaniards, in showing their towns, and betraying them.
For they are fully persuaded, that by driving these Arwaccas, who serve the
Spaniards (for a great part of this nation does also hate, or not know them)
out of their territories, and Trinidado, the Spaniards for want of bread, will
be enforced to seek habitation farther of, or at the least in time consume and
be wasted.

The 6. day of April we came to an ancor within the mouth of the river
Raleana, having spent twenty and three days in discovery upon this coast.
The channel of this river has six or seven fadam depth, nine or ten miles
off at sea, the bar lies farther out, and at low water has not full two
fadam. It highes not above five foot, except at a spring tide. We ancored in
ten fadam the first night: the next morning twelve Canoas came unto us,
furnished and provided of victualles after their manner for the wars. Their
Captains names were Anawra, and Aparwa. These Cassiques when the Spaniards
made the last inrode in those parts, were in the Inland amongst the
Iwarewakerie their neighbors, by which occasion having lost some of their wives
(for notwithstanding their profession of Christianity, some of these Spaniards
keep ten or twelve women, thinking themselves well and surely blessed,
howsoever they live, if their town and houses be religiously crossed) they
kept together thirty Canoas, hoping at our coming, which they had now long
expected to recover this loss upon them, and the Arwaccas who in their absence
had done this wrong. They showed me this their purpose, and required to be
joined in league of friendship with us against our enemies. When of them I had
learned so much of the present estate of the country, as they did know: they
demanded whether we had brought no more forces with us, but only one ship? I
answered them as before I did the others, that we now came only to trade, not
knowing until this present that any Spaniards were in the Guiana; that upon our
return our whole Fleet will hasten to set forwards, and that in the mean
time, we would now visit our friends and help them so far as we could in
any thing, that we should find needful presently to be done. After long
discourse (for their chief man stayed with me all night) when he had caused
me to spit in my right hand, with many other ceremonies which they use in
confirming friendship, he went to the shore, and one of his Canoas he sent to
bring forwards the other twenty: one other he caused to go up the river before
us, to bring intelligence. Then calling together the chief of his company,
they made small fyers, and sitting in their Hamaccas, each one sorted himself
with a companion, recounting amongst themselves the worthiest deeds, and
deaths of their Ancestors, execrating their enemies most despightfullie, and
magnifying their friends with all titles of praises and honor, that may be
devised. Thus they sit talking, and taking Tobacco some two hours, and until
their pipes be all spent (for by them they measure the time of this their
solemn conference) no man must interrupt, or disturb them in any sort: for
this is their religion, and prayers, which they now celebrated, keeping a
precise fast one whole day in honor of the great Princess of the North, their
Patroness and Defender. Her Majesty.
Their Canoas being made ready, they accompanied us, and in the way showed us,
where the shoalds of the river do lie. By this Captain I learned that
Muchikeri is the name of the country where Macureguerai the first town of the
Empire of Guiana, that lies toward Raieana, is seated in a fair and
exceeding large plain, below the high mountains that bear Northwesterly
from it, that it is but three days journey distant from Carapana his port: and
that Monoa is but six days farther. That they themselves do pass in three
days into the country of the Iwarewakeries by the river Amacur, which though
it be not the directest, yet is it the readiest way to Macureguerai for that
which leads by Carapana his dwelling, is in some places difficult, and
mounteynous. That a nation of clothed people, called Cassanari, do dwell not
far from the place, where the river does first take the name of Orenoque, and
that far within, they border upon a sea of salt water, named Parime. That a
great river, called Macurwini, passes through their country into Orenoque.
That Manoa stands twenty days journey from the mouth of Wiapoco: sixteen
days from Barima: thirteen days from Amacur, and ten days from Aratoori.
That the best way unto it, is not by Macureguerai, because it is in some places
combersome and rockie. That of all others the Charibes that dwell high up in
Orenoque, know most of the inland, and of those nations, and that they speak
no other language, then such as John your Interpreter does well understand. He
certified me of the headless men, and that their mouths in their breasts are
exceeding wide. The name of their nation in the Charibes language Chiparemai,
They have eminent heads like dogs, and live all day time in the sea they speak
the Chari^es language.
and the Guianians call them Ewiapanomos. What I have heard of a sort of
people more monstrous, I omit to mention, because it is no matter of
difficulty to get one of them, and the report otherwise will appear fabulous.
Lastly, he told me of an Inland river, named Cawrooma, adjoining to Aratoori,
and that the Cuepyn mountains, where Carapana dwells, are hardly
accessible. That the Amapagotos have images of gold of incredible bigness, and
great store of vnmanned horses of the Carackas breed: and that they dwell five
days iourny up the river about Caroli. We with our fleet of Canoas were now
not far from Carapanas port, when our intelligencer returned and informed us
that ten Spaniardes were lately gone with much trade to Barima, where these
Indians dwelt, to buy Cassaua bread: and that within one day two other Canoas
of Spaniards were appointed to come by the river Amana, to Carapana his port.
Upon this occasion they took counsel, and in the end desired to return to
their houses, least the Spaniards finding them from home, and imagining that
they did purposelie absent themselves, should take away their wives, and spoil
their dwellings. They farther resolved, if it were possible to cut them off.
Which afterward they did perform. For when they were dispersed in their
houses seeking Cassaua: suddenly at one time, in all places they were
assaulted, and not one of them escaped. Carapana, whose hand was in laying
this plot, sent us this news, as we returned down the river. The two other
Canoas that came from Trinidado by Amana, notwithstanding that we kept a league
before the ship with our boats, saw the ship before we had sight of them, and
presently with all speed went to Berreo to advertise him of our coming. He
forthwith dispatched two or three messengers to Trinidado. One of his Canoas
met with our Spy, whom the Indians of Barima had left to go with us: they
rifled him of his victuals, gave him knives, and dismissed him,

In 8. days sailing still before a wind, we arrived at Topiawaries port, in
all which time, no Indian that we knew came aboard us. For the time of our
return promised at your Lordships departure from thence, being expired; they
in despair severed themselves amongst the other nations. Here the Spaniards
have seated their Rarceria of some twenty or thirty houses. The high rockie
Island, that lies in the midst of the river, against the mouth of Caroli, is
their fort or refuge, when they misdoubt safety in their town, or have notice
of any practice against them: but now leaving both town and Island, they
joined themselves altogether, and retiring to the mouth of the river Caroli,
placed there a secret ambush, to defend the passage to those mines, from whence
your Oar and white stones were taken the last year: We all not without
grief to see our selves thus defeated, and our hungry hopes made void, were
witnesses of this their remove. As we road at an ancor within musket shot of
their town, an Indian came unto us with lean cheeks, thin hair, and a
squint eye, to inform us that they were very strong, that Berreo his son was
with him, that they had but two small Pynnaces at Trinidado, which they daily
looked for to come up the river, and lastly to view our ship well, and our
provision, but especially to learn whether Gualtero, Topiawarie his son
were with us.

This Informers very countenance gave him to be suspected, and therefore
partly by threatening, partly by promise of reward we won him to confess the
truth. Which he did, assuring us that Berreo had not full 55. men with him,
whereof twenty came lately from Trinidado: twenty from Nueuo Reyno, and the
rest he brougt with him about six months since, when he fled from Carapana
his port, and was driven with his small company to keep the foresaid Island
near Caroli. And that though now his number is thus increased, yet dares he
not adventure at any time to leave the fast woods, and to go but half a
league from his hold into the plains. That some few of the Arwaccas are
abiding with him That he daily looks for his son from Nueuo Reyno, for his
Campemaister from Trinidado, and for horses from the Caraccas. That Topiawarie
is dead: the Indians of that coast all fled, and dispersed, excepting the son
of one Curmatoi, and another woman of account, whom the Spaniards hold
prisoners, for consenting to the death of their nine men, and the holy Friar
in Morekito his time. This Curmatoi is fled toward Guanipa, and is a man of
special note amongst the Indians. That Iwiakanarie Topiawarie his son.
Gualtero his near kinsman, has held the country to his use, by his fathers
appointment, ever since your being in the river. That there are ten ships,
and, many Spaniards at Trinidado. That the Indians our friends did fear,
least you with your company were all slain, and your ships sunk at Cumanaw
(for so the Spaniards noysed it amongst them.) that some of Gualtero his frinds
with Putijma, were in the mountains not far from the hill Aio. And that
Berreo had sent for six pieces of ordinance, which he meant to plant, where
they might best command the river.

When we had stayed here two days, considering that where no hope was left of
doing good: to abide there in harms way doing nothing, would be bootlesse: I
resolved to seek Putijma in the mounteines: and turning down the river with
the force of the stream some twenty miles in six hours: the next morning
with ten shot I went ashore, intending if the Indians should think
themselves too weak, with our help to displant the Spaniardes: to set some of
them on work, for hatchets and knives to return us gold grains, and white
stones from such places, as they should be directed unto. When we came to the
place of their usual abode: we saw that they lately had been there, but
could speak with none of them. It may be that fear (which is easy of
belief) persuaded them that we were Spaniards, Gilbert my Pylot, here offered
to bring us either to the mine of white stones near Winicapora, or else to a
gold mine, which Putijma had showed him, being but one days journey over
land, from the place where we now stayed at an ancor. I saw far off the
mountain adjoining to this gold mine and having measured their paths nere the
same place this last year, could not judge it to be fit eene miles from us. I
do well remember how coming that way with Putijma the year before, he
pointed to this same mountain making signs to have me go with him thither. I
understood his signs, and marked the place, but mistook his meaning,
imagining that he would have showed me the ouerfall of the river Curwara from
the mountains. My Indian showed me in what sort without diging they gather the
gold in the sand of a small river, name Macawini, that springs and falls
from the rocks, where this mine is. And farther told me, that he was with
Putijma, at what time Morekito was to be executed by the Spaniards, and that
then the chief of Morekito his friends were in consultation, to show this mine
unto the^, if so they might redeem their Captains life; but upon better advise,
supposing them in this case to be implacable, and that this might prove a
means to loose not only their king, but their country also: they have to this
day concealed it from them, being of all others the richest, and most
plentiful The aged sort, to keep this from common knowledge, have devised a
fable of a dangerous Dragon that haunteth this place and deuoureth all that
come near it. But our Indian, if when we return, we do bring store of strong
wine (which they love beyond measure) with it will undertake so to charm this
Dragon, that he shall do us no harm.

I, that for this end came from home, and in this journey had taken much more
pains to less purpose, would very gladly from this mountain have taken so
good a proof to witness my being in the country: but withal considering that
not one Indian of our known friends came unto us: that Don Iuan the cosen of
Gualtero, who lives here a euolt from the Spaniard was now in election to be
chief commander of all the Indian forces in those parts, cannot in policy,
for Gualtero his sake, whose inheritance he sought to usurp, be a fast friend
unto us: that the Spaniards abiding in Winicapora (for there were ten) might
well before we could do any thing, and return, cause some others of Berreo
his men to join with them, in the way to intercept us: and forethinking
withal, that there being no means, but by our selves to make known our
discovery, if we returned not; in our misfortune the hope of following this
voyage would be buried: but besides all this, and the respect of such spyals,
as the Spaniards kept to observe our doings, foreknowing that if the enemy
should by our lingering stop our passage, which in one or two places of
advantage, few of them might easily do: it would be a question how with our
ship to get out of the river, except first we could remove them: I thought it
best (all other possibilities set apart) to seek in time to be free from the
hazard of the forsaid evil passages.

Whilst we were searching at the shore for the Indians, my barge took a Canoa,
with three men in her: the one a servant to Berreo (as before is mentioned,)
the other two merchants of Cassaua. They had a letter sent from the Governor
to be coueied to Trinidado: which I received. There was also a great hatchet,
and twenty knives, wherewith this Indian servant should buy a Canoa, and hyre
Indians to carry her up the river toward Nueuo Reyno. This Canoa forsooth with
four others was to be sent to bring down Berreo his son with all his
forces, which now have been I think, full three years in preparing, If five
such boats be sufficient to conuoy him his men, and all their provision: it
may seem, he comes with no great strength.

This servant, as he was a man of especial trust, and near Berreo: so appeared
he to have some insight in his proceedings. He showed me that the Indians,
who with these knives should be hired, were to pass up so high, as where some
of the Cassanari do dwell in small villages. That Berreo his purpose was, when
they came thither to leave them there, and make them his chief Officers over
the other Indians: and in their places some of the Cassanari should return, who
likewise should be made Justices and Constables over them of Guiana: that from
Trinidado he meant to remove most of the old inhabitants, that would be
tractable; and interpose them amongst the Cassanarians of Guiana, and the
Guianians of the Cassanari. That the Arwaccas should wholly possess Trinidado,
and the river side of Raleana. That they already were provided of threescore
Negroes, to work the mines in these places. And that by this means Berreo
hoped to keep these several nations in mutual enmity each against other, all
to serve his turn, and never to become strong, or likely to join themselves
against him. He farther showed me that Topiawarie soon after our departure
from the river, fled into the mountains carrying Hugh Godwyn with him, and
leaving a Substitute in his country, as aforesaid: and that the next news
they heard of him was, that he was dead, and the English boy eaten by a Tiger.
That the Spaniardes believe neither the one, nor the other. That about the end
of June, when the river shall be impassable, the ten ships shall depart from
Trinidado. And that Berreo ever since his coming to Guiana, has spent his
time altogether in purueying of victuals, whereof there is such scarsitie, by
reason that the Indians forsaking their houses, have not this half year planted
any of their grounds, that the Spaniards are enforced to seek their bread far
off, and content themselves to live with little.

In sailing up the river, we passed by Toparimacko his port, which in one place
is very shoald, the channel lying close aboard the shore. We returned
therefore another way by the maine river on the South side: this branch we
found large, deep, and without danger. When we were come nere Carapana his
port: he sent five or six several Canoas, promising this day and the next,
that he would come and speak with us. Thus we lingered six or seven days, but
he came not. In the end he sent one of his aged followers, to certify us,
that he was sick, old and weak: that the ways near his dwelling are not
easy: and that therefore he desired us to hold him excused for not coming.
This old man dilated unto us, that Carapana in hope of our return, has ever
since your Lordships being in that country, kept the mountains, where the
Spaniards can hardly any way enforce him; that they have taken from him and
his people, many of their wives, because they refused to furnish them weekelie
with a certain proportion of bread and victualles: that Don Iuan otherwise
called Eparacano has the commandment of all his subjects, excepting only a
choice guarde of men sufficient to keep the place he now dwells in. That it
repents him of his ambition, ever to have sought by the Spaniards means, to
have enlarged his countries and people. For true it is that from the beginning
he was a Lord of no other then ordinary power amongst them, until he had
entered into frinedship with Berreo: for then the Indians on all sides left
some their habitations, and many their commanders to become his subjects,
that so they might have the privilege to trade with the Spaniards for hatchets
and knives, which are rare jewels of great price amongst them. that he now saw
no other choice, but that the Indians must, if they will do well, without
farther dissembling of their necessity, either entertain us their friends, or
else give place to the Spaniards their enemies. For the plenty of gold that is
in this country, being now known and discovered, there is no possibility for
them to keep it: on the one side; they could feel no greater misery, nor
fear more extremity, then they were sure to find, if the Spaniardes
prevailed, who perforce do take all things from them, using them as their
slaves, to run, to row, to be their guides, to carry their burdens, and
that which is worst of all, to be content, for saftie of their lives, to leave
their women, if a Spaniard chance but to set his eye on any of them to fancy
her: on the other side; they could hope for, nor desire no better state and
usage, then her Majesty's gracious government, and princely virtues do
promise, and assure unto them. For, said he, when the other year, we fled into
the mountains, and measuring your doings by the Spaniardes in like case, made
no other account, but that your Commander being able, as he was, would
doubtless have persecuted us to the uttermost, as the only maintaineres and
supporters of your enemies, and would at the least, if he could not reach us,
take our towns, and make us ransom our wives and children: we found it far
otherwise, and that none of your well governed company durst offer any of us
wrong or violence, no not by stealth when unknown they might have done it. We
then believing it to be true, that your grand Captain reported of his
Princess, took this for a good proof of her royal commandment and
wisdom, that had framed her subjects to such obedience, and of your
happiness, that enjoyed the benefit thereof: that Carapana weighing the good
and friendly course of our proceedings, does humbly crave of her Majesty for
himself and his people, that with the rest of the Indians, which wholly
depend on her princely regard toward them; he also may enjoy her favorable
protection, that he does this, not as a man left unto himself, and forsaken by
the Spaniards, but as one that knows their injustice hates their cruelties,
and takes it fos his best choice, utterly to disclaim their friendship. It
may be pertinent (as surely it is a thing worth the noting) to consider how
this president, of your moderation and good order, which to us seems a matter
but of small, and ordinary respect, has both alienated their hearts altogether
from the Spaniard, and stirred up in them true love and admiration thereof. For
as government is the only bond of common society: so to men lawless, that
each one to another are, Omnes hoc iure molesti, quo fortes: To men, I say,
that live in daily tumultes, fears, doubts, suspicions, barbarous cruelties,
never sleeping secure, but always either drunk, or practicing one another
death: to such men as these be, who wanting discipline, justice, and good order
to confirm them in a quiet and peaceable course of living know not where to
find it: the sense and sweetness thereof, is as the dew of Hermon: it is as
the harmony of a well tuned Instrument: to be brief, it carries in it self
not only a due and worthy commendation; but is auayleable without stroke
striking to gain a kingdom. For the Indians in all parts within and near
the Guiana, do offer their service, and promise to provide victual, and what
else their country yields, desiring only that some force of men may remain
with them, to deliver them from oppression and tyranny. And now by general
consent (though hatchets and knives be the only things of request and useful
unto them) they have agreed by no means to trade with the Spaniard for any
thing. Farther, this old man showed me, whence most of their gold comes, that
is formed in so many and diverse fashions: whence their Spleene-stones, and
others of all sorts are to be had in plenty: where gold is to be gathered in
the sands of their rivers: from what parts the Spaniards, both by trade, and
otherwise, have returned much gold. This he uttered with Carapana his consent
(I doubt not) hoping thereby to induce us to return again. For contrary to
their law of secrecy, which in this case they do all generally observe,
sharply punishing the breakers thereof, as enemies unto their native country:
I found this man no whit scrupulous, but very free and liberal of speech in
all things.

And because we might know, that we should not want hands or help, in this
or any other our enterprises, if perhaps we should find cause to pass up to
the head of this river: he declared that the Spaniards have no Indians to trust
unto but some of the Arwaccas, which since they were not many could be but of
small force: That the Charibes of Guanipa, the Crawannas amongst the Tiuitiuas,
the Shebaios, Iaos, Amaipagotos, Cassipagotos, Putpagotos, Samipagotos,
Serowos, Etaiguinams, Cassamari, with the rest of the nations far and near,
were all ready, on what side soever the Spaniard shall stir, to fight against
them: that the Pariagotos, through whose country they must first pass, are
alone sufficient to encounter them, such is the strength of their country, and
the valor of the men. The Indians hold opinion, that they are notable
sorcerers, and inuulnerable. In the mountains where they dwell white stones are
found of such hardness, that by no art or means they can be pierced: they
imagine that these Pariagotos become inuulnerable, by eating these stones. The
fable omitted, happily they may prove good Diamonds.

Then he showed how the Iwarewakeri have nourished grass in all places,
where passage is, these three years, and that it is at this present so high as
some of the trees; which they mean to burn, so soon as the Spaniard shall be
within danger thereof. Lastly, he showed me that Wariarimagoto the Emperors
chief Captain for those parts, has gathered together many thousands of the
Epuremai, to keep the borders of the Empire; and that he lay now on the south
side of the mountains, some one days journey, or little more from the
Spaniard. To be short, he certified me, that they all were resolved not to
seek upon them (for indeed they fear their shot) but to defend their own,
and to expect our coming. In the mean time they take opportunities, when they
find any of them straggling or divided from their strength, by little and
little, to lessen their number.

The place, where we were at an ancor was but one days journey from Carapana:
I therefore made motion to this Captain to stay with two or three of his
company aboard the ship, and to cause his men to bring me with my Interpreter
to Carapana his dwelling: he answered that it were not good so to do, least
perhaps some Spy might inform the Spaniardes thereof, whereby danger would
grow to Carapana. For they have many times used many means to reconcile him
unto them: but he from time to time has dalyed with them, neither professing
himself their enemy, nor in aught showing them any friendship. Now said he)
if the Spaniard shall by any means come to knowledge, that you have conferred
together, they will take this occasion to persecute him with all extremity, as
their open enemy, whom they now neglect, or at the least fear not as being an
harmless old man. And for this cause only has Carapana forborne to come
unto you.

By this I perceived, that to stay longer for him (though gladly I could have
been content to spend one seuenight more to speak with him) would be
purposelesse. Wherefore having assured so many of the Indians, as at any time
came unto us, of our speedy return, promising them plenty of knives, beads,
and hatchets, if they would reserve their Cassaua, and provide store of their
pieces of gold for us: I desired this Captain to be a means that our
friends of Trinidado might understand of our being in the river, and that we
meant to relieve them so soon, as conveniently might be. He promised in
Carapana his behalf, that this should not be forgotten. One of the Captains
of the Cyawannas, who do now dwell in the river Arawawo, near Trinidado,
undertook also without fail to ascertaine them thereof. I was the more
careful herein, because so many ships being there, I doubted least they would
take order that no Indian should speak with us. For so indeed it fell out.

This Captain of the Cyawannas came likewise to ioyn with us, and had provided
fifteen Canoas for that purpose. Their dwelling was lately in Macureo, where the
Spaniards one night stealing on them, killed twenty of their men, and burnt
their houses, because they refused to trade with them for certain images of
gold made with many heads, which they had gotten out of the Guiana. I sent a
present of Iron to Carapana, and then set sail.

In turning down the river we spent eight days. In many places where the
channel lies, we found twenty fadam depth: where it is sholdest we had two
fadam and a half, and that but in one or two places. Of the woorthynesse of
this river, because I cannot say enough, I will speak nothing. We have presumed
to call it by the name of Raleana, because your self was the first of our
nation that ever entered the same, and I think it nothing inferior to
Amasones, which is best known by the name of Oreliana, the first discouerer
thereof. By turning only, without help of owers, to pass so long a way, in
so short a time, against the wind, may sufficiently prove, that the channel
is very large, good, and likely to second our hopes in all that we can
desire. Without the mouth of this river, our Pynnace, the Discouerer, whom we
lost near the coast of England, came unto us. She fell with this land somewhat
to the Southward of Cape Cecyll, and had spent three weeks and od days in
ranging along the coast, when she met with us. William Down the Master,
informed me that they entered, and searched these four rivers. In Wiapoco they
sailed so far, until the rocks stopped their passage. In Caiane they went up
one days iourny. In Cunanama they found many inhabitants. Curitini was the
last river they had been in. Whence, having no other means to find Raleana,
they were enforced to borrow a Pilot against his will: whom afterward I would
have returned with reward to his contentment; but he would not.

Our English that to steal the first blessing of an vntraded place, will
perhaps secretly hasten thither, may be beholding to me for this caveat, if
they take notice thereof. They may be assured, that this people, as they no way
sought our harm, but used our men with all kindness: so are they impacient of
such a wrong, as to have any of their people perforce taken from them, and
will doubtless seek revenge. The example of the like practice upon the coast
of Ginnie, in the year 1566. and again at Dominica, where Alderman Wats his
ship hardly escaped being taken may serve for our warning in like case to
look for no good, before they be satisfied for this injury.

When we had taken aboard us such victuals as were in the Pynnace: we set fire
in her, (for her Rudder could serve her to no longer use) and stopping the
floods, plied to windward with the ebb near the shore, until we were
sixteen leagues to the Eastward of the rivers mouth, and then standing off to
sea, we fell in 24. hours sailing with Punto Gallera the Northeastermost part
of Trinidado. But having Tobacco Island in sight, we first went thither. This
Island is plentiful of all things, and a very good soil. It is not now
inhabited, because the Charibes of Dominica, are evil neighbors unto it. They
of Trinidado have a meaning and purpose to fly thither, when no longer they
can keep Trinidado. Their only doubt is, that when they are seated there, the
Spaniard will seek to possess it also. The Governor of Marguerita went
lately in a pynnace to view this Island. Gilbert my Pylot who sometime lived
there, notes it for the best and fruitfullest ground that he knows.

Thence we returned to Punto Gallera and ancored in ten fadam under the
northside of the Island some five or six miles from the said point. The
floud-tyde strikes along the coast to the Eastward very strongly. We
discharged a piece of ordinance, and afterward went to the shore in our
boat: but no Indian came unto us. I would have sent John of Trinidado to
procure some of them to speak with us: but he was altogether unwilling,
alleging that their dwellings were far within the mountains, and that he
knew no part of that side of the Island. From this place we set sail for S.
Luce but fell with the Granadas, which we found not inhabited, S. Vincent we
hardly recovered by turning under the liegh of the Island. The Tobacco of this
place is good: but the Indians being Canibals, promising us store, and delaying
us from day to day, sought only opportunity to betray, take and eat us, as
lately they had devoured the whole company of a French ship This their
treachery being by one of their slaves revealed, from thencefoorth they did
all forbear to come unto us. To sit down on their low stools, when they by
offering such ease, will seem to show courtesy, abodeth death to strangers,
that shall trust them. At Matalino we found not any inhabitants. Lastly, we
came to Dominica, where we could get no good Tobacco. But having intelligence
of a Spanish ship, that was taking in of fresh water, at the northwest side of
the Island; we wayed ancor to seek him He descrying us, stole away by night. The
Indians of this place have determined to remove, and join with them of
Guanipa, against the Spaniards, who lately dispeopled one of their Ila^ds, and
at our being there, one of their Canoas returned from Guanipa, and certified us,
that the ten Spanish ships at Trinidado, do ride some of them at Conquerabia,
the rest at the small Islands near the difimboging place. Herehence we
steered North and by East, taking the directest course to shorten our way
homewards.

Thus have I emptied your purse, spending my time and travel in following your
Lordships directions for the full discovery of this coast, and the rivers
thereof. Concerning the not making of a voyage for your private profit, I
pretend nothing. Sorry I am, that where I sought no excuse, by the Spaniards
being there, I found my defect remediless. And for mine own part, I do
protest, that if the consideration of the public good, that may ensue, had not
ouerpoysed all other hopes, and desires: I would rather have adventured by such
small and weak means as I had, to do well with danger, then to return only
with safety. Now although in a cause not doubtful, my allegation is no way
needful: yet because the waightinesse thereof, and the expectation of others,
seems of due and right to claim, something to be said by me whom your
especial trust and favor has credited and graced with this employment: Pardon
it (I beseech your Honor) if, where my lamp had oil, it borrow light also;
and my speech, which is altogether unsavory, season it self with some of the
leaven of your own discourse touching this discovery. The particular relation
of some certain things, I have reserved, as properly belonging to your
self, who only, as knowing most, can make best use thereof. So much in
general is here touched, as (I hope) may serve to refresh the memory of this
worthy enterprise in those whom it may concern, and testify your care and
expense in following the same: That in a second age, when in time truth shall
have credit, and men woondering at the richesse, and strength of this place,
which nature her self has marueilouslie fortified, as her chief treasure
house, shall mourn and sigh to hold idle cickles, whilst others reap, and
gather in this harvest: it be not said, that Sir Walter Ralegh was of al men
living in his days, most industrious in seeking most fortunat in attaining to
the fulness of an inestimable public good: if, knowing that for envy and
private respects, his labors were lessened, his informations mistrusted, his
proffers not regarded and the due honor of his deserts imparted to others If
(I say) seeing, knowing and bearing all this, he with patience had persisted
in so good a way of doing his Princess, and country service; and had but
perfected his first discovery by sending a ship, or two for that purpose: for
then surely all lets and doubts being removed, and so large a kingdom, so
exceeding rich, so plentiful of all things, as this by his discourse, appeared
to be, being offered: no devises, and vain surmises could have taken place, no
illusions could have prevailed, it had been blindness and deafness in those
that being near her Majesty: do spend their days in serving the common
weal, not to see, and know in so weighty a matter: it had been malicious
obstinacy, impotencie of mind, and more then treason to the common wealth,
the matter standing only upon acceptance, to seek either to foreslowe so fit
an occasion, or forsake so general a blessing. This, if, is now cut off
through a singular and incomparable temper, in ouercomming evil with good:
This your second discovery has not only found a free and open entrance into
Raleana, which the Naturals call Orenoque: but moreover yields choice of
forty several great rivers (the lesser I do not reckon) being for the most
part with small vessels nauigable, for our merchants and others, that do now
find little profit in setting forth for reprisall, to exercise trade in. To
such as shall be willing to adventure in search of them, I could propose some
hope of gold mines, and certain assurance of pieces of made gold, of
Spleen-stones, Kidney-stones, and others of better estimate: but because our
belief seems to be mated in these greater matters, and a certainty of
smaller profits, is the readiest inducement to quicken our weak hopes; I not
going so far as mine own eyes might warrant me, do only promise in theafore
said rivers, Brasil wood, honey, Cotton, Balsamu^, and drugs to help defray
charges: and farther, because without a beginning there can be no continuance
of these benefits unto our country, to any that shall be the first under takers
hereof, I am gladly content, to give such light and knowledge, as by conference
with the Indians I have attained unto.

My self, and the remain of my few years, I have bequeathed wholly to
Raleana, and all my thoughts live only in that action. The prosecuting whereof
is in it self just, profitable, and necessary. Just: because it is intended
for the defense of harmless people, who fearing thraldom, and oppression,
desire to protect themselves and their country under her Majesty's tuition:
Profitable, as may be gathered not only by many Spanish letters intercepted,
but also by the proofs mentioned in the discourse of the first discovery, and
since that, by the Indians own voluntary relations: and lastly, by the
provision that the Spaniardes do make to acquit us thereof. Necessary it is,
as being the only help to put a byt in the mouth of the unbridled Spaniard;
the only way to enter into his treasury of Nueuo Reyno, and Peru; the only
means to animate the wronged Indians, with our assistance, to seek revenge for
the extreme murders and cruelties, which they have endured, and to ruinate
his naked cities in all those parts of the Inlande, whose foundations have
been laid in the blood of their parents and ancestors.

The forces that the Spaniard has already sent to Trinidado, to fortify
there, and keep the passage of this river, are an evident argument, that the
king fears and doubts the sequel of this discovery. For can it be a
small matter? or has he so waste employment for his men and shipping, that
upon no ground, he would send 28. ships, to keep us only from Tobacco? (for
what else that good is can Trinidado yield us?) no, doubtless, if the return
of Berreo his Campe-maister with ten of these ships, be compared with
precedent aduertisments concerning him: it will appear more then probable,
that the Guiana gold waged these men and shipping: and that they are now more
careful to obtain this place, then to keep others, which they have already
gotten, which note except in matters of extraordinary account, is not incident
to their policy and proceedings. Again, it cannot be thought but that either
it was senseless madness in the governors of Marguerita, and the Caraccas to
bring their states, and lives in question, by seeking contrary to their kings
order, to enter the Guiana, and kill Berreo with his his followers: or else the
abundance of pearl in Marguerita, and the gold mines in the Caraccas,
seeming matters of small account: the Guiana only was in their judgment,
rich, plentiful, and able of it self to redeem their trespass and offense,
how great soever it should be.

The sundry attempts and overthrows of the Spaniards being men of power, and
honorable place, in laboring these 63. years, and upwards to enlarge the
kingdom of Spain, with this mighty and great Empire, do plainly show, that
they long time sought a path, where in one month a high way was found: that
the loss of their lives witnesses their desires, and the worthiness of the
thing, where to us the easiness of obtaining discrediteth the greatness of
the attempt: and that if now at the last they do prevail, they must hold by
tyranny that which they get by the sword; where then our return nothing by
the Indians is more wished for, nothing expected more earnestly.

Those objections, which have been made by many seeming wise, and the
impediments likely to arise, as they have supposed, are best answered by the
unreproved witness of these men's actions. Some have termed these discoueries
fables, and fantasies, as if there had been no such land, or territory: others
allowing both of the place, and that such a kingdom or country is discovered,
make conclusion that if it had been so rich, as we have supposed: that no
doubt the king of Spain would by this time have possessed it. But if they
consider that the Spanish-nation has already conquered the two Empires of
Mexico, and Peru, with so many other kingdoms and provinces: we may very
well answer, that his power is not infinite, and that he has done well for
the time. And yet it is manifest, that this very Empire has been by all those
several Spaniards (the catalogue of whose names, is by it self hereunto
annexed) at sundry times undertaken, and never performed. Howbeit, the world
has reason to admire their constancy, and their great labors, and we may
well blush at our own idle, dispairefull, and loytering dispositions, that can
find ability in another barren, and sterued nation, to possess so much of the
world: and can do nothing but frame arguments against our selves as unfit
and powerless to possess one province already discovered and of which our
nation has assurance of the peoples love, and that all the Chieftaines and
principalles have vowed their obedience and service to her Majesty; the
navigations being withal so short, dangerlesse and free from infectious
sickness. If doubt of perils might moderate the minds of men once moved with
steadfast hope, that gold shall be the reward of their travels: it may easily
be perceived that all those lettes and hindrances, that can any way be
alleged, or wrested so much, as but to touch us, do deeply and neerelie
concern the Spanish king, and in a manner violently with-holde him from that,
which he notwithstanding carries with success, whilst we out of season, do
affect the bare style, to be named men stayed and circumspect in our
proceedings. It is reported, that Calanus the Indian threw down before
Alexander the great, a dry sear piece of leather, and then put his foot on
one of the ends of it: the leather being trod down on that side, rose on all
parts else. By this the wise man did show unto him a figure and similitude of
his kingdom, which being exceeding large, must of necessity in all other
parts excepting the place of the kings residence, be always full of stirs,
tumults, and insurrections. The end afterward confirmed, that this Empire
consisting of sundry nations, could not keep it self from dissolution. No
potentate living has, or can have so faithful and incorrupt Counselors, as be
the examples and histories of fore passed ages. We may therefore be bold to
think that the Governors of the Spanish affairs should mind it, that their
kings lustful desire, and ambicious thoughts to establish over all Europe one
law, one Lord, one religion, are built and erected on a dangerous ungrounded
resolution: Considering that many of the neighbor kingdoms being of equal
force in men, or greater then he can make, are settled in a long continued
estate, are entire within themselves, and hate to hear the voice of a
stranger. It is not unlikely that they in this case should lay before their
king the fatal destinies of many Worthies, that have been constrained for
want of sufficient numbers of their natural subjects, after many years
spent in the wars, to retire to their own countries, and have been glad
peaceably to hold their own Signiories at home, resigning all that unto
others, which they have gotten abroad by hard adventure, and much effusion of
blood. The King of Spain cannot but discern, that his spacious Empires and
kingdoms being so many, and so far divided one from another, are like the
members of a monstrous body, tied together with cables only For take away the
trafique of unnecessary commodities transported out of Spain: those huge
countries of the Indies having no common link of affinity, law, language, or
religion, and being of themselves able to maintain themselves without foreign
commerce, are not so simple, as not to know their own strength, and to find,
that they do rather possess Spaniardes, then that they are possessed by them.
He cannot be ignorant that Spain it self is on all sides environed with many
puisant enemies, mighty and great princes, who knowing it to be rich without
men, confident without reason, proud and aduenturous without means sufficient;
may happily confederate to chastise him, as an insolent intruder, and
disturber of all quietness; and going no farther then Spain it self, may
even there shake the foundation of his long contrived devises, and in one act
redeem the time, control his aspiring humor, and break the bands in sunder,
that import servitude, and subversion to all the dominions of Christendom.
Again, his counsel may well inform him, that to dispeople and disable
himself at home, in hope to obtain the Guiana, being a country strong of it
self, and defended with infinite multitudes of Indian enemies, being rich, and
by the inhabitants offered unto the English: his contempt toward us would
seem so intolerable and despightfull as might be sufficient to provoke us,
though otherwise we had no such inclination; if he unprovided of able helps to
effect it, should rest himself on a careless presumption, that we cannot, we
dare not we will not stir in a matter that promises us so great benefit,
and may so highly offend him. He may be persuaded, that to leave no other
succor or saftie to his nakedness, but the old, stale practice of spreading
rumors, and giving out false intelligence of preparations to invade England,
thereby to keep us at home; or else of hyring and suborning some Machauilian
under hand by secret conueyance, to stop the course of our proceedings; or
lastly, of procuring some wild outlaw to disquiet our tranquillity; is but a
poor, weak, and uncertain stay to uphold his estate by. And yet setting
such like driftes aside: what can be imagined likely to hinder us from
prevailing in the Guiana, rather then him, whose disadvantage it is to be
encombred with the self same, and manifold more impedimentes, then can any way
be supposed, with good cause to impeach, or divorce us from so profitable an
attempt? All this notwithstanding, if the Spanish king not being able to
dissemble his desire, or bear the loss of this one kingdom; putting himself
out of his strength at home, and exposing his people to the hazard of all
casualties abroad, be resolved whatsoever shall happen, not to relinquish the
Guiana, but to keep this one Iron more in the fire, on no other assurance, but
a peremptory disdain of prevention: If he appear so eagerly bent for the
Guiana, as if it were enacted for a law amongst themselves, Viis and modis to
thrust for it and not to hear, conceive, or believe any thing, that may
dissuade or deter them from the conquest thereof: It then appertains unto us,
not to enforce those objections against our selves, which he with less reason
rejects, as frivolous; since by how much the more earnest he is in following
this purpose: by so much the less cause have we to be diuerted from it. To
such as shall be willing farther to wade in this argument; fos breuities sake,
I do propose only this bare assertion: that England and the Guiana conjoined,
are stronger, and more easily defended, then if England alone, should repose
her self on her own force, and poerfulnesse. The reasons that might be
inferred to prove this, need no rational discourse: they are all intimated in
the only example of Spain it self; which without the Indies, is but a purse
without money, or a painted sheath without a dagger. In sum: it seems unto me
that whereas the difficulty of performing this enterprise, has been produced
for a discouragment: it were a dull conceit of strange weakness in our selves,
to distrust our own power so much; or at least, our own hearts and courages;
as valewing the Spanish nation to be omnipotent; or yielding that the poor
Portugal has that maistering spirit, and conquering industry, above us; as
to be able to seat himself amongst the many mighty princes of the East
Indies, to frontier China, to hold in subjection the Philippines, Zeilan,
Calecut, Goa, Ormus, Mozambique, and the rest; the navigations being so tedious
and full of peril: to suffer our selves to be put back for worthless
ciphers, out of place, without account. All which Regions being now also by the
late conquest of Portugal, entitled to the Spanish king: to whom the
Colenies of those parts do yet generally refuse to swear fealty and
allegiance: and the care depending on him, not only of governing them in the
East, so far off; but also of ordering and strengthening of those disunited,
scattered, and ill guarded Empires and provinces in the West: It might very
well be alleged to the said Spanish king, that it were more wisdom for him
to assure and fortify some part of those already gotten then to begin the
conquest of Guiana, so far separate from the rest of his Indies: in which he
has had so many misfortunes, and against whom the natural people are so
impetuously bent and opposed: were it not, that it exceeds all the rest in
abundance of gold, and other riches. The case then so standing: is it not
mere wretchedness in us, to spend our time break our sleep, and waste our
brains, in contriuing a cauelling false title to defraude a neighbor of half
an ^kor of land: whereas here whole shyeres of fruitful rich grounds lying
now waste for want of people, do prostitute themselves unto us like a fair
and beautiful woman, in the pride and flower of desired years?

If we do but consider, how vnhappelie Berreo his affairs, with his
assista^ts have of late years, in our own knowledge succeeded: who can say, if
the hand of the Almighty be not against them, and that he has a work in this
place, in steed of Papistrie to make the sincere light of his Gospel to shine
on this people? The effecting whereof shall be a royal crown of everlasting
remembrance to all other blessings, that from the beginning, the Lord has
plentifully poured on our dread Sovereign, in an eminent, and supreme degree
of all perfection. If the Castilians pretending a religious care of planting
Christianity in those parts, have in their doings preached naught else but
avarice, rapine, blood, death, and destruction to those naked, sheeplike
creatures of God; erecting Statues and Trophies of victory unto themselves, in
the slaughters of millions of Innocents: does not the cry of the poor
succourlesse ascend unto the heavens? Has God forgotten to be gracious unto
the workmanship of his own hands? or shall not his judgments in a day of
visitation by the ministry of his (...) Maie^^^^.
chosen servant, come on these bloodthirstie butchers, like rain into a fleece
of wool? Aliquando manifesta, aliquando (...)cculta: semper iusta sunt Dei
iudicia.

To leave this digression. It is fit only for a Prince to begin, and end
this work: the maintenance and ordering thereof requires Sovereign power,
authority and commandment. The river of Raleana gives open and free passage,
any provision that the Spaniard can make to the contrary, notwithstanding;
(for once yearly the lands near the river be all drowned) to convey men,
horse, munition, and victual for any power of men, that shall be sent thither.

I do speak it on my souls health as the best testimony, that I can in any
cause yield, to auerre a truth, that having now the second time been in this
country, and with the helps of time, and leisure well advised my self upon
all circumstances to be thought on; I can discern no sufficient impediment to
the contrary, but that with a competent number of men, her Majesty may to her
and her successors, enjoy this rich and great empire: and having once planted
there, may for ever (by the favor of God) hold and keep it, Contra Iudaeos
and Gentes. Subjects, I doubt not, may through her Majesty's gracious
sufferance, joining their strength together, invade, spoil, and ouerrunne it,
returning with gold and great riches. But what good of perpetuity can follow
thereof? Or who can hope that they will take any other course, then such, as
tends to a private and present benefit; considering that an Empire once
obtained, is of congruitie, how, and wheresoever the charge shall grow, to be
annexed unto the Crown? The riches of this place are not fit for any private
estate: no question, they will rather prove sufficient to cross, and
counteruaile the Spaniard his proceedings in all parts of Christendom, where
his money makes way to his ambition.

If the necessity of following this enterprise do nothing urge us, because in
some case better a mischief, then an inconvenience: let the conueniencie
thereof somewat move us, in respect both of so many Gentlemen, soldiers,
and younger brothers, who, if they for want of employment, do not die like
cloyed cattle in rank easefulnesse; are enforced for maintenance sake,
sometimes to take shameful and unlawful courses: and in respect of so many
handicraftsmen having able bodies, that do live in cleanness of teeth, and
poverty. To sacrifice the children of the common weal unto Beliall, is not to
defile the land with blood, because the law of God does not prohibit it, and
the execution of justice requires it to be so: but yet if the waterboughes,
that suck and feed on the juice, and nourishment that the fruitful branches
should live by, are to be cut down from the tree, and not regarded: luckie, and
prosperous be that right hand, that shall plant and possess with a soil, where
they may fructify, increase, and grow to good: thrice honorable and blessed
be the memory of so charitable a deed, from one generation to another.

To conclude. Your Lordsh. has paid for the Discovery and search, both in your
own person, and since by me. You have framed it, and molded it ready for her
Majesty: to set on her seal. If either envy or ignorance, or other devise
frustrate the rest, the good which shall grow to our enemies, and the loss
which will come to her Majesty and this kingdom, will after a few years
show it self. We have more people, more ships, and better means, and yet
do nothing. The Spanish king has had so sweet a taste of the riches thereof,
as notwithstanding that he is Lord of so many Empires and kingdoms already,
notwithstanding his enterprises of France and Flaunders, notwithstanding that
he attended this year a home invasion: yet he sent twenty eight sail to
Trinidado, whereof ten were for that place, and Guiana, and had some other
ships ready at Cades, if the same had not been by my Lord, her Majesty's
General and your Lordship set on fire.

In one word. The time serves, the like occasion seldom happens in many
ages, the former repeated considerations do all jointly together importune
us, now, or never to make our selves rich, our posterity happy, our Prince
every way stronger the^ our enemies, and to establish our Country in a state
flourishing and peaceable. O let not then such an indignity rest on us, as to
deprave so notable an enterprise with false rumors, and vain suppositions, to
sleep in so serious a matter, and renouncing the honor, strength, wealth, and
soueraingtie of so famous conquest, to leave all unto the Spaniard.

A Table of the names of the Rivers, Towns, and Cassiques or Captains that in
this second Voyage discovered.
Rivers. Nations. Towns Captain. 1 Arrowari great. Arwaos Pararweas. Charibes.
1 These are enemies to the Iaos, their money is of white and green stones.
They speak the Tiuitiuas language: so likewise do the nation of the Arricarri,
who have greater store of those moneys then any others.

2 Iwaripoco. very great. Mapurwanas. ^aos. 2 Here it was, as it seems, that
Vincent Piuzon, the Spaniard, had his Emeralds. In one of these two rivers,
certain French me^ that suffered shipwreck some two or three years since, do
live.

3 Maipari^g. Arricarri. 3. 4. 5. These with the other 2 seem to be branches of
the great river of Amazones. When we first fell with land, we were, by the
Indians report, but one days journey from the greatest river, that is on that
coast.

4 Caipurogh. g. Arricurri. 5 Arcooa. g Marowannas. Cha. 6 Wiapoco. g
Coonoracki Wacacoia. Wariseaco. Charib. 6 The first mountains that appear
within land do lie on the East side of this river. From the mouth thereof, the
inhabitants do pass with their Canoas in twenty days to the salt lake, where
Manoa stands. The water has many Cateractes like Caroli, but that they are
of greater distance one from another. where it falls into the sea, hills do
enclose it, on both sides.

7 Wanari. 8 Capurwacka. g. Charibes. 9 Cawo. g. Iaos. Ico omana. Wareo. 10
Wia. g. Maworia. Charib. Paramo^na. g. Mashwipo 10 The Freshet shoots out into
the sea, with great force: the sea does here sometimes camp high, and break,
as if it were full of rocks. but in prooffe it is nothing else but the pride
and force of the tides. In this baye, and round about, so far as the
mountains do extend there is great store of Brasill wood, some of it bearing
far darker color then other some. Here are also many sorts of other good
woods.

11 Caiane. g. Gowateri: a great Island Wiaco. Chapter Shebaios. Canawi, g
Orinikero. Parawatteo. 12 Macuria. Piraos. Chapter 13 Cawro^ra Arawaccos Charib. 14
Manmanuri. Ipaios. Chapter 14 These speak the language of the Indians of
Dominicae. They are but few, but very cruel to their enemies. For they bind,
and eat them alive peece-meale. This torment is not comparable to the dedlie
pains that comes of hurtes, or wounds, made by those arrows that are
inuenomed with the juice of the herb Wapototo. These Indians because they eat
the^ whom they kill, use no poison. The sea coast is no where populous, for
they have much wasted themselves in mutual wars. But now in all parts so
far as Orenoque, they live in league and peace.

15 Cureey. Shebaios. 16 Curassawini. Shebaios. Musswara. g. Ocapanio. 17
Cunanama. Iaos. Arwaccas. Waritappi. g Carinamari. Curipotoore. 18 Vracco.
Arwaccas. Marwabo. Moruga. Arwaccas. Eramacoa. 19 Mawari. Winicinas Arwaccas.
Iwanama. Atanacoa. 20 Mawarpari. Arwaccas. Awaricana. Mahahonero. 21 Amonna.
very great Capeleppo. g. Charibes. Iaremappo very great. 21 Nere the head of
this river, Capeleppo falls out of the plains, and runs into the sea with
Cu^itini. Some of the Guianians live in this river.

22 Marawini. g. Paracuttos 23 Owcowi. 24 Wiawiami 25 Aramatappo. 26 Wiapo. 27
Macuruma. 28 Carapi. 29 Vraca. 29. This river, as also most of the rest, is not
nauigable above six days journey by reason of rocks. It is ten days journey
to the head, where the Guianians do dwell Honey, yarne of Cotton, Silk,
Balsamum, and Brasill beds are hereto be had in plenty, and so all the
coast along Eastwarde. Some Images of Gold, spleenestones, and others, may
be gotten on this coast, but they do somewhat extraordinariliy esteem of
them, because every where they are current money. They get their Moons, and
other pieces of gold by exchange, taking for each one of their greater Canoas,
one piece or image of gold, with three heads, and after that rate for their
lesser Canoas, they receive pieces of gold of less value. One hatchet is the
ordinary price for a Canoa They have every where diverse sorts of drugges,
Gummes, and roots which I doubt, not by father trial, will be found medicinable

Names of poisoned herbs.

Ourari. Carassi. Apa^eepo. Parapara.

Hea be^ good against poison.

Turara. Cutarapama. Wapo. Macatto.

The 29. day of June we arrived in Portland Road, having spente five months
in going, staying, and returning.

30 Chaimawinini. g. Carepini. Charib. 31 Ecrowio. 32 Pawro. Vpotommas.
Arwaccas. Maripomma. Caponaiarie. 33 Shurinama. g. Carepini. Cha. 34 Shurama.
g. Carepini. Cha. Cupari. 35 Northu^briae, or Cupanama. very g Arwaccas. 36
Wioma. 37 Cushwini. Neekcari. Tawrooromene Neperwari. 38 Inana. g. 39 Curitini.
g Carepini. Arwaccas. Parawianni Owaripoore. Mawronama. Maiapoore Cariwacka.
Aneta. Manacobeece. 40 Winitwari. g. Eppera. Parawiannos. 41 Berbice. g.
Arwaccas. Lupulee. Warawaroco. 42 Wapari. Shebaios. Arwaccas. Madewini.
Benmurwagh. 43 Maicawini. Panapi. ^rw^ccas. Itewee. Caporaco. great Cap. 44
Mahawaica. Arwaccas. Ma^uresa g 45 (...) e. g. wacawaios. Arwaccas. Maburesa. g
46 So called after the name of the right ho. the Earl of Essex.
Deuoritia, or Dessekebe. very g. Matorooni. Coowini. Chipanama. Arawanna.
Itorebece. Iaos. Shebaios. Arwaccas. Char^bes. Maripai. wocowaios Parawianni
Iwarwackeri. 47 Pawrooma. g. Aripacoro. Ecawini. Manuriwini. Iaos. Panipi.
Caiaremappo. waroopana Maripa. Chiparipa^o. Towtwi. Sarinbugh. Wariwagh.
Macapowa. Shuracoima. 48 Moruga. g. Piara. Chaimeragoro. Iaos. Arwaccas.
Cooparoore. g. Awiapati. Topoo. Manare cowa. Iarwarema 49 Waini. g. Charibes.
Tocoopoima. g. Parana, 50 Barima. g. Caitooma. Arooca. Charibes. Arwaccas.
Pekwa. g Arwakima Anawra. Aparwa. Arracurri. 51 Amacur. g. 52 Aratoori. g.
Cawrooma. g. Raleana, or Orenoque. Maipar Itacaponea Owarecapater. Warucanasso.
Islands in mouth of Raleana.

Here follow the names, of those worthy Spaniardes that have sought to
discover and conquer Guiana: Extracted out of the writings of Iuan de
Castellanos clerigo, who compiled the book, entitled, Primera part de las
Elegias de varones illustres de Indias.
1 THe enterprise of Guiana was undertaken by Diego de Ordas of the kingdom of
Leon, in the year, 1531. He was one of the Captains of Cortes in the conquest
of Mexico. This Ordas made his entrance by the river of Amana, by which we
entered, and spent fifty days before he came to the river of Orenoque, which
we past in fifteen. He named the river by which he entered Viapari; which name
it still retains in the Spanish descriptions. It lies South from Trinidado
some five leagues. He transported out of Spain a thousand soldiers. He dyed
afterward at sea, in returning for Spain.

2 I^an Gorteso arrived at the river of Amazones or Oreliano with three hundred
men: He marched up into the country. But neither he, nor any of his company
did return again.

3 Gaspar de Sylua, with his two brothers, departed from Tenerife, accompanied
with 200. men, to assist Diego de Ordas. They sought El Dorado by the river of
Amazones: but staying there a short time, they fell down to Trinidado, where
they all three were buried.

4 Iuan Gonzales set sail from Trinidado to discover the Guiana. He reposed
himself more on the faith of his guides the on his small number of men He by
trial found the confines of Guiana, so far as he entered, to be populous,
plentiful of victual, and rich in gold. Upon such proofs as he brought with
him to make good his report: many others adventured to follow his steps.

5. 6. Philip de Vren, and after him Pedro de Limpias, who both successively
commanded the Almaines, were leaders in this action. Limpias was slain by an
Indian Cassique named Porima.

7 Ieronimo de Ortall vndetrooke it by the way of Marecupana. After great
travel and his substance all spent, he dyed on the sudden at S. Domingo.

8. 9. Ximenes, brother of Don Ximenes de Quesida the Lantado, and Pedro de
Osuq, were both at sundry times in the same quest.

10 Father Iala, a Friar, taking with him only one companion, and some Indian
guides passed into the provinces of Guiana. He returned with good intelligence,
and brought with him Eagles, Idols, and other jewels of gold. An. 1560. He
assayed the second time to pass in like manner, but was slain by the Indians.

11 Hernandes de Serpa also undertook it. The Indians of Cumanawgoto killed
him, and defeated his Army.

12 Afterward, Diego de Vargas, and his son Don Iuan followed this
enterprise, and at their first setting out, were slain by the Indians.

13 Caceres undertook this discovery from Nueuo Reino de Granada. He came no
nearer to it the^ Matachines, which borders upon the said kingdom of Granada:
He rested there and peopled that place.

14 It was also attempted by Alonzo de Herera, at two several times. He
endured great misery, but never entered one league into the country. He sought
it by Wiapari, or Amana, and was at last slain by a nation of Indians called
^aguas.

15 It was also undertaken by Antonio Sedenno, with who^ Herera and Augustine
Delgado joined in the conquest of Trinidado, against Bawcunar a famous king of
that place. He passed by Marecupana in the year 1536. to discover El Dorado
with 500. chosen men. In this iourny he got much gold and took many Indian
prisoners; whom he manacled in yrons, many of them died as they were led in
the way. The Tygres being fleshed on those dead carcasses, assaulted the
Spaniards, who with much trouble hardly defended themselves from them. Sedenno
was buried within the precinct of the Empire near the head of the river
Tinados. Most of his people perished likewise.

16 Augustine Delgado searched the country to the southward of Cumanawgoto with
53. footmen and three horsemen. The wars that were then between the Indians of
the vale, and those of the mountains, served well for his purpose. By which
occasion he found means to pass so far until he came to an Indian
Cassique, named Garamentall, who entertained him with all kindness. And gave him
for a present some rich jewels of gold: six seemlie Pages: ten young slaves,
and three Nymphs very beautiful, which bore the names of three provinces
from whence they were sent to Garamental, chief Commander of all that
country. Their names were, Guanba, Gotoguane, and Matarare. These provinces
are of an excellent temperature, very healthful, and have an admirable
influence in producing beautiful women. The Spaniards afterward to requite
the manifold courtesies that they received in that country, took and carried
away besides all the gold that they could get, all the Indians that they could
lay hold on: they conveyed them in yrons to Cubagua and sold them for slaves.
Delgado afterward was shot in the eye by an Indian: of which hurt he died.

17 Diego de Losada, succeeded in his brothers place. He had many more men;
who in the end wasted themselves in mutinies: those that lived returned to
Cubugua.

18 Reynoso undertook this journey: but having endured exceeding troubles, in
the discomfort of his mind, he gave it over and was buried in Hispaniola.

19 Pedro de Vrsua, in the year 1560. sought it with 400 Spaniards, by the
river Oreliano. He imbarqued his men in the country of the Moti^ones. As they
passed down the river, they found Synamon trees. His men murdered him and
afterward the said rebels beheaded Lady Anes his wife, who forsook not her
Lord in all his travels unto death.

20 Friar Francis Montesinos, was in the province of Marecupana with 100.
soldiers bound for the Guiana, when Lope Aguirri the Tyrant made insurrection
in all those parts of the Indies. What became of this intended journey is not
expressed.

In the discovery of Guiana, you may read both of Oreliano, who discovered the
river of Amazones An. 1510. and of Berreo, with others that have trod this
maze, and lost them selves in seeking to find this country.

An aduertisment to the Reader.
IN this Breuiarie, the names only are comprised of such as being led with the
general fame of Guiana, have endeavored to discover and possess it. The whole
histories are long and cannot suddenly be translated, or Englished at large,
as we in these Elegies find them. It may perhaps seem strange and incredible,
that so many Caualeros should all fail in this one attempt, since in many
parts of the Indies, far smaller numbers in shorter time have performed as
great matters, and subdued mighty Kingdoms: I have therefore thought it good,
here to allege those reasons, which by circumstance may be gathered to have
been chief impediments to the Spaniard in this intended search and conquest.

The first may be the remoteness or distance of their places of Rondevow, from
the Dorado: which appear to be four, Nueuo Reyno: the mouth of Amazones or
Oreliano. Cubagua, or the coast of the Carackas: and Trinidado.

1. From Moisbanda, where Oreliano has his head-spring to his mouth the
Spaniards account it 2000. leagues. Raleana rises near the said mountains
in Moiabanda, and tributeth his waters to the sea, not far from the other:
Guiana is environed with these two fresh water seas, where their distance is
greatest from their risinges, and is besides guarded with impassable mountains,
which in close and defend it on al parts, excepting Topiawaries country. It is
no marvel then, if the vigor, heat, and life of those Spaniards, who sought it
from Nueuo Reyno, were allayed and spent, before they came nere it in those
long, desolate, and uncomfortable ways.

2. From Cubagua to seek it by sea, in vessels of any burden, is a work of
far greater labor, then to sail directly from Spain. And to pass ouerland
is a matter of great difficulty, by reason that the Indian Nations inhabiting
between the coast of the Carackas and Guiana, being wearied and harried with
the daily incursions of the Spaniards, have now turned their abused patience
into fury, refusing to suffer any forces of men to be led through their
countries. For the Spaniards traveling in those parts, when they found not
gold answerable to their expectation, ouerlaid them with cruelties, tyranny,
and thraldom: forbearing neither men, women friends, nor foes. Which manner of
dealing, though in some sort it satisfied their desire of present profit: yet
has it otherwise done them much harm in hardening and driving those nations
to desperate resolutions.

3 From the mouth of Oreliano to seek entrance with any number of men, and to
bore a hole through the mountains, is all one. Neither find we, that any
seeking it that way, have at any time boasted of their gains or pleasurable
iourneyes.

4 From Trinidado as the course is shortest: so does it promise best likelihood
of success. Howbeit, impossible it is with any vessel of ordinary burden by
that way to recover the river of Raleana.

The second. The Spaniards have been so far from furthering and helping on
another, or admitting partners or coadiutors in the Guiana cause that amongst
so many attempts, from the beginning to the last, I cannot find any one, when
they were otherwise likliest to prevail, free from discords, mutinies, and
cruel murders amongst themselves.

Thirdly. The Spaniards in this place have mist that advantage, which else where
has steeded them in all their conquests: namely, the dissentitions and
mutual wars of the Indians amongst themselves, Which of what force it is,
may be gathered by the example of A^awcania in Peru. For the Indians of that
one province containing in circuit not above 20. leagues, have maintained
wars above these 30. years, against all the Spaniards, and in despite of
them have kept their own country, oftentimes discomforting their enemies in
many set battayles, burning and destroying some of their strongest towns. The
chief reason whereof I take to be, because no Indian nation was enemy unto
them. And howsoever the Spaniards vaunt of their redoubted exploits in the
Indies: yet do their own writings in effect testify, that without the aid of
the Indians divided amongst rhemselues, Mexico, Peru, and the rest, had never
been Spanish.

Lastly. I can impute it to no cause so rightly, as immediately to the divine
providence. For by him princes reign. And in my belief (except we will look
to be warned by miracle from heaven,) we need no farther assurances, then we
already have to persuade our selves that it has pleased our God of his infinite
goodness, in his will and purpose to appoint and reserve this Empire for us.

FINIS.

