decorative border surrounding title page 1534



The armyng of a Christen Warrier ready to fight with the enemies of our
captain and Savior Jesus Christ, to the which soldiers, Henry Barret the
writer of this rude book, wishes health and much increase of faith.

Anno. 1549.

TO THE RIGHT VVORshypfull Sir John Marcham Knight Lieutenaunte of the Kings
maiestes Tower of London. Henry Barret wysheth health and long encreace of
worship.
Considering the manifold enormities which heretofore has crepte into this
realm through the false usurped power of the bishop of Rome and the ungodly
doctrine of his adherentes not only to the great decay of Christen religion but
also (if gods mercy were not) to the utter destruction of many erable souls,
which through Ipocrisie and pernicious doctrine were seduced, and brought from
honoring of our only capitain the true, living and eternal god unto the
worshippyng of creatures, stocks and stones unto voluntary works and
pha^tasies invented of men, such was their hypocritical and pharisaicall
policies in the wars of their master the bishop aforesaid, their armure so
pestylente strong, that hitherto is not only thoroughly pierced, but had in
some estimacion and price, ye appointing of their armure so delectable and
pleasant, and ordered in such abuse sort and fashion that uneath any christen
captain or soldier may without long travail make plain the false deuyse
thereof, apparellyng the said christian soldyers in barnesse of sauegard
fashioned, invented, and made by our everlasting captain Christ, but for my
part lackyng learning and knowledge, yet of a good and earneste mind to the
furtheraunce therein, and also to provoke the learned captains who has read
the order of Christ's batail wherein he teaches what order and armuur his
soldiers must use to explane and set forth the same, have taken in hand this
simple and illiterate treatise, dedicatyng the same, to your good maistership
whom I doubt not will esteem and accept my good will which may stere and
instigate the learned to travail for the perfect armyng of all Christian
soldiers, and order in battle that thereby they may have the reward that is
laid up for the^ which god of his infinite mercy grant us for his sons sake
our savior Jesus Christ

The greaues and Queshes.
First put on your greaues and queshes, that your legs may be so armed
that ye may boldly walk in ye right ways that is directid unto us by our
captain and savior, Ephe. iiii.
and wa^der not in the wrong ways which of long time has been taught us, by
the false gydes of Rome and there tradicions, but ye shall only follow our own
captain to whom is given al power in heaven and in earth, Mat. xviii.
for he is an everlasting king, and we his famile and soldiers which are
baptized in our captain, Roma. Vi.
by faith are baptized with him to the death, and by his provision shall be
partakers of his everlasting camp and kingdom, Roma. Vi.
for when ye were dead through sin we were quickened with him in spirit. etc.
Wherefore let us take that same way that we have in commandment by our
captayn Jesus Christ, which is our savior, and captain after the order of
Melchisedech.

The Collar
ANd ye shall Arm your self with a Collar, of good and perfect metal so well
tempored that there shall not pass through the same any wepons of our enemy
Satan, which goes about with many proud assayes to pearse our armure and to
hurt both our body and soul but like good and true soldiers keep the ordres
that is given to you in our graunde captains book, and your enemy Satan nor
all his disciples shall not pearse your armure, neither hurt your body nor
soul. Math. V
First ye shall not swear by your captain Jesus christ's name nor by any
thing that is of his making, not by one hear of your head white nor black,
Zacary. 5.
for the curse of God our captain shall rest in ye house of him that swears
falsely, ye shall not let pass thorough the same any words of vntrewth other
to the dispraise of our captain, or to the hurt of our neighbor: but let your
co^municacion be agreeable with your living, so that ye love your captayn above
al, Math. xii.
and your neighbor as your self: and beware of excessious drinking which
oftentimes makes an unable soldier, and causes his captain to put him out of
his book, Exodi. xxxii.
and then he becomes a venturer which when he is taken, is not sure of his
ransom without the great mercy of his captain, also your captain will ask
account of every idle word that shall pass thorough your collar, Ephe. iii
wherefore be not outrageous in any thing but let your words and living be
agreeable with your captai^s commandment, so that your account, may be the
better at the last day.

The Corsolate other wise called Curates.
THen put on your Corsolat, with a rest basses and tasses to defend your
body in all places made of pure and gostly metal so edified with a good and
clear conscience void of al unchaste living, as horekepynge, dronkennes,
extorcion, covetous and malicious minds etc which be clean contrary to the
commandments written in the new testament of our captain John. xiii
which says if ye do love me keep my comaundementes, ^m. viii.
and put your only trust in the death and passion of our captain and savior
Jesus Christ, that thorough the sheadyng of his precious blud, and his merits,
we his soldiers were only saved from the house of thraldom, ^me. iiii.
and are made partakers of his ca^pe and kingdom, through our faith in his
only blood.

The vanbrasses and gauntlets
Then put on your vanbrasses and gantlets that your arms and hands may be
defended from al ungodliness from stelyng, (...). x. 8.
defraudyng, from fighting and killyng, and from unjust dealing, and be of
such living as ye have in commandment and to thy power give to him that (...)
Vi.
asks in our captayns name and from him that would borowe, Marc. x^
turn not away thy face, but to thy power assiste him, if thou lack worldly
substance deliver such talant as thou haste received of our captayn, as one
christian soldier ought to do to an other wherewith he may be comforted and be
thy self ware of the proud assaults of ye world, the devil and the flesh,
Johan. ii^
and take the weapon of our captain in your hand, and therewith ye shall strike
the ungodly til they be converted to ye faith of Jesus Christ.

The Helmet
THen put on your Helmette most Ghostly edified with the strong word of
God, that with the same your head may be covered from all your enmies and
from al vain words, Ephesi. ii^
works and thoughts so that ye may only consist in our captains death and
passione which has paid the raunsom of all faithful warriers, which walks
in the right wars of his vocacio^, then if ye find any soldiar that has been
necligent in ye true service of our captain let him call faithfully and with a
good intent to offend no more and he shall be suer to find an advocate, with
god the father even the same captain that already has paid the raunsomes of
all his faithful soldiers with his precious bloudde who also sees the
thoughts of al hertes and is ready to receive all repentant offenders acordyng
to his saying: which says, come to me all ye that labor and are laden and I
shall refreshe you, also if ye knock it shall be opened unto you. etc. And then
lock down your bauier and moffle so fast and close, Deutronon^
that it may defend you from all flesshely syghtes and worldly temptacions
and from the buffetes of all false Charms, witchcraftes, and sosseries, and
from all Hipocrysy Supersticions and Idolatrye, so that ye have your hole trust
only in our Captain and savior, in none other but in our only captain and
savior the living god and then your helmet shall defend and bear the strokes
of al your enemies bodily and gostly through the help of our said captain
and savior, Jesus Christ.

The graund guard and polgremes
THen set one your Graunde guard and polgremes which shall be edifyed with
all spyrituall consolacion, that you may be by the healpe of our capitayn
defended from all the incou^ters of our enemies though ye be assailed, by many
means to call you from your own captain, and to bring you to the service of
satan, the deuell, and the rather through the false guides of Rome. etc. But be
you faithful soldiers to your own captayn, and ye may be sure ye shall be
placed with the felowshyppe of warriers in heaven which followed their Captayn,
on white horses, and were clothed in pure white sylke, ^poca. 17,
according to the pureness of yt place, to the which camp our captain and
savior give us grace so to serve that we may be worthy to come at the last
day.

The Sword.
THen gyrde fast about you the two edgedsweorde and therwithe ye shall
ministre execucion to the soldiers of unbelief even to their utter confusion
and ye shall extol and only magnify ye name of our captain which is in
heaven, Ebrues. 4
and there sytteh on the right hand of God the father, Mat xx. 5
and from thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

The Lawuse or Spear
THen take the lance of faith in your hand, Ephesy. 4
which is prepared to in cou^ter with the ungodly and with it ye shall stoutly
stryke the^ to their great overthrow, Math 4
and shall put them to utter silence through the help of our captain, but
beeware that your frail flesh cause you not to forget your Captain and that
ye pearse him not in sted of the enemy, as blind lunges did, and that you kiss
him not with Judas unfaithfully.

The warryars Charge
THen being thus armed and weponed and through the healpe of our Captayn and
savior which has the governance of heaven and earth the sea, Matthew i.
and all that is in them, for they be of his own hands making, and he is a
king of kings and a lord of lords, and of his kingdom there is no end,
Apoca. 17,
go forth boldly and do the message of our Captayn and savior and if ye find
any enemies or thieves that will rob our captain of his honor or glorious
inheritance, or will attribute his glory unto stocks or stones, or to any thing
of man's making, or will say that they have our captains and saviors Jesus
Christ's natural body naturally, even the same that was born of Mary ye
virgyn, fast presoner and locked in a box and carye him whether they list at
their comau^dement etc. ye shall take the weapons which our captain did at his
last supper leave in the new testament of our captain and savior Jesus Christ
which is in heaven and there sits on ye right hand of god the father
almighty, which when he ascended, and before the cloud, received him out of
the sight of the men of Galilee: he said, John 14. and 20.
I goo to my father, and your father, and to my god, and your god, to prepare a
eat for you, and will receive you eue^ to my self, that where I am there shall
you be, and when that the lord had spoken to them he was received into heaven
and there sytteh on the right hand of god eue^ with his whole godhed and
manhed, ^arke 16 ^uke xxii.
^ctes. 7.
although his godhed be eueriwhere: also you shall find so many places of
auctorite in the same Testament to prove the same that the infideles romysh
Champyons and all other the disciples of the devil shall be confounded by the
same, although the Enemies have been suffered by our graund captayn to judge by
great false tyranye, some true solders to the fire for the truth sake, and so
has persecuted them as they did our Captain and savior before gyltlesse etc.
but he has rau^somed them home unto his own Camp and kingdom that Joyful
soldiars be they which has received such persecucions for their Captains sake.
John.
Therefore good christen soldiers take this armur unto you and govern your
selfs with it so well that ye put your hole confidence and trust in our
Captain and saviors death and passion, Acts i^
and ye shall be suer that ye shall be placed with the feloship of ye faithful
which shall never see corupcio^. etc. Dauyd 1^
O what kind of soldiers be they that have so good a captain and yet will seem
so unkind unto him to refuse his saruice which has louid them so well that
he has writteen their names in his book with his own precious blood so that
they are sure their raunso^e is not to seek for he has paid it all redye with
his precious body and blood upon the Cross, Peter ^
and yet some ungodly soldiers, of a deuelyshe mind does willynglye forsake
their own god and true captain and becomes venterers and subjects to the
devil, which when they have served a certain time after the lusts of the
flesh, they shall be rewarded according to their service, that is, to lose the
kingdom of Joy and to enter into the continual pain emonge the forlorn hope
of lost soldiers which when they were once placed with their captain of their
ungodly mind refused the same, so that withowte the great mercy, of the
great Captain they have lost their ransom and must remain Presoners for ever
from which preson our graunde Captain and savior Ihesu Christ save all
soldyars and give us grace to amend our living in time and to serve truly
like faithful Soldiars.

The soldiers charge.
NOw verily there is a faut emonge many soldiers, as well among some English
soldiars as other nations which when they be once chosen to goo against the
kings ennemies whether it be in Scotland or France or else where, they do use
such ungodly vsages with in the kings realm both owtwarde and homewardes as is
great shame to rehearse for some will take their neighbors Cattayle and
vittayle and will pay nothing, and some will procure men's wives and
servants to ungodly living and some uses excessiows drinking and other
some abominable sweryng in such wise that the godly soldiars often times
fear to be plagued for the euels sake wherefore good Christian soldiers let us
pray to our graund Captain that he may give us his grace so to embrace his
holy word that we may live according to the same and that every Christen
soldier may rejoice each with other so that from this time forward no
English soldier shall be worthy of reproach in the offense aforesaid and that we
may live only by the kings wages and by his conduct money which we have
according to his graces godly custom and that we may be an ensample to al
other nations to use the same unto ye land and praise of god, and to the
pleasure of our king. For verelye we are sure that he that asks of god the
father, Math xi
for god the sons sake it shall be granted him, for our good captain and
savior is so ready an advocate for us that if we be repentant he will
purchase grace for us of God the father according John xiiii and xvii.
to his godly promise and custom, not only for my sins, but for the sins of
all the hole world. Also our ennemy satan has so many kind of spies and so
many ways to allewer soldiars to his unprofitable service that many of them
that is led by the flesh and be lovers of gold and silver puts themselfs so
to serve for the same, as if yt would last ever, like unto the reward of our
true Captain, for some men fear not to swear an oath to their prince for to be
true subjects, and yet of an unfaithful mind breaks the same, whose faltes be
spied immediately and be put out of our own captai^s book and has lost their
service, and raunsomes and be of the forlorn hope, which fault our Captayn and
savior give us al grace to amend.

The Soldiars charge,
ALas good Christian soldiers remember what an hard saying it is when our
graund Captain shall say to the unjust soldears of unbelief depart from me ye
soldiars of unbelief, Mat. xxv.
and ye shall go to everlasting pain for your enfidelitie where there shall be
waylyng and gnashing of teeth and burning fire without ceassyng. etc. From the
which our captain and savior Jesus christ give us the grace so to mortify our
frail flesh and to lead our life in such ciuilytie of the law that we may
dread his cente^ces so that we may be worthy to be partakers of the glory of
his kingdom and there to rest in the peace of GOD with Abraham Isaak and Jacob
in the kingedome of Heaven. ^ohn xiii.
Amen.


