STRANGE NEWS out of Kent, of a Monstrous and misshapen Child, borne in Old
Sandwitch, upon the 30. of Iulie last, the like (for strangenes) has never
been seen.



Imprinted at London by T. C. for W. Barley, and are to be sold at his shop in
Gratious-streete. 1609.

STRAVNGE NEWS OVT OF KENT. OF A Monstrous and misshapen Child, borne in Old
Sandwitch, upon the 30. of Iulie last, 1609. the like (for strangenes) has
never been seen, known, nor heard of.
GOds wonders, (dear Countrymen of England) daily showed amongst us, as well
Celestial as earthly, may, if any grace be within us, procure a continual
fear and trembling, and the abortiue and prodigious byrths from time to time,
which many of us have been eye witnesses of, may sufficiently summon us from
sin, and speedily awaken us from our dreams of security, wherein we lie
carelessly sleeping.

God we see is highly offended with us, in that he thus changes the secret
workings of nature, as he lately showed, in the strange birth of a monstrous
child brought into the World, at Sandwitch in Kent, the strange shape and
unnatural proportion thereof, not only raised much fear, fright, and wonder,
to the inhabitants of that Country there dwelling, which beheld it, but also
the reports (now most truly) certified, by men of credit and substantial
reputation, may give sufficient cause of terror and amazement to all people,
the whole Kingdom over, and being rightly considered of by judicial
censurers, and men of understanding, it may without all doubt, put each degree
and estate in mind, and consideration of the heavy wrath of our angry God, not
only by this his judgment here expressed, but diverse other ways threatened
against us, for our sins and transgressions, therefore good Countrymen, and
you whose Christianlike minds will relent at the relation hereof: good
Countrymen, I say, let me entreat you, that both your eyes, and ears, may be
gentle witnesses to the truth of this strange wonder in nature, and that your
hearts and minds may be bent to a repentant understanding, for the discourse
here following, is both strange, true, fearful, and full of much wonder, and
because there shall be (no doubt) made of the verity thereof, I have here
placed down the names of such personages of credit, now dwelling in London,
that were eyewitnesses thereof, and personably saw the same, to their great
hearts grief and sorrow, which I hope, will be sufficient to approve the
truth.

The names of such Witnesses that saw this Monstrous Child, now dwelling in
London.
1. M. Bills, at the sign of the Ship in Thames street. 2. M. Dickson, a
Cooper, in Thames street, near to Saint Dunstons church. 3. M. Smith, a
victualer, in long-Southwark. 4. Richard Rawson, Waterman, dwelling in
East-Smithfield. 5. Ales Smith, dwelling in Byshops-gate-streete. 6. Amie
Ratcliffe, of Shore-ditch, with diverse others, whose inward griefs there
taken, is yet fearcely worn away, and cannot well (for the strangeness
thereof,) be forgotten, and this is the only truth.
It is not unknown to most part of the kingdom, that Sandwitch is one of the
principal towns in Kent, bordering upon the Sea, rich, and populous, and well
stored with substantial and welthy inhabitants, nere unto which town now
stands a very old house, (being the dwelling place of one Goodwife Wattes,
whose husband is a shepherd) which house is the only remnant of an other
town, which time has ruinated and worn away, now called by the name of old
Sandwitch, in which house, being some quarter of a mile from Sandwitch, wherein
as I said before, dwells one Goodwife Watts, a very honest poor old woman,
wel-beloued of the country, and of an honest conversation amongst her
neighbors, one that takes great pains for her living, and most willing to
keep her credit upright.

Upon the thirty of July last past, 1609. being satterday, there came unto this
old pore woman's house, a certain wandering young woman, as it seemd great with
child, handsome, and decently apparelled, and being not well able to travel
further, by reason of her great belly, even ready to be delivered, desired
succor of this kind-harted old woman Mother Watts, and that she would grant
her some help and comfort in this her extremity, and with weeping tears
running down her cheeks, requested for Gods sake, that some Christian-like
charity might be showed her, and houseroome for that night offorded her for
womanhood sake, otherwise her self, and the babe within her body were like to
perish. This request of hers seemed so reasonable, and the regard of her big
belly, drew such pity and womanly nature from this good old woman Mother
Watts, that she not only granted her houseroome and lodging for that night,
but also sucker, help and furtherance, (if it so stould happen) at the
painful hour of her delivery: to be short, this big belly wandering young
woman having thus by her humble entreaties obtained lodging, where the very
first night of her lying there, fell into a most strange labor, where her womb
was tormented with such grievous pain, that it much affrighted the old woman
Mother Watts, and in her mind struck such a fear, that she immediately called
in her neighbors, being women all of a willing forwardnes in such a business:
but through the inward laboring of the woman's body, not any of them all knew
how to shift in such a dangerous case, wherefore amazedly they looked one of
another, til such time as one goodwife Hatch, the yo^ger, was sent for, being a
Midwife of a mild nature, and of good experience, who at her coming thither,
so cunningly showed her skill, that with the helping hand of God, this
distressed young woman was speedily delivered, for which dilligent pains she
gave her vii. shillings, but her womb yielded forth into the world a kind of
creature, but no child rightly shapt, for it was most strange and dreadful to
behold, and drove the Midwife goodwife Hatch and the rest of the company into a
great fright, even ready all to sink down dead to the ground with fear,
whether it were for the sins of the Parents, or that God would have his
Justice, in the estranging of nature for our sins here shown, let the wiser
sort imagine: but surely this unknown woman yielded from her womb such an
abbortiue and prodigious fruit, that this ages memory cannot call to mind the
like: for it had no head, nor any sign or proportion thereof, there only
appeared as it were two faces, the one visibly to be seen, directly placed in
the breast, where it had a nose, and a mouth, and two holes for two eyes, but
no eyes, all which seemed ugly, and most horrible to be seen, and much
offenciue to humane nature to be looked upon, the other face was not perfectly
to be seen, but retained a proportion of flesh in a great round lump, like
unto a face quite disfigured, and this was all of that which could be
discerned. The face, mouth, eyes, nose, and breast, being thus framed together
like a deformed piece of flesh, resembled no proportion of nature, but seemd as
it were a caios of confusion, a mixture of things without any description, from
the breast downward to the bowels it was smooth and straight, all the other
parts of the body retained a most strange deformity, for the arms grew out at
the top of the shoulders, having neither joint nor elbow, but round and
fleshy, at the end of which arms, grew two hands, with fifteen fingers, the
one hand had eight, the other seven, of a contrary shape, not like to the
natural fingers of newborn children: also it had fourteen toes, of each
foot seven, being as it were like unto geese or ducks feet. The wast and
middle as I said before, was straight and without joints, but the lower parts
were al in a lump of flesh, like unto a lambs paunch, or such li^e loathsome
thing to be seen, and withal the legs so short, that they seemed to have no
proportion. This miracle in nature, or rather Gods wonder, thus brought into
the world, quite disfigured from human creation, as by the picture is
rightly deciphered, wrought such an amazement in the beholders hearts, that for
a time, they were stricken almost senseless: the Room also where this child
lay, smelled so earthly (for it was dead borne) that not any of them all could
hardly endure the sent thereof.



Among other remembrances, this is to be observed for a thing of strangeness,
that the woman her self confessed, that this monster, a little time before her
delivery, moved in her belly, not like unto other natural children, but as
she had been possessed with an evil spirit, which put her to extreme
torments.

Not many hours passed, before the reports of this strange birth was bruited
abroad, and the ears of the inhabitants there-about dwelling, so filled with
the news thereof, that they came in multitudes to behold it, in such
abundance that it was wonderful.

But now again to our purpose. On Sunday being the last of Iulie, this new
delivered woman, in reason seeming to be weak and sickly, lying in her bed,
desired the old woman her hostis, Mother Wattes (within whose house she lay)
to go into the town, and to buy such necessaries as was needful for a weak
woman in childbed to have, giving her money for the same purpose, the which
mother Wats most willingly did: But now mark what in tht mean time happened,
and let all women in such a case consider what might be done, and how strongly
nature in this new delivered woman prevailed, for before Mother Wats could
return from Sandwitch, which was in less time then two hours, she had got up
out of her bed, put on all her clothes, and was gone from the house, leaving
behind her eight shillings, lying upon the Table, the child being dead, laid
by it, with an intent that the money should pay for the burial of the same, all
which at mother Wats her return, being found in this order, seemed to be an
accident most strange, whereupon she immediately called in her neighbors, where
(making known unto them all these aforesaid proceedings) with a general
consent, they certified the same unto the Magistrates, who upon good
consideration, together, with the advice of a reverend and learned Minister, of
Saint Clements church in Sandwitch, one M. Simons, who very charitably gave it
buryall, and withal, giving many godly admonitions to the people, concerning
this most strange birth: from such like terrible examples of Gods wrath, sweet
Jesus be merciful unto us, for such like domb warnings of our own
overthrows as this is, if we be not graceles, may lead us out of the pathway
of perdition, and guide us aright into the true way of happiness.

Some other things concerning this wonder is to be considered of, the one is,
that there was one of the Sergiants Wives of Sandwitch, that by the sight, and
corrupted smell proceeding from the child, received such a conceit, that to
this day she is not scarce well, but sickly, and much decayed in health:
likewise, in the time of this woman's continuing in Mother Watses house, it
could not be known by any means what she was, from whence she came, nor
whither she was going, nor as yet it is not known for a truth to what place
she is traveled, but for a certainty she was proved to be a wanderer, and
supposed to be ones daughter in the I Will of Tennet, but of what life and
conversation she has been, and is of, none can justly say as yet, but surely
the birth of her womb has bredde much cause of fear.

God in his other creatures, shows the like examples, only to put us in mind
of repentance, both by birds, beasts, fowls, and fishes, as there has been
diverse strange birds, and fowls sent into the world with the likeness of great
ruffes about their necks some with periwigs, chains, and such like.

The Sea in like manner yeeldes forth her monsters in sundry likenesses and
deformed shapes. London had lately a fearful pattern of the same, by a huge
deformed fish, that would groan and roar contrary to his kind, which by many
people was seen at the Swanne within Newgate.

There be many I know that remembers the late groaning tree near Burndwood in
Essex, ye sinking of ye ground in Sussex, with a number such other like wonders
wrought by the hand of God for our amendments, yet carelessly we still run
astray, regarding nothing at all these larum-bels sent from our gentle redeemer.

And if we do consider thereof aright, we are to make our prayers to God
daily, that in mercy he would look upon us, and not in this manner make a
deformity of nature, examples of his heavy indignation, threatened against us:
from such and all other the like, God in his sweet mercy deliver us all: Amen.

FINIS.

