The Popish Kingdom, or reign of Antichrist, written in Latin verse by
Thomas Naogeorgus, and englyshed by Barnabe Googe.

2. TIMOTH. 3. Like as Iannes and Iambres withstoode Moises, even so do these
also resist the truth. Men they are of corrupt minds, and lewd as concerning
the faith: but they shall prevail no longer. For their foolishness shall be
manifest to all men, as theirs was. Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, for
Richard Watkins. Anno. 1570.

To the right high, and mighty princess, Elizabeth by the grace of God,
Queen of England, France, and Ireland, defender of the faith, and of the
Church of England and Ireland, on earth next under God the supreme governor.
I WOULD NOT HAVE TAken upon me (most gracious and my redoubted sovereign
Lady) to have brought into english this brief description of your graces
greatest adversary, though often I have thereunto been earnestly required, but
only of purpose to dedicate it to your majesty: Neither yet would I so have
presumed to have done, but that I have here before seen your graces most
gracious accepting of smaller matters. The Author so eloquentlye in Latin has
expressed his mind, and so plainly and truly has described the feigned
sanctity of the Romish religion that now so much is boasted of, as J cannot
but judge him a present meet for a Queen. The translation (though rude) so
deals with truth, as being earnestly hated of the enemies of truth, it
requires of necessity the patronage of so noble a princess, being before in
Latin safely defended by the no less virtuous, than valiant prince the
Lantgraue of Hess, a Prince as well affected in religion, as of mind and
courage invincible. Most humbly I therefore beseech your majesty to vouchsafe
the defense thereof against the wrongefull slanders of malicious tongues, and
to pardon, according to your accustomed clemency, my bold attempt in
presenting to your highness so rude a translation: wherein I have the less
been curious, because it was chiefly made for the benifite of the common, and
simpler sort. J have also hereunto joined some part of another book written
by the same Author, and entitled, The spiritual husbandry (which I long
before translated) because the other being printed, seemed something to small
in volume. God long preserve your most excellent majesty, and always in all
dangers as he has hitherto most wonderfully done: so evermore through his
mighty and merciful providence defend the same to his honor and glory, and
the singular comfort of all your loving subjects.

Your Majesty's most humble and faithful subject. Barnabe Googe.

B G
POST. TRISTIA. LAETA*


To the right high and mighty Prince, Philip by the grace of God Lantgraue of
Hesse. etc. Thomas Naogeorgus his humble subject wishes. etc.
THE BEVVTIFVLL LIGHT of the Gospel (most worthy Prince) has now so many
years shyned, that not vnvvorthily, if it so had seemed good to God, it might
have drawn all men to the love and estimation thereof, and assvvaged the
malice of the chiefest enemies, in such sort, as though they could not find
in their hearts to embrace it, yet at the leastvvyse they should forbear from
their uncharitable slanders and cruel raylings. But because they only do
believe (as we read in the Acts of the Apostles) that are before appointed
to salvation: So far of are our adversaries from vvaxing more gentle, or any
vvhitte forsaking their cruelty and reproachful words, as now at length
they pour out more boldly and dispitefully the vilest words they can, not
only against the poor Preachers, but also against their doctrine, and the
very Gospel it self. For of late came there one abroad, (whose name I will
not here declare) who taking occasion of these last vvarres, with a foolish
and slanderous book, cuttes in pieces, tears, chides, and with as ill
reports as may be, burdeneth as well the Princes, as subjects, that be
favorers of the Gospel, and herevvithall (full vvisely) calls us again to
Popery, tearming us Apostatas, and forsakers of our faith. But surely he
deserves no aunsvvere, as one that except raylinges has uttered nothing: and
his Book that he vvrote, seems to be written by a man ouerseene with
wine, having no Method therein, but a certain disordered heap of words,
and (as they say) a tale without a head. Yet vvoulde I there should be some
that should aunsvvere this slaunderer, not for his sake, but for the
worthiness of the religion that we profess: whereby he might perceive
with what rashness, ungodliness, and malepartnesse he controlles and
persecutes the thing he does not understand. For although we are bound by the
word of God, to bear and dissemble the injuries and offenses that are done
unto us: yet such things as belong unto truth, the pure doctrine of the
Gospel, and so to the honor and glory of God, we ought by no means to
dissemble, but earnestly both with words and vvritings to fight against the
enemies, as with great commendation did the ancient Doctors of the Church,
against the Heathen, and first planters of Herisies: for these slaunderers,
although of such as sufficiently know the truth, they be but laughed at and
despised, yet do they infect, and not a little abuse the vveake, and cause
them to mistrust and think the worse of the religion we teach. Therefore
either for the Doctrine it self, or else for the vveakelinges that have but
newly begone to taste the truth, the wickedness and malice of this defamer,
in calling the gospel that we preach Turkish, and by other hateful terms,
is to be beaten down and utterly confuted. And here I can not but vvoonder
with what face he can thus shamelesly behave himself, since it is well
known he never read any book of ours, whereby he might rightly judge of
our faith and religion, neither is it reason for the fault and offense of some
one Prince or subject to give judgment upon all. But I think he learned these
slau^ders, at the Sermons of some bavvling Friars, or other venomous Papists,
who have more care for their bellies, than for the truth, vvherby he thought
to be accounted a great Clearke, for thundering out his railing Rethoricke
against us, and thinks it no little glory, if with his fond and ruffianly
booke^, he may not overthrow (for so great his learning is not: and if it
were* the truth is invincible) but like a fly or a gnat, sting and bite us,
whom it pleases him to call Lutherans. But I trust there shall some man be
found that shall aunsvvere the fool, as Solomon says, according to his
follye, least he should seem wise to himself. I for my part, as well as
leisure vvoulde presently serve, have plainly and truly set forth the chief
members of the Popish state, their faith, their ceremonies, and religion,
though I pass over names: that every man may see, whether they or we come
nearer to the steps of the Apostles, and whether they be Catholics, or rather
we whom they so hate and persecute as Heritikes. What goodness, what true
dealing, or what thing agreeing with the Apostolic doctrine there is among
these Papists, I truly can not see. On the other side it plain appears,
that our religion is such, as the Papists with all their endeavor, by
faithful witness of Scriptures, yet hitherto could never be able to
overthrow. VVhither than do they call us? Do they think that we will
forsake the truth, and follow falshoode in so clear a light? Why do they
call us Apostatas? Is it a shame to forsake ungodliness and Idolatry, and
other things both vain and foolish? That this religion of theirs is none
other, I intend so brieflye to show, that it may appear as in a Table,
whereby our men may pacientlier bear the iniuryes and reproaches of these
fellows, in seeing from what monsters by the doctrine of the Gospel they
are delivered, and our adversaries not bear their heads so lofty, and boast
themselves to be the true Church of Christ, beholding the abuses asvvell of
their life, as of their religion, disclosed and declared unto all men. I
therefore exhort our brethren, that they esteem as their greatest glory, the
departing from the Pope, and as a singular blessing of GOD, the knowledge of
the Gospel. I exhort also and admonish our adversaries, that they leave of in
time from slaundering, not only us (who in respect are nothing) but rather
the truth of God, and the Gospel of Christ, and that they weigh the matter
with more diligence, and remove a while from their eyes the consent of
numbers of people, the authority of the Pope and his members, and the
accustomed religion of a fevv hundred years: for these and such other like are
of no force in the confirming of truth, but are rather lettes and hinderaunces
to the knowledge thereof, and common to the inhabitants of the whole
world, who by antiquity, continuance, authority of Kings and Princes,
and the general consent of people, are able to defend their supersticious
laws. But other grounds of faith and religion ought Christians to have, as
the consent of the Prophets, and the Apostles, the authority of the holy
Ghost, bearing witness of our Lord Jesus Christ, as well in scriptures, as
in the hearts of men. These if they thorovvlye consider, and without
parcialitie regard, I doubt not but it shall come to pass, that clothing
themselves with Christian shamefastness, they shall amend and return unto
more sounder and surer doctrine. A great foolishness it is to know what is
best, and to follow the vvorst, as many of our adversaries for gain, and
their bellies sake do. In the mean time, most excellent Prince, great cause
we have to rejoice of our selves, beholding in how great darkness, errors,
deceyts, and vanities, our enemies walk: and to beseech God, that it may
please him, to open their eyes and their minds, that they may behold the
light of the Gospel, by which the quietness of heart is only obtained, and
that they may seek for and enjoy al things in Christ our alonely savior.
How great a grief it is to such as travail to be ignorant of their way,
or taught amiss by some malicious guide, they well can tell that have had
experience thereof. Neither does it any whit avail to prove many vvayes, and
yet to be far of from the right. Which commonly happens, as is well
known, to our enemies. For many vvayes they attempt, and try, and carefully
wrest their mind hither and thither, to obtain the forgiveness of their
sins, and everlasting life. But every man that is Godly does see, that they
strive and travail in vain, when the only way unto God is Christ, John. 14.
who is made unto us of God the father, vvisdome, righteousness,
sanctification, 1. Corin. 1.
and redemption, and there is no other name in the world given unto men
whereby they may be saved, Acts. 4.
but only the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. This way because it is plain,
and not gainefull, the blind and wicked guides do either craftily shun,
and lead men into thickets, or vvildernesses, whence they never can get out,
or carry the poor creatures to craggie rocks, and break neck mountains.
Besides we ought to account it no small benifite of God, that we are
delivered from these fellows, and that we understand their devises and
deceytes, whereby we may continually bevvare of them. For this only intent,
have I taken this work in hand, that the truth and the brightness of the
Gospel may the better shine out, by setting forth the contrary devises,
vvorspippings, ceremonies, and life of the Papists, that every man may take
heed of these, and more earnestly receive, embrace, and with all their
endeavor keep and defend the other. And to you (most vvorthie prince) have I
dedicated this work for many respects, all which to rehearse were nedelesse.
Your singular and gracious favor toward me, and liberality well beseeming
a prince deserves some greater matter, and more meet for your highness* But
I know your grace is alvvayes wont more to esteem the mind of the giver,
than the gift: neither did I mind to give your grace this, as a recompense for
your goodness toward me, (for that am I never able to do) but only to
declare my self, not unmindful of your benifites. Moreover, I thought it
good to give this book unto you as meetest before all other Princes, for your
great and singular travail in setting forth of the Gospel, for the dangers
and miseries that you have sustained in defending of it, vvherin even to
captivity, and the great hazard of your life (from the which I thank God,
and with all my heart rejoice, that you are at the length delivered, and
restored to the seat of your Progenitors) most valiantly ye have striuen: and
also for the vvonderfull and Princely courage of your heart, in so many, so
great and grievous temptations, and constancy in keeping it. You shall here
behold what things they be (although you were not before ignorant of them)
unto the which, though by sundry deuyses assaulted, you could by no means
be brought. And on the other side aparantly, what manner of religion it is
that you furthered, hitherto defended, and by the mighty help of God
retained. Certain there be that are severe and immovable in keeping their
faith heretofore delivered them, as the Turks, the Jews, and such others,
but settled upon no certain ground, nor aucthorised by the witness of any
holy scriptures, but only by the inventions and dreams of men. But such
constancy (or if I may so say) obstinacy, is to be commended, that has her
foundation upon Gods word: and can by no means be drawn or forced to error
and ungodliness, for the which the vvitnesses of Christ have alvvaies been
vvorthily praised. Therefore because I thought this little work would not be
altogether unpleasant unto you, I presumed to dedicate it unto your highness,
most humbly beseeching you to bear with the simpleness thereof, and to
accept herein my well meaning mind, and to receive me into your graces
protection, whose long prosperity, with the happy success of your most
noble and renowned children, I earnestly desire God to preserve.

From Basil the.20. of February. 1553.
The Popish Kingdom. The first Book.
THe strange disguised shape, and faith, of popish proud estate,
The sundry orders, and the days they yearly consecrate
Good Muse declare, my force to weak, can not thereto attain:
Ne can disclose the mysteries, of such a matelesse reign.
Often have we heard the thundering fame, of Scythian sceptor great,
The Turks estate, and of the Indians farther distant seat:
The warlyke Parthyans power beside, and stately Persian charge,
And of the Romans all men knows, the ancient empire large.
But these are nothing in respect, if any man do way,
The far surmounting majesty, and power of popish sway:
Whose Lordship lifts up it self, unto the heavens hye, D. 22. omnes.

And all the earth, whereon we dwell, to him does subject lie.
And all the Devils deep in hell, at his decrees do quake,
So that the threefolde engyn of the world he makes to shake.
Nor unadvisedly we speak, nor rashly thereof feign,
The Pope himself does challenge this, in words and writings plain.
And lustily he does defend, the same with tooth and nail.
Draw near therefore Calliopey, and let thy force prevail.
And thou Apollo grant thine aid, great matters here I sing,
Whereof the fame, blown forth abroad, all Europe makes to ring.
Guide you my lately verse begun, by perfect path and plain,
Disclose the secret mysteries, of this so sacred reign.
For though it thoroughly be known, and easily appeeres,
To every Wight, that here has seen, the end of thirty years.
The younger age yet knows it not, ne children have it seen,
That have been taught, to tread the steps, of Christ's religion cleene.
And what of our posterity, that many years to come,
Shall not attain to know the faith, nor toys of stately Rome.
Being many a hundred miles from thence, and dwelling far away,
This book shall well instruct them than, and show them half the play.
If worms do not consume it first, nor Merchants occupye
It, for enclosing of their wares, that they far hence do bye:
Our question first, is, if from heaven this lusty blood do spring,
And whether thence he slipped down, from that almighty King:
Or rather from the Stygian floods he raysde himself so hye,
Created first by Satan, and the spirits that damned lie,
To be a plague to Christian faith, and virtuous famylie,
To fill the world with troubles, broils, and wretched misery?
Such as are bent to search the same, bring many causes strong:
And weighty arguments, and proves, the chiefest here among.
They from the fruits do first derive, and long they feed their eyes,
To view the monstrous shape, that does from doubtful parent rise.
It is not much amiss, if that we say, he came from hie:
For Lucifer the Prince of pride, and all his company,
That now do trouble all the world, from heaven down did fall,
At his commaundment, and his word, that guides and gouernes all.
From heaven eke fell out the floudde, that all the world did drown:
Besides on Sodom, came from thence, both fire and brimstome down.
What if ye monstrous sins of men, wherewith the world did swarm,
Provoked God to send this plague, for their deserved harm.
Men made but small account of Christ, Gods word esteemed vain,
Each heart was then peruersely bent, and truth had in disdain.
Faith was not to be found at all, ne love could once be seen,
And hellish sects, had put to flight, the true religion cleene.
Each ear was then set open wide, to learn devises mad,
And ioyde to hear of teachers new, though they were near so bad.
No difference made, of right or wrong, none sought the perfect way.
But every man with willing mind, did yield himself a pray.
What marvel was it now, if that the almighty gave them up,
And suffered them to drink their fill, of lying errors cup?
Besides, when all was hushed and still, the chief, and learned sort,
Gave over book, and Pulpet quite, and gave themselves to sport.
Still woondering at the worldly pomp, and hunting after gain.
Each one did seek the others fall, with hatred and disdain,
The stronger put the weak to worse, with aid of Princely might,
Thus malice touchte the high estates, who wondered at the spite,
And muzde what madness moude them thus, ye priests and prelates great,
Should thus with civil wars, envy each one the others seat.
Of these disorders, lewd, and great, what judge you should appear,
But stoppes to sound religion and this present kingdom here?
While God th'offences punished, of this distempered mind,
And ouerwhelmde the idle hearts, with mistes and darcknesse blind*
For both about one time began, the fond religion vain,
Of Mahomet his foolish law, and eke the popish reign.
Two stubborn horns to overthrow, both faith and virtuous mind,
And for to drown the doubtful world, with vice, and errors blind.
For one thing, both of them we see, do strive for to attain,
Which is, that no remembrance might, of Jesus Christ remain.
And that the searching out of truth, from men be pluckte away,
That so in errors thick and gross, they all may sooner stray.
Ne shall thou much amiss affirm, if that thou do declare,
That God has plaste them in the world, as horns that egall are.
For this the Pope himself presumes, and plainly does decree,
And as a Key of faith does will, that it believed be. D. 21. In nouo. D. 22.
omnes and, Sacro sancta.

But for the same we will not strive, but easily give him place,
Yet neither can the Pope nor such, as him do here embrace,
Deny but many things he has, at Satan's hands been tought,
Which both in life and doctrine here, he often has lewdely wrought.
But of this wondrous Empire great, the head I now declare,
Surnamed Pope, Pope.
a name that once to those that meanest wear
Amongst the Bishops common was, till such time as alone,
The Romish Bishop chalengde it, resisted then of none.
What could they do? now was he great, and to be fearde of all,
Not only through his earthly force, but power celestial.
This Pope does boast himself to have, the keys of heaven gates,
And brave in scutchin blaseth them, that Kings and high estates,
And common people bent to lies, may know that none can clime
To heaven, to be placed there, without his power divine.
Without his warraunt, or his grant, for in his gift does ly,
The skies, and happy life, and whom he list he puts by.
And with a word, he hoyseth up, unto the starry reign,
Even whom he listes, and where him likes, he casts down again,
Unto the bottom deep of hell, he byndes, and loses all,
Even as a perfect Marshall of, the chief and highest hall.
To great an Empire sure is this, and dreadful power to hear,
Whereat great Dukes have trembled, and Princes quakte for fear.
Both noble men, and people poor, their countnaunce now let fall,
When as they heard the name of Pope, and such a power withal.
For every man accounted sure, that after loss of life,
They should receive eternal bliss, and heaven, void of strife.
But how poor wretches, may they now the heavens hope to win,
When as the Pope does keep the keys, and wards the coming in?
Therefore of all men must he needs, as God be worshipped,
Yea, no man sought to have the aid of God himself in deed.
Nor minded his commandments, his threats, nor promises,
For why, the terror of this Pope, each mind did now distres,
That God could have no part thereof, who yet regardes not part,
But chalengeth, as due to him, the whole of every heart.
We know full well, that Peter, and all such of Peter's mind,
Receive these heavenly keys of Christ, and power to lose and bind.
But in the gospel lies this power, and farther does not reach,
He shuttes, and closes fast the doors, that does this gospel preach,
To such as will not him believe, men beastly, void of shame,
And eke to virtuous men and good, he opens wide the same.
Thus does he bind the stubborn sort, and men of froward kind,
With gospels force, and not by power, of his presumptious mind.
Far otherwise the Pope does work, as well we may behold,
He preaches not as Peter did, nor feeds the Christian fold,
Ne does he travel in the word, with any learning pure,
Con. D. 95. Esto.
But countes himself the guide of faith, and life that shall endure.
Which power no God, nor man him gave, yet so it has been wayde,
That Emprours, Kings, and Dukes and all, have him as God obayde.
So much has lewd persuasion done, from wrested scriptures brought
That for the entering heaven gates, and joys of all men sought:
D. 10. Quoniam.
As subject here the faith he kept, and heart of all men held,
Except the Greeks, that never would, such honor to him yield.
For all the Italians, Spaniardes, and the French, their neighbors nie,
The Scotts, the English people, and the men of Germany,
Th'ungarians, Danes, and Norweyes both, Bohemians eke beside
And Irelande, Russia, and Poland, with woods and pastures wide,
In fine, whersoeuer the Latin name, has erst been blown and spread.
Do honor, fear, and worship eke, the Pope as chief and head:
And gyuer of eternal life, thus far he rules the skies,
And more he seeks: Greg. in Re.
but on the earth he still does exercise
All things that long to God, or man, appointed by the highest,
To be a factor here for God, and Vicar unto Christ, D. 12. Non decet, and
praecipius. 9. q. 3. aliorum contra. 1. q. 1. vt euidenter.

Who evermore is present here, in power, and sacred breath,
The head of that same spouse, that he redeemed with his death,
And washed with his precious blood, from spots and wrinckles cleene.
And is not this aduoultry now, and madness plainly seen,
To boast himself to be the head, and guide an others wife?
Who can abide this? Christ, that bought her here, with loss of life?
Yet says he, Christ did leave him here her head, who paid this price, D. 22.
omne^ and, Sacro sancta.

Thus shames he not to blind the world, with falsehood and with vice.
Moreover least that some should spring, that might his power deface,
And both by scripture, word and wit, deprive him of his grace,
He warely lays the Bible up, 17. q. 4. nemini. 24. q. ^ quoties, and Rogamus.
and wills that none do take
It, otherwise than he himself, does in his comment make.
And with decrees he does forbid, that none so hardy be,
As moude by love of troth, or hate of falshoode, for to see
The sacred leaves, or to expound them, but as he does teach,
Nor privately, nor openly, unto the people preach,
(Then he himself alowes, nor none) may on the same depend,
But such as thereby build his reign, and do his power commend.
And thus against the scriptures force, he easily buildes his forte,
Which scriptures should be most of weight, amongst the christian sort.
What help is now in arguments? what good can reason do?
Or whereto serves the sharp devise, that sheddes and parts in two
The troth from falshoode? all are blind, the Pope does only see, 9. q. 3.
patet and cuncta, and nemo. D. 12. Si Romanorum.

And learnings laws, and reasons good alonely judges he.
With Princes, people, Doctors, and the solemn counsels hye,
And whatsoever he decrees, must unremoved lie,
And be received as a law, whereof may no man doubt,
But blyndefielde every man must ^ake, whatsoever he settes out. 17. q. 4.
nemini D. 19. Sic omnes.

And with an ill unsavory taste, must down the throat be sent,
What he propoundes, decrees, or dreams, or what he does invent.
And well he looks to this, that none of him may judgment give, D. 40. Si
p^pa 9 q. 3 nemo and, Sequent.

Nor of his life nor wicked deeds, how ill so ever he live.
Yea, though through his example^ lewd, he brings down to hell,
Great troops of men that viciously, upon the earth do dwell.
He may do what him list and likes, and lives here below,
As one that neither fears man, nor any God does know.
His will for reason only stands, and for a law must go,
Extra de concess. pro. proposuit. Extra de apellari. Vt debitus. 3. q. 6. Hoc
quippe. C. de rei uend. li. 5.2. q. 6. Decreto
Nor no man dare demand of him, why do thou so, or so:
For why he can dispense withal, and change with every man,
Of right make wrong, and eke of wrong, make right again he can.
What lawful is, unjust he makes, injustice eke is right,
And when it likes his holiness, the Crow is also white.
The order here of nature good, he turns another way,
And alters quite, what needs more words, on earth he bears the sway.
He breaks with his word the bond, of faithful married mates,
And couples eke in marriage bed, the plain forbidden states.
Gods holy laws he alters quite, or takes clean from hence,
Or wretchedly he wresteth them, unto some other sense.
No marvel then if that he deal with man's decrees so ill,
Discharging subjects from their oath, and placing whom he will.
Permitting theft and robbery, so he may have his share,
Bestowing others goods, and bearing such as faithless are.
About his holy Aulters eke, he places in degree,
Such as have falsely been forsworn, and beastlyest men that be.
But these are trifles in effect, of estimation none,
With him that holds the heavenly keys, and rules the world alone.
D. 19. Sic omnes and Si Romanorum, and sequentibus D. 11. Hoc vestrae.
For to the ancient scriptures old, and word of God divine,
Full like a prince he equal makes, his own commaundments fine,
And words that from his mouth proceeds, from mouth that can not lie
Nor can deceive, but does support, the truth most painefully.
Wherefore it is both right and just, that thus he does persuade,
All such as seek for life, to obey the laws that he has made.
D. 11. Nolite 24. q. 1. Rog^mus. D 11 Hoc vestae. D. 19. Sic omnes.
For what can be more true than those? what can be thought or done?
That shows more beautiful, or does in better order run.
What helps sooner to attain, the joys of happy life?
By this we know who is our head, and ender of all strife.
And who does keep the glystering keys, that opens heaven wide,
What need we seek for other aid, or other Christ beside.
Who suffered death and cruel pain, for our offenses mad,
And satisfied his fathers wrath, which we deserved had.
Besides into his hand he takes, the state of Caesar hie,
That nothing in the world be found, of any majesty.
But he possess and conquer it, and therefore does he wright,
Himself as heir apparent to the Empire here of right.
Whereto he has persuaded Kings, and men of each degree,
Which wonderful above the rest, appears unto me.
But all men with the name of God, he rules and threatens hear,
And with the same so stops their mouths, that none dare hiss for fear,
Against that shameless wicked face, ne bragges he thus alone,
But uses his usurped power, deliuerde him of none.
He makes Kings and gives the crown, to such as serve him best, D. 63. tibi.

Whereby he gets him trusty men, still ready at his hest.
Who if they wax unruly ones, or happen to rebel,
He plucks them from their kingdom strait, and casts them down to hell,
With dreadful lightning ouerwhelmde, and does discharge anon,
Their subjects from alegeance due, absoluing every one.
If that they attempt with weapon to defend their realm and right,
Then mooues he other Kings in haste, and Princes for to fight,
And forth he sendes his proper band, and all his force withal,
So that although the Prince be strong, he cannot match them all.
If leaving wars they list to strive, with writing openly,
And to commit their cause and right unto some council hye,
In vain it is no council sittes, without his own consent,
Nor may give sentence otherwise, than after his intent. D. 17. Synodum. and
nec licuit.

And thus poor Prince no remedy, but yield he must at last,
And ask forgiveness for his faults, and his offenses past.
Most humbly bowing down his knees, or falling on his face,
And kissing though against his will, his feet for hope of grace.
The stories tell that once there was, an Emprour great of might,
Whose neck was stamped and trod upon, by this deformed spright,
And used with most dispitefull words, whereby may plain appear,
What power the Pope does challenge over Kings and nations here.
That of the Church of Christ he is, not head nor Lord alone,
But of the universal world, and subject unto none.
Wherefore such Kings as wisdom have, do hear, and nothing say:
And dare not move their lips against the man that bears such sway.
But are content to hold their peace, and judge their hap most sweet,
If once they may attain to come to kiss his holy feet.
Ne would they do this same to him that sittes in Turkish feate,
Nor to the mightiest Prince on earth, though he were never so great.
And better were it sure by much, a thousand times to dye,
Then that such shame should thus redownde unto such Princes hye.
But as the Lord of heaven and earth, this same to him they do,
And whatsoever he commaundes, they straight are ready to.
If that he will them wars to make, than Armor out of hand
They wear, and Cities strong they sack, or spoil some welthy land.
They pill, and powle, and quite deface, the fair and plesaunt realms,
They waste, they ransack, and distaine, each place with blouddy streams.
If that he bid them take the life, or cast in dreadful flame,
The learnde, vnlearnd, the Lord, the mean, they straight fulfill ye same.
Ne think it lawful for to spare their parents in this case,
Nor kinsemen nere, they burn and kill whereas it likes his grace.
Although they know no cause thereof, nor have not wayde it right,
Yea though they know that it be naught, and only came of spite.
Yet his commaundments must be done, for thus the father will,
Extra de offi. D. 96. Been quidem and in scripturis. D. 10. Suscipitis.
And does command that every lay man be contented still
With whatsoever he appoyntes, not asking how nor why,
In things that touch the Church of Rome, but let the sentence lie.
Besides the Courts of every Prince, to him must subject be.
If any happen to mislike, that they may francke and free
Appeal unto the Court of Rome. A wondrous power and might
In things that long to God and man to give a judgment right.
But be not thou herein deceyude, for this as all the rest
Does smell of gain, which how he gettes he takes for the best.
So many things of Kings and Dukes and commons does he gain,
They freely granting, since for that he gives the heavenly reign.
Fair Countries, Castles, Dukedomes, States and famous cities large,
For blessed life he does receive as things of little charge.
For Bishops often use the aid, of Kings in trifles small,
But Kings and Dukes have need of Popes, to save their souls withal.
What cannot lewd persuasion do, with cloak of godliness?
And more he has decreede that such, as do his laws transgress,
That all the rest his enemies be, who cannot with this port,
Both Kings and Emprours overthrow, much more the poorer sort? D. 93. Si
inimicus.

Who would not fear the anger of, so great and black a train?
Therefore do Kings full warely fly, and wisely eke refrain,
From speaking evil of his grace, whatsoever has been done,
And far from such a God, and from his lightnings fast they run.
Thus in the mean time lives he safe, and free from every man,
Since none he knows may be his mate, nor none above him than,
Nor any that dare with him strive, or stout against him stand,
He enters league with Princes and with kings of every land.
With Cities and with people great, that live at liberty,
And able are to deck the fields, with lusty cheualrie.
In fine both wise and ware he is, in every kind of case,
If all be still, and blessed peace, do reign in every place:
Then strait he stirs and moves wars, and helps the stronger side,
And will be sure to gain a fleece, whosoever lose beside.
Thus seeking his commodity, with loss of others blood,
Sometime himself to battle goes, with fond and frantike mood.
His Gotish bearde long hanging down, in shirte of mayle arayde.
Safe shrouded in his Corselet close, all gilt and ouerlayde.
Thus glistering all in armor brave, with spoil and pillage rife,
He closes stately towns with trenche, and threatens loss of life
Unto his foes, with cannon shot he battereth down a pace,
The lofty walls, or lying long does cause them sue for grace.
And yield for fear of famine up, their towns and goods withal,
Then puttes he whom he list to sword, for words and trespass small.
And so to Rome returns strait, his triumph with him led,
Lo, thus upon the earth does live, our chief and sovereign hedde.
Can thou declare a worthier wight, or more excelling grace?
Then bring him forth, peruse the time, and search in every place.
Hence sendes he down his power into, the smokie pit of hell,
With charms and solemn ceremonies, and days agreeing well.
Where though he cannot clearly lose, the damned souls from chains
Ne quench the furious firye flames, nor cease the raging pains.
Nor break the swift still turning wheels, nor kill the dreadful snakes,
Yet with his voice their torments all and greeues more light he makes.
So that the wretched souls have ease, whilst certain hours last,
Ne burns the fire, nor gnawes the worm, nor turns ye wheel so fast.
For if that Orpheus with his songs, Megaeras whip could stay,
And cease the biting of the worms, and hellish pains alay.
Why should the Pope not do so much, the King of earth and skies?
Besides, an other kind of fire to purge he does deuyse,
Whereas he raines himself alone, and shows his force and might.
From hence he loses souls, and sendes them to the heavens bright,
With pardons, prayers, himnes and gifts, ne forces much the same*
Although the souls three hundred years have burnt in fiery flame.
If at the length some golden shower do happen for to fall,
In little space it drives him out, and makes an end of all.
Whole kinredes loses he with this, and keeps from the fire,
Whereas his favor does extend, and wheare he has his hier.
Himself not Pluto can resist, nor all his army black,
Although they strive with claws to stay, or pluck with fleshokes back^
His voice makes all the fiendes afraid, and from the bottom deep,
He hoyseth up the weeping souls, in blessed joys to sleep.
What King, Apostle, Prophet else? could ever do this feat,
There never was, nor is, nor shall, be any power so great.
Moreover any Wight on earth, in robes he passes cleene,
If any time in majesty, he lists to be seen.
With clothes of purple couerde quite, which long about him fall,
With silk and crimson shining bright, and cloth of gold withal,
Beset with precious stones and pearl, that costly India bears,
Such as no Queen of Egypt would, have dronk or drawn from ears.
Above all this his triple crown, does shine and glister bright,
With beauty like of stones arayde, of strange and wondrous sight.
His Crosier then with double cross, all framde of finest gold,
May here be seen, no silver show, may any man behold.
Except some solemn day require, I leave out here among,
His chiefest pomp, his stately train, and guard in armor strong.
Their order eke, and how they stand, their ceremonies sweet,
With books and bells their iesture strange, with head with hands and feet,
Besides a number of the like, which hear were long to tell.
If that his wealth, his pride, and pomp: thou have regarded well,
And all his fond conditions lewd, thou shall not find his mate
On all the earth, that more does seek the joys of worldly state.
The earth is also holy thought, wheresoever his feet do stand,
And every thing is holy made, that comes near his hand.
Wherefore to Church he never goes, but borne on shoulders hye,
Even as the sacred Arc whereas, the Manna hid does lie. Ratio. diui*

O Lord, that shame cannot compel these men to come away,
And that they have no fear of God, nor of the latter day.
This is the shameless forheade of that purple Hoar unclean,
Whereby she sottes and mockes the world, without all end or mean.
Thou askst parhaps what shift he makes, these chargis to maintain,
Demand no more, no Prince nor King, nor Emprour hear again
Has so much silver in his Chest, nor store of golden sommes,
And of a welthie Peter eke, I know not whence he commes.
He has the whole inheritance, that large and broad does ly,
With Cities great, and fruitful soyles, and ports and havens by.
Eke has he Rome the Queen and head, of all the world before,
So that a thousand talentes yearly comes in, or more.
Besides a greater sum he does throughout the world receive, 600000.

By selling heaven, and pardning faults, and granting power and leave,
And by his Annates much he gettes, these terms themselves do feign, Con. 1.
q. 1. Quicquid statuimus. Gratia. q. 3. Vendentes. Chn. D. 100. Nouit.

Which words I hear am forcde to use, to show their usage plain.
The pelting Pals besides do get, and gain him treasures great,
The Bishops confirmation like, and welthy Abbots seat.
What profit comes by Prebenders, when as with bribes they play
Each one to win, where who gives most, goes conqueror away.
Yea certain months he chooses out, and times in every year,
Wherein an others due and right, to him belongs clear.
What should I every thing declare, he falsely deals in all,
And upon every morsel fat, his crooked Talentes fall,
And part he takes in every place, he huntes for money round
Both hear amongst the living and such as are brought to ground.
That so his chestes may still be full, and Gold may always flow,
Which upon furious wars he does, and houses fair bestow,
In building Bridges, Temples, Towers, and costly Chapels fair,
In placeing of his kinsemen hie, in lofty Lordely chair.
In ryo^, pleasure, and disporte, and sumptuous banketings,
That long to worldly Princes here, and other heathen Kings.
Which represents some Perses stout, or Craesus full of pride,
And not like Christ's Apostles true, or any christian guide.
Desirst thou for to know his trade, and steps in living right,
All full of pomp and glory it is, and foolish vain delight.
Such filthy acts I will not tell, as Fame does true report,
Least that I stain my verse and book, in lewd and filthy sort.
But now regard advisedly in all that has been told,
If any thing Apostlelyke, or christianlike does hold.
Or near unto that doctrine pure, that Christ himself has tought,
Or that may holy counted be, or Catholic be thought.
Nothing against the glory more, of God thou can declare,
Nor nothing that more filthy seems, than this if we compare.
Wherefore at this time many be, that think and plainly say,
That Antichrist possesses Rome, and does the Bishop play.
Wherefore they from his name do fly, and from his fond decrees,
His orders, doctrine, temples, and his solemn mysteries:
None otherwise than from a Bear, or Lion in their way,
And in the morning bless themselves, least that they hap that day,
To meet some shaven oyled beast, or else some other Grome,
Belonging to the filthye Court, and popish sea of Rome.
I marvel therefore why that men, should call him by the name,
Of holiest, since no man yet, could holy prove the same.
But rather naught. The place can not, nor yet his chief degree,
Nor all his riches pomp or pride, can prove him good to be.
Wherefore good Phoebus here declare, by Oracle divine,
And eke you learned Muses all, this matter here define.
Wherein this man should here be thought, Apostolic to be,
D. 40. Non Loca. Ante omnia.
Or holiest calde, we know no cause, nor no desert we see.
And do you smile? would you that we, should know the color dim,
Of phrase contrary, and after that, in all things judge of him?
Thus of this present kingdom here, the goodly head I deem,
Thou well perceyust, but better should, if thou at Rome had been
And any time continued there, and seen him face to face,
Then should thou well have vewde thy self, his whole and comely grace
The other pillors of this kingdom, now I will declare,
That bear a sway above the rest, and chief and greatest are.
Such as this head creates and does join with him to guide,
But full and whole authority, is unto them denyde.
The greatest, and the chiefest are, those men that take their name,
Cardinals.

Of Charnels that are fixed fast, and bear the door in frame.
Because that on these holy hooks, these kingdoms gates do stand,
And that the care and cure thereof, they wholly take in hand.
Out of this holy company the Pope himself does spring,
And to no other does belong, the choice of such a King.
The most of them are learned men, and borne of houses good, Rational. diuinor.

But favor oftentimes of friends, and highness of their blood,
Does bring the unlearned hereunto, and such as are not wise.
These men if from their woonted state, of life they did not rise,
Unto such honor great, perhaps they would be godly bent,
And labor in the works of Christ, with good and true intent.
But as they be they never can, for honor spilles them quite,
And makes them labor for to keep, this welthie reign upright.
And by their oath they promise all, and faith assured give,
This kingdom here withal their might, to maintain whilst they live:
And first that no pretense against the Pope permitted be,
Nor that he have dishonor here, nor loss of liberty.
And secondly, that nothing of his kingdom here decay,
Nor of his Laws and ceremonies (though lewd) be pulde away.
Thus safe through their defense and aid, the Pope now fears not,
But safely keeps that he has long, with frawde and lying got:
These therefore as his counselors, and faithful does he take,
Who rather will be peecemeale torn, than once their prince forsake.
And these in message does he send, to Kings and Princes great,
Whereby he may their councelles learn, and better work his feate.
Then dreadful wars he does persuade, or else some peace to take,
Which he perceyues that best shall for his own advantage make.
Or else some foolish matter does, he wrongfully defend,
Or moves them that heritikes, be brought to cruel end,
Or under color false of Turks, for aid he labors long,
Deuiseth some attonements new, or breaks the friendship strong.
The people run to meet them strait, the council do resort,
Sometime the Prince himself does go, but all the oyled sort
With shaven pates do forward march, with lofty cross in site,
The guydes and rulers of the schools, all clad in surples white
And down they ducke with solemn cheer, and many a crooked knee,
Beseeching God to send them life, and long in health to be.
Thus with this jolly welcome here, these fathers forth are led.
Who cross and bless with fingers often, as men astonished
To see the peoples fondenesse such, they well themselves do know,
They bring no good nor virtuous thing, yet proud their port they show
And use the peoples foolishness, thus forth in pomp they ride,
In costly Crimsons all arayde, and Purple hattes beside.
A number great of men they bring, with Moyles and horses fair,
In princely order furnished, and diverse of them spare.
And even at Rome this pomp is seen, and gorgeousness of life,
Where fleshly lust and belly cheer, remains always rife:
The better to maintain this state, and charges of the same,
And that they may be Cardnallike, and to their head no shame,
They chosen are of prelates such, as welthiest were before,
Yet will not all this wealth now serve, that erst suffisde and more.
Their charges now are grown so great, their sumptuousness is such,
Since first they attainde with greedy mind, ye Cardnals hatte to touch.
Of sundry fetches have they need, and like their Captain fine,
They must some kind of ways devise, to frame a silver mine.
And this they do some months when as, the Pope does bear the sway
They sease upon some Prebens fat, as on a pleasant pray.
And Monkish Abbeys rich they ^etch, and take into their hands,
They polle the Monks and oftentimes, reserve the cheifest lands.
The hook hangs out on every side, to bring in greater gain,
Least they should lack at any time, to furnishe out their train.
Thou think perhaps they do some good, or stand some Realm in stedde
Wherefore it is not much amiss, that thus they often be spedde.
Thou art deceyude no good there comes, from them to any wight,
Except perhaps some one their friend, be brought in better plight.
A hateful burden are they to the world, and people plain,
And Dranes that greedily consume, the fruits of others pain.
They serve their chief, and for his state, they ieoparde often a joint,
But as for any other man, they weye him not a point.
If kingdoms great to ruin come, and people perish quite,
Or blood be spilt in every place, they force it not a mite.
They laugh and with a rowting noise, their grief they plain discrye,
But if themselves a Fle but bite, with gaping jaws they cry.
And God and man to witness call, what torment and what pain,
They suffer for the Church of God, and for the heavenly rain.
Whereas in deed they nothing feel, for her they never knew,
But for the Popes decrees and right, and honor to him due.
They ready are to suffer harm, wherefore they wander wide,
That think they wear their hattes of red, and purple garments side,
Because that with the loss of blood, the fold of Christ they keep.
It is a lie, they meddle not, with Christ nor with his sheep.
They strive for ease, and for their fathers false usurped hedde,
And sometime for to come by wealth, their tender blood is shed.
Of such he makes in every realm if any there excel,
And favor things that longs to Rome, and are contented well,
To strive for them with learned books, with voice with tongue and hand
They think themselves in paradise, and happiest for to stand.
While he regardes them not a whit, nor all their honor vain,
But looks only to himself, and to his lusty reign.
And riches here by help whereof, and wretched life beside,
He framed Rome the glass of faith, the sampler and the guide.
A guide in deed if that thou mindste, to travel unto hell, D. 19. Enim vero.

And to be shut out from the place where God himself does dwell.
Their office thus, thou have their life, and all their fond arayes,
But see thou ought Apostolic, or that deserves praise?
Or tastes any thing of Christ? is it because they strive,
In princely pleasure to excel, the greatest Prince alive?
Or that they keep their stables stoarde, with Moyles and coursers ^^ne,
Or that they stately houses build, with waste of golden mine?
The Turks that know not Christ a whitte, in this can do as well,
And well would laugh if they should see, that such as bear the ^ell
Above the rest, by whom the Church of Christ is guided hear,
Should thus bestow their travail whole, about such foolish gear.
Now must we tell the Bishops state, and their disguysings see
Such Bishops namely as has been, with us in Germany.
Bishops. D. 84. Peruenit. D. 25. Primu^ D. 36. Qui. and Si quis. 12. q. 2.
Gloria. 16. q. 1. Quoniam Con. 11. q. 1 Te quidem. and. 12. q. 1. Clericus. and
sequentibus. Con. D. 88. episcop. per latum. Con. D. 42. episcopus.
These ought of duty to defend, the flock of Christ, and feed,
To give example with their lives, and to be learnde in deed,
In virtue and in godliness, all other to excel,
To see the poor and fatherless, and Widows ordered well,
Like as the steps of old declare, and late decrees have tought,
But all things otherwise thou see, and topsie turuie brought.
Of Princes here the name they take, and dreadful titles hye:
They look aloft, and unto worldly things themselves apply.
Regarding not the word of Paul, who byddes them this beware.
Great towns they have, and castles placed on Rocks that stately are,
And Lordships rich in hand they hold, revenues great beside,
Which with the sword they safely keep, and with the sword they guide.
Himself upon some lofty hill, in Castle strong does lie:
Far of from preaching of the word of God, or peoples eye.
Whereas he lists he leads his life, and like a Prince does reign,
Appoynting for his deputies, unlearned men and vain,
And granting power to bussardes blind, who spredde in every place
The counsels and decrees of Popes, and with ill favored grace,
They bawle against all such as put their trust in Christ alone,
And think themselves redeemed by his death, and others none.
While as this Prince and Bishop here, all drownde in vain delight,
And ouerwhelmde in worldly cares, cannot regard aright
The Affairs of Christ, nor if he would, he dares not busy be,
Lest that he should be periurde ralde, and staynde with heresy:
And from his stately seat be cast, with great reproach and shame,
By force of dreadful oath constrainde, in all things here to frame
Himself according to the Pope, and to defend his hedde,
His stately seat, his laws, his faith, and orders publishedde.
And not a hearebred for to pass, the steps of custom old,
By which the holiest father hie, does maintain here and hold,
His supersticious vanities, his mockries and deceat,
His foolysh faith and beastly life, of shaven slouens great.
And all his other gewgawes here, and trumpries on a heap,
Of which within my other books, hereafter will I speak.
He knows that lies does him sustain, and all his family,
And nothing gainefuller unto the oyled company:
Then people kept in blindness still, not knowing good nor right,
But ready always to believe, whatsoever they resight.
No Bishop therefore sworn, unto the Pope dare once apply,
Himself to preach the word of Christ, and doctrine perfitely:
Nor for to show the people plain, the true undoubted way,
Nor alter supersticions, nor take some part away.
Although he know that many things, are horrible and naught:
Ne will he suffer such as would the people well have taught.
As late a reverend Bishop old, began with virtuous mind,
To break the darckned mistes of men, and path of Christ to find:
And saw what mischief under face of holiness was wrought, Tharchbishoppe of
Coleyne.

Wherefore disordred things to bring, to better state he thought,
And diverse matters to amend, that clean contrary were
To God, as worships, orders, and the guise of teaching here.
This matter was no sooner known, but strayte the Monkish route,
Their lying darts began to throw and all the clargie stout,
Put pen to book, the schoolmen eke, a pace did sharp their stings,
The Lawyers also sought to know, the state of diverse things.
At length the matter came to Rome, before the Popish seat,
Who seeing the harm might come thereby, and what destruction great
Unto his kingdom, calls strayte a council to him near,
And cites the feeble aged man, from country far to appear.
Whose cruel drift perceiving he, and knowing well beside,
Their lewd demeanours and deceytes, that erst he often had tried.
And how they never could be brought, to good or sober mind,
His Bishopric he gives up, and honors all resinde.
This thing would no man here have done, that had regarded more,
This worldly pomp and pleasures vain, then Christ and christian lore.
For each man fears the Popish force, and judgment aye severe,
And most of all applies himself, with care and travail here,
In word and deed to show themselves, good servant for to be,
Unto the Pope, and furtherers of his supremacy.
And he that gives his mind to this, how should he any ways,
As Soon deserve the truth or seek, of Christ the only praise.
When as he thinks himself not bound, to God nor to his son,
For unto them he has not sworn, as he before has done
Unto the Pope, nor thinks to have by them commodity,
What good unto the people then, or where in profits he?
That for to please does teach untruth, and still defends it,
And towns and Cities only guides, and preaches not a whit.
Nor suffers others truth to teach, nor any thing at all,
That to a Bishop does belong, but in his princely hall
Does lead a slothful easy life? we know not perfectly,
But wonderful it seems sure, that holiness should lie
Within such idle drowsy shows, for thus for to excel,
In pleasures, Cities fair to build, defend and furnish well,
Great horse to keep, and many men, in liuerie rich arayde,
To hunt and hawke, and look aloft, and make poor men afraid.
The Turk and every worldly Prince, as well as they do this.
Do thou suppose that this will serve, or else sufficient is,
That on some Holy days they serve the Lord in solemn guise,
Therein does passing pomp appear, and hurlyburly rise,
And for the people goodly game, th'unskilfull youth resortes,
And fast with mazed minds they run, to see such goodly sportes.
The Bishop in the mean time is, apparelde gorgiously,
And fourteen sundry garments does, he herein occupy,
Without the which he cannot do, his sacrifice at all,
Yea some must fifteen on them have, beside their costly Pall.
His Sandals first he puts on, of silk or velvet new,
And then his Amias and his Albe, that hangs to his show,
Which does in whiteness pass the Swan, that in the river fleetes,
A slender Gyrdle round about his loins, embracing meets.
And eke about his neck a ^^oale, does round in compass sit,
The greatest part is wrought of silk, of length and largeness fit,
Which when upon his blessed breast, a cross is ouerlayde,
It passes down and underneath his girdle fast is stayde.
Then puttes he on his Tunicle, of purple color bright,
And over that his Dalmatik, a short sleeude garment light.
And then upon his tender hands his Gloves he draws on,
And many a costly stone in Kings he wears thereupon.
Then over all he puttes his Cope, a garment strange in sight,
Which like unto the loathsome Tode behind is shaped right.
With cross depainted brave upon, his back and eke his breast,
And after this his napkins white, he joins with the rest.
And round about his porkish neck, his Pall of passing price,
He casts on, with hanging whoode, and knot of fine device.
His forked Myter then he takes, with gold and stones arayde,
From whence two labels hanging out, behind are ouerlayde.
Now last of all his Crostar staff, in hand he holds upright,
Whose crooked upper part is decked, with gold and Jewels bright.
The rest with silver garnisht is, and plaited fine and neat,
Least it should grieu^ his holy hands, with weight of metal great.
What God I say, or Sybyll then, what Moses ever tought,
For to be clad with such a pomp, and garments straungly wrought?
When long agone they left their books, and freely had assinde,
Each block to preach, and Bussards such, as had none other mind:
But only for to ^eede themselves, and that they weary were,
Of such things as belong unto, the Bishops duty here.
And thinking shame for them to deal or meddle with the same,
Addict themselves to matters grave, and worldely works profane,
Amidst their pleasant quietness, these toys they did devise:
To mock the amazed foolish world, and bleare the peoples eyes.
That when they should behold them thus, with stones and gold beset,
And see them in their masking cotes, with gorgeous grace to ^et:
They should account them wondrous men, sent down from heavens hie,
Of whom they might eternal joy and perdons dearly buie.
And least themselves should hear be thought to dote and wander wide,
They do declare by every sign, what thing is signifide,
As if they Moses vestures were, and God had them assignde,
And not the trifles fond of men, and fancies of the mind.
The Bishops part is learning sound, into the Church to bring,
And not the foolish signifyings, and shadows of the thing,
That doting heads have erst deuisde, and foolish minds of men:
No gold, nor pomp, nor strange attire becomes this house or them.
They ought not of the Church to make a Stage or Theatere,
Nor for to prick or prancke themselves, in such disguised gear.
But all the popish state almost consists in this degree,
Of trifles such as thou thy self anon shall plainly see.
Thus armde at last with every piece the Bishop comes in,
Aproching to the Altar hie, with countnaunce ferce and grim:
Whom scarce his weighty clothes permits, to draw his breath at all,
Or for to pass with any pace, or any moving small.
But who is able then to show the iesture strange, and grace,
And shuffling up and down of Clerks, herein from place to place?
With what a great solempnitie, he liftes his look on hie?
His Myter now he puts of, and on immediately,
And at his hand there stands one with still attentive eyes,
To put it on and of again, according to the guise.
Sometime he stands, sometime he sittes, and sweetly often does kiss,
His Altar, Chalice, Book, and Glass, enclosed here for this.
Some whiles upon the left side of the Altar does he stand,
And straight from thence he fiskes again unto the other hand.
From thence unto the midst he goes, and once again^ away
To the left side, then to the midst, where ends at last the play.
Sometime he musing stands still, as fastened to the ground,
And mumbling with a secret voice, himself he turns round.
Now both his hands, a sunder far upon the Alter lie,
And strayte ways both together ioynde, he liftes them up on hye,
And shortly spredeth them again, and both he thrusts forth,
The one directly to the South, the other to the North.
Now down upon the ground he stares, and then he patters often,
And suddenly he starteth up, and castes his eyes aloft.
A thousand Crosses then he makes, and blesses every place,
For fear least that some saucy spirit his doings might disgrace.
None otherwise his Ministers that round about him stand,
Do handle all their holy rightes, and always are at hand,
Who Cushions soft of Silk, whereon to lay his books, do bring,
And Frankenscence in every place, with Ce^sers sweet they fling,
And Candeles, Crosses, Banners, all they bear, and wait upon,
And shoulders, books, and hands they kiss, and eke the Altar stone.
One up a lofte the patten holds, enclosde in silken veil,
Who ever stands, behind his back, to see what thing does fail.
An other to the people turnde, in tune full strange does cry,
Such words as scarcely any there, knows what he means thereby.
Which chiefest is above the reast, the Bishop all alone,
Does eat and drink, and gives no part, thereof to any one,
Nor any seeks thereof to have, so much these fellows way,
Their high and holy mysteryes, that bear so great aswaye.
Of all these things what profit can there to the people rise?
They are but trumprye and deceytes, to daze the foolish eyes.
Yet is the same the greatest thing, and holiest aye by much,
Nor any better service has the papacy then such.
What seekst thou than? may these things faith, or godliness be thought
Has ever them our master chief commanded, wild, or tought?
The scriptures read, and look what Christ, has us appointed there,
Go search thappostles orders well, from first and farthest year,
Which in their acts and writings they unto the world did leave,
Thou shall no such thing ever see, nor any like perceive.
Both Baptism and the Supper of the Lord they evermore,
Did purely in one sort observe, according to their lore:
Ne playde the fools with gesture strange, and foolish trifles vain,
Nor counterfeited Princes thus, with guard and stately train.
Yea some of them there are that when they to the altar go, The Bishop of
Herbipolis.

A sword before them carried is, and set before them so:
That men may know that power they have, as well as Princes great
To use the sword, and upon life to sit in judgment seat,
What makes fury here? what does the bloody sword upon,
The altar mylde, a place of peace? the holy room whereon,
The blessed sacraments of peace, ought always to be done,
There stands a lofte the fearful signs, of deadly wars begone,
And where the sweet forgiveness of, our sins we ought to have, 8. q. 1.
Qui episcopatum. D. 36. Si quis. D. 84. peruenit. 2. q. 7* Non. omnes. D. 45.
Quid autem.

There stands the Bishop to revenge, and threaten slaughters brave,
A worthy thing to join that does, pertain to God and man,
How can they so? he should be sure, a worthy Bishop than.
If that he would behave himself, as old decrees him teach,
And leaving sword, and feats of war, would give himself to preach
I marvel they suppose that things, that thus contrary be,
Should join in one, and that the Myter should with sword agree.
As if of Moses and of Christ, one person they should frame,
Whereof the one draws out the sword, and fiercely shakes the same.
The other puttes it up, and does forbid all his to kill.
The one appoynteth laws severe, and penalties at will,
The other settes his free from all, content but one to make,
Releaseth all offenses here, and sins away does take.
The one a Minister of death, a Prince revenging rife,
The other author still of peace, and gyuer here of life.
But Anius long agone was both, a Priest and eke a King,
In deed we are come to such a pass, as now in every thing,
The orders of the Heathen vain, and rytes we do receive,
And follow all the foolishness, that they to us did leave.
Nay fonder things by much we feign, then ever they could find,
At Christ they only seem to laugh, and count his words but wind.
But whether pass I now my bounds? it was not mine intent,
For to refell each foolish thing, that shameless Priests invent,
But to resite them here for such, as knew them not before,
Whereby they might delighted be, and laugh at them the more.
Some sort there are that better like, in Princes courts to look,
Then poorly for to preach of Christ, and pore upon a book.
They commonly of counsel are, the weightiest things that be,
Are done by them: they Councillors are, and sit in hie degree.
By whom the kingdoms most are ruled, in every Parliament,
They give their voice, and nothing passes void of their consent.
They look to vittayling of Camps, when bloody wars do reign,
Or take some matter such in hand, as does to Dukes pertain.
A wondrous thing it is that Kings, these men so much does need,
As if there were not of the laytie, skillful men in deed:
Whom good experience well has taught, and who by learning can,
Sufficiently deserve the things, that long to God or man.
Do they desire their doings should, at Rome reported be,
And nothing of their council kept, at home in priuitie.
But that unto the holy father, strayte it should be borne,
To whom they swear, who does discharge such as before have sworn?
What has the commonwealth beside, to be asurde of them,
That they shall trusty be, and with their counsel help the realm?
They neither wife nor children have, for whom they should prepare*
And for their own posterity, they have no cause to care.
Nor howses of their own they have, nor any kind of lands,
But have the fruits of other men, and toil of strangers hands.
Being free from care of any loss, yea though the skies should fall,
Or realms, or people perish quite, they take no hurt at all.
They strayte can out of goneshot be, and far from danger lie,
And safe from secret dens they can, such hurlyburlyes fly.
O blessed happy court whereas, no Bishop ever is,
It is no place for any such, they are not calde to this.
And therefore nothing prospers well, that they do undertake,
Their hapless hands in every thing, unhappy work do make.
To every Bishop chief there does, belong a Suffragan, Suffragans.

Which name I think Apollo scarce, can tell from whence it came,
But sure I am his masters turn, he serves continually,
He bishops children, halowes aultars, and Church and Chapels by*
He blesses all the Popish sort, and always does provide,
In every parish oyled Priests, the people for to guide.
The threefoulde oil and water in, the Font he haloweth,
And stones and fire and many such, and belles he christeneth.
These Pageants evermore he makes, rewarded for his pain,
Though not so much he get thereby, as Roscius wont to gain.
This man does buy some title for, a hundred Crowns or two,
Of some old ruinous Church defaste in Turkye long ago,
Whereto he dare not once come near, much less to preach or teach,
And show himself a Bishop there, within his enemies reach.
Yet falsely does he swear that he, would shortly visit it,
And do his duty, if it be peace, and Turks will him permit.
But herein does no danger lie, he meant not such a thing,
To preach abroad, and wandering sheep of Christ in fold to bring.
But idleness and slothful life, this only seeks he,
And therefore from his oath he is dischargde at liberty.
And whyther he list he may go walk, with title fond and vain,
And labor for an other man, rewarded for his pain*
Are not these same right goodly things, and follyes great the while,
And foolish fancyes and deceytes, that all the world beguile?
Yet this good man is also sworn at first full solemnly,
For to defend the Popes decrees, and all his orders hie.
If now at any time he preach, which if he should not often,
He scarcely could maintain himself, nor come to look aloft,
He shows how that he neither seeks the glory of Christ alone,
Or peoples health but only how, ta'duaunce the Popish throne.
Therefore its always good such sworn companions to eschew,
For surely unto both their masters, can they not be true,
Especially if they descent, and sundry things do preach,
As known it is the Pope and Christ, contrary clean do teach.
What if I here should call to mind, the foolish parts he plays,
When as he haloweth Churches or some solemn service says?
A matter long it is to tell, some part therefore I will
Declare: Democratus draw near, here may thou laugh thy fill.
All others voyded from the Church, that thus shall hallowed be,
The Sexten only there remaynes, enclosed secretly.
The doors are shut and Tapers twelve, before the Crosses light,
Do stand, and twelve within the Church, are ever burning bright,
Himself without the Bishop stands, with pomp, and proud array,
And haloweth water first with salt, which pretty kind of play,
If from the Jews or Gentiles first, it came I cannot tell,
But Moses always used the water as it came from Well.
Then thrice about the Church he walks, and thrice does water cast,
Upon the walls, and thrice upon the door he knockes at last,
With crooked staff, and of the Psalm with dreadful voice does cry,
Lift up your gates, supposing that, six hundred Devils do lie
Within the Church. The Sexten strayte, for them does answer make,
With roaring voice: what king is this, that thus does on him take?
And then as though the Devils all, should therewith give him place,
The Clarke vnbarring strayte the gate, he enters in a pace,
Accompanied with few that happily worthy are to see,
Such mysteries: the rest shut out, that so unworthy be.
Then on the saints he calls, and on the ground does staring stand,
And makes a cross with Ashes strawde, or if it lack with sand.
Then Latin letters paintes he fair, and great ilfauourdlye,
And Hebrew woorst of all by much, a tongue for them to hye.
Forthwith he coniures water new, the first no more of might,
With salt and wine and ashes small, and every solemn right.
To halowe there the Altar hie, at last he sets out,
Twelve crosses thereupon, annoynting it with oil about.
In this sort every altar great, is hallowed evermore,
But holy water is always one, among the things before.
Then on each corner of the altar, crosses does he set,
With water drawn, and seven times about it does he iette.
And seven times upon the table, sprinckleth water clear,
Then every corner of the sepulcher, is signde with crosses here,
(A four square hole this sepulcher, amid the table is,
Made out by Art) and all with Chrisme anointed, after this
His relics there he does enclose, and certain franckenscence,
And of the table places five, with solemn reverence:
He does annoint not only with oil, but with his cream divine,
And last as children are confirmde, so does he likewise ^ine,
With cross and cream the aultars brave: are not these wondrous sightes
Are they not wondrous mysteries? these fond and foolish rightes,
The idleness of learned men, that lived long ago,
Brought forth, and eke their monstrous pride, wherewith provoked the,
They much despisde the common sort, and making them to gaze,
They found out first these foolish toys, the simple eyes to daze.
Like ceremonies does he use, while as he does repair, Giving of orders.

The shaven sort and fine young impes, does plant in kingdom fair,
As every one by name is calde, together stand they theare,
Clad all in Albes, for so they term the vesture that they wear.
The Bishop does demand if that they good and virtuous be,
And whether they are learnde and meet, to take this great degree.
The Officer does answer strayte, with plain and open voice,
That learnde and worthy both they are, and men of perfect choice.
Whom erst before he never saw, nor of their names has thought.
Then strayte unto the Acoluth, from th'aultar down is brought,
A Candle and a Candlestick, and here they do resight,
How in the Church his office is, the Candles still to light.
And bear about, an empty Cr^^^t put they in his hands,
Wherewith to give the Priest his wine, whilst at his Mass he stands
Yet does he it not, nor place there is where this is lookte unto,
Besides each lay man when he list, this holy thing may do.
Yet for the same his crown is shorn, and hear is cut away,
Nor wear it in that place of length, he ever after may.
The Coniurer receyues the book, and is commanded there,
To learn the thing conteynde therein, and well away to bear,
And for to cast out Devils by, his power and force divine:
He minds it not, nor of the same does ever see a line.
For claspt it is deliuerd him, and claspt from thence again,
Unto the altar is it borne, whereas it does remain.
He drives no Devils out of men, nor dare the matter prove,
So that this great authority, does serve to no behoue.
The reader then perhaps does take the Testament in hand,
To teach the people plain the word of God to understand.
He reads not, nor h^ble is sometime, nor seeks to be,
No certain place appointed is, nor hour him to se.
The Dorekeeper instructed than, what things he ought ^o do,
When as this office great of weight, he there does come unto.
The Church door keys in hand he takes, and to the door does bear,
A hempen rope with laughter great, of all that see him there.
Hereby he lea^nes his duty is, to shut with diligence
The doors, to keep the hallowed things, and drive the wicked thence.
Yet none of all the same he does, nor suffered thus to stand,
Yet is there stir as if there were some wondrous thing in hand,
When as the new made Priests cannot, their laughter here restrain
But most of all the common sort, and foolish people vain.
What should I speak of all things now? I am ashamed here,
To wear my pen and spend the time, about such foolish gere.
For all their holiness consistes in vestures and in books,
And putting stoa^es about their necks, with lewd and apish looks.
On all their left hands every one, a labell hangs down,
The Priests their fingers grease, ye Bishops hands, and thumbs and crown.
But here there is a great a do, a weighty matter plain,
To see the oyntmentes drop not down, nor on their heads remain.
Each Priest with rubbing dryes his hands, and after that with sand,
Or ashes skouring thoroughly clean, each finger of his hand.
Then bread unto the altar from the Oven whote is brought,
And cut in sundry sippets small, in order there is wrought.
Which on the Bishops greasy pate, in solemn sort they lay,
And thus dry up the ointment there, and take it clean away.
So careful are they for these things, that are not worth a straw,
That never an hour do they leave, for faith and christian law,
When as they christen belles: that man has sure a brazen mind,
That can forbear to laugh and does, not think them Asses blind,
Who grudgeth not with all his heart, that wickedness of time,
For gain has brought it unto this, that that most blessed sign,
Which shows how we received are, as servant here of Christ,
And pressed to fight against the world, as soldier of the highest,
Should with a senseless creature be, defilde before our face,
With such add, and by a man of such a solemn grace?
The people round about resort, on every side that be
Together, mo^de with one desire, this wondrous sight to see,
And warned by the wardens of the Church before the day,
The Godfathers are present in their best and chief array.
And some there are that so desire, this honor for to have,
That of themselves they challenge it, and earnestly do crave.
Of these the number is not small, a hundred shall thou see,
Two hundred yea, three hundred if the bell so worthy be.
Then forth at last the Bishop comes in all his wonted gear,
And praying fast he halloweth first, with salt the water clear.
For without this he has no power, though in the day time bright,
A number great of Tapers stand, about him always light.
When as he long has prayed here, he wills them down to fall,
Upon their knees and unto God, to pray in general,
That he vouchsafe to grant this bell, a happy christendom,
A lustye sound to drive away the dangers all that come.
Anointed then it is in places such as needful be,
And where the Priest is pleased, for in all parts they not agree.
Then biddes he them declare the name, (for as they children name,
So name they belles in every point) and when he knows the same,
He poures on water lustily, and thrice he does it wet,
And then with holy Chrisme he does, his crosses thereon set*
Then straytwayes thereupon he puttes, a lynnen Crysome white,
A vesture such as children wear, when first they come to light.
And now the Godfathers begin, to stir about and toil,
To touch and pluck it up a loft, from out the sacred soil.
But with their hands they cannot all come near it now by much,
Therefore with ropes they hale and hoyse, and so far of do touch:
And think they have done sufficiently, then gifts they offer all,
Unto their christen daughter, gold, and silver therewithal.
Each one would then seem rich, and strives the other to excel,
Hangde up in steeple hie, they feast, and joy that this same bell
Has thus receyude her christendom, and all that day throughout,
They celebrate with drink and play, and daunsing round about,
With vomiting, and oftentimes, with brawling and with fight,
And wanton iestures herewithall, and each unseemly sight.
What thing more foolish can thou tell, or have thou seen before,
Of great and small committed thus, and with religious lore?
In fine regard this Suffragan, in all his matters hie,
What thing soever he does, it may be laughed at worthily.
For take from him his sprinckle, and his oil, and iesturs all,
And that which in the Grecian tongue, they Crisma use to call:
Thou have vnarmde him utterly, and spoylde him of his grace,
That now he is not worth a point, in any kind of place.
And as both Popes and Cardnalles with, their pomp and passing pride
And welthy Bishops fat, even so, these kind of men beside,
The Church of Christ full well may spare, with loss and damage small
For shame, and hurtes, and burdens are, they to the people all.
Regarding only this, that praise and glory here assinde
To Christ, in darcknesse deep to hide, and keep the people blind.
FINIS.
The popish Kingdom The.ij. Book.
Perchance you look I should declare, their Consistories here,
The warehouse chief of all their fraud, and foul deceitful gere.
Consistories.

Whereas for money crooked things, are made direct and plain
And black is changed into white, and white to black again.
As pleases him that fightes with Fees, and gives them gold at will.
Such pregnaunt wit have Doctors there, and such the Proctors skill.
Where gaynes grow not, with long delay, untried there hanges ye case,
And where the Suitor is but poor, and comes not of a pace.
With gifts they do begin to feel, and plye the case again,
And prosecute it then as long, as they see gifts remain.
Here justice seldom time is seen, but such as Plutos might
Procures, for gold with weight and show, weies down both law and right.
By this they break such marriages, as Gods decrees do knit,
And join again in wicked sort, such as are most unfit:
Without advice of Parents had, contracted secretly,
Or fautie for some other cause, or lewd infirmity.
Often times the cause requires such filthy deeds and tales to tell,
As chaste and honest ears cannot, abide to harken well.
Hereat they laugh a pace and wondrously themselves delight
That thou would swear they only sought, with this to cheer their spright*
If that the wife be found to be, an harlot openly,
And from her husband, with some beastly knave away does fly,
An other wife although the poor vnguiltie man desire,
He cannot have though needful lust, and household it require.
But is constraynde to seek a hoore, in countries far to rome,
With charges great and hindraunce of his business at home.
And after her in every place, to ask where she has strayde,
In Churches, markets, and in towns, to crave the Rulers aid.
Whom if he cannot find, they grant, with great ado and strife,
That he another woman take, but yet not as his wife.
But if that after many years, the harlot come again,
And wearied with her lewd companions, seeks to remain,
At home, she has her place although, the husband it deny,
As loath to leave the other for her fruit and honesty.
These laws no books of God do teach, but toys of mortal brain,
And dreams of Popes wherewith the world, defiled does remain.
Officialles.
A member is there of this same, the polling Official,
And no small man he, is but one, that guides and rules all.
Him must you please and always bribe, and bring him money still,
If that you will your business frame, according to your will.
This fellow for the Bishop holds, and hurles the flashing flame,
And troubles men when often times, no cause requires the same.
Wherefore if any time thou hapst, for to be cited here,
Be sure that when thou comst thou do, some worthy present bear,
And so thou shall with joy depart, and better satisfide,
By much then if thy cause were good, or laws were on thy side.
Who does deny but money often, corrupts the common place?
But polshorne Priests exceedes them all, in any bribing case.
This kingdom has an endelesse pit, whose dampes that dreadful be
Have burst abroad and drawn the wealth of all the world we see.
The eger Kite so follows not the Chickens here with care,
Ne lusty Egle does pursue, the faint and fearful Hare,
As do these men hang out their nets, abroad for greedy gain,
And lay their baits in every place, the simple sort to train.
Cannons.
But to the Cannons let us come, who for the most part all,
Are Gentlemen descended from some old and ancient hall.
In old time only for such men, as learned were and good,
Though of the common sort they were, this place appointed stood.
Which men the people well could teach, and help in every thing,
And truly prea^he the word of God, and serve the almighty king.
But when that riches once had hatched, Dame idleness with care,
Nobility respe^ting ease, and dainty Lordely fare,
Put out the common sort, although they learnde and Godly were.
And sent them to less holiness, and to more painful gere.
These men about their shoulders wear, the skins that hearie be,
Of beasts hangde round about with tails, a proper thing to see.
Sometime in mantels black they go, according to the time,
As though they mournd, when as no grief, their pleasant heart does pine.
They muse why they should laughed at be: who would not laugh to skorne
Such foolish weeds, which if a man should wear that were not shorn:
The very boys with rotten Eggs, and dirt would him beray^,
Or to Phisition^ would his friends, go send him where he may*
Be purged of this humor mad, with pocions two or three,
These men suppose themselves great folks, and worshipped to be.
They nothing have to do, but that to Church sometime they come,
Arayde in linen weeds and Cowles, with frowning countnance glome.
Or in their Catskin whoodes with tails, and woonted iesture proud,
Whereas their hours Canonical, they chaunt and sing alowde,
And that alonely with their lips not praying with their mind,
This same is all their godly life* by which such wealth they find.
What profit they the people here, what gains the Church hereby?
Or may it not forbear these men, as well as may the eye
Forbear the web and painful pearl? and be as well without,
As may the perfect foot remain, without the feeble gout?
What would they do? how could they come, to be such ^olly men,
If Damassus the Pope of old, had not devised them?
Their hours canonical and eke, decreede with statutes sore,
No Priest should eat his bread at home, and take no pains therefore?
They should be mainetainde for their whoodes, and foolish fond array,
And kept as idle l^^bers still, for pastime and for play.
And in some places so they are, for (tender Sowles) they have got,
Least yt with daily singing they, should strain their stratcht out throtte
Some other in their romes do sing, whom Quier men they call, Quier men.

These men for money do dispatch, the seven hours and all,
Though never a word they understand, for gain is all their cheer,
Although it be but small for which it is a wondrous work to hear
How joyfully they ringe it out, and fill the Church with noise,
How each one strives for to excel, the other with his voice.
Thou would suppose they all were drunk, or some reward thereby,
For which they strive with all their might, to get the victory.
By means of these the Cannons are, dischargde of burden great,
And scarce at hours, or mass they sit, thus silent in their seat.
And only hearers now they are: yea this does seem a pain,
And labor great unto these men, which scarcely they sustain.
They rather choose to sit by fire, and talk and chat at will,
Than for to dull their ears with Psalms, whereof they have no skill.
And saving on the holy days, the Church they come not at,
For present there they money have, and none but lyketh that.
Yet scarcely can they tarry till, their money given be,
Which done, they go and leave the Church, to such as hired be.
These are the toils and trauayles great, for which of charity,
Great gifts they have, fair houses build, and masters called be.
Besides at home they Parots keep, and Apes and Munckeys store,
And Hawks and Hounds with horse, that well are furnished evermore.
And never seeks for to re^^raine, the pleasures of their mind,
A thing that common is almost, to all the Popish kind.
Besides a people lewd there is, a hateful sort withal,
Curtisans.
Whom as I hear and understand, they Curtisans do call,
Who running from their masters or, their parents in dispite,
Do come to Rome all ragde and torn, in miserable plite,
And to some Cardnalles stable creep, or to some Bishop great,
And keep their horse, themselves y^ while being almost starued for meat:
Till after many years, and many labors past and known,
Their masters mind to help them there, though nothing with their own
(For all the Popish court does love, such servant as do live,
Without wages, and always readier are to take than give.
They nothing count a thousand Crowns to spend in pomp and pride
And grudge their man a coat or cloak, n^w half with cold destride.
Such charity is at Rome) therefore according to their guise,
They make them Priests, and after yt they have taught them to be wise,
They send them to their country strayte, with Bulls and license all,
Whereas such Prebendes now they take, as in some ^outhes do fall.
(But here they have heddes alone, the Gripe does not so swiftly snatche,
The carcass vile, nor does the fire, so soon the tinder catch,
Nor Owl that in the day time here, does happen for to sing,
With loathsome shape the wondering birds, about her flocking bring.)
They are straight at hand, and (...) the mouth unto the Pope assinde,
And of their licenses do boast, with lo^t (...).
Who so denies, is thratned ^ore, with law and cruel strife,
And court of Rome, where Popish aid and favor still is rife.
Who so will here to trouble bring himself, and loss withal,
Who so will wast for Charters vain, and smacke such popish gall,
And go to Rome about the cause, to seek uncertain shifts,
And think for to repeal the grant, for money and for gifts,
(When right has no prerogative) this surely were the part
Of one that had his purse at will, or else a lusty heart.
The Patron here amazed stands, repyning secretly,
To be deprived of his right, and take such injury.
Such as are good and learnd give place, and dare not here contend,
With Monsters such, nor go to Rome to try the final end.
Yet are they not content with one, the value being great,
But seize upon some other such, with fraud and like deceat.
As Well unto their masters use, as to their own behoue,
That they may show what thankful minds they have, and how they love.
Such preetie Begles have these Bishops still in every place,
That hunt out Prebendes fat for them, and follow fresh the chase.
And some of them hereby augment their living very much,
And fill their Coffers many times by bringing in of such.
But resident these Courtiers are, and many times there dwell,
Sometime again forsaking all, their benifice they sell,
And home to Rome they run as fast, and graunts they purchase new,
Of Prebendes such as other Months do happen to be due.
Sometime reserving nothing to themselves, they secretly
Do sell and put them all away not fearing Symony.
For laws they wey not here a rushe, they care for nothing than,
And no man fear, but rather fearde they are of every man.
In Rome they only put their trust, and for the place alone
They think men must be fearde, and here they count themselves at home.
Some others get these Prebendes by a strange and wondrous way,
Their grauntes obtaynde, and month well markde they change their own array.
And cou^terfeyt the countriman, or else some beggars state,
Till that the Church door open stand, or else the Prebend gate,
And on the aultare straight they leap, each man amazde to see,
What monstrous act shall there be showed, or pageaunt played be.
And tell the people there, that by the Popes authority,
They hold the Prebend longing to that Church and altar hie.
Desiring both the Patron, and the people all and some,
They trouble him not, nor rashely deal, least that they come to Rome.
That of the Popes bequestes they there will thus possession take,
What would you more? the derie name does make them all to quake.
The Patron straight gives place, and he, to whom he meant the same,
The Sea of Rome does make them all to tremble at the name.
They list not strive so far from home, nor would they cited be,
And both consume their goods and time with men of no degree.
Thus enter they into the house, as men that make no doubt,
Commanding such as there do dwell, to get them straightwayes out.
And to deliver up the keys, according to their will,
For shameless fortune always helps such lusty fellows still.
Perhaps thou think they learning have, and can sufficiently
Both guide and teach, whereby the people have no harm thereby.
Thou art deceyude, but few are learnde. The greatest part that be,
Scarce understand a learned word, nor can their A.B.C.
As men that late from rubbing of a horses heels are brought,
And never came in company where Grammar rules are taught.
Some scarce do know the vulgar speech, nor can the peoples tongue,
That all men hate them worthily, and both the old and young
Do curse the orders fond of Rome, that thus devised arre,
As things that trouble all the world, and all estates do mar.
Parsons.
There Parsons also are, that in the villages remain,
And in the towns, that justly do their offices obtain.
Some part of them are learnde and good, and some unlearned be,
And far unmeet for to attain unto so hie degree.
Their duty is to preach unto the people earnestlye,
And minister the sacraments, and other matters hye.
If any profit of the popish sort might come unto
The people, ^urely these were they that should the matter do.
Nor should they ydlely live at home, but must their books apply,
Except they would be counted blind, and laughed at commonly.
But since the Pope subverted has all right in general,
And has with loathsome poison stuffed and staynde his members all:
These also teach no doctrine pure, but all with poison dressed
And mingled ^^ill, which e^^st they drew and suc^te from mothers breast.
As dreams and superstitions great, and childishe service vain,
And many lewd ungodly things invented all for gain.
They can not only Christ regard, while thus the matter stands,
Nor unto heaven bring the souls committed to their hands.
Them lettes the great respect to Rome, and eke the Pope their head,
One of no small account, a man of kings and princes dread.
Besides the great agreement of such as in Pulpets speak.
A matter hard it is such bars and stoppes of truth to break:
And for a man to strive against his profit and his gain,
No mischief without lucre is, nor superstition vain.
Wherefore it does endure, and yet is kept unto this day,
With tooth and nail in every place, and maintainde every way.
So that the simple people get no kind of good thereby,
But nusseled from their youth by these, in vile Idolatry.
What should I tell you how they use their services divine,
With man's inventions all defilde, corrupted with the time?
And how they have set out a book full of such filthiness,
From which to tread an inch awry they count a wickedness.
Their doctrine and their dealings all, with filth defiled lie,
And greater hurt the people take, than fruit or gain thereby.
For not alonely does the Preacher here the word declare
Untruly to the people, but often leaving it, does square
And spend the time about complaints and railing openly
If any have defamed him, or have not worthily
Him honored. If any have their tithes not duly brought.
In fine what wrong or injury against the man is wrought:
The Pulpet streightwayes rings thereof, and all the Church does sound
Of raylings, and of spiteful words, his chief and greatest ground.
Amongst them some there are that to the people do foretell,
If Springtime, Summer, Harues^, or the Winter happen well:
What store of Wheat shall be, and of the other courser grain,
How Mast shall prove, and how the Vine shall yield her fruit again.
Besides of wars and sicknesses, of plagues and other gear
They tell, to which the people give a more attentive ear
By much, then if he there should speak of Christ or godliness,
Of faith, good works, or of the law, and perfect holiness.
Some tell again the Turks affairs, or of the Emp^ours wars,
Of Spain, of France, of Venice, or of lusty Myllanarres.
And fill the peoples ears with this, till time be finished,
But most when of the Gospel they ill fauouredly have red.
Some part where of their duty were to see the people taught,
And to expound it openly: then in the dead are brought,
And beadroll long recited is, of every bodies name
For which they are paid, supposing thus to escape the feigned flame.
Lo this their doctrine is, and this is all the care they have,
In serving of the almighty Lord, whose service they deprave.
Then out of hand to Mass they go, and dine in heathnish wise,
That is not having faith, content with old accustomde guise.
When dinners done, to th'alehouse straight they go as merry as Pyes,
And tipple with their neighbors there, or else some sport deuyes.
To pass the time with Cards and dice, or with some wanton talk,
Whereas a note above them all, their tongue does always walk.
These also should dispatch their hours and service orderly,
Which they let pass, except they see some worthy company*
Abroad into the fields they walk themselves for to disport,
And view the corn or hear some tales, to make the time more short.
And least the nights should seem to long, each one at home does keep,
A pleasant Dame that in his arms all night does sweetly sleep.
Lo thus they spend their time, and on this sort do always live.
The holy Ghost unto the elect true godliness must give.
And even in their dying hour must Christ to them disclose,
The mean that sa^de our fathers long ago as I suppose:
Whereby they wonderously escapde the darkness that was then:
For surely none shall saved be, by means of these same men.
Monks.
Tell on good Muses for the swarms of Monks do yet remain,
And not the meanest members of this same most holy reign.
These men forsaking clean the world, and lothing all things hear
Attire themselves in strange array, and certain colors wear.
And frame themselves a rule to live, and follow euerychone,
As if so be the rule of Christ sufficed not alone.
And with their threefolde solemn ^owes (...) the towns they go,
Or to some desert place (...) of (...) people tho.
And by their proper force they think unto the Skies to clime,
And escape the everlasting chains of death for deadly crime.
Whereby they show the wickedness that in their heart does lie,
And how they wey not Christ nor yet his famous victory.
Moreover to their own good works they arrogantly cleave,
And of their merits great they vaunt the people to deceive.
And notably they have deceyude, not only simple men,
With their hypocrisy, but also kings, persuading them
To buy their merits and desartes of price and value great,
And how they should be sure to save their souls, and have a seat
Above the Stars, if they would build them gorgious houses hie,
And give them lands to feed their paunch, and fat themselves, whereby
They might consume their days and spend their life at ease, and well,
And strive the Dormowses themselves in sleeping to excel.
For what thing else do they regard, or ever do apply?
The little children in the streets these things can testify.
They vaunt how that they worship God, and service daily sing,
And how they pray and often fast (an acceptable thing.)
Who does not wonder at these things, and at these trauayles told,
And think them worthy of such wealth and Dukedoms here to hold.
As many kings have given them, and Dukes in elder days?
A goodly kind of worship sure, and much deserving praise.
While as they chaunt up Psalms aloude, whereof they have no skill,
And pray with lips and not with heart, and Church with noyses fill.
Nor other men's afflictions now they way that thus have sped,
Who will suppose that they can care that thus in dreams are ded?
Therefore they are no prayers at all, but voices lewd and vain,
As when the hungry hogs do grunt that in the s^ie remain.
But often do they fast, and flesh and whitmeates bothforbeare,
So always used to dainty fair, they count it fasting hear.
If that two meals they do not eat the shortest days that be,
And be not served at supper with the daintiest meats they see.
Such monstrous dinners do they make, that fullness does compel,
Their girdles for to let at large whiles as their bellies swell,
Like Horseleaches or loathsome Tickes, that swell with filthy blood,
Great fishes do they hear devour, who can prepare so good
A meal of flesh, or will desire with eggs for to be fed,
While as the Table with such store of fish is furnished?
Besides with pleasant Wines they fill themselves, and qua^^e amain,
Till red about the gilles they look, and belch it up again.
That this may fasting called be, both Milo will deny,
And eke Apitius, he that was the Prince of gluttony,
And all the Catian school, and eke the troop of Jews beside,
And of the very Turks themselves, it will be sure denide.
These men yet with hypocrisy, and cloak of holiness,
Have brought the people, Kings, and Dukes, unto such foolishness,
That they supposde them chaste and good, and far from worldly men
In all their deeds, and bought good works, and heaven eke of them.
O strong illusions, and deceytes, O miserable tide,
That brought these men, as if there were not ylles enough beside.
But wherefore should they leave the world, and fly from company,
And hide themselves in Forrestes thus, and in the desartes lie?
Because it is corrupted quite, and bent to wicked lore?
Who does deny? But therefore has it need a great deal more
To have Physicians still at hand, that good and faithful be,
And able are for every sore to give a remedy.
And not such fellows as will run away for lothsomnesse:
And shaken with the fever, leave his pacient in distress.
In darkness lives? More needs it the light of holy men,
As Christ sometime did lighten it, and his Disciples then.
Or do they think that they shall stain their life with company,
Where they may lead a Godly life, and well themselves apply?
No flight can this procure, but faith and virtuous pacient mind,
That can resist the raging storms of any blustering wind.
Daniel that dwelt at Babylon, and many Jews beside,
Whose minds were always godly bent, and faithful often were tried,
Amidst the Gentiles godly liude, and served God arightes:
So Loath did likewise lead his life among the Sodomites.
And Joseph ruled Egypt well, observing every iotte
Of Moses law, and chastely kept his mind from any spotte.
For if they alter not their minds, that over Seas do run,
No woods nor wilderness shall cause this same for to be done.
But rather shall they more infect, and worser much shall stain
The minds of men addicted thus, to fond traditions vain.
The spirit there oppressed is, ne can they lift their eyes
Aloft to view the way that leads directly to the skies.
Besides more worldly minds they have, and of more wanton chere,
Than worldly men. Naught in the world is done, but Monks are there.
If that the Counsel for the commonwealth assembled be,
They are present there, and give out laws by their aucthoritee.
In wars they be, on Princes camps they evermore attend,
And towns of force and Castles strong, with weapons they defend:
If any wedding great be had, they are present still at hand,
If any Church be dedicate, they present there do stand.
Then has the Comedy all her parts. What should I here resight
Their riot, pomp, and passing pride, and all their fond delight,
Which does declare their wicked mind? what helps their strange array,
And crown shorn down unto their ears, and houses from the way?
Since that of Monks the world may learn, a worldly life to frame,
And so is forced, and has no means for to eschew the same.
It gladly would, and seeks often, of them for to be rid,
But fast as Burres to wool they stick, or Sowtars wax in third.
If they themselves would shun the world, and far from thence would fly,
And in the frosen Northren parts, would altogether lie,
A better thing to please the world, they never could invent,
Nor any thing devise that would the people more content.
But now regard their threefolde vows, how ill they do^ agree,
And in their life how lewdly they unmeet observed be.
They vow t'obbay their Abbot, or their Prior placed hie,
Which Abbot if he virtuous be, and godliness apply,
(As seldom haps) and do command such things as God does will,
Why should he not obeyed be, and had in honor still?
We all are bound that at the Font receive our Christendom,
To hear such men as truly teach the trade of life to come.
No vows we need, or shaven crowns such men for to obey,
Nor for to change our clothing here, to strange and fond array.
But if he neither godly be, nor godliness do teach,
But foolish fancies of his own, and man's decrees do preach:
Then is it sure a wickedness, to vow or to obey.
Such as in bondage bring the heart, and teach to run astray.
Their whole religion does consist in singing day and night,
In rules of life and sundry laws and gestures fond and light.
As if that God such worship likde, deuisde by mortal brain,
Or rather had not plainly taught that all such stuff is vain.
But wherefore stand I hereupon, and words in vain bestow?
Since all the popish kingdom here no better things do know?
All men are bound to chastity, but for to shun the state
Of blessed marriage, and the bed that is immaculate,
We then shall be of force when as no lust in us does reign,
And when no raging heat of flesh, does force our feeble brain.
But now how chaste they live, the boys in every street can tell,
And Citizens are sore afraid, when nere to them they dwell.
What should I other things declare, that honest ears and chaste,
Could not abide to hear, nor of such loathsome things to taste?
Why boast they so of poverty, does virtue herein lie?
Can none but poor men godly live, and up to heaven fly?
When as the poor man has as many lettes in living well,
As has the richest man alive, that others do excel.
But poverty they fowly scorn, and shamefully deride,
As Well in Lordly fare, as in their pomp and passing pride.
And in their vows and wicked life, they plainly do express,
That neither God nor man they wey, nor any vertuousnesse.
What if I should their sundry sorts the better this to see,
Unknown to men it is infinite, and eke a vanity.
So many sundry sects there are, that differ only hear
In rules, and ceremonies fond, and wearing of their gear.
In this they all do iumpe agree, their Popish trifles vain,
And rules of him that first deuisde in order them to train.
To set before the will of Christ and through their own desartes,
They think to escape the pit of hell, and all those painful smartes.
But presently I will divide them altogether here,
Into two only sorts, that so they plainly may appear.
Rich Monks.
To such as rich and welthie are, and such as beggars be,
Appointed by their rules to beg, and by the Popes decree.
Those welthie are, whom long ago some mighty Princes hands,
Or Noble man has granted here, revenues great, and lands,
Large fields, with meadows fair, and towns, and parks, and purlues large,
With vineyardes great, and villages, and Castles strong of charge,
And Earledomes oftentimes for them did carefully provide,
And gave them Lordely liberties, and Dukedomes whole beside,
That throw their prayers and lewd deserts, they might their souls releue
And purge themselves of every crime, that did their conscience grieve.
That for these same these gifts were given, and this was all their care,
The grauntes of Dukes, and Princes great, at this day do declare.
Persuaded were they that the bliss, and joys of heaven hie,
In merits of this Monkish sort, and Popish power did lie.
This madness long ago possessed the world when as did sit,
Amidst the Church proud Antichrist, and ruled and gouernde it.
What need these Monks such riches great? themselves to punish here
With fasting often and penury, and simple slender chere?
And to attain humility, in mind and outward show,
Still mourning (as they boast) the sins, that in the world do flow?
Far otherwise falls out the case, their Founders should have known,
They punish here their flesh until with fat they are ouergrowne,
Whereto their fained fastings tend, none has more merry mind,
Than have these same, nor prowder shall thou any people find.
The pleasures of the world, they all did hunt and seek always,
For look where any valleys was, where goodly meadows lay,
Through which some pleasant River ran, or goodly stream did pass
That stoarde with diverse dainty fish, and full of Creuis was,
Encompast round about with woods, and fruitful hills beside,
Whereas they vineyardes great might have, or store of corn provide,
Here commonly they plaste themselves. What man so much does rave,
As would in smokie Cities dwell, and may such pleasures have?
Yet these they desert places calde, whereas in pains and strife,
These poor afflicted fathers purgde th'offences of their life.
Besides in houses fair they might, with any Prince compare,
Whose loftye walls with largest motes, encompast always ware
With parkes, and pleasant chases fair, adjoining to the same,
Empalde and trenched round about, and stored well with game.
There stands the stately Towers aloft, and dreadful shot within,
Or decked with curious furniture to feast and banquet in.
In every place the Counduites run, within continually,
And gardens here with pleasant herbs, and flowers furnished ly.
With Cloisters square, and arbours that procure a pleasant shade.
In fine it seems a paradise, such as the almighty made,
Great heardes of cattle they possess, and servants many one,
And officers of high degree, attending them upon.
Great store of pondes abroad they have, that commonly they may,
Suffice to furnish out with fish, their tables every day,
Not far removed from their walls, their pleasant Orchardes be,
Such as do pass and far surmount, all others in degree.
Thus hunt they after worldly joys, and after pleasures fish
And have obtainde each sweet delight, that earthly men can wish.
Of sleep they also have their fill, as well by day as night,
Yea in the day time are they wild to sleep and reast their spright.
Lest to much watching dry them up, and palenesse stain their face,
And least their bodies do decay, and lose their lusty grace.
But here a matter great they make, at midnight that they rise,
To mumble up their Psalms and prayers, with senseless ears and eyes
Not weying what a sort of men, that poor and needy be,
Do labor all the day long in the heat with misery,
And in the night can take no rest, for children there that lie,
And fill their ears with wrawling all the night, and tedious cry.
Their books they naught regard at all, yet learning still and schools,
Are worthyly committed to these gross and doltish fools.
Abbottes.
The order of saint Benet and Cistercian company,
Have evermore an Abbot great, who setting nothing by
The life and title of a Monk, their order does detest,
And better likes the head to be, and Prince of all the rest.
And sure in pomp and lofty look, he is not far behind
The worldly Prince, reserving this, yet secret still in mind:
That far beyond them does he go, in lecherous delight,
For maidens young he does deflowre, and spends all the night,
In wanton daunces plays and sportes, with quaffing and excess,
And haunteth always company, addict to idleness.
A mad and loathsome sight it is, the shapes that disagree.
To join in one, and knit together things that diffring be.
As if the head of dog or Bull upon a sheep did stand,
So ill agrees together knit a Monk and Prince in hand.
And sure I muse and wonder much, the world could ever bear,
To see so foul a monster as this same mishaped hear.
But wonders always likes the world, and nothing can be wrought,
So foolishly nor any thing, so wicked can be brought,
But that the world will it esteem, and wonder for to see,
Wherefore let it enjoy them still, and worship them for me.
I to my matter will return: this Abbot evermore,
With weapons fears his neighbors next, and battles fierce and sore
He often gives, and does rejoice, great tumultes still to see,
No lowly thing he does desire, speak, do, or yet decree.
But look what that he takes in hand, he rages at the same,
As Cacus breathing out the sparks of fires and fiery flame.
What rule of Benet teaches this? I surely think, because
That Benet did forbid his flock by strayte and curious laws,
That on the Bible none of them should read, or scripture know,
Whence seed of heresy does spring, and errors all do grow.
Least they should slothful be, or spend their life in idleness,
Amid their lofty swelling state, and wonderful excess.
Their greedy hands and minds they whole applide to worldly things,
Whereof they shortly had such skill, that they like Dukes and Kings,
Provided laws for commonweals, and civil statutes made,
Lo, in this sort they shonde the world, and fled from worldly trade,
And got themselves to wilderness, where only they took pain,
To serve the Lord continually, and heaven for to gain.
But shaven crowns here needed not, nor greasy Cowles beside,
Since that the world did never want sufficient men to guide.
Their practices and all their pranckes, of their unruly rain,
Their manors, virtues, and their life, in every place are plain.
All things are lawful unto them, and are dispenst withal,
So thou beleeuest not on Christ, nor on his name do call.
But now the begging sort of sundry names and orders vain, Mendicanter.

In towns and Cities always dwell, as lies for their gain.
Where first by begging they have built, them sumptuous houses strong,
Well furnished of every thing, that thereto does belong,
That thou would marvel how these beggars purses, empty still,
Could in so few years build such neastes, and get such things at will.
But with their often fasting still, they wrought this subtle slight,
With daily prayers, service long, and merits great of weight.
The newness of their sect confirmde, did stand them aye in stead,
Their iesture strange, hypocrisy, and ducking with the head:
Their earnestness in teaching still, and deep dissembling chere,
Their eloquence, and filed tongue, and gravity severe:
That men did think each thing was well bestowed, and happily,
That given was unto so good and holy company.
Besides their common merchandise, their frawde, and falshoode great,
Did help them well, they promised in heaven happy seat,
And part of all their merits here, to such as willing were,
To help them here with any thing, their order to prefer.
This brought the fish a pace to net, this poison bayted hook,
Made gifts come in, beguilde a number, and most of them they took.
By this such buildings brave they made, in every town almost,
By this such goodly furniture they had in every cost,
From this proceeds their princely fare, for fasters far unmeet:
They trusting to this merchandise, do swarm in every street,
And house by house abroad they run, with bold and shameless face,
And beg, but chiefly in the town does stand their greatest grace.
No marriage is solemnized, nor great assembly had,
No feast is made in any place, but strayte these beggars mad
With Boxes stand about the board, and impudently than,
They crave and ask, like loathsome flies molesting every man.
At supper none in quiet sittes, nor can their dinner take,
But in they come, and both their hands and ears they weery make.
When holy times of fasting fall, and people feared be,
With bitter laws and threatened sore, with sharp and sour decree,
Than they continually do vaunt, of fasting and desartes,
And of their prayers that proceeds from hot and holy hearts.
Then rolling in comes all the gains, of such as do not fast,
Nor change one whit their former life, nor sinful usage past.
These buy the measure great of all their merits euerychone,
Supposing that the Lord above will never look upon
Their wickedness, but favor them, and all their faults forgive,
If that they send the Friars wine, and store of saltfish give:
Or feed them often with dainty meats, or costly dinners make,
Such as the Priests of Mars were wont continually to take.
Besides in welthy villages, they find a wondrous gain,
Where cheese and flax, and roots they get, and every kind of grain.
With porke, and puddings, souse and brawne, and bacon flitches great,
Which who denies is threatened with, Saint Antonies raging heat.
And more to powle the simple sort, and to beguile withal,
They needles, points, and glasses give, and other trifles small.
These things although dishonest they, and lewd and filthy be,
Yet count they them for virtues great, and signs of sanctity.
Such wickedness the Papacy, does evermore esteem,
And makes of every Devil God, contrarily to seem.
And Devils eke of God they make, as every fool may see,
In all their doctrine faith and rytes, what ever they decree.
But yet above the reast I do the wisest count those same,
That begging round about the world with title fair and name,
Have grown in little time to wealth, and treasures infinite,
Have purchased vineyardes, lands, and rents, and houses fair in fight.
With Graunges great, and pleasant Farms, and droues of cattle store,
That now no need they have to beg, nor ask for any more.
Yea loath they are to have the names of beggars in degree.
So abbey lubber like they live, and Lords they called be,
The earnest zeal of making wars upon the Turkish sect,
And care of looking unto those, whom sickness did infect,
Was fauorde first of Germans much, who made Collections great,
Whereby they well in every place, might exercise this feate.
What would you more? all men to this with willing hearts did pay.
Now when the treasure gatherd was, the sick neglected lay.
And no provision did they make, nor any means invent:
For to relieve the afflicted sort, whom sickness did torment.
If wars were to be made upon the Turks at any time,
Their pillowes soft they lift not leave, nor slothful life resign.
So did the rest whose names in verse, cannot be all expreast,
So has this wretched kind of men in little time encreast.
But worser now by much are those, who though they welthie be,
And lands and riches great possess, like Princes in degree.
Yet leave they not their custom old, to beg in every place:
So sweet a thing does begging seem, and of so goodly grace.
There be such as their orders does continually constrain,
To beg abroad: and such as still in poverty remain.
Who neither lands nor living have, of all the rest the wurst,
And such as are more troublesome, of every man accursed.
With these the Pope has much dispenst, when once he understood,
They were for his commodity, and for his purpose good,
By whom he might in every Realm, be highly had in price,
And utter all his wicked wares, and filthy marchandice:
And surely herein have they ^eemde, full thankful for to be,
As chief maintainers of his state, and princely dignity.
For all his doctrine have they learnde, and faith at fingers ends,
And whatsoever likes the Pope, each one of them defendes.
Nor for this kingdom sweet they any lies refuse to feign,
And so they may the same advance, no labor great nor pain.
By land and seas abroad they roame, and here and there do fly,
To howses great of noble men, and mighty Princes hye.
In every place they suffered are to preach and teach about,
And Bishops none does them forbid, nor person keeps them out,
Whereby they may their kingdom much, enlarge and amplify,
According to their earnest zeal, and daily industry.
For why they see that underneath their shadow they are fed,
And that their state by means of them, is well established.
They see while as the Papacy, does spring and flourish here,
Their order ever shall increase, and happy life appear.
And contrary all things decay, and staruing strayte at hand,
If that his holiness should slip, or not uprightly stand.
Therefore both for themselves and for the Pope with toth and nail,
They toil and moyle least that his state, by talk of tongue should quail.
Therefore the inquisition is, to them alone assinde,
For to inquire of herisies, in every case and kind.
Among the which the greatest and of danger most of all,
Are those which presently do seem, for to procure their fall
If any man deny the Pope, for to be supreme head,
And chiefest guider of the church, by Christ established:
If any say that man cannot by work deserve the skies,
And everlasting life, but that in Christ it only lies,
Or if that any man affirm, the polshorne sort to be,
A hurtefull kind of weed and plant of no commodity,
That only does deceive the world, with toys, and trifles daine,
And manifest hypocrisy, of troth the enmies plain:
Like dogs in raging mood on such, with bloody mouth they fall,
And vex and persecute them still, in bands and prison thrall.
And if at length they will not turn, they cast them into flame,
The rabble all of Popish rout rejoicing at the same.
And whom they cannot handle thus, nor deal so ill withal,
At them with hateful tongue they hiss, and currishly do bawle,
And with unlearned foolish books, and slaundrous do they bite,
And think to make them hateful in the common peoples site.
These men if that they strove for Christ, they would not beg at all,
Ne should such ignorance of truth, upon the people fall.
But with the Popish kingdom truth can never well agree,
Of falshoode it is framde, and without falshoode cannot be.
Wherefore it deadly hates all those, that mutter here of Christ,
And seek by truth to please the Lord, and to content the highest.
And uses these as instruments, the knowledge to oppress
Of Christ: and for to drive away all perfect godliness.
And not alonely in this case, this kingdom they mainetaine:
No Primate, Prince, nor king there is, but one of this same train.
He to his ghostly father takes, to whom he does confess,
The secrets of his heart, and all his sins and wickedness.
The which for sundry ends is to this kingdom profitable,
For by this practice, and these means, he evermore is able
To train the Primates as him list, but chiefly to defend,
The Popish sea, and to resist, all such as do contend.
Who if they stackering chance to stand, and wavering doubtfully:
Then with their sins they fear them sore, and pardon do deny.
Then which no thing more dreadful is, nor hurtful to the blind,
By this besides his holiness does understand the mind
And purposes of every Prince, that hereby speedily
He may prevent each great mishap, if ought should run awry.
Besides if that the Pope would feign, have money in some place,
Or any lusty Cardinal, or Bishops Lordly grace:
That may not well redeem his Pall, the pardons out be sent,
And these be they that chiefly serve, to further his intent.
Nor in the world there lives not, a kind of men more meet,
To work deceytes and to bring in, both Gold and silver sweet.
Like Bulls they roar and void of shame, they utter falsehoods vain,
And boldly strive, and Satan up, they lift to Stars again.
Of Flies they able are to make, great Eliphants in sight,
And popish state for to advance, above the heavens bright.
I think there are no kind of men, that profitabler be,
Or more in use, for to advance the Popes authoritee.
By them the common people have, beleeude such shameful lies,
And have bestowde their goods, and all their wealth on vanities:
Suppos^ng heaven for to buie, and holy men's desartes,
And everlasting life to have, allotted to their parts.
The others well enricht with spoil, do laugh and get them hence,
And to their Lords with praise do bring, their Caskets stuffed with pence.
I here declare not all their deeds, nor their devises lewd:
What shameless shifts they here have made, what filthye life they shewde:
What foul example here they gave, of life abominable,
So that it even did offend themselves the Roomish rabble.
That nothing (may be said) there is, but Cowles dare take in hand:
If in their fancy once it come, or with their mind do stand.
I row with light and slender Ores, and not with raging wind,
Nor for to cleanse the durty sincke, of Augae is my mind.
Yet here thou have a little show, of all this Empire great,
And see the members chief that do, belong to Popish seat.
Whereby thou wiselye may discern, the others all that be,
For both in life and faith they all, do wonderously agree.
So that I am sure thou shall not find amongst them any thing,
That does beseem the flock of Christ, or may to virtue bring.
But strong illusions and deceytes, and every cursed kind
Of covetousness, with careless life, and blouddy beastly mind.
And pomp, and pleasures great with pride, and superstitions vain,
And fond attire, with idleness, the Princess of their reign.
That where the word of God does reign, and Christ is clearly taught*
These people daily do decrease, and shortly come to naught.
And both the beggars, and the rich, are forced hence to fly,
As pestilences to the says, and springes of Heresy.
As slothful paunches great, unto the earth a thriftlesse lode,
Whom long agone did Italy send out in coasts abroad.
And spewde them into Germany, as mother of all ill,
And such her madness is, that she new sects inuenteth still.
For lately sent she certain out, of Jesus bearing name,
Calde for belike of lusty Lords, that lykde the popish game.
That with the name of such renown, they easily might deceive,
The rude and simple people, that are soon procurde to cleave.
As though they sought the honor here of Christ, and worship best
The impes of Satan, are they sure, no better than the rest.
For all against our Savior Christ, are sworn assuredly,
Both Monks and shaven Sophisters, the supersticious Fry.
For favor and good will, that they do bear unto the Pope,
So that of any goodness here, in them there is no hope.
These here and there run up and down, with double diligence,
To benifite the Devil, and the Pope: and with pretense
For to suppress the Gospel here of Christ, and eke his name,
That lately drawn from darkness great, abroad does freshly flame.
But Christ shall shortly them suppress, with all the rifra^^e here,
His enemies with Majesty, when as he shall appear.
Now as they something special have, so have they eke again,
A number that are common all among this greasy train. Common things.

By which they covet to be known, and others to excel,
With Heathnish ambition, wherewith as yet they swell.
From which they neither can be drawn, by scorn of people made,
Nor any seemelynesse of state, nor comeliness of trade.
And first their crowns are shaven all as longs to their gree,
And look as more religious and holier they be,
So brother do they shave their crowns, almost unto their ears,
That scarce an ynchebrode hoope of hear, about their pate appears.
This fancy fond no Jews them taught, nor yet is published:
What foolish people in the world would thus deforme their head,
And vnconstrainde, the beauty spoil, that comes of nature so:
Nor think it fair with shaven scence, amongst th'unsha^de to go.
Sure no man ever saw the founders of our faith so shorn,
No such thing they commanded here, so full of shame and scorn.
The slothful sort long after them, found out this foolish guise,
And idleness, as all the rest, this mischief did devise.
But yet I marvel much, that they are not ashamde hereat,
And how they dare in company, put of their cap or hat.
But hie and holy mysteries they say are signifide,
And thus they seek a filthy thing with honest cloak to hide.
Themselves they count as kings to be, of passing great renown,
And thus to show their dignity, they wear a shaven crown.
What dreams will not these doltes devise, that dare in open sight,
Such things affirm? but still to mock the world they had delight.
They also all anointed are, even from the Parson small,
Anointed.
And poorest Priest, unto the best that rules and gouernes all.
Observing still the Jewish law and rytes determined,
That by the Testament of Christ are quite abolished.
But all things that they did, were then commanded to be done:
As figures for to testify that Christ should shortly come.
These use their own authority, as pleases best their mind.
As if that Christ were not yet come, or chiefest priest assignde.
Thus do they all annoint themselves, and all their company,
Both when they take their Christendom, and at the time they die
Anointed are the Churches walls, and aultars oyled lie,
And eke the brazen Belles that bray aloft in steeple hye.
They also Princes do annoint, when that they crowned are,
And Moses people plain they be, and yet from Moses far.
Without commandment of God, or Christ's commission plain,
In every thing they follow still the fancies of their brain.
Which afterward reputed are for holy things and great,
Whereby in estimation more may grow the popish seat.
Besides Egiptian like they all in Surplesse white do go,
Or like the Jewish Priests, Surplesse wear^^s.
that were by law commanded so
To wear a linen Ephod on, so do they always wear,
A linen vesture wondrous white, and pleated here and there.
Without the which, they never do into the Pulpet come,
Nor service say, nor any thing that in the Church is done.
The same also they do command the Parish Clerks to wear,
And every scholemaister must be apparelde with this gear.
And every scholar young, that first does enter into schools:
Thus are the people dolted still, and fools are made of fools.
For whereto serves the Surplesse here? it neither keeps out cold,
Nor has the apostles warrant sure, nor Christ's with it to hold.
Nor worn has any comeliness, but rather does disguise:
As if a lay man clad therewith, before the peoples eyes
Should travail by the way, he should be scornde or beaten ill,
Or for a mad man bound in Chains, and broken of his will.
But here I muse that Monks do not, this linen garment try,
But this I take to be the cause, that Monks sufficiently
Are laughed at for their fond array, and foul enough they be,
Whereby they from the common sort do aptly disagree.
Or that their clothes more holy are, than any others worn,
And black is meeter far than white, for such as seem to morn.
In garments long they also use apparelled to go,
And beardlesse all to women chaungde, the Pope commands so.
With burdens of the common wealth, they are not touched beside, Immunities.

For Princes long ago for them, did in this case provide.
They pay no tribute nor no task, nor any penalties,
Nor troubled are with any toils, or common miseries.
They subject only are unto the Pope, and to his law,
And as for civil or common laws, they wey them not a straw,
Except they on their side do make, and stand them well instead,
Whereby they may attain the thing that they determined.
They freely live and counted are the holiest men that be,
Nor good it is to harm them here, in word or any gree,
If any of them by deadly wound do happen to be slain,
O Lord how great a crime it is, and what a loss again?
Both Mass and Mattens then do cease, and Church doors fast are shut
And song and Organs laid aside, and Belles to silence put.
Great mourning made till suffered have the graceless murderer,
So much they way themselves, and of reuengement careful are.
But if he happen for to escape, and by that means do live,
They smite him down with dreadful curse, and to the devil him give.
And bind his soul in fearful bands, secluded quite from bliss,
And none (except the Pope alone) can him absolve from this.
Thus have they brought men in such fear, yt they themselves always,
May boldly quarrel first begin, and brawling bloody frayes.
If they themselves do kill a man, the matter is but small,
And may be easily ouerpast, and safely dealt withal.
The Judge dare touch no shaven crown, nor give them punishment,
What crime soever they commit, or mischief do invent.
First are they to their Bishop sent, and after certain days,
To Rome until forgetfulness the enmies rage allayes.
Then of their murder chearly quit, they homewarde boldly go,
Not fearing laws of any Realm, nor forcing any so.
The young sir John but newly shorn, that lately orders took,
Does vaunt to escape the Judges hands, and from the hangmans hook.
And not in vain: for unto them that thus anointed be,
Above the rest is granted sure, a wondrous libertee.
They may do whatsoever they list, and what they will invent,
Such things as neither countriman, nor stranger dare attempt,
For civil laws they do not fear, nor any penalty,
Their Bishop is their gentle Judge, and keeps them tenderly.
Great volumes have they writ, that of these liberties entreat,
And term them Cannon laws, under whose shadows wide and great
They safely route, and pleasauntly do take their quiet rest,
And void of danger every where, do what them lyketh best.
This every Emprour is constraynde, for to confirm before
He take his Crown: and sworn for to defend them evermore.
And is not this a happy kind of people? such a one,
As like to them in all the world, there lives others none.
Moreover all of marriage shun the sacred state as ill,
The Pope commanding them against Gods heavenly word and will.
For Paul being taught the secrets of the skies: determined,
Whereby such heat might be aswagde, and whoordome banished, Single life. D.
27. Presb. D. 28. Ass. D. 31. Si Laicus. Sacerdotibus.

That every man should have his wife, and women husbands all,
Permitting only single life, to those whom God did call,
And by his special gift exempt, from common law and state.
But whether popish Priests are here exempt, let him that late
Came from the new found Islands doubt, for here with us it is rife,
And known as well to young as old, the chastnesse of their life.
How ill they can themselves refrain, and eke how every where,
Nothing can be in safety kept, from their unruly gere.
For either with men's wives they lie, or else at home they keep.
Their harlots all at liberty, with whom they safely sleep.
Or have some in their neighbors house, or while abroad they rome,
Take tag and rag as comes to hand, as easily as at home.
That lust may have her full delight, thus fill they every place,
Whersoeuer they come with Bastards, and with children void of grace.
No lay man has this privilege, nor lusty liberty.
And surely well, they are compeld to live in honesty:
And use the undefiled bed, as God does plainly will.
Thus only live in filthiness the popish members still,
And only granted are to them, their whoores at liberty,
And every other kind of vice, and vile iniquity.
Which all their sect does well allow, and countes them commendable,
And better like them with this life, and deeds abominable:
Then if they changed from this trade, and came to better life,
And follow Gods commandments, in taking of a wife.
Yea such they cruelly do hate, and slander wickedly,
With hateful words of great reproach, and spiteful infamy.
And if they can deprive them of their living and their grace.
And drive them poor and naked out, into some foreign place.
That not enough thou can not muse, to see their crooked mind,
And judgment all inragde, whereby against both rule and kind
Of nature, and against the just precepts of reasons lore,
And all the common ordnaunces, that have been made therefore.
And eke against the customs of all Nations that we know,
They do commend adulterous life, and marriage overthrow.
If some there be that always praise, and like their loathsome trade,
Why should they not attempt whatsoever their lust does the^ persuade?
Thus in their filthy lives they do continue to the end,
And alter not, nor any seeks their doings to amend.
They had rather all be torn and rent, than leave their woonted guise,
The Bishop also winckes for gain, nor hope of help he spies.
Covetous
And more besides is Avarice, a sickness general,
Beginning first at head: and so dispersed through them all.
They are themselves for to be sold, whosoever is bent to buy,
And all things that they have besides, to sale does open lie.
Give money thou, and straight the Gates of heaven open be,
And eke as many souls drawn out of hell as pleases thee.
Give money, and from all thy faults and sins thou shall be free,
And all made well, and with their Bull it shall confirmed be.
Give money, and for thine estate they pray continuallye,
And fast, till as all ouergrowne in fat they wallowing lie.
Give money, and their merits great, to thee they straight will sell,
So that thou need take no care at all for living well.
Give money, and they give thee leave to marry at thy will
In times unlawful, and to hop about with Jack and Gill.
Give money, and they license give, both eggs and flesh to eat,
As well on frydayes as in Lent, and every kind of meat.
Give money, and thy child shall soon receive his christian vow,
And after that be bishopped and noynted on the browe.
Give money, and thou shall receive of Christ the body true,
Even as it hoong upon the Cross, when as he suffered nue.
Give money, nose, and eyes, and ears, shall then be noynted well,
And mouth, and hand, and foot, and all anointed sent to hell.
Give money, and thy Tomb amid the Church shall placed be,
Or in the Queere, so that no rain or wet shall trouble thee.
Give money then, and store of Psalms and Dirges shall thou have,
And eke with great lamenting shall thy corpse be borne to grave.
Give money, and thou shall be blessed, with store of Trentals soong,
And yearly in remembrance had, with Soul peales duly roong.
Give money, and upon thy Tomb a princely hearse they set,
Still smo^t with Franckensence, and all with holy water wet.
Give money, and of all thy vows discharged shall thou be,
And eke with Gods commandments they shall dispense for thee.
All things for money will they do, yet never satisfide,
For diverse Masses are they feed, yet one shall serve the tide.
Sometime a thousand underneath the Chalice do they lay,
Receiving money for them all, yet never a one they say.
Nor careful of their guile they are, the people they despise,
And all the means they can to scrape up gold they do devise.
They diverse benifices get, and serve the turn of none:
But only set their mind on gain, and idleness alone.
Both ginnes, and traps, and baytes and hooks, they lay on every side,
And present are at sick men's wills, some portion to provide.
Besides for tithes and offering pence, they earnestly do call.
These are the things that common are unto these members all.
Judge now thy self, if that they be the Church of Christ, that so
They seek to seem, and feign would have themselves accounted tho.
Attempt they any kind of thing, that Christian rule does teach?
Tread they the ancient fathers steps whereof so much they preach?
All things contrary shall thou see, their pomp and fond array,
Their Apish Cowles and strange attire, and beards cut quite away.
Their shaven crowns, their mourning gowns, their bedlem iesture mad,
Their Mitars, and their Cros^ars gilt, square caps and music glad.
Their holy Chrisme, contempt of laws, and life corrupted so,
And all the rest that idleness invented long ago:
As plagues to perfect godliness, and toys the world to daze,
That so the people still might have something whereat to gaze.
Whereby the ground of superstition from these gay things might grow,
For seldom does the common sort, the truth from falsehoode know.
Nor try the doctrine and the life by scriptures perfect light,
And rules of Prophets old, that were inspirde with holy spright.
The things that gorgeous are and gay, as holy they esteem,
And ever more do loath the things that plain and simple seem.
Hereby the Popes had easy way, while as they only sought,
To have their doings of the people great and wondrous thought.
If they had sought the honor here, and glory of Christ alone,
As best becomes his ministers, and servant every one,
They simply would have taught the flock, and used no colors vain,
And liude according to the laws of God, and statutes plain.
Now have the people better skill, of Popes decrees and lies,
Than of his holy ordnaunces, that framde the lofty skies,
And will not way their own estate, and miserable case,
But stop their ears if any speak, and turn away their face.
And rather altogether be deceyude and run awrie,
And everlastingly be damnd in hell for company.
The popish Kingdom The third book.
NOw must we here behold their faith, and how the papacy
believes, because of faith it would a Captain counted be.
And of the Catholic Church alone, of Christ to have the fame,
And wondrously they boast and brag, in bearing of this name.
Which Church if that it were in deed, and doctrine as they say,
Great wickedness it surely were, from them to fall away.
But if it may be plainly prooude, they trust no whit in Christ,
Nor worship God alone, nor look for succor of the hiest.
But as the Gentiles Idols serve, and worship them with care,
What kind of Church it may be calde, a child may sone declare.
How much it always should be shoonde, of such as Christ do love,
And only seek through him to please, the almighty Lord above.
But first it is meet for to declare, the perfect faith and right, Catholic
faith.

As has before been taught by men, inspirde with holy spright:
One only God we are wild to have, and worship evermore,
To whose right hand we must commit, our selves and all our store.
Abandoning all worldly care, and confidence in man,
As he that cares for us, and guides, and best of others can.
This whosoever does, both fears, and him does truly love,
And puttes his only confidence, and trust in him above:
And unto him alone does fly, in his adversity,
And calls to him being sure of help, as best for him shall be.
We also must in Jesus Christ, believe assuredlye:
His only son who at his time, came down from heavens hye,
For our offenses and relief, made perfect man whereby
He might redeem us all from death, and hell eternally:
And with his blood our sins deface, that for his sake alone,
The father only favors us, and blesses every one:
Has given us life, and all our sins and faults forgiven quight,
And of his mercy made us heirs, with him of heaven bright.
This who so constantly believes, and does with tongue confess,
Is made the child of God, and heir of everlasting bless.
He neither fears Devils force, nor death with cruel strife,
Nor all the raging of the world, nor dangers of this life.
But fastening still his eyes on Christ, in safety does he row,
Such one is perfect Israel, the Church of Christ does know.
Such Citizens, and such thou may call always worthily
True Catholics, and members of the blessed company.
For those that dare not trust in Christ, nor in his father hie,
Do quake for fear, and seek for holes, not knowing where to lie.
And of their own they always seek, a righteousness to have,
Whereby they may content the Lord, their sinful souls to save:
Not satisfied with heavenly gifts, nor righteousness from hie,
And fathers favor here for Christ, who gave himself to die
For our offenses great, and made the satisfaction full,
And from the hands of death and hell, did us for ever pull.
O Lord how few do thus believe? how every where in vain,
They do abuse the name of Christ, and counterfeytes remain.
Being Christians calde, and both in life, and faith do disagree,
As in this popish kingdom here thou perfitly may see.
Popish faith.
For mark what things they do believe, what monsters they do frame
I not deny, but every where of Christ the blessed name
Is calde upon in Churches great, and Creed is daily songue,
And Christ the true redeemer calde, alonely with the tongue,
And termed Lord, but far from him, the heart does seem to be,
And with the wide resounding mouth, it does no whit agree.
Which in so many things appears, so plain unto the eye,
That graceless must he counted be that will the same deny.
And first behold how earnestly, they seek in every thing,
The righteousness that of themselves, and proper force does spring.
Not to thentent to live a right, and please the father great,
That of his mercy calls us, unto his blessed seat:
Or Christ that all our sins and faults, does clearly wash away,
Nor with their life and aid to help, their brethren all they may.
But only heaven for to win, and to be free from blame,
And with deserts to please the Lord, that all the world did frame.
Where now appeeres the hope of life, by Christ obtained right?
And clear forgiveness of our sins, and Satan put to flight?
For who so seeks and searches still, thinks yet he has it not*
For no man seeks for the thing now in possession got.
Nor any man that has his wits, by merits seeks to win,
The thing that is already given, but rather thanketh him:
And merrily enioyes the gift, of his obtained wealth,
With grateful mind set free from cares, in quietness and health.
Therefore since that in every thing, they righteousness desire,
And heaps of merits and deserts, they earnestly require.
And most ungodly uses them, unto so ill an end,
They neither do believe in Christ, that he does only send,
And freely give eternal life, nor that he satisfise
For all our grievous sins and faults, they rather do despise
His merits and his fathers gifts, while prowdely in their hearts
They trust unto their righteousness, and to their own desartes,
Hereto it tendes whatsoever they do, in Church or otherwhere,
For this such strange religion have they framde, and paultrie gere.
And this alone of all their life, the mark and end they made,
Supposing not to come to God, by any other trade.
A Jewish people sure and such, as at this present day,
No better then the Gentiles are, take name of Christ away.
For in like sort through all the world, they do believe as well,
And law of nature does instruct, and reason does them tell:
That for good deeds there does behind, a recompense remain,
And that the almighty father that does guide the starrie rain
Is to be pleased with worshipping, good deeds and righteousness,
And other things whereby we may, our loving minds express.
Herewith they covet every one, to raise up mountains hie,
As long time since the Giantes did, for to assault the sky.
But sure they shall be overthrown, and driven down to hell,
For why the Lord has long agone, decreede as scriptures tell,
Not to forgive th'offences of the world, but by his son,
By whom the subtle serpents head, is broke and overcome.
The blinded world regardes not this, nor seeks to understand
Nor trustes the word of God, but in her own conceytes does stand.
And countes her fancy still the best, and crediteth always,
The fond devises of her brain, until her dying day.
Even so the Turkish multitude, do put there only trust,
In living as their law commaundes, and in their doings just.
So likewise does the Jew believe, salvation for to have,
By keeping of their ancient law that Moses to them gave.
And every kind of people else, the very same confess,
Believing to be saved by their law and righteousness.
None otherwise the papacy, continually believes,
Nor understands the righteousness, that faith alonely geeues.
Although they read the scriptures and saint Paul, and do them sift,
Who of the righteousness of faith, and of the Fathers gift,
Through Christ does speak so often, who is our righteousness alone,
And ransom eke. But let us see the parcelles every one.
Baptism.
Christ when he went from hence did leave two sacraments behind,
Whereby we might continually his goodness keep in mind,
And stay our faith: believing all our sins forgiven quight,
By him alone, and we made heirs, of everlasting light.
The first is Baptism wherewithal, we washed in water clean,
Being buried in the blessed waves, and plungde in sacred stream:
Are made the servant here of Christ, with him continuallye,
To suffer what so ever faules, and eke to live and dye.
Which as it plain and simple is, so is it most of price,
And not to be defilde with any toye or man's device.
But this it here defiled has, with wicked doctrine plain,
And with a foolish number great of Ceremonies vain,
For thus it plainly teaches that our sins forgiven arre,
Alonely by the deed hereof, not adding any bar.
Accounting not the gifts of God, dealt here without desert,
Nor sins by Christ forgiven free, but by the deed and part:
Of him that well prepares himself unto this sacrament,
That merits may have place, and works may gain the firmament.
And that which unto God is due, to us imputes aye,
Ascribing that to deeds, that faith does only take away.
And that assuredly before, the font thou come near,
And ere thou washed and plunged art, amid the waters clear.
Nor here through baptising the sins of man forgiven are,
Nor by the deed thereof as plain, the scriptures do declare.
But all forgiven when they do believe we do confess,
As counted eke among the flock, and heirs of blessedness.
But such as have no faith at all, but unbelievers be,
No pardon have though ten times in the fludde they sowsed be.
That of it self it profits not, although it here be done,
With purpose to amend the life, that after is to come.
Wherefore in ancient time it was not given any man,
Before he had confessed Christ, with mouth expressing than
The faith that in his heart lay hid declaring all and some,
And how forgiveness here of sin, from Christ does freely come.
Ascribing nothing to the deeds, of man and merits vain,
Nor trusting to the fond device, of supersticious brain.
But now because this Popish state, in Christ does not believe,
It does not teach that only he, does freely sins forgeeue.
But wanders through the stony ways, and ditches blind to hell,
And through the thorns to follow him, the people does compel,
Besides with foolish toys he has defilde this baptism quight,
To make the estimation more, of man's deserving right.
A number great of crosses first, he makes and lustilye,
He blows out sprights, commanding them with cruel words to fly.
The fool believes the infantes young, with sprightes to be possessed,
Whom faithful christian people here begat, and parents blessed,
Then thrustes he salt into their mouth, annoynting all the while,
The infantes tender eyes, and ears, with stinking spittle vile.
This done his oil and cream he takes, and with discretion small,
Annoyntes the shoulders of the Child, and eke his breast withal.
The Crysome then he calls for, wherein he fast does foulde
The little soul: and makes him in his hand a Taper houlde.
And that he may the better grow, he liftes him up on hie,
Herein least that he should be thought to dote and run awrie.
And only with these trifles to delude the people blind,
Then wondrous signs of holy things, he fayneth in his mind.
Who will not now make more account, of these same trifles vain,
The solemn order of the Priest, and toys of mortal brain:
Then of the gracious gift of God, and merits of his son,
Who with his precious blood redeemde us all from death to come.
Especially when all the rowte, that stands about him round,
Knows never a word of all that he, in latin phrase does sound.
But only hears a babbling noise, and earnestly do mark,
The outward show of all his deeds, and ceremonies dark.
The supper.
So play they with the supper that our Lord did sanctify,
Whereby we might be mindful of his death continually:
Unto the strengthening of our faith, and our ascertaind wealth,
As pledges of our happy state, and everlasting health.
To show that with his death he has our sins defaced quight,
And with his precious blood has made us in his fathers sight
Both clean and free from every spot, and every crime withal,
And made us righteous here and just, and free from deadly fall.
Which hope is by this supper still, made new and fresh again,
And by the word and blessed sign, does written still remain,
Both in our feeble eyes and hearts, whereby we evermore,
May praise the Lord and Jesus Christ his only son therefore.
And thankful be with joyful hearts, for all these mercies kind,
United all together with, one heart and friendly mind.
To nourish this affection still, and eke in memory
Always to keep this great good will, and favor worthily.
He has commanded bread and wine, to be receyude of all,
As of his blessed body and blood, the tokens mystical.
But O good God, what monstrous things, has here this papacy
About this supper fainde? what follyes, and iniquity?
First has he altered quight the name, and Mass he calls the same,
Which what it signifies, if it be Greek or Latin name,
Or rather from the Hebrew fetched, himself he cannot tell,
Nor all his court about the same, are yet resolved well.
Then six or seven shameful things, devised by his brain,
He has commanded to believe, mistaking scriptures plain.
As that the substance here of bread, by force of words and might,
Is chaungde into the body of Christ, and in the selfsame plight
The wine is turned into his blood that nothing does remain,
Of bread and wine, when once the Priest his words has spoken plain:
But only color, smell, and taste, and least that any man
Unlearned here perhaps might doubt, himself declares than,
Into what kind of body this bread, is changed and transformde,
And eke into what kind of blood, the blessed wine is turnde.
The body as it here was of the Virgin Marie borne,
As it with whips was scourged here, and on the cross was torn.
His blood as from his precious side, upon the ground was shed,
And though this sacrament be every day, and hour solemnized,
And Christ thus eaten evermore, yet does he not decay,
But vnconsumde of shape and form, remains one always.
Besides although the little Cake, a sunder broken be,
Into a thousand pieces, or as small as small may be:
Yet every little piece is Christ, and that most perfitelie,
With skin, and flesh, and blood, and bones, and all his quantity.
That no ungodly man defiles, this holy blessed thing,
And that the wicked man as well, does Christ from heaven bring
Into the bread, as does the man that lives most upright,
Beside that Christ does not withdraw himself from any wight.
And that as well the ill as good and faythlesse people vain,
Even as the faithful him do eat, though not with equal gain.
That this same body goes not down, as other meat does go,
But changed into him it is, that does receive it tho.
Besides as soon as in the mouth it comes, so sodainelye
Away it goes (not torn with teeth) into the heavens hye.
That in this bread which here we see, and little compass small,
Lies Christ that suffered for our sins, and God that fills all.
And that in many places here, at once at that same tide
He is, and present therewithal, through all the world beside.
That this same body vttred many words and phrases fit,
While as among his well disposde disciples he did sit.
And even there transformde to bread, while as he talking stood,
And eaten of his people strayte, as other kind of food.
Besides he plainly does affirm, that every Priest that is,
Does in his massing offer Christ, and that this sacrifise
Is even as much in weight with him, that all the world does guide,
As was his bitter death when on, the painful cross he did.
Moreover twelve commodities, he also does resight,
That every skillful Priest receyues, and every housled wight.
And every one that present is, while as the Mass is said,
And marketh with attentive ears, how well Sir John has prayde.
Besides he teaches that the Mass, does profit equallye,
As Well the men alive, as those that long ago did dye.
And last of all he from the people, pluckes the cup away,
And under one kind lies as much as under both, does say.
Because no body here does live, but blood must needs be there,
Nor blood can any life possess, without the body here.
As if that Christ the master of the world knew not of this,
But in his own appointment should for lack of knowledge mis.
And are not these same wondrous things, and learnings passing great,
When Christ did never will the same, nor hereof did entreat?
To this he patcheth merits to, the Priests deserving hy,
And every one that hears the Mass, and every stander by.
For nothing in the Papacy, without deserts is done,
Nor must be wrought: since for a rule, it generally does run.
That all our health depends of our works and our good deeds,
No place has faith nor glory given, to Christ From whom proceeds
Our happy state and blessed life, nor only to the grace
Of God they have respect, that does of mercy us embrace.
Who causes Mass or does it say, does merit wondrously,
The like do they that do it hear, and mark attentively.
Who neither hears nor understands a word thereof at all,
But stands only in the Church, as painted on a wall,
With merits great rewarded is, and all his sins thereby,
Forgiven quite the hope whereof, does make him look full hye.
Yea if the bell to sacring toule, and far from thence thou be,
And cannot come but earnestly do wish the same to see.
A merit great you gotten have, thus plain it does appear,
The supper serves for deserts, with papists every where.
Their trust is always in the Mass, to this they only fly,
In every thing that touches them, and every ieoperdye.
And is not this a goodly crewe? they are persuaded still,
What day they hear or see a Mass, to have no kind of ill.
Thus comes it here to pass that I, did lately say and wright,
They put not all their trust in Christ, but in their proper might.
And in their own good works, as in their doings they express,
Being full of incredulity, and all ungodliness.
Mass opens heaven gates, and does deliver men from hell,
Mass heals all diseases, and does sicknesses expel.
Mass does relieve the burdned mind, and sins defaceth quight.
Mass pleases him that guides the skies, and gives the heavens bright.
Mass pluckes the sinful souls from out the Purgatory fire,
Mass comfort the afflicted sort, and makes them to aspire.
Mass washes clean the mind, and makes the guilty conscience clear,
Mass does obtain the grace of God, and keeps his favor here.
Mass drives wicked Devils hence, and overthrows the feendes,
Mass brings Angels good from hie, and makes them faithful friends.
Mass does defend the trauayler, from danger and disease,
Mass does preserve the sailing ship amid the raging seas.
Mass gives store of corn and grain, and helps husbandree.
Mass blesses every such as seeks in welthie state to be.
Mass gettes a man a pleasant wife, and gettes the maid her mate,
Mass helps the Captain in the field, and furthereth debate.
Mass also does assuage the heat that in the heart does reign,
Mass does defend the pleasant grapes, and vineyards does maintain.
Mass helps the hunter with his horn, and makes the dog to run,
Mass sends store of sport and game into their nets to come.
Mass molifieth the angry minds, and drives rage away,
Mass brings the woeful Lovers to their long desired day.
Mass does destroy the witches works, and makes their charmings vain,
Mass causes good deliverance, and helps the woman's pain.
Mass makes thy prayers to be heard, and gives thy request,
Mass drives away the greedy Woolfe, that does the sheep molest.
Mass makes the murraine for to cease, and stock to thrive apace,
Mass makes thy journey prosper well, whersoeuer thou turnst thy face.
Mass overthrows thine enmies force, and does resist his might,
Mass drives out Robyn good fellow, and bugs that walk by night.
Mass plague and hunger does expel, and civil mutenie,
Mass makes a man with quiet mind, and conscience clear to die.
Mass uses many slothful knaves, and lubbers for to feed,
Mass brings in daily gain, as does the Sowters art at need.
In Mass is all their trust and strength, all things through Mass are don,
In all their griefs and miseries, to Mass they streightwayes ron.
Such force has lewd persuasion here, in teaching men awrie,
That our good works are only they that gain the heavens hie.
By this so many aultars in the Churches up did rise,
By this the number grows so great of Priests to sacrifice.
From hence arose such shameful swarms of Monks with great excess,
Whom profit of this Mass does keep in slothful idleness.
For this same cause such mighty kings, and famous Princes hie,
Ordained Masses for their souls, and Priests continually,
With great revenues yearly left and everlasting fee,
An easy way to joy, if it with scriptures might agree.
Straight after these, the welthie men took up this fancy vain,
And built them Chapels every one, and Chaplaynes did retain
At home, or in their parish Church, where Mass they daily soong,
For sauegarde of their family, and of their children young.
Both for their friends alive, and such as long before did die,
And in the Purgatory flames tormented sore do lie.
Christ in his Supper gives himself to us assuredly,
And all his virtuous deeds on us bestows, and does apply,
His merits and his hie desartes with us he common makes,
His grace and mercies every one, extended for our sakes.
We this receive, and nothing give, nor can we give again,
But only faithful loving hearts, and thankful for his pain.
These men by meritorious works, and solemn chaunting cheer,
With Masses make him recompense, and satisfy him here.
Thus much the Pope perverted has the gifts of God divine,
With dreams and fond device of man, and cursed countermine:
That no where now appears the hope of sins forgiven quight,
By Christ and life obtained here, and Satan put to flight.
Others.
To these two Sacraments, that Christ himself appointed here,
They add five others, that more cause of merits may appear.
Which though they neither tokens be of Gods assured love,
Which they ne can being not confirmde with promise from above:
Yet dare he boldly promise here, to such as take them right,
The grace and favor of the Lord, and eke the holy spright.
He does confirm the children young, without examining,
Or trayll of their faith, or of their woonted handling.
He teaches that the holy ghost may be receyude, and had
At hands of every Priest, that is, as well of good as bad.
Not putting difference betwixt Christ's Legates truly sent,
And wicked Simon, damned for his mischievous intent.
With Cream their foreheads does he mark, the people laughing there,
And those whom thus he marked has he strikes on the ear.
Then Godfather or Godmother is ready straight at hand,
To bind the noynted forehead, like a wound, with linen band.
Which he enforced is to wear eight days continually,
With pleasure great to every one that keeps him company.
And after taken of again, his forehead washed cleene,
So that no holy Chrisme thereon, for to remain be seen.
What should I here remember now, Penance,
what crimes and heinous things
Confession takes away? and eke what help contrition brings
And satisfaction for our faults? to shield our souls from pain,
It must buy out our misdeedes all, to their purloyning gain.
For all things still he does impute, to deeds of mortal men,
Not knowing perfect faith in Christ, nor teaching it to them.
But rather does destroy it quite, accounting wickedlee,
Our Savior Christ but as a man, and Cipher here to be.
Undoubtedly the flock of Christ does evermore confess
Their sins, and for the same repents with grief and heaviness:
Nor makes any righteousness hereof, nor iustifide
Does seek to be, no more than in the law or death beside.
Nor any other ransom for their sins do think to pay,
But only Christ, whose precious death does take them all away.
The Pope contrary clean to this, does teach in plain decree,
And does command with dreadful law, all faults confessed to be
Unto the Priest at Easter time, or of necessity,
When as the fatal hour is come, and day wherein to die.
And that sincerely here and plain, what has been thought or done,
Else can no sins forgiven be, nor absolution come.
Where now appeeres th'unfayned hope of sins forgiven quight
By Christ, and everlasting life, and Satan put to flight?
Who can declare what harms the people have receyude by this,
How many it has drawn from Christ and everlasting blis?
What scruple unto consciences, and trouble it does bring:
For as they can not call to mind, each fault and wicked thing
That they have done, whereby they may confessed thereof be:
So can they not believe, that they forgiven are and free.
Besides with mumbling in a tongue unknown, he pardons all,
And has no word to bear him out, and stay his faith withal.
But blindly will this teacher blind have all things credited,
A guide of all ungodliness, with doltishe fancies led.
He absolution also gives, by merits for to come,
And such as long agone are past, and presently are done.
Not only of their own, but bought with money other wheare.
Unto the merits eke of Christ, his death and passion dear,
He ioynes the merits here of Saints, and makes them all as one,
Persuading our redemption, not wrought by Christ alone.
In fine a satisfaction for all sins it does suffice,
If to the Romish Chest you throw your money any wise.
Or unto Abbeys give your goods, or else your wealth apply.
In building solemn synagogs, and lofty towers hie.
Or gad about in Pilgrimage, to visit holy shrines,
Or say your Aue Mary every hour forty times,
And bid the blessed Virgin still good morrow manerly,
Or what soever else (...) Priest does bid you orderly.
I well remember once at Spires I saw a wondrous sight
Of people, in the evening late, with Cross and torches bright.
The Cross before them borne, and all their faces covered,
With backs all bare they passed throw, the streets and market sted,
Commanded for to beat them selves with whips and scourges there,
And truly here they trifled not, nor did themselves forbere.
The blood sprang out a pace, and eke their back did swell and wheale
With multitude of stripes, that scarce the Surgeon them could heal.
Thus would they wipe away their sins, and fully satisfy.
Is not this same a madness gross, and shameful injury,
Brought in into this world with speed, and beastly wickedness,
Of this unshamefast popish state, that truth does still opresse?
Think thou that with this doctrine here, they trust in Christ above?
Or takste thou them for Catholics, which name they chiefly love?
The godly Ministers at first, did put to penance still,
Such as were excommunicate, and openly did ill.
That discipline might in the Church be had continually,
Least that the heathen should suppose that each iniquity
Might there be done unpunished, and that the others all,
By their example might beware, how they hereafter fall.
And also that such punishment might please again the minds,
Of those that were offended with these former wicked crimes:
Not that the sins forgiven were of God with penance such,
For laws of God and man's decrees do differ very much.
And with one sort of penance here, they are not both content,
Nor God and man are pleased both alyke with one intent.
Men's minds with punishment are pleased, and fully satisfide,
But God is only pleased in Christ, and nothing else beside.
Through pure and perfect faith, the Lord that made both earth and skies,
Releaseth everlasting pains, and never ceassing cries.
But of this present life he does release the punishment,
To such as only trust in him, and virtuously are bent.
They bid that men should in their own good works have all their hope,
And trust to merits of the Saints, and pardons of the Pope.
Christ has not fully satisfide, they think assuredly,
And doubt not for to preach the same in audience openly.
Which serves surely to their gain, for hereof does arise,
Their majesty, their passing wealth, and Lordly liberties.
So likewise does annealing last, take venial sins away,
While as for help unto the Saints, devoutly they do pray.
They always are against the Lord, and Christ that here was slain
For our offenses, and our faults, with agony and pain.
And with their pomp and proud deserts they carry down to hell,
The foolish flock that does believe whatsoever they do tell.
What ancor do they fly unto in all adversity,
In famine, pestilence, and wars, and every ieopardie? Refuge.

Look well about thee now, and give attentive eyes and ears,
For here the perfect faith and trust of every man appears.
What hope there is in any man, herein is plainly spyde,
The heart of every creature here, by this is truly tryde.
Who trustes in God alone, and thinks him merciful to be,
And eke almighty, call on him in all aduersitee.
And unto him he only flies in fear and dreadful woe,
As by his word he oftentimes commands us to do.
But whither flies this Papacy? in whom put they their trust?
In all things rather than in Christ, or in his father just.
Denying him to be their God, and helper at their need,
Nor that all things in heaven and earth, does from his hands proceed.
For if they did not in their hearts this openly deny,
They would in all their troubles here, to him for succor fly.
And all their things into his hands they would commit always,
Not seeking Mediators here, nor speachmen for to pray.
Contented only here with one, whose grace and favor great
For us we may be well assurde, does evermore entreat.
But with one perfect God alone, they can not well away,
Their chiefest trust and hope, they in the Virgin Marie lay.
The worship of the virgin Marie.
She pleases God, and with her child, in arms continually
Delights him, and what she asks, he never does deny.
She is the Queen of heaven bright, and with a beck can do
Whatsoever she determinde is, and gives hirselfe unto.
She is the happy star on seas, and port of perfect rest,
And surest ancour for to stay the ship in seas oppressed.
She is the light of all the world, and mother here of grace,
That does of God forgiveness get, and does our sins deface.
She keeps those that worship her in heart continually,
From hands of every wicked sprite, and devils tyranny,
And with her gown she couers Kings, and Popes, and people all,
From wrath of God, and vengeance due, that on their heads would fall.
The gate of heaven eke is she, and everlasting life,
The only life of all the world, and end of all our strife.
She is the hope of every man, and chief defendresse here,
She shows us Jesus Christ, when as before her we appear.
She also in the dreadful hour of death does us defend,
She blesses all the life of man, and fortune good does send.
Wherefore to her in every place, with all their hearts they call,
She helps children at their books, and gives them wits withal.
She helps young maids to husbands both of living fair and face,
She helps the woeful suitor, to obtain his Ladies grace.
And unto married folks, she gives fair children here with joy,
And in their travail keeps the wives, from danger and annoy.
She heals aged men of coughes, and shortness of their breath,
And brings them in their latter days unto a happy death.
She helps the husbandman with seed, and ^endes him rain enough,
She filles his barn with corn and hay, and guides well his plough.
The shipman seeks her aid in seas, in danger great and pain,
The wandering Merchant trustes by her to have his wished gain.
The greedy crafts man trusts still a good success to have,
By her that is the Lady of the world, and all does save.
To her they do commend themselves, and all their family,
That get themselves beyond the seas for fear of ieopardie.
What should I every thing resight, in every matter she
Is callde upon, and always thought the only aid to be.
She is all in all, and hears and sees what can be done or thought,
And gouernes all in every place where as this faith is taught.
Right acceptable unto God, and holiest sure of all
The Virgin is, whom evermore the world shall blessed call:
Yet never ought she for to have such estimation here,
Nor power divine, without the word of God and scriptures clear.
For if she have such force, and can do all that has been told,
What does remain to Christ the king, that Scepter chief does hold?
Add more to this that Popish priests these fancies fond do feign,
Without the Prophets warrant, or the Apostles teaching plain.
Who sees not here that they ne do in God put all their trust,
That framde the earth and heaven hie, with perfect measure just?
And that they make no account of Christ, who here ascended hie,
Whereby he might relieve the world and all things here supply?
They rather in our Lady trust, and still to her do call,
If any danger them oppress, or mischief great do fall.
Her do they paint and lively carue, and give her praises tho,
In Churches hie and every house wheresoever you come or go.
To her they weping, sob, and sigh, and howl, and mourn, and all,
To her they certain prayers give, that here the Course they call,
And sundry other services, but used commonly
As most of weight, the Rosaries do flourish wondrously,
Devised first and made by Monks, a kind of men that be
The authors still of wickedness, and all iniquitee.
They under cloak of worshipping the Virgin, have assignde
A certain foolish fellowship, whom weekly they do bind,
To offer up these Rosaries, unto the Virgin pure,
And never fail this service great, as long as they endure.
An other kind of Monks there is, by office sanctified,
That nothing have to do with Christ, nor any Saint beside,
But serve the Virgin Marie here, as only of her train,
And wisely sure they are aduisde, for so they more do gain:
Than if they should account themselves Christ's servant here to be,
And only labor to advance his name and dignity.
True faith continually is poor, and lives in simple case,
Ungodliness procures gain, and wealth in every place.
The Virgin more on solemn days appointed festival,
Is highly worshipped of her folk, and shaven Papists all.
Her Image do they bravely deck with sumptuous show to sight,
Her altar set about with bows, and Lamps, and Candels bright.
Each man his Candle present has, that burns through the year,
And Franckensence in every place does smoke, and singing clear
With Organs in the Church resoundes, the people brings in pence,
And on the altar offer all with wondrous reverence.
Such honors are not here bestowde on Christ in any place,
He is not thought to do so much, nor of so great a grace:
Or counted of his nature else for to be more severe,
Than to vouchsafe to look upon our deeds and prayers here.
Besides they keep our Ladies fast at sundry solemn times,
Instructed by a turning wheel, or as the lot assigns.
For every Serten has a wheel, that hangs for the view,
Markte round about with certain days, unto the virgin dew.
Which holy through ye year are kept, from whence hangs down a thread,
Of length sufficient to be touched, and to be handled.
Now when that any servant of our Ladies comes here,
And sekes to have some certain day by lotte for to appear,
This Sexten turns the wheel about, and bids the stander by,
To hold the thread whereby he does, the time and season try:
Wherein he ought to keep his fast, and every other thing,
That decent is, or longing to our Ladies worshipping.
Who does so much for Christ, or who for him does take such pain,
To whom if that they light a syse, his mother has six again.
The second place in every thing, he has or else the last,
For no man does his hole affiaunce here upon him cast.
The popish sort and people all, by name do know him here,
But all their trust and confidence, they set another where.
Nor only to the Virgin here, they dare themselves commit,
Nor underneath her sole defense, they quietly can sit: worship of saints.

But unto other saints they fly, whom God has long agone
Received from this present world, unto his stately throne:
That after all their cares and toils, with misery oppressed,
Delivered from the world, they might have everlasting rest.
But these men from the skies do bring them down to earth again,
Depriving them of rest, and putting them to worldely pain.
For yet (they say) they careful are for mortal men beside,
None otherwise than God, or Christ, that all the world does guide:
And that they mediators are, and advocates for man,
Before the Lord and help us here, by all the means they can,
Delivering us from punishment, and our deserved fall,
And that they hear the prayers of all such as to them call.
As if that Christ unable were, to do all this alone,
Who made himself our advocate, before his fathers throne.
These things they feign and do invent, without both faith and mind,
That steadfast can they never stand, nor safety here can find.
As he cannot that puttes not all his trust in God alone,
And in the faithful savior, of all our hope the stone.
Therefore they worship saints with hymns, and songs and music sweet
With Aultars fair and Churches built, in every town and street,
In fields abroad and parishes, in villages about,
So that no corner can be found, nor place appear without:
But picture painted of some saint, there gorgeously does shine,
Or caruen Image worshipped, with reverence divine.
And each one has his day alowde, whereon they do believe,
That from the earth departing here, the skies did them receue.
An other holy day they have, when church or altar here,
Is dedicated unto them, with pomp and lusty chere.
The Churches for their sakes are strawde, with pleasant flowers sweet
And every pillar garnished with bows and branches meet.
The altar also covered is, with clothes of value great,
The Tabernacles opned are, and saints are shewde in seat,
Fair guilt and finely ouerlayde, with silver sumptuously,
The ground with Turkey carpettes spread, and hangde with tapestry,
Perfumed all with franckenscence, and every pleasant thing,
That may provoke devotion, and money in to bring.
Relics.
Their bones they also up do dig, and sepulchers destrye,
Contrary quight to man's decrees, and will of God on hye:
Whereby a greater gain may come, and wickedness arise,
And that they may beguile the world, and bleare the peoples eyes,
And all in Gold these bones they set, and round with silver bind,
And closde in Crystal to delude, th'unlearned simple mind.
Here feign they many miracles, and of their lives they preach,
And all their good and gracious works, continually they teach.
Not to the honoring of Christ, nor that the people might,
By following of their virtuous life be brought to live upright:
But for to bring them from the truth, unto idolatry,
And for to pick their purses here, and them to follies tie.
For this they bring them forth abroad, and on the altar show,
For this they carry them about, with many a cursey low:
And offer them to any man, for money here to kiss,
Nor only in this wretched case, they are content with this:
To have their bones in silver closde, and fondely to persuade,
Men unto supersticion, with this same foolish trade:
But also forth they show their clothes, their clokes, their socks, their hose
Their napkins, shoes, and silly shirtes, their hear, their skin, their tose.
And eke the Virgin Mary's milk, (so far they be from shame,)
And coals whereon saint Laurence lay, while as he broylde in flame.
Yea more than this, they show the Hay, whereon our savior lay,
Amid the maunger when he first, was borne with joyful day.
And eake his coat that cruel soldiers, would not here divide,
The nails and dreadful poynted spear, that perst his tender side.
From whence sprange out the watrish blood, and cartlodes great beside
Of that same cross that long time since was in the river spide:
Whereof in every famous Church some pieces do appear
Besides the sliuers that about their necks do many wear:
And sundry other things they show, which here for to resight,
Time suffers not, nor leisure does permit me here to wright.
Thou wonder would how these same things, so many years should lie
And in what place they found them first, and how they came therebie.
But lawful is it not to ask, to doubt thereof is sin:
For all things are most truly done, and no deceyt therein.
Besides they promise pardon here, of fault and trespass quight,
And merits great of weight to such, as came to see this sight.
So vile deceyuers of the world, borne here to feign and lie,
To lead the people into hell, and keep them from the sky.
To every saint they also do, his office here assine,
And fourtene do they count of whom, thou may have aid divine. Help^.

Among the which our Lady still, does hold the chiefest place,
And of her gentle nature helps, in every kind of case.
Saint Barbara looks that none without the body of Christ do dye,
Saint Cathern favors learned men, and gives them wisdom hye:
And teaches to resolve the doubts, and always gives aid,
Unto the scolding Sophister, to make his reason stayde.
Saint Appolin the rotten teeth does help when sore they ache,
Otilia from the bleared eyes, the cause and grief does take.
Rooke heals skabbes and maungines, with pockes and skurfe and skall,
And cools raging Carbuncles, and byles and botches all.
There is a saint whose name in verse cannot declared be,
He serves against the plague and each infectiue malady.
Saint Valentine beside to such, as do his power despise
The falling sickness sendes, and helps the man that to him cries.
The raging mind of furious folks does Vitu^ pacify
And does restore them to their (...), being calde on speedily.
Erasmus heales the Collicke and the griping of the guts,
And Laurence from the back and from the shoulders sickness puttes.
Blase drives away the quinsey quight, with water sanctifide,
From every Christian creature here, and every beast beside.
But Leonerd of the prisoners does, the bands a sunder pull,
And breaks the prison doors and chains, wherewith his Church is full.
The quartane ague and the reast, does Pernel take away,
And John preserues his worshippers, from prison every day.
Which force to Benet eke they give, that help enough may be,
By saints in every place: what do thou here omitted see?
From dreadful unprovided death, does Mark deliver his,
Who of more force than death himself, and more of value is.
Saint Anne gives wealth and living great, to such as love her most,
And is a perfect finder out, of things that have been lost.
Which virtue likewise they ascribe, unto an other man,
Saint Vincent, what he is I cannot tell, nor whence he came.
Against reproach and infamy, on Susan do they call,
Romanus drives sprites away, and wicked devils all.
The Bishop Wolfgang heales the gout, S. Wendlin kepes the sheep
With shepheardes, and the Oxen fat, as he was wont to keep.
The bristled hogs does Antonie preserve and cherish well,
Who in his life time always did in woods and forrestes dwell.
Saint Gartrude riddes the house of Mise, and kills all the Rattes,
The like does Bishop Huldrich with his earth, two passing Cattes.
Saint Gregory looks to little boys, to teach their a. b. c,
And makes them for to love their books, and scholars good to be.
Saint Nicolas keeps the Mariners, from danger and diseas
That beaten are with boystrous waves, and tossed in dreadful seas.
Great Chrystopher that painted is with body big and tall,
Does even the same, who does preserve, and keep his servants all,
From fearful terrors of the night, and makes them well to rest,
By whom they also all their life, with diverse joys are blessed.
Saint Agathae defendes thy house, from fire and fearful flame,
But when it burns, in armor all does Florian quench the same.
Saint Urban makes the pleasant wine, and does preserve it still,
And spourging, vessels all with Must continually does fill.
Iudocus does defend the corn, from myldeawes and from blast,
And Magnus from the same does drive the Grasshopper as fast
Thy office George is only here, the horseman to defend,
Great Kings and Noble men with pomp, on thee do still attend.
And Loye the smith does look to horse, and smithes of all degree,
If they with Iron meddle here, or if they Goldesmithes be.
Saint Luke does evermore defend, the paynters faculty,
Physicians eke by Cosme and his fellow guided be.
Who can remember all the saints, to whom the popish sort,
In all their troubles here with prayer, as unto God resort?
For Christ they do suppose is mad, and s^outhfully does live,
Regarding naught but all his mind to idleness does give.
Yet here it does not unto them, a thing sufficient seem, Pilgrimages.

To worship all these saints at home, that they so much esteem,
Nor that they can in every place, nor will show all their might,
Though equally they in the heavens shine with glory bright:
But into countries far they go, as they have vowde before,
Or of their voluntary wills, to seek their favor more:
And bear to them their offerings great, with free and earnest mind,
Supposing at their hands therefore, more favor for to find.
Some thither are constrainde to run, by wicked sprites and ill,
And in their hand a staff they take, or else some crooked bill:
Or whatsoever in their hands, they at that hour had,
Wherein they were compelled thus, with woondrous rage to gad.
Of weapons such at Ratspon are, there thousands to be seen,
As monuments of people mad, whereto all naked cleene
With thirst and hunger some have gone, our Lady for to see,
Enough cannot this wickedness, and madness called be.
There are that leave their own affairs, and business that does fall,
To them in common wealth, their men, their wife, and children all,
And run abroad on pilgrimage, with danger great and pain,
To purge their sins and by deserts, the heavens for to gain.
For why the Prince of errors all, the better to deface
True godliness has promised, not here in every place
Forgiveness of our sins, but in some Churches great alone,
Which poor and rich, and young and old, do credit every one.
Therefore unto the holy land, Jerusalem to see,
Or unto Compostel they run, and pass the Pyrannee,
Or else to Rome the Lady chief, of pardons evermore,
Who always has her coffers stuffed with merits great in store:
And does dispense with every man, that willing is to pay,
And for the same has travailed, from country far away.
The blessed Virgin Marie, is in sundry places sought,
But most at Aquisgran except he better has it thought:
That sinful is and weary of Christ, to England for to go,
Where as she can do many things, and rules and reigns so:
That they account it vanity, to call upon the highst,
And take him for a blockehead here, that trusts unto Christ.
Likewise has every other saint, a country of his own,
Where most he shows his miracles, and lists to be known:
And where he hears the prayers best, of such as money give,
Unto the idle Monks and Priests, that in the Churches live.
Each one for his degree does give, none thinks he well has wrought,
Except some offering meet for his estate he there has brought:
Whereby such store of precious stones, and costly clothes you spy,
And gifts of Gold and silver great, but Basins specially:
And Chalises, and Crosses big, beset with pearl and stone,
That from the Indians black are brought, or got in seas alone.
There glisters green the Esmerald, that blasing burns bright,
The Carbuncle there sweetly shows, the pleasant Camnes whight:
There shines the purple Iacinct fair, great store of Saphires there,
With Diamonds, Iaspers, Chrysolytes, and Agats do appear:
And all the precious stones that in the world are to be seen,
That long ago the gifts of kings* and Princes great have been.
There Candles stand as great as men may well in arms embrace,
And number great of Tapers small, that burn in every place,
And round about hang Images* of wax that likeness have,
Of Children, women, men, and sheep, and swine, and horses brave,
With sundry other likenesses, that here were long to tell,
As signs of diverse dangers by this saint escaped well.
Who can declare the massing weeds? the ships of franckensence?
Their relics, and their costly shrines, with hie magnificence?
Their Banners and their other things, that in Vestrie lie?
The gifts that to these saints are due, each man gives willinglye.
Nor any man restrained is, by need or poverty,
So that they be their advocates, and keeps them from anoye,
And leads, them when their life shall end, to everlasting joy.
Who does not see that they do more, in them then Christ believe,
To whom they scarce in all their lives one halfepeny do geeue.
Few Churches also in the world, there are that bear his name,
But saints have Churches swarming thick, in every street and lane,
Christ still does keep his poor estate, but Paul and Peter there,
In wealth do Craesus far surmount, and eke in costly gere.
The image of our Lady does King Solomon excel,
And painted James with Midas may in show be matched well.
Yet all their trust is not in saints, whom though they worship all,
Yet dare they not commit their lives, into their hands to fall:
So that no ankar hold they have, but hang amid the sky, Merits.

And downward list they not to fall, nor can they upward fly:
But tossed and tumbled here and there, with blastes of boystrous winds,
They have no place to rest or stay, their wavering doubtful minds.
By their good deeds they only think, the heavens for to take,
And in themselves good hope they have, if prayers long they make:
And tire their tongues with mumbling vain, and endless pattering,
Or Coocoolike continually, one kind of music sing.
A merit great they count it here, to keep their fasting days,
And eat no flesh, nor eggs, nor milk, nor whitemeate any ways.
But fill their bellies full of fish, of every dainty kind,
For these good deeds they think that God will leave his angry mind:
And places in the heaven give, whereas he will them bless,
With meet rewards for authors such, of so great righteousness.
And if they almose give and bread, to such as are in need,
Or ragged clothes, they strayte suppose to have heaven for their meede.
If any thing to Monks they give, or on the Church bestow,
Or of their proper charges build a Chapel fair of show:
And find a Pressed to sing a Mass, therein continually,
Than look they wondrously aloft, and surely think thereby,
Above the heavens bright in joy, for evermore to live,
The Lord himself can scarce devise a just reward to give,
If they to holy places go, and for religion sake,
Unto the image of some saint, they painful iourneys make,
Into the coasts of Syria, or desert places great
Of Egypt, they do sure suppose, that for this worthy feate,
They are absolude from all their sins, as clear and free beside,
As is the dog from duskish Fleas, amid the summer tide.
For to their merits so they trust, and swell so much withal,
That no man able is to make, their lofty mind to fall.
Thence joyfully they do return, beset with Skallop shelles,
Their cloakes and hattes hangde round about, as if it were with belles
With Images of lead and tin, which they in every coast,
Do blase abroad, and of their great desartes and merits boast.
All things they here for merits do, and all that in them lies,
They seek in every thing to have, some merit to arise:
For by the same they think their sins, are here forgiven quight,
And that they find the certain way, that leads to heaven right.
Wherefore if of their own they want, as they have little store,
They go and buy of other men, that commonly have more.
But specially of Monks that have the merits chief to sell,
Sufficient both to keep themselves, and other men from hell.
I saw a Gallye painted once, that was both large and tall,
That driven forth with pleasant winds, and happy course withal,
The raging seas and waves of this same tombling world did cut,
And sailed out to heaven gates, that presently were shut.
Her straught was only Friars and Monks, and on the spardecks hie,
Were all the chiefest members of the wicked papacy.
The people with their Saren Priests, even at the point to drown,
Amid the wild and woeful seas, were swimming up and down,
And holding up their weary hands, with plaint and pitious cry,
They calde upon the holy Monks, that in the Galley lie.
The Monks cast over board their ores, and out their Cables threw,
And catching diners in this sort, a few to ship they drew,
Whereby that none without the aid, of Monks are saude you see,
But drowned in the Stygian streams, and hellish waters be.
All such as are not Monks or saved by their merits hear,
Or in their ship, and this makes fools to buy their merits dear.
Nor yet the mind is satisfide, nor heart in quiet lies, Pardons.

Of such as seek to live by works, and Christ do thus despise.
Wherefore the Pope them Pardons sels, and graunts them grace at will,
And gives for gold the deeds of Saints, to purge away their ill.
No fool the Pope that by this fraud such treasure great inioyes,
But fools are they that him believe, and give their goods for toys.
According to the Proverb thus, the cloth must still be shorn,
Least it should hap to be consumde with mothes, and all to torn.
In Christ alone they will not trust, therefore they worthily
Do buy such lies, and for the same do give such prises hie:
And know not where to set their foot, but here and there do run,
And always doubt in every thing, if they enough have done.
This birding has the people spoylde, and every realm beside,
And of the Pope the hungry mawe has fully satisfide,
Who uses evermore to sell the reign of heaven hie,
To every man that offers gold, and willing is to buie.
Amid the Church there placed stands a Chest with iron bound,
Made fast behind with Chains of force, unto some Pillar round:
A narrow mouth it has, wherein a Testorne scarce will go,
Then furnish they the Pulpet with some bawling Friar tho,
Or others that are void of shame, and care not what they say,
Who may extol their Pardon there, and show what men shall pay,
Persuading every man, that has regard the skies to gain,
And for to have their sins releast with little price and pain,
And for to have the souls drawn out of flame departed hear,
Of father, mother, grandsire, wife, or any kinsman dear:
That they remember well the Box, and money fast do bring,
For them and theirs, not letting slip so hie and great a thing.
Who would not here preserve himself, and set at liberty,
Both him and his with sums, from wrath of him that rules the sky,
If these deceyuers told the truth, with earnest mind and will,
And did not with these falsehoodes, both the soul and body kill?
The people thus persuaded all, bring in their pence apace,
And gives their money unto them, that near the Box have place.
Who, lest suspicion might arise of iugling or deceat,
Do with their seals and writing both, confirm this pardon great:
And take the name of such as buy, and those for whom they (...).
Both of the men that live, and such as long before did die.
The man reioyceing goes his way, unskillful of the guile,
Though both himself and eke his soul he therewith does beguile.
They on the other side do laugh, enjoying thus their pray,
And neither here the living, nor the dead a whit do way.
Herein where does the hope appear, of sins forgiven quight
By Christ, and life obtained here, and Satan put to flight?
Perhaps thou think now their hearts are fully satisfide,
Tables and Images.
And that so many merits bought, no further they provide.
Thou art deceyude: in every Church are painted Tables found,
That fastened are unto the walls, or to the pillars round.
Wherein the Virgin Marie fair is counterfeyted right,
Or else the Savior lively drawn, appears before the sight.
Their Images are also made, and caruen cunningly,
Where written have the holy members of the Papacy,
Whosoever does before this Image here devoutly pray,
And on his Beads the Pater and the Aue Mary say,
He has forgiveness of his sins, and pardon of his pain,
Which pardon does for many years in virtue full remain.
To this on every side they run, and worship reverently,
While as with body prostrate on the ground, in dust they lie.
Is not this same the worshipping of Idols very plain
Forbidden, by the word of him that guides the starrie reign?
Belles.
If that the thunder chance to rore, and stormy tempest shake,
A wonder is it for to see the wretches how they quake,
How that no faith at all they have, nor trust in any thing,
The Clarke does all the Belles forthwith at once in Steeple ring:
With wondrous sound and deeper far, than he was wont before,
Till in the lofty heavens dark, the thunder bray no more.
Ratio. diuino.
For in these Christened belles they think, does lie such power and might,
As able is the tempest great, and storm to vanquish quight.
I saw my self at Numburg once, a town in Toring coast,
A Bell that with this title bold, her self did prowdly boast,
By name I Mary called am, with sound I put to flight
The thunder crackes, and hurtful storms, and every wicked spright.
Such things when as these Belles can do, no wonder certainly
It is, if that the Papists to their tolling always fly.
When hail, or any raging storm, or tempest comes in sight,
Or thunder boltes, or lightning fierce that every place does smight:
Besides they Candles up do light, of virtue like in all,
And Willow branches hallow, that they Palms do use to call.
This done they verily believe, the tempest nor the storm,
Can neither hurt themselves, nor yet their cattle, nor their corn.
But some there be, and not a few, that dare not well commit
Their lives to this, but underneath the stars they seek to sit,
For there (they say) the lightning can no kind of creature smight,
Nor fall upon the feeble corse of any fearful wight.
There are that hide themselves in Caves, and under ground do lie,
When as they hear the roaring sound, and rumbling in the sky.
Where here appears the confidence, and trust unto the hiest?
And hope in all adversity cast wholly upon Christ?
Where do they here commit themselves, and all that they possess,
Unto the will of God, as in their words they do express?
Are not these Papists Catholics, and men appointed well,
That are defended in the storms, by sound of brazen Bell?
And steps of stayres, and branches burnt, with flames encompast round,
And Candels light, and Caves, and dens made underneath the ground?
Such Gods, and such defenders here, the heathen wont to have,
To whom in all their danger they did fly themselves to save.
Besides they do believe their sins to be forgiven quight, Holy water.

By taking holy water here, whereof if there do light
But one small drop, it drives out the hellishe devils all,
Then which there can no greater grief unto the feend befall.
Therefore they oftentimes do hurl and cast abroad the same,
Both on the people, and themselves, and Papists chief of name:
Whose learning is above the rest, with willing minds prepare,
To take the drops upon their hands, and heads, uncovered bare:
And evermore amidst the Church, and in the Porch beside,
There stands a Sprinckle, and a stock, wherewith they may provide,
To drive away the fearful feende, and to resist their strife,
And for to wash away the sins, and faults of wicked life.
This water also carried is into their houses all,
Wherewith they sprinckle chambers, beds, and every rotten wall.
No man does pass his thresholde, but before he goes abroad,
Him self, and all his garments are, with holy water stroade.
The use thereof is very great, almost in every thing,
And wonder none when as it does such force and virtue bring.
The common people also lick up salt, unto this end,
And give it to their children, and their cattle, to defend
And keep them, that the Devil have no power to do them harm,
Nor any mischief on them light, nor any cursed charm.
What need have these same men of Christ, that with so little pain,
Can do such wondrous works, and to such matters great attain?
They drive out sprites, and wipe away each sinful crime and fault,
With little drops of water clear, or eating up of sault.
Munkry.
Yet fully trust they not to this, nor therewith are content,
But desperation many of them does wretchedly torment,
Because they find not here sufficient comfort perfitelie
Against their sins, the pains of hell, and wrath of God on hie:
Therefore to Monkry after all, do fly this people blind,
Supposing that herein consistes the perfect peace of mind,
And that our sins with foolish Cowles, and deeds are done away,
That unto everlasting life it is the surest stay.
If bound unto their treble vow, they keep their fasting days,
And prayers long appointed them, and other foolish plays,
And all their life long from the use of tender bathes they fly,
And in their several Sels, as do the Monks Carthusian lie.
But others in their aged years, and ready now to die,
Especially the learnde and rich, and kings and princes hie:
Do fly unto S. Fraunces Cowle, as men beside their mind,
Whereby of all their sins they think forgiveness for to find:
None otherwise than if at Font they took their Christendom,
And borne a new to righteousness, and perfect life should come.
So with this sacred weed, they think most surely to appear
Before the face of God, with hope must vain deceived hear.
Though all their time before were spent in beastly wickedness,
Without the Lord and Christ, by whom we only life possess.
Now tell me, does this faith and hope seem Catholic to be,
And with the perfect word of God and scriptures to agree?
Yet do not all these Saints avail, nor merits dearly sold,
Nor man's good works, nor Pardons, Mass, nor all that I have told. Funerals.

They doubt as yet if that their sins be clearly put away,
Or whether God his angry mood, and fury, does allay:
Even as the Turks and Infidels before have always done,
And every wicked nation, and people under Son.
For look how they do end their life, their sins they do confess
Unto the Priest, and are absolude from all their wickedness:
According to their Pardons bought, which if they chance to lack,
Their merits and their own good works, are cast upon their back,
And all the pains and punishments that has upon them light,
In recompense whereof, their sins are them forgiven quight.
Besides the very body of Christ, they take into their mawes,
Against the Devil, and of hell the tooth and greedy jaws:
Whereby they also may be safe from that infernal pain
Of Purgatory flame, that they themselves do falsely feign.
Yet more, the Saints being calde to help, they are anneald at length,
A medcine not to be dispisde, of virtue great and strength
Against both sin and raging death, the rest I ouerslide,
That every man does for his soul here carefully provide.
Yet quiet are they not with this, nor can they boldly say,
That all their sins forgiven are, and clearly done away,
Nor that the Lord is pacifide, and pleased with them well,
And they delivered perfitely, from power of death and hell.
They doubt, they tremble, and they fear, that something yet remains
Of their offenses, and the wrath of God with dreadful pains.
Therefore they will that after death, a solemn obsequie
Be made, with Dyrge song both day and night continually.
Six hundredth Masses to be said, and Tapers burning bright,
And Monks, and Priests with them to go to grave in doolefull plight,
By whose good prayers their hellishe pains may there released be,
And souls there hence mount to the sky, where naught is else but glee.
They also hier folks to say the Psalter speedily,
And money unto Churches give, and to the poverty,
And unto Monks and other Priests, who daily have this gain,
With prayers and merits to set free the guilty soul from pain:
And bring them to eternal joy, to this belongs always,
That they at every seuennights end, and every thirty days,
And at the end of every year, do here command and will,
Their offerings, and their ceremonies, to be observed still.
So little hope and trust they have eternal life to gain,
Or to obtain his favor, that does guide the starrie reign.
For ignorant of Christ they are, and of his office hie,
His merits here, and wherefore on the Cross so painfully
He suffered death, and rose again, O miserable men,
That waver still, and have no certain hope nor faith in them,
What end is dew? what recompense does here remain behind
But only just damnation, for this their doubtful mind?
But all the popish sort does doubt, and teach men eke to doubt,
If we be righteous, if our sins be clearly blotted out:
If that the father favor us, and through his only son,
Has made us hear his heirs of everlasting life to come.
And think thou these are Catholics? or Church of Christ aright,
That hearken not to Christ, but overthrow his triumph quight,
And eke his death, and rather had to every creature fly,
Than unto him that has the rule of every thing from hie?
I had as lieue the Turkish law and doctrine to profess,
As with the papist to believe, that teach such wickedness.
What matter is it whether sect thou folowest in thy works,
For papists do no more believe in Christ, than do the Turks.
The Faith of both is fond and vain, and both alike in show,
The name alone of Christ and all his doings here do know.
In worship, life, and faith, they do his power and force deny,
And do despise his benifites, and cast them clearly by.
The popish Kingdom The fourth book.
AS Papists do believe and teach the vaynest things that be,
So with their doctrine and their faith, their life does iump agree.
Their feasts and all their holidayes they keep throughout the year
Are full of vile Idolatry, and heathenlike appear:
Whereby though they do nothing teach, but should their doctrine hide,
(Which yet in volumes more than one, may openly be spide)
Thou easily may know whether true Catholics they be,
And only trust in Christ, and keep th'assured veritee.
Be therefore here a perfect Judge, and all things warely way,
With equal balance, for before thine eyes I here will lay
Most plainly, though not all (for who is able that to tell,)
But such as best are known to us in Germany that dwell.
And first betwixt the days they make no little difference,
For all be not of virtue like, nor like pre-eminence. Con. 26. q. ^. Si quis.
Non ob^er. Quis. q. 2. Nos planet. Sed and illud q. 5. Non liceat.

But some of them Egyptian are, and full of ieopardee,
And some again beside the rest, both good and luckie be.
Like diffrence of the nights they make, as if the almighty king,
That made them all, not gracious were to them in every thing.
Beside they give attentive ear to blind Astronomars,
About th'aspects in every hour of sundry shining stars:
And underneath what Planet every man is borne and bred,
What good or evil fortune does hang over every head.
Hereby they think assuredly to know what shall befall,
As men that have no perfect faith nor trust in God at all:
But think that every thing is wrought and wholly guided here,
By moving of the Planets, and the whirling of the Spear.
No vain they pearse nor enter in the bathes at any day,
Nor pare their nails, nor from their head do cut the hear away:
They also put no child to nurse, nor mend with doung their ground,
Nor medicine do receive to make their crased bodies sound,
Nor any other thing they do, but earnestly before
They mark the Moon how she is placde, and stands evermore:
And every planet how they rise, and set in each degree,
Which things unto the perfect faith of Christ repugnant be.
Which first I show, least in my course I should be driven plain,
To call to mind these foolish toys, now to my theme again.
Three weeks before the day whereon was borne the Lord of grace,
Aduent.
And on the Thursday Boys and Girls do run in every place,
And bounce and beat at every door, with blows and lusty snaps,
And cry, the aduent of the Lord not borne as yet perhaps.
And wishing to the neighbors all, that in the houses dwell,
A happy year, and every thing to spring and prosper well:
Here have they pears, and plumbs, and pence, each man gives willinglee,
For these three nights are always thought, unfortunate to be:
Wherein they are afraid of sprites, and cankred witches spite,
And dreadful devils black and grim, that then have chiefest might.
In these same days young wanton Eyrles that meet for marriage ^ee,
Do search to know the names of them that shall their husbands be.
Four Onyons, five, or eight, they take and make in every one,
Such names as they do fancy most, and best do think upon.
Thus near the Chimney them they set, and that same Onyon than,
That first does sproute, does surely bear the name of their good man.
Their husbands nature eke they seek to know, and all his guise,
When as the Sun has hid himself, and left the starrie skies,
Unto some woodstacke do they go, and while they there do stand,
Each one draws out a faggot stick, the next that commes to hand,
Which if it straight and even be, and have no knots at all,
A gentle husband then they think shall surely to them fall.
But if it foul and crooked be, and knottie ^ere and theare,
A crabbed churlish husband then, they earnestly do fear.
These things the wicked Papists bear, and suffer willingly,
Because they neither do the end, nor fruits of faith epsy:
And rather had the people should obey their foolish lust,
Than truly God to know, and in him here alone to trust.
Christmasse day.
Then comes the day wherein the Lord did bring his birth to pass,
Whereas at midnight up they rise, and every man to Mass.
This time so holy counted is, that diverse earnestly
Do think the waters all to wine are changed suddenly:
In that same hour that Christ himself was borne, and came to light,
And unto water straight again, transformde and altered quight.
There are beside that mindfully the money still do watch,
That first to altar commes, which then they privily do snatch.
The Priests least other should it have, takes often the same away,
Whereby they think throughout the year to have good luck in play,
And not to lose: then straight at game till daylight do they strive,
To make some present proof how well their hallowde pence will thrive.
Three Masses every Priest does sing upon that solemn day,
With offerings unto every one, that so the more may play.
This done, a wooden child in clowtes is on the altar set
About the which both boys and gyrles do dance and trymly iet,
And Carrols sing in praise of Christ, and for to help them hear,
The Organs answer every verse, with sweet and solemn cheer.
The Priests do rore aloude, and round about the parents stand,
To see the sport, and with their voice do help them and their hand.
Thus wont the Coribants perhaps upon the mountain I Would,
The crying noise of Jupiter newborn with song to hide,
To dance about him round, and on their brazen pannes to beat,
Least that his father finding him, should him destroy and eat.
Then follows Saint Stephens day, whereon does every man, Saint Steven.

His horses iaunt and course abroad, and swiftly as he can.
Until they do extreemely sweat, and than they let them blood,
For this being done upon this day, they say does do them good,
And keeps them from all maladies and sickness through the year,
As if that Steven any time took charge of horses hear.
Next John the son of Zebedee has his appointed day,
Who once by cruel tyraunts will, Saint John.
constrained was they say
Strong poison up to drink, therefore the Papists do believe,
That whosoever puts their trust in him, no poison them can grieve.
The wine beside that hallowed is, in worship of his name,
The Priests do give the people that bring money for the same.
And after with the self same wine are little manchets made,
Against the boystrous winter storms, and sundry such like trade.
The men upon this solemn day, do take this holy wine,
To make them strong, so do the maids to make them fair and fine.
^^^rmasse.
Then comes the day that calls to mind the cruel Herodes strife,
Who seeking Christ to kill, the king of everlasting life,
Destroyde the little infants young, a beast vnmercilesse,
And put to death all such as were of two years age or less.
To them the sinful wretchesse cry, and earnestly do pray,
To get them pardon for their faults, and wipe their sins away.
The Parents when this day appears, do beat their children all,
(Though nothing they deserve) and servant all to beating fall,
And Monks do whip each other well, or else their Prior great,
Or Abbot mad, does take in hand their breeches all to beat:
In worship of these Innocents, or rather as we see,
In honor of the cursed king, that did this crueltee.
Newyeares day.
The next to this is Newyeares day, whereon to every friend,
They costly presents in do bring, and Neweyeares gifts do send.
These gifts the husband gives his wife, and father eke the child,
And master on his men bestows the like, with favor mild.
And good beginning of the year they wish and wish again,
According to the ancient guise of heathen people vain.
These eight days no man does require his dettes of any man,
Their tables do they furnish out with all the meat they can:
With Marchpaynes, Tartes, and Custards great, they drink with staring eyes,
They rowte and revel, feed and feast, as merry all as Pyes:
As if they should at th'entrance of this new year hap to die,
Yet would they have their bellyes full, and ancient friends allie.
Twelfe day.
The wise men's day here follows, who out from Persia far,
Brought gifts and presents unto Christ, conducted by a star.
The Papists do believe that these were kings, and so them call,
And do affirm that of the same there were but three in all.
Here sundry friends together come, and meet in company,
And make a king amongst themselves by voice or destiny:
Who after princely guise appoyntes, his officers always,
Then unto feasting do they go, and long time after play:
Upon their bordes in order thick the dainty dishes stand,
Till that their purses empty be, and creditors at hand.
Their children herein follow them, and choosing princes here,
With pomp and great solemnity, they meet and make good chere:
With money either got by stealth, or of their parents e^t,
That so they may be trained to know both riot here and theft.
Then also every householder, to his ability,
Does make a mighty Cake, that may suffice his company:
Herein a penny does he put, before it come to fire,
This he deuides according as his household does require,
And every piece distributeth, as round about they stand,
Which in their names unto the poor is given out of hand:
But who so chances on the piece wherein the money lies,
Is counted king amongst them all, and is with showtes and cries
Exalted to the heavens up, who taking chalk in hand,
Does make a cross on every beam, and rafters as they stand:
Great force and power have these against all iniuryes and harms
Of cursed devils, sprites, and bugges, of coniurings and charms.
So much this king can do, so much the Crosses brings to pass,
Made by some servant, maid, or child, or by some foolish ass.
Twice six nights then from Christmasse, they do count with diligence,
Wherein each master in his house does burn up Franckensence:
And on the Table settes a loaf, when night approaches nere,
Before the Coals, and Franckensence to be perfumed there:
First bowing down his head he stands, and nose and ears, and eyes
He smokes, and with his mouth receive the fume that does arise:
Whom follows straight his wife, and does the same full solemly,
And of their children every one, and all their family:
Which does preserve they say their teeth, and nose, and eyes, and care,
From every kind of malady, and sickness all the year.
When every one received has this odor great and small,
Then one takes up the pan with Coals, and Franckensence and all,
An other takes the loaf, whom all the reast do follow here,
And round about the house they go, with torch or taper clear,
That neither bread nor meat do want, nor witch with dreadful charm,
Have power to hurt their children, or to do their cattle harm.
There are that three nights only do perform this foolish gear,
To this intent, and think themselves in safety all the year.
To Christ dare none commit himself. And in these days beside,
They judge what weather all the year shall happen and betide:
Ascribing to each day a month, and at this present time,
The youth in every place do flock, and all appareld fine,
With Pypars through the streets they run, and sing at every door,
In commendation of the man, rewarded well therefore:
Which on themselves they do bestow, or on the Church, as though
The people were not plagude with Roges and begging Friars enough.
There Cities are, where boys and gyrles together still do run,
About the street with like, as soon as night begins to come,
And bring abroad their wassell bowls, who well rewarded be,
With Cakes and Cheese, and great good cheer, and money plentiouslee.
Saint Agnes.
Then commes in place saint Agnes day, which here in Germany,
Is not so much esteemde, nor kept with such solemnity:
But in the Popish Court it stands in passing hie degree,
As spring and head of wondrous gain, and great commoditee.
For in saint Agnes Church upon this day while Mass they sing,
Two Lambs as white as snow, the Nonnes do yearly use to bring:
And when the Agnus chaunted is, upon the altar hie,
(For in this thing there hidden is a solemn mystery)
They offer them. The servant of the Pope when this is done,
Do put them into Pasture good till shearing time be come.
Then other wool they mingle with these holy fleeses twain,
Whereof being sponne and dressed, are made the Pals of passing gain:
Three fingars commonly in breadth, and wrought in compass so,
As on the Bishops shoulders well they round about may go.
These Pals thus on the shoulders set, both on the back and breast,
Have labels hanging something low, the ends whereof are dressed,
And typte with plates of weighty lead, and vesture black arayde,
And last of all to make an end, with knots are surely stayde.
O joyful day of Agnes, and to Papists full of gain,
O precious worthy Lambs, O wool most fortunate again.
O happy they that spin and weaue the same, whose hands may touch
This holy wool, and make these Pals of price and virtue such.
For by the same the Bishops have their full authority,
And Metropolitanes are forced, these dearly for to buie.
Bestowing sometime eight, or ten, yea thirty thousand crowns,
Ere half the year be full expirde, for these same pelting gowns.
Ne can they use the Pall that was their predicessors late,
Nor play the Bishop, nor receive the Primates his estate,
Till that he get one of his own, with such like subtlety,
The Pope does all men pow^e, without respect of Simonie.
Perchance such force does not in these same holy Lambs remain,
Nor of it self the wool so much, nor all the weauers pain,
As these same powlers seem to say: for thus these palles being wrought,
Are straight ways to S. Peter's Church by hands of Deacons brought,
And underneath the altar all the night they buried lie,
Among saint Peter's relics and saint Paul's his fellow bie.
From hence the sacred juice they draw, and power celestial,
As if the holy ghost should give these Clerks his virtue all.
Strange Relics sure, and bodies eke of passing sanctity,
That to such lousy clokes can give so great authority.
Who would not more esteem you now then when you here did live,
When as no clokes at all you did unto your Bishops give,
Nor fed so many paunches great, nor shaven companies,
With foul illusions and deceytes and shameless suttelties?
Now silver do you give and heaps of gold together rake
From every realm, and for a den of thieves provision make.
Far be it from me that I should thus of you believe or say:
But what so holy in this world has been, or is this day,
That this same wicked Papacy does not convert to gain?
The Almighty Lord himself above in safety cannot reign.
Now here the Papists do declare from whom at first did spring,
The use of this same pelting Pall, and this unseemly thing.
And here a thousand lies they make, from ancient fathers old,
They say the first invention came, ne dare they yet be bold
To burden Peter with the same, for fear they faint in proof,
But to reject, nor probably, yet farther of aloof.
Such folly and ambicion great, whereat you wonder may.
For Linus he that Peter first succeeded as they say,
And guyded next the sea of Rome, first took this same in hand,
That woollen garment might in steed of lynnen Ephod stand.
But where was Agnes at this time? who offered up and how,
The two white Lambs? where then was Mass as it is used now?
Yea where was then the popish state, and dreadful Monarchy?
Sure in saint Austens time, there were no Palles at Rome to see:
When Bishops all had equal power, although as stories tell,
The romish Bishop did the reast in worthiness excel.
Thus Papists never count it shame, nor any fault to lie,
So they may get great sums of gold, and raise their kingdom hie.
Candelmasse.
Then comes the day wherein the virgin offered Christ unto
The father chief, as Moses law commanded her to do.
Thou numbers great of Tapers large, both men and women bear
To Church, being hallowed there with pomp, and dreadful words to hear.
This done, each man his Candell lights, where chiefest seems he,
Whose taper greatest may be seen, and fortunate to be:
Whose Candell burns clear and bright, a wondrous force and might
Does in these Candels lie, which if at any time they light,
They sure believe that neither storm nor tempest dare abide,
Nor thunder in the skies be heard, nor any devils spide,
Nor fearful sprites that walk by night, nor hurts of frost or hail,
How easily can these fellows all these hurly burlyes quail?
That needless is it now to put their trust in Christ alone,
Or to commit all things to him that fittes in chiefest throne.
Blase.
Then follows good sir Blase, who does a waxen Candell give,
And holy water to his men, whereby they safely live.
I diverse Barrels often have seen, drawn out of water clear,
Through one small blessed bone of this same holy martyr hear:
And carried thence to other towns and Cities far away,
Each superstition does require such earnest kind of play:
But in the mean time no man seeks for Christ and God above,
Nor dare content themselves to have his favor and his love.
Shrouetide.
Now when at length the pleasant time of Shrouetide comes in place,
And cruel fasting days at hand approach with solemn grace:
Then old and young are both as mad, as ghestes of Bacchus feast,
And four days long they tipple square, and feed and never reast.
Down goes the Hogs in every place, and puddings every wheare
Do swarm: the Dice are shakte and tossed, and Cards apace they tear:
In every house are showtes and cries, and mirth, and revel route,
And dainty tables spread, and all be set with ghestes about:
With sundry plays and Christmasse games, and fear and shame away,
The tongue is set at liberty, and has no kind of stay.
All things are lawful then and done, no pleasure passed by,
That in their minds they can devise, as if they then should die:
The chiefest man is he, and one that most deserves praise,
Among the rest that can find out the fondest kind of plays.
On him they look and gaze upon, and laugh with lusty cheer,
Whom boys do follow, crying fool, and such like other gear.
He in the mean time thinks himself a wondrous worthy man,
Not moved with their words nor cries, do whatsoever they can.
Some sort there are that run with staves, or fight in armor fine,
Or show the people foolish toys, for some small piece of wine.
Each party has his favorers, and faithful friends enowe,
That ready are to turn themselves, as fortune list to bow.
But some again the dreadful shape of devils on them take,
And chase such as they meet, and make poor boys for fear to quake.
Some naked run about the streets, their faces hid alone,
With visars close, that so disguisde, they might be known of none.
Both men and women change their weed, the men in maids array,
And wanton wenches dressed like men, do travel by the way,
And to their neighbors houses go, or where it likes them best,
Perhaps unto some ancient friend or old acquainted ghest,
Unknown, and speaking but few words, the meat devour they up,
That is before them set, and clean they swinge of every cup.
Some run about the streets attyrde like Monks, and some like kings,
Accompanied with pomp and guard, and other stately things.
Some hatch young fools as hens do eggs with good and speedy luck,
Or as the Goose does use to do, or as the quacking ducke.
Some like wild beasts do run abroad in skins that diverse be
Arayde, and eke with loathsome shapes, that dreadful are to see:
They counterfeit both Bears and Woolues, and Lions fierce in sight,
And raging Bulls. Some play the Cranes with wings and stilts upright.
Some like the filthy form of Apes, and some like fools are dressed,
Which best beseem these Papists all, that thus keep Bacchus feast.
But others bear a torde, that on a Cushion soft they lay,
And one there is that with a flap does keep the flies away.
I would there might an other be an officer of those,
Whose room might serve to take away the scent from every nose.
Some others make a man all stuffed with straw or rags within,
Apparayled in dublet fair, and hosen passing trim:
Whom as a man that lately dyed of honest life and fame,
In blanket hid they bear about, and streightwayes with the same
They hurl him up into the air, not suffering him to fall,
And this they do at diverse times the City over all.
I show not here their daunces yet, with filthy iestures mad,
Nor other wanton sportes that on these holidays are had.
There places are where such as hap to come within this door,
Though old acquainted friends they be, or never seen before
And say not first here by your leave, both in and out I go,
They bind their hands behind their backs, nor any difference tho
Of man or woman is there made, but Basins ringing great,
Before them do they dance with joy, and sport in every streat.
There are that certain prayers have that on the Tuesday fall,
Against the quartaine Ague, and the other Fevers all.
But others than sow Onyon seed, the greater to be seen,
And Persley eke, and Lettys both, to have them always green.
Of truth I loath for to declare the foolish toys and tricks,
That in these days are done by these same popish Catholics:
If snow lie deep upon the ground, and almost thawing be,
Then fools in number great thou shall in every corner see:
For balls of snow they make, and them one at another cast,
Till that the conquerde part does yield and run away at last.
No Matrone old nor sober man can freely by them come,
At home he must abide that will these wanton fellows shonne.
Besides the noble men, the rich, and men of hie degree,
Least they with common people should not seem so mad to be,
There wagons finely framde before, and for this matter meet,
And lusty horse and swift of pace, well trapt from head to feet
They put therein, about whose neck and every place before,
A hundred gingling belles do hang, to make his courage more.
Their wives and children therein set, behind themselves do stand,
Well armde with whips, and holding fast the bridle in their hand,
With all their force throughout the streets and market place they ron,
As if some whirlewinde mad, or tempest great from skies should come.
As fast as may be from the steates, the amazed people fly,
And gives them place while they about do run continually.
Yea sometime legs or arms they break, and horse and carte and all
They overthrow, with such a force, they in their course do fall.
Much less they man or child do spare, that meets them in the way,
Nor they content themselves to use this madness all the day:
But even till midnight hold they on, their pastimes for to make,
Whereby they hinder men of sleep, and cause their heads to ache.
But all this same they care not for, nor do esteem a hear,
So they may have their pleasure still, and foolish wanton gear.
The Wednesday next a solemn day, to Church they early go,
To sponge out all the foolish deeds by them committed so, Ashwednesday.

They money give, and on their heddes, the Priests does ashes lay,
And with his holy water washes all their sins away:
In woondrous sort against the venial sins does profit this,
Yet here no stay of madness now, nor end of folly is,
With mirth to dinner straight they go, and to their woonted play,
And on their devils shapes they put, and sprightish fond array.
Some sort there are that mourning go, with lantarnes in their hand,
While in the day time Titan bright, amid the skies does stand:
And seek their shroftide Bachanals, still crying every where,
Where are our feasts become? alas the cruel fastes appear.
Some bear about a herring on a staff, and loud do rore,
Herrings, herrings, stinking herrings, puddings now no more.
And hereto join they foolish plays, and doltish dogrell rimes,
And what beside they can invent, belonging to the times.
Some other bear upon a staff their fellows horsed hie,
And carry them unto some ponde, or running river nie,
That what so of their foolish feast, does in them yet remain,
May underneath the flood be plungde, and washed away again.
Some children do intise with Nuttes, and pears abroad to play,
And singing through the town they go, before them all the way.
In some place all the youthful flock, with minstrels do repair,
And out of every house they pluck the girls, and maidens fair.
And them to plough they straitwayes put, with whip one does them hit,
Another holds the plough in hand, the Minstrell here does sit
Amidde the same, and drounken songs, with gaping mouth he sings,
Whom follows one that sowes out sand, or ashes fondely flings.
When thus they through the streets have plaide, the man yt guides all
Does drive both plough and maidens through some ponde or river small:
And dabbled all with dirt, and wringing wette as they may be,
To supper calls, and after that to daunsing lustilee.
The folly that these days is used, can no man well declare,
Their wanton pastimes, wicked acts, and all their frantic fare.
On Sunday at the length they leave, their mad and foolish game,
And yet not so, but that they drink, and dice away the same.
Thus at the last to Bacchus is this day appointed clear,
Lent.
Then (O poor wretches) fastings long approaching do appear:
In forty days they neither milk, nor flesh, nor eggs do eat,
And butter with their lips to touch, is thought a trespass great:
Both Ling and saltfishe they devour, and fish of every sort,
Whose purse is full, and such as live in great and welthie port:
But onyans, brown bread, leekes and salt, must poor men daily gnaw
And fry their oten cakes in oil. The Pope deuisde this law
For sins, th'offending people here from hell and death to pull,
Believing not that all their sins, were erst forgiven full.
Yet here these woeful souls he helps, and taking money fast,
Does all things set at liberty, both eggs and flesh at last.
The Images and pictures now are couerde secretly,
In every Church, and from the beams, the roof and rafters hie
Hanges painted linen clothes that to the people does declare,
The wrath and fury great of God, and times that fasted are.
Then all men are constrainde their sins, by cruel law to tell,
And threatened if they hide but one, with dreadful death and hell.
From hence no little gains unto the Priests does still arise,
And of the Pope the shambles does appear in beastly wise.
Care sunday.
Now comes the sunday forth, of this same great and holy fast,
Here does the Pope the shriuen bless, absoluing them at last,
From all their sins, and of the Jews the law he does allow,
As if the power of God had not sufficient been till now.
Or that the law of Moses here, were still of force and might,
In these same happy days when Christ, does reign with heavenly light.
The boys with ropes of straw does frame an ugly monster here,
And call him death, whom from the town, with proud and solemn chere
To hills and valleys they convey, and villages thereby,
From whence they straggling do return, well beaten commonly.
Thus children also bear with spears, their Cracknelles round about,
And two they have, whereof the one is called Summer stout:
Apparalde all in green, and dressed in youthful fine array,
The other Winter, clad in moss with hear all hoare and graye:
These two together fight, of which the Palm does Summer get,
From hence to meat they go, and all with wine their whistles wet.
The other toys that in this time, of holly fastes appear,
I loath to tell, nor order like, as used every wheare.
Here comes that worthy day wherein, our savior Christ is thought,
To come unto Jerusalem, on asses shoulders brought: Palm Sunday.

When as again these Papists fond, their foolish pageantes have,
With pomp and great solemnity, and countnaunce wondrous grave.
A wooden Ass they have, and Image great that on him rides,
But underneath the Asses feet, a table broad there slides,
Being borne on wheels, which ready dressed, and al things meet therefore
The Ass is brought abroad and set before the Churches door:
The people all do come and bows of trees and palms they bear,
Which things against the tempest great, the Parson coniures there,
And straytwayes down before the Ass, upon his face he lies,
Whom there an other Priest does strike with rod of largest sise:
He rising up, two lubbours great upon their faces fall,
In strange attire and lothsomely, with filthy tune they ball:
Who when again they risen are, with stretching out their hand,
They point unto the wooden knight, and singing as they stand
Declare that that is he that came, into the world to save,
And to redeem such as in him their hope assured have:
And even the same that long agone while in the streate he road,
The people met, and Olive bows so thick before him stroade.
This being soung, the people cast the braun^hes as they pass,
Some part upon the Image, and some part upon the Ass.
Before whose feet a wondrous heap, of bows and branches ly,
This done into the Church he straight, is drawn full solemly:
The shaven Priests before them march, the people follow fast,
Still striving who shall gather first the bows that down are cast:
For falsely they believe that these, have force and virtue great,
Against the rage of winter storms, and thunders slashing heat.
Are Idols worshipped otherwise, are these not wicked things?
Even I my self have erst beheld, both wise and mighty Kings
Defilde with this religion vile, that on their knees have kneelde,
Unto these stocks, and honor due to God, to them did yield.
In some place wealthy Citizens, and men of sober chere
For no small sum do hire this Ass, with them about to bear,
And manerly they use the same, not suffering any by,
To touch this Ass, nor to presume unto his presence ny:
For they suppose that in this thing, they Christ do highly serve,
And well of him accepted are, and great rewards deserve.
If any man shall hap to think, them Asses here in this,
I sure believe he is not much deceyude, nor thinks amiss.
When as the Priests and people all have ended this the sport,
The boys do after dinner come, and to the Church resort:
The Sexten pleased with price, and looking well no harm be done,
They take the Ass, and through the streets, and crooked lanes they rone,
Whereas they common verses sing, according to the guise,
The people giving money, bread, and eggs of largest cise.
Of this their gains they are compelde, the master half to give,
Least he alone without his portion of the Ass should live.
Maundy Thursday.
From Thurseday then till Easter come, the fondest toys have place
Wherein these cathlikes think themselves, great men of wo^drous grace
First three days space the belles are wild, in silence for to lie,
When from the tops of hawtie towers, with clappers loud they cry.
The boys in every streat do run, and noyses great they make,
While as in calling men to Church their wooden clappers shake.
Three nights at midnight up they rise, their Mattens for to hear,
Appointed well with clubbes and staves, and stones in order theare:
The Sexten straightwayes puts out the candles speedely,
And straight the Priest with rustie throat, alowde begins to cry.
Then furious rage begins to spring, and hurlyburly rise,
On pewes and deskes and seats they bounce, and beat in dredfullwise:
Thou would suppose they were possessed, with sprightes and devils all,
Or fury such as forces them, that upon Baccus call.
Some beaten down with clubbes and staves, amongst the pewes do ly
And others almost brainde with stones, or wounded mortally.
Well serves the darckenesse for these deeds, and thereto does agree,
The fashions like of every one, that thus enraged be.
Here wicked Judas all to torn, with vile reproaches lies,
And Marie in the darcke is calde upon with childish cries.
That she be merciful and help, and heal the faults that be,
And through her power deliver them, from hurt and miseree.
These things unto these feasts belonges, the candles being light,
An Image fastened to a cross is carried all upright:
A lantern round about his neck, is hangde to show the way,
Are not these popish foolish toys, a pretty kind of play?
This day the oil and glasses of the Bishop hallowed be,
And twice three times saluting them, he lowly bendes his knee.
The Cannons after do the same, with laughter would thou faint,
And wonder far to see them make, their speechelesse glass a saint.
Their dinner done, from th'aultar all their costly clothes they take,
And wash it, rubbing it with bows, and bromes that they do make*
Then water on they power and wine crosswise there on they lay,
And to the patron of each altar, humbly do they pray,
That they vouchsafe to look upon their servant worshipping,
And to aswage the fury great, of Jove the thundering King.
And here the Monks their maundie make, with sundry solemn rights
And signs of great humility, and wondrous pleasant fights.
Each one the others feet does wash, and wipe them clean and dry,
With hateful mind, and secret frawde, that in their hearts does lie
As if that Christ with his examples, did these things require,
And not to help our brethren here, with zeal and free desire,
Each one supplying others want, in all things that they may,
As he himself a servant made, to serve us every way.
Then strait the loaves do walk, and pottes in every place they skinke
Wherewith the holy fathers often, to pleasant damsels drink,
And sure with no dissembling heart, for true as steel they be,
And often times they put in proof their great fidelitee.
Good friday.
Two Priests the next day following, upon their shoulders bear,
The Image of the Crucifix, about the altar near:
Being clad in coape of crimozen die, and dolefully they sing:
At length before the steps his coat plucked of they straight him bring*
And upon Turkey Carpettes lay him down full tenderly,
With cushions underneath his head, and pillowes heaped hie:
Then flat upon the ground they fall, and kiss both hand and feet,
And worship so this wooden God, with honor far unmeet.
Then all the shaven sort falls down, and follows them herein,
As workmen chief of wickedness, they first of all begin:
And after them the simple souls, the common people come,
And worship him with diverse gifts, as Gold, and silver some:
And others corn or eggs again, to poulshorne persons sweet,
And eke a long desired price, for wicked worship meet.
How are the Idols worshipped, if this religion here
Be Catholic, and like the spowes of Christ accounted dear?
Besides with Images the more, their pleasure here to take.
And Christ that every where does reign, a laughing stock to make,
An other Image do they get, like one but newly dead,
With legs stretched out at length and hands, upon his body spread:
And him with pomp and sacred song, they bear unto his grave,
His body all being wrapped in lawne, and silks and sarcenet brave,
The boys before with clappers go, and filthy noyses make,
The Sexten bears the light, the people hereof knowledge take:
And down they kneel, or kiss the ground, their hands held up abrod
And knocking on their breasts they make, this wooden block a God.
And least in grave he should remain, without some company,
The singing bread is laid with him, for more idolatry:
The Priest the Image worships first, as falls to his turn,
And franckensence and sweet perfumes, before the bread does burn:
With tapers all the people come, and at the barriars stay,
Where down upon their knees they fall, and night and day they pray:
And violets and every kind of flowers about the grave
They straw, and bring in all their gifts, and presents that they have.
The singing men their Dirges chaunt, as if some guilty soul,
Were buried there, that thus they may, the people better poule.
On Easter eve the fire all, is quenched in every place, Easter eve.

And fresh again from out the flint, is fetched with solemn grace:
The Priest does halow this against great dangers many one,
A brande whereof does every man with greedy mind take home,
That when the fearful storm appears, or tempest black arise,
By lighting this he safe may be, from stroke of hurtful skies:
A Taper great the paschall namde, with music then they bless,
And franckensence herein they prick, for greater holiness:
This burns night and day as sign, of Christ that conquerde hell,
As if so be this foolish toye, suffiseth this to tell.
Then does the Bishop or the Priest, the water halow straight,
That for their baptism is reserude: for now no more of weight
Is that they used the year before, nor can they any more,
Young children christen with the same, as they have done before.
With woondrous pomp and furniture, amid the Church they go,
With candles, crosses, banners, Chrisme, and oil appointed tho:
Nine times about the font they march, and on the saints do call,
Then still at length they stand, and straight the Priest begins withal,
And thrice the water does he touch, and crosses thereon make,
Here big and barbrous words he speaks, to make the devil quake:
And wholesome waters coniureth, and foolishly does dress,
Supposing holyar that to make, which God before did bless:
And after this his candle than, he thrusts in the floode,
And thrice he breathes thereon with breath, that stinkes of former food:
And making here an end, his Chrisme he pours thereupon,
The people staring hereat stand, amazed every one:
Believing that great power is given to this water here,
By gaping of these learned men, and such like trifling gere.
Therefore in vessels brought they draw, and home they carry some,
Against the grieves that to themselves, or to their beasts may come.
Then Clappers cease, and belles are set again at libertee,
And herewithall the hungry times of fasting ended be.
At midnight then with careful mind, they up to mattens ries, Easter day.

The Clarke does come and after him, the Priest with staring eyes:
The Image and the bread from out the grave (a worthy sight)
They take, and Angels two they place in vesture white,
And round about each place appeeres, all void of standers by,
Save only that the watchmen there, amazed seem to ly.
But yet I think the trembling of the earth they never see,
Nor of the heavenly messenger, the flaming majesty.
An other Image of a Conqueror they forth do bring,
And on the altar place, and then, they lustily do sing,
That Gates of hell a sunder burst, and Satan overthrown,
Christ from his grave is risen up, and now alive is known.
Which yet they think not so to be, as plainly does appear,
By their Religion, doubts, and fear, and by their ^oings here.
In some place solemn sightes and shows, and Pageants fair are played,
With sundry sorts of maskers brave, in strange attire arayd,
As where the Mary's three do meet, the sepulcher to see,
And John with Peter swiftly runs, before him there to be.
These things are done with iesture such, and with so pleasant game,
That even the grauest men that live, would laugh to see the same.
At midnight strait, not tarying till the daylight do appear,
Some gettes in flesh and glutton like, they feed upon their cheer.
They roast their flesh, and custardes great, and eggs and radish store,
And trifles, clouted cream, and cheese, and whatsoever more
At first they list to eat, they bring into the temple straight,
That so the Priest may halow them with words of wondrous weight.
The Friars besides, and pelting Priests, from house to house do roame,
Receiving gain of every man that this will have at home.
Some raddish roots this day do take before all other meat,
Against the quartan ague and such other sickness great.
What should I show their forced faith and great hypocrisy,
When as of Christ they do receive the dreadful mystery?
Which they ne would if that they fearde not lightnings of the Pope,
For none of them believes here, nor none of them does hope
That they receive eternal life, and everlasting seat,
By death of Jesus Christ and by his cross and triumph great.
For who should teach to them the same, since every Popes decree,
Their doctrine, faith, and all their rightes, to this contrary be?
Straight after this, into the fields they walk to take the view,
And to their woonted life they fall, and bid the reast adewe:
Go now and laugh the Jews to scorn, and all the Turks that be,
For faith, religion, laws, and life, and their Idolatree.
Sure wondrous wise and good they be, if that thou will compare
Them with these doltish Papists here, that blind and beastly are.
Now comes the day wherein they gad abroad, with cross in hand, Procession
week.

To bounds of every field, and round about their neighbors land:
And as they go, they sing and pray to every saint above,
But to our Lady specially, whom most of all they love.
When as they to the town are come, the Church they enter in,
And look what saint that Church does guide, they humbly pray to him,
That he preserve both corn and fruit, from storm and tempest great,
And them defend from harm, and send them store of drink and meat.
This done, they to the Tavern go, or in the fields they dine,
Where down they sit and feed a pace, and fill themselves with wine,
So much that oftentimes without the Cross they come away,
And miserably they reele, till as their stomach up they lay.
These things three days continually are done, with solemn sport,
With many Crosses often they unto some Church resort,
Whereas they all do chaunt alowde, whereby there straight does spring,
A bawling noise, while every man seeks highest for to sing:
The Priests give ear, this madness them does most of all content,
And wine to them that pass the reast, is from the Parson sent.
Then comes the day when Christ ascended to his fathers seat, Ascension day

Which day they also celebrate, with store of drink and meat.
Then every man some bird must eat, I know not to what end,
And after dinner all to church they come, and there attend.
The block that on the altar still, till then was seen to stand,
Is drawn up hie above the roof, by ropes, and force of hand:
The Priests about it round do stand, and chaunt it to the sky,
For all these men's religion great, in singing most does lie.
Then out of hand the dreadful shape of Satan down they throw,
Often times with fire burning bright, and dashed a sunder tho,
The boys with greedy eyes do watch, and on him straight they fall,
And beat him sore with rods, and break him into pieces small.
This done, they wafers down do cast, and singing Cakes the while,
With Papers round amongst them put, the children to beguile.
With laughter great are all things done: and from the beams they let
Great streams of water down to fall, on whom they mean to wet.
And thus this solemn holiday, and hye renowned feast,
And all their whole devotion here, is ended with a jest.
Whitsunday.
On Whitsunday white Pigeons tame in strings from heaven fly,
And one that framed is of wood, still hangs in the sky.
Thou see how they with Idols play, and teach the people to,
None otherwise then little gyrles with Puppets use to do.
Corpus Christi day.
Then does ensue the solemn feast of Corpus Christi day,
Who then can show their wicked use, and fond and foolish play?
The hallowed bread with worship great, in silver Pix they bear
About the Church, or in the City passing here and theare.
His arms that bears the same, two of the welthiest men do hold,
And over him a Can^pey of silk and cloth of gold
Four others use to bear aloufe, least that some filthy thing
Should fall from hie, or some mad bird her doung thereon should fling.
Christ's passion here derided is, with sundry maskes and plays,
Fair Vrsley with her maidens all, does pass amid the ways:
And valiant George with spear thou killest the dreadful dragon here,
The devils house is drawn about, wherein there does appear
A wondrous sort of damned sprites, with foul and fearful look,
Great Christopher does wade and pass with Christ amid the brook:
Sebastian full of feathred shaftes, the dint of dart does feel,
There walks Kathren with her sword in hand, and cruel wheel:
The Challis and the singing Cake, with Barbara is led,
And sundry other Pageants playde in worship of this bred,
That please the foolish people well, what should I stand upon,
Their Banners, Crosses, Candlestickes, and relics many on,
Their Cups and carved Images, that Priests with countnance hie,
Or rude and common people bear about full solemnly?
Saint John before the bread does go, and poynting toward him,
Does show the same to be the Lamb that takes away our sin:
On whom two clad in Angels shape do sundry flowers fling,
A number great of sacring Belles, with pleasant sound do ring.
The common ways with bows are strawde, and every street beside,
And to the walls and windows all, are boughs and branches tide.
The Monks in every place do roame, the Nonnes abroad are sent,
The Priests and schoolmen loud do rore, some use the instrument.
The stranger passing through the street, upon his knees do fall:
And earnestly upon this bread, as on his God does call.
For why, they count it for their Lord, and that he does not take
The form of flesh, but nature now of bread that we do bake.
A number great of armed men here all this while do stand,
To look that no disorder be, nor any filching hand:
For all the Church goods out are brought, which certainly would be
A booty good, if every man might have his libertee.
This bread eight days together they in presence out do bring,
The Organs all do then resound, and priests alowde do sing:
The people flat on faces fall, their hands held up on hie,
Believing that they see their God, and sovereign majesty.
The like at Mass they do, while as the bread is lifted well,
And Challys showed aloft, when as the Sexten rings the bell.
O blessed God, why suffrest thou such wickedness to reign,
And bringst them not into the steps of fathers old again,
Whereof they do so often boast? yet so unlike them be,
That doctrine, faith, nor life with theirs, does any whit agree.
In Villages the husbandmen about their corn do ride,
With many Crosses, Banners, and sir John their Priest beside:
Who in a bag about his neck does bear the blessed bread,
And oftentyme he down alightes, and Gospel loud does read.
This surely keeps the corn from wind, and rain, and from the blast,
Such faith the Pope has taught, and yet the Papists hold it fast:
Not taken from the Gospel, nor the worthy doctors old,
But from the mind of man, and from blind reason mistress bold.
Straight after this comes Urban in, the Vintners God divine,
Whose day if that it pleasant be, and Sun abroad do shine, Saint Urban.

Good luck to them they count it then, and Bacchus holiness,
His Image and his Church they deck, and curiously do dress,
About his neck both cups and bowls they hang in order round,
And fast upon his head a crown of vinie leaves is wound.
Then him to Tavern do they bring, or to some tippling house,
With lusty train, and unto him they quaffe and drink carrouse:
Who for because he pledges none, as one that is not dry,
In his behalf they pledge themselves, and that so handsomely,
Till mystes before their eyes appears, and legs do wax full weak,
Their face does flame, their head does nod, and scarce a word they speak.
But if the day be clowdie now, or given unto rain,
On him they list not to bestow such honor, nor such pain,
Poor knave into some river than, they cast him cruelly,
And all to souse him in the stream, or durtie let him lie.
And if this madness be not such, as may be laughed at well,
What thing should move us for to laugh, I surely can not tell.
Vitus.
The next is Vitus sodde in Oil, before whose image fair,
Both men and women bringing hens for offering do repair:
The cause whereof I do not know, I think for some disease,
Which he is thought to drive away from such as him do please.
Then does the joyful feast of John the Baptist take his turn,
John Baptist.
When bonfiers great with lofty flame, in every town do burn:
And young men round about with maids, do dance in every street,
With garlands wrought of Motherwort, or else with Veruain sweet,
And many other flowers fair, with Violets in their hands,
Whereas they all do fondly think, that whosoever stands,
And through the flowers beholds the flame, his eyes shall feel no pain.
When thus till night they daunced have, they through the fire amain
With striving minds do run, and all their herbs they cast therein,
And then with words devout and prayers, they solemnly begin,
Desiring God that all their illes may there consumed be,
Whereby they think through all that year, from Agues to be free.
Some others get a rotten wheel, all worn and cast aside,
Which covered round about with straw, and tow, they closely hide:
And carried to some mountains top, being all with fire light,
They hurl it down with violence, when dark appears the night:
Resembling much the Sun, that from the heavens down should fall,
A strange and monstrous ^^ght it seems, and fearful to them all:
But they suppose their mischiefs all are likewise thrown to hell,
And that from harms and dangers now, in safety here they dwell.
Wheresoever Huldryche has his place, the people there brings in,
Both Carpes, and Pykes, and Mullets fat, his favor here to win. Saint
Huldryche.

Amid the Church there sits one, and to the altar nie,
That sells fish, and so good cheepe, that every man may buie:
Nor any thing he loses here, bestowing thus his pain,
For when it has been offered once, it is brought him all again,
That twice or thrice he selles the same, ungodliness such gain
Does still bring in, and plentiously the kitchen does maintain.
Whence comes this same religion new? what kind of God is this
Same Huldryche here, that so desires, and so delights in fish?
Which never any heathen God, in offering did receive,
Nor any thing unto the Jews the Lord hereof did leave.
Much folly and iniquity, in every place they show,
But we the chiefest will declare, and write but of a few.
The blessed virgin Mary's feast, has here his place and time, Assumption of
the Virgin Marie.

Wherein departing from the earth, she did the heavens clime:
Great bundels then of herbs to Church, the people fas^ do bear,
The which against all hurtful things, the Priest does hallow theare.
Thus kindle they and nourish still, the peoples wickedness,
And vainly make them to believe, whatsoever they express:
For sundry witchcrafts by these herbs ar wrought, and diverse charms,
And cast into the fire, are thought to drive away all harms,
And every painful grief from man, or beast, for to expel,
Far otherwise than nature, or the word of God does tell.
To belly cheer yet once again does Martin more incline,
Whom all the people worshippeth, with roasted Geese and wine: Marty^.

Both all the day long and the night, now each man open makes
His vessels all, and of the Must often times the last he takes,
Which holy Martyn afterward, allows to be wine,
Therefore they him unto the skies extol, with praise divine:
And drinking deep in tankardes large, and bowls of compass wide,
Yea by these fees the Schoolemaisters have profit great beside:
For with his scholars every one, about do singing go,
Not praising Martyn much, but at the Goose reioyceing tho,
Whereof they oftentimes have part, and money therewithal,
For which they celebrate this feast, with song and music all.
Nicholas.
Saint Nicholas money used to give to Maidens secretly,
Who, that he still may use his woonted liberality
The mothers all their children on the eeue do cause to fast,
And when they every one at night in senseless sleep are cast:
Both Apples, Nuttes, and pears they bring, and other things beside,
As caps, and shoes, and petticotes, which secretly they hide,
And in the morning found, they say, that this saint Nicholas brought:
Thus tender minds to worship Saints and wicked things are taught.
Catheryn.
What should I tell what Sophisters, on Cathrins day devise?
Or else the superstitious toys that Masters exercise.
Andrew.
To Andrew all the lovers, and the lusty wooers come,
Believing through his aid and certain ceremonies done,
(While as to him they presents bring, and conjure all the night)
To have good luck, and to obtain their chief and sweet delight.
Church holyday.
The dedication of the Church is yearly had in mind,
With worship passing Catholic, and in a wondrous kind:
From out the steeple hie is hangde, a Cross and banner fair,
The pauement of the temple strowde, with herbs of pleasant air,
The Pulpets and the aultars all that in the Church are seen,
And every pewe and pillar great, are decked with boughs of green:
The tabernacles opned are, and Images are dressed,
But chiefly he that patron is, does shine above the rest:
A board there stands whereon their Bulls and pardons thick they lay,
That given are to every one that keeps this holy day:
The Idol of the Patron eke, without the door does stand,
And beggeth fast of every man, with pardons in his hand:
Who for because he lackes his tongue, and has not yet the skill
In common peoples languages, when they speak well or ill:
He has his own interpretor, that always stands by,
And unto every man that comes in or out does cry:
Desiring them the Patron there, with gifts to have in mind,
And Popish pardons for to buie, release of sins to find.
The Priest does other Priests procure, and wills every knave,
His harlot for to bring, and all the swarm of Bastards that they have:
On every side the neighbors come, and such as dwell not nere,
Come of their own good wills, and some required to be there.
And every man his weapon has, their swords, and lances long,
Their axes, curriars, pystolets, with pykes and darts among.
The young men in their best array, and trimmest maids appear,
Both Ieasters, Roges, and minstrels with their instruments are hear^*
The Peddler does his pack untruss, the Host his pots does fill,
And on the table bread and drink does set for all that will:
Nor either of them their heap deceyues, for of the others all,
To them th'aduauntage of this feast, and gain, does chiefly fall.
The service done, they either to the tavern fast do fly,
Or to their neighbors house, whereas they feed vnreasonablie:
For six or seven courses, they unto the table bring,
And for their suppers may compare with any heathen king.
The table taken up they rise, and all the youth apace,
The Minstrell with them called go to some convenient place:
Where when with Bagpipe hoarce, he has begone his Music fine,
And unto such as are preparde to dance has given sign,
Comes thither straight both boys and gyrles, and men that aged be,
And married folks of middle age, there also comes to see,
Old wrinckled hagges, and youthful dames, that mind to dau^ce aloft,
Then sundry pastimes do begin, and filthy daunces often:
When Drunkardes they do lead the dance with fray and bloody fight,
That hands, and ears, and head, and face, are torn in woeful plight:
The streams of blood run down the arms, and oftentimes is seen
The carcass of some ruffian slain, is left upon the green.
Here many for their lovers sweet, some dainty thing do buie,
And many to the tavern go, and drink for company,
Whereas they foolish songs do sing, and noyses great do make:
Some in the mean while play at Cards, and some the Dice do shake.
Their custom also is, the Priest into the house to pull:
Whom when they have, they think their game accomplished at full:
He far in noise exceedes them all, and eke in drinking dry
The cups, a prince he is, and holds their heads that speewing lie*
And that with such attendaunce good, that often therewithal
His stomach turns, for which his neighbors like and love him all:
Whom if the lyquor that he tastes do hap to handle so,
As on his feeble legs unto his house he can not go:
But reele and stagger here and there, as oftentimes is seen,
They friendly set him on a horse, and home they carry him cleene:
To show their thankful hearts again, this Catholic array,
Is always used upon this feast, and venerable day.
For souls departed from this life, they also careful be,
All soulne day.
The shaven sort in numbers great, thou shall assembled see,
Where as their service with such speed, they mumble out of hand,
That none, though well they mark, a word thereof can understand,
But soberly they sing, while as the people offering be,
For to releaue their Parents souls that lie in miseree.
For they believe the shaven sort, with doleful harmony,
Do draw the damned souls from hell, and bring them to the sky:
Where they but only here regard, their belly and their gain,
And never troubled are with care of any soul in pain.
Their service thus in order sing, and paid for Mass and all,
They to the Tavern streightwayes go, or to the Parsons hall,
Where all the day they drink and play, and pots about do walk,
Whereas these Cathlicke fathers have such lewd and beastly talk,
As doutlesse would abhorred be, in any stinking stews,
And such as any ruffian would, ashamed be to use.
These are their chief solemnities, and orders all the year,
Which with the popish faith in all agreeing does appear:
And does declare thou see the minds of these same holy men,
What virtues great they have, and what religion lies in them.
Churches.
The like their temples teach, dressed up in more than Pagan guise,
That shines with wicked furniture, before the peoples eyes,
As Idols, aultars, pictures lewd, with arms of men profane,
And Banners, Crosses, burning Lamps, and lights that always flame
Before the Virgins Image fair, and bread in secret put,
That round about with iron grates, and Chauncell close is shut:
That surely not unworthily the Turks believe and say,
The Papists are Idolaters, and have no perfect way
In serving God, who yet account themselves assuredly,
The very Spouse and Church of Christ, that cannot run awry.
Funerals.
See thou how in their life they do believe, and when they die,
How doubtful they? that shauelings seek their own commodity,
Regarding not what hap unto the simple people falls:
For if that any would neglect, the woonted funeralles,
Their singing and their roaring vain, and only here commit
Himself to God, his heir should be constrainde to furnish it,
And punished sore if any thing herein shall wanting be,
Of all the toys that does belong, to such solemnitee.
Think thou they careful are that souls, the heavens do attain,
And Purgatory escape, or rather for their filthy gain?
Some where for children is the like, whom yet they do confess,
For to be just, and innocent, and dye in blessedness:
Their parents for their funeralles, constrained are to pay,
Least of the Popish tyranny, should any part decay.
No faith nor perfect godliness does any where appear,
But fraud, and crafty coulourings, and such deceitful gear.
Behold again their prayers and the books they occupy, Prayers.

Wherewith to God, and to the saints, they pray continually:
And to the Angels use the like, which supersticious kind,
They do not read with any sprite, or zealousnesse of mind:
No cause provoke them to pray, this only them assinde,
To babble much, for otherwise would want no words nor mind,
Ne should they need so many prayers, appointed them to say,
Nor thus to tire their weeried tongue, with mumbling all the day.
Likewise before the heaps of bones, prepared for the same
They stand, and to the spirits and souls in grave, they prayers frame:
And for their good estate they pray, that measure none they know,
Of foolishness, nor wicked deeds do ever cease to flow:
To Church they come with beads of bone, or of some other thing,
Whose middles pierced through are tide, and joined with a string:
Thus fastened, fifty Rosaries, they still account the same,
And thrice so many Psalters they accustomde are to name.
With these unto our Lady, and to God, and to his saints,
They number all their babbling words, and all their tedious plaintes.
So that they number only seek, not caring for the mind,
That woman holiest is by much, and of deuoutest kind:
Whose beads unto her foot do reach, and eake whose maidens so
Dressed up with her in like attire, unto the Church do go.
Charms.
Besides for Charms and Sorseries, in all things they excel,
Both Dardan and the Witches foul, that by Maeotis dwell.
The reason is, that yet to trust in God they have no skill,
Nor will commit themselves unto the almighty fathers will.
If any woman brought abed, amongst them haps to lie,
Then every place enchaunter like, they cleanse and purify:
For fear of sprightes least harm she take, or carried clean away,
Be stolen from thence, as though she than in greatest danger lay,
When as her travails ouerpast, and ended well her pain,
With rest and sleep she seeks to get, her strength decade again.
The like in travails hard they use, and marriages as well,
And eke in all things that they buy, and every thing they sell.
About these Catholics necks and hands, are always hanging charms,
That serve against all miseries, and all unhappy harms:
Amongst the which, the threatening writ of Michael makes one,
And also the beginning of the Gospel of Saint John:
But these alone they do not trust, but with this same they have,
Their barbrous words, and crosses drawn, with blood or painted brave.
They swords enchaunt, and horses strong, and flesh of men they make
So hard and tough, that they ne care, what blows or cuttes they take,
And using Necromancie thus, them selves they safely keep,
From bows, or guns, and from the woolues their cattle, lambs and sheep:
No journey also they do take, but charms they with them bear,
Besides in glistering glasses fair, or else in crystal clear
They sprightes enclose, and as to Prophets true, so to the same
They go, if any thing be stolen, or any taken lame.
And when their Kine do give no milk, or hurt, or bitten sore,
Or any other harm that to these wretches happens more.
Holy days.
Now last behold how they do keep, their sabbath days throghout,
First in the morning finely dressed, they iet the streets about:
With garments fondly iagde and cut, and proud and lofty pace,
And rapyres long about them girt, their great and chiefest grace*
Some others walk into the fields, or else at every gate,
They talk and laugh, and thus begin the day to celebrate.
An other sort together come, and drinking hand to hand,
They quaffe so long, till none of them be able for to stand:
Yea oftentimes they in their seats, with drink are strangled quight,
And yielding up their dronken ghostes, do bid their mates godnight.
But few of them do care for Mass, though every one do say,
And think it holiest is, nor to the Church they go to pray:
But either breakefastes long they make, at home when they arise,
Or drink until the evening star, begin to shine in skies.
Or else before the Church door prate, or in the marketsted.
Now when their dinner once is done, and that they well have fed,
To play they go, to casting of the stone, to run, or shoot,
To toss the light and windy ball, aloft with hand or foot:
Some others try their skill in gonnes, some wrestle all the day,
And some to schools of fence do go, to gaze upon the play:
An other sort there is that do not love abroad to roame,
But for to pass their time at cards, or tables still at hoame:
Some use to sit before their doors, and backbite every man,
Or news devise, or some debate, and strife whereas they can.
The God of wine does never want, in all their sportes and play,
Who when he once has touched the brain, and drawn the mind away,
Of every word arises blows, their manhood to assay,
So that no sunday shall thou see, without some dronken fray.
And thus of custom ends still, this solemn festival,
With drunkenness, a plague unto the brain and members all*
To Ensong are they called straight, by towling of the bell,
But from their place they list not stir, being occupied so well:
They forward with their game do go, and Church and service all,
Commit unto the schoolemaisters, or Vicar general.
Some others to their Ladies sues, being amorous all the while,
Or frame deceytes or subtilties, young maidens to beguile,
The wanton youth to daunsing goes, and wickedly do draw,
The maidens in ring, and wantonness has neither bonds nor law.
And least the youth their pleasure full of whoredom should not take,
In every City common stews, they maintain and they make: Stews.

And Bawdes they suffer openly, and cherish them withal,
Of whom no slender price do here receive nor profit small:
These Catholics and holy men, and Church of Christ on hie,
The same that all the world reform, and heritiks destroy.
To these do come all those whom here their filthy lust prouokes,
Both country men, and forriners, and poor and welthie folks.
Whatsoever they be that have not yet, the yoke of marriage tried,
No kind of shame does drive them hence, nor any care beside.
For lawful here they do it see, and not to be dispisde,
But with the Popish sort to be, an exercise deuisde.
Sometime it also haps, that married men do here resort,
But not without their punishment, if once the youthful sort
Perceive that they do thither come, for this they dearly pay,
And oftentimes are used ill, and bear the blows away:
But at this same the rulers laugh, and nothing do it way,
For Papists whordome do allow, and count it but a play.
For of the polshorne Priests they learn, and them they follow still,
That laws are not of any force to remedy this ill:
The law Scatinian is extinct, and Julian laughed at now,
The Papists every kind of vice, and wickedness allow:
And not alonely in themselves, they do the same permit,
But also unto all that list, with Gold to purchase it.
But here I feign would understand, what strange Apostle he,
That gave unto the Christian sort, this wanton libertee?
That where they freely might enjoy, and have them openly,
And they themselves to take the hier of beastly letcherye?
And notwithstanding this to be true Catholics in fine,
The perfect servants here of God, and Church of Christ divine?
Of their religion, life, and deeds, learn thou their faith at full,
That they with empty shadow thee not into error pull.
This was the guise of Corynth great, and Cyprus eke of old,
While darcknesse raind, and Satan ^oule, his scepture there did hold:
But with a worthy cloak they cover now this whoredom vile,
Least that the youth should hap both maids and matrons to defile.
Who would not muse to see the wit of these same catholics,
Their sharp inventions, and devise, in all their proper tricks?
This thing could Moses not perceive, that all things else did see,
Deuteronomy 2^. 1. Cor 5.6.7.10.
Who wild that whoremong^rs should none among the people be:
And banishte all the ^^rlottes qu^ght, as God did him advise,
No: Paul it saw being lifted up, above the starrie skies:
Who did forbid that any man, his members framde of right, Heb. 13. Gal. 5.
Ephe. 5. 1. These. 4.

To be the dwelling place of Christ, and of the holy spright:
Should unto Harlots give, and make the same thereby to be,
The body of a hoar, this stain and blot commanded he
To be excluded far from saints, and such as christened be.
But they have nothing for to do, with Moses nor with Paul,
Nor any honest things they will obey, nor laws at all.
Themselves they pardon and forgive, dispensing wondrouslye,
As men that only here possessed the keys of heaven hye.
I many things do over pass, nor have they every where,
Their customs like, for every realm has his devised gere:
Yea both in Cities great, and in the villages thereby,
There are that do such doltish dreams, defend maliciously,
That quight contrary are to Christ, and to religion right,
Which neither can thou easily know, nor well in verse resight.
Now when these Popish loathsome limbs, by no means we can see
In life nor in their travail here, the limbs of Christ to be,
Nor can in any wise embrace, the fond religion vain,
And shameful orders to the world, of God contrary plain,
Nor doctrine of so wicked faith, to Christian people give,
But rather as the Apostles teach, do simply seek to live,
Rejecting toys and man's device, as which we surely know,
To be detested of that Prince, that lightnings down does throw:
We here are called Heritykes, and worthy thought to be,
Of halter, sword, consuming fire, and each extremitee.
We punished are, our houses sealde, or from our country far
We banished be, or else oppressed at home with civil war:
Whereas the dreadful Soldier does consume, and clean deuours,
The goods that here has gotten been, by toil and pain of ours.
These things these Catholics attempt, when in so many years,
By scriptures sure they cannot plant, this foolish faith of theirs:
Nor ours with scriptures overthrow, that now they seek to make
The Prince of hell and Christ to join in one, and parts to take.
For (all ashamde) they plain perceive, that long they cannot stand,
With this religion and this life, if once do come in hand,
The word of God the heavenly light, and that abroad do shine,
The twelve Apostles doctrine, and that blessed court divine.
Nor good it seems yet to them (such is their wisdom hie,)
To grant that they have erd in any thing or gone awrie.
For shame it is that learned men, and such as famous be,
For Mitars and for Crosiar staves, amongst the Christiantee
Christ nor the Apostles faith to know, that perfect is and just,
But to be led with dreams of men, whom none may safely trust.
From hence proceeds all their grief, and all their cruel hate,
That with effusion of our blood, they stablish their estate:
And will not here be pacified by any other means,
Except we do allow and like, their lewd and monstrous dreams:
And altogether run in one, like flocks for company,
To false and wicked worshippings, and vile idolatry:
And knowledge them for Lords of faith, and rulers of us all,
Although they teach no doctrine of the King celestial.
Often has it been agreed that either part should freely use
Their own religion, serving God as best they list to choose:
And neither part the other for to trouble or molest,
With wars or books, that Germany might live in peace or rest.
But Papists can no peace abide, continually they write,
And both with words, and wretched deeds, most cruelly do bite:
Not only us, which might (perhaps) be well enough endurde,
But also Gods most holy word, and gospel here assurde.
If tumults on our parts arise, or any great ado,
Or if our men do armor take, being forced thereunto,
And by the law of arms do burn, and spoil their enemy,
And take the pillage of their foes, immediately they cry:
The wicked Gospel works this, behold in what a plight
These fellows live, the Devil brought this Gospel first to light:
It Turkish is, and not the same, that Luke wrought long ago:
And spightfully they slander it, with many raylings mo:
As if that any Preacher here, did ever this allow,
Or any did by word of Christ, such cruelty auow.
They know full well themselves that none of ours did ever teach,
To use such violence nor this unto the people preach:
Yet with their vile infectiue tongues, and mouths enuenemde tho,
With poison that in hellish lakes, and Stygian streams does flo,
The Gospel of the Lord they do, most spightfully defame,
And herewithall the Ministers and Preachers of the same.
But who can Princes govern here, or any means devise,
To keep them in, from using force against their enemies?
Why do they not as well diswade their Catholics, and blame
Them for their force and cruelty, that do the very same?
And boldly every where destroy, and every man molest,
Yea even their very friends at home, that feign would live at rest.
What kind of Gospel teach those men, that even openly
With bitter words and books persuade men to such cruelty?
Are these to any man unknown? does France and Italy
Not openly declare the same, and plainly testify?
Do not the pulpettes of the Pope, persuade this martial might,
And pardons every man his sins that in their quarrel fight?
But sure the wallet them beguiles, that hanges behind their back,
And better others faults they see, than what themselves do lack:
Accounting here for catholics, themselves and all their train,
And others all as heritickes, and wicked people plain:
Wherefore the chiefest members of this holy popish state,
Their ceremonies and their days, they yearly consecrate.
Their foolish faith and beastly life, I openly do show,
That all the world may understand, and every man may know,
That neither Christ nor perfect faith, they any whit do way,
But only seek to look aloft, and boldly for to say,
That they the book of Peter are, and holy Catholics,
And we unhappy castawayes, and cursed heritickes.
But wherein are they Catholics? because they follow here
The truth? but what they follow and believe does plain appear.
So it is that in number they and countries us excel,
So may thou both the Turks and Mores, call Catholics as well.
Herewith I judge that every man, that has an upright heart,
Does understand how just our cause has been for to depart
From this their monstrous faith, and from their lewd ydolatree,
And for to shonne these popish members all of each degree:
As men that neither Christ do know, nor ever seek to find,
Nor suffer such as would, but keep them still in darcknesse blind.
FINIS.
A Table of the principal matters contained in this Book.
A
ABbot of what Monks. 21 His conditions. 22
Abottes their confirmation. 6 Absolution how the Papists use it. 34
Absurdities that the Pope commands to be believed in the ministering of the
Lords supper. 31 Agat the stone. 39 Acoluth his office. 13 Aduent. 44
Aduoutrie a pastime. 58 Agatha her virtue against fire. 38 Agnes her feast. 46
Agnus dei. 46 Albe. 13 Alters their dedication. 13 Altars their washing. 51
Altars their number how they sprang. 33 Andrew his feast. 55 Angels about the
sepulcher. 52 Alsoulne day. 56 Anne her virtue. 38 Annates commodious to the
Pope. 6 Anthony his help. 38 Appeals to Rome. 24 Appolin the virgin her
virtue. 38 Aquisgran. 39 Altars anointed. 25 Archbishop of Colin. 9 Ascension
day. 53 An Ass of wood. 50 Assumption of the virgin Marie. 55 Avarice a common
disease with papists. 27 Austen his time. 47 Ashwednesday. 49 Almose to what end
given to papists. Absolution for works. 34 Annoynting of finger head, and
hand. 34
B.
BIshop his order at the Altar. 10.11 Baptism done in Latin. 31 Baptism the
order and use. 30 Profane by the papists. 31
Bachanalles. 47.48 Baptism how it was used at ye first. 31 Baptism defiled
with foolish gestures. 31 Barbara what she carries. 53 Barbara her virtues. 38
Bennet Monks their Abbot. 21 Bennet why he forbad his Monks the Bible. 22
Bennet his virtue. 38 Benifites of our Lady to her worshippers. 35.36 Bible
the interpretation belonging only to the Pope. 3 Blase his day.47. his virtue.
38 Boemians worshippers of ye Pope. 2 Benifites given by the Papystes for
money. 27 Breeches of Saints showed for Relics. 38 Butter to be eaten, a
sin. 49 Bell of numberg Heruaunt. 41.42 Belles anointed. 25 Bishop his
furniture and apparel. 9 Bishops their description, their oath their order
in preaching. 8 Bonefires. 54 Begging Friars their order. 22 Bawdes allowed by
the Papists. 58 Begging thought a beauty. 23 Bawlinge Friars set on to get
money. 41 Bones of saints dug up for gain. 39 Bread changed into ye body of
christ. 31 Blockheades deputies to bishops.
C.
CHristning of Belles. 14 Towling against tempests. 41
Candels at pilgrymages. 39 Candlesticks offered by Pilgrims. 39 Commons their
riot. 16 Canonical hours. 16 Common law how it came. 26 Commons arrayed in
black. 16 Prisoners their God. 38
Carbuncle. 39 Cardinals their intertainment. 7 Cardinals a burden to the
world. 8 their manner of polling. 7
Carpes offered, to what Saint. 55 Charterhouse Monks. 42 Catherin her weapons.
53 her feast. 55
Catherin her virtue. 38 Catholics who be. 29 Catholic faith. 29 Chrisme. 14
Chrisme, the use thereof in baptism. 31 Chrisme used about children. 34
Christopher. 53 Christopher his aid. 38 Christ why he ascended. 36 why he
washed his disciples feet. 51
Christ poor. 39 Christ our righteousness. 30 our advocate before the father.
37
Christ what he has done for us. 4 what he gives us in his supper. 33 how he
is always eaten. 32
Christ and Moses their difference. 11 Christ his birth. 44 his bare ^^^ue. 34
Churches seldom built to him, his offering in Mass. 32
Christ eaten of good and evil. 32 joined with beliall. 59
Christ his estimation with the Turk, and the Papists. 43 Christians their
true penance. 34 Chrysolyt. 39 Candlemasse day. 47 Coffer in the Church. 41
Citizens purchase ye carrion of an Ass. 50 Coleyn tho Archbishop. 9 Counsel
none without the Pope. 4 Confirmation popish. 33.34 Corinthians their Custom.
58 Christ his body to be sold. 27 Corpus Chris^i day, 53 Coribantes. 45
Cross kiss^d by popish priests. 51 Crosses abo^t Papists necks. 57 Course
prayers to our Lady. 36 Curtizans, or Courtiers of Rome. 16 Church of Christ,
her true Citizens. 29 her power, from whom she has it. 2
Coniurer his office. 13 Court of Rome what servants they like. 16 Cowle of
Friars fled unto. 42 Cardinals hattes. 7 Childermasse day. 45 Cardinals
their oath. 7 Care sunday. 49 Coals of saint Laurence to be seen. 37 Cardinals
imbassadors. 7 Chrisome for children. 31 Candle used at Christnings. 31 Casting
of snow balls. 48 Caves sought in time of tempest. Clappers Church walls
anointed. 3^ Churches garnished. 37 Churches bear the name of every saint,
but seldom of Christ. 37 Christ his coat to be seen. Common people deceived
by inquisitors. Councels in Germany. Canons their Catskin hoodes. 16 Camewse a
ston^
D.
DEscription of Abbayes. 21 Dancing at Bonefires. 54 Devils enclosed in
Crystal. 57 Damasus the Pope deuisor of ye hours canonical 16 Danes
worshippers of the Pope. 2 Daniel his life. 19 Dardanus a witch. 57 Difference
in days. 44 Divine honor not due to our Lady. 36 Deaths picture carried
about. 50 Dedication of Churches. 12 Damnation the reward of doubtful mind.
43
E.
ENglish worshippers of the Pope. 2 Ephod of the Jews. ^6.47 Excommunication
how it was used at the first. 35 Exequies. 57 Eggs forbidden. 49 Eggs lawful
to be eaten. 27 Eggs offered by pilgrims. Emeralde. 39 Extreme unction the
use. Extreme vnctio^ takes away sins. Easter even. 52 Easter day. 52
F.
Flesh forbidden. 49 Funerals their order. 57 Fever what saint helps. 38
Feasts of our Lady. 36 Faith in christ defaced by the Pope. 34 Florian his
force. 38 Frenchmen worshippers of the Pope. 2 Falling sickness who helps.
38 Fasting of Papists. Faith only in Christ. 29 Freedom of Priests. 26
Frankensense offered by Pilgrims. 39 Frankensense burned. 3 Flowers and bows
on palm s^nd. 50
G.
GOdfathers to Belles. 14 God how he is pleased. 34 God his power and
pitifulness denied by Papists. 35.36 God and man not pleased in one sort. 35
God pleased with Mass. 33 God called upon in trouble. 35 Who flies unto him.
29
Gospel how it is slaundered by Papists. 59 Gospel where it is preached the
Pope decreaseth. 59 Saint George. 53 Saint George his force. Germans
worshippers of the Pope. 2 S. Gertrude her force against mice. 38 Greeks never
worshipped the Pope. 2 God gives all things freely. Saint Gregory his force.
38 Gain of ungodliness, 55 Gospel of Saint John worn about necks. 57 Gods
laws and man's far different. 35 Good Friday. 51 Giving of orders.
H.
HAlowing of the Font. 52 Holy water his use. 41 Helpers fourteen. 38 Horses
offered in Pylgrimage. 39 Halowing of Candles. 47 their virtue.47. their use
against tempests. 42
Heads of Priests anointed. 25 Halowing of meats. 52 Heaven to be sold.
Hallowing of Churches. 12 Horses healed by Steven. 45 Holidayes how they are
used. 57 Hay of the Manger where Christ lay showed as relics. 39 Hens
offered to Vitus. 54 Hanging of herrings. 49 Herod's cruelty. 45 Saint Huldrich
his force and help. 38 Harlots punished by Moses law. 58 Holy land sought in
Pilgrimage. 39 Hogs offered by Pilgrims. 58 Hunting for prebendes. 17
Harlots allowed to every priest. 18 Holy water. 42 Hungarians worshippers of ye
Pope. 2
J.
John the Baptist his feast. 54 John Baptist his going before the singing Cake.
53 In the supper what is given. 33 Inquisitors of Heresies. 23 Iacinct. 39
Irish men obedient to the Pope. 2 Saint James rich. 38 Jasper a stone. 39
Saint John the Evangelist his force against poison. 45 Idolles. 41 Idols their
tabernacles set open. 55 Jesuits a sect. 25 Indulgens. 41 Infantes thought to
be possessed with deuilles. 31 Infants their exequies. 43 Inquisition what
articles it has. 23 to whom it is committed. 23
Italians worshippers of the Pope. 2 Judas torn in pieces. 51 Jews by what
they think to be saved. 30 Jews did all things by Gods commandment, and
Papists all of their own head. 25 Idol of the virgin exceeding Solomon in
costly clothes. 40 Images covered. 40 Jerusalem sought unto in pilgrimage. 39
Image of Christ buried. Images offered by Pilgrims. 39 Image of our Lady how
it is clad.
K.
Keys of the Pope. 2 Knights of Duchland. Kings anointed. 25 Kings kneeling
to an Ass. 50 Kings their obedience to the Pope. 4
L.
License to eat flesh. 27 Loy his force. 38 Larence his virtue. 38 Lectoror
his office. 13 Saint Leonard his virtue. 38 Laws of God how the Pope uses
them. 3 Lechery of priests. 27 Linus Pope his device. 47 Loath his life in
Sodom. 19 Luke the God of Painters. 38 Lucifers fall from heaven. 1 Lying
thought no shame. 47 Lent. 49
M.
MAry beneficial to husbandmen. 36 Mar^in worshipped with chese. 55 Maidens
how they choose their husbands by Onions. 44 Mass opens heaven. 33 Mass
what commodity it brings. 32 Marriage shunde of Papists. 27 of Monks. 20
Marriage broken by the Pope. 3 Marriage made and broken in co^sistorie. 15
Monks their maundie. 51 Men of Cipresse their manners. 58 Men pleased with
deeds. Murder made light of. 26 Mediators. 38 Milk of the virgin Mary a
relic. 37 Milk not eaten. 49 Maskers. Saint Martine benificiall to
Schoolemaisters. 55 Moon observed by Papists. 44 Magic used. 57 Saint
Magnus his virtue. 39 Mahomets law when and how it began. 2 Mischiefs from
heaven. 1 S. Mark his virtue against death. 38 Mary where she is most
worshipped. 39 Maryes three coming to the Sepulcher. 52 Married men coming to
the stews punished. 48 Saint Martin his feast. 55 Merchant men worshippers of
the virgin. 36 Merits sought in all things. 40 Merits their estimation. 40
Merits to be sold. 27 bought of Monks, by whom. 40
Michaels Epistle. 57 Mass her commodities. 33 Masses ordained of kings and
princes. 33 Masses what and how great benifites they bring. 33 Murder made
light of. 26 Massing garments offered by pilgrims. 39 Monkery. 42 Monks
welthie. 20 the inuenters of all mischief. 36
Monks their life, their studyes, and offices. 18.19 Mo^ks their chastity,
poverty, sects. 20 Monks their delicacie and riot. 21 their swarms how they
spring and increase. 31
Monks merits to be sold. Monks called to sleep in the day time, and whic.
21 Monasteries described. 21 Moses and Christ their difference. 11 Mullets
offered to saints. 55 Miracles esteemed of the world. 22 Monks meddle with
wordly matters 20 Myse and rattes driven away by saints. 38 Mariners
worshippers of the Virgin Marie. 36 Monks where they made their nests. 21 Money
snatched from the altar. 45 Money who gives, what blessings he receyues. 27
Maids how they learn the conditions of such as shall be their husbands.
Maidens how they guess their husbands in Aduent. 44 Maids drawing in the
plowe. 49 A wodden child in swadlingclouts. 45
Making of a king. 46 Monks their daintiness. 19
N.
Nails where christ was crucified 38 Nicholas his help, his feast, and
worship. 55 Napkins of Saints preserved. 37 S. Nicholas gives gold to maids.
55
O.
Offering of Lammes. 46 Oxen offered in pilgrimage. 39 Our Ladies fast. 36 Old
fire quenched and new hallowed. 52 Our Lady of Ratspon. 39 Our Ladies Monks.
36 Offerings of the people. 28 Officialles and their office. 15 Oil the use in
baptism. 31 Saint Ottilia her virtue. 38 Offering of fish. 55
P.
POwlers. 47 Plowing on Ashwednesday. 49 Papists skillful in Logique. 57
Papists trust in Astrology. 44 Pope author and perswader of wars. 60 Pope
usurps ye state of ye Emperor. 4 Prebendaries old and new. 15 Priests
their chief holiness in song. 53 Paskall. 52 Pilgrimage to Compostell. 39
Pilgrims decked with scallop shells. 40 Priests their punishment for marying. 27
Pope his consistories. 15 Pieces of the Cross of Christ showed in every
Church. 38 Pope his triple Crown. 5 Procession Week. 53 Priests fingers
anointed. 13 Preachers given to covetousness. 1 Preachers their evil life
before the Papacy. 15 Papists all teach to be doubtful. 43 Protestants their
wars, how the Papists account. 59 Pope commands to trust in our own
deeds. 35 Prayers against the Fever. 48 Popish faith. 29 Papists ryding about
corn. 54 Precious stones offered in pilgrimage. 39 Papists seek like Giants
to get heaven by their own works. 30 Purgatory fire. 5 Priests all shaven.
25 Popish impiety. 53 Pope the master of ungodliness. 34 Pardons their
order. 41 Plates of lead fastened to the Palle. 46 Penance. 34 Papists their
pastime on holy days. 58 Princes which they gave lands to Monasteries. 21 Pope
his riches. 6 Palles their description. 46 Palles their use. 47 Palm sunday
how it is kept. 50 Palms against tempests. 42 Pope whether and how he is
holiest. 6 Pope whether he be the Churches head. 3 How he uses his keys. 2
worshipped of all men as God. 2 how he gets his riches 6 how he knows the
secrets of every Prince. 24
Papists put all their trust in Mass Pope his power in Hell. Pope his pardon.
Pope his apparel, his going a warfare. Pope his horrible doctrine of penance.
his majesty, riot. etc.
Popish faith. 29 Popish pardons. 41 Popish Parsons what they preach. 17
Papists their patrones. Saint Paul welthy. 40 S. Paul's sentence against
whoremongers. 58 Papists washing of feet. 51 Pilgrimages, their order, their
estimation. 39 Saint Parnell her virtue. 37 Saint Peter the rich. 6 Peter his
book. 60 his running to the sepulcher. 52
Persecution of Protestants. 59 Penance of Papists and of Christians. 34
Poloners worshippers of the Pope. 2 Pope how he brings the people in
subjection. 4 Power of the Church wherein it consistes. 2 Prayers of Papists.
57 Pope how he has brought in subjection Princes. 4 Princes their obedience to
the Pope. 4 Popish Psalter. 57 Purgation how the Pope uses it. 50 Papists
refuge. Papists count themselves kings for their shaven crowns. 25 Pope
makes no difference betwixt the Apostles, and Simon Magus. 34
Q.
QViermen. 16
R.
RVnning in Charetes. Radish eaten with devotion. 52 Ratspon. 39 S. Roke his
virtue against scabbes. 37 S. Roman against Devils. 37 Rosaries certain
prayers made by Monks. 36 Russians worshippers of the Pope. 2 Running under
stayers for fear of thu^der. 42
S.
SExten compelled to ware a surplesse. 26 Sickness healed by Mass. 33 Summer
a boy. 50 Shoes of Saints showed for relics. Single life. 27 Supper of the
Lord why it was ordained. 31 Supper of the Lord how the papists use it.
50.52 Supper of the Lord changed into Mass. Supper of the Lord applied for
merits. 32 how many maids defiled. 31.32
Sins forgiven to the faithful. 31 Sins wyped away by Mass 33 Spaniardes
obeyers of the Pope. 2 Spear that slew Christ a relic. 39 Surplis what good
it does. 26 School masters part of the Ass 50 Schole masters surplesse
wearers. 26 Shroue tuesday how it is used. 48 Sheep their Saint. 38 Singing
Cake worshipped. 53 Saints clokes preserved. 39 Shearing of cloth for fear
of Mothes a Proverb. 41 Spittle used in baptism. Steven his feast. 38
Suffragans their office. Susanna her aid. 38 Sacraments.5. devised by the
Pope. 33 Sault used in baptism. 31 Sapphire. 39 Satisfaction. 34 Scatmia^ law
against lechers abrogated. Scots worshippers of the Pope. 2 Silken garments
offered by Pilgrims Sacraments only two appointed by Christ. 30 Scilence of
Belles for three days. 50
T.
TAbles. Toothach what saint heals. 38 Twelfeday. 45 Turks and Papists
compared. Turks how they believe, how they think of papists, that they
have more reason than Papists. The Papists members cannot be taken for the
members of Christ.
W.
Wars caused by the Pope, and when. 5 Worship of Saints, merits of saints,
their force in penance. 34 Worshippers of themselves at Spires. 34 Wells
changed into wine. 44 Winter a boy. 50 Vaunt of good works. 29 Without
merits nothing. 32 Saint Valentine his virtue. 38 Saint Vincent his virtue. 38
Vintners worshippers of s. Urban. 38 Wine changed into the blood of Christ.
Water changed into wine. S. Vitus his virtue, his feast and worship. 38 Saint
Urban his feast, worship, and virtue. 38 Vrsula. 38 S. Wendelin, his virtue and
aid. 38 S. Wolfgang his virtue, and aid. 38 Whisontide. 53 Women in childbed
defended from Deuiles. 57 wheel used in showing of fastes. 36 Willow branches
cast before an Ass. 50 Virtuous life. 19 Whoredom. 58
FINIS.
Faults escaped.
The first leaf, fifth verse, for Sceptor, read Scepter.

The sixth leaf, eleventh verse, for hoar, read whore.

The eight leaf, second verse, for dranes, read droanes.

The ninth leaf, verse 27 for show, read shoe.

The tenth leaf, verse the seventh, for wood, read hoode.

The twelfth leaf, verse 61 for Damocratus, read Democritus.

The thirtenth leaf, verse the first, for Great, read Greek.

The same leaf, verse.26. for does, read to.

The sixtene leaf, verse.17. For Damassus, read Damasus.

The.19. leaf, verse.69. for. In darkness lives? more needs it the light.
etc.

Read thus. In darkness does it live? more needs the light of holy men.

The twenty leaf, verse.62. For should, read toulde.

The.21. leaf, verse.37. for or, read all.

The.26. leaf, verse 50* for cherely, read clearly.

The same leaf, verse.63. For Luke wrought, read Luke wrote.

The.55. leaf, verse 28. For the last he takes, read the taste he takes.

The.44. leaf, verse.3. For steates, read streates.

The.48 leaf, verse 38. For Scent read sent.

The.56 leaf, verse.6. For their heap deceaues, read their hope deceaues.

The last leaf, the first side, and.29. live. For so it is, read so is it.

To the right honorable and worthy Lords, the governors and Senate of Bern,
Thomas Naogeorgus wishes. etc.
WHEN AS I UNDERSTOOD (right honorable Lords) your common wealth to be
thorovvly furnished and beautified, not only with good laws, and
ordinances, but also with pure religion and sound doctrine, and pleasantly to
flourish with all honest and virtuous studies, I can scarcely express how
joyful it was unto me: and so much the more, because you have determined to
give no place at all to the adversaries of Gods truth, who now do labor with
the uttermost of their force, to darcken the light of Christ, and to bring in
again the stinking and contagious mistes of false and ydolatrous religion.
This surely is the stedfastnes of the known and assertaine truth, from which
in these days (the more pity) have great numbers vvithdravvne theirselues,
either for fear, or hope of living and revvard, tha^ which can nothing be
more wicked, nor of more force to the establishing of ungodliness. For
according to the saying of saint Peter, far better were it for a man never
to have known the truth, than after he has entered the path of true
godliness to forsake the truth for any cause, and refusing Christ to cleave to
the illusions of Satan. For what thing do our adversaries more shoot at, tha^
to accuse us of lightness and unfaithfulness, and more and more to entangle
us with their errors and entisements? VVo be to the world for offenses,
says our savior Christ. What commendation, and how great a glory it is in
so many storms and tempests, yea, in the Shipwreck of such a number,
rightly to hold the helm, and to give neither place to vvinde nor vvaue, no
man there is but knovves. This glory of your common wealth, I do more a great
way esteem, than if you had brought in subjection some mighty and large
dominion, because that earthly things with heavenly things and truth (which
is Christ) with the world are not to be compared, and earthly things, be we
pleased or displeased, will we, or nill we, must shortly be forgone. But the
truth remaynes, and shall keep you for ever. Go therefore happily forvvard
(right vvorthie Governors) having obtained such virtue and constancy.

For thus to heaven do we go, as the Poet in a far more base and other thing
affirms. Greatly beholding unto you are all those that love and worship our
Lord Jesus Christ, but especially the people that are under your government:
Considering their neighbors round about them dwelling in darkness, they
enjoy the most svveete and comfortable light of the Gospel, and that thorovv
your wisdom, council, authority, steadfastness, and of long time great
care in aduaunceing the Gospel of God. I vvish therefore well from the
bottom of my heart, both to you and your common wealth, and minding to
declare my good will toward you, I find nothing meeter tha^ to dedicate this
present work unto you, that if it shall happen to come unto our posterity,
your commendable and careful diligence in setting forth the Gospel may not
be passed in silence. Neither do I doubt but that (according to your
accustomed gentleness) you will take in good part this my poor labor and
good will. The Lord Jesus long preserve both you and your government in
prosperous estate.

From Campidun the first of March. 1550.
The spiritual Husbandry. The first Book.
OF holy husbandmen, and of the art we mind to sing,
That mortal minds does til, and blinded breasts to good does bring,
What noisome plants out of ye hearts corrupted thou shall weed
Before that of the Gospel there thou sowste the joyful seed:
And how the fields are to be dressed, and eke the certain way,
To keep the seed in saftie, so as it do not decay,
Nor that the prince of hell abroad the cockle foul do fling,
Or of the lewdness of the ground, or faulty soil it spring.
Herein unknown to Poets old, that long agone did write,
O Christ the perfect son of God, and fathers Image right,
Grant me thine aid: for wisdom all from thee alonely springs,
And worthy Poets through thy help, have written worthy things.
Thine own affairs are had in hand, of this so sacred pain,
Thou art the cause, for it belongs unto thy heavenly reign:
Thou sendes the husbandmen and art the plowmans chiefest aid,
The blessed corn that springs up, shall in thy barnes be laid.
And you most worthy sovereign Lords, and chosen fathers grave,
That in this age above the rest, the chiefest honor have,
For learning and religion pure, of Muses taking charge,
As Bern your Country does declare, and all your Empire large.
For there true godliness is taught, and Christ and faith withal,
And place assignde to virtuous wits, and studyes liberal.
You are not (as a great sort are) of Christ ashamde awhit,
That here amongst a thousand foes, in blinded world does sit,
And calls all men in the end unto his heavenly reign,
Accept these simple verses here, and favor this my pain.
At first the almighty father framde the world, and mortal kind,
In perfect state, and yielding fruit such as himself assignde,
Who wholly gave themselves to him with all their force and might,
For first of all within their hearts, he sowde a knowledge right:
And gave them reason to discern in every kind of thing,
That in the foming seas, or air, or on the earth does spring.
Thus when the passing force of his almighty name did shine,
He plaste in man a dreadful fear, of his estate divine.
Which least it caused fearful flight, or stirde up deadly hate,
He ioynde a pleasant love withal of his excelling state:
Whereby the fear and reurence of his mighty Maiestee,
With fellowship of fervent love might safely guided be.
For with himself he framed man, both Lord of earth and seas,
And after death to live with him in everlasting ease:
Providing him to feed upon the fruit of every tree,
And pleasant herbs, that so he might his careful mercy see.
Who would not with his heart esteem and love with all his mind,
A Lord so good and gracious, and of so gentle kind?
Yet least that cause of fear should want, and favor breed disdain,
And to much wealth inflame his heart, and prick his idle brain:
He gave him one commandment, to bar him of his will,
That is, he should not taste the tree of knowing good or ill:
Except they would their life forgo, and lose these gifts of grace.
Besides all this he planted in the deepest of their mind,
That unto other creatures to, of nature was assignde,
That they ne should with hate pursue their kind, nor overthrow,
But with a friendly faithful heart each other friendship show,
And give advice what best to do, and mischief how to let,
Such happy seeds in heart of man at first were deeply set,
By him that all thing here did frame, and thus he left this field
Of own accord, his pleasant fruits and good increase to yield.
But straight the Stygyan Prince that late from skies was hedlong thrown
For proud presu^ptuous mutenie and trespass erst unknown,
Both hating God himself above, and all his virtuous deeds,
Began to frown and lowre on man, and on these pleasant seeds:
Determining these plants plucked up, to sow contrary grain.
And taking on himself the shape and cloak of Serpent plain,
Our father first he does persuade, to break the sacred hest,
That so he might both ra^e and pluck due fear from out his breast,
And cease the love and certain hope of Gods assistance known,
Whereby the ground disordred might with weeds be ouergrowne.
Ne faylde he of his purpose here, for why the woman's heart
Consented straight to tast^ the (...), and gave her husband part.
As ground that long has lien vntilde, is filled every where
With humblockes, thorns, and thistles sharp, and other hurtful gere:
So was the mind of man oppressed with mischiefs foul and great,
And harmefull things deserving death, had there abiding seat.
The knowledge of the almighty Lord with darkness was disgraste,
Our judgment eke in worldly things, with blindness great defaste.
Both fear and reverence due to God, were banished clean away,
Love cold, and hope of help divine did utterly decay.
In place whereof sprang hate, and flight, contempt of God beside,
And nothing that was good or right, the will corrupt applide.
If any good desire by chance, of virtue mooues the mind,
The force does straight begin to fail, in slothful body blind:
And sin prouokes to greater crime, not suffering them aright
To run their race, but mooues against the Lord both day and night.
Nor needful is it much to move, for of his proper sway,
Like Lead he always hedlong falls, and runs the hurtful way.
Do thou not see how leaving God, his honor here we give
To trifles vain, and wretched men that on the earth do live?
If that a king that may to day, or else to morrow die,
Receive us into favor great, and give us honor hie,
Or if of glistring gold we have abundaunce in our hands,
Or have our bags with silver full, to purchase Lordly lands,
Or Jewels great, or precious stones, or costly rich array,
And friends in number great about us dwell and bear the sway,
Or store of lusty soldiers have, to encounter with the fo:
O Lord how then we look aloft, how stately then we go?
And think our selves in happy case, and blessed on every side,
How fowly does our filth appear, to him that all does guide?
With most men for their God alone, the belly here is thought,
And every thing as it commaundes, is either shund or sought.
Some place a lo^t on aulters hie the sharpness of their wit,
And some the bodies force, and as a God they worship it.
But no man labors so the will of God for to obey,
As all men do for trifles vain, that fade and pass away.
Of Gods innumerable sort are found, by fear and love,
And in the mean time he dispisde that reigns and rules above.
What mischief can be found, but does from blinded ignorance spring?
Or what contempt of God? to swear is thought a decent thing.
With Gods most dreadful name above, both men and children play,
And diffrence none is made betwixt the laws divine, and lay.
What God commands to be shund, or wills to be wrought,
Is to the ears a torment great, and dreadful poison thought.
Nor unto him they seek for aid, nor confidence they have,
But rather seek to stocks and stones, than him that all does save.
No honor to their parents due, at any time they pay,
A hell it is to feel the yoke, or master to obey.
The mind desires to run at large, and raunge at libertee,
The blood does boil about the hearts of such as harmed be:
And slaughters great attempted are, and deadly battayles fought,
And at the wagging of a straw, good laws are set at naught.
Beside both vile and beastly love in every place does reign,
That none can keep the holy rytes of sacred bed from stain.
The Harlots eke among themselves, their bodies do defile:
Who can declare the shameful theft, and ways for to beguile,
That commonly with youth does spring? deceyt does most delight,
And sweet it seems an others goods to get against all right.
And look what wants in doing wrong, with force and wretched will,
Is recompenst with railing mouth, and spiteful language ill.
The teeth together gnash, and poison foul abroad do spit,
As well against the unworthy, as such as deserved it.
Discention sown, and lies abroad in eurye place do reign,
And filthy talk, and words unclean, are used of wretches vain.
The simple man deceived still, with words that feigned be,
And from the heart the flattring tongue does always disagree.
As raging seas with boystrous winds do swell aloft and rore,
And drive the mountains of their waves against the rocken shore:
Even so the wretched fiend of man, both every day and night,
Spewes out his filth, and joys to offend the sovereign Lord of light.
Ne thinks he meet for him it is to sleep, to drink, to eat,
Except he do before commit, some heinous trespass great.
Thus in the heart of man the prince of hell had sown his seeds,
And ouergrowne his precious plants, with his ungracious weeds,
And had oppressed godliness, while it was yet but green,
That scarcely any where the steps of virtue might be seen.
And brought unto the Chains of death, and misery all their days.
Men first created unto life, and to the almighty's praise.
Poor Adam spoiled of his grace, in naked plight and bare,
Perceived straight this hellish seed and never ceassing care.
Wherefore in Figtree vesture clad, himself by flight he hydes,
Both doubting of the mercy of God, and of his life besides.
Whose sight he shoonnes, and eke his voice he quaketh for to hear,
As does the Chicken of the Kyte, or Ox of Lion near.
And surely underneath the yoke of death and dreadful sin,
Both he and his posterity, for evermore has been:
But that the almighty Lord above took pity of his case,
And gave against the devils thorns, and seed of cursed grace,
A remedy, an other seed, his blessed word divine,
And promise of his favor made, how that in after time,
A holy virtuous man and strong, should rise and succor bring,
And tread upon the serpents head, and cease his deadly sting.
And purge away the sins of man, though loss he do sustain,
Not void of ouerpoyse, but with his profit great and gain,
Commanded Adam for to sow this in his sense unsound,
To oppress thereby (if that he could not pluck out of the ground)
The deep set roots that Satan's hand had planted there before,
And so become a husbandman for him and others more,
That after sprang, and so resist by all the means he may,
The serpent still with earnest prayer, and with a perfect way:
And for to teach from hand to hand, to his posterity,
The art and all the whole effect of holy husbandry,
The coming of the blessed seed, and promises divine,
That godliness and hope of life might still remain in time,
And be preserved in the world: and that he never yield,
And boldly meet the prince of hell, and face him in the feeld.
He ioying in the word of God, and in his happy state,
Of skillful perfect husbandman that he receyude of late,
Withstood the devil well, and dressed his heart with tillage due,
And plucked out nettles, thistles, and each other weeds that grue.
And found again the love of God, whereof he felt the smell
And in the virtuous order of his life declarde it well.
The fruit of righteousness he looude, and all that in him lay,
Represt the raging of the flesh, and caused it to'bay,
He hated every wicked act, and every sinful lore,
That was displeasing unto God, and all his sins before
With prayer and streams of perfect tears, he wypte and washed away,
And all his hope and confidence, in Christ does surely lay.
This same unto his wife he taught, and to his children dear,
And all his offspring every one unto his latest year:
And then to Seth he left the plowe, who eke committed it
To Enock, that applyde it well, with all his force and wit,
And sowde the word and faith abroad, with luckie fruitful hand,
And so did all the younger sort that after ought the land.
Old Satan hating all this while, the seed so promised,
The chief esteemers of the same, and faithful brotherhed,
And seeking all men for to draw unto the infernal reign,
Applyde himself with all his force, and all his hellish train,
To overthrow these fathers deeds, and all their work to spoil,
And under cloak of truth with lies, he poisons all the soil:
And in the steed of Godly fear, he sinful life reuiues,
With heaps of vice, and Godly seeds to spoil again he strives.
And now amid the pleasant corn the pricking thistle flows,
And graceless cockle loathsome to the eye it ouergrowes.
Sometime the raging storms of hail does beat it to the ground,
And often consuming worms, and drake, and darnell there is found,
Or mildewes foul, or storms of rain, or heat, or frostie coldes,
Sometime a sunder crackes the plowe, while Camock strongly holds.
Not much the plowmen then preuaylde, and Cayne did first beginn^
To hate his fathers husbandry, and sow the seeds of sin:
Whom all his issue followed fast, as one of greatest skill,
And better fruit might not be seen, than this so lewd and ill,
Nor godliness was to be found in all the world so wide,
So that the almighty father drownde both man and earth beside,
And every creature having life, as justly they deserude,
Save one poor Bark, that in the floods of mercy he preserude.
What should I all things call to mind? the world renude again,
Not long regarded virtuous words, but followed pleasures vain.
Each godly thing was lothde and left, as men did fast increase,
So all things waxed worse and worse, and virtue began to cease.
Although the guide of heaven and earth, did evermore provide,
For husbandmen and prophets good, and sent his son beside,
In vesture clad of fading flesh, of workmen all the chief,
And author of our life: who though he sent for our relief,
His messengers and servant forth abroad in every place,
To teach the perfect art and way, and sow the seeds of grace:
Yet of the dreadful dragon black prevailed much the heed,
To tread and stamp in every place upon this sacred seed.
The seeds of Gods triumphant word, were never so largely sown,
Nor covered in the heart of man, nor virtue better grown,
Nor in so many places seen such store of goodly grain,
As when these holy Messengers, and their disciples plain,
Did teach in every place abroad the art of husbandry,
And trod the steps of virtuous life for their posterity.
But straight the enemy poisoned all, and brought it unto this,
That godliness in few remaynde, and most men ran amiss,
And put not for eternal life in Christ their only trust,
So many weeds of herisies among the corn he thrust,
And monstrous droues of ravening wolves, such fierce debate and strife,
So many superstitions vain, and such deformed life.
Now these with raging furious heat, he causes for to start:
Now those with frostie coldes congeald, he nyppeth to the heart.
And look how much this wretched world to end does nearer grow,
So much the more he strives the reign of Christ to overthrow:
And with his filthy seed, the heart of man to cast away,
Nor much he forces them herein, that fall by proper sway.
The old remaynes of sinful rock, is unto him an aid,
So is the lusting force of flesh, with reign and head vnstayde.
Against these ylles the ruler of the lofty heavens bright,
Sendes out his learned laborers, that ouerturning quight
All wickedness, and driving hence the darkness far away,
True godliness may plain appear, and virtue bear the sway.
And every one with heart and might, his holy will obey,
And follow perfect righteousness, and hate the wicked way.
By whom they may restore the hearts, where Satan had his seat,
Even as to let of woonted course the running river great,
And make it pass the mountains hie, or else to quench the flame
That entered has the dryest woods, and rages in the same.
The pain is great to labor thus against the sturdie streams,
Or for to bend the aged bough grown hard with Phoebus beams.
And as the pains are great, so great rewards thou shall enjoy,
When Christ shall shed the stinking Goats that did his flock annoy.
When as the dreadful day of doom, and clearest light shall shine,
That shall reveal how every man has wrought and spent his time.
And therefore shrink not for no pains, if that thou mindst the skies,
If that thou seekste to see the face of God with happy eyes.
But who deserves so great a gain, and such a stately charge?
Or who is meet to till and dress a soil so fair and large?
As no man takes the Ores in hand, nor thrustes the plow in ground,
Or guides the sailing ship on sea, or Captain may be found,
Except he wise and active be, and taught his skill in time:
So none can out of hand be meet to till the soil divine.
His pattern and his fashion eke, my Muses let us see,
And how from youth in every point, he framed ought to be:
What kind of man in all respects, and after let us tell,
The manner how he ought to teach, and order all things well.
First let the favor of his face be good, and countnance clear,
Not staynd with loathsome colourde mowle, nor speckled here and there,
Nor mangled any where with cuttes, nor let his head be hie,
Or pyked like a Sugerlofe, not set with hanging eye,
As lowering Bulls are always markte, ne let them hollow be,
Deep settled in their darkened dens, no Cocles let us see,
Nor any blearde or squinteyde mate, no hooked hawkish beak,
Nor short and apish turnde up nose, nor Pypers puffed up choke,
Nor toothde like dogs: who knows not eke that tillers may not be
Dumb, deaf, or lame, or stammerers, or such as cannot see?
Away with broken limping legs, and halting hips beside,
No mowlehill carried on the back, nor wennes the throat to hide.
No lynmie nor member let there want, but all in order due,
And in proportion comely framde, and pleasant to the view.
Least Vulcane with his crooked pace delight the scornful sort,
Or with some other fault or maime, do make the people sport,
Resembling Thersit in his look, or else Corites face,
Or Esope in his loathsome shape, or Damon in his grace.
Ne let him of a harlot be borne of dishonest fame,
By common rut as beasts do use, or villains void of shame.
This also must be lookte unto, what trade his parents used,
If no reproachful kind of art that ought to be refused,
They liude upon, for trade of life does often hinder much,
And let the word, that as it should the heart it cannot tuch.
Of these things also other causes may thou many bring,
For though it lies not in our power, and though it be a thing
We can not do withal nor help, what shape soever fall,
By foul mishap or parents fault, yet he that gouernes all,
Creates nothing here in vain. For if the fashion right
Of things be altered here from good, and nature changed quight,
It does declare some great mishap, and is a perfect sign
Of Gods appointed punishment, and of his wrath divine.
If that the same be stainde with black, against his nature clear,
Or that the moon before the full eclypsed do appear:
If in the glistring starrie night, a blasing star do rise,
And armed men in clouds appear, and skirmish in the skies:
If suddenly the sun do stay, or Planets runs awrie:
If dreadful streams of blood do gush and fall from heavens hie:
Or if amid the market place a savage Woolfe do stand,
Or beast do speak, who can suppose that goodness is at hand?
Who fears not straight the wrath of God, or who that has his wit,
Will not conceive some great mischaunce to happen after it?
Both nature and examples eke persuades us to the same,
The Grecians eft the signs of God have felt of ancient fame.
The like in many overthrows the Romans proud have known,
Nor rashly seemed the ore to warn, that Rome should keep her own.
Sagunthus sacked, and all her men in cruel order slain,
Did show the infant entered not his mothers womb in vain:
Did not the armies, sword, and cart, that God in clouds did send,
Foreshow Hierusalems decay, and miserable end?
And Xerxes might in field before his legs for flight prepare,
When as a Mare amongst his camp did fool a flying Hare.
The monstrous foling of a M^yle beside, did plainly show
The lofty walls of Babylon should have an overthrow.
We all abhor these monstrous birthes, as nature us does move,
And seldom after them is seen, does any goodness prove.
But most of all if women chance, such monstrous shapes to bear,
If nature fail in those that are the worldly rulers hear.
For sure the outward countnaunce does declare the inward mind,
And what lies hid in secret sense, of good or ill we find.
Of any foul ill favored face, what lookste thou for but ill?
And who does not his talk abhor, and shun his presence still?
For these misshapen folks unto themselves or other men,
Betoken harm, or else a sign of froward wit in them.
Therefore let not our husbandman be shapte ill fauouredly,
Nor any such whose parents have been staynde with infamy.
And if it might be done, I would (a thing we seldom see)
That in his tender youth he should in virtue trained be,
And from his childhoode learn to love the Lord, and him to dread,
And evermore commit himself to Christ his sovereign head:
And worship him with harmless heart, in deed and word always,
And seek the thing that most may sound to his most worthy praise.
Likewise to pray that from the skies the blessed holy spright
On him may fall: by whom he may teach Christ to all men right.
Let him to parents duty show, and honor learn to give
To each man as his place requires, and as he here does live.
I would beside he should be kept with virtuous company,
And shun the graceless sort of youth, that use to prate and lie*
Least that his fellows him infect with manners lewd and ill,
That hardly after will be le^t for any care or skill.
The die that wool does first receive, will hardly out be got,
No more than on the Tables new the first deformed spot.
And this beside imports much, if that the parents hear,
The nourse, and eke the schoolemaister be good, and Christ do fear.
Thus would I have him live with men that good and virtuous be*
In youngest years, when as you list you bow the tender tree.
And filthy words he may not hear, nor use at any time,
Nor with his eyes behold the thing that may to ill incline.
Besides in Country language must he have a perfect skill,
And remedy be had, if that his words he utter ill.
Nor only in the vulgar tongue he must be thoroughly seen,
But also in the fountaynes sweet of Latin phrases cleene,
And taught the best Gramarians that old or new have been,
And read the purest writers first, as Cato teaches him,
And hear the best, least barbarousnesse do him in youth infect,
Which once a man, he must forsake and utterly reject.
The Roman speech does profit much, as openly is seen,
Which of all other languages, in Europe is the Queen.
The ancient Romans as they did their Empire large extend,
Unto the frostie Northren pole, where earth does seem to end,
And to the floods of Euphrates, and mighty Parthians reign,
To foot of lofty Atlas mount, that does the skies sustain:
So was their tongue through all the world dispersed here and there,
And for their scepter and their sword, was reurenst eurye where.
For in this tongue the subjects all their answer ever had,
And all their proud Edicts and laws, in this were likewise made.
And hitherto wheresoever the Empire large of Rome does reign,
In estimation is it had, and honor great does gain.
Besides it famous is for holy books and works profane,
Wherein to have no skill, were to our husbandman a shame.
By this we tread the path that leads to eurye science hie,
Whereto by vulgar speech, we never can approach so nie.
For this same cause, and for the learnde and godly writers sake,
That long time since in teaching Christ, did pains and travail take.
Let him the Grecians tongue pervse: and for the volumes grave
Of Moses and the Prophets old, the Hebrew let him have.
And join thereto the Chaldean speech: the water that is shed
Through many vessels, cooles not so as does the fountaynes head.
Each thing himself let him pervse, and know the speech divine,
And not depend on other men, to preach as they assign.
Therefore let him apply the tongues, wherein were first enrolde*
The holy laws that God did give unto our fathers old.
And weigh the rules and title^ well, and what each word does mean^
Know perfitely, that in the phrase he may be thoroughly seen.
For of the name a knowledge great in matters often is found,
And fond it is for men to talk, and not to know their ground.
Wherein a number great of men have mooude the skillful sort,
To laugh to scorn their ignorance, whereof they made a sport.
For as in all things, names and words do greatly signify,
So most of all in scriptures where both often and commonly,
The letters small and little pricks, do mysteries contain,
Which no good man will slightly way or count as matters vain.
The figures and the diverse tropes that in these speeches are,
Let him beside well understand, for often the sense they mar
That are unskillful in the same, whereby they utter lies
Unto the simple common sort in steed of verities.
Whence springs such heaps of errors now as at this day do reign*
Or hurly burlyes that do rage among the people vain:
But only that a great sort are, so to the letters bound,
As can no Metaphor allow, nor any figure sound?
Of this must mischief needs ensue, no tropes yet I allow,
Except the text require the same, or charity auow.
For in the scripture certainty the people must be taught,
And one thing still that they may know, what good and what is naught.
Nor meet it is to force the phrase, to senses many mo,
When nothing does compel thee from the very words to go,
Least things assurde be doubtful made, and charity be broke,
Nor any phrase may judged be by figure to be spoke,
Except the same in other place be open told and plain,
For else to think a mystery in figure hid is vain.
That speech does most delight the ears, and winnes the peoples praise
That sundry sorts is varied often, and turnde a thousand ways.
But thou take heed thou do not wrest, the text out of his kind,
Nor play with holy scriptures, for to please thy foolish mind:
Which now is used of many men, a dreadful thing to see.
Consider thou and ponder well, what thing may meetest be,
And profit most the common sort, and rude unruly train,
Before that thou delight their ears, or play with them in vain.
Not only old Palaemons art, our husbandmen must have,
But great Chrysippus cunning to, and skill of Zeno grave,
Not therewithal to scolde or brawle, as school men use to play,
Or to beguile the simple sort, and wipe the truth away:
But better to defend the darts of deadly enemy,
Or for to break the snares and ginnes of such as teach awrie.
For theirs it is above the rest to answer all men here,
That question move of faith and hope, or doubts that do appear,
To keep their doctrine and their flock, against the greedy woolfe.
Now if they know the snares and trappes, and depth of every goolfe*
And easly can discern the truth, and falsehood put away,
Then still the truth they shall preserve, and never it betray,
Nor cause it to be iested at, nor for to suffer wrong.
For if to mortal mysers here, destruction does belong,
That know not Christ the savior hie, nor his religion pure:
What shall we of the teachers think, whose want of skill procure,
Not to themselves alone, but to a hundred thousand mo,
By error harm, who led to hell by their persuasion go.
Who doubts that reading of the works of famous Cicero,
Is needful for our husbandman, and well agreeing tho,
The art of speaking fair and plain, this meetest is to know,
The pleasant filed speech that from the learned breast does flow,
The quick and well persuading tongue, that knows well how to deal*
What matters secret for to keep, and what for to reveal:
And to observe the change of time the persons and the place,
This is the plowe of husbandmen, that riddeth work apace.
Let children out of order prate, and people gape and gale,
It does beseem a preacher well, by art to frame his tale.
Nor any thing against us hear the mind of Paul does make,
Nor yet unlearned kind of words, that Christ's Apostles spoke.
Where diverse causes ever be (as has been always said)
Effects are diverse to be seen, and to be thoroughly wayde.
We may not therefore follow them, in every thing aright,
Since that our causes differ much, and case is altered quight.
Who knows not that otherwise we always ought to speak,
Unto the learnde and skillful sort, than to the young and weak?
The first beginnings of our faith, they did the Gentiles teach,
Which needed not a filed phraise, and curious tongue to preach,
But rather of the power of God to move them thereunto.
Wherefore the Lord did give them power, great wonders for to do.
That might unto the word give force, though learning were away,
That thus persuaded to the faith, they could not truly say
That eloquence had trained them for to believe on Christ,
But that it was the holy spirit and virtue of the hiest.
Beside the principles may not be taught, by curious art or wit,
Nor needs a Rhethoricians tongue in the persuading it.
But steadfastly we must believe the first beginnings well,
Therefore it is but vain, a fine and pleasant tale to tell,
Unto the rude unskillful sort, that do the grounds deny,
As of no miracles they need, nor wonders from the sky,
That know the true and certain path, and after Christ have sought,
But from the Craddle, Christ and his decrees to us are tought.
In these our tender years we need plain words, not lofty speech,
But rather aid of holy spirit, and faithful man to teach.
But after Christ and faith is got, then use the ^^nest kind,
Of Rhetoric, and colors all, to move the slothful mind.
Inflame their hearts with love of Christ, and God continually,
Persuade them wickedness to hate and all Idolatry:
And virtue always to embrace, in goodness to delight,
And wickedness to shun and hate, and every sinful sight,
To leave their hard and flintie hearts, provoking God to ire,
To fear the threatenings of his word, and everlasting fire:
To shed their saltish tears for sin, and all their confidence
On Gods great mercy for to set (who pardons each offense)
Assured of his favor great, extolling him always:
On this bestow thy Rhetoric, and all that thou can say.
And likewise if thou chosen be, to fight against the train
Of Satan, errors to suppress, and truth for to maintain.
For though as sharp and fiery sword, the word of God we see,
Does pearce into the deepest part of hardest hearts that be:
And as a heavy hammer great, breaks all that does withstand,
Yet is the force increased much, by help of perfect hand:
Even as the wound is deeper cut, that stronger hand does make,
And sooner break ye stone, which maule with stronger arm does shake.
Use Rethoricke therefore husbandman, and set thy whole delight,
In furthring of the word of God with all thy force and might.
For Paul among the perfect sort, did deeply still entreat,
And fed the weaker sort with milk, refusing stronger meat.
What should I show how eloquent they were, and eke how fine,
That wrote their worthy volumes near unto the Apostles time.
Choose where thou likest among the Greeks, or all the Latin rowtes,
None hates Rethoricke certainly, but slothful drowsy lowtes,
And gorbellyes that evermore do set their whole delight,
In living lasily at home, and sleeping day and night.
Our husbandman must yet attempt, the other studyes all,
That termed are of ancient men, the learnings liberal,
None of the things that here to God or man belonging be,
Are void of number dealt withal. The Almighty Maiestee
Framde each thing with his perfect poyse, and numbered every thing,
The art of numbering pleasant is, and profit great does bring.
In this alone from brutishe beasts, we men do differ here,
So would the almighty king, when first he made us rule to bear,
And Lords of all things that he framde, appointed us to be,
That perfitely we might pervse each thing in his degree,
That in the skies or earth he made, each thing he did divide,
Both generally, particular, and minutes small beside:
That waying so his wondrous works, and using well the same,
We should extol his worthiness, and praise his holy name.
The skill of heavenly motions eke, does to the same incline,
Than which amongst us men there is, no knowledge more divine,
Nor more that brings us to the love, of God himself above,
Nor farther liftes us from the earth, and to the skies does move.
Who woonders not to see the Sun and Moon continually,
To keep their course, and planets fair, and glistring stars in sky,
And prayseth not the hand of God, that them did thus create,
And does not count himself to be in passing happy state?
Who shall enjoy that blessed house, whose walls so outward shine,
With Princely beauty garnished, and figures framed fine?
For needs he must suppose, that greater things remain within,
Nor in he here deceyude, for neither eye has ever seen,
Nor ear has heard, nor any heart of mortal man might deem,
The joys that God prepared has, for such as him esteem.
Wherefore a pleasant study sure, and aptest for our mind,
Is this that does the skies behold, and stars of every kind.
Our countnance seems to prove the same, that lifted up a hie,
Is framde as it appointed were for to behold the sky.
Beside it stands man in steed for many uses here,
For whose behoof the Lord has made, each thing that does appear.
By face of heaven, and moving of the Moon and Phoebus crown,
And by the three fold rising of the stars and going down.
The Lord divided times, and did appoint the day and night,
The change of years and months and hours, both equal and unright.
And set them signs of winter black, and of the cheerful spring,
Of burning Summer, and the time that rypest fruits does bring,
Of weather fair and foul or storms and tempests that arise,
And tokens for the Mariner that on the water lies,
And for the husbandman that in the ground his seed does sow:
Hereto the Northren Pole does serve, the bear and beareward slow,
The monstrous Waine of Charles, the Goat and little Kiddes withal,
And Hyades that tempest shows, when as they rise or fall:
Orion eke that winter brings, with sword and dreadful face,
And underneath his feet the Hare, whom Syrian Curre does chase,
And many other goodly stars, and pictures in the sky,
Besides the twelve familiar signs that in the Zodiake lie.
These ought our husband man to know, and thoroughly to pervse,
Because of holy scripture, and that often they come in use.
And least he should not understand, the things that even those
That rude and common people be, are able to disclose.
I suffer not the Chaldeyes here, ne yet the Aradians vain,
Who think that every thing is wrought, by force of starrie reign,
And fearful in their matters, wey what sign does upward spring,
Dividing all the heavens great (a strange and monstrous thing)
To houses twelve, and boldly than their figure up they rere,
Assigning to the Lord of birth, each man's conditions here.
Than Planets plase, and marking how their fond asspects do run,
The bussardes blind do straight ways judge what good or ill to come?
How short or long his life shall be, that than the mother bears,
What wealth he shall obtain, and how, and in what space of years,
What brethren, and what sisters, or what parents he shall have,
What masters, or what sicknesses, and when he goes to grave.
They likewise of his marriage judge, what wife he shall obtain,
And in what sort she shall be got, with pleasure, or with pain.
Then of his honesty they deem, and his dishonest life,
What friendship he shall always find, what hatred, or what strife.
Besides, of signs they monstrous things and wonders do declare,
Appoynting of the lineaments of man to each his share,
Without the which they may not touched, or ever moved be,
Whereon both death dependes they say, and life in their degree.
Then to the seven wandering stars, they houses do assign
Perhaps for fear of banishment, when here or there they clime.
And which of them are hot or cold, or do with moystnesse flow,
Which dry, or which are swift in course, or which in moving slow,
Which black, or white, or yellow are, which green or red do shine,
Which of them of the women's sex, or which are masculine.
These things they boldly do affirm, and with as sober grace,
As if they late from heaven came, and saw it face to face.
What should I tell how they prescribe an hour for every thing?
And with their superstitions, fear on feeble hearts do bring?
They teach how that it is not good, this day or that to sow,
Nor for to trim the barraine fields, nor cut the woods that grow,
Nor for to plant or cut the vines, nor houses for to make,
Nor wane the little sucking child, nor men to friendship take,
Nor for to cut or shave the beard, nor for to dress the hands,
Nor for to pass from place to place, nor visit other land.
Nor for to beat the bushe for bird, nor bait the fishers hook,
Nor for to chase the fearful Heart, nor teach the child his book,
Nor for to take a wife, nor once at Cards or Dice to play,
Nor for to keep thy word, nor thought, nor borrowed things to pay,
Nor to dispute of any thing, nor take the law in hand,
Nor for to cut the bleeding vain, nor seek the healing hand,
To break no young untamed horse, nor Geldings for to make,
To bine no jewels, nor no land, nor any bargain take:
To send no posts nor messengers, to bear thy friend thy mind,
To cut no hear, nor poll the head, nor send thy corn to grind,
Not for to dig or deal with mines, nor houses fair to make,
Nor lately built to dwell therein, nor servant for to take,
Nor battle to begin, nor meet in field the furious fo,
Nor on the surging seas in Bark for any thing to go.
Who can remember all their toys, a hell they here do frame,
While nothing can be done, except the skies permit the same?
Such Prophets blind I do not like, that in their foolish trance,
Persuade the common people fond, that this or that shall chance:
In giving all things to the stars, that none alive can know,
Nor any reason nor experience perfitely can show.
I give them leave that worldly are, such folly for to use,
Wherewith themselves and other men, they fondly may abuse.
But for the other perfect is, and causes certain be,
That from the old experience of the world deriude we see.
Next to this knowledge is the same, that first from prick does spring,
And teaches all the trade to meat and measure every thing,
As Meadows, Pastures, Mountains great, and valleys large and wide,
And lofty stately towers, and stars that in the skies do glide.
A worthy pleasant art is this, for many matters meet,
Which needs our husbandman must ^oine with other learnings sweet.
The dearest daughter of the Muses now who dare despise,
Or melody that in the voice, or in the finger lies?
The cares that do consume the heart, does Music drive away,
And comfort the sad, and rayseth minds that troubled lay,
Provoke tears, and moves unto pity now and than,
Which ways thou will does Music draw the thought and mind of man.
It cease anger great and fierce, and fury does withstand,
And mooues again the martial heart, to take the sword in hand,
By Music ^owle and hurtful spirits, are often overthrown,
And good are brought, a thing full well to ancient Prophets known.
The force does Music est augment, and easy make the pain,
That workmen, shipmen, and the plowman do full often sustain.
The child by means of Music does, in Cradell quiet lie,
And does forget the mothers breast, and h^nger by and ^ie,
The fierce Laconians when they were in battle bent to meet,
Terpander set them all agreed, by song and Music sweet.
Not men alone are mooude with sound of sweet and pleasant note,
But also birds and brutish beasts, and fish in floodes that flote.
The lofty prauncing horse we see, in Music does rejoice,
The vnweeldie Bear does also leap to hear his masters voice.
Arion borne upon the back of Dolphyn swimming sure,
Does show what force in Music is, and what it can procure.
Both mountains, woods, and hawtie rocks, as ancient men do wright,
Did follow Orphaeus for his song, and wonderful delight.
Amphion eke the son of Jove, as stories do declare,
With Harp did cut the ragged stones, and brought them into square,
Wherewith he built the Thebane walls, and stately tower strong,
That wayde not all the Grecians force, nor enmyes sieges long.
The Almighty father has assignde, to every mind a love
Of Music sweet, and would the earth should show the works above.
And counterfeit them in her kind, as near as here might be,
That highest and the chiefest things, with basest might agree.
For doubtless all the heavenly Spheres, that make so sweet a noise,
With whirling up and down of stars, or else of angels voice,
That do in thousands serve the Lord, does to the earth let fall,
This sweet consent that mooues the mind, delights and pleases all.
And as this same in sweetness far each other art exceedes:
So ought it to be well applyde with good and godly deeds:
Not unto wanton pleasure here, nor foolish vain delight,
As men in madness often do use, oppressed with wicked spright.
With good example has the son of Iesle taught us so,
And Moses with his shining face, and many Prophets mo.
As Paul inspirde with holy spirit, does teach and will the same*
The Gentiles all their prayers eke, in verse did chiefly frame,
And chaunted up their Hymns unto their Gods in solemn plight,
Persuaded that their feigned Saints in Music took delight.
Our husbandman therefore must not this worthy art disdain^,
But with the chiefest seek the top of Music to attain.
Whereby he may extol the Lord, and move the sluggish mind,
And what if that in making of a verse he pleasure find?
And prove a christian Poet good? the Prophets old sometime
Were wont to write there works in verse, and pleasantly to rhyme.
In verse Apollo answer gave, Religion and good laws,
Unto the common sort were taught, in verse and Poets sawes.
By Manto, Linus, Amphiaraus, Sibills, and Orphey eke,
The majesty was always great, in stately verse to speak.
With this the virtuous Poets learnd, did please and well entreat,
Both simple common people rude, and worthy princes great.
Now time it is the nature strange, and cause of things to know,
And whatsoever learned men, in Phisicks carst did show.
Although they are but laughing stocks, and dotars commonly,
And that you sooner may the North and South together tie,
And join unto the british shore, the Persian dignity,
Then for to cause their diverse minds, in one for to agree.
Nor marvel when without the light, that from the scriptures springs,
They rashly judge of head and end, and order right of things.
As if a blind man in the way would make himself a guide,
Or judge of colors which were fairst, or which were better did.
It shall not hurt thee much these things (though fond) in hand to take,
And lightly to pervse and see, for lies do often make
The truth to be esteemed more, and of more for^e to show.
Both sweet it is, and I allow the cause of things to know.
But such as certain are, and such as no man can deny,
Of knowledge certain ends there are, and bounds appointed lie.
The word of God must bear the bell, and sway in every thing,
And next to that such reasons good, as wise men here do bring,
Must be esteemed as a troth.
Be circumspect in every thing, if ought thou seekst to find
Concerning heaven, world, and form, of substance, or of kind,
Or touching fortune, place, or hap, the elaments and time,
Of motion, thunder, wind and snow, rain, hail, or frostie rhyme.
Whereof it comes that pleasant dewes in Summer wettes the spring,
Or what procures the lightning fierce, that pearceth every thing.
What makes the fire oftentimes, in hellish clouds to glow,
Or why the sun in shower appearing, the rainbow straight does show*
Why Moon with fogge is compast often, or how the blasing star
Appears, that often is sign to men, of famine, death, or war:
Wherefore the earth does tremble so, and Cities ouerturne,
And why that Phoebus oftentimes with threefolde ^ace does burn^*
Besides let him consider well, if that a good man may
Believe the distance of the skies to be as they do say.
If that the Moon so far exceed the earth in quantitee,
Or if the stars so far above the earth in bigness be,
Or if the Lord created more than two of greatest light,
Or any save the Sun that past the Moon in force and might.
Moreover, land and seas pervse, and mark their natures plain,
And all that in the earth or air, or in the seas remain.
But for these strange and foreign things, men ought not so to care,
As for our nearer neighbors much, that in us dwelling are.
Unto our proper houses therefore, let us come and see,
What wondrous things by natures hands in us created be,
How much we do excel and pass, each other worldly kind,
Whose rulers and correctors here, the Lord has us assignde.
What gifts of mind we do enjoy, and what of body here,
What virtuously of us is wrought, and what does lewd appear.
These things are first to be perusde, that we may perfitely,
Both know our selves, and eke the things that are to us so nie.
Fond is it to be wise abroad, and only for to see
The outward things, while as at home like bussards blind we be.
But here me thinks some last lowte should say to me. O how
Suppose you sir that meet it is your plowman first to know
These things, before he till his ground, and holy plow do hold:
What say you to the Apostles than, and to the Prophets old,
Where ever find you that these men were learned in this sort:
Or who would credit him that any such thing would report.
Besides but few such plowmen could be got as you desire,
Whereas the harvest of the Lord, does numbers great require.
The time has been when men of god, without their books were taught,
And diverse suddenly by him, to state of Prophets brought.
So fishers and unskillful men, by force of holy spright,
He made the teachers of the world, and shows of perfect light.
Besides a number more of such, his mighty hand did frame,
Not for to break dame Natures laws, and alter quite the same,
But for to show his mighty force, and great prerogative,
And that he was not tied to sleaue of any thing alive.
We may not therefore give our selves, to gape for wonders still,
But as the guise of men requires, we must conform our will,
Till God do work in other sort, and other means does give.
In stern and barren wilderness the Jews sometime did live,
And neither plowde, nor sowde, nor reapte, in forty winters space:
And were not he stark mad that now would look for such a grace,
And like an idle lubber sit, and take no kind of pain
With hand nor foot, for him or his a living for to gain?
Or gape to have the Ravens come, or widow at his need,
Who at the bidding of the Lord, Helias once did feed.
The River great of Jordan once, and eke the fearful seas,
Through might of God, and all on foot, the Hebrews past with ease.
Now need we when we pass these floods, both dark, and (...) and sail,
And Tiphys eke to hold the helm, least on the seas we avail*
Thus are we bound to learn whatsoever, on earth we know or see,
That may unto the honor great of God and glory be.
Ne must they look for idleness, that will be husbandmen,
Least that the Lord be tempted so, and justly plague us then,
For our contempt and slothfulness, example here let be,
The frantic Anabaptists that in any place we see:
Who hating books and learned arts, do count it virtue grave,
No skill in any language, save their Country tongue to have:
And leaping lately from the shop of Shoomakers, or such,
Are not ashamde the Preachers place with greasy hands to tuch,
Still boasting of the holy ghost, and so with passing pride,
They hedlong throw themselves to hell, and numbers great beside,
By teaching false and foolish things, the Prophets eke divine,
Good Moses first in Pharaos house, applyde the Muses nine,
Before he taught the word of God, or trained the Jewish hearts,
And Daniel did refuse the Chaldeans meat, but not their arts.
Paul of a learned Doctor in Jerusalem was tought,
And not alonely in the scriptures to excel was thought,
But in the Grecian eloquence, and sciences profane,
Wherein to be exactly learnde, he always had the name.
With which he better armed, put the Gentiles soon to flight,
And with these weapons of their own, he overthrew them quight.
At Athens with Aratus words, he gave them all the foil,
And brought against the Creteans witness of their native soil.
A man that hedlong threw himself in Etnaes raging flame,
Amongst the people for to gain an everlasting fame.
What good and honest is among these arts, they well may choose,
And make them for to serve their turn, that virtuously them use.
The Egyptians once were robbed of goods, and spoiled utterly,
To increase the treasure of the Lord, and his to bewtifie.
The Gentiles faith and life we only are forbidden here,
And not their worthy sciences and springes of learning clear,
So that we put them to good use, and profit any ways,
Applying them with all our force unto the almighty's praise.
Our savior Christ commended eke, the Scribe that well was tought,
Resembling him unto the rich, who from his treasure brought,
Things old and new abundantly. Yea glory does remain
At home for learned men that do in godliness take pain.
As that most learned Prophet song, and plainly did declare,
He whom the cruel Lions in their dreadful den did spare,
Rude rusticall unskillfulness deserves no praise at all,
But loathsome is in him to whom the sacred plow shall fall.
Who does allow the laysie lobbe? where is not sloth unmeet?
The honey gathering Bees are praysde, because in springtime sweet,
With daily labor great they make the wholesome honey good.
The little Ant does frame his house with travail in the wood,
And on his back a greater burden than himself does lay,
And thrusts up his corn in cave against the winter day.
Why should not likewise in our husbandmen such care appear,
In those whom God appointed has the worlds correctors here?
No loytring leisure here was left, but business to be done,
Which faithful servant should apply until their master come.
That few such servant at this time in any country be,
Who does not know? and eke the cause I think each man does see.
Some seek their own commodity, and belly well to fill,
And some in fields of idleness, do love to linger still.
But seldom any man t'aduaunce the praise of Christ desires,
Nor weyes what labors great and toil, the heart of man requires.
Therefore the fields do barraine lie, and brambles thick does bring,
And Cockle foul abundantly, in every place does spring.
The tender sheep dispersed are, and faint and sick they be,
And feed upon the poisoned plants that in the Marsh they see.
Yet none vouchsafes for to redress this miserable case,
Thou would suppose that all had sworn together now in place.
The devil and the raging world, and princes of estate,
And all the shaven plowmen here, that evermore do prate,
And talk of Christ and boast themselves to be his servant true,
That blinded minds of men might not with wholesome tillage due,
Be brought unto a blessed state, nor perfect seeds be sown,
And grateful harvest unto God, with great advantage mowne.
What wages to these servant lewd and deulish kingdom here
Shall God assign, when on his judgment seat he shall appear?
With patience let them look for that, and bear their own contempt,
We mindful of our matter here, will better things attempt.
Now must our husband frame himself a virtuous man to be.
That both his teaching and his life, may justly here agree,
Least teaching others, he himself does miss the perfect way,
And bring the word to bide reproach, and building to decay.
Above all things he must beware of pride and lofty mind,
The perfect following here of Christ, who lived in lowest kind,
(Who must be their assured mark) does not allow the same
In christenmen, and eke above the rest, it is a shame
For any servant to presume above his masters gree,
And for to challenge pri^cely state, and worldly soueraintee.
Where Christ the Lord with bloody sweat, and face with spittle stainde,
And blows, and mockes (...) bear his cross, and cruel death sustainde.
Who hates not Nestorius voice, and words deserving blame?
Or pride of Paul, the Bishop once of Antioche* the same*
That clear Orontes passes by? who does not here repine,
To see the christian husbandman, the steps of Maximine
The proud to tread, and both his hands, and stinking wretched feet.
To let be kissed, and borne on backs of men with pomp unmeet,
Beset about with precious stones, all clad in rich array,
Like Persean prince or Emprour great that bears in Inde the sway.
Let kings pursue such pomp and pride, and our poor husbandman,
Content himself with mean estate, not looking hier than
Confessing not alone himself a servant here in name,
But both in countnance, weed, and voice, and life, declare the same.
Directing all the order of his life by Christ alone,
And making him the mark of saving health, and others none.
There is no cause why man should swell with pride, or such disdain,
For noble blood, or welthie state, or shape of body vain,
Or troop of men, or learned show, or titles gotten grave,
Or any other kind of thing. (For what is all we have?)
Since that we were created here, with all that in us lies,
Each one to be an others help, which if we do despise,
And look aloft with hautie mind, and think to bear a sway,
The greatest gifts that here we have will turn to our decay.
Beside the servant of the Lord must not inflamed be,
With wrath, or ire, nor frowning look, as beasts that often we see,
With hurtful horns do run upon such as do come in sight,
And threaten with their countnance fierce, continually to fight.
Let gentle minds be shrouded still, with mild and comely cheer,
And in the servant of the Lord, Christ's Image plain appear:
Least that before he gin to speak or clime the Pulpet hie,
The people straight suspecting harm, for fear away do fly.
And let him learn both words and deeds to suffer patiently,
Contemning diverse things, and most esteeming not a fly.
A noble heart in body bear, not mooude with easy wind
And take good heed he never speak no words of wrathful kind*
Forbearing grinding with his teeth, and frowning with his face,
And most of all from skirmishing with hand or fist in place.
Such anger does not well agree, that he shall eft despise,
And think unmeet for common people rude to exercise.
Who can abide Amphitrions son, on O^ta for to see,
Or view the face of Ajax fierce, while in his fury he
Destroys the poor vnguiltie beasts Ulysses for to kill?
Who will not shun the company and friendship all to ill
Of mad Eurilochus, while as he does pursue in chase
His man, with spit and meat in hand unto the Market place?
Who can delight in Commodus, that in his raging ire,
For trifles cast the master of his bathes into the fire?
Or who does not Comedes his wicked act detest,
That Samson like in furious rage, a school of boys oppressed?
Let rage and wrath be driven hence, nor let him ever speak
With bitter words to any man, his malice for to wreake,
Nor cool his mind with Stygian stream, nor any man defame,
In every matter let him learn to keep his tongue in frame.
And talk of pleasant things and good, not prating much the while,
The chattring tongue is loathsome still, and foolish speech is vile,
And full of lies is always scornde. To rule the tongue aright
Is acceptable unto God, and unto every Wight.
The spiritual Husbandry. The second Book.
THese things as meetest to be kept of plowmen all we thought,
And more beside (my gracious Lords) yt they be chiefly taught
To shun all greedy avarice, and foul desire of gain,
A thing that always commonly amongst these men does reign:
And therefore are they often reprooude at common peoples hands.
This is the worst they teach men to despise both goods and lande^
And every other fading thing, and worldly vain delight,
And only for to set their minds upon the heavens bright.
For when above the rest they seek, for riches gredilie,
What do they else but plain confess, and truly testify,
That to no other end their pains, in teaching this they take,
Than for to scrape unto themselves that other men forsake?
As in Vicenza sometime did a careful Usurer,
(The story is not very long) it chaunst this man to hear,
That in the town a learned man of eloquence profounde,
Did preach in every place abroad where Usury was found,
Condemning much the use thereof, and eke the filthy gain.
To him he comes and greetes him well, and thanks him for his pain,
And praise him much for to proceed, in blaming of this vice,
And to dissuade the Citizens from filthy avarice.
Declaring eke the greatness of the sin and wretched state,
And how that God above all other vices this does hate:
What torments they shall have in hell, when as the world does end.
And how they shall be punished that so their money lend.
Thus while with tedious talk he does molest the aged man,
Rehearsing oftentimes the words that he before began:
What moves thee, quoth he, for to desire this thing so much,
Since thou thy self art one of those that it does chiefly tuch.
Forsooth quoth he, for nothing else, but when they all were gone
Through your disswasion good, I might receive this gain alone.
That now am pestred with the prease, and pinched with my shows.
None otherwise (their deeds report) these plowmen all do use,
Whom well thou may perceive to mock, and with the world to play,
For earthly things they still do teach, to leave and cast away.
And for to set the whole delight upon the heavens hie:
While as themselves the things above esteeming not a fly.
But leaving far behind their backs, with all their force and might
Do hunt for earthly riches here, and foolish fond delight.
And look what people, Princes, Dukes, and mighty Monarchs big
Have thrown away, they chest it up, and give them all the fig.
And yet no end of gayning here devises fine they have,
To spoyse as well the living here, as those that lie in grave.
O God forbid our husbandman, should labor in this plight,
And teach the people one thing here, and do contrary quight.
Nor let him be addicted thus to lucre and to gain,
Nor for to set his heart and mind on wicked treasures vain.
Let him content himself to live in slender simple gree.
That must a Captain keep the field where bloody battles be.
The simple man whose purse is light, dare boldly meet his fo,
Whereas the rich man fears from his riches for to go,
To put his life in ieopardie that now so well is sped,
Who for to lead a pleasant life and void of care and dred.
Esteems nothing that does belong to God nor honesty,
Comparing gain what kind of thing do we more common see?
Who knows not that Pluto has been always counted hear,
Of Poets blinded of his sight, and full of fainting fear?
Who so has any thing to lose, and does it much esteem,
Dare not control the hie estates or such as mighty seem,
Nor warn the great man of his fault, that runs here awrie,
Nor teach him how to do to God his duty faythfullie.
Where as so many Princes dote, and sinful crimes commit,
Regarding neither Gods decrees nor laws of man a whit:
And such great store of husbandmen upon their Courts attend,
How chances it that none of them do move them to amend,
Or tell them that they do amiss? but rather flatter still,
Or pass their time with silence dumme, not speaking good nor ill?
Assuredly the hope of Gold, and pleasant princely fare,
And love of men constrayneth them hereof to have no care.
Our husbandman must here despise both riches, world, and strife,
And neither weigh the Princes wrath, nor hazard of his life.
Of Jesus still respecting most, the honor and the wealth,
His own estate and office great, and peoples saving health.
If that the common people rude through covetous desire,
Run hedlong in the devils chains to everlasting fire.
What goulfe of torments does remain for learned men that preach,
And most of all for wealth and grain, with greedy hand do reach:
The learned bent to any vice in madness does exceed,
And run with greater sway and swing to every wicked deed,
Their folly eke appears most when as they do offend,
And unto hell with swiftest pace themselves they always send.
Example of this wretched crime, and of the vengeance dew
Does Judas give that hung himself, and eke the king that slew
Young Polidor for money sake: a like example meet
Is he that once was hoyst aloft, and hanged by the feet,
Whose head was downewarde thrust by force into Pactolus great,
Bethsaydas brood with fearful words, does Simon Magus threat,
Desirous for to buy with gold the gifts from heaven sent,
Whereby he might be sooner rich, who after Satan went.
Let love of Gold therefore be shunde, and greedy thirst of gain,
Least Plowmen bring themselves and others, both to endless pain.
Besides let lust and daintiness be clearly cast away,
With foul excess of meat and drink, and Persian proud array:
Which things who seeks for to maintain, no living great must lack,
Offends aye the people much, and keeps the Gospel back.
Let drunkenness be far from hence, and love of pleasant wines,
Which both decay the force and wit, and unto vice inclines.
Nor let them often the Tables use of great and welthie men,
Least they through dainty fare be thought to fawn and flatter them,
And to betray the precious truth, for often it haps thereby,
Their mouths stopped up they dare not speak the truth unfeignedly.
But as I would our husbandman, these foresaid faults should shun,
So will I not advise that he to vice contrary run.
Ne praise I life in riot spent, nor like I slouens guise,
Nor savage life with vesture fond in most unseemly wise.
Such as abide the voice of such as them have well aduisde,
Like Demea rude, or Timon, he that all the world despisde.
I like not dainty A^istip, nor beastly Cinicks sort,
Nor tables of the Sybarit^, nor yet king Porus port.
As proud is he that feeds on roots, and goth but poorly clad,
And oftentimes as much desires in honor to be had,
As Persian Prince arayde with gold, and glistring in the eye,
Or yet Lucullus using still to fare so daintilie.
All superstition hateful is, excess deserves blame,
If any way to much thou do thy mind and fancy frame.
Democritus I do condemn, nor Crassus do I praise,
Let measure be obserude and kept in every thing always.
With mean contented keep thy self, and therein most delight,
For virtue placed there does lie, as Homer well does wright.
A heinous crime by public fame has touched mine ears of late,
A piteous thing for to behold, and miserable state.
Whersoeuer the worthy name of Christ has been reputed hie,
There whoremongers in every place, and harl^ts swarming lie:
Aduoutryes foul and shameful acts, do rage in every place,
In tauernes, hie ways, streets, and eke amid the Market place:
Whereof good christian people should not once declare the name,
Much less abide or haunt the thing, allowing well the same.
Nor only on the people does this sink of mischiefs light,
Who scarcely know the will of God, nor how to serve him right:
But chiefly on their guides, and on the husbandmen professed,
Who know the Lords commaundments well, and brag above the rest,
In things belonging unto God, in all dominions wide,
Most skill to have and term themselves the masters chief beside.
O shame with tongue not to be touched, and foul iniquitee,
Behold thy husbandmen, O Christ (if that it lawful be,
To call them thine that now do fold, and roll themselves within
Thy sacred name as loathsome Apes in princely Lions skin.)
Aufidius manners use, and in Sardanapalus guise,
Do lead their life, and always pass their time in pleasure so,
As Chratis did, Semiramis, and Xerxes long a go,
As men that never trained were, nor fostred in thy law,
Or knew thy dreadful word divine, or stood thereof in awe.
Or brought up in the bosom of thy chaste and sacred fold,
But in the Capraean Isles whereas Tiberius built his hold,
Where from their tender youth they use to drink and read the while
The bawdie book of Sotades, and Eelephantis vile.
What country is there in the world, where Christ his name is known,
And Popish laws by tyranny has erst been ever sown?
What Colleges can you report, what Cities great of name,
What villages in Christendom, or towns of any fame?
Wherein the husbandmen themselves from harlots do refrain,
Where as no great examples foul of filthy lust remain?
That escape with lesser punishment, and easlier dealt withal,
Than those that break a light decree in law or statute small.
The hyer sort abuse themselves, and live so void of shame,
That justly can they not control the meaner for the same.
And dare such beasts the blessed word of God to others break?
And both in body and soul defilde, of holy scripture speak?
May such disguised wretches full of vice and sinful crime,
To any man presume to give the sacraments divine?
Who could Autolycus or else his crasie father bear,
Or Cacus, or Voranus, if they should them plainly hear,
Dissuading men from frawde and theft? who would not all to break
Both Pulpet and the Tables quite, in hearing Caine to speak,
And to entreat of brothers love? or else to chastest trade
Of life, to hear the mother of Orestes mad persuade?
Aristo, or Pasiphae, of shamefastness to tell?
Or weryed with the use of men, yet not contented well.
The wife of Caesar great that past in order last of all,
The shameless threshold of the stews, and hateful harlots hall?
Far of from hence you godly men, depart and go in have,
Among the servant of the Lord, go seek for manners chaste:
Whom pure religion best becomes, the gifts of God divine,
Receive not at such filthy hands, nor of such beastly swine:
More wholesome is the stream by much that from the fountain clear
Does run, than that which durtie stands in lake defiled hear.
The Lord himself cannot abide ill men to handle hear,
His holy word, who once forbad the devil witness clear.
The like did Paul, who of her tale the Prophetess did break,
And would not suffer Phoebus Maid the certain truth to speak.
Look you likewise you suffer not such plowmen as you know,
With any open filthiness, or wicked vice to flow.
The swine can never wholsomely of holy matters speak,
No more than can the Lapwing lewd with foul and durtie beak.
Here therefore let our plowmen learn to live in chastity,
And to restrain the raging force that in his flesh does lie,
For Gospels sake, least from the same he drive men quite away
With filthy life, and from the love of Christ him self do stray.
And underneath the dreadful waves of worldly pleasures run,
From whence he never can escape, what need soever come.
But if he cannot lead his life in perfect chastity,
But feels himself a subject still to fleshly frailty,
And flameth evermore with lust: then let him take the hold
Of marriage as a remedy, that scriptures have him told,
And chastely therein lead his life among the virtuous crew,
This liberty does God allow, and men have thought it due.
No fault it is t'obay the order of the holy spright,
But rather reason good, and most according unto right.
Thus all things well prepared thus, that hereto needful be,
Instructed eke in every art and learned qualitee,
With good conditions furnished, in mind and body cleene,
For filthiness must banished be, when scriptures must be seen:
Then unto this let him apply his wit with all his might,
To find the chiefest seed to sow, by which in better plight
Himself also may daily wax. Can thou not truly tell,
What Garner for to seek for this, or in what secret Cell?
What fields to ouerlooke, whereas the knowledge does remain,
Of Christ, And virtuous life, without which all things else are vain?
Give care unto the master great, discending down from hie,
He wills us for to search, what does in holy scriptures lie.
The volumes five of Moses, and the Prophets all beside,
In them to hear the tongue and voice of him that all does guide:
And for to learn what thing is good, and meet for virtuous men,
And eke what things are ill and naught, and to be shoonde of them.
So that we never need the aid of devils here to crave,
Or heathens help, or for to call the sprite from stinking grave.
It Is sure these Prophets never did their own devises teach,
Nor men's decrees, but evermore the word of God did preach.
Hereby appears how much we ought their writings for to wey,
What credit eke we ought to give unto their words always,
That God by them does utter here, who dare his name despise,
Or yet his word, by whom is ruled each thing in earth or skies?
First therefore let us here persuade our selves assuredly,
Who think with God to live and dwell, above the heavens hie:
That God will have us to esteem, whatsoever the Prophets old,
Inspired with the holy ghost, in ancient time foretold:
As if himself with sacred voice the words pronounced had,
Long time agone by Angels mouth, he spoke to good and bad,
And many things himself declarde in that most happy tide,
When as the world was not so ill, and he but few did guide.
Before that Amrams son was borne, while as the Hebrews all,
Were sore oppressed in the land where Nilus flood does fall.
But when they were delivered thence, then Moses straight did write,
His volumes five the Prophets eke put out their works to light,
That of the word of God, the sons might evermore remain,
And men no l^nger look to hear the voice from starry reign.
Nor can the ears of man abide the speech of God to hear,
As once the Hebrews made afraid, good witness well may bear.
Therefore he mortal doctors unto mortal men did send,
As Moses, Aaron, and such men as ever did attend
About the service of the Lord, and Moses now in grave,
They read the people still the law, and labored them to save,
As Prophets, priests, and Leuits eke, who preached and always taught,
For to beware of wicked things, and to eschew the naught.
And to conceive assured hope in Christ the promised seed,
Whereby the hearts might healed be, which grief had causde to bleed.
This was the Prophets office than, and this their order just,
When Moses here had yielded up his carcass unto dust.
Whose wrytings through the gift of God do hitherto remain,
The very doctrine of the holy ghost appearing plain.
We must not weigh them as the work of mortal men that die,
But take them as the books of God, sent down from heavens hie.
In like sort must the Gospel here of good men honorde be,
For both with all the Prophets old it justly does agree,
And with the dreadful voice of God, it has confirmed been,
Nor any thing repugnant here, may any where be seen.
Therefore the Church did justly give the chief authority,
Unto the holy books that in the Bible written lie:
Commanding that they never be abusde by any wight,
But to remain for evermore in good and perfect plight.
As knowing well her husbands voice, the ender here of strife,
And these the certain instruments of everlasting life.
Beside we must esteem them more than all the Sibylles hear,
Or all the Oken groves that erst to Jove were counted dear,
And think that unto men these books sufficient light does give,
Whereby they well may know the will of God, and how to live.
So that we profit much herein, in knowing that we need,
Not ransacke other volumes great of faith or hope to reed.
For miserably does he toil, and toss his troubled mind,
That seeks his pleasure where it does not lie, or else is blind.
Whosoever of pure and perfect gold, has found the fruitful vain,
By which he may to Pelops wealth, or Craesus state attain,
And pass the Arabians riches here, and Hermus sands that shines
Will hardly hence be had away to dig in empty mines,
And vainly pecke in every rock, whereas no gold does lie,
Where travail great must be indurde, and nothing got therebie.
To these therefore let husbandmen their minds and study give,
Here shall they find what needful is to teach them how to live.
No need is here to vex the mind with turning many books,
Nor for to gaze on barraine field, with vain and idle looks.
Here of the everlasting word, the knowledge full does lie,
That son of God, and Jesus whom the world is saved bie:
The knowing of whom alonely, brings us to everlasting bliss
And reconciles us to the father, where we did amysse,
And makes us heirs of heaven bright, this is the treasure which
Lay hidden in the ground so deep, and Jewel passing rich,
For which all worldly substance great is well bestowed here:
Look where thou list thou shall not find it any other where.
Leave searching of the Cesterns, and the Fennes and filthy soyles,
And stinking pondes, when as at home the fountain freshly boyles.
Here draw of clear and Cristall streams, here may thou drink thy fill,
If thirst of everlasting life, and virtue move thy will:
Give all thy force and mind hereto, and all thy wits apply.
Moreover this persuasion does great profit herein bring,
When in the scriptures plain appears, Gods will in every thing.
What honor we must give to him, what worship him delights,
What manners and what ways are meet to frame the life arightes.
Least superstition in our minds, or wicked error spring,
And least we preach and blase abroad, some lewd and hurtful thing.
As if the things sufficed not that God himself has tought,
Or that we think by our device might better things be wrought.
Who so believes that God has hid no virtue here nor right,
Contents himself, and does obey the word with all his might,
And faynes not any thing himself, nor follows fancy vain,
Nor any gloses blind of men, nor dreams of idle brain.
As most men commonly do use, this madness vexes sore,
And is a plague that all the world does trouble evermore.
Without the word of God each fool dare frame himself away,
Procuring eke companions to run with him astray:
Whom at the first he does persuade, and after does constrain
T'obay his folly as a God that over all does reign.
Let not our husbandman be staynde with such untoward mind,
But know the weight of scriptures well, where he may easily find
What best is to be done or left, least that he wander wide,
Obaying more the voice of man, than his that all does guide.
Thus boldned let him duly read the scriptures evermore,
From top to toe, and often rehearse that he has read before,
And print it deeply in his mind, laid up in safety there,
None otherwise than gold or pearls, or such like precious gere.
From whence he largely may disburse to men as cause requires,
The manner how to please the Lord, and leave their fond desires.
And if perhaps he vnoerstand not all things perfitely,
Or read some things that do declare a great simplicity:
Let him beware that tediousness, nor lothsomnesse him take,
And force him so the sacred word of God for to forsake.
In profane writers many things at first do not appear,
But hidden lie, and do deceive the readers looking near.
No marvel then if that the holy ghost declare not all
In easy phrase, but sometime teach with senses mystical.
Accept the plain and easy words, and those that from thee fly,
With haste pursue and draw them from the darkness where they lie:
He blessed is that profits both with the hard and plain,
And is not feared with the tone, nor countes the other vain,
But marks the order and the guise of Gods most holy spright,
And bears with that in every case, and takes his meaning right.
First shall he know the causes true, and father of each thing,
From whose commaundment, and whose word all kind of things do spring.
Created of no substance here, the stately framed skies,
The breathing air, and weighty earth that in the middle lies.
The monstrous waves of raging seas that here and there do flow,
And what in six days work was wrought for garnishing or show.
The wondrous sort of creatures strange, in air, in seas, or lands,
That have been made, committed to the power of Adams hands.
By this he also well shall learn, that in the world there is,
But one all only Lord and king, whose power almighty is,
Who does of persons three consist, coequall in degree,
In nature, Godhed, power, and everlasting dignitee,
Who does regard the deeds and acts, that here on earth are done,
And suffers nothing in the world, at random here to run:
But holds the helm of all himself, and stern does only guide,
Though diverse Ministers he has for every thing beside.
He well shall also understand, the great affection dear,
That God does always bear to man, who made his subjects hear,
Both birds, and beasts, and skalie fish that in the seas do swim,
And gave him from the skies a mind that most resembled him:
Nor left him when he wickedly upon the ^^ende did weight,
But threatening Satan and his train, to mercy took him straight.
Moreover he shall learn from whence the spring of death and sin,
And wretched ignorance of truth, did in the world begin:
And what great force of ours remaynes to deal in virtuous deeds:
And whence the safe assured hope of righteousness proceeds,
And whence remission of our sins. Besides he plain shall see,
Examples store of Gods great wrath, for such as wicked be:
And eke again the mercy great of God omnipotent,
Toward them that virtuous are, and such as earnestly repent.
There plainly also shall he see, what things the law does tell,
How it condemns every man, and drives down to hell:
That sin deserves dreadful death, and eke the certain way,
To please the everlasting Lord, and him for to obey.
Moreover that there are good sprites, and angels fair above,
Sent out from God for man's defense, and for their great behoue,
As unto them the wicked sprites are deadly enemies.
There shall he learn, that soul of man with body never dies,
Nor that the body evermore shall keep the stinking grave,
But sound and safe at the end of the world, their old estate shall have,
And come to everlasting life, where of the Judge severe,
The fearful sentence shall they see, and righteous judgment here.
There shall the wicked sort receive their just deserved hire,
Cast down into the smokie pit of dreadful flaming fire.
The good exalted to the joys of heaven shining bright,
Shall see the face of God, and live in passing great delight.
And more he well shall understand, that will of God above,
What honor here he best esteems, and what he most does love,
What orders he accepts here, what duty eke we owe
Unto the Magistrate, the whole estate of marriage shall he know.
But of this worthy treasure^great, why call I all to mind?
As if I would the surges tell of seas in raging wind:
Or number all the glistring stars that in the skies appear,
And cast abroad their golden beams when as the night is clear:
Or tell how many thousand leaves in wooddie groves do lie,
While as in Autumn Saturn throws his frostie flakes from hie:
Or count the number of the ears that through the world are seen,
While as approaching Harvest near, the corn forsakes his green.
There shall he find whatsoever does to husbandmen belong,
Wherewith to overthrow the foe, and to instruct the young:
Therefore let him at first the books of Moses well apply,
And all the other Prophets else in order heedilie,
And from the fountaynes draw the word, and fetch it from the spring,
That perfitely he know the mind of God in every thing,
But chiefly in the scriptures written by the holy ghost,
These two, the law, and Gospel, let him always think on most.
Discerning well betwixt them both, what does to each belong,
The property of every one, their force and virtue strong.
Least that he hap to deal therein as most men do this day,
To make them both agree in one, that differ far away.
The law destroys, condemns, and works wrath and vengeance due,
And showth us what we ought to do, and what we must eschew,
Augmenteth sin, and drives men down into the pit of hell,
That do not hear in every point observe and keep it well.
On the other side the Gospel does bring everlasting life,
And does appease the wrath of God for sin, and cease strife,
And through Christ forgiueth all that has been done amiss,
And drawth us from the depth of hell, and places us in bliss.
In giving joys that never ends: ne shows how we should live,
So much as it the deeds of Christ to us does wholly give,
And makes righteous every one, and does our sins deface,
Restoring unto saving health, all such as seeks his grace.
Lo here thou see a diffrence great, that will no unity,
No more than foul deformed death, with life will here agree.
Therefore herein our husbandman must sever them aright,
Not mingling them together thus, as just in egall plight,
Not making Moses here of Christ, or old Licurgus sour,
Nor yet ascribing that to Christ, that longs to Moses power.
Let each of them their office keep, their time, and eke their place,
Sometime it is meet the stony hearts with deadly law to chase:
And to declare the dreadful plagues, that no excuse remain,
To wretched men that all their life in wickedness do train.
A time again when meet it is of nothing else to speak,
But graciousnesse, and to relieve and comfort up the weak,
With sweetness great of Jesus mild, both neck and hands unbound,
From doleful chains of misery, that weyes them to the ground.
What can be worse than for to kill such as deserve to live,
And unto such as death deserve, eternal life to give?
Which thing does always come to pass when all things are not well
Discerned as they ought to be, and as I erst did tell.
And though the face of Moses, and our Saviors countnance bright,
Must both be bare and open showde, and furnished out with light,
Yet most of all we ought the name of Christ to magnify,
And seek t'aduaunce above the rest, his praise and dignity.
For he of every other thing is final end and sum,
And all things both in heaven and earth, by means of him are done,
And every thing committed here unto his holy hand,
Wherein both health and righteousness, and death, and life does stand,
With favor, grace, and punishment, and whatsoever does lie,
Created hear upon the earth, or in the heavens hie.
He is the sovereign king and guide of chosen people pure,
The happy priest, chief head and Lord, and Sanctuary sure:
The steadfast stone to cleave unto, and strongest tower of might,
The glorious Bridegroom, garnished most bewtifull in sight,
That with his own most precious blood, did wash and purify
His spouse from every spot and stain that might offend the eye.
The only shepherd, bread, and light, and chiefest master here:
In fine, the large and welthie horn, where all things does appear.
Him from the first beginning, God did promise for to give,
To Adam and his children all, that after him should live,
A gift that well should pacify, his just conceived ire,
And eke redeem the damned souls, from never ceassing fire:
Thus taught the holy ghost abroad, and Moses did the same,
And all the Prophets after him did blase abroad his fame.
The Apostles band did preach and teach him all the world throughout,
With travail and with labor great. And eke the Lawyer stout,
That was sometime his enemy, confessed openly,
That nothing here he sought to know, save Jesus that did die
Upon the cross for man's offense, who at that present time,
Was made our wisdom, righteousness, and purger of our crime.
And not by will or force of man, but by the almighty's law.
Why seekst thou here to know the cause? the rest not worth a straw,
(Respecting this) thou may account but all as darkness blind,
And fond ymaginations, and fancies of the mind,
The perfect way that leads to hell, which here with labor great.
The foolish world does blase abroad, while as it does entreat,
Of laws, religion, offices, yea though they taken be,
From Gods most holy word, or more from worldly fantasee.
They all are vain and of no force, except we hereto join
The knowledge pure of Jesus Christ, and majesty divine.
The Jews although the Bible still they gaze and look upon,
And honor great do give unto the Prophets every one,
Whose foming lips with boasting of the law the people feeds,
And glory in such Cartlodes here of good and virtuous deeds,
Yet blind they still remain, shut out from everlasting light,
In darkness groping all about, do run to hell aright.
What profits books or Moses now, or yet the Prophets all,
When as thou do not understand the chief and general?
Both many and worthy words likewise, from Turkish mouth proceeds,
Of God, his worship, prayers, and good works, and almose deeds:
And in the soberness of life, they far do us excel,
They fast, and keep their bodies ever pure, and clean, and well,
And often a pilgrimage they run, with pains and great expense,
From Saint to Saint to visit shrines, with wondrous reverence.
But all not worth a straw. For if that God be angry still,
And neither hear their prayers, nor to their vows he hearken will.
For if he all extreemely hate, and can away with none,
That put not all their confidence in Jesus Christ alone,
As holy scriptures testify, and teach in every place:
What profits all this travail vain, or labor void of grace?
Like vanity a great while now has vexed the christian sort,
With ignorance of Christ, whose name they only could report.
The merits of good works and prayers, men's cares did always fill,
Of vain and foolish ceremonies, their Pulpets thundered still.
And in the mean time as the Turks, with name of Christ they play,
Not teaching all our confidence and trust on him to lay.
And thus no good foundation of their doyngs does remain:
But as the daughters of Danaus, they labourde all in vain,
And took their travail to no end, with weak and weary hand,
But tilde upon the barraine earth, and sowde upon the sand.
Not that they lack the word of God, which likewise had the Jews:
But that it lay neglected still, and slept in deske and Pewes,
With dust and Cobwebs all to rayde, in foul and filthy plight:
Whereon if any man by chance did happen for to light,
And otherwise than custom was, on leaves a few to look,
As used it was in Churches often, to chaunt upon the book.
He sought not here for Christ, nor how to find the way to skies,
(For that was thought but childishness, and plain to all men's eyes,)
But sought for other kind of things, though worthy sure of praise,
As for to lead a virtuous life, and to direct his ways.
Some others used to mumble up the matter speedily,
And with the swiftness of their tongue did labor busily.
Regarding neither sense nor words, to whom it seemde a hell,
For to bestow a little time in reading scriptures well.
Hereof sprang up the blindness great, that dazde the people sore,
And well deserving did oppress their husbandmen the more.
The knowledge eke of Christ lay hid, that brings righteousness,
And causes us the blessed reign of heaven to possess,
Thus warnde by Christ's example, and the danger that may fall,
Our husband man must follow Jesus Christ before them all:
That for the people and himself, by this he may provide,
Least that he stumble at a straw, and mountains ouerstride,
And wonder at the village small, and stately town despise,
And at the entrance miss the house of God before his eyes:
Which does declare a bussard blind, or one that wants his sight,
Or else some dronken Plowman mad, that knows no way aright.
This rule obserude, and drinking at the purest fountain clear,
And taking counsel first of God, and always giving ear
Unto the voice of Christ our Lord, reserving it in mind,
No voice nor any Paraphrase, nor gloss of any kind.
That old or new has written been, must be dispisde of thee,
That either is the Bridegroomes friend, or else is thought to be
Both for the Bridegroomes sake, and for the right of all the reast,
That justly here are called in unto the Bridegroomes feast.
Yet not without a judgment great, or straight examining,
Read thou the works of any man, or his interpreting:
For oftentimes it comes to pass, that even the guide of hell,
Takes on himself the furniture of Angels seeming well.
And in the midst of righteous men, the crafty knave does stand,
And as a Saint his matters there he takes than in hand.
Whatsoever writer follows still the text of scriptures plain,
With Paul and Peter joining just, and all the Apostles train,
And teaches that our health proceeds from only Christ alone,
And for to live as he commaundes, and trust to others none,
Him read, and earnestly withal lay up his words in mind,
As one that only teaches, as the holy ghost assignde,
And seeks with all his force and might, to extol and magnify,
The honor of the Bridegroom here and sovereign Majesty.
But some there are that at the Thresholde of the door are blind,
Who leaving all the Prophets, and the testament behind,
Set out the fond decrees of men, and fancies lewd and vain,
Such as the man that never heard of Christ, nor of his reign,
With easy travail might invent, as once did Xenophon,
Isocrates, and Cicero, and others many one.
Who surely better things do teach, and sounder much are tried,
Than diverse whom we erst have known with baptism purifide.
These also read: for underneath the dunghill often does lie
The precious stone, and many times from sands the Gold we try.
Scarce can there any book be found, so lewd vnlearnde or naught,
But brings some commotitie, as Pliny truly taught.
For though there be no learning great, for to be had therein,
And though the phrase and matter all, be scarcely worth a pin.
Though many wicked things they teach, yet good to know the same,
For to avoid the ill, and of the ^est to make a game.
More laugh to hear the Cuccow lewd, to rattle in the throat,
Than for to hear the Nightingale with sweet and pleasant note.
But if these foolish books do hap, a lothsomenesse to breed,
And to offend the stomach much, as often they do in deed,
Than after reading once or twice, no more about them stand,
But give them to the Spiders, Mothes, or to the Grocers hand,
Whatsoever is good esteem it well, and keep it for thy need,
And what is ill dispatch it quite, and take thereof good heed.
But if a controversy rise amongst the learned men,
And such as teach the people hear with grave and skillful pen.
If that the matter come to fight, by battle to be tried,
And that the skirmishe waxes hot, with books on every side.
Let him a Newter keep himself, neglecting Solons lore,
And meddle not with any part, nor judgment give before
He well do understand the case, and wayde it perfitelie,
Regarding no man's person, style, nor earthly dignity,
Nor gifts of happy fortune here that have been dealt to men,
Nor great or little company, of such as follow them.
Let neither private love nor hate persuade him any way,
Nor force him any kind of thing, on either part to say.
Nor kin nor Country move his mind, to bear his hand awrie,
And cause the balance for to swerve, and fall unequally.
But free from all affections, let him mark above the rest,
Which of them nearest comes to Christ, and follows truth the best,
And keeps the perfect rule of faith, and justly does agree,
With every thing that in the apostles volumes written be.
(For new things no man here may fame) and rightly understand
The word of God, to such let him assent to give his hand.
And bear this always in his mind, that scriptures only must
Be they, whom godly men are bound undoubtedly to trust.
All other wrytings of such force and value ought to be,
But only where with scripture they are found for to agree.
Nor must we here regard nor wey, what man the Author be,
Of any learning new, nor yet how great the companee.
If that he bring not with him still the perfect Bridegroomes sound,
And heavenly word of God, unto the which are only bound
The hearts of mortal men, and which we safely may apply,
And vanquishe both the gates and reign of hellishe soil therebie.
What thing has more dispersed it self through all the world so wide?
What sect has got so many friends and followers beside?
What is more constantly affirmde? with sword and fire defended?
And thought to come from God, as from the lofty skies descended?
Then that so gross and foolish law of Mahomet the blind,
Whose doltish dreams among themselves contrary often we find?
What shall he do, if number great of people move his mind?
Or general consent of all the world his fancy bind?
Or stately crowns of Emperors, or Diademes of Kings,
With madness shall he run the way that to destruction beings,
And doubtful hanging just betwixt the earth and heaven tho,
To hell with crowde and number great of people shall he go.
Go search the scriptures teaches he that from the heavens came,
Appointed by the fathers voice, the governor of man.
He biddes not here the doting fruit of man's devise to way,
Nor what the lofty Prince commaundes, nor multitude does say.
For error springs with mortal men by special property,
And blindness from the mothers womb, does all accompany.
From which does neither Chains redeem, nor towns, nor princely seat,
Nor wool that twice has erst been did in purple poison great.
These are the chief desires of Pan, and Mydas fond delight,
And eke the heddie frantike rage of Princes great of might,
Not only with the Gentiles lewd, who lack the light divine,
But with the learnde and fleshly seed that comes of Abraham's line.
That now thou needste not to condemn of Ocean seas so deep,
The farthest parts that in Cimmerian mistes and darkness sleep.
For all the earth whereas the Sun does cast his countnance clear,
Oppressed with dreadful darkness great, and blindness does appear.
In matters touching faith therefore, and joys of heaven than,
Let him not trust the judgment here of any kind of man.
But know that men will always lie, with minds disposed ill,
Except the holy ghost, and word of God do guide them still.
Which whether it be done or not, let scriptures here decide,
Considering well of every part, as Argus thoroughly eide.
Except he does despise the words that Christ did once declare,
Who does command attentively, false Prophets to beware.
The like has Paul commanded often, and earnestly does will,
So does the son of Zebedey by good and perfect skill.
But for the judgment now in books, and their examining,
Our Plowman must give heed to this, as to a special thing,
That to no doctor here he bind himself continually,
Although the same be learnde, and had in estimation hie,
And of the people honorde much, and worshipped for his skill,
Least by this means he be enforst with good to swallow ill,
And maintain lies in steed of troth, yea for his masters sake,
To wrest and wrie, and small account of scriptures for to make.
But let him keep his judgment, and reserve his libertee,
To allow the things that with the holy sprite agreeing be.
And to reject the lewd and false, with malice never mooude,
But only with the love of truth, which as before I prooude,
Must only here respected be, no kind of man beside,
Nor lofty hats, that erst has been with purple color did,
Nor multitudes in number great, nor prease of people rife,
Nor miracles that have been ioynde with holiness of life.
For since the Apostles worthy time, has not been known to live,
A man to whom in every thing we credit safe may give.
For through affections ^f the mind, the general company,
That both in Greek or Latin write, do often run awrie,
And from the perfect path decline, and does the scriptures wrong,
Enforcing them to other sense than does to them belong,
While as they took not heed enough, or else too earnest were,
In things they went about for to persuade or maintain here.
Often times they supersticious things do teach and fancies vain,
That neither with the Gospel do agree, nor christian reign.
Let these be spots and marks that in thy body fair appear,
Yet think we them not worthy praise, nor to be made of here.
As on the other side, for these we may not damn the rest,
That soundly they have vttred here, and Christianly expressed,
A foolish love and all to blind, is it when we allow,
The manifest deformities, and them for good auowe,
And in a princely hall commend the dung before our face.
Let every thing retain his name, his praise, and eke his place:
And let not things contrary quite, have both one worshipping,
Nor yet that matters base and vile, be sealde with precious ring.
Wherein they shall constrained be, to trespass now and than,
That in this sort addict themselves to any private man.
But this is not the greatest harm that happens thereby,
In such as to one Author bind themselves continaully,
There is another greater thing and worser aye by much:
They care for no man here beside, nor make account of such,
As painefully do write or teach, especially if he
In any point do swerve, and from their master disagree,
Whom only here they make their God, as one that cannot lie,
Nor be deceyude in any point, nor ever tread awrie.
He only looks not by the glass, nor shadows here that lies,
But all things openly discernes, with more than Lynceus eyes.
Who if he any thing commend, their praises than excel,
And look what he does here mislike, they damn it down to hell,
And at an ynche they follow him, and iumpe with him they go,
And evermore as he decrees, there minds are altered tho.
Of these men can thou look for good, or faithful husbandmen?
Imaginst thou that ever truth can be esteemde of them?
Or that they can uprightly teach: he that from ^^ftie reign
Of heaven came, did not forbid his followers here in vain.
No man on earth their master, or their father for to call,
For why he knew in every place were swarms of doctors all,
Puffed up with pride, by reason of the learning that they had,
Who chiefly sought for to advance their own devices mad,
And clearly do deface the truth: and here in every thing,
To conquer all men's hearts, and them unto subjection bring.
Since cleaving to one master still, does make men soonest fall,
We neither must our parents here, nor friends esteem at all.
But only Jesus as the Doctor chief we must obey,
As one that only teaches here the truth and perfect way.
This was the ancient fathers rule, for this the writers new,
Have striuen long, and plain disclosde a lewd and loathsome crewe
Of errors blind, wherein great learned men in time did stray,
Whereat I more do muse why men should at this present day
Allow this rule, and use it boldly toward every man,
When as the works of writers new, and of the old they scan.
Yet as if they in heaven should continually abide,
Of no man here they will be iudgde, nor have their matters tried,
But would be thought in every thing to touch the perfect pin,
Whose doings here to bring in doubt, or to resist is sin,
And taken for a deadly crime that needs sacrifice,
Whatsoever they teach must be deuourde with shut and closed eyes.
If that thou doubt, and that thy stomach loath at diverse things,
Then hatred and defiance straight, and hurly burly springs,
And dangers great does thee awayte, and prison hard at hand,
And death with cruel torments near, unto thy head does stand,
Thou happy art and eke thy birth has fortune fauourde right,
If that thou may thy country leave in poor and simple plight.
And is not this a foolish rage, and madness gross and blind?
Yet numbers great of fools that do accept this same they find,
And bind themselves to all their toys, and farther with them go,
Esteeming all their doings here, as God had wild it so.
Nor any thing herein they doubt, and worse than Todes they hate
All those that seem to doubt thereof, or speak against their state.
Even as a lofty Pine, they labor such to throw to ground,
And worser than their masters far, in all things are they found.
Therefore addict thy self to none, but gather still the best,
And things that well agreeing be, with word of God expressed:
The other to the Doctor leave, or to his foolish band,
Nor suffer him in sted of Gold, to give thee durtie sand.
But though the almighty Lord has here delivered unto men
His holy word, with writers store, and worthy husbandmen,
Whereby the truth may well be known, and Christ that does redeem,
And all men ought to learn and read, but chiefly such as meene
To take the holy plough in hand, and minds in order bring:
Yet shall thou not discern the truth, nor Christ the sovereign king,
Except the holy ghost from hie instruct thy feeble mind,
And teach thee here the per^ite path, and certain way to find.
Behold in every place, what store of schools are to be seen,
What numbers great of Doctors here, whose learning men esteem:
What company of books, and eke what care to learn and teach,
Yet empty stands the Pulpet still, and few of Christ do preach,
And few regard to hear of him, nothing is pure or cleene,
Nor of the holy ghost may any steps or path be seen:
The earthly things are had in price, and worldly wisdom vain,
But no man seeks the doctrine that belonges to christian reign.
From whence proceeds such mischief great of God, the fury fell
It is wherewith he plagues contempt, and world that does rebel,
And does deny his heavenly deawes to every study still,
And only leaves the world the shell and letter that does kill.
Himself the kirnell close does keep, and takes the pith away,
And lewd dispisers does despise, and suffers them to stray
In worldly trifles fond and vain, wherewith they feed their flock,
Why should he open heaven gates to such as do not knock?
Why should he give his holy sprite, his Christ and gifts divine
To them that never ask, but with a frowning look repine?
Thus men still trusting to their wits, while as they seek to find
The way to heaven with fond decrees, and acts of diverse kind,
In sundry follies drown themselves, and labor all in vain,
And hedlong hurl themselves into the floods of hellish reign.
But thou apply thy force and mind, and banishe slothful ease,
Spread out the sails of diligence, and try the learned seas.
Remember yet the aid of God, and help of heavenly light,
And pray to God continually, to give the heart his spright,
And to reveal the certain truth, thy mind for to inspire
With Christ the saving health, who ought to be thy chief desire,
Thy only glory, and thy talk, and in thy mind to lie,
In setting forth whose honor, thou thy learnings must apply.
These things if that with earnest mind, of God thou do require,
No doubt but he will help thee straight, and grant thee thy desire,
And fill thy open mouth with food, and precious treasures great:
Thus has he promised, and likes it well when we entreat.
Do thou not see how Solomon did greatly him delight,
In asking neither goods nor life, but wit and judgment right,
How much above all other men he thereby did receive?
Go pray therefore, and knock a pace, desire and never leave.
Thou never can thy self desire more earnestly to have,
Than he is ready for to give to such as thus do crave,
The blessed gifts of heavenly sprite. Thence shall he open wide,
The secret Celles of sacred books, and wisdom great beside,
Wherein the sweetest sight of all may Christ be plainly seen,
That of the chosen evermore, the only hope has been,
And many mysteries beside of strange and wondrous kind,
Kept still in secret from the world, that evermore is blind,
Which no dispiser lewd may know. His word eke will he teach
Abundantly, and give a sprite that earnestly shall preach.
Who if he give thee not these things, and thou to ask disdain,
In learning only shall thou not bestow thy time in vain,
But what thou speakste shall foolish be, unsavory, and unsweet,
Disordred eke in every point, not having head nor feet.
Nor Doctor shall thou counted be, but for a trifler vain,
A duns, a foolish babbler, and most worthy of disdain,
Whose presence, voice, and foolish words, no sheep of Christ will hea^
That knows the voice of Jesus Christ, and Gods co^maundments clear.
What profits it forsaking God, to be accounted great,
And with the damned stinking Goats to have the highest seat.
Like as the Iewishe Rabbines have, among the castawayes,
And as the teachers of the Turks, and many in these days,
That bounce and beat the Pulpet still, with loathsome noyce and cry,
Meet only for to rail, and in the rest not worth a fly?
A great thing is it in the house of God to drudge and sweep,
And servant in the earth to be unto the chosen sheep.
For such a worthy rowme therefore, look well thou worthy be,
Requiring God continually to grant this force to thee,
To give thee grace and strength thereto, and while thou here do live,
Eschew no travail great, nor toil, thy mind to labor give.
According to thy calling, let thy house well furnished be,
Not glistring all with sumptuous plate, nor costly Imageree,
Nor hangde about with Arras rich, nor pleasant Tapestrie.
Let all Th'assirian furnitures, and Phrygian beauty lie,
Nor seal thy house with Iuory white, nor Marble graven fine,
Ne let thy walls with painted Tables of Apelles shine,
Nor with Parrhasius costly works, nor Euphranors beside,
These things are meet for Princes great, and men addict to pride.
Who (foolish) much regard such ^oyes, with lofty swelling mind,
And little wisdom got thereby, not meet for such a kind
Of men as search for heavenly things, and scriptures do apply:
And of poor Christ do preach the word, and doctrine faythfullie.
Dress up thy house in comely sort, but not with great expense,
Clean kept, and swept, perfumed well, with pleasant franconsence,
With berries sweet of Iunyper, or in the Summer time,
With Lauender, or Violets, and Roses sweet and fine,
Or pleasant Lillies white. Sweet smelles the wit does chiefly feed,
As stinking air does dull the mind, and great diseases breed.
Let large and fair thy study be, and lightsome every where,
Far placde from any filthy smell, no sink nor dunghill nere,
No loathsome privy there aboutes, no marshe nor lakes at hand,
Nor filthy vapors that arise from stinking pooles that stand.
Here let thy chiefest goods appear, and books in number great,
Of sundry sort, among the which, the best and highest seat
The Bible chalengeth of right, which many years agone,
Was written by the holy sprite, and in the tongues each one,
Wherein it has been written here. Of which the chiefest grace
The Hebrew has, and next to it the Chaldean tongue has place,
Let not the Greek translation want, but stand among the rest,
Which seventy sundry men did write, at Nilian kings request,
And which the ancient fathers used, that Christ of old did preach,
And with their virtuous wrytings grave, the Christian faith did teach.
Then let the worthy Doctors all, and famous christian crew,
That long time since have written books, be placde in order due.
And ne^t unto the Bible, first let Austine have his place,
Who has among the writers all, in Latin chiefest grace,
Whose pregnant wit found out the truth, and syft^th all things well,
Whose iudg^ment in detecting fr^^de, did others far excel.
And next to him his ancient friend, let Jerome have his seat,
Well known unto the world, for skill in tongues, and wisdom great,
Who perfect was in every act, and learned science tho,
And was not far behind in (...) to worthy Cicero.
Let Ambrose also there be se^, with learned phrase and sweet,
Whose fatherly hea^^ in^tructing well, does teach us what is meet.
Nor let Hilarious absent be, nor Athanasius great,
Who always does with steadfast tongue of pure religion treat:
Nor both the Gregory's that in the Grecian tongue excel,
Whose glistring beams unto the world has erst been known full well.
Let Cyprian eke the Martyr here, an handsome place possess,
And virtuous Basyll, and Chrysostom full of holiness,
Whose words do like a fountain flow, and eke whose worthy wit
For eloquence excelles, amid whose lappes does Pitho sit.
Let Irenaeus have his place, a famous writer old,
Let Origin be placed there, and eke Cyrillus bold,
And sundry others mo, that do in Greek and Latin write
The names of whom it were to long and tedious to resite.
Take also those that lived next, of less antiquitee,
Although for faith nor virtue they may not compared be
With those so famous fathers old, and though they rudely write,
Not having eloquence alike, nor cunning to endite.
And to fill up the number, let in worthy places stand,
Such men as in this age of ours have set their helping hand,
Whereof thou not a few shall find, that to these Doctor good
Full near have gone, and through the holy ghost have understood
Such things as few before have known, who not inferior be,
In knowledge tongues and eloquence, and in diuinitee,
Unto those men that wrote of old, for God has at this time
Brought forth such glistring beams of light, and causde the^ forth to shine,
And wondrous gifts has dealt abroad as no man can deny,
That wisdom has, for which we are bound to yield continually
Great thanks and praises to his name, and well to use them here,
To our behoof, and profit great, and not for to despise
Them as the custom is of old, in shameful sort and guise,
Wherewith the things that in our days are found and brought to light,
Though never so good, we do contemn with loathsome appetite.
On the other side, the fashions old, and such as far be ^et,
With willing arms we do receive, and most by them we set.
This spiteful custom cast away, and let us here embrace
Gods blessing sent from hie, and works of men so full of grace,
Nor moved be if any thing therein amiss do seem,
Or fancy such as ought of us to be rejected cleene.
What writer (scriptures here except) could ever yet be found,
That has not erde in any point from doctrine pure and sound?
We all in many things offend, and sundry things deceive,
When darkely placde the perfect s^use the mind does not conceive.
Among these writers here deserves the chief and highest seat,
Erasmus, he that learned was in every science great,
The Jewel of our time, and glory great of Germany,
By whom we safely may contend and have the victory,
With all the Italians, Spaniards, French, and such as English be.
In these most learned works, thou shall be sure for to attain,
To know whatsoever Christians good have thought, or heathen vain.
Next unto him let sundry other good men have their place,
Shut no man out that takes pains to fill the world with grace*
What Country man soever he be, or in what time he live,
Yea what soever name the world to him does use to give.
So shall thou well be furnished, of counsel learnde and good,
That may declare what needful is for to be understood,
Of Christ, of faith, and hope, whereby thou well may answer give
In every doubt, as one that still about the Lord does live.
Let not the whip of Jerome fear, nor force thee to refrain,
(For in the world he uttered has his dreams and fancies vain,)
From reading of the heathens works, and of Philosophy.
Sometime for recreation sake, thy mind a while apply,
In Aristotle's books to search the sense and phrase obscure,
And whatsoever Plato here has left in writing pure,
Or Plutarch, Euchide, Xenophon, or Ptolomae the grave,
As touching Mathematicals, or manners written have.
Let here the Lawyers present be, and also them withal
The Popes decrees, rescriptes, and such as Decretals they call.
A meet and worthy place is due to Poets here of right,
As unto virtuous minds, and men inspirde with holy spright.
Let Galen, and Hippocrates be placed near to thee,
And other famous Doctors that in physic skillful be*
Let Tullie that excelles in Latin tongue have here his seat,
The father sw^ete of eloquence, and guide of duty great.
Let Pliny, and Demosthenes, and valiant Caesar hie,
Isocrates, and Seneca, be placed worthylie.
Join here withal in company the story writers old,
Such as have written lives of men, and acts of Princes told*
Who able is each writers name, in verse for to resight?
Who in rehearsal of so great a number would delight?
But such as hold the sacred Plowe, must not be ignorant
Of any Author, but with them be always conversant.
Learn of the honiemaking Bees, about the Meadows fly,
And suck the pleasant juice that does in every flower lie.
Of every thing are arguments, and reasons to be brought,
Not only out of books, and out of things that nature wrought:
But even from the handicraftes, of base and vile degree,
That husbandmen may have no time vnoccupide to be.
What should I show how great a gain and pleasure hence does spring:
For first of all assuredly it is a worthy thing
To have so many learned mates, and sweet companions here,
And such a learned Senate as about thee shall appear:
To whom thou may for counsel come, in any doubt of thine,
That either longs to worldly state, or unto things divine.
In silence they remain, if ought thou would not forth to fly,
And truth is told thee plain, and nothing vttred there by flattrie:
Them shall thou have that can their part in weighty matters play,
And such again as mirth can move, and sorrow drive away.
Thus shall thou willing masters have, that present still shall be,
Who if thou will shall teach, if not, they will not trouble thee.
Hereby thou shall eschew the prease of common people vain,
Nor pleasure shall thou take in rude assemblies to remain.
Thou shall both spare thy pursse and ears, and keep a quiet mind,
Nor shall sustain the vile reproach of such as be unkind.
Nor shall thou be constraynde to look upon thy frowning so,
Nor driven for to hear the ribaulds tongue at large to go.
No malice, wrath, nor wretched love, shall purchase thee disease,
No gates of noble men shut up from thee shall thee displease*
The doubtful cases of the law shall never move thy mind,
Nor strife that here in trifles vain the brawling people find.
Thou shall no whit regard the steps of hie estate to clime,
Nor shall thou be with Dice undone, nor cast away with wine,
Thou shall as in a Paradise, enjoy thy liberty,
And walk amongst the flowers sweet of white and purple die.
The world thou shall despise, and only joys of heaven embrace,
And follow here the doctrine true of Christ in blessed case.
FINIS.

