Unto the right honorable the nobility and ientlemen of England: Willyam
Rethe wissheth peace, with constancye of mind.
THe man / that is borne of a woman (as says holy Job* Job. 14.
) has but a very short time to live, his days being re^lete mith many
miseries, which thing certain Heathen men (belyke) well considered, as
Seneca, who very pretelye compares this world to a way, Seneca.
full furnished with hid thistles, wherethorow a man had need to be well ware
how he wa^dre, least he prick him self: and also that death is the fynisher
of all heuines and sorrow. And in like manner Pithagoras. ^^tha.
Death (says he) is rather to be desired then despised, for it changes us
from this world of uncleanness and shame to the world of worship: from this
transitory life, too the life everlasting: from the world of follye and
vanities, to the world of wisdom, reason and truth: and from this world of
pain, travel, and misery, to the world of rest and consolacion etc. But if
as well holy write, as all profane histories, had with silence passed over
this known and assured trueth^ I think that these dreadful days and miserable
co^flictes, which we feel presently, might be allowed for a sufficient
testimonye. And yet to behold the course of things, both past and presentlye
a workinge, it moves me often times to muse, when I se the strange diversity of
estates, how that in sundry respects, the one may be accounted very
pleasante and easy in comparison of the other.

As, if we consider the unquiet, restles, and slydinge estate of those in high
authority (who yet seems to have most felicity) and then the happy, quiet,
and peaceable estate of them, who (for the basse estimacion they be in) seems
of all men to be most unfortunate. And even this is the same, which so often
times makes me to thyncke, (sadly sittinge some time alone) How well at ease
they be, which have drawn too them selfs the luckye lot of contentatio^ of
mind in the myddest of their porest poverty, and how unhappily ye residue
run, who, being in low degree, will travel to be in high authority, in
seking whereof they rather procure their ill hap, by obtaining their desire,
then wanting their welthes, by remayninge as they were.

But now at the last when I saw no end of climming up, and in such number
also, yt they daily fall down by ruthful heaps, taking unrecoverable falls to
their utter vndowing: And besides all this to the farther increase of my
admiracion, that other by saying their present harm can not avoid their
slippery steps to prolong their own prosperity, but wilfully (as it were)
to tumble down the tree after them: And yet I speak nothing of that, how by
secret shuldring, each pussheth other, I wot not how, from his place, but so
daungerously, as I may sai in secret, it passes playinge in pastyme: but now
to make rehearsed me, and not that I thought ye dowinge thereof to be so
exquisite, but because such profit thereby unto me insuede, that me seems I
must needs confess it.

But now, calling to remembrance what travel and study some of your
honors and worshippes have taken in the wayghtie affayers of the realm of
England, when you were thought mete too bear rule, how so ever things
happened now and then to succeed: I think the same of every faithful subject
thus yet to be considered, as lamenting the ill with hope of redress, so for
those good things, by your travels then enjoyed, our humble thanks still to
remain, though, through the tyranny of tyrants, the benefit be withdrawn.

For as friendship, being commendable in men of equality, is yet more laudable
in the honorable or worshipful, that can be contented to extend the same too
the simple poor man: Even so he (upon whom such friendship is bestowed) not
to express by such ways as he is able, his faithful and thankful heart,
the same man, if my judgment fail not, deals not only unnaturally, but
deserves, as he is well worthy, too be sharply reprehended.

In consideracio^ whereof it may please your honors and worships to understand,
yt I have thought it a part of my duetye, too offer unto you this simple seeing
glass folowinge, in the which (I wene) may be discerned, both the estate of
the mighty and mean man, what a hudge heappe of endless troubles always
accompanies the one: and the great quietness yt is lost by leaving the other.
Of ye which, albeit your honors and worshippes can not be ignorant,
that have been daily trauelers as well in other men's matters as in your own:
yet in my mind, the effects thereof be not, neither can be so apparante
always too memory, but that in as dymme and course a glass, as here is
exhibited, there may be somewhat espied* which otherwise might have been buried
in the deep doungeo^ pit of extreme oblivion.

But as touching the premises, it would here be noted, that I have not
spoken it to the derogacion of common authority, neither would I thereby
discourage (if my words were of power to persuade) any man, that were
ordinarely called to bear rule, seeing I must needs confess the same too be
of such force by thee infallyble prouydence of God, as the public weal may
in no wise want, only then my meaning is of such as seek more their own
glory, profit and commodity, then too be faithful ministers and godly
governors in that high dignity, whereunto they aspire.

^o^peius a ^ble Ro^ayne.
It is written, that Pompeius was wont to say of him self, yt he never came
to office bearing in Rome, but that he obtained it sooner then for his own
part he looked for, and that he ever gave up the same again before other men
wisshed it. A report without all doubt, worthy great praise. Oh that our
rulers and officers of England could justly boast so much of them self: it
is to be feared, a very few are they, which dare attempt that enterprice, as
well for that their gredie coueteousnes, and vain glorious ambicion, as also
the multitudes murmuring for their cruel oppression would testefie against
them.

But many things were here to be spoken more mete to au^swer the request of
so lamentable a time, then this which does but aggrauate our sorrow: to wete
that as God plaged the people of the old time, with pestilence, famine, sword,
captivity and bondage, taking away their godly kings and magistrates, and
placinge wicked, ungodly tyrants and strangers in their romes, as often as they
either resisted his truethe, or having it lived not accordinglye: Even so, how
as soon as they repented unfeignedly, confessed their sins earnestly, prayed
purely, and amended their lives effectually, God vnladed them and delivered
them of such grievous punishments, as they deseruinglye sustained, and to this
might have been added, how hotely the Lord in like manner has begone to
kendell his wrath, ^he bow ^ring is (...), y^ dar^^ fle a ^^se, they ^^ill
pay ^^me short (...).
and bent his bow (nay, let me me^de it) has already shote down his persinge,
sharp poynted darts upon our country of England, and most justly for that
we have both so horribly abused his truth, and obstinately resisted the same,
despised his prophets the preachers thereof, who for the space of these.6.
or.7. years have in their true preachings prophesied of these monstrous
plagues too be at hand, Read the ^. and. 6. chap (...) Esaias.
as a reward due for sin, which begins to nyppe in deed, I pray God it
be not to our endless confusion. But who then believed their preachinges? did we
not think their words madness? for who regarded them? yea, did we not think
them to be out of their wits? or at last could abide them? did not all laugh
them to skorne? how did you noble me^ rage and fu^e against them, layinge
sedicion to their charges, when they cried out against your sensuality and
oppression: but could ye meaner sort of me^ speak well of the^, when they
rebuked their rebellion? as for your cruel clergy, their tyranny in all
ages, in torme^ting the me^ of god, might suffice to testify how hotli they
loved them, if their present wodenesse were absente too declare it.

But here the extremity of time so enforsinge me,
I must sudde^ly stryke sail and come too an ancker (while a word or two be
spoken) trusting, (for as much as I ente^d not to say any thing, but by ye way
of exhortacion) my ship shall not be driven against the rocks, though she ride
in rough water.

Has your unthankfulness ben so great toward the almighty God (O ye
noble men of England) that the same thing, which is so apparent and manifest
in ye eyes of al indifferent men, should be hid from you? I mean your
dolorous destruction. Could not the soundinge blaste, ^arke well that nota^le
tale in ^ayster ^ornes epistle, and then ^aste your ^ccomptes what certain ^ie
ye have of your heads, if proud prelacie prosper.
that Horn latelye blewe in your ears, open your eyes, they being both so
nyre neighbors?

Can neither the notable admonitions of so many godly men, as have both spoken
and written unto you, nor yet present experience, cause you to have
understanding? oh to what cruel vengeance has God reserved you? belike ye
either trust to your strong stedes and mighty men, or else to the courtesy of
your churlishe church men: but how little he lie ye had in your horses and
harnes^e men, I trow ye have not yet forgotten, when ye thought to had wonders.

And if ye think, by your dissemblinge or making fair wether with proud
priesthood, to spend your days in quietness, ye may chance also to be
disceaued. No, no they know well enough, ye d^ but disse^ble with the^ and
there^fore etc.
Call to your minds how their predecessors (which might not be thought able
to match with these in maliciousness) handled your noble auncetours. Read
you the dolfull story of S. Ihon. Old castle, the worthy L. Cobham, by ye
vilanous handelynge of whom you may partly se their charity. Yea, If
scripti^ seem bitte^ unto you yt is able too save your souls: read^ you yet ye
aunciente ^^ories for ^^fegarde (...) your (...), which (...) ny^er y^ (...)
and block (...) ye think (...), but oh ye (...) could (...) it.
but what say you too their traiterous handelinge of good king Ihon, when as
they not contented most violentlye to pull the croune from his head (what
though he were their anointed king) but also at the length, miserablye did
poison him? I doubt not, but that the monk, which poisoned him self to bring
yt to pass, shall shortli have his yearly masses, song for his soul at
Swyneshead abbay, when the lands is restored again, as that and ye rest must
be shortly what promises soever be made to the contrary: for such promises are
commonly made more to way the time the^ to be kept, as partly you in England
do know by present experience. and here after may feale peradventure to your
pain. But to the purpose, if these iolie champions of the church durst do this
to a king, The clergy ^n times past were ^ut of the ^euelles ^ourt, but ^ow
they ye of his preuy counsel.
and in those days when as iniquity was not at the prime, what will these do
unto you (being but subjects) in whom iniquity does so abound, that by
whole running ryuers it flows over.

If these and such like things, being pas^, be not sufficient too teach you,
at the least by things present weye things to come. If that bedlem, bishop
Bo^ner of London, be neither ashamed nor affrayed, without all law or order
too bear him, so to torment that sely poor man, Thomas Weuer, Thom^^ Weuer,
dwellyn^ w^thoute Bisshop^ gate.
because he would not consent to his deuilishe doctrine: what will that
dreadful devouring deuell do, y^ wilful Winchester with his adheren^es, now,
when as they have established laws, to outbeare the^.

I am afraid, In de^^ they beg^^ pretelye. A fable.
the fable of Esopes Fox and Got will shortly be verified. The Fox and the
Got descended both in to a deep pity, from whence they could not get forth
again, the Fox being a crafty and subtle beast, ye know (as the most
part of the clergy be) desires the Got that he might step up upon his
back, and so to get out of ye pit, promisinge the Got y^ he will draw him out
after him, ^he fox, by this craft escaping the danger, was required by ye Got
to perform his promis. But says the Fox: Ah Got, Got, if thou had had
so much wit in thy headde as thou haste heir in thy bearde, thou wouldeste
not have gone down, except thou had known how too have gotten up again.

Now that the two foted Fox is escaped out of the pyt, and that you noble men
of England have (with the Got) set both back and shulders too his liftinge
up, it is most evident: for the filthe of his tail and fete has all to be
stained your clothes. There remains now of your part to claim ye Foxes
promis, that he may draw you out of that dangerous gulffe where into ye be
fallen: but think you ye shall not find the Fox still a Fox in his answer? I
went so. Ye shall then find that your punishing and inprisoninge of good men
for the Foxes pleasure, shall little help you, in the tormentyng of whom, as
ye esteem them and make them your slaves, that of late days ye seemed with
touth and nail to defend and favor: eue^ so do you therein show your selfs
vile slaves and bond me^ in deed, and that unto such as are more viler then
vileness it self, who w^ have th^^ghte the haute c^^^rage of (...) no^^^litie,
(...) so witti^^ have (...) slaves, (...) ye (...) and (...) Pope of Rome.
even to a sort of proud prelates and baudie beasts, who, to murder gods
people, have made you their hangemen, and have appointed you, as open baudes,
to cloak and defend both their spiritual and carnal whoredom.

O merciful God, what tolerable thing, in those blood thirsty Balamites,
has moved your honors thus to abase your selfs under the^, not only to ye
destruction of your persons, but also of all your posterity. Were there in
the^ rayning, either the constancy of Camillus, ^^millus (...) such (...) to
his ^itrey, yt (...) gift threat^d cause (...) work (...) a^^^nst it.
or ye humanity of Plato, the chastity of Pithagoras, or the gravity of
Cato, the temperance of Socrates, or the fortitude of Scipio, there were yet
some appeara^ce, that their virtues provoked you: but they now being clean out
of gonneshot, from the smell of the least verity that can be named, and then
in cruelty surmounting conquerours far passinge Nero, (...) of (...) noble
(...) ye (...) your (...) shameless not a^^med (...)
in woodnesse and wrath equal to Ajax, in dronckennes and lechery comparable
to Heliogabalus, and in pride and presumption fellow like to Lucifer: what ca^
be otherwise thought of your unnatural doings, but that it either proceadeth
of a chyldishe fear (which of all infirmities should have been fardest of
from you, that have been the rulers of so noble a realm) or else (if that were
not the cause) then the old proverb to be fulfilled, which is, that one
wicked will to the deuell, too have the others company, from whom God for
his mercies sake (if you be not cast awayes) save and defend you.

Wherefore, repent, O ye noble men of England, repent, embrace again the
truth, but be constant in the same, and labor now another while by your
well doing too qualify that rumor, which your inconstancy has caused in
forrayne Realms to be spread, to the great dishonor, both of you and your
cou^trye, in that you are compared (you have set forrayn realms a work to
wonder at your dasterdli doing) too smoth worn wethercockes y^ wayteth on the
wynd, the reward whereof is not only worldli sham, but farther then that, to
receive ye reward which is due unto ypocrites in the lake, that burns with
brimstone and fire, where ye shall find darkness in stead of light, hungring
in thirste, and thirsting in pain, ^he (...) of (...) yt be (...) cold.
clothed with cold, yet flaming in heat, evermore dieng, but still tastinge
life, wisshinge to dye, but may not obtain: too be short, your dwellinge
place shall be where as is for evermore wringinge of hands, and gnasshinge of
tethe etc.

But now I hold it more then time to return where I was before. Were not the
poor preachers of the verity (for speaki^g the truth) abhorred in manner of
all, and beloved all most of none? And now for publishing of the same truth
too be tormented somewhat worse then thieves and murderers? alas ^ou miserable
Ieremies, for eue^ so was he handled of the wicked priests of his time, Iere. ^
as the.26. of his prophecy does notablye declare. I think verelye, the
dreadful days draws on a pase, that as Ieremi sat pitifully, beholding the
miserable desolatio^ that came upon the Jews, for their stubborn infidelity
and murdering of gods Prophets: Even so you that by gods providence shall
eskape the cruel slaughter, now put in practice, shall behold England, and
say with him: alas, how lies that land so waste, which some time was full
of people: how is she become like a widow, that was some time ye flour of all
nations? how is she now brought under tribute, which some time ruled all
lands etc. But me thinks I hear one busye speaking alreadi, and says: Sir,
from whence came you? are ye a Prophet? how know you yt these things shall
happen?

Forsouthe Sir say I, by this I am more then half assuredlye persuaded. I
find, that as God is eternal, everlasting, almighty, and immutable, so is he
a God that has no respect of persons, who uses his justice universally upon
all wilful offenders. But in the old time he distroied them, that fell from
his word to (...) Idolatry, and we now commit^e the same offense more horribly
then ever they did: therefore he will also distroye us (for I wene repentance
be paste) so that the alteration of states, the mutabilitie of fortune, the
woeful fall of nobility, the ruthefull rysynge of proud prelacie, and
consequently the utter subversion of the realm of England is far away
less too be marueled at then lamented. Engla^^^ of (...) must (...) to
dest^^^tion.


But of these things farther too entreat in such sort, as should satisfy your
honorable expectatio^s, as I must needs confess my imperfection therein, and yt
there wholly wa^teth in me such dexterity of knowledge and lerning as should
accomplish the same: Eue^ so, (praised be god) there be works enough for such
purposes, which for ye excellency of them (as I have hard the godly learned
report) can not lightlye be amended, and among sundry one in especial I
commend to all troubled co^scie^ces, entitled ye spiritual and precious perle,
set forth by the right Christian and godly gouernoure (under our most noble
and excellent prince, The (...) which (...) to me (...) bring of (...) me to
(...) the (...) to all (...).
then being) the good duke of Somerset.

The book, without all doubt, will bring to the studious readers thereof such
singular comfort in their adversity, as far passes ye value contained in
the title thereof.

And as I wish this to ye comfort of all the godly afflicted, as a soueraygne
and present remedy, which number I trust be not few in these mourning days of
sorrow and anguishe (consideringe how gods gusshinge out wrath is poured
forth for sin:) so do I heartily beseech all such, as be not yet resolved,
concerning the usurped authority of the B. of R. of supersticious ceremonies,
of unlawful vows* of the wicked law and decrees of men, and that the
scriptures of God is only able and sufficient to teach the true church of
Christ, as touching their salvation etc. to read a book, made and set forth
by Stephen Gardener, now the unworthy Chanceloure of England, De (...)
obedie^t^^ (...) into ye E^^glish (...)
entitled de Vera obedie^tia, in the which book (puttinge a part his treason
toward the Queen, in making her a bastard) is contained such notable
arguments, for probation of the truth, clean contrary too that detestable
and execrable doctrine, which he against his own conscience maliciously
mayntayneth, as is strong enough (though there come no better help) too beat
down too the ground all his sandy and wilful buyldinges, whereby all
indifferent men may se, as in a most clear glass, the very lively Image of
our dissembling papists, how they, A (...) note, to know ye ^^^perous
^^^neratio^ (...) papiste
being cousynne Iarmanes to Paul's wether cock, can turn as the wind turns
for advantage.

The eternal and almighty God of heaven, for his mercies sake, mollify your
hearts, and open your eyes that you may se the perilous pathe of perdicio^, in
the which you now wander astraye, and give you grace unfeignedly to repent,
that ye receive not ye punishmente, which is due unto your deserts. Amen.


