A WONDER VVOORTH THE READING, OR A True and faithful Relation of a Woman, now
dwelling (...) Kentstreet, who, upon Thursday, being the 21 of August last, was
delivered of a prodigious and Monstrous, Child, in the presence of diverse
honest, and religious-women to their wonderful fear and astonishment.

depiction of deformed baby

LONDON Imprinted by William Jones dwelling in Redcrosse-streete 1617.

To the Reader.
I Will broach no lie, past man's belief or reason,
For that I would keep custom with the Season,
I Bring no news here of some hideous Dragon,
Nor tell I of Charles Starre-bestudded Wagon
New hurld from heaven: Nor of some Horse and Bear
which' fore the King did one another tear:
Nor of strange Earthquakes swallowing worlds of people:
Nor Prophecy, found in some ruind Steeple:
But here I bring (in a new true-borne Story)
A monstrous Message sent from the King of Glory.
A True and faithful Relation of a Woman, now dwelling in Kentstreet, who upon
Thursday last, being the 21 of August, was delivered of a Prodigious and
Monstrous Child, in the presence of diverse honest, and religious women, to
their wonderful fear and astonishment.
IT is reported of the famous Scythian, that when he went forth to war
against his enemies; it was his fashion, first to display a white Ensign, as a
token of his mercy, if his foes would yield to fair conditions: but if not,
then would he display a red Ensign, in sign of effusion of blood and
threatening death and destruction: but if at least they refused to stoop to his
fair admonitions; then would he set up his black banner: betokning nothing but
revenge, and bloody slaughter; and that not one should escape from his
threatening fury. So has Almighty God dealt with this our Country: has he
not from time to time sent down his Ensigns of anger amongst us to affright
us from our sins and to stope our fete in the way of Iniquity, and yet
notwithstanding, we go one in our abominations? He has devoured us with
diseases, pinched us with famine, terrified us with accidental fires consuming
our houses? he has commanded the merciless waters to swallow the friutes of
the Earth, so as they became utterly vselesse and unprofitable to you: he has
tra^sposed the seasons, set Summer in Winters place, and Winter in Summers
stead: He has called from amongst you, the Noble, grave, and learned, the
wise, the judge, and godly: nay has he not come nearer unto you; and called
the husband from the wife, the wife from the husband? the child from the
mother? the father from the Son, one friend from another, and said them all
up together in the grave of corruption by the hand of death to your sad sorrow
and discomfort? These, and many more Judgments has God sent down amongst you,
as so many Heralds to proclayme his just anger against you for your
abominatio^s, and yet you lie snorting in your sins, quaffing down iniquity
like water, and securely streching your limes upon the bed of luxuritie, as if
God were not jealous of his honor, and regarded not our tra^sgressions. O
England, England, delude not thy self with these goulden dreams? but resol^^
that God will come, and visit thee in some sharper measu^^ and manner, then
heretofore he has done: the axe is already laid to thy root? his powerful
hand has long been heaued up over thee, and when it falls, it must be thy
confusion: O remember, that God is said, to have feet of Lead, and hands of
Iron, he is slow to wrath; but when he strikes, he paies home and heavy.
Therefore abuse not thou Gods patient.

How many warning pieces of his displeasure has he discharged upon thee (O
England) and yet, thou take no warning. What blazing Comets, what
Apparitions, what unnatural Inundations, what maleuolent Coniuntions of the
Stars? what Conspiracies against our King and State? What miraculous,
Monstrous, and Prodigious births have been presented to our eyes, as hideous
spectators of deformity? yet all these cannot move us from our wickedness?
For better confirmation here of, and meeting with so fair an occasion; I will
briefly relate a most strange and monstrous accident in nature, which,
howsoever in man's apprehention, it may seem unpossble. Therefore, lest any
should meet my discourse with a scoff, and smilingly say? This is an usual
trick put upon the world for profit? and that this monstrous Child birth
(whereon my present subject is chiefly grounded) was begotten in some monster
hatching brain; produced for a Bartlemew fair babie; and sent at this time
(for order sake) to be nurced at the common charge of the news affecting
multitude; let them know, that not one syllable shall be added to the making up
of an untruth? but as it is approved to be true, by the attestation of many
godly, honest, and religious women? so no less faithfully and truly will I
relate it, to the general satisfaction of all those that read. And in brief,
thus it happened. In Kent-streete there dwells one, whose name is John
Ladyman? whose wife (upon the 21. of August 1617.) after long travel, was
delivered of a Female child with a half forehead, without any scull, having a
fair proportioned body from the breast downward: the said child had its mouth
and eyez miraculously placed in the said half forhead near upon the breast,
upon the said half forehead lay a piece of flesh of two fingers thick round
about, the flesh being wonderfully curled like Gentle women's attire: being of a
very blew coullour like a turcke Cock, the eyes being very bigg staring and
very fiery red, which greatly terrifyed the midwife and all that were present,
the chid being dead, the midwife labored to close the staring eyes but could
not, they presently fell all to prayer desiring God to take from them this so
sudden astonishment and fear, the midwife after prayer arising, and so the
rest of the women, beholding again the Child, they saw the ears of it
fastened to the half forhead, not being like to Christians ears, but stood
pricking up, behind each ear, was two little bones standing up ouergrowne with
flesh, and having very long heaire. In this hideous and fearful form was
this child brought forth alive, to the great astonishment of the beholders, and
grieuious lamentation of the parents; If any curious censurer call in question
the truth hereof, let him e^quire at the place before recited, for his better
satisfaction: In the mean time let me thus stop his mouth: That he, who bad
the Sun retire, and it obeyed: that he, who reared up the divided waters like
walls of brick? and maid a pathway through the deep: that he, who graspeth
the thunder in his right hand, and the Rainbow in his left: that he, whose
thro^e is heaven? whose footestoole is earth? that this terrible God, I say,
who created all of nothing, can as easily divert the usual and orderly course
of procreation, into dreadful and hideous deformity. Therefore let me induce
every honest heart, to apply this to his own conscience, and seriously to
weigh and consider the sins of the land in a holy consideration? then shall
he clearly discern this monstrous production, to be a merciful message sent
from the Almighty, for our further admonition and instrustion. And thou O
London, that art entitled the beauty of the world, the blazing beacon of
Europe. That in the midst of judgments, God has allwaies remembered mercy, and
has not suffered, of a long time, his wrath to lie hard and heavy upon thee,
and further that thou should not reach forth thy hand to iniquity? he has
endowed thee with many great and infinite favors, turning thy ficknesse into
health, thy penury into plenty, thy mourning into mirth? and most abundantly
(out of his gracious goodness) has dispersed the glourious light of his word,
both in the public Ministry, and private excercises thereof, whose
all-spreading lustrie breaks forth (like the swallowing of the Sea) in every
street, yet still thou hate to be reformed: Thus has he led thee with the
lines of his love, to walk more uprightly with him, who is the God of thy
life, liberty, health, wealth and peace: and yet for all this (O London) art
thou misted by the malice of Satan, and thine own corruption, miserably
deceived with the pleasures of sin, which last but for a moment: and still
do thou lift up thy heels and hands against God: and steelest thy heart,
and face, against his ways, works, judgment, and mercy. No man takes heed
to his paths: he that was filthy, is become more filthy: and the crew of the
abominations (under whose burden the earth groans: and men should mourn if
they were not senseless, and graceless) are so far from diminishing, that
they infinitely increase, and get head over thee. What need I point out unto
thee, thy pride, extortion, oppression, briberie, usury, with the rest of
those crying sins? give me leave to be silent: why the very stones in thy
streets, beasts in the field, all dumb and insensible Creatures, do in their
kind, jointly cry out against thee, as the prophet did in his days: Justice
is turned into gall and wormwood, the poor are sold for silver, and the
needy for shoes, why should I capitulate, thy great pride and excess in
apparel for back, with attyres for head, thy whoredom, luxury,
drunkenness? (sins daily committed, in the presence both of God and man, as
though the Magistraite had no law to punish them: nor the Minister courage to
reprove them: for fear of offending a great man in his parish, or loosing part
of his pention. Thus does the Snake devour the Toad, and the Toad the snake:
thus one wicked man strives to Canopie the wickedness of another, lest his
own should be unmasked and laid bare. As for that fearful sin of
profaning the Saboth, that is slighted off with the title of Recreation: O
where should one find that man, woman, or child who with care and conscience
sanctifies the Saboth day? either by their religious and reverent preparing of
themselves to come to the public assemblies? or being come, to demean
themselves as beseems such heavenly exercises, as prayer, and preaching? who
regards, to spend the holy Saboth in meditation, and conference of instructions
publicly taught: in singing of Psalms, Prayer, in visiting the sick, in
doing works of charity and Christian love? Or who rather does not publicly
profane it, privately abuse it: some holding it to be but a day of bodily rest,
and therefore betake themselves to their pillow, and sleep longer then on any
day of the week: some accounting of the Church assemblies, and the religious
excercises therein, no better, then of common meetings for sports: nor receive
the word with no more reverence and attention, then a profane Stageplay, or
winters tale: some sitting idly at their doors, gaping and gasing: suffering,
nay, commanding their servants and children to prophaine it, by dancing,
stoole-ball playing, with the like unlawful and wicked recreatio^s: some also
poasting over their worldly affairs, casting up their accounts: telling of
money in Sermon time, reparing to Justices for execution of Law, banqueting
their kinsfolks? with a thousand such like abominations, fearfully committed
upon the Lords day?

For these (O London) may not I (with the Prophet) cry out in the bitterness
of my soul: Shall not the Land tremble for this? and shall not every one
mourn that dwells within thee? The which to prevent then, O let my
admonishme^t beat upon the Anuile of thy heart, and force thee to fall low
upon the knee of submission: repent thee betimes, while it is called to day,
cease to provoke thy Maker with obstinate ambition: thy sins are at full
height, and with open mouths call for vengance and destruction to consume
thee: O send out thy prayers and repentance to stop the violence of the Lords
just anger breaking forth against thee, which (as a starued Lion) waits at
thy doors, and watches in thy highest streets, to devour thee, and to
ouercloude thy beauty in dark, comfortless, and woeful desolation: The
which, God of his gracious mercy, and favorable goodness toward thee,
prevent in his due time.

FINIS.
Judicious Reader,
IVdge mildly: and what faults thou meetst with, mend.
For in two hours, this had both birth, and end.
Ass, for the foule-toung'd speller, I not fear him;
Let him scoule, scoff, and scold, I scorn to hear him.

