will bucke his Testament.

Imprinted at London, by Wyllam Copland.



AS I stood in a Park, streite up by a tree
Mi Arowe in mi hand, mi bow rdi bente
I saw where came buckes. ii. or three*
And oon especial, to mine entente
I struck him even in the haunche, as I was mente
When he felt him hurt, he went his wey full soon
I drew to him, from. viii. of the clock tile noon.
But when noone came, I brought him to a bay
By the broad pawme, anon I him espied
Than he desired me, how he might that day
Make his Testament, yet or he dyed
I granted him anon, hit should not be denied
The^ take pen and Ink, and set you down to write
What I shall say, and how I shall me quite.
I bequeth mi body, to the cold seler
I would that a lady, took the say of me
And I bequethe mi skin, to your bow berer
The reward of mi throat, to your howndes perde
The right shulder, is the personis quantite
The left shulder, to the perker that is fallen in age
Mi suet to the fair lady is visage.
My cabage, I will the hounde for strife
When he has done, cast hit on the pale
Mi blood and my guttis, great to the poding wife
She to make in them, so they be not stale
A morsel for a king, with a cup of ale
And with wine better, who might come thereto
But many times, hit is absent and goo.
I bequeth my tongue, that never ^sed lesinge
To the lady, when she list to break with her fast
And he that me helps, to the quarry bring
I will he have mi neck, for a short repaste*
The Ravens morsel, stick hit on a thorn fast
My liver to reward, all your young hounds
My small guttis, to ye harp yt makith meri sou^des
My foot with the synew, to hang at the door
The tippe of my tail, to put in your horn
My bladdyr is the purse, of every color
My tuell to the crow, which beauty is worn
My stonis in a pie, when ye list to skorne
And he that brekith my body, all and some
Water for his hondis, is the old custom.
I bequeth my greece, to the fermete pot
Also the remanent, that is past abele
I would that ye bake hit, and serve it forth hot
In at first corse, to the Lordis table
To have some roste, I will be agreeable
My bonis in broth at noone, and at night in sewe
When ye make your siruice, short ye them hew.
I will that ye make Stekis, for a brekefaste
Of the leniste flesh, of my body
Which is good for Widow, or Maiden chaste
Also the good man, will hit not deny
Uineger is the sauce, I you certifye
With powther of Gingir, and Sugre treicute
This will I warrant, with any clerks to desput.
If any thing be else, think well an this
Let it be allowed, I hold hit (...) and stable
Mine executor, I make Robin redbreste I wysse.
The wrong to redress, he is right able
He louid my flesh in life, and death hit is no fable
Wherefore I trust him, above all men alone
I may no more speak, my breath is nigh gone
At my month mind, I will ye make a feste
Of Will buckes son, and that of cowrses three
To serve all that cummeth there, both most and lest
But other deuties, than of ye same shall there none be
I leave the feste in writing, that cooks may hit se
Fare ye well now frendis, I ma no longer tarry
I must nedis hense go, I here them blow ye quarry.
To make. iii. courses of a Bucke, or of a Do.
THe potage of the first course, Chine chopped in small wirtes, and than
venison and frumente, and then blake podinges. and tripes and carpe, and the
tongue roasted.

For ye second course of Bucke. The potage stued tripes, and Noumbles in sewe,
and trotters, ye rape and the Hagges, the shulder rostid, and Alowes roasted
stekis in sauce, venigre some bake.

For the third course of the bucke. The potage Mogets and Nowmbleis stued, the
hostets in sewe chitterlinges broyled and therbut, and Isinge and the fenche
rostid and ye felet, and noumbeis roasted stekes dry, and the breast chopped
and chewets, bake dowcetts, and tendreus, and the liver rostid, and if it be a
Do take the lure.

For to preporcion all this.
When the bucke is deed, and dight, look that ye flesh be hole and wholesome,
then take up the blood with in him with a cup, or a pexe, then take the suet
of the call and then cut hit but not to small and keste him to ye same blood,
and take a good quantite of Otemele and ceste thereto and salt, and medyll all
these to gethet with your hands for clodding of the blood, and then take the
guttis that be most best therefore and wesshe them clean, and then turn them
and put the blood therein. And the be black podinges, than take the rape and
opin him by the side of the length of an ynche and pike out the stuff that is
with in, and pinch not the skine that is without, and than take ye same stuff
that ye make your blake podinges and put hit in and fill your rape but not to
full for breaking and take a nedyll and a threde and show it, than take ye
skine that is abought the heart, and that is called ye Erber, tha^ take and
show them, save leave a part opin for to put in your stuff, and take the same
stuff that seruid for the black podinges and put it therein and then so him
together close than cast all togeter in a fair sethi^g pott with water or
with broth, and prick them, and turn them well podinges and all, or else the
suete will be more in the to side than on the other and when they ^r Enough take
them up and ley them upon a fair grediren and broyle them, and cast on salt,
and serve them forth as the course spekes of.

For to make the Ifinge poding.
Take the gutte that is hind must of al, that is the gutte of Isu, and then
wasshe him clean with water* and salt, and pick away the fat that is about
him, and then take fair suet and minse hit but not to small, and cast thereto
a great quantite of Otemel, than take the yolks of Eggs about a four, and is
Enough for one, and then cast thereto powther of Peper, Safron and turn the
out side of the gutte out wards for with the turning of the gutte ye shall
put in the stuff, prick him and sethe him, fair bloile him on a grediron and
cast salt on him, and serve him forth for an Isinge.

For to make Cheterlinges.
Take the small gutte of ye Bucke but not all, for we must keep of the
fatteste for Hagges, and than take the small gutte and cut him in tweine yt
every gut be half as long or your self, and then turn him fair with a
stick and let him lie and soke. ii. or, iii. hours in water for he will be the
swetter, and then knife them together and make of them. ii. chiterlinges or.
iii. after that the stuff is, and than seth them feyre and sowse them, then
broyle them on a grediron and serve the^ forth.

For to make the Hagges.
Take the mawe and wasshe hit clean and let him soke in water also, and the^
the guts of the same dear and slytte them fair and scrape them clean and
wash them clean and let them lie in water all a night, or else as long as ye
may, and then cast them into a fair pot with brothe fresh, and cast there
to a qua^tite of Noumbleis, some of the heart, and some of the kidnes and a
great quantite of suette for to make them fate Enough, and when that it is
bolied al together Enough, then ley them upon a fair board, and cast thereto
fair gratid bread and perseley feayre picked and a litel saueren and time and
fair yelkes of Eggs about, vi. or* vii. in on, and the^ powther of Peper and
safron but not to much, let them have sum what a brown cullor, and then
take. ii. knifis and hew the^ small, and then take the Hagges gut that I spoke
of before and put the same stuff therein, but fill him not to full for he will
swel, prick him, close him and cast in a pot and gefe him a boil, and let
him soke a while, and take him up and ley him in a disshe and cute of the
grette end that is pricked, and look that he be fat Enough with in him
self, and cast brothe about him and serve him forth for a good Hagges.

For to dight Tripes of the same Bucke.
Cut the womb and cast out the herbis, and take skalding hot water, let hit
not be to hot, and scalde the Tripes feire and then let them soke in the water
all the night and ye may, and take and cast them in a pot of fair water and
boil them tender and then take and put them in fair cold water, and then
wash them and pike them white and let the fat be on the^ still; and then take
the fatteste tripe and ley him in a souce and the cheterlings to gether, and if
so be that yeserue them in haste make the souce the sharper of ale and salt,
and then take a fair grediron and ley your tripe there upon, and broile them
fair and brown and put them in disshes and serve them forth.

Then take another lener tripe and cut him and dyse him of the bred of a dise
and cast him in a fair pot with strong broth and cast thereto powther of
Peper and saffron, and a litell bread drawn through a streynor, and then set
him to the fire and boil him bute let it not be thick, and when he is enough
set him out and season them up with vergis and a good quan tite of Ginger
and salt and dress them forth for stued Tripe.

For to dight the Moget.
Skalde him fair and white, and cast him in a posnete with fair water and
seth him till the be tender and then take him up, and take water and salt and
rub him between thy hands till he be white, and keep him hole and cast him
in a fair pot, and cast thereto fair strong brothe and a morsel of fair
Lier befe, or Moton with all and cast thereto fair leaves of Persely enough and
let hit seth to gether a good pretty while, and then set him fro ye fire and
cast there in Safferon and salt, and powther of Ginger and Uergis to gether,
but put hit not therein till thou shall serve it forth, and then dress it in
a disshe ye herbs and ye hole Moget together and brothe enough there with and
that is Mogets of ye bucke or of ye Do.

For to make the Trotters of the Bucke.
Take the four fete and skalde them fair and white and cast in a pote and
boil them tender, and then take them up and lay them in fair water and salt
and clefe themfaire and ley them in a dishe and cast there on leauis of percely
and veneger, and serve them forth and that been the Trotters.

For to dight the tongue of the same bucke.
Skalde him fair and scrape him and let him come in no coldewater, for than he
woll be toughe, and parboyle him in water and salt, and put him on a broche
and roste him and baste him well or else he will be dry draw him out and ley
him in a fair dishe and cast on salt and serve him forth.

For to dight the liver of the same bucke.
Look, he be hole, and take ye gall out and take a fair grediron and fair
spilts upon it, and take the same liver and ley there upon and let hit have an
esy five and prick him well with a prick and roste him fair ley him a
disshe, cast in him salt and serve him forth.

For to proportion the flesh of the same bucke.
Take a side and ley him in powther all night, or else seth him in water and
salt and then cut him in twain and b^ude it fair and take the roste side and
cut it in pecis, and thou will serve hit with frumente and then take the same
brothe and put thy uenison therein and keep it hot, and take the breast and cut
the skin endlonges and ouerthwarte to the bone, and then cast thereon grated
bread and powther of Ginger, and boil hit on a saw gre^diron brown both
sides, and then ley him in a dishe and serve him forth for a good Carpe.

For to make small wortes.
Take the chine and choppe him every piece an ynche broad and then piece hit
feyre and wasshe him and cast him in a pot and cast thereto strong brothe,
and sete him on the fire and toil him with a pot staff till he sethe for
quailing, and then he shall be brown of his own kind, and then set him down
and skime him fair, and cast on him Otemel, and then take herbs of the best
that thou can get for wortes, and hew them small, when the flesh is half
Enough cast in thy wortes and let them, sethe to gether, and look it be sum
what brown of his own kind, and cast there on saffron and salt, dress him
in disshes, flesh and wortes to gether, and serve him forth for small wortes

For to make Frumente.
Take fair whete that is fair picked and clean and pile him well and wash
him in many waters and cast in a pot of hot sethinge water and let him sethe
till they be tender, and then take them up, and cast him in another fair pot
and cast thereto liar of befe and Moton, and cast thereto sweet milk and set
him over the fire and stere them to the boil, and then sete the^ down and let
them sethe, and look the be thick enough of his own kind, and cast therein
saffron and salt, when it is enough serve them forth in fair disshes Take the
Uenison that is ordained therefore and serve it forth in other disshes by, and
cast thereon fair broth of the same, and serve it forth for Frumente and
Ueniso^.

And than as for other Potages, stued Trypys, yt is dight ready. And than for to
make the Numbleis in sewe.

Take the Numbleis and look that they be clean, and look they be not gored, and
mince them small even raw and vnwasshen and put them in a fair, pot and cast
thereto strong broth and set him on the fire and stere him well till he boil,
and then skime him and look he be brown of his own kind, the^ cast thereto a
good qua^ (...)

Powther of Canell and Powther of Peper some, and then take bread and skalde
hit and let the Numbleis be new Enough for to give him self a good color else
take blood of a good sheep or of a good kid and draw hit with the bread and
lier up thy pot therewith but not to thick. Than when it is Enough set him out
and cast in him a quantite of vinegar and salt and a little saffron, but let
his own color be these and then serve him forth.

And then for ye other potage, mogetts be made ready.

For to make Numbleis stued.
Take the Numbleis and look yt they be clean washed and dight, and then cut
them to the length of the bread of half a thombe and sum what more, and the^
put them on a broche and roste them til they be half Enough and put them in a
fair pot and cast thereto strong broth and wine to gether, and a good quantite
of Canell and powther of Peper, and Resons of Corans, and let them boil to
gether and the^ lire him up with crustes of bread drawn with with wine or else
with bread tosted, other else the yolks of Eggs when they be sodin herd, and
break them small and cast there among powther of ginger, and powther of Clowes
and of Mace, and melt all these together and when thou shall serve hit forth
cast therein vergis and a litell vinegar, and if thou lire him up with bread
cast therein vinegar and vergius, and ginger, and powther of clowes and mace,
and give him a color of saffron and look that he be sum what egre dowce and
serve it forth in disshes.

For to make Hosts.
Take the fair bones of the bucke, that is called the maribones and cut away
all the flesh about him and break the bones at every end that ye may se the
marye or else hit will waste away, and then cast them in a fair pote and cast
thereto broth and wine, and other manner flesh of the bucke what ye will and
then set him on the fire and toil him with a potstafe till he boil, and than
cast thereto Onions, minced but nothing small, and then cast thereto Herbs,
Persely Isope, Sauery, and Time, and let al these be boiled together and cast
thereto a quautite of Canel and pow there of Pepper, Clowes and Mace, and let all
these boil to gether, when it is enough cast thereto vinegar and salt, and
look he have a brown color of his own kind or else cast thereto saffron and
saunders to gether but not to much, and take up thy bonis and ley them in a
disshe or in a charger and cast the same broth upon him and serve them forth
for Hosts in sewe.

For to depart our flesh the on of the sides in Fru mente and Carpe to
gether. And then take the other side and take out the fillet and roste the
side, and pick awey the utter skin, when it is roasted cut him fair every
ribbe fro other and put them in a fair Charger and take varges, and vinegar
and wine to gether and cast thereto powther of Canell and Ginger and Pepper
some and make it almost boiling hot on ye fire in a pot, or a disshe and cast
it on the breast that is choppid, and cast there in salt and sarue him forth
for breast choppid. And then take thy fellet and cut awey the senowis of ye
to side and the bonis that is on the other side and parboyle him and put him on
a small spitte and roste him fair, and put him in a fair disshe, and then
cast on him salt and powther of Gynger meddled to gether and serve him forth
for a good meat.

For to cut out kindly the fowche.
Take of the buttockes of him by the inner Joint of of the loyne, and let both
the loins sit to gether and not departed in no wise, and the flank set
therein also and of the otter side of the rybbe, and leave therein the Kidneys, of
the Numbleis sitting still. And if it be of a Fawn, or else a small Der, cut of
the buttoc kes sumwhat without the inner Ioynte for I speak by cause of the
rostiuge, and put him on a great broche and bind him so fast, and let him
have. iii, or illi. hours rosting, and then draw him out and lay him in a
Charger and cast on Saite, and serve him forth, and then put the shoulder on a
fair broche and roste him fair, and the call about him, and cast on salt
and serve him forth also:

Then take the fatteste piece of the hawnche and cute him out in. ii. pieces. or,
ii. after that ye have stufe for to take and parboile him in water and salt,
and ley him up and let him be cold. And the^ take fair flower and make paste
and make thy cakes fair and broad and take powther of Peper and salt, and
medyll all to gether, and take thy pieces of Uenison and lay them in thy cake
and put the same stuff there upon above hit and beneth hit, and then close him
fair and bake him and serve it forth for pasteys of Uenyson.

For to make Chewets bake.
Take a clode of the same Uenison and mince it small and sewet among it, cast
thereto powther of Peper saffron and salt, and a little of sweet wine, and make
small cofins and put in fair pieces of mary, and take the same stuff and fill
it therewith, and put therein herd yolks of Eggis Clowes, Mace, and Rasons of
corans yuoughe, Then close him saire and bake him and serve him forth for
Chewets.

For to make tarte Barbones.
Take fair yolks of Eggs and sweet wine for to make the paste, and for to
make the stufe. Take tender chese of. iii. wekes old or of a fourtnight and
pare him clean and cast him in to a mortar and grind him small and cast
thereto a good quantite of yolks of Eggs and a good quantite of sweet creme,
and fair clarified butter, Sugar, and Saffron medel al these together, but make
it not to thin, then make thy coffins of thy paste abouesaide, and make them
broad with low borders, then lay thy stuff therein and sprede it all abroad.
Than take the same paste and drive him thine and cover thy coffin there with,
and pinche him, cut the lydde sumwhat above to make an Issue culler him with
Saffron, bake him fair and cast on Sugar, and serve him forth for a good Carte.

For to make Bawderikes.
Take sweet Creme and a qua^tite of Manchet bread and draw all through a
strainour then cast all into a fair pote and set it on the fire and give him
a litell boil then set him down, than take fair yolks of Eggs and streine
them through a straynour and then cast them small renning into yt pote, take a
pot stafe and ster it well that it quail not then gife him a littell hete and
look it be stonding Enough than cast thereto fair clarified butter and sugar
Enough and a good dele of Saffron and salt, medil these together but make it
not to thine, if it be on a flelshe day take fair mary minced small instead
of butter and ye will. And for to make the paste. Take yolks of Eggs and fair
manchet flower and Saffron and sumwhat of Sugar, and medill all this together
and make thy paste, and make broad Cakes and thin and look thy stuff be
cold and standing Enough, than take yt same stuff and plat him of breadth upon
a cake and keuer it with another cake and close him well, than kerue him out in
the mids of both the cakes stuff and all the bread of a sauser and close it
well that the stuff goo not out, and leave a good large hole in the midst, of
bawdricke wise, then bake him fair and cast on sugar, and sarue him forth:

Finis.
quod. John Lacy.


