An easy Method to know the Causes and Signs of the Humor most rules in the
Body, and to avoid thereby things hurtful: as also to enable men to give better
account of the state of their Bodies, when they are diseased to the Physician,
and not hazard the Lives of themselves and their Friends by only urging him to
prophesy (and that often falsely) the Disease by only the inspection of Urine.
THe antecedent or foregoing signs of fullness are such causes as breed plenty
of blood, Antecedent signs of fullness,
such as are,

The good temper of the whole Body, but chiefly of the Liver and Heart, with a
moderately hot and moist temper.

The Age increasing, for Children and such as are constituted betwixt them
both, have much blood, because they are not far distant from the principles of
Nature.

Spring season, Because in the Spring the blood is most plentiful, for the
cold then remitts, and moisture puts forth it self.

A Region temperate, but chiefly.

A more liberal diet of meats of good juice, and well tempered, as too much
plenty and affluency of the best meat and wine, a life void of cares, full of
rejoicing, with moderate and seasonable exercise, and sleeping mean.

Suppressing of customary vacuation of blood of its own accord, or medicinal a
long time intermitted, suggests mattter to fullness.

The consequent or following signs of fullness of blood, Consequent signs of
fullness.
are incidents which demonstrate plenty of blood to be contained and reign in
the body: such as are

The color of the face and body ruddy beyond custom, or mingled with red and
white.

An equal swelling of all the veins,

The exte^^^ ^f the filled vessels and stretched with fullness of blood man
(...) the view.

An exten^^^^ wearisomnesse coming of it self, wherein the body and all the
joints through weariness are hardly moved, and the hand is hardly contracted
into the fist: For a distending wearisomnesse comes, when as the greater veins
swelling with plenty, empty themselves into the lesser, whence it happens that
the muscles are filled and distended.

An overfull mass of body, of abundance of flesh springs from plenty of blood.

The habit of the body meanly fleshly, bedewed with a mild, gentle, and
breathing heat: because a habit mouerately fleshy, betokens a temperate nature
which is full of blood.

The manners of mind pleasant and sweet, calm and gentle: For a temperate and
mild disposition of mind, is a mark of a temperate habit of body.

Simpleness and stupidity of mind for simplicity and stupidnesse of mind
proceeds from blood; heaviness of the head, by reason of plenty of vapors
ascending to the brain.

Deep and for the most part pleasing sleep, in the which things are represented
by dreams full of joyfulnesse and pleasantness, shining like light, or adorned
with flowers.

The pulse great, strong and full. For the veins being full the conjunction of
their mouths with the Arteries, do transfuse some of their plenty into them:
but the Arteries being full, do yield such a pulse, not only in the wrist, but
in the temples also, the fingers, and the extremity of each part, conspicuous
by a trouble some beating.

The breathing is more difficult and thicker then of custom, chiefly after
exercise, because the muscles of the breast through plenty of blood, are more
slow in their motion, whence the breathing is more frequent in respect of its
use, but lesser because the inward capacity of the breast is streightened.

Speedy casting forth of blood by stool, the haemorrhoides, monthly
evacuations, urine, spittle or nose.

A facility in bearing of much bleeding.

Much sweat continually flowing through the whole course of a disease, does
deelare the presence of fullness.

Moreover, if the party diseased has been accustomed to be vexed frequently
with diseases coming of fullness, as a continent fever, inflammation: for all
inflammation comes by afflux of blood.

Cacochimy or ill juice is three fold, Choleric, Antecede(...) signs of
ch(...)ler.
Melancholic, and Phlegmatic. Ill juice proceeding of Choler, arises from
such antecedent causes as heap up plenty of choler. Such are

A temper hot and dry, for in men of hot and dry tempers, much Choler is
engendered, because the choleric humor is agreeable to their complexion.

The age constant and flourishing, such as endures from the 25 year to the
thirtieth, for yellow choler exceeds in the consisting age, because the natural
heat is much more dry and intense, then it was before, a great part of the
first inbred humor, wherewith it was overwhelmed as it were, being consumed.

The summer season, for in summer Choler is most abounding, because blood by
the incompassing air is rendered more hot and dry.

The dry constitution of the time; for dryness effects a bilious quality in
the humors.

A region hot and dry, but chiefly a diet foregoing hot and dry.

Likewise, exercises, labor, anger, cares, watching, abstinences and wants,
heap up much Choler: as also, voluntary evacuation of choler suppressed, or
such as was accustomed to be avoided by art intermitted, by vomit, the belly,
Urine, or sweats.

The consequent signs of choler, The consequent signs of choler.
immoderately exceeding in the body are;

The color of the face, eyes, and whole body pale, yellow or citrin color,
approaching to that of the yellow Jaundice. Or,

Black, for if the temperament do much exceed in heat, the color appears black.

The habit of body dry, lean, and slender, for slender or spare men for the
most part are choleric. Also haiery bodies, for the temper hot and dry is very
hairy.

The hair yellow, for yellow hair is the dreggy excrement of yellow Choler.

Much more also the hair that is black, for the hair becomes black when the
vapor being burnt by the force of heat, the excrement is changed into an exact
smuttiness. But yellow when as it is less burnt.

The largeness of the veins being distended by the force of heat; for they who
have large veins are of a hotter nature, but contrarily they are colder whose
veins are smaller, and stricter. For it is the work of heat to dilate, and as
it were puff them up.

A heat to the touch, smart and biting.

Swiftness to anger, ptopension to wrath and revenge, promptness of mind, and
cheerfulness.

The senses are quick, sharp, and nimble, the wit sharp and industrious. For
sharpness of wit, and industry proceed from the billious humor.

Sleep little and light, and with much tossings and tumblings unquiet.

Watchings almost continual: for immoderate watchings proceed either from the
distemper of the brain alone, or from abundance of Choleric humor.

Dreams full of War, fury and fire.

The pulses vehement, swift, frequent and hard.

Bitterness of taste, inappetency, vehement and unsatiable thirst, gnawings in
the mouth of the stomach, and from thence falling sickness, Convulsions,
faintings through pain of the mouth of the stomach.

Vomiting and dejection by stool choleric.

The belly daily bound.

The Urine yellow, fiery, sharp, and with small Choleric diseases frequent. As
the disease called Cholera, the Fever tertian, and burning, creeping sores and
fretting, choleric pushes breaking forth over the whole body.

The purging of Choler profitable, and easy of bearing, and the use of cool
things grateful and delightful, because they bridle the fierceness of Choler,
as hot things exasperate it: Whence a choleric disease, by administering hot
things, is made more fiery, Antecedent signs of melancholy.
as on the other part, by cool things it is remitted.

Cacochymy, melancholic is known first by the Causes which congest a larger
portion of melancholy and black choler in the body; of which sort are.

A natural temper cold and dry, with the weakness of the spleen, or a hot
temper indeed at the first, but by change turned into cold. For if any which
before was hot and dry, by adustion has generated much black choler, he verily
is besides that he is dry, and cold, forthwith also melancholic.

The age inclining, which is extended from the Thirtieth year of age to the
Forty nineth; for Choler adust abounds in the declining age, because
succeeding to youth, of all the ages the most Choleric, receives unto it
Choler adust.

The Autumnall Season, forasmuch as Choler adust is plentiful in the fall of
the leaf, because this succeeding the Summer of all the parts of the year, the
hottest and dryest entertaines from it burnt Choler.

The manner of life, and frequent use of gross and earthly nourishment, sueh
as are course brown bread, Beef, Hare, Goats flesh, Venison, but most of all
meats over-falted, gross Wines, dark, color red, ill brewed Beer, or not
well defaecated, old Cheese.

A sad condition of life, enfolded in many cares, businesses, contemplations
and study of Letters, no refreshing or rejoicing the mind being interposed, or
bodily exercise; For under this the natutall heat languisheth, and the whole
parts of the body wax gross, being lulled asleep by sluggishuesse.

The customary vacuation of melancholy suppressed, whether it was voluntary, as
by the haemorrhoides, the Terms, by the Belly, or by the Varices or scab, or
by Medicaments accustomed.

The color of the face and the whole body, dark, brown, obscure and swartish;
sometimes it is Universal and equal in the whole body, sometimes mured with
certain spots.

Hardness of the Spleen; Swelling, a weighty pain.

The habit of the body dry and lean.

The Aspect sixed, horrid and mournful.

Fear and sadness, silence, solitariness, a vain forging of things that are
not, constancy and stability of mind. Because that which is constant and sixed
in the mind, proceeds of melancholy.

A mind slow indeed to wrath, but fierce, and hardly appeasable.

Sleep turbulent, floating and tossed with horrid dreams, Visions of dark
things, Devils, Torments, Death, dead Carcasses

Graves, which things are full of terror.

The pulse is little, slow, rare and hardish.

The appetite is often corrupted, yet sometimes the hunger is like dogs
hunger, sour matter, lining and sucking the stomach.

Melancholy voluntarily breaking forth through over-plenty, by vomit, stool,
urine, sweates, or the hard knote or swellings in the veins.

The Urine if no melancholy issue with the urine, is thin and white, but if any
of it flow forth with the urine gross and black.

Melancholy diseases frequent.

Medicaments that draw melancholy are conducefull, and easing the diseased:
also all diet that breeds good and thin juice, is helpful, but the contrary is
hurtful.

Antecedent signs of Phlegm.
The knowledge of phlegmatic ill juice is taken first from the causes which
make large provision of phlegm; such as are.

A temper cold and dry.

Old Age, which is extended from the 49th year, to the lives end. For in old
age there is congested much excrementitious phlegm, through the want of
natural heat.

The winter season: Because the Winter fills the body with phlegm, by reason
of multitude of rain.

Constitution of the season moist: for the moisture of the ambient Air heaps
up phlegmatic superfluities.

The immoderate use of cold and moist nourishment, and overlarge drinking
waterish Liquors.

A diet overfull, unseasonably taken in, the former not being digested,
likewise all satiety and gluttony.

A sedentary life led in slothful idleness, specially in places waterish and
moist.

Long sleep, especially after eating.

The suppression of phlegm wont to be voided either by mouth or belly, which
was long accustomed either by it self or by Art.

The conseqnent discoverers of phlegm ruling in the body, Conseqent signs of
Phlegm.
are such as are,

The color of face and body whitish, sometimes of Leadcolour, or bluish, the
face somewhat swollen, and the whole habit of the body vast and overgrown with
fat, forasmuch as gross and fat folk are cold and phlegmatic; for fat is
always generated by the refrigeration of the habit.

The veins and arteries small and narrow passaged, because they contain but
little blood.

The skin white, soft, and without hair; for the temper cold and moist is
exceeding smooth.

Hair white; for white hair comes of phlegm.

The feminine Sex for women, are by nature colder then men.

The manners and mind, and all the motions of the body slow with heaviness and
sloth, the senses dull, the understanding blockish.

Sleep is deep and heavy.

Dreams filled with water, rain, snow and drowning.

Heaviness of the head.

The pulse small, slow, rare, soft.

Slow concoction, sour belshings, loathing after eating.

The Urine is white or pale, now thin, now thick, and troubled with much
settling.

Phlegm voluntarily breaking forth by vomit or dejection, and a body
overflowing with moisture.

White flux in Women.

The custom and frequency of phlegmatic diseases, as swellings coming of
phlegm, rheumes and the like.

Whatsoever vacuation of phlegm, whether it shall fall to be by Art, or of it
self, is conducefull, meats, and hot drinks, and all heating causes occurring
are pleasing and profitable.

But salt phlegm, since it acquires unnatural heat either by mixture of
choler, or putrefaction introduced: as it obtains the mixed causes of choler
and phlegm, so after a manner it has their mixed signs. For the most part it
is known, by the taste, itchings, and foul scabs. Ancecedent signs of Wind.


Plenty of winds are raised in the body by a cold and moist stomach, together
with imbecility of heat, whether it proc^ed of simple distemper, or that it
be contracted by the fault of the humors.

The Spleen swelling, and obstructed with melancholy, offending the condoction
of the stomach.

Windy meats, and raw fruits, as Chestnutts, beans, Mushrums.

Immoderate drinking, and, and the overmuch floting of the stomach with liquid
meats, as aiso cramming and gluttony.

Idleness, much sleep, the age, region and constitution of the season cold.
Consequent signs.


When as by the former causes much wind is gathered together, the stomach and
gut Colon, chiefly on the left side, are distended, and roar, as if they were
tossed with the winds: Extensive pains coast about the whole body, wandering,
as it were, too and fro.

Frequent breakings forth of Wind are heard both by the mouth and belly, to
which ease speedily succeeds: as also frequent singings, or ringings in the
ears.

Great proness to cholick pains, and other diseases psoceeding of Wind.

Dreams of things swiftly running or flying, sometimes also of thunder and
tempests.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Have by me a far larger Tract on this subject, but this being more easy
for common capacities, I thought fit to present it first (...) view; As this
shall find acceptance, and I encouragement, I shall send to light matters of
greater moment than these.

Farewell. That I may not seem to be a plagiary, the Author in Latin is
Frambesarius.

FINIS.

