THE SPANISH Tragedy, Containing the lamentable end of Don Horatio, and
Bel-imperia: with the pitiful death of old Hieronimo. Newly corrected and
amended of such gross faults as passed in the first impression.

AT LONDON Printed by Edward Allde, for Edward White.

ACTVS PRIMVS.
Enter the Ghoast of Andrea, and with him Revenge. Ghoast. WHen this eternal
substance of my soul,
Did ^^ue imprisond in my wanton ^lesh:
Each in their ^unction serving others need,
I was a Courtier in the Spanish Court.
My name was Don Andrea, my descent
Though not ignoble, yet inferior far
To gracious fortunes of my tender youth:
For there in prime and pride of all my years,
By duteous service and deserving love,
In secret I pos^est a wor^hy dame,
Which hight sweet Bel-imperia by name.
But in the harvest of my summer joys,
Deaths winter nipt the blossoms of my bliss,
Forcing divorce betwixt my love and me.
For in the late conflict with Portingale,
My valor drew me into dangers mouth,
Till life to death made passage through my wounds.
When I was slain, my soul descended straight,
To pass the flowing stream of Acheron:
But churlish Charon only boatman there,
Said that my rites of burial not performde,
I might not sit amongst his passengers.
Ere Sol had slept three nights in The^is lap,
And slakte his smoking Chariot in her ^loud:
By Don Hora^io our knight Marshals son,
My funerals and obsequies were done.
Then was the Feriman of hell content,
To pass me over to the slimie strond,
That leads to fell Auernus ougly waves:
There pleasing Cerberus with honied speech,
I past the perils of the foremost porch.
Not far from hence amidst ten thousand souls,
Sat Minos, Eacus, and Rhadamant,
To whom no sooner began I make approach,
To crave a pasport for my wandering Ghost:
But Minos engraven leaves of Lotterie,
Drew forth the manner of my life and death.
This knight (quoth he) both lived and died in love:
And for his love tried fortune of the wars,
And by wars fortune lost both love and lif^.
Why then said Eacus, convey him hence,
To walk with lovers in our fields of love:
And spend the course of everlasting time,
Under green myrtle trees and Cipresse shades.
No, no, said Rhadamant, it were not well,
With loving souls to place a Martialist,
He died in war, and must to martial fields:
Where wounded Hector lives in lasting pain,
And Achilles mermedons do scour the plain.
Then Minos mildest censor of the three,
Made this device to end the difference.
Send him (quoth he) to our infernal King:
To dome him as best seems his Majesty:
To this effect my pasport straight was drawn.
In keeping on my way to Plutos Court,
Through dreadful shades of ever glooming night:
I saw more sights then thousand tongues can tell,
Or pens can write, or mortal hearts can think.
Three ways there were, that on the right hand side,
Was ready way unto the foresaid fields,
Where lovers live, and bloody Mar^ialists,
But either sort containd within his bounds.
The left hand path declining fearfully,
Was ready downfall to the deepest hell.
Where bloody furies shakes their whips of steel,
And poor Ixion turns an endless wheel.
Where Usurers are choakt with melting gold,
And wantons are imbraste with ougly snakes:
And murderers groan with never killing wounds,
And periurde wights scalded in boiling lead,
And all soul sins with torments ouerwhelmd*
Twixt these two ways, I ^rod the middle path,
Which brought me to the fair Elizian green.
In midst whereof there stands a stately Tower,
The walls of brass* the gates of Adamant.
Here finding Pluto with his Proserpine,
I showed my pasport humbled on my knee.
Whereat fair Proserpine began to smile,
And begd that only she might give my doom.
Plu^o was pleased and sealde it with a kiss.
Forthwith ( Revenge) she rounded thee in the ear,
And bad thee lead me through the gates of Hor:
Where dreams have passage in the silent night.
No sooner had she spoke but we were here,
I wot not how, in twinkling of an eye.

Revenge. THen know Andrea that thou art ariu'd,
Where thou shall see the author of thy death:
Don Balthazar the Prince of Portingale.
Deprived of life by Bel-imperia:
Here sit we down to see the mystery,
And serve for Chorus in this tragedy.

Enter Spanish King, General, Castil^, Hieronimo* King. NOw say L. General,
how fares our Camp?

Genesis All well my sovereign Liege, except some few,
That are deceast by fortune of the war.

King. But what portends thy cheerful countenance,
And posting to our presence thus in have?
Speak man, has fortune given us victory?

Genesis Victory my Liege, and that with little loss.

King. Our Portingals will pay us tribute then.

Genesis Tribute and wonted homage therewithal.

King. Then blessed be heaven, and guider of the heavens,
From whose fair influence such justice flows.

Cast. O multum dilecte Deo, t^b^ militat ^^her,
Et coniuratae curuato poplito gentes
Succumbunt: rectis^ror est victoria iuris.

King. Thanks to my loving brother of Castile.
But General, unfold in brief discourse,
Your form of battle and your wars success.
That adding all the pleasure of thy news,
Unto the height of former happiness*
With deeper wage and greater dignity,
We may reward thy blisfull chivalry.

Genesis Where Spain and Portingale do jointly knit
Their frontiers, leaning on each others bound:
There met our armies in their proud array,
Both furnished well, both full of hope and fear:
Both menacing alike with daring shows,
Both vaunting sundry colors of device,
Both cheerly sounding trumpets, drums and fifes.
Both raising dreadful clamors to the sky,
That valleis, hills, and rivers made rebound,
And heaven it self was frighted with the sound.
Our battles both were pitched in squadron form,
Each corner strongly ^enst with wings of shot,
But ere we joined and came to push of Pike,
I brought a squadron of our readiest shot,
From out our rearward to begin the fight,
They brought another wing to encounter us:
Mean while our ordinance played on either side,
And Captains strove to have their valors tried.
Don Pedro their chief horse men's Co^^onell:
Did with his Cornet bravely make attempt,
To break the order of our battel^ ranks.
But Don R^gero worthy man of war,
Marched forth against him with our Musk^^ier^,
And stopped the malice of his fell approach.
While they maintain hot skirmish too and fro,
Both battles join and fall to handie blows.
Their violent shot resembling the oceans rage,
When roa^ing loud and with a swelling ^^de,
It beats upon the ra^^piers of huge rocks,
And gapes to swallow neighbor bounding lands.
Now while Bellona rages here and there,
Thick storms of bullets ran like winters hail,
And shiuered Lances dark the troubled air.
Pede pes and cuspide cuspis,
Anni sonant annis vir petiturque viro.
On every side drop Captains to the ground,
And Soldiers some ill mai^^de, some slain outright:
Here falls a body scindred from his head,
There legs and arms lie bleeding on the grass,
Mingled with weapons and vnboweld steeds:
That scattering over spread the purple plain.
In all this turmoyle three long hovres and more,
The victory to neither part inclinde,
Till Don Andrea with his brave Lau^ciers,
In their maine battle made so great a breach,
That hal^e dismayed, the multitude ret^rde:
But Balthazar the Portingales young Prince,
Brought rescue and encouragde them to stay:
Heere-hence the fight was eagerly renewd,
And in that conflict was Andrea slain.
Brave man at arms, but weak to Balthazar.
Yet while the Prince insulting over him,
Breathd out proud vaunts, sounding to our reproach,
Friendship and hardy valor joined in one,
Pricked forth Horatio our Knight Marshals son,
To challenge forth that Prince in single fight:
Not long between these twain the fight indurde,
But straight the Prince was beaten from his horse,
And for^st to yield him pr^soner to his foe:
When he was taken, all the rest they fled,
And our Carbines pursued them to the death,
Till Phoebus wauing to the western deep,
Our Trumpeters were chargde to sound retreat.

King. Thanks good L. General for these good news,
And for some argument of more to come,
Take this and wear it for thy sovereigns sake.
Give him his chain, But tell me now, ^ast thou confirmd a peace?

Genesis No peace my Liege, but peace conditional,
That if with homage tribute be well paid,
The fury of your forces will be staide.
And to this peace their Viceroy has subscribde.
Give the K^a^paper. And made a solemn vow that during life,
His tribute shall be truly paid to Spain.

King. These words, these deeds, become thy person well.
But now Knight Marshall ^rolike with thy King,
For it is thy Son that winnes this battles prize.

Hiero. Long may he live to serve my sovereign liege,
And soon decay unless he serve my liege.

A tucket a far off. King. Not thou nor he shall dye without reward,
What means this wa^ning of this trumpets sound?

Genesis This tells me that your graces men of war,
Such as wars fortune has reserved from death,
Come marching on toward your royal seat,
To show themselves before your Majesty,
For so I gave in charge at my depart.
Whereby by demonstration shall appear,
That all (except three hundred or few more)
Are safe returned and by their foes inricht.

The Army enters, Balthazar between Lorenz^ and Horatio captive. King. A
gladsome sight, I long to see them here.
They enter and pass by.
Was that the warlike Prince of Portingale,
That by our Nephew was in triumphled?

Genesis It was my Liege, the Prince of Portingale.

King. But what was he that on the other side,
Held him by th'arme as partner of the prize?

Hiero. That was my son my gracious sovereign,
Of whom, though from his tender infancy,
My loving thoughts did never hope but well:
He never pleased his fathers eyes till now,
Nor filled my heart with ouercloying joys.

King. Go let them march once more about these walls,
That staying them we may confer and talk,
With our brave prisoner and his double guard.
Hieronimo, it greatly pleases us,
That in our victory thou have a share,
By virtue of thy worthy sons exploit.
Enter again. Bring hither the young Prince of Portingale,
The rest martch on, but ere they be dismissed,
We will bestow on every soldier two ducats,
And on every leader ten, that they may know
Our largess welcomes them.
Exeunt all but Bal. Lor. ^lor. Welcome Don Balthazar, welcome Nephew,
And thou Horatio thou art welcome too:
Young Prince, although thy fathers hard misdeedes,
In keeping back the tribute that he owes,
Deserve but evil measure at our hands:
Yet shall thou know that Spain is honorable.

Balt. The trespass that my Father made in peace,
Is now controlde by fortune of the wars:
And cards once dealt, it boots not ask why so,
His men are slain, a weakening to his Realm,
His colors ceaz'd, a blot unto his name,
His Son distressed, a corsiue to his heart,
These punishments may clear his late offense.

King. I Balthazar, if he observe this truce,
Our peace will grow the stronger for these wars:
Mean while live thou though not in liberty,
Yet free from bearing any servile yoke.
For in our hearing thy deserts were great,
And in our sight thy self art gracious.

Balt. And I shall study to deserve this grace.

King. But tell me, for their holding makes me doubt,
To which of these twain art thou prisoner.

Lor. To me my Liege.

Hor. To me my Sovereign.

Lor. This hand first took his courser by the raines.

Hor. But first my lance did put him from his horse.

Lor. ^^eaz'd his weapon and enioyde it first.

Hor. But first I forced him lay his weapons down,

King. Let go his arm upon our privilege.
Let him go. Say worthy Prince, to whether did thou yield?

Balt. To him in courtesy, to this perforce:
He spoke me fair, this other gave me strokes:
He promisde life, this other threatened death:
He wan my love, this other conquered me:
And truth to say I yield my self to both.

Hiero. But that I know your grace for just and wise,
And might seem partial in this difference,
Infor^t by nature and by law of arms,
My tongue should plead for young Horatios right.
He hunted well that was a Lions death,
Not he that in a garment wore his skin:
So Hares may pull dead Lions by the beard.

King. Content thee Marshall thou shall have no wrong,
And for thy sake thy Son shall want no right.
Will both abide the censure of my doom?

Lor. I crave no better then your grace awards.

Hor. Nor I, although I sit beside my right.

King. Then by my judgment thus your strife shall end,
You both deserve and both shall have reward.
Nephew, thou tookst his weapon and his horse,
His weapons and his horse are thy reward.
Horatio thou did force him first to yield,
His ransom therefore is thy valors fee:
Appoint the sum as you shall both agree.
But Nephew thou shall have the Prince in guard,
For thine estate best fitteth such a guest.
Horatios house were small for all his train,
Yet in regard thy substance passes his,
And that just guerdon may befall desert,
To him we yield the armor of the Prince.
How likes. Don Balthazar of this device?

Balt. Right well my Liege, if this prouizo were,
That Don Horatio bear us company,
Whom I admire and love for chivalry.

King. Horatio leave him not that loves thee so,
Now let us hence to see our soldiers paid,
And feast our prisoner as our friendly guest.

Exeunt. Enter V^ceroy, Alexandro, Villuppo. Vice. Is our ambassador dispatched
for Spain?

Alex. Two days (my Liege) are past since his depart.

Vice. And tribute payment gone along with him?

Alex. I my good Lord.

Vice. Then rest we here a while in our unrest.
And feed our sorrows with some inward sighs,
For deepest cares break never into tears.
But wherefore sit I in a Regal throne,
This better fits a wretches endless moan.
Yet this is higher then my fortuues reach,
And therefore better then my state deserves.
Falls to the ground. I, I, this earth, Image of mellancholly,
Seeks him whom fates adiudge to misery:
Here let me lie, now am I at the lowest.
Qvi iacet in terranon ha^et vnde cadat,
In me consumpsit vires fortunanocendo,
Nil superest vt iam possit obesse magis.
Yes, Fortune may bereave me of my Crown:
Here take it now, let Fortune do her worst,
She will not rob me of this sable weed,
O no, she enuies none but pleasant things,
Such is the folly of dispightfull chance:
Fortune is blind and sees not my deserts,
So is she deaf and hears not my laments:
And could she hear, yet is she wilful mad,
And therefore will not pity my dis^resse.
Suppose that she could pity me, what then?
What help can be expected at her hands?
Whose foot standing on a rolling stone,
And mind more mutable then fickle winds.
Why wail I then where is hope of no redres^e?
O yes, complaining makes my grief seem less.
My late ambition has distaind my faith,
My breach of faith occasiond bloody wars,
Those bloody wars have spent my treasure,
And with my treasure my peoples blood,
And with their blood, my joy and best beloved,
My best beloved, my sweet and only Son.
O wherefore went I not to war my self?
The cause was mine I might have died for both:
My years were mellow, his but young and green,
My death were natural, but his was forced.

Alex. No doubt my Liege but still the Prince suruiues.

Vice. Suruiues, I where?

Alex. In Spain, a prisoner by mischance of war.

Vice. Then they have ^laine him for his fathers fault.

Alex. That were a breach to common law of arms.

Vice. They recke no laws that meditate revenge.

Alex. His ransomes worth will stay from foul revenge.

Vice. No, if he lived the news would soon be here.

Alex. Nay evil news fly faster still than good.

Vice. Tell me no more of news, for he is dead.

Villup. My soueraign pardon the Author of ill news,
And I Will bewray the fortune of thy Son.

Vice. Speak on, I Will guerdon thee what ere it be,
Mine ear is ready to receive ill news,
My heart grown hard against mischiefs battery,
Stand up I say and tell thy tale at large,

Villup. Then hear that truth which these mine eyes have seen.
When both the armies were in battle joined,
Don Balthazar amidst the thickest troops,
To win renown, did wondrous feats of arms:
Amongst the rest I saw him hand to hand
In single fight with their Lord General.
Till Alexandro that here counterfeits,
Under the color of a duteous friend,
Discharged his Pistol at the Princes back,
As though he would have slain their General.
But therwithall Don Balthazar fell down:
And when he fell then we began to fly,
But had he lived the day had sure been ours.

Alex. O wicked forgerie: O traitorous miscreant.

Vice. Hold thou thy peace, but now Villuppo say,
Where then became the carcass of my Son?

Villup. I saw them drag it to the Spanish tents.

Vice. I, I, my nightly dreams have told me this:
Thou false, unkind, unthankful traitorous beast,
Wherein had Balthazar offended thee,
That thou should thus betray him to our foes?
Wast Spanish gold that bleared so thine eyes,
That thou could see no part of our deserts?
Perchance because thou art Terseraes Lord,
Thou had some hope to wear this Diadome,
If first my Son and then my self were slain:
But thy ambitious thought shall break thy neck.
I, this was it that made thee spill his blood,
Take the crown and put it on again. But I Will now wear it till thy blood be
spilt.

Alex. Vouchsafe (dread Sovereign to hear me speak.

Vice. A way with him, his sight is second hell,
Keep him till we determine of his death.
If Balthazar be dead, he shall not live.
Villuppo follow us for thy reward.
Exit Vice.
Villup. Thus have I with an envious forged tale,
Deceived the King, betrayed mine enemy,
And hope for guerdon of my villainy.
Exit.
Enter Horatio and Bel-imperia. Bell. Signior Horatio, this is the place and
hour,
Wherein I must entreat thee to relate,
The circumstance of Don Andreas death:
Who living was my garlands sweetest flower,
And in his death has buried my delights.

Hor. For love of him and service to your self,
I nill refuse this heavy doleful charge.
Yet tears and sighs, I fear will hinder me.
When both our Armies were enioynd in fight.
Your worthy chiualier amidst the thikst,
For glorious cause still aiming at the fairest,
Was at the last by young Don Balthazar,
Encountered hand to hand: their fight was long,
Their hearts were great, their clamours menacing,
Their strength alike, their strokes both dangerous.
But wrathful Nemesis that wicked power,
Envying at Andreas praise and worth,
Cut short his life to end his praise and worth.
She, she her self disguisde in armours mask,
(As Pallas was before proud Pergamus:)
Brought in a fresh supply of Halberdiers,
Which pauncht his horse and dingd him to the ground,
Then young Don Balthazar with ruthles rage,
Taking advantage of his foes distress,
Did finish what his Halberdiers begun,
And left not till Andreas life was done.
Then though too late incenst with just remorce,
I with my band set foo^th against the Prince,
And brought him prisoner from his Halberdiers.

Bell. Would thou had slain him that so slew my love.
But then was Don Andreas carcass lost?

Hor. No, that was it for which I cheefely strou^,
Nor stepped I back till I recouerd him:
I took him up and wound him in mine arms.
And welding him unto my private tent,
There laid him down and dewd him with my tears,
And sighed and sorrowed as became a friend.
But neither freendly sorrow, sighs nor tears,
Could win pale death from his usurped right.
Yet this I did* and less I could not do:
I saw him honored with due funeral,
This scarf I plucked from off his liueles arm,
And wear it in remembrance of my friend.

Bell. I know the scarf, would he had kept it still,
For had he lived he would have kept it still,
And worn it for his Bel-imperias sake:
For it was my favor at his last depart.
But now wear thou it both for him and me,
For after him thou have deserved it best,
But for thy kindness in his life and death,
Be sure while Bel-imperias life endures,
She will be Don Horatios thankful friend.

Hor. And (Madame) Don Horatio will not slack,
Humbly to serve fair Bel-imperia.
But now if your good liking stand thereto,
^e crave your pardon to go seek the Prince,
For so the Duke your father gave me charge.
Exit.
Bell. I, go Horatio, leave me here alone,
For sollitude best fits my cheereles mood:
Yet what auailes to wail Andreas death,
From whence Horatio proves my second love*
Had he not loved Andria as he did,
He could not sit in Bel-imperias thoughts.
But how can love find harbor in my breast,
Till I revenge the death of my beloved.
Yes, second love shall further my revenge.
I Will love Horatio my Andreas friend,
The more to spite the Prince that wrought his end:
And where Don Balthazar that slew my love,
Himself now pleades for favor at my hands,
He shall in rigor of my just disdain,
Reap long repentance for his murderous deed:
For what wast else but murderous cowardice,
So many to oppress one valiant knight,
Without respect of honor in the fight?
And here he comes that murdered my delight.

Enter Lorenzo and Balthazar. Lor. Sister, what means this melancholy walk?

Bell. That for a while I wish no company.

Lor. But here the Prince is come to visit you,

Bell. That argues that he lives in liberty.

Bal. No Madame, but in pleasing servitude.

Bell. Your prison then belike is your conceit.

Bal. I by conceit my freedom is enthralde,

Bell. Then with conceit enlarge your self again^

Bal. What if conceit have laid my heart to gage?

Bell. Pay that you borrowed and recover it.

Bal. I die if it return from whence it lies.

Bell. A hartles man and live? A miracle.

Bal. I Lady, love can work such miracles.

Lor. Tush, tush my Lord, let go these ambages,
And in plain terms acquaint her with your love.

Bell. What boots complaint, when there is no remedy?

Bal. Yes, to your gracious self must I complain,
In whose fair answer lies my remedy,
On whose perfection all my thoughts attend,
On whose aspect ^nine eyes find beauties bower,
In whose translucent breast my heart is lodgde.

Bell. Alas my Lord these are hut words of course.
And but devise to drive me from this place.

She in going in, l^ts fall her Glove, which Horatio comm^ng out takes up. Hor.
Madame, your Glove.

Bell. Thanks good Horatio, take it for thy pains.

Bal. Signior Horatio stoopt in happy time.

Hor. I reapt more grace then I deserved or hoped.

Lor. My Lord, be not dismayed for what is past.
You know that women often are humerous:
These clouds will ouerblow with little wind.
Let me alone, I Will scatt^r them my self:
Mean while let us devise to spend the time,
In some delightful sports and reuelling.

Hor. The King my Lords is coming hither straight,
To feast the Portingall Ambassador,
Things were in readiness before I came.

Bal. Then here it fits us to attend the King,
To welcome hither our Ambassador,
And learn my Father and my Countries health.

Enter the banquet, Trumpets, the King and Ambassador. King. See Lord
Ambassador, how Spain entreats
Their prisoner Balthazar, thy Viceroyes Son:
We pleasure more in kindenes then in wars.

Embass. Sad is our King, and Portingale laments,
Supposing that Don Balthazar is slain.

Bal* So am I slain by beauties tirannie.
You see my Lord how Balthazar is slain.
I frolike with the Duke of Castiles Son,
Wrapped every hour in pleasurs of the Court,
And graste with favors of his Majesty.

King. Put off your greetings till our feast be done,
Now come and sit with us and taste our cheer.
Sit to the banquet. Sit down young Prince, you are our second guest:
Brother sit down, and Nephew take your place,
Signior Horatio wait thou upon our cup,
For well thou have deserved to be honored.
Now Lordings fall too, Spain is Portugal,
And Portugal is Spain, we both are friends,
Tribute is paid, and we enjoy our right.
But where is old Hieronimo our Marshall,
He p^omised us in honor of our guest,
To grace our banquet with some pompousiest.
Enter Hieronimo with a Drum, three Knights, each his Scutchin, then he fetches
three Kings, they take their Crowns and them captive. Hieronimo, this mask
contents mine eye,
Although I sound not well the mystery.

Hiero. The first armed Knight that hung his Scutchin up,
He takes the Scutchin and gives it to the King. Was English Robert Earl of
Gloucester,
Who when king Stephen bore sway in Albion,
Arrived with five and twenty thousand men,
In Portingale, and by success of war,
Enforced the King then but a Sarasin,
To bear the yoke of the English Monarchy.

King. My Lord of Portingale, by this you see,
That which may comfort both your King and you,
And make your late discomfort seem the less.
But say Hieronimo, what was the next?

Hiero. The second Knight that hung his Scutchin up,
He does as he did before. Was Edmond Earl of Kent in Albion,
When English Richard wore the Diadem.
He came likewise and razed Lisbon walls,
And took the King of Portingale in fight:
For which, and other such like service done,
He after was created Duke of York.

King. This is another special argument,
That Portingale may daine to bear our yoke,
When it by little England has been yoakt:
But now Hieronimo what were the last?

Hiero. The third and last not least in our account,
Doing as before. Was as the restavaliant Englishman,
Brave John of Ga^nt the Duke of Lancaster.
As by his Scutchin plainly may appear.
He with a puissant army came to Spain,
And took our King of Castile prisoner.

Embass. This is an argument for our Viceroy,
That Spain may not insult for her success,
Since English warriors likewise conquered Spain,
And made them bow their knees to Albion.

King. Hieronimo, I dtinke to thee for this devise.
Which has pleased both the Ambassador and me:
Pledge me Hieronomo, if thou love the King.
Takes the Cup of Horatio. My Lord, I fear we sit but ouer-long.
Unless our dainties were more delicate.
But welcome are you to the best we have.
Now let us in that you may be dispatched,
I think our council is already set.
Exeunt omnes.
Andrea. Come we for this from depth of under ground,
To see him feast that gave me my deaths wound?
These pleasant sights are sorrow to my soul,
Nothing but league, and love and banqueting?

Revenge. Be still Andrea ere we go from hence,
I Will turn their freendship into fell despite,
Their love to mortal hate, their day to night,
Their hope into despair, their peace to war,
Their joys to pain, their bliss to misery.

Actus Secundus.
Enter Lorenzo and Balthazar. Lorenzo. MY Lord, though Bel-imperia seem thus
coy,
Let reason hold you in your wonted joy:
In time the savage B^ll sustaines the yoke,
In time all haggard Hawks will stoop to lu^e,
In time small wedges cleave the hardest Oak,
In time the flint is pearst with softest shower,
And she in time will fall from her disdain,
And rue the sufferance of your freendly pain.

Bal. No, she is wilder and more hard withal,
Then beast, or bird, or tree, or stony wall.
But wherefore blot I Bel-imperias name?
It is my fault, not she that merits blame.
My feature is not to content her sight,
My wodres are rude and work her no delight.
The lines I send her are but harsh and ill,
Such as do drop from Pan and Marsias quill.
My presents are not of sufficient cost,
And being worthles all my labors lost.
Yet might she love me for my valiancie,
I but that's slaundred by captivity.
Yet might she love me to content her fire:
I but her reason masters his desire.
Yet might she love me as her brothers friend,
I, but her hopes aim at some other end.
Yet might she love me to vpreare her state,
I* but perhaps she hopes some nobler mate.
Yet might she love me as her beauteous thrall,
I, but I fear she cannot love at all.

Lor. My Lord, for my sake leave these ecstasies,
And doubt not but we will find some remedy,
Some cause there is that lets you not be loved:
First that must needs be known and then removed.
What if my Sister love some other Knight?

Balt. My summers day will turn to winters night.

Lor. I have already found a stratage me,
To sound the bottom of this doubtful theme*
My Lord, for once you shall be ruled by me,
Hinder me not what ere you hear or see.
By force of fire means will I cast about,
To find the truth of all this question out.
Ho Pedringano.

Ped. Signior.

Lor. Vien que presto.

Enter Pedringano. Ped. Has your Lordship any service to command me?

Lor. I Pedringano service of import:
And not to spend the time in trifling words,
Thus stands the case; it is not long thou know,
Since I did shield thee from my fathers wrath,
For thy conueiance in Andreas love:
For which thou were adiudg'd to punishment*
I stood betwixt thee and thy punishment:
And since, thou know how I have favored thee*
Now to these favors will I addereward,
Not with fair words, but store of golden coin,
And lands and living joined with dignities,
If thou but satisfy my just demand.
I'ell truth and have me for thy lasting friend.

Ped. What ere it be your Lordship shall demand,
My bounden duty bids me tell the truth.
If case it lie in me to tell the truth.

Lor, Then Pedringano this is my demand,
Whom loves my sister Bel-imperia?
For she reposeth all her trust in thee:
Speak man and gain both freendship and reward,
I mean, whom loves she in Andreas place?

Ped. Alas my Lord, since Don Andreas death,
I have no credit with her as before,
And therefore know not if she love or no.

Lor. Nay if thou dally then I am thy foe,
And fear shall force what friendship cannot win.
Thy death shall bury what thy life conceales.
Thou dyest for more esteeming her then me.

Ped. Oh stay my Lord.

Lor. Yet speak the truth and I will guerdon thee,
And shield thee from what ever can ensue.
And will conceal what ere proceeds from thee,
But if thou dally once again, thou die.

Ped. If Madame Bel-imperia be in love.

Lor. What villain ifs and ands?

Ped. O stay my Lord, she loves Horatio.

Balthazar starts back. Lor. What Don Horati^ our Knight Marshals son?

Ped. Even him my Lord.

Lor. Now say, but how know thou he is her love?
And thou shall find me kind and liberal:
Stand up I say, and feareles tell the truth.

Ped. She sent him letters which my self perusde,
Full fraught with lines and arguments of love,
Preferring him before Prince Balthazar.

Lor. Swear on this cross, that what thou say is true,
And that thou will conseale what thou have told.

Ped. I swear to both by him that made us all.

Lor. In hope thine oath is true, heeres thy reward,
But if I prove thee periurde and unjust,
This very sword whereon thou tookst thine oath,
Shall be the worker of thy tragedy.

Ped. What I have said is true, and shall for me,
Be still conceald from Bel-imperia.
Besides your Honors liberality,
Deserves my duteous service, even till death.

Lor. Let this be all that thou shall do for me,
Be watchful when, and where these lovers meet,
And give me notice in some secret sort.

Ped. I will my Lord.

Lor. Then shall thou find that I am liberal,
Thou know that I can more advance thy state
Then she, be therefore wise and fail me not.
Go and attend her as thy custom is,
Least absence make her think thou do amiss.
Exit Pedringano. Why so: T am armis quam ingenio:
Where words prevail not, violence preuailes.
But gold does more then either of them both.
How likes Prince Balthazar this stratageme?

Bal. Both well, and ill: it makes me glad and sad:
Glad, that I know the hinderer of my love,
Sad, that I fear she hates me whom I love.
Glad, that I know on whom to be revenged,
Sad, that she will fly me if I take revenge.
Yet must I take revenge or dye my self,
For love resisted grows impatient.
I think Horatio be my destinde plague,
First in his hand he brandished a sword,
And with that sword he fiercely waged war,
And in that war he gave me dangerous wounds,
And by those wounds he forced me to yield,
And by my yielding I became his slave.
Now in his mouth he carries pleasing words,
Which pleasing words do harbor sweet conceits,
Which sweet conceits are lim'd with sly deceits,
Which sly deceits smooth Bel-imperias ears,
And through her ears diue down into her heart,
And in her heart set him where I should stand.
Thus has he taken my body by his force,
And now by sleight would captiuate my soul:
But in his fall i will tempt the destinies,
And either loose my life, or win my love.

Lor. Lets go my Lord, your staying stays revenge,
Do you hut follow me and gain your love,
Her favor must be won by his remove.

Exeunt. Enter Horatio and Bel-imperia. Hor. Now Madame, since by favor of
your love,
Our hidden smoke is turned to open flame:
And that with looks and words we feed our though*
Two chief contents, where more cannot be had.
Thus in the midst of loves fair blandishments,
Why show you sign of inward lan guishments.

Pedringano shows all to the Prince and Lorenzo, placing them in secret. Bell.
My heart (sweet friend) is like a ship at sea,
She wishes port, where riding all at ease,
She mad repair what stormy times have worn:
And leaning on the shore may sing with joy,
That pleasure follows pain, and bliss annoy.
Possession of thy love is the only port,
Wherein my heart with fears and hopes long tossed,
Each hour does wish and long to make resort,
There to repair the joys that it has lost:
And sitting safe to sing in Cupids quire,
That sweetest bliss is crown of loves desire.

Balthazar above. Bal. O sleep mine eyes, see not my love prophande,
Be deaf my ears, hear not my discontent,
Dye heart, another joys what thou deseruest.

Lor. Watch still mine eyes, to see this love disioynd,
Hear still mine ears, to hear them both lament,
Live heart to joy at fond Horatios fall.

Bell. Why stands Horatio speecheles all this while?

Hor. The less I speak, the more I meditate.

Bell. But whereon do thou chiefly meditate?

Hor. On dangers past, and pleasures to ensue.

Bell. On pleasures past, and dangers to ensue.

Bell. What dangers, and what plesures do thou mean*

Hor. Dangers of war, and pleasures of our love.

Lor. Dangers of death, but pleasures none at all.

Bell. Let dangers go, thy war shall be with me,
But such a warring, as breaks no bond of peace.
Speak thou fair words, i will cross them with fair words,
Send thou sweet looks, i will meet them with sweet looks*
Write loving lines, i will answer loving lines,
Give me a kiss, i will counterchecke thy kiss,
Be this our warring peace, or peaceful war.

Hor. But gracious Madame, then appoint the field,
Where trial of this war shall first be made.

Bal. Ambitious villain, how his boldenes growes^*

Bell, Then be thy fathers pleasant bower the field,
Where first we vowed a mutual amity:
The Court were dangerous, that place is safe:
Our hour shall be when Vesper ginnes to rise,
That summons home distresfull travelers.
There none shall hear us but the harmeles birds.
Happily the gentle Nightingale,
Shall carroll us a sleep ere we be ware.
And singing with the prickle at her breast,
Tell our delight and mirthfull dailiance.
Till then each hour will seem a year and more.

Hor. But honey sweet, and honorable love.
Return we now into your fathers sight,
Dangerous suspicion waits on our delight.

Lor. I, danger mixed with jealous despite,
Shall send thy soul into eternal night.

Exeunt. Enter King of Spain, Portingale Ambassador, Dou Ciprian, etc. King.
Brother of Castile, to the Princes love:
What says your daughter Bel-imperia?

Cip. Although she coy it as becomes her kind,
And yet dissemble that sheloues the Prince:
I doubt not I, but she will stoop in time.
And were she froward, which she will not be,
Yet herein shall she follow my advice,
Which is to love him or forgo my love.

King. Then Lord Ambassador of Portingale,
Advise thy King to make this marriage up,
For strengthening of our late confirmed league,
I know no better means to make us friends.
Her dowry shall be large and liberal,
Besides that, she is daughter and half heir,
Unto our brother here Don Cip^i^,
And shall e^ioy the moitie of his land.
I Will grace her marriage with an vnck^es gift,
And this it is, in case the match go forward,
The tribute which you pay shall be releast,
And if by Balthazar she have a Son,
He shall enjoy the kingdom after us.

Embas. I Will make the motion to my sovereign Liege,
And work it if my counsel may prevail.

King. Do so my Lord, and if he give consent,
I hope his presence here will honor us,
In celebration of the nuptial day,
And let himself determine of the time.

Em. Wilt please your grace co^mmand me ought besid?

King. Commend me to the King, and so farewell.
But where is Prince Balthazar to take his leave?

Em. That is perfourmd already my good Lord.

King. Amongst the rest of what you have in charge,
The Princes ransom must not be forgot:
That's none of mine, but his that took him prisoner,
And well his forwardnes deserves reward.
I^ was Horatio our Knight Marshals son.

Em. Between us there is a price already pitched,
And shall be sent with all convenient speed.

King. Then once again farewell my Lord.

Em. Farewell my Lord of Castile and the rest.
Exit
King. Now brother, you must take some little pains,
To win fair Bel-imperia from her will:
Young Virgins must be ruled by their friends,
The Prince is amiable and loves her well,
If she neglect him and forgo his love,
She both will wrong her own estate and ours:
Therefore whiles I do entertain the Prince,
With greatest pleasure that our Court affoords,
Endeavor you to win your daughters thoughts,
If she give back, all this will come to naught.

Exeunt. Enter Horatio, Bel-imperia, and Pedringano. Hor. Now that the night
begins with sable wings,
To ouer-cloud the brightness of the Sun,
And that in darkness pleasures may be done:
Come Bel-imperia let us to the bower,
And there in safety pass a pleasant hour.

Bell. I follow thee my love, and will not back,
Although my fainting heart controles my soul.

Hor. Why, make you doubt of Pedringanos faith?

Bell. No he is as trusty as my second self.
Go Pedringano watch without the gate,
And let us know if any make approach.

Ped. In steed of watching i will deserve more gold.
By fetching Don Lorenzo to this match.
Exit Ped.
Hor. What means my love?

Bell. I know not what my self:
And yet my heart foretells me some mischaunce.

Hor. Sweet say not so, fair fortune is our friend,
And heavens have shut up day to pleasure us.
The stars thou see hold back their twinkling shine,
And Luna hides her self to pleasure us.

Bell. Thou have preuailde, i will conquer my misdoubt,
And in thy love and council drown my fear:
I fear no more, love now is all my thoughts,
Why sit we not, for pleasure asks ease?

Hor. The more thou sitst within these leauy bowers,
The more will Flora deck it with her flowers.

Bell. I but if Flora spy Horatio here,
Her jealous eye will think I sit too near.

Hor. Hark Madame how the birds record by night,
For joy that Bel-imperia sits in sight.

Bell. No Cupid counterfeits the Nightingale,
To frame sweet music to Horatios tale.

Hor. If Cupid sing, then Venus is nor far,
I thou art Venus or some fairer star.

Bell. If I be Venus thou must needs be Mars,
And where Mars reigns there must needs be war.

Hor. Then thus begin our wars put forth thy hand,
That it may combat with my ruder hand.

Bell. Set forth thy foot to try the push of mine.

Hor. But first my looks shall combat against thine.

Bell. Then ward thy self, I dart this kiss at thee.

Hor. Thus I retort the dart thou threw stat me.

Bell. Nay then to gain the glory of the field,
My twining arms shall yoke and make thee yield.

Hor. Nay then my arms are large and strong with*
Thus Elmes by vines are compast till they fall.

Bell. O let me go, for in my troubled eyes,
Now may thou read that life in passion dies.

Hor. O stay a while and I will dye with thee,
So shall thou yield, and yet have conquered me.

Bell. Whose there Pedringano? we are betraide.

Enter Lorenzo, Balthazar, Cerberin, Pedringano, disguised. Lor. My Lord away
with her, take her aside,
O sir forbear, your valor is already tried.
Quickly dispatch my masters,

Thy hang him in the Arbor. Hor. What will you murder me?

Lor. I thus, and thus, these are the fruits of love.

They stab him. Bell. O save his life and let me dye for him,
O save him brother, save him Balthazar:
I loved Horatio but he loved not me.

Bal. But Balthazar loves Bel-imperia.

Lor. Although his life were still ambituous proud,
Yet is heat the highest now he is dead.

Bell. Murder, murder, help Hieronimo help.

Lor. Come stop her mouth away with her.

Exeunt. Enter Hieronimo in his shirt* etc. Hiero. What out cries pluck me from
my naked bed,
And chill my throbbing heart with trembling fear,
Which never danger yet could daunt before.
Who calls Hieronimo? speak, here I am:
I did not slumber, therefore was no dream,
No, no, it was some woman cride for help,
And here within this garden did she (...)
And in this garden must I rescue her:
But stay, what murdrous spectacle is this?
A man hanged up and all the murderers gone,
And in my bower to lay the guilt on me:
This place was made for pleasure not for death.
He cuts him down. Those garments that he wears I o^t have seen,
Alas it is Horatio my sweet son.
O no, but he that whilome was my son,
O was it thou that call'dst me from my bed,
O speak if any spark of life remain.
I am thy father, who has slain my son?
What sauadge monster, not of humane kind,
Has here been glutted with thy harmeles blood?
And left thy bloody corpse dishonored here,
For me amidst this dark and deathfull shades,
To drown thee with an ocean of my tears.
O heavens, why made you night to cover sinue?
By day this deed of darkness had not been.
O earth why did thou not in time devour,
The vilde prophaner of this sacred bower.
O poor Horatio, what had thou misdoone?
To leese thy life ere life was new begun.
O wicked butcher what so ere thou were,
How could thou strangle virtue and desert?
Ay me most wretched that have lost my joy,
In leesing my Horatio my sweet boy.

Enter Isabell. Isa. My husbands absence makes my heart to throb, Hieronimo.

Hiero. Here Isabella, help me to lament,
For sighs are stopped, and all my tears are spent.

Isa. What world of grief, my son Horatio?
O where is the author of this end^es woe.

Hiero. To know the author were some ease of grief,
For in revenge my heart would find relief.

Isa. Then is he gone? and is my son gone too?
Ogush out tears, fountains and ^louds of tears,
Blow sighs and raise an everlasting storm.
For outrage fits our cursed wre^chednes.

Hiero. Sweet lovely Rose, ill plucked before thy time,
Fair worthy son, not conquered but betrayed:
I Will kiss thee now, for words with tears are stainde.

Isa. And i will close up the glasses of his sight,
For once these eyes were only my delight,

Hiero. See thou this handkercher bes^erd with blood,
It shall not from me till I take revenge:
See thou thoss wounds that yet are bleeding fresh,
I Will not intombe them till I have revenged:
Then will I joy amidst my discontent,
Till then my sorrow never shall be spent.

Isa. The heavens are just, murder cannot be hid,
Time is the author both of truth and right.
And time will bring this treachery to light.

Hiero. Mean while good Isabella cease thy plaints,
Or at the least dissemble them a while,
So shall we sooner find the practice out,
And learn by whom all this was brought about.
Come Isabell now let us take him up,
They take him up. And bear him in from out this cursed place,
I Will say his dirge, singing fits not this case.
O a^quis mihi quas pulcbrum var educet herbas.
Hiero sets his breast unto his sword. Misceat and nostro detur, medicina dolori:
Aut siquifaciunt annum oblimia succos,
Prebeat, ipse ^^tum magnam quicunque per orbem*
Gramina Sol pulcbras effecit inluminis oras.
Ipse bibam quicqu^d meditatur saga veneri,
Quicquid and irra^i euecaca menia nectit.
Omnia perpetiar, le^bu^ quoque dum scm^l^mnis,
Noster in extincto (...) p^ct^ra sensus:
Ergo tuos occulos nunquam (mea vita) videb^.
Et ^ua perpetuus sepeliuit lumina so^^ius:
Emoriar tecum Sic, sic (...) sub vmbras,
Attamen absistam proper (...),
Ne mortem vindicta tuam iam nulla sequatur.
Here he throws it from him and bears the body away.

Andrea. Broughtst thou me hither to increase my pain?
I looked that Balthazar should have been slain:
But it is my friend Horatis that is slain,
And they abuse fair Bel-imperia.
Or whom I doted more then all the world,
Because she loved me more then all the world.

Revenge. Thou talkest of harvest when the corn is green,
The end is crown of every work well done:
The Sickle comes not till the corn be ripe.
Be still, and ere I lead thee from this place,
I Will show thee Balthazar in heavy case.

Actus Tertius.
Enter Viceroy of Portingale, Nobles, Alexandro, Villuppo. Viceroy. Unfortunate
condition of Kings,
Seated amidst so many helpeles doubts:
First we are plast upon extremest height,
And often supplanted with exceeding heat,
But ever subject to the wheel of chance?
And at our highest never joy we so,
As we both doubt and dread our overthrow.
So strives not the waves with sundry winds,
As fortune toyleth in the affairs of kings,
That would be feared, yet fear to be beloved,
Since fear or love to Kings is flatterie^
For instance Lordings, look upon your King,
By hate deprived of his dearest s^nne,
The only hope of our succes(...) li^e.

Nob. I had not thought that Al^x^ndros heart,
Had been (...) with such extr^^me hate:
But now I see that words have several works,
And there is no credi^^^ the coun^en^^^^.

Vil. No, for my Lord, had you beheld the train,
That fained love had colored in his looks,
When he in camp consorted Belthazar:
Far more inconstant had you thought the Sun,
That howerly coasts the center of the earth,
Then Alexandros purpose to the Prince.

Vice. No more Villuppo, thou have said enough,
And with thy words thou slaiest our wounded thoughts.
Nor shall I longer dally with the world:
Procrastinating Alexandros death:
Go some of you and fetch the traitor forth,
That as he is condemned he may dye.

Enter Alexandro with a Noble man and Halberts. Nob. In such extremes, will
naught but patience serve.

Alex. But in extremes, what patience shall I use?
Nor discontents it me to leave the world,
With whom there nothing can prevail but wrong.

Nob. Yet hope the best.

Alex. It Is Heaven is my hope.
As for the earth it is too much i^sect,
To yield me hope of any of her mould.

Vice. Why lingerye? bring forth that daring fe^nd,
And let him die for his accursed deed*

Alex. Not that I fear the extre^^tie of death,
For N^bles cannot stoop to servile fear.
Do ^ (O King) thus discontented live.
But this, O this torments my laboring soul,
That thus I die suspected of a sin,
Whereof, as heavens have known my secret thoughts,
So am I free from this suggestion.

Vice. No more I say, to the tortures, when?
Bind him, and burn his body in those flames,
They bind him to the stake. That shall presigure those unquenched fires,
Of Phlegiton prepared for his soul.

Alex. My guiltles death will be aueng'd on thee,
On thee Villuppo that has malisde thus,
Or for thy meed, have falsely me accnsde.

Vil. Nay Alexandro if thou menace me,
I Will lend a hand to send thee to the lake,
Where those thy words shall perish with thy works,
Injurious traitor, monstrous homicide.

Enter Ambassador. Stay hold a while, and here with pardon of his Majesty,
Lay hands upon Villuppo.
Vice. Ambassador, what news has urged this sudden entrance?

Em. Know sovereign L. that Balthazar does live.

Vice. What say thou? lives Balthazar our son?

Em. Your highness son, L. Balthazar does live.
And well entreated in the Court of Spain:
Humbly commends him to your Majesty.
These eyes beheld, and these my followers,
With these the letters of the Kings commends.
Gives him Letters. Are happy witnesses of his highness health.
The King looks on the letters, and proceeds.

Vice. Thy son does live, your tribute is received,
Thy peace is made, and we are satisfied:
The rest resolve upon as things proposde,
For both our honors and thy benefit.

Em. These are his highness farther articles.

He gives him more Letters. Vice. Accursed wretch to intimate these ills,
Against the life and reputation
Of noble Alexandro. come my Lord unbind him.
Let him unbind thee that is bound to death,
To make a quitall for thy discontent.

They unbind him. Alex. Dread Lord, in kindenes you could do no less,
Upon report of such a damned fact:
But thus we see our innocence has saved,
The hopeles life which thou Villuppo sought,
By thy suggestions to have massacred.

Vice. Say false Villuppo? wherefore did thou thus
Falsely betray Lord Alexandros life?
Him whom thou know, that no unkindness else,
But even the slaughter of our dearest son,
Could once have moved us to have misconceaued.

Alex. Say treacherous Villuppo, tell the King,
Or wherein has Alexandro used thee ill?

Vil. Rent with remembrance of so foul a deed,
My guilty soul submits me to thy doom:
For not for Alexandros injuries,
But, forreward and hope to be preferred:
Thus have I shamelesly hazarded his life,

Vice. which villain shall be ransomed with thy deeth,
And not so meanea torment as we here
Deuisde for him, who thou said slew our son:
But with the bitterest torments and extremes,
That may be yet invented for thine end:
Alex. seems to entreat. Entreat me not, go take the traitor hence.
Exit Vil. And Alexandro let us honor thee,
With public notice of thy loyalty,
To end those things articulated here,
By our great L, the mighty king of Spain.
We with our council will deliberate,
Come Alexandro keep us company.

Ex^unt. Enter Hieronimo. Hiero. Oh eyes, no eyes but fountains fraught with
tears,
Oh life, no life, but lively form of death:
Oh world, no world but mass of public wrongs.
Confusde and filde, with murder and misdeeds
Oh sacred heavens, if this unhallowed deed,
If this inhumane and barberous attempt,
If this incompaeable murder thus,
Of mine, but now no more my son,
Shall vnreueald and unrevenged pass,
How should we term your dealings to be just,
If you unjustly deal with those, that in your justice trust.
The night sad secretary to my mones,
With direful visions wake my vexed soul,
And with the wounds of my distresfull son,
Solicit me for notice of his death.
The ougly feends do sally forth of hell,
And frame my steps to unfrequented paths,
And fear my heart with fierce inflamed thoughts.
The cloudie day my discontents records,
Early begins to regester my dreams,
And drive me forth to seek the murderer,
Eyes, life, world, heavens, hell, night and day,
See, search, show, send, some man,
Some mean, that may:
A Letter falls. What Is here? a letter, tush, it is not so,
A Letter written to Hieronimo.

Red incke. Bell. For want of incke receive this bloody writ,
Me has my haples brother hid from thee,
Revenge thy self on Balthazar and him,
For these were they that murdered thy Son.
Hieronimo, revenge Horatios death,
And better fare then Bel-imperia does.

Hiero What means this unexpected miracle?
My Son slain by Lorenzo and the Prince.
What cause had they Horatio to malign?
Or what might move thee Bel-imperia,
To accuse thy brother, had he been the mean?
Hieronimo beware, thou art betraide,
And to entrap thy life this train is laid.
Advise thee therefore, be not credulous:
This is devised to endanger thee,
That thou by this Lorenzo should accuse,
And he for thy dishonor done, should draw
Thy life in question; and thy name in hate.
Dear was the life of my beloved Son,
And of his death behoues me be revenged:
Then hazard not thine own Hieronimo,
But live to effect thy resolution.
I therefore will by circumstances try,
What I can gather to confirm this writ,
And harkning near the Duke of Castiles house,
Close if I can with Belimperia,
To listen more, but nothing to bewray.

Enter Pedringano. Hiero. Now Pedringano.

Ped. Now Hieronimo.

Hiero. Where Is thy Lady?

Ped. I know not, heers my Lord.

Enter Lorenzo. Lor. How now, whose this, Hieronimo?

Hiero. My Lord.

Ped. He asks for my Lady Bel-imperia.

Lor. What to do Hieronimo? The Duke my father has
Upon some disgrace a while remoou'd her hence,
But if it be ought I may inform her of,
Tell me Hieronimo, and i will let her know it.

Hiero. Nay, nay my Lord, I thank you, it shall not need,
I had a suit unto her, but too late,
And her disgrace makes me unfortunate.

Lor. Why so Hieronimo? use me.

Hiero. Oh no my Lord, I dare not, it must not be.
I humbly thank your Lordship.

Lor. Why then farewell.

Hiero. My grief no heart, my thoughts no tung can tell.
Exit.
Lor. Come hither Pedringano, see thou this?

Ped. My Lord, I see it, and suspect it too.

Lor. This is that damned villain Serberine,
That has I fear reuealde Horatios death.

Ped. My Lord, he could not, it was so lately done,
And since he has not lest my company.

Lor. Admit he have not, his conditions such,
As fear of flattering words may make him false.
I know his humor, and there with repent,
That ere I used him in this enterprise.
But Pedringano, to prevent the worst,
And c^use I know thee secret as my soul,
Here for thy further satisfaction take thou this.
Gives him more gold.
And harken to me, thus it is deuisde:
This night thou must, and prithee so resolve,
Meet Serberine at S. Liugis Park,
Thou know it is here hard by behind the house,
There take thy stand, and see thou strike him sure,
For dye he must, if we do mean to live.

Ped. But how shall Serberine be there my Lord?

Lor. Let me alone, i will send to him to meet
The Prince and me, where thou must do this deed.

Ped. It shall be done my L. it shall be done,
And i will go arm my self to meet him there.

Lor. When things shall alter, as I hope they will,
Then shall thou mount for this, tbou know my mind.

Exit Ped. Che le Ieron. Enter Page. Page. My Lord.

Lor. Go sir to Serberine, and bid him forthwith,
Meet the Prince and me at S. Liugis Park,
Behind the house, this evening boy.

Page. I go my Lord.
But sir, let the hour be eight a clock.
Bid him not fail.

Page. I fly my Lord.
Exit.
Lor. Now to confirm the complot thou have cast,
Of all these practices, I Will spread the watch,
Upon precise commandment from the king,
Strongly to guard the place where Pedringano
This night shall murder haples Serberine.
Thus must we work that will avoid distrust,
Thus must we practice to prevent mishap,
And thus one ill, another must expulse.
This sly enquiry of Hieronimo for Bel-imperia, breeds suspicion,
And this suspicion boads a further ill.
As for my self, I know my secret fault,
And so do they, but I have dealt for them.
They that for coin their souls endangered
To save my life, for coin shall venture theirs:
And better its that base companions dye,
Then by their life to hazard our good haps.
Nor shall they live for me, to fear their faith:
I Will trust my self, my self shall be my friend,
For dye they shall, slaves are ordeind to no other end.
Exit. Enter Pedringano with a Pistol. Now Pedringano bid thy pistol hold,
And hold on Fortune, once more favor me,
Give but success to mine at tempting spirit,
And let me shift for taking of mine aim:
Here is the gold, this is the gold proposde,
It is no dream that I adventure for,
But Pedringano is possessed thereof.
And he that would not strain his conscience,
For him that thus his liberal purse has stretched,
Unworthy such a favor may he fail,
And ^^^hing, want when such as I prevail.
As for the fear of apprehension,
I know, if need should be, my noble Lord
Will stand between me and ensuing harms.
Besides, this place is free from all suspect:
Here therefore will I stay and take my stand.

Enter the watch. 1 I wonder much to what intent it is,
That we are thus expressly chargde to watch?

2 It Is by commandment in the Kings own name.

3 But we were never wont to watch and ward,
So near the Duke his brothers house before.

2 Content your self, stand close, there is somewhat int*

Enter Serberine. Ser. Here Serberine attend and stay thy pace,
For here did Don Lorenzos Page appoint,
That thou by his command should meet with him.
How fit a place if one were so disposde,
Me thinks this corner is to close with one.

Ped. Here comes the bird that I must ceaze upon,
Now Pedringano or never play the man.

Ser. I wonder that his Lordship stays so long,
Or wherefore should he send for me so late?

Ped. For this Serberine, and thou shall ha'te.
Shootes the Dagge. So, there he lies, my promise is performde.

The Watch. 1 Hark Gentlemen, this is a Pistol-shot.

2 And heeres one slain, stay the murderer.

Ped. Now by the sorrows of the souls in hell,
He strives with the watch. Who first lays hand on me, i will be his Priest,

3 Sir, confess, and therein play the Priest,
Why have thou thus unkindly killed the man?

Ped. Why, because he walked abroad so late.

3 Come sir, you had been better kept your bed,
Then have committed this misdeed so late.

2 Come to the Marshals with the murderer.

1 On to Hieronimos, help me here,
To bring the murdered body with us too.

Ped. Hieronimo, carry me before whom you will,
What ere he be i will answer him and you,
And do your worst, for I defy you all.

Exeunt. Enter Lorenzo and Balthazar. Bal. How now my Lord, what makes you rise
so soon?

Lor. Fear of preventing our mishaps too late.

Bal. What mischief is it that we not mistrust?

Lor. Our greatest ils, we least mistrust my Lord,
And in expected harms do hurt us most.

Bal. Why tell me Don Lorenzo, tell me man,
If ought concerns our honor and your own?

Lor. Nor you nor me my Lord, but both in one.
For I suspect, and the presumptions great,
That by those base confederates in our fault,
Touching the death of Don Horatio:
We are betraide to old Hieronimo.

Bal. Betraide Lorenzo, tush it cannot be.

Lor. A guilty conscience urged with the thought,
Offormer evils, easily cannot err:
I am persuaded, and diswade me not,
That als revealed to Hieronimo.
And therefore know that I have cast it thus:
But heeres the Page, how now, what news with thee?

Page. My Lord, Serberine is slain.

Bal. Who? Serberine my man.

Page. Your Highness man my Lord.

Lor. Speak Page, who murdered him?

Page. He that is apprehended for the fact.

Lor. Who?

Page. Pedringano.

Bal. Is Serberine slain that loved his Lord so well?
Injurious villame, murderer of his friend.

Lor. Has P^dringano murdered Serberine?
My Lord, let me entreat you to take the pains,
To exasperate and hasten his revenge.
With your complaints unto my L. the King.
This their dissension breeds a greater doubt.

Bal. Assure thee Don Lor^nzo he shall dye,
Or else his Highness hardly shall deny.
Mean while, i will haste the Marshall Sessions,
For die he shall for this his damned deed.
Exit Balt.
Lor. Why so, this fits our former policy,
And thus experience bids the wise to deal.
I lay the plot, he prosecutes the point,
I set the trap, he breaks the worthles twigs,
And sees not that wherewith the bird was limde.
Thus hopeful men that mean to hold their own,
Must look like fowlers to their dearest friends.
He runs to kill whom I have help to catch,
And no man knows it was my reaching fatch.
It Is hard to trust unto a multitude,
Or any one in mine opinion,
When men themselu^s their secrets will reveal.

Enter a messenger with a letter. Lor. Boy.

Page. My Lord.

Lor. What Is he?

Mes. I have a letter to your Lordship.

Lor. From whence?

Mes. From Pedring ano that is imprisoned.

Lor. So, he is in prison then?

Mes. I my good Lord.

Lor. What would he with us?
He writes us here to stand good L. and help him in distres.
Tell him I have his letters, know his mind,
And what we may let him assure him of.
Fellow, be gone: my boy shall follow thee.
Exit Mes. This works like wax, yet once more try thy wits,
Boy, go convey this purse to Pedring ^n^,
Thou know the prison, closely give it him:
And be aduisde that ^one be there about.
Bid him be merry still, but secret:
And though the Marshall sessions be to day,
Bid him not doubt of his delivery.
Tell him his pardon is already signde,
And thereon bid him boldly be resolved:
For were he ready to be turned off,
As it is my will the uttermost be tried:
Thou with his pardon shall attend him still,
Show him this box, tell him his pardons int,
But opent not, and if thou love thy life:
But let him wisely keep his hopes unknown,
He shall not want while Don Lorenzo lives: away.

Page. I go my Lord, I run.

Lor. But sir, see that this be cleanely done.
Exit Page. Now stands our fortune on a tickle point,
And now or never ends Lorenzos doubts.
One only thing is vneffected yet,
And that's to see the Executioner,
But to what end? I list not trust the Air
With utterance of our pretense therein.
For fear the privy whispring of the wind,
Convey our words amongst vnfreendly ears,
That lie too open to advantages.
Et quel que voglio It nessun le sa,
Intendo io quel mi bassara.
Exit. Enter Boy with the Box. My Master has forbidden me to look in this
box, and by my troth it is likely, if he had not warned me, I should not have had
so much idle time: for we mens-kinde in our minority, are like women in their
uncertainty, that they are most forbidden, they will soonest attempt: so I now.
By my bare honesty heeres nothing but the bare empty box: were it not sin
against secrecy, I would say it were a piece of gentlemanlike knavery. I must
go to Pedring^no, and tell him his pardon is in this box, nay, I would have
sworn it, had I not seen the contrary. I cannot choose but smile to think,
how the villain will flout the gallows, scorn the audience, and descant on the
hangman, and al presuming of his pardon from hence. Wilt not be an odd jest,
for me to stand and grace every jest he makes, pointing my finger at this box:
as who would say, mock on, heers thy warrant. Is It not a scuruie jest, that a
man should jest himself to death. Alas poor Pedringano, I am in a sort sorry
for thee, but if I should be hanged with thee, I cannot weep.

Exit.
Enter Hieronimo and the Deputy. Hiero. Thus must we toil in other men's
extremes,
That know not how to remedy our own,
And do them justice, when unjustly we:
For all our wrongs can compass no redress.
But shall I never live to see the day,
That I may come (by justice of the heavens)
To know the cause that may my cares allay?
This toils my body, this consumes age,
That only I to all men just must be,
And neither Gods nor men be just to me.

Dep. Worthy Hieronimo, your office asks,
A care to punish such as do transgress.

Hiero. So is it my duty to regard his death,
Who when he lived deserved my dearest blood:
But come, for that we came for lets begin,
For here lies that which bids me to be gone.

Enter Officers, Boy, and Pedringano, with a letter in his hand, bound. Depu.
Bring forth the Prisoner for the Court is set.

Ped. Gramercy boy, but it was time to come,
For I had written to my Lord anew,
A nearer matter that concerns him,
For fear his Lordship had forgotten me:
But since he has remembered me so well,
Come, come, come on, when shall we to this geere.

Hiero. Stand forth thou monster, murderer of men,
And here for satisfaction of the world,
Confess thy folly and repent thy fault,
For there is thy place of execution.

Ped. This is short work, well, to your Marshallship
First I confess, nor fear I death therefore,
I am the man, it was I slew Serberine.
But sir, then you think this shall be the place,
Where we shall satisfy you for this gear?

Depu. I Pedringano.

Ped. Now I think not so.

Hiero, Peace impudent, for thou shall find it so.
For blood with blood, shall while I sit as judge,
Be satisfied, and the law dischargde.
And though my self cannot receive the like,
Yet will I see that others have their right.
Dispatch, the faults approved and confessed,
Hnd by our law he is condemnd to die.

Hang. Come on sit, are you ready?

Ped. To do what, my fine officious knave?

Hang. To go to this geere.

Ped O sir, you are to forward, thou would feign furnish me with a halter, to
disfurnish me of my habit.

So I should go out of this geere my raiment, into that geere the rope.

But Hangman, now I spy your knavery, i will not change without boot, that's fl^t.


Hang. Come Sir.

Ped. So then I must up.

Hang. No remedy.

Ped. Yes, but there shall be for my coming down.

Hang. Indeed heers a remedy for that.

Ped. How? be turned off.

Hang. I truly, come are you ready.
I pray sir dispatch, the day goes away.

Ped. What do you hang by the hour, if you do, I may chance to break your
old custom.


Hang. Faith you have reason, for I am like to break your young neck.


Ped. Do thou mock me hangman, pray God I be not preserved to break your
knaves pate for this.


Hang. Alas sir, you are a foot too low to reach it, and I hope you will never
grow so high while I am in the office.


Ped. Sir, do see yonder boy with the box in his hand?


Hang. What, he that points to it with his finger.


Ped. I that companion.


Hang. I know him not, but what of him?


Ped. Do thou think to live till his old doublet will make thee a new
trusse?


Hang. I, and many a fair year after, to trusse up many an honester man then
either thou or he.


Ped. What has he in his box as thou think?


Hang. Faith I cannot tell, nor I care not greatly.
Me thinks you should rather hearken to your souls health.

Ped. Why sir Hangman? I take it, that that is good for the body, is likewise
good for the soul: and it may be, in that box is balm for both.


Hang. Well, thou art even the meriest piece of man's flesh that ere gronde at my
office door.


Ped. Is your roaguery become an office with a knaves name?


Hang. I, and that shall all they witness that see you seal it with a thieves
name.


Ped. I prithee request this good company to pray with me.


Hang. I mary sir, this is a good motion: my masters, you see heers a good
fellow.


Ped. Nay, nay, now I remember me, let them alone till some other time, for now
I have no great need.


Hiero. I have not seen a wretch so impudent,
O monstrous times where murders set so light,
And where the soul that should be shrinde in heaven*
Solelie delights in interdicted things,
Still wandering in the thornie passages,
That intercepts it self of hapines.
Murder, O bloody monster, God forbid,
A fault so foul should escape unpunished.
Dispatch and see this execution done,
This makes me to remember thee my son.
Exit. Hiero.
Ped. Nay soft, no have.

Depu. Why, wherefore stay you, have you hope of life?

Ped. Why I.

Hang. As how?

Ped. Why Rascal by my pardon from the King.

Hang. stand you on that, then you shall off with this.

He turns him off. Depu. So Executioner, convey him hence,
But let his body be unburied.
Let not the earth be choked or infect.
With that which heavens contemnes and men neglect.

Exeunt. Enter Hieronimo. Where shall I run to breath abroad my woes,
My woes whose weight has wearied the earth?
Or mine exclaimes that have surcharged the air,
With ceasles plaints, for my deceased son?
The blustering winds conspiring with my words,
At my lament have moved the leaueles trees.
Disroabde the meadows of their flowred green,
Made mountains marsh with spring tides of my tears,
And broken through the brazen gates of hell,
Yet still tormented is my tortured soul,
With broken sighs and restles passions,
That winged mount, and houering in the air,
Beat at the windows of the brightest heavens,
Soliciting for justice and revenge:
But they are placed in those imperial heights,
Where countermurde with walls of diamond,
I find the place impregnable, and they
Resist my woes, and give my words no way.
Enter Hangman with a Letter. Hang. O Lord sir, God bless you sir, the man sir
Petergade, Sir, he that was so full of merry conceits.


Hiero. Well, what of him?

Hang. O Lord sir, he went the wrong way, the fellow had
a fair commission to the contrary. Sir, here is his pasport,
I pray you sir, we have done him wrong.

Hiero. I warrant thee, give it me.

Hang. you will stand between the gallows and me.

Hiero. I, I.

Hang. I thank your L. worship.
Exit Hangmon.
Hiero. And yet though some what nearer me concerns,
I will to ease the grief that I sustain,
Take truce with sorrow while I read on this.
My Lord, I write as mine extremes requirde,
That you would labor my delivery:
If you neglect, my life is desperate,
And in my death I shall reveal the troth.
You know my Lord, I slew him for your sake,
And was confeder ate with the Prince and you,
Won by rewards and hopeful promises,
I hope to murder Don Horatio too.
Help he to murder mine Horatio,
And actors in th'accursed Tragedy.
Wast thou Lorenzo, Balthazar and thou,
Of whom my Son, my Son deserved so well,
What have I heard, what have mine eyes beheld?
O sacred heavens, may it come to pass,
That such a monstrous and detested deed,
So closely smootherd, and so long conceald,
Shall thus by this be venged or reueald.
Now see I what I durst not then suspect,
That Bel-imperias Letter was not fainde,
Nor fained she though falsely they have wronged,
Both her, my self, Horati^, and themselves.
Now may I make compare twixt hers and this,
Of every accident, I near could find
Till now, and now I feelingly perceive,
They did what heaven unpunished would not leave.
O false Lorenzo, are these thy flattering looks?
Is this this honor that thou did my Son?
And Balthazar bane to thy soul and me,
Was this the ransom he reserved thee for?
Woe to the cause of these constrained wars,
Woe to thy baseness and captivity,
Woe to thy birth, thy body and thy soul,
Thy cursed father, and thy conquered self:
And band with bitter execrations be
The day and place where he did pity thee.
But wherefore waste I mine unfruitful words?
When naught but blood will satisfy my woes:
I will go plain me to my Lord the King,
And cry aloud for justice through the Court.
Wearing the flints with these my withered feet,
And either purchase justice by entreats,
Or tire them all with my revenging threats.
Exit.
Enter Isabell and her Maid. Isa. So that you say this herb will purge the eye
And this the head, ah but none of them will purge the heart:
No, there is no medicine left for my disease,
Nor any physic to recure the dead:
She runs lunatic. Horatio, O where is Horatio.

Maid. Good Madam, affright not thus your self,
With outrage for your son Horatio.
He sleeps in quiet in the Elizian fields.

Isa. Why did I not give you gowns and goodly things,
Bought you a whistle and a whipstalke too*
To be revenged on their villainies.

Maid. Madame these humors do torment my soul.

Isa. My soul, poor soul thou talks of things
Thou know not what, my soul has silver wings,
That mounts me up unto the highest heavens,
To heaven, I there sits my Hor^tio,
Backed with a troup offiery Cherubins,
Dancing about his newly healed wounds
Singing sweet hymns and chaunting heavenly notes,
Rare hermony to greet his innocence,
That did, I did a mirror in our days.
But say, where shall I find, the men, the murderers,
That flew Horatio, whether shall I run,
To find them out, that murdered my Son.

Exeunt. Bel-imperia at a window. Bell. What means this outrage that is offered
me?
Why am I thus sequestered from the Court?
No notice, shall I not know the cause,
Of this my secret and suspicious ils?
Accursed brother, unkind murderer.
Why bends thou thus thy mind to martyr me?
Hieronimo* why writ I of thy wrongs?
Or why art thou so slack in thy revenge?
Andrea, O Andrea that thou saw,
Me for thy friend Horatio handled thus,
And him for me thus causeles murdered.
Well, force perforce, I must constrain my self,
To patience, and apply me to the time,
Till heaven as I have hoped shall set me free.

Enter Christophill. Chris. Come Madame Bel-imperia, this may not be,

Exeunt. Enter Lorenzo, Balthazar, and the Page. Lor. Boy, talk no further,
thus far things go well,
Thou art assurde that thou saw him dead?

Page. Or else my Lord I live not.

Lor. That's enough.
As for his resolution in his end,
Leave that to him with whom he soiourns now.
Here, take my ring, and give it Christophill,
And bid him let my Sister be enlarged,
And bring her hither straight.
Exit Page. This that I did was for a policy,
To smooth and keep the murder secret,
Which as a nine days wonder being ore-blowne,
My gentle Sister will I now enlarge.

Bal. And time Lorenzo, for my Lord the Duke,
You heard enquired for her yester-night.

Lor. Why? and my Lord, I hope you heard me say,
Sufficient reason, why she kept away.
But that's all one, my Lord, you love her?

Bal. I.

Lor. Then in your love beware, deal cunningly,
Salve all suspicions, only sooth me up,
And if she hap to stand on terms with us,
As for her sweet heart, and concealment so,
lest with her gently, under fained jest
Are things concealde, that else would breed unrest.
But here she comes.

Enter Bel-imperia. Lor. Now Sister.

Bell. Sister, no thou art no brother, but an enemy.
Else would thou not have used thy Sister so,
First, to affright me with thy weapons drawn,
And with extremes abuse my company:
And then to hurry me like whirlewinds rage,
A midst a crew of thy confederates:
And clap me up where none might come at me,
Nor I at any to reveal my wrongs.
What madding fury did possess thy wits?
Or wherein is it that I offended thee?

Lor. A duise you better Bel-imperia,
For I have done you no disparagement:
Unless by more discretion then deser^'d,
I sought to save your honor and mine own.

Bell. Mine honor, why Lorenzo, where in is it,
That I neglect my reputation so,
As you, or any need to rescue it.

Lor. His highness and my Father were resolved,
To come confer with old Hieronimo,
Concerning certain matters of estate,
That by the Viceroy was determined.

Bell. And wherein was mine honor touched in that?

Bal. Have patience Bel-imperia, hear the rest.

Lor. Me next in sight as messenger they sent,
To give him notice that they were so nigh:
Now when I came consorted with the Prince,
And unexpected in an Arbor there,
Found Bel-imperia with Horatio.

Bell. How than?

Lor. Why then remembering that old disgrace,
Which you for Don Andrea had indurde,
And now were likely longer to sustain,
By being found so meanly accompanied:
Thought rather, for I knew no readier mean,
To thrust Horatio forth my fathers way.

Bal. And carry you obscurely some where else,
Least that his highness should have found you there.

Bell. Even so my Lord, and you are witness,
That this is true which he entreats of.
You (gentle brother) forged this for my sake,
And you my Lord, were made his instruement:
A work of worth, worthy the noting too.
But what is the cause that you concealde me since?

Lor Your melancholy Sister since the news,
Of your first favorite Don Andreas death,
My Fathers old wrath has exasperate.

Bal. And better wast for you being in disgrace,
To absent your self and give his fury place.

Bell. But why had I no notice of his ire?

Lor. That were to add more fuel to your fire.
Who burnt like A^tn^ for Andreas loss.

Bell. Has not my Father then inquired for me?

Lor. Sister he has, and thus excusde I thee.
He whispereth in her care. But Bel-imperia, see the gentle prince,
Look on thy love, behold young Balthazar.
Whose passions by thy presence are increast,
And in whose melancholy thou may see,
Thy hate, his love: thy flight, his following thee.

Bell. Brother you are become an Orator,
I know not I, by what experience,
Too pollitick for me, past all compare,
Since last I saw you, but content your self,
The Prince is meditating higher things,

Bal. It Is of thy beauty then that conquers Kings.
Of those thy tresses Ariadnes twines,
Where with my liberty thou have surprisde*
Of that thine iuorie front my sorrows map,
Wherein I see no haven to rest my hope.

Bell. Toloue, and fear, and both at once my Lord,
In my conceit, are things of more import,
Then women's wits are to be busied with.

Bal. It Is I that love.

Bell. Whom?

Bal. Bel-imperia.

Bell. But I that fear.

Bal. Whom?

Bell. Bel-imperia.

Lor. Fear your self?

Bell. I brother.

Lor. How?

Bell. As those, that what they love, are loath, and fear to loose.

Bal. Then fair, let Balthazar your keeper be,

Bell. No, Balthazar does fear as well as we.
Est tre^^ulo met^^ pauidum (...),
Et vanum stolidae proditionis opus.
Exit.
Lor. Nay, and you argue things so eunningly,
We Will go continue this discourse at Court,

Bal. Led by the loadstar of her heavenly looks,
Wends poor oppressed Baltbazar,
As ore the mountains walks the wanderer,
Uncertain to effect his Pilgrimage.

Exeunt. Enter two Portingales, and Hieronimo meets them. 1 By your leave Sir.

Hiero. Good leave have you, nay, I pray you go,
For i will leave you, if you can leave me so.

2 Pray you which is the next way to my L. the Dukes.

Hiero. The next way from me.

1 To his house we mean.

Hiero. O hard by, it is yon house that you see.

2 You could not tell us, if his Son were there.

Hiero. Who, my Lord Lorenzo?

1 I Sir.
He goes in at one door and comes out at another.

Hiero. Oh forbear, for other talk for us far fitter were.
But if you be importunate to know,
The way to him, and where to find him out,
Then list to me, and I Will resolve your doubt.
There is a path upon your left hand side,
That leads from a guilty conscience,
Unto a forest of distrust and fear.
A darkesome place and dangerous to pass,
There shall you meet with melancholy thoughts,
Whose balefull humors if you but uphold,
It will conduct you to despair and death:
Whose rockie cliffes, when you have once beheld,
Within a hugie dale of lasting night,
That kind'ed with the worlds iniquities,
Does cast up filthy and detested fumes.
Not far from thence where murderers have built,
A habitation for their cursed souls:
There in a brazen Caldron fixed by Io^e,
In his fell wrath upon a sulpher flame:
Your selves shall find Lorenzo bathing him,
In boiling lead and blood of innocents.

1 Ha, ha, ha.

Hiero. Ha, ha, ha: why ha, ha, ha. Farewell good ha, ha, ha.
Exit.
2 Doubtless this man is passing lunaticke,
Or imperfection of his age does make him dote.
Come, lets away to seek my Lord the Duke.

Enter Hieronimo with a Poniard in one hand, and a Rope in the other. Hiero.
Now Sir, perhaps I come and see the King,
The King sees me, and feign would hear my suit.
Why is not this a strange and seld seen thing.
That standers by with toys should strike me mute.
Go too, I see their shifts, and say no more,
Hieronimo, it is time for thee to trudge.
Down by the dale that flows with purple gore,
Stands a fiery Tower, there sits a judge,
Upon a seat of steel and molten brass:
And twixt his teeth he holds a firebrand,
That leads unto the lake where hell does stand.
Away Hieronimo to him be gone:
Heel do thee justice for Horatios death.
Turn down this path thou shall be with him strait,
Or this, and then thou needst not take thy breath.
This way, or that way: soft and fair, not so:
For if I hang or kill my self, lets know
Who will revenge Horatios murder then?
No, no, fie no: pardon me, i will none of that:

He flings away the dagger and halter. This way i will take, and this way comes
the King,
He takes them up again. And here I Will have a fling at him that's flat.
And Baltbazar i will be with thee to bring,
And thee Lorenzo, heeres the King, nay, stay,
And here, I here, there goes the hare away.
Enter King, Ambassador, Castile, and Lorenzo. King. Now show Ambassador what
our Viceroy says,
Has he received the articles we sent?

Hiero. Justice, O justice to Hieronimo.

Lor. Back, see thou not the King is busy?

Hiero. O, is he so.

King. Who is he that interrupts our business?

Hiero. Not I, Hieronimo beware, go by, go by.

Embas. Renowned King he has received and read,
Thy kingly proffers, and thy promised league,
And as a man extremely ouer-ioyd,
To hear his Son so Princely entertainde,
Whose death he had so solemnly bewailde.
This for thy further satisfaction,
And kingly love, he kindly lets thee know:
First, for the marriage of his Princely Son,
With Bel-imperia thy beloved Niece,
The news are more delightful to his soul,
Then myrrh or incense to the offended heavens.
In person therefore will he come himself,
To see the marriage rites solemnized,
And in the presence of the Court of Spain,
To knit a sure inexecrable band,
Of Kingly love, and everlasting league,
Betwixt the Crowns of Spain and Portingale.
There will he give his Crown to Balthazar,
And make a Queen of Bel-imperia.

King. Brother, how like you this our Vice-roies love?

Cast. No doubt my Lord, it is an argument
Of honorable care to keep his friend,
And wondrous zeal to Balthazar his son?
Nor am I least indebted to his graee,
That bends his liking to my daughter thus.

Em. Now last (dread Lord) heer^ has his highness sent,
Although he send not that his Son return,
His ransom due to Don Horatio.

Hiero. Horatio, who calls Horatio?

King. And well remembered, thank his Majesty.
Here, see it given to Horatio.

Hiero. Justice, O justice, justice, gentle King.

King. Who is that? Hieronimo?

Hiero. Justice, O justice, O my son, my son,
My Son whom naught can ransom or redeem^.

Lor. Hieronimo, you are not well aduisde.

Hiero. A way Lorenzo hinder me no more,
For thou have made me bankrupt of my bliss:
Give me my son, you shall not ransom him.
Away, i will rip the bowels of the earth,

He diggeth with his dagger. And Ferrie over to th'Elizian plains,
And bring my Son to show his deadly wounds.
Stand from about me, i will make a pickaxe of my poniard,
And here surrender up my Marshalship:
For I Will go marshall up the feends in hell,
To be avenged on you all for this.
King. What means this outrage? will none of you restrain his fury?

Hiero. Nay soft and fair, you shall not need to strive,
Needs must he go that the devils drive.
Exit.
King. What accident has hapt Hieronimo?
I have not seen him to demean him so.

Lor. My gracious Lord, he is with extreme pride,
Conceived of young Horatio his Son,
And covetous of having to himself,
The ransom of the young Prince Bal^hazar.
Distract and in a manner lunatic.

King. Believe me Nephew we are sorry fort,
This is the love that Fathers bear their sons:
But gentle brother, go give to him this gold,
The Princes ransom, let him have his due,
For what he has Hor^^^ shall not want,
Happily Hieronimo has need thereof.

Lor. But if he be thus helples^y distract,
It Is requisite his office be resignde,
And given to one of more discretion.

King. We shall increase his molanchollie so.
It Is best that we see further in it first:
Till when, our self will exempt the place.
And Brother, now bring in the Ambassador,
That he may be a witness of the match.
Twixt Balthazar and Bel-imperia.
And that we may prefixe a certain time.
Wherein the marriage shall be solemnized,
That we may have thy Lord the Viceroy here.

Em. Therein your highness highly shall content,
His Majesty, that longs to hear from hence.

King. On then, and hear you Lord Ambassador.

Ex^^^t. Enter Hieronim^ with a book in his hand. Vindicta mihi.
I, heaven will be revenged of every ill,
Nor will they suffer murder vnrepaide:
Then stay Hieronimo, attend their will,
For mortal men may not appoint their time.
Perscelus semper tuinm est sce^eri^us iter.
Strike, and strike home, where wrong is offered thee,
For evils unto ils conductors be.
And death's the worst of resolution.
For he that thinks with patienco to contend,
To quiet life, his life shall easily end.
Fata si mis^r^s iuuant habes salutem:
Fata si vitam negant, habes sepulchrum.
If destiny thy miseries do ease,
Then have thou health, and happy shall thou be:
If destiny deny thee life (...).
Yet shall thou be assured of a tomb:
If neither, yet let this thy comfort be,
Heaven covers him that has no burial,
And to conclude, I will revenge his death,
But how? not as the vulgar wits of men,
With open, but ineuitableils*
As by a secret, yet a certain mean,
Which under kindeship will be cloked best.
Wise men will take their opportunity,
Closely and safely fitting things to time:
But in extremes advantage has no time.
And therefore all times fit not for revenge:
Thus therefore will I res i am in unrest,
Dissembling quiet in unquietness,
Not seeming that I know their villainies:
That my simplicity may make them think,
That ignorantly I will letall slip:
For ignorance I wot, and ^ell they know,
(...) malorum iners est.
Nor ought auailes it me to menace them,
Who as a wintrie storm upon a plain,
Will bear me down with their nobility.
No, no, Hieronimo, thou must enjoin
Thine eyes to observation, and thy ^ung
To milder speeches, then thy spirit affoords,
Thy heart to patience, and thy hands to rest,
Thy Cappe to cutte^ie, and thy knee to bow,
Till to (...) thou know when, where, and how.
How now, what noise, what coile is that you keep?
A noise within. Enter a Servant. Ser. Here are a sort of poor Petitioners,
That are importunate and it shall please you sir,
That you should plead their cases to the King.

Hiero. That I should plead their several actions,
Why let them enter, and let me see them.
Enter three Citizens and an old Man.

1 So I tell you this for learning and for law,
There Is not any advocate in Spain,
That can prevail, or will take half the pain,
That he will in pursuit of equity.

Hiero. Come near you men that thus importune me,
Now must I bear a face of gravity,
For thus I used before my Marshalship,
To plead in causes as Corrigedor.
Come on sirs, what is the matter?

2 Sir an Action.

Hiero. Of Battery?

1 Mine of debt.

Hiero. Give place.

2 No sir, mine is an action of the case.

3 Mine an Eiectione firma by a Lease.

Hiero. Content you sirs, are you determined,
That I should plead your several actions?

1 I sir, and heeres my declaration,

2 And here is my band.

3 And here is my lease.

They give him paper: Hiero. But wherefore stands yon silly man so mute,
With mournful eyes and hands to heaven vprearde?
Come hither father, let me know thy cause.

Senex. O worthy sir, my cause but slightly known,
May move the hearts of warlike Myrmy dons,
And melt the Corsicke rocks with ruthful tears.

Hiero. Say Father, tell me what is thy suit?

Senex. No sir, could my woes
Give way unto my most distresfull words,
Then should I not in paper as you see,
With incke bewray, what blood began in me.

Hiero. What Is here? the humble supplication
Of Don Bazulto for his murdered son.

Senex. I Sir.

Hiero. No sir, it was my murdered son, oh my son.
My son, oh my son (...).
But mine, or thine, (...) be content.
Here, take my hand-kercher and wipe thine eyes,
Whiles wretched I, in thy mishaps may see,
The lively portraict of my dying self,
He draws out a bloody Napkin. O no, not this, Horatio this was thine,
And when I did it in thy dearest blood,
This was a token twixt thy soul and me,
That of thy death revenged I should be.
But here, take this, and this, what my purse?
I this and that, and all of them are thine,
For all as one are our extremeties.

1 Oh, see the kindenes of Hieronimo.

2 This gentleness shows him a Gentleman.

Hiero. See, see, oh see thy shame Hieronimo,
See here a loving Father to his son:
Behold the sorrows and the sad laments*
That he delivers for his sons dicease.
If loves effects so strives in lesser things,
If love enforce such moodes in meaner wits,
If love express such power in poor estates:
Hieronimo, When as a raging Sea,
Tossed with the wind and tide ore turnest then
The upper billows course of waves to keep,
Whilst lesser waters labor in the deep.
Then shamest thou not Hieronimo to neglect,
The sweet revenge of thy Horatio.
Though on this earth justice will not be found:
I Will down to hell and in this passion,
Knock at the dismal gates of Plutos Court,
Getting by force as once Alcides did,
A troop of furies and tormenting hagges,
To torture Don Lorenzo and the rest.
Yet least the triple headed porter should,
Deny my passage to the slimy strond:
The (...) Poet thou shall counterfeite:
Come on old Father be my Orphe^s,
And if thou can no notes upon the Harp,
Then sound the burden of thy fore hearts grief,
Till we do gain that Proserpine may grant,
Revenge on them that murdered my Son,
Then will I rent and tear them thus and thus,
Shiuering their limbs in pieces with my teeth.

Tear the Papers. 1 Oh sir my Declaration.

Exit Hieronimo and they after. 2 Save my bond.

Enter Hieronim^. 2 Save my bond.

3 Alas my lease, it cost me ten pound,
And you my Lord have torn the same.

Hiero. That can not be, I gave it never a wound,
Show me one drop of blood fall from the same:
How is it possible I should stay it then,
Tush no, run after, catch me if you can.

Exeunt all but the old man. Bazulto remains till Hieronimo enters again,
who staring him in the face speaks. Hiero. And art thou come Horatio from the
depth,
To ask for justice in this upper earth?
To tell thy Father thouart unrevenged,
To wring more tears from Isabellas eyes?
Whose lights are dimd with ouer-long laments.
Go back my son, complain to Eacus,
For heeres no justice, gentle boy be gone.
For justice is exiled from the earth:
Heronimo will bear thee company:
Thy mother cries on righteous Radamant,
For just revenge against the murderers.

Senex. Alas my L. whence spri^gs this troubled speech?

Hiero. But let me look on my (...):
Sweet boy how art thou changed in deaths black shade?
Had Proserpine no pity on thy youth?
But suffered thy fair crimson colored spring,
With withered winter to be blasted thus?
Horatio, thou art older then thy Father:
Ah ruthlesse Father, that favor thus transformess

B^. Ah my good Lord, I am not your young Son.

Hie. What, not my Son^e, thou then, a fury art,
Sent from the empty Kingdom of black night,
To summon me to make appearance:
Before grim Mynos and just Radamant.
To plague Hieronimo that is remiss,
And seeks not vengeance for Horatioes. death.

Ba. I am a grieved man and not a Ghost,
That came for justice for my murdered Son.

Hie. I, now I know thee, now thou namest my Son,
Thou art the lively image of my grief,
Within thy face, my sorrows I may see.
Thy eyes are gum'd with tears, thy cheeks are wan,
Thy forehead troubled, and thy muttring lips
Murmr sad words abruptly broken off,
By force of windy sighs thy spirit breathes,
And all this sorrow rises for thy Son:
And self same sorrow feel I for my Son.
Come in old man, thou shall to Izabell,
Lean on my arm, I thee, thou me shall stay,
And thou, and I, and she will sing a song:
Three parts in one, but all of discords framed,
Talk not of cords, but let us now be gone,
For with a cord Horatio was slain.

Exeunt. Enter King of Spain, the Duke, Viceroy, and Lorenzo, Balthazar, Don
Pedro, and B^limperia. King. Go Brother it is the Duke of Castiles cause,
salute the Vice. roy in our name.


Casti^^c. I go.

Vice. Go forth Don Pedro for thy Nephews sake,
And greet the Duke of Castile.

Pedro. It shall be so.

King. And now to meet these Portaguise,
For as we now are, so sometimes were these,
Kings and commanders of the western Indies.
Welcome brave Viceroy to the Court of Spain,
And welcome all his honorable train:
It Is not unknown to us, for why you come,
Or have so kingly crossed the Seas:
Suffiseth it in this we note the troth,
And more then common love you lend to us.
So is it that mine honorable Ne^ce,
For it beseemes us now that it be known,
Already is betrothed to Bal^hazar:
And by appointment and our condiscent,
To morrow are they to be married.
To this intent we entertain thy self,
Thy followers, their pleasure, and our peace:
Speak men of Portingale, shall it be so?
If I, say so: if not, say flatly no.

Vice. Renowned King, I come not as thou think*
With doubtful followers, unresolved men,
But such as have upon thine articles,
Confirmed thy motion and contented me.
Know sovereign, I come to solemnize
The marriage of thy beloved Niece,
Fair Bel-imperia with my Balthazar.
With thee my Son, whom since I live to see*
Here take my Crown, I give it her and thee,
And let me live a solitary life,
In ceaselesse prayers,
To think how strangely heaven has thee preserved.

King, See brother, see, how nature strives in him,
Come worthy Viceroy and accompany
Thy friend, with thine extremities:
A place more private fits this princely mood.

Vice. Or here or where your highness thinks it good.

Exeunt all but Cas^ and Lor. Cas. Nay stay Lo^enzo, let me talk with you,
See thou this entertainment of th^se Kings?

Lor. I do my Lord, and joy to see the same.

Cas. And know thou why this meeting is?

Lor. For her my Lord, whom Bal^haz^r does love,
And to confirm their promised marriage.

Cas. She is thy Sister?

Lor. Who Bel-imprria, I my gracious Lord,
And this is the day, that I have longd so happily to see.

Cas. Thou would be loath that any fa^lt of thine,
Should intercept her in her happiness.

Lor. Heavens will not let L^renzo err so much,

Cas. Why then Lorenzo listen to my words:
It is suspected and reported too,
That thou Lorenzo wrongst Hieronimo.
And in his suits toward his Majesty,
Still keepst him back, and seeks to cross his suit.

Lor. That I my Lord?

Cas. I tell thee Son my self have heard it said,
When to my sorrow I have been ashamed
To answer for thee, though thou art my son,
Lorenzo, know thou not the common love,
And kindenes that Hieronimo has wone,
By his deserts within the Court of Spain?
Or see thou not the K. my brothers care,
In his behalf, and to procure his health?
Lorenzo, should thou thwart his passions,
And he exclaim against thee to the King,
What honor were in this assembly,
Or what a scandale were among the Kings,
To hear Hieronimo exclaim on thee.
Tell me, and look thou tell me truly too,
Whence grows the ground of this report in Court.

Lor. My L. it lies not in Lorenzos power*
To stop the vulgar liberal of their tongues:
A small advantage makes a water breach,
And no man lives that long contenteth all.

Cas. My self have seen thee busy to keep back,
Him and his supplications from the King.

Lor. Your self my L. has seen his passions,
That ill beseemde the presence of a King,
And for I pitied him in his distress,
I held him thence with kind and courteous words,
As free from malice to Hieronimo,
As to my soul my Lord.

Cas. Hieronimo my son, mistakes thee then,

Lor. My gracious Father, believe me so he does,
But what is a silly man distract in mind*
To think upon the murder of his son:
Alas* how easy is it for him to err?
But for his satisfaction and the worlds,
Twere good my L. that Hieronimo and I,
Were reconcilde, if he misconster me.

Cas. Lorenzo thou have said, it shall be so,
Go one of you and call Hieronimo.

Enter Balthazar and B^l-imperia. Bal. Come Bel-imperie, Balthazars content,
My sorrows ease and sovereign of my bliss,
Since heaven has or dainde thee to be mine:
Disperce those clouds and melancholy looks,
And clear them up with those thy Sun bright eyes,
Wherein my hope and heavens fai^e beauty lies.

Bell. My looks my Lord, are fitting for my love,
Which new begun, can show* brighter yet.

Bal. New kindled flames should burn as morning Sun.

Bell. But not too fast, least heat and all be done.
I see my Lord my Father.

Bal. Truce my love, I will go salute him.

Cas. Welcome Balthazar, welcome brave Princ^,
The pledge of Castiles peace:
And welcome Bel-imperia, how now girl?
Wh^ come thou sadly to salute us thus?
Content thy self for I am satisfied,
It is not now as when Andrea lived,
We have forgotten and forgiven that,
And thou art graced with a happier love,
But Balthazar here comes Hieronimo.
I Will have a word with him.

Enter Hieronimo and a Servant. Hiero. And where is the Duke?

Ser. yonder.

Hiero. Even so: what new device have they devised tro?
Pocas Palabras, mild as the Lamb,
Is It I will be revenged? no, I am not the man.

Cas. Welcome Hieronimo.

Lor. Welcome Hieronimo.

Bal. Welcome Hieronimo.

Hiero. My Lords I thank you for Horatio.

Cas. Hieronimo, the reason that I sent
To speak with you, is this.

Hiero. What, so short?
Then i will be gone, I thank you fort:

Cas. Nay, stay Hieronimo, go call him son.

Hieronimo, my father craves a word with you.

Hiero. With me sir? why my L. I thought you had done.

Lor. No, would he had.

Ca^. Hieronimo, I hear you find your self agreeued at my Son,
Because you have not access unto the K^ing,
And say it is he that intercepts your suits.

Hiero. Why, is not this a miserable thing my Lord?

Cas. Hieronimo, I hope you have no cause,
And would be loath that one of your deserts,
Should once have reason to suspect my Son,
Considering how I think of you my self.

Hiero. Your son Lorenzo, whom, my noble Lord?
The hope of Spain, mine honorable friend?
Grant me the combat of them, if they dare.

Draws out his sword. I Will meet him face to sace to tell me so.
These be the scandalous reports of such,
As loves not me, and hate my Lord too much.
Should I suspect Lorenzo would prevent,
Or cross my suit, that loved my Son so well.
My Lord, I am ashamed it should be said.
Lor. Hieronimo, I never gave you cause.

Hero. My good Lord, I know you did not.

Cas. There then pause, and for the satisfaction of the world,
Hieronimo frequent my homely house,
The Duke of Castile Ciprians ancient seat,
And when thou will, use me, my son, and it:
But here before Prince Balthazar and me,
Embrace each other, and be perfect friends.

Hiero. I marry my Lord, and shall:
Friends (quoth he) see, I Will be friends with you all.
Specially with you my lovely Lord,
For diverse causes it is sit for us,
That we be friends, the world is suspicious,
And men may think what we imagine not.

Bal. Why this is freendly done Hieronimo.

Lor. And that I hope old grudges are forgot.

Hiero. What else, it were a shame it shonld not be so.

Cas. Come on Hieronimo at my request,
Let us entreat your company to day.

Exeunt. Hiero. Yor Lordships to command,
Pha: keep your way.

Mi. Chi m^fa? Pui Correzza Che non sule
Tradito viha otrade vule.
Exit.
Enter Ghoast and Revenge. Ghost. Awake Erictha, Cerberus awake,
Solicit Pluto gentle Pro^erpine,
To combat Achinon and Ericus in hell.
For near by Stix and Phlegeton:
Nor ferried Caron to the fiery lak^s,
Such fearful sights, as poor Andrea se^?
Re^enge awake.

Revenge. Awake, for why?

Ghost. Awake Revenge, for thou art ill aduisde,
Th^sleepe, away, what, thou art warnd to watch.

Revenge. Content thy self, and do not trouble me.

Ghost. Awake Revenge, if love as love has had,
Have yet the power or preuailance in hell,
Hieronimo with Lorenzo is ioynde in league,
And intercepts our passage to revenge:
Awake Revenge, or we are woe degone.

Revenge. Thus worldlings ground what they have dreamd upon,
Content thy self Andrea, though I sleep,
Yet is my mood soliciting their souls,
Suffices thee that poor Hieronimo,
Cannot forget his son Horatio.
Nor dies Revenge although he sleep a while,
For in unquiet, quietness is faind:
And slumbring is a common worldly wile,
Behold Andrea for an instance how,
Revenge has slept, and then imagine thou,
What it is to be subject to destiny.

Enter a dumme show. Ghost. Awake Revenge, reveal this mystery.

Revenge. The two first the nuptial Torches boar,
As brightly burning as the mid-daies sun:
But after them does Himen hie as fast,
Clothed in ^able, and a Saffron robe,
And blows them out, and quenches them with blood,
As discontent that things continue so.

Ghost. Suffices me thy meanings understood,
And thanks to thee and those infernal powers,
That will not tolerate a Lovers woe,
Rest thee for I will sit to see the rest.

Revenge. Then argue not for thou have thy request.

Exeunt. Actus Quartus.
Enter Bel-imperia and Hier^nimo. Bel-imperia. IS this the love thou bearst
Horatio?
Is this the kindness that thou counterfeits,
Are these the fruits of thine incessant tears?
Hieronimo, are these thy passions?
Thy protestations, and thy deep laments,
That thou were wont to weary men withal.
O unkind Father, O deceitful world,
With what excuses can thou show thy self?
With what dishonor, and the hate of men,
From this dishonor and the hate of men:
Thus to neglect the loss and life of him,
Whom both my letters, and thine own belief,
Assures thee to be causles slaughtered.
Hieronimo, for shame Hieronimo:
Be not a History to after times,
Of such in gratitude unto thy Son.
Unhappy Mothers of such children then,
But monstrous Fathers, to forget so soon
The death of those, whom they with care and cost
Have tendered so, thus careless should be lost.
My self a stranger in respect of thee,
So loved his life, as still I wish their deaths,
Nor shall his death be vnreuengd by me.
Although I bear it out for fashions sake:
For here I swear in sight of heaven and earth,
Should thou neglect the love thou should retain,
And give it over and devise no more,
My self should send their hateful souls to hell,
That wrought his downfall with extremest death.

Hie. But may it be that Bel-imperia
Vows such revenge as she has daind to say:
Why then I see that heaven applies our drift,
And all the Saints do sit soliciting
For vengeance on those cursed murderers
Madame it is true, and now I find it so,
I found a letter, written in your name,
And in that letter, how Horatio died.
Pardon, O pardon Bel-imperia,
My fear and care in not believing it,
Nor think, I thoughtles think upon a mean,
To let his death be vnreveng'd at full,
And here I vow, so you but give consent,
And will conceal my resolution,
I will ere long determine of their deaths,
That causles thus have murderd my Son.

Bell. Hieronimo, I will consent, conceal,
And ought that may effect for thine avail,
Join with thee to revenge Horat^oes death.

Hier. On then, whatsoever I devise,
Let me entreat you grace my practices.
For why, the plots already in mine head,
Here they are.

Enter Balthazar and Lorenzo. B^l How now Hieronimo, what, courting Bel-imperi^*

Hiero. I my Lord, such courting as I promise you
She has my heart, but you my Lord have hers.

Lo^. But now Hieronimo or never we are to entreat your help.

Hie. My help, why my good Lords assure your selves of me.
For you have given me cause, I by my faith have you.

Bal. It pleased you at the entertainment of the Ambassador,
To grace the King so much as with a show,
Now were your study so well furnished,
As for the passing of the first nights sport,
To entertain my Father with the like:
Or any such like pleasing motion,
Assure your self it would content them well.

Hiero. Is this all?

Bal. I, this is all.

Hiero. Why then i will fit you, say no more.
When I was youg I gave my mind,
And plide my self to fruitles poetry:
Which though it profit the professor naught,
Yet is it passing pleasing to the world.

Lor. And how for that?

Hiero. Marry my good Lord thus.
And yet me thinks you are too quick with us.
When in Tolledo there I studied,
It was my chance to write a tragedy,
See here my Lords.
He shows them a book. Which long forgot, I found this other day,
Now would your Lordships favor me so much,
As but to grace me with your acting it,
I mean each one of you to play a part,
Assure you it will prove most passing strange,
And wondrous plausible to that assembly.

Bal. What would you have us play a Tragedy?

Hiero. Why Nero thought it no disparagement,
And Kings and Emperors have taken delight,
To make experience of their wits in plays?

Lor. Nay be not angry good Hieronimo,
The Prince but asked a question.

Bal. In faith Hieronimo and you be in earnest,
I Will make one.

Lor. And I another.

Hiero. Now my good Lord, could you intrear,
Your Sister Bel-imperia to make one,
For what is a play without a woman in it?

Bell. Little entreaty shall serve me Hieronomo,
For I must needs be employed in your play.

Hiero. Why this is well, I tell you Lordings,
It was determined to have been acted,
By Gentlemen and scholars too,
Such as could tell what to speak.

Bal. And now it shall be plaide by Princes and Courtiers
such as can tell how to speak:
If as it is our Country manner,
You will but let us know the argument.

Hiero. That shall I roundly: the Cronicles of Spain
Record this written of a Knight of Rodes,
He was betrothed and wedded at the length,
To one Perseda an Italian dame.
Whose beauty ravished all that her beheld,
Especially the soul of Soliman,
Who at the marriage way the cheifest guest.
By sundry means sought Soliman to win,
Persedas love, and could not gain the same.
Then began he break his passions to a friend,
One of his Bashawes whom he held full dear,
Her had this Bashaw long solicited,
And saw she was not otherwise to be won,
But by her husbands death this Knight of Rodes.
Whom presently by treachery he slew,
She stirde with an exceeding hate therefore,
As cause of this slew Soliman.
And to escape the Bashawes tirannie,
Did stab her self, and this the Tragedy.

Lor. O excellent.

Bell. But say Hieronimo what then became of him
That was the Bashaw?

Hiero. Marry thus, moved with remorse of his misdeeds
Ran to a mountain top and hung himself.

Bal. But which of us is to perform that part,

Hiero. O, that will I my Lords, make no doubt of it*
I Will play the murderer I warrant you,
For I already have conceited that.

Bal. And what shall I.

Hiero. Great Soliman the Turkish Emperor.

Lor. And I.

Hiero. Erastus the Knight of Rhodes,

Bell. And I.

Hiero. Perseda, chaste and resolute.
And here my Lords are several abstracts drawn,
For each of you to note your parts,
And act it as occasion's offered you.
You must provide a turkish cappe,
A black mustacio and a fauchion.
Gives a paper to Bal. You with a cross like to a Knight of Rhodes.
Gives another to Lor. And Madame, you must attire your self,
He gives Bell. another. Like Phoeb^, Flora, or the huntresse,
Which to your discretion shall seem best.
And as for me my Lords I Will look to one,
And with the ransom that the Viceroy sent,
So furnish and perform this tragedy,
As all the world shall say Hieronimo,
Was liberal in gracing of it so.

Bal. Hieronimo, me thinks a Comedy were better.

Hiero. A Comedy, fie, comedies are fit for common wits
But to present a Kingly troop withal,
Give me a stately written Tragedy.
Tragedia cother nato, fitting Kings,
Containing matter, and not common things.
My Lords, all this must be performed,
As ^itting for the first nights reuelling.
The Italian Tragedian^ were so sharp of wit,
That in one hours meditation,
They would perform any thing in action.

Lor. And well it may, for I have seen the like
In Paris, among the French Tragedians.

Hiero. In Paris, mas and well remembered,
There Is one thing more that rests for us to do.

Bal. What Is that Hieronimo forget not any thing.

Hiero. Each one of us must act his part,
In unknown languages,
That it may breed the more variety.
As you my Lord in Latin, I in Greek,
You in Italian, and for because I know,
That Bel-imperia has practiced the French,
In courtly French shall all her phraises be.

Bell. You mean to try my cunning then Hieronimo.

Bal. But this will be a mere confusion,
And hardly shall we all be understood.

Hiero. It must be so, for the conclusion
Shall prove the invention, and all was good:
And I my self in an Oration,
That I will have there behind a curtain,
And with a strange and wondrous show besides:
Assure your self shall make the matter known.
And all shall be concluded in one Scene,
For there is no pleasure taken in tediousnes.

Bal. How like you this?

Lor. Why thus my Lord we must resolve,
To soothe his humors up.

Bal. On then Hieronimo, farewell till soon.

Hiero. You Will plie this geere.

Lor. I warrant you.

Exeunt all but Hiero. Hiero. Why so, now shall I see the fall of Babylon,
Wrought by the heavens in this confusion.
And if the world like not this tragedy,
Hard is the hap of old Hieronimo.
Exit. Enter Isabella with a weapon. Tell me no more, O monstrous homicides,
Since neither piety nor pity moves
The King to justice or compassion:
I will revenge my self upon this place,
Where thus they murdered my beloved Son.
She cuts down the Arbor. Down with these branches and th^se loathsome bows,
Of this unfortunate and fatal pine.
Down with them Isabella, ^ent them up,
And burn the roots from whence the rest is sprung:
I will not leave a root, a stalk, a tree,
A bow, a branch, a blossom, nor a leaf,
No, not an herb within this garden Plot.
Accursed complot of my misery,
Fruitless for ever may this garden be.
Barren the earth, and blislesse whosoever,
Immagines not to keep it vnmanurde:
An Eastern wind comixt with noisome aires,
Shall blast the plants and the young saplings,
The earth with Serpents shalb^ ^^stered,
And passengers for fear to be infect,
Shall stand aloof, and looking at it, tell
There murdered did the son of Isabell.
I here he did, and here I him embrace,
See where his Ghoast solicites with his wounds,
Revenge on her that should revenge his death,
Hieronimo make haste to see thy son,
For sorrow and despair has scited me,
To hear Horatio plead with Radamant,
Make haste, Hieronimo to hold excusde.
Thy negligence in pursuit of their deaths,
Whose hateful wrath bereu'd him of his breath*
Ah nay, thou do delay their deaths,
Forgiues the murderers of thy noble son,
And none but I bestirre me to no end,
And as I curse this tree from further fruit,
So shall my womb be cursed for his sake,
And with this weapon will I wound the breast,
The haples breast that gave Horatio suck.

She stabs her self. Enter Hier^nimo, he knocks up the curtain. Enter the
Duke of Castile. Cas. How now Hieroni^o where is your fellows,
That you take all this pain?

Hiero. O sir, it is for the Authors credit,
To look that all things may go well:
But good my Lord let me entreat your grace,
To give the King the coppie of the play:
This is the argument of what we show.

Cas, I will Hieronimo.

Hiero. One thing more my good Lord.

Cas. What Is that?

Hiero. Let me entreat your grace,
That when the train are past into the gallerie,
You would vouchsafe ^o throw me down the key.

Cas. I will Hieronimo.
Exit Cas.
Hiero. What are you ready Balthazar?
Bring a chair and a cushion for the King.
Enter Balthazar with a Chair. Well done Balthazar, hang up the title.
Our scene is Rhodes, what is your beard on?

Bal. Half on, the other is in my hand.

Hiero. Dispatch for shame, are you so long?
Exit Balthazar. Bethink thy self Hieronimo,
Recall thy wits, recompt thy former wrongs,
Thou have received by murder of thy son.
And lastly, not least, how Isabell,
Once his mother and thy dearest wife:
All woe begone for him has slain her self.
Behoues thee then Hieronimo to be revenged,
The plot is laid of dire revenge,
On then Hieronimo pursue revenge,
For nothing wants but acting of revenge.
Exit Hieronimo.
Enter Spanish King, Viceroy, the Duke of Castile, and their train. King. Now
Viceroy, shall we see the Tragedy,
Of Soliman the Turkish Emperor:
Performde of pleasure by your Son the Prince,
My Nephew Don Lorenzo, and my Niece.

Vice. Who, Bel-imperi^?

King. I, and Hieronimo our Marshall.
At whose request they deine to do it themselves.
These be our pastimes in the Court of Spain.
Here brother, you shall be the booke-keeper.
This is the argument of that they show.

He gives him a book. Gentlemen, this play of Hieronimo in sundry Languages,
was thought good to be set down in English more largely, for the easier
understanding to every public Reader. Enter Balthazar, Bel-imperia, and
Hieronimo. Balthazar. BAshaw, that Rhodes is ours, yield heavens the honor,
And holy Mahomet our sacred Prophet:
And be thou graced with every excelence,
That Soliman can give, or thou desire.
But thy desert in conquering Rhodes is less,
Then in reserving this fair Christian Nymph
Perseda, blisfull lamp of Excellence:
Whose eyes compel like powerful Adamant,
The warlike heart of Soliman to wait.

King. See Viceroy, that is Balt^azar your Son,
That represents the Emperor Solomon:
How well he acts his amorous passion.

Vice. I Bel-imperia has taught him that.

Castile. That Is because his mind tons all on Bel-imperia

Hiero. What ever joy earth yields betide your Meiestie.

Balt. Earth yields no joy without Persedaes love.

Hiero. Let then Perseda on your grace attend.

Balt. She shall not wait on me, but I on her,
Drawn by the influence of her lights, I yield.
But let my friend the Rhodian knight come forth,
Erasto, dearer then my life to me,
That he may see Perseda my beloved.

Enter Erast^. King. Here comes Lorenzo, look up on the plot,
And tell me brother what part plays he?

Bell. Ah my Erasto, welcome to Perseda.

Lo. Thrice happy is Erasto, that thou live,
Rhodes loss is nothing to Erastoes joy:
Since his Perseda lives, his life suruiues.

Balt. Ah Bashaw, here is love between Erast^
And fair Perseda sovereign of my soul.

Hiero. Remove Erasto mighty Solomon,
And then Perseda will be quickly won.

Balt. Erasto is my friend, and while he lives,
Perseda never will remove her love.

Hiero. Let not Erasto live, to grieve great Soliman.

Balt. Dear is Erasto in our Princly eye.

Hiero. But if he be your rival, let him die.

Balt. Why let him die, so love commands me.
Yet grieve I that Erasto should so die.

Hiero. Erasto, Solomon saluteth thee,
And lets thee wit by me his highness will:
Which is, thou should be thus imploid.

Stab ^im. Bell. Ay me Erasto, see Solomon Erastoes slain.

Balt. Yet lives Solomon to comfort thee.
Fair Queen of beauty, let not favor die,
But with a gracious eye behold his grief,
That with Persedaes beauty is encreast.
If by Persedaes grief be not releast.

Bell. Tyrant, desist soliciting vain suits,
Relentles are mine ears to thy laments,
As thy butcher is pitiless and base,
Which seazd on my Erasto, harmless knight.
Yet by thy power thou think to command,
And to thy power Perseda does obey:
But were she able, thus she would revenge
Thy treacheries on thee ignoble Prince:
Stab him. And on herself she would be thus reuengd

Stab herself. King. Well said old Marshal, this was bravely done.

Hiero. But Bel-imperia plays Perseda well.

Vice. were this in earnest Bel-imperia,
You would be better to my Son then so.

King. But now what follows for Hieronimo?

Hiero, Marry this follows for Hieronimo.
Here break we off our sundry languages,
And thus conclude I in our vulgar tung.
Happily you think, but bootles are your thoughts,
That this is fabulously counterfeit,
And that we do as all Tragedians do.
To die to day, for (fashioning our scene)
The death of Ajax, or some Roman peer,
And in a minute starting up again,
Revive to please to morrowes audience.
No Princes, know I am Hieronimo,
The hopeles Father of a haples Son,
Whose tung is tuned to tell his latest tale,
Not to excuse gross errors in the play,
I see your looks urge instance of these words,
Behold the reason urging me to this,
Shows his dead son. See here my show, look on this spectacle:
Here lay my hope, and here my hope has end:
Here lay my heart, and here my heart was slain:
Here lay my treasure, here my treasure lost:
Here lay my bliss, and here my bliss bereft.
But hope, heart, treasure, joy, and bliss:
All fled, faild, died, yea all decaide with this.
From forth these wounds came breath that gave me life,
They murdered me that made these fatal marks:
The cause was love, whence grew this mortal hate*
The hate, Lorenzo and young Balthazar:
The love, my son to Bel-imperia.
But night the couerer of accursed crimes,
With pitchie silence hushed these traitors harms,
And lent them leave, for they had sorted leisure,
To take advantage in my Garden plot,
Upon my Son, my dear Horatio:
There merciless they butcherd up my boy,
In black dark night, to pale dim cruel death.
He shrikes, I heard, and yet me thinks I hear,
His dismal outcry echo in the air:
With soonest speed I hasted to the noise,
Where hanging on a tree, I found my son.
Through girt with wounds, and slaughtred as you see,
And grieved I (think you) at this spectacle?
Speak Portaguise, whose loss resembles mine,
If thou can weep upon thy Balthazar,
It Is like I wailde for my Horatio.
And you my L. whose reconciled son,
Marched in a net, and thought him self unseen,
And rated me for brainsicke lunacie,
With God amend that mad Hieronimo,
How can you brook our plays catastrophe?
And here behold this bloody hand-kercher*
Which at Horatios death I weeping dipped,
Within the river of his bleeding wounds.
It as propitious, see I have reserved,
And never has it left my bloody heart,
Soliciting remembrance of my vow.
With these, O these accursed murderers,
Which now performed, my heart is satisfied.
And to this end the Bashaw I became,
That might revenge me on Lorenzos life,
Who therefore was appointed to the part,
And was to represent the Knight of Rhodes,
That I might kill him more conveniently.
So Viceroy was this Balthazar thy Son,
That Soliman, which Bel-imperia,
In person of Perseda murdered:
Solie appointed to that tragic part,
That she might sl^y him that offtended her.
Poor Bel-imperia ^ist her part in this,
For though the story says she should have died,
Yet I of kindenes, and of care to her,
Did otherwise determine of her end.
But love of him whom they did hate too much,
Did urge her resolution to be such.
And Princes now behold Hieronimo,
Author and actor in this Tragedy:
Bearing his latest fortune in his fist:
And will as resolute conclude his part,
As any of the Actors gone before.
And Gentles, thus I end my play,
Urge no more words, I have no more to say.

He runs to hang himself. King. O hearken Viceroy, hold Hieronimo,
Brother, my Nephew, and thy Son are slain.

Vice. We are betraide, my Balthazar is slain,
Break open the doors, run save Hieronimo.
Hieronimo, do but inform the King of these events,
Ypon mine honor thou shall have no harm.

Hiero. Viceroy, I will not trust thee with my life,
Which I this day have offered to my Son:
Accursed wretch, why staiest thou him that was resolved to die?

King. Speak traitor, damned, bloody murderer speak,
For now I have thee I will make thee speak:
Why have thou done this undeserving deed?

Vico. Why have thou murdered my Balthazar?

Cas. Why have thou butchered both my children thus*

Hiero. O good words, as dear to me was my Horatio,
As yours, or yours, or yours my L. to you.
My guiltles Son was by Lorenzo slain,
And by Lorenzo and that Balthazar,
Am I at last revenged thoroughly.
Upon whose souls may heavens be yet avenged,
With greater far then these afflictions.

Cas. But who were thy confederates in this?

Vice. That was thy daughter Bel-imperia.
For by her hand my Bal^hazar was slain
I saw her stab him.

King. Why speak thou not?

Hiero. What lesser liberty can Kings afford
Then harmeles silence? then afford it me:
Suffices I may not, nor I will not tell thee.

King. Fetch forth the tortures.
Traitor as thou art, i will make thee tell.

Hiero. Indeed thou may torment me as his wretched Son,
Has done in murdring my Horatio.
But never shall thou force me to reveal,
The thing which I have vowed inuiolate:
And therefore in despite of all thy threats,
Pleased with their deaths, and easde with their revenge:
First take my tung, and afterward my heart.

King. O monstrous resolution of a wretch,
See Viceroy, he has bitten forth his tung,
Rather then to reveal what we requirde.

Cas Yet can he write.

King. And if in this he satisfy us not,
We will devise the'xtreamest kind of death,
That ever was invented for a wretch.
Then he makes signs for a knife to mend his pen.

Cas. O he would have a knife to mend his Pen.

Vice. Here, and advise thee that thou write the troth,
Look to my brother, save Hieronimo.
He with a knife stabs the Duke and himself.

King. What age has ever heard such monstrous deeds?
My brother and the whole succeeding hope,
That Spain expected after my discease,
Go bear his body hence that we may mourn,
The loss of our beloved brothers death.
That he may be entom'd what ere befall,
I am the next, the nearest, last of all.

Vice. And thou Don Pedro do the like for us,
Take up our haples son untimely slain:
Set me with him, and he with woeful me,
Upon the maine mast of a ship vnmand,
And let the wind and tide hall me along,
To Sallas barking and untamed grief:
Or to the loath some poole of Acheron,
To weep my want for my sweet Balthazar,
Spain has no refuge for a Portingale.

The Trumpets sound a dead march, the King of Spain mourning after his
brothers body, and the King of Portingale bearing the body of his Son. Enter
Ghoast and Revenge. Ghoast. I, now my hopes have end in their effects,
When blood and sorrow finnish my desires:
Horatio murdered in his Fathers bower,
Vilde Serberine by Pedringano slain,
False Pedringano hanged by quaint device,
Fair Isabella by her self misdone,
Prince Balthazar by Bel-imperia stabd,
The Duke of Castile and his wicked Son,
Both done to death by old Hieronimo.
My Bel-imperia fallen as Dido fell,
And good Hieronimo slain by himself:
I these were spectacles to please my soul.
Now will I beg at lovely Proserpine,
That by the virtue of her Princely doom,
I may consort my friends in pleasing sort,
And on my foes wo^ke (...) and sharp revenge.
I Will lead my friend H^ratio through those feeldes,
Where never dying wars are still i^^^de.
I Will lead fair Isabella to that train,
Where pity weeps but never feels pain.
I Will lead my Bel-imperia to those ^oyes,
That vestal Virgins, and fair Queens possess,
I Will lead Hieronimo where Orpheus plays,
Adding sweet pleasure to eternal days.
But say Revenge, for thou must help or none,
Against the rest how shall my hate be shown?

Revenge. This hand shall hale them down to deepest hell,
Where none but furies, bugs and tortures dwell.

Ghoast. Then sweet Revenge do this at my request,
Let me be judge and doom them to unrest.
Let loose poor Titius from the vultures gripe,
And let Don Ciprian supply his room,
Place Don Lorenzo on Ixions wheel,
And let the lovers endless pains surcease:
Juno forgets old wrath and graunts him ease.
Hang Balthazar about Chineras neck,
And let him there be wai^e his bloody love,
Repining at our joys that are above.
Let Serberine go roll the fatal stone,
And take from Siciphus his endless moan.
False Pedringaco for his treachery,
Let him be dragde through boiling Acheron,
And there live dying still in endless flames,
Blaspheming Gods and all their holy names.

Revenge. Then haste we down to meet thy friends and foes,
To place thy friends in ease, the rest in woes.
For here, though death has end their misery,
I Will there begin their endless Tragedy.

Exeunt. FINIS.

