THE APPELLATION OF JOHN KNOXE FROM the cruel and most iniust sentence
pronounced against him by the false bishops and clergy of Scotland, with his
supplication and exhortation to the nobility, estates, and co^munaltie of the
same realm.

Printed at GENEVA, M.D.LVIII.

TO THE NOBILITY AND ESTAtes of Scotland John Knoxe wishes grace, mercy, and
peace from God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ with the spirit of righteous
judgment.
IT is not only the love of life temporal (right honorable) neither yet the
fear of corporal death, that moves me at this present to expone unto you the
injuries done against me, and to crave of you, as of laufull powers by God
appointed, redress of the same, but partly it proceeds from that reverence
which every man owes to Godds eternal truth, Every man oght to confess and
reverence gods truth.
and partly from a love which I bear to your salvation, and to the salvation
of my brethren abused in that realm by such, as have no fear of God before
their eyes. It has pleased God of his infinite mercy, not only so to
illuminate the eyes of my mind, and so to tuche my dull heart, that clearly I
se, and by his grace vnfeanedly believe, that their is no other name given to
men under the heaven, Act. 4.
in which salvation consists, save the name of Jesus alone,

Who by that sacrifice which he did once offer upon the cross, Hebr. 10.
has sanctified for ever those that shall enherite the kingdom promised: but
also it has pleased him of his superaboundant grace, to make and appointe me
most wretched of many thousands a witness, minister and preacher of the same
doctrine: the sum whereof I did not spare to communicate with my brethren
being with them in the realm of Scotland in the year 1556, 1 Cor. 3.
because I know my self to be a steward and that accounts of the tale^t
committed to my charge shall be required by him who will admit no vain excuse
which fearful men pretend. Mat. 25.
I did therefore (as God did minister) during the time I was conversant with
them (God is record and witness) truly and syncerly according to the gift
granted unto me, divide the word of salvation, teachinge all men to hate Syn,
which before God was and is so odious that none other sacrifice could
satisfy his justice except the death of his only son, and to magnify the
great mercies of our heavenly Father, John 3.
who did not spare the substance of his own glory but did give him to the
world to suffer the ignominious and cruel death of the cross, Romans 5, 8. 2.
Cor. 5.
by that means to reconcile his chosen children to him self: teaching further
what is the duty of such as do believe them selves purged by such a price from
their former filthiness. Romans 6.
To wit, Ephe. 4. 5
that they are bound to walk in the newnes of life fighting against the lusts
of the flesh and studyinge at all times to glorify God Ephe. 2.
by such good works as he has prepared his children to walk in.

In doctrine I did further affirm, so taught by my master Christ Jesus, Mat.
10.
that whosoever denies him, yea or is ashamed of him before this wicked
generation, him shall Christ Jesus deny, and of him shall he be ashame when he
shall appear in his majesty. And therefore I feared not to affirm that of
necessity it is, that such as hope for life everlasting avoid all
superstition, vain religion, and idolatry. Vain religion or idolatry.
Vain religion and idolatry I call, what soever is done in Gods service or
honor without the express commandment of his own word.

This doctrine did I believe to be so comfortable to Gods holy scriptures
that I thought, no creature could have been so impudent as to have damned any
point or article of the same. Yet nevertheless me, as an heritike, and this
doctrine as heriticall, have your falls bishops and ungodly clergy damned, A
sentence pronu^ced.
pronouncing against me a sentence of death, in testification whereof they have
burned a picture. Appellation from the same.
From which falls and cruel sentence, and from all judgment of that wicked
generation I make it known to your honors, that I appeal to a laufull and
general counsil, to such I mean, as the most ancient laws and canones do
approve to be holden, by such as whose manifest impiety is not to be reformed
in the same: The request of John Knoxe.
most humbly requiring of your honors, that, as God has appointed you princes
in that people, and by reason thereof requires of your hands the defense of
innoce^tes troubled in your dominion, in the mean time, and till the
controversies, that this day be in religion, be laufully decided, ye receive me
and such others, as most unjustly by those cruel beasts are persecuted, in
your defense and protection.

Your honors are not ignorant that it is not I alone, who does sustain this
cause against the pestilent generation of Papists, but that the most part of
Germany, The petition of Protestants.
the country of Heluetia, the king of Denmark, the nobility of Polonia,
together with many other Cities and Churches refromed, appeall from the
tyranny of that Antichrist, and most earnestly do call for a laufull and
general cou^sil, wherein may all controversies in religion be decided by the
authority of Gods most sacred word. And unto this same, as said is, do I
appeal yet once again, requiri^g of your honors to hold my simple and plain
appellation of no less value nor effect, then if it had been made with greater
circunsta^ce, solemnity, and ceremony, and that ye receive me calinge unto
you, as to the powers of God ordained, in your protection and defense against
the rage of tyrants, not to mentaine me in any iniquity, error, or falls
opinion, but to let me have such equity, as God by his word, ancient laws,
and determinations of most Godly counsils, grant to men accused or infamed.

The word of God will that no man shall die except he be found criminal and
worthy of death for offense committed, Deuteronomy. 17.
of the which he must be manifestly convicted by two or three witnesses.
Ancient laws do permit just defenses to such as be accused (be their crimes
never so horrible) and godly counsilles will that nether Bishop nor Person
ecclesiastical whatsoever accused of any crime shall sit in judgment,
consultation, or counsil, where the cause of such men, as do accuse them, The
petitions of John Knoxe.
is to be tried.

These things require I of your honors to be granted unto me: to wit, That
the doctrine which our adversaries condemn for haeresie may be tried by the
simple and plain word of God, that just defenses be admitted to us that sustain
the battle against this pestilent generation of Antichrist, and that they be
removed from judgment in our cause, saying that our accusation is not intended
against any one particular person, but against that hole kingdom which we
doubt not to prove to be a power usurped against God, Note well.
against his commandment and against the ordenance of Christ Jesus
established in his Church by his chief Apostles: Yea we doubt not to prove the
kingdom of the Pope to be the king dome and power of Antichrist. And therefore
my Lords I can not cease in the name of Christ Jesus to require of you that
the matter may come in examination, and that ye the estates of the realm by
your authority compel such as will be called bishops, not only to desist
from their cruel murdering of such as do study to promote gods glory in
detecting and disclosing the damnable impiety of that man of syn the Roman
Antechrist, but also that ye compel them to answer to such crimes as shall be
laid to their charge for not righteously instructing the flock committed to
their cares.

Answer
But here I know two things shall be doubted. The former: 1. to objections.
whether that my appellation is lawful and to be admitted seeing that I am
damned as an heritike: and secondarely whether your honors be bound to defend
such as call for your support in that case, 2
seeing that your bishops (who in matters of religion claim all authority to
appertain to them) have by their sentence allredy condemned me.

The one and the other I nothing doubt most clearly to prove. First that my
appellation is most Lawful and just: and secondarely that your honors can not
refuse to defend me thus calling for your aid, NOTE.
but that in so doing ye declare your selves rebellious to God, mentainers of
murderers and shedders of innocent blood.

How just cause I have by the civil law (as for their canon it is accursed of
God) The appellation is just and lawful.
to appeal from their unjust sentence my purpose is not to make long
discourse. Only I will touch the points which all men confess to be just
causes of appellation. First laufully could I not be sommoned by them being for
that time absent from their jurisdiction, charged with the preachi^g of
Christ's Eua^gill in a free city not subject to their tyranny.

Secondarely to me was no intimation made of their sommondes, but so secret
was their surmised malice that the copy of the sommondes being required was
denied.

Thirdly to the realm of Scotland could I have had no free nor sure access
being before exiled from the same by their unjust tyranny. And last to me they
nether could nor can be competent and indifferent judges, for that, before any
sommondes were raised against me, I had accused them by my lre^s published to
the queen dowagier, and had intended against them all crimes, offering my self
with hasard of life to prove the same, for the which they are not only
unworthy of ecclesiastical authority, but also of any sufferance within a
commune welthe professing Christ. This my accusation preceding their so^mo^des,
neither by the law of God, neither yet by the law of man can they be to me
competent judges till place be granted unto me ope^lie to prove my accusation
intended against them, and they be compelled to make answer as criminalls. For
I will plainly prove that not only bishops, but also Popes have been
removed from all authority and pronouncing of judgment till they have purged
them selves of accusations laid against them. Yea further I will prove that
bishops and Popes most justly have been deprived from all honors and
administration for smaller crimes then I have to charge the hole rabble of your
bishops.

But because this is not my chief ground I will stand content for this present
to show, Gods m^ssin may appeall from unjust sentences, and civil powers are
bound to admit them.
that lawful it is to Gods Prophets and to preachers of Christ Jesus to
appeall from the sentence and judgment of the visible church to the knolledge
of the temporal Magistrate, who by Gods law is bound to hear their causes,
and to defend them from tyranny.

The Prophet Jeremy was co^mma^ded by God to stand in the court of the house
of the Lord and to preach this sermon in effect. Ier. 26.
That Jerusalem should be distroyed and be exponed in opprobrie to all nations
of the earth, and that also that famous temple of God should be made desolate
like unto Sylo, because the priests, the Prophets, and the people did not
walk in the Law, which God had proposed unto the^, neither would they obey the
voices of the Prophets, whom God sent to call them to repentance.

For this sermon was Jeremy apprehended and a sentence of death was pronounced
against him and that by the priests, by the Prophets, and by the people,
which things being bruted in the ears of the Princes of Judah they passed up
from the kings house to the temple of the Lord, and sat down in judgment for
further knowledge of the cause. But the priests and Prophets continued in
their cruel sentence, which before they had pronounced saying, This man is
worthy of the death: for he has prophesied against this city as your ears
have hard. But Jeremy so moved by the holy Ghost, began his defense against
that their tyrannous sentence in these words. The Lord (says he) has sent
me to prophetie against this house, and against this city all the words which
you have hard. Now therefore make good your ways, and hear the voice of the
Lord your God, and then shall he repent of the evil which he has spoken
against you. As for me behold I am in your hands (so does he speak to the
Princes) do to me as you think good and righteous. Aduert.
Nevertheless know you this most assuredly, that if ye murder or sley me, ye
shall make your selves, this city, and the inhabitants of the same criminal
and gyltie of innocent blood. For of a truth the Lord has sent me to speak in
your ears all those words. The princes did absolve the Prophet whom the
preests had condemned.


Then the princes and the people (says the text) said, this man is not
worthy of death, for he has spoken to us in the name of the Lord our God. And
so after sum contention was the Prophet delivered from that danger. This
fact and history manefestly proves whatsoever before I have affirmed. To wit,
that it is Laufull for the servants of God to call for the help of the civil
magistrate against the se^te^ce of death if it be unjust, by whom soever it be
pronounced and also that the civil sword has power to repress the fury of
the preests and to absolve whom they have condemned. For the prophet of God
was damned by those who then only in earth were known to be the visible
church, to wit priests and prophets who the^ were in Jerusalem the
successors of Aaron to whom was given a charge to speak to the people in the
name of God, Deute. 17
and a precept given to the people to hear the law from their mouths, to the
which if any should be rebellious or i^obedie^t he should die the death without
mercy. These men I say thus auctorised by God, first did exco^municat Ierimie
for that he did preach other wise then did the common sort of prophets in
Jerusalem, and last apprehended him, as you have hard, pronouncing against him
this se^te^ce before written from the which nevertheless the prophet appealed,
that is sought help and defense against the same and that most earnestly did he
crave of the princes. For albeit he says, I am in your hands do with me as
ye think righteous, he does not contemn nor neglect his life as thoghe he
regarded not, what should become of him, but i^ those his words most
vehemently did he admonish the princes, and rulers of the people giving them
to understand what God should require of the^. The meaning of these words I
amin your hands, etc.
As he should say, You princes of Judah, and rulers of the people, to whom
appertains in differentlie to judge betwixt party and party, to justify
the just man and to condemn the malefactor, you have hard a sentence of death
pronounced against me by those, whose lips oght to speak no decept, because
they are sanctified and appointed by God him self to speak his law and to
pronounce judgment with equity, Deuteronomy. 17.
but as they have left the living God, Ierem. 1.
and have taught the people to follow vanity, Deu. 1. 10
so are they beco^med mortal ennemies to all Gods true servants, of whom I am
one rebuking their iniquity, apostasy and defection from God which is the
only cause they seek my life. But a thing most contrary to all equity, law
and justice it is, that I a man sent of God to call them, this people, and you
again to the true service of God, from the which you are all declined, shall
suffer the death because that my ennemies do so pronounce sentence. I stand in
your presence, whom God has made princes, your power is above their tyranny,
before you do I expone my cause I am in your hands and can not resist to
suffer what ye think just. But lest that my lenity and patience should either
make you negligent in the defense of me in my just cause appeali^g to your
judgment, either yet encorrage my ennemies in seakinge my blood, this one
thing I dar not consile: That if you murder me, (which thing ye do if ye
defend me not) ye make not only my ennemies gyltie of my blood, but also your
selves and this hole city. By these words I say, it is evident, that the
prophet of God being damned to death by the priests and by the prophets of
the visible Church, did seek aid support and defense at the princes and
temporal magistrates, threatnyng his blood to be required of their hands, if
they by their auctorite did not defend him from the fury of his ennemies:
alleging also just causes of his appellation, and why he oght to have been
defended: to wit, that he was sent of God to rebuke their vices and defection
from God: The causes of his appellation and why he oght to have been defended.
that he taught no doctrine which God before had not pronounced in his Law:
that he desired their conversion to God, continually calling upon them to
walk in the ways which God had approved and therefore does he boldly crave of
the princes, as of Gods lieutena^tes to be defended from the blind rage and
tyranny of the preests, notwithstanding that they claimed to themselves
authority to judge in all matters of religion. And the same did he what time
he was cast in prison and thereafter was brought to the presence of king
Zedechias, after I say that he had defended his innoce^tie, affirmyng that he
neither had offended against the king, against his servants nor against the
people, at last he made intercession to the king for his life, saying,

But now my lord the king take heed, Ierem. 38.
I beseech thee let my prayer fall in to thy presence command me not to be
carried again in to the house of Jonathan the scribe, that I dye not there.

And the text witnesses that the king commanded the place of his imprysonment
to be changed. Whereof it is evident, that the prophet did ofter then once
seek help at the civil power and that first the princes, and thereafter the
king did acknowledge, that it appertained to their office to deliver him from
the iniust sentence, which was pronounced against him. if any think that
Jeremy did not appeall because he only declared the wrong done unto him, and
did but crave defense according to his innocence let the same man understand,
that none otherwise do I appeal from that falls and cruel sentence, Just cause
of appellation.
which your Bishops have pronounced against me. Neither yet can there be any
other just cause of appellation but innoce^cie hurt, or suspected to be hurt,
whether it be by ignorance of a judge, or by malice and corruption of those,
who under the title of justice do exercise tyra^nie. if I were a thief,
murderer, blasphemer, open adulterer, or any offender whom Gods word
commands to suffer for a crime committed, my appellation were vain and to
be rejected: but I being innocent, yea the doctrine which your Bishops have
condemned in me, being Gods eternal verity, have no less liberty to crave
your defense against that cruelty, then had the Prophet Jeremy to seek the
aid of the Princes and King of Judah. But this shall more plainly appear in the
fact of saint Paul, who after that he was apprehended in Jerusalem, Act. 22.
(...) and 25.
did first claim to the liberty of Romayne citeze^s for avoiding torment,
what time that the captayn would have examined him by questions: there after in
the cou^cile, where no rightious judgment was to be hoped for, he affirmed
that he was a Pharisie, and that he was accused of the resurrection of the
dead, and last in the presence of Festus he appealed from all knowledge and
judgment of the Priests at Jerusalem to the Emperor: of which last point,
because it does chefelie appertain to this my cause, I will somewhat speak.

After that Paul had diverse times been accused, as in the Acts of the
apostles is manifest, at the last the chief Priests and their faction came to
Cesarea with Festus the president, who presented to them Paul in judgment,
whom they accused of horrible crimes: which nevertheless they could not prove,
the Apostle defending that he had not offended neither agai^nst the Law,
neither against the Temple, neither yet against the Emperor.

But Festus willing to gratify the Jews, Act. 25.
said to Paul: Will thou go up to Jerusalem, and there be judged of these
things in my presence? But Paul said: I stand at the justice seat of the
Emperor, where it behooves me to be judged, I have done no injury to the
Jews as thou better know. If I have done any thing iniustly, or yet
committed crime worthy of death, I refuse not to die. But if there be nothing
of these things true, where of they accuse me, no man may give me to them: I
appeall to Caesar.

It may appear at the first sight that Paul did great injury to Festus the
judge, and to the hole order of the preesthode, who did hope greater equity in
a cruel tyrant then in all that session and learned company. Which thing no
dout Festus did understand, pronouncing these words: Have thou appealed to
Caesar? thou shall go to Caesar. As he would say, I as a man willing to
understand the truth before I pronounce sentence, have required of thee to go
to Jerusalem, where the learned of thine own nation may hear thy cause and
decerne in the same. The controversy standith in matters of religion. Thou art
accused as an apostatat from the Law, as a violator of the temple, and
transgressor of the traditions of their fathers: in which matters I am
ignorant, and therefore desire information by those, that be learned in the
same religion, whereof the question is. And yet do thou refuse so many godly
fathers to hear thy cause, and doestappeale to the Emperor: preferring him to
all our judgments, of no purpose belike, but to delay time. Thus I say it
might have appeared that Paul did not only injury to the judge and to the
Priests, but also that his cause was greatly to be suspected: partly for that
he did refuse the judgment of those that had most knowledge (as all men
supposed) of Gods will and religion: and partly because he appealed to the
Emperor, who then was at Rome far absent from Jerusalem, a man also ignorant
of God and ennemie to all virtue. But the Apostle considering the nature of his
ennemies, and what things they had intended against him, even from the first
day that he began freely to speak in the name of Christ, why Paul would admytt
none of the Leuiticall order to judge in his cause.
did not fear to appeal from them, and from the judge that would have
gratified them. They had professed the^ selves plain ennemies to Christ Jesus
and to his blessed Euangill, and had soght the death of Paul, yea even by
factio^s and treasonable co^spiracie: and therefore by no means would he admit
them either judges in his cause, either auditors of the same as Festus
required: Upon what reasons the appellation of Paul was grounded.
but grounding him self upon strong reasons, to wit, that he had not offended
the Jews, neither yet the Law, but that he was innocent, and therefore that no
judge oght to give him in the hands of his ennemies: grounding I say his
appellation upon these reasons, he neither regarded the displeasure of Festus,
neither yet the brute of the ignorant multitude, but boldly did appeal from
all cognition of them to the judgment of the Emperor, as said is. By these
two examples I dout not but your honors do understand, that lawful it is to
the servants of God oppressed by tyra^nie to seek remedy against the same, be
it by appellation from their sentence, or by imploring the help of civil
Magistrates. For what God has approved in Jeremy and Paul, he can condemn in
none that likewise be e^^reated. I might allege some histories of the
primative Church serving to the same purpose: as of Ambrose and Athanasius, of
whom the one would not be judged but at Millan, where that is doctrine was hard
of all his Church and received and approu^d by many: and the other would in no
wise give place to those cou^ciles, where he knew that me^ conspired against
the truth of God should sit in judgment and co^sultatione. But because the
Scriptures of God are my only fundation and assurance in all matters of weight
and importance, I have thought the two former testimonies sufficient, as well to
prove my appellation reasonable and just, as to declare to your honors that
with safe conscience ye can not refuse to admit the same. If any think it
arroga^cie or foolishnes in me to compare my self with Jeremy and Paul, let
the same man understand that as God is immutable, so is the verity of his
glorious Euangill of aequall dignity, The cause is to be regarded and not the
person.
whenever it is impugned, be the members suffering never so weak. What I
think touching mine own person, God shall reveal when the secrets of all
hearts shall be disclosed, and such as with whom I have been conversant, can
partly witness, what arroga^cie or pride they epsy in me. But touching the
doctrine and cause which that adulterous and pestilent generation of
Antichrists servants (who will be called Bishops amongst you) have condened in
me, I neither fear nor shame to confess and auow before man and Angel to be
the aeternall truth of the aeternall God. And in that case I dout not to
compare my self with any menbre in whom the truth has been impugned se^ce
the beginning. For as it was the truth which Jeremy did preach in these
words,

The Priests have not known me (says the Lord) but the pastors have
traitorously declined and fallen back from me. Ierem. 2.
The Prophets have prophesied in Baal, Ierem. 1.
and have gone after those things, which can not help. My people have left the
fontaine of living waters, and have dug to them selves pits, which can
contain no water:

As it was a truth that the pastors and watchmen in the days of Isaie were
becomed do^me dogs blind, ignorant, Esa. 56.
proud and auaricious And finally as it was a truth, that the Princes and the
Priests were murderers of Christ Jesus, Act. 3. and 4.
and cruel persecutors of his Apostles: so likewise it is a truth (and that
most infallible) that those that have condemned me (the hole rabble of the
papisticall clergy) have declyned from the true faith, Tim. 4.
have given ear to deceauable spirits and to doctrine of devils, are the
sterres fallen from the heaven to the earth, Jude 1.
are fontaines without water: 2. Pet. 2.
and finally are ennemies to Christ Jesus, deniers of his virtue, and horrible
blasphemours of his death and passion. And further as that visible Church had
no crime, where of justly they could accuse either the Prophets, either the
Apostles, except their doctrine only: so have not such as seek my blood other
crime to lay to my charge, except that I affirm, as alwais I offer to prove,
Let the cause be noted.
that the religion, which now is maintained by fire and sword, is no less
contrarious to the true religion taught and established by the Apostles, then
is darkness to light, or the Devil to God: and also that such as now do claim
the title and name of the Church ar no more the elect spouse of Christ Jesus,
then was the Synagoge of the Jews the true Church of God what time it
crucified Christ Jesus, damned his doctrine and persecuted his Apostles. And
therefore seeing that my battle is against the proud and cruel hypocrites of
this age, as that battaill of those most excellent instruments was against the false Prophets and malignant Church of their ages: neither ought any man think
it strange that I compare my self with them, with whom I sustain a common
cause, neither ought you my Lords judge your selves less addetted and bound
to me calling for your support, then did the Princes of Judah think the^ selves
bound to Jeremy, whom for that time they deliue red notwithstanding the
se^te^ce of death pronounced against him by the visible Church. And thus much
for the right of my appellatio^, which in the bowelles of Christ Jesus I
requier your honors not to esteem as a thing superfluous and vain, but that
ye admit it, and also accept me in your protection and defense, that by you
assured I may have access to my native country, which I never offended to the
end: that freely and openly in the presence of the hole realm I may give my
confession of all such points as this day be in controversy, and also that
you by your authority which ye have of God, compel such, as of long time have
blinded and deceived both your selves and the people, Answer to an objection or
dout.
to answer to such things as shall be laid to their charge. But lest that
sum dout remain, that I require more of you then you of conscience ar bound
to grant, in few words I hope to prove my petition to be such, as without
Gods heavy displeasure ye can not deny. The petition of John Knoxe.
My petition is, that ye, whom God has appointed heads in your common wealth,
with single eye do study to promote the glory of God, to provide that your
subjects be rightly instructed in his true religion, that they be defended
from all oppression and tirannie, that true teachers may be maintained, and
such as blind and deceive the people, together also with all idle bellies
which do rob and oppress the flock, may be removed and punished as Gods Law
prescribes. And to the perfurmance of every one of these, do your offices and
Names. The honors and benefits, which ye receue, the Law of God universally
given to all men, and the examples of most godly Princes bind and oblish you.

My purpose is not greatly to labor to prove, that your hole study oght to be
to promote the glory of God, neither yet will I study to allege all reasons
that justly may be brought to prove that ye are not exalted to reign above your
brethren as men without care and solicitude. For these be principals so grafted
in nature, that very Ethnicks have confessed the same. The singular honors
which Magistrates receive of God oght to move them with all diligence to promote
his religion.
For seeing that God only has placed you in his chair, has appointed you to
be his lieutenantes, and by his own seall has marked you to be Magistrates,
and to rule above your brethren, to whom nature nevertheless has made you like
in all points (for in conception, birth, life, and death ye differ nothing from
the commune sort of men, but God only, as said is, has promoted you, and of
his especial favor has given unto you this prerogative to be called Gods:)
how horrible ingratitude were it then, that you should be found unfaithful to
him, that thus has honored you? And further what a monster were it that you
should be proved unmerciful to them, above whom ye are appointed to reign as
fathers above their children? because I say that very Ethnicks have granted,
that the chief and first care of Princes, and of such as be appointed to rule
above others, oght to be to promote the glory and honor of their gods, and
to maintain that religion, which they supposed to have been true. And that
their second care was to maintain and defend the subjects committed to their
charge in all aequitie and justice. I will not labor to show unto you what
oght to be your study in mai^tainyng Gods true honor: lest that in so doing I
should seem to make you less careful over Gods true religion, then were the
Ethnickes over their idolatry. But because other petitions may appear more
hard and difficile to be granted, I purpose brefely, The duties of Magistrates.
but yet freely, to speak what God by his word does assure me to be true. To
wit* first that in conscience you are bound to punysh malefactors, and to
defend innocents imploringe your help: secondarely that God requires of you
to provide that your subjects be rightly instructed in his true religion, and
that the same by you be reformed whenever abuses do crepe in by malice of
Satan and negligence of men: and last that ye are bound to remove from
honor, and to punish with death (if the crime so require) such as deceive the
people, or defraude them of that food of their souls, I mean Gods lively
word. The first and second are most plain by the words of S. Paul thus
speaking of lawful powers. Romans 13.


Let every soul (says he) submit him self unto the higher powers. for
there is no power but of god. The powers that be, are ordained of God.
Whosoever therefore resists power, resists the ordinance of God, and they
that resist shall receive to them selves damnation. For rulers are not to be
feared of those that do well, but of those that do evil. Will thou then be
without fear of the power? do that which is good, and so shall thou be praised
of the same. For he is the minister of God for thy wealth. But if thou do that
which is evil, fear. For he bears not the sword for noght: for he is the
minister of God to take vengance on them that do evil.

As the Apostle in these words most straytly commands obedience to be
given to lawful powers, pronouncing Gods wrath and vengance against such as
shall resist the ordonaunce of God, so does he assign to the powers their
offices, which to be take vengance upon evil doers, to maintain the well
doers, and so to ministre and rule in their office, that the subjects by them
may have a benefit and be praised in well doing. Now if you be powers ordained
by God (and that I hope all men will grant) then by the plain words of the
Apostle is the sword given unto you by God for maintenance of the innocent,
and for punyshement of malefactors. But I and my brethren with me accused, do
offer not only to prove our selves innocents in all things laid to our charge,
but also we offer most evidently to prove your Bishops to be the very
pestilence, who have infected all christianity. And therefore by the plain
doctrine of the Apostle you ar bound to maintain us, and to punysh the other
being evidently co^uict and proved criminal. In what points be Powers bound
to their subiestes.
Moreover the former words of the Apostle do teach, how far hie powers be
bound to their subjects: to wit, that because they are Gods ministers by him
ordained for the profitt and utility of others, most diligently oght they to
inte^d upon the same. For that cause assigns the holy Ghost commanding
subjects to obey, and to pay tribute: saing,

For this do you pay tribute and tole. Romans 13.


That is because they are Gods ministers, bearing the sword for your utility.
Whereof it is plain, that there is no honor without a charge annexed. And this
one point I wish your wisdoms dipely to consider: that God has not placed
you above your brethren to reign as tyrants without respect of their profitt
and commodity. You hear the holy Ghost witness the contrary, affirmyng
that all lawful powers be Gods ministers ordened for the wealth, profitt and
salvation of their subjects, and not for their destruction. Could it be said
(I beseech you) that Magistrates, Let the similitude be noted.
enclosing their subjects in a city without all victuales, or giving unto
them no other victuales but such as were poisoned, did rule for the profitt of
their subiet^es? I trust that none would be so foolish as so to affirm: but
that rather every discrete person would boldly affirm, that such as so did,
were tyrants unworthy of all regiment. If we will not deny that, which
Christ Jesus affirms to be a truth infallible, to wit, That the soul is
greater and more precious, then is the body: then shall we easily espy how
unworthy of authority be those, that this day debar their subjects from
the hearing of Gods word, and by fire and sword compel them to feed upon
the very poison of their souls, the damnable doctrine of Antichrist. And
therefore in this poi^t I say, I can not cease to admonish your honors
diligently to take heed over your charge, which is greater then the most part
of men suppose. It is not enough that you abstain from viole^te wrong, and
oppression which ungodly men exercise against their subjects: It is not
enough that rulars oppress not their subjects.
but ye are further bound, to wit, that ye rule above them for their wealth.
Which ye can not do, if that ye either by negligence not providing true
pastors, or yet by your maintenance of such as be ravening wolves, suffer
their souls to sterue and perish for lack of the true food, which is
Christ's Euangill syncerely preached. It will not excuse you in his presence,
who will require account of every talent committed to your charge, to say
that ye supposed that the charge of the souls had been committed to your
Bishops. No no, my Lords, so ye can not escape Gods judgment. For if your
Bishops be proved to be no Bishops, but deceauable thieves and rauenyng
wolves (which I offer my self to prove by Gods word, The offer of John knoxe
and his accusation intended against the papisticall Bysshoppes.
by law, and cou^cils, yea by the judgment of all the godly learned from the
primative Church to this day) then shall your permission and defense of them be
reputed before God a participation with their theft and murder. For thus
accused the Prophet Esaie the Princes of Jerusalem.

Thy princes, says he, ar apostatats: Esaie 1.
that is obstinat refusers of God, and they are companions of thieves.

This grievous accusation was laid against them, albeit that they ruled in that
city which sometime was called holy, where then were the temple, rites and
ordonances of God: because that not only they were wicked them selves, but
chefely because they maintained wiked men their Priests and falls prophets in
honors and authority if they did not escape this accusation of the holy
Ghost i^ that age, look ye neither to escape the accusation nor the judgment
which is pronounced against the mai^tainers of whicked men: to with that the
one and the other shall drinck the cup of Gods wrath and vengance together.
Ierem. 23. and 27.
and lest ye should deceive your selves, Ezech. 13.
Hosa 4.
esteming your Bishops to be virtuous and godly, this do I affirm and offer
my self to prove the same, that more wicked men, then be the hole rabble of
your clergy, were never from the beginning universally known in any age, yea
Sodom and Gomorra may be justified in their respect. For they permitted just
Lot, to dwell amongst them without any violence done to his body, which that
pestilent generation of your shauensort does not, but most cruelly persecute
by fire and sword the true members of Christ's body for no other cause, but
for the true service and honoring of God. And therefore I fear not to affirm
that, which God shall one day justify: That by your offices ye be bound, not
only to repress their tyra^nie, but also to punish them, as thieves and
murderers, as idolators and blasphemers of God, NOTE.
and in their roumes ye are bound to place true preachers of Christ's Eua^gile
for the instruction, comfort, If powers provide not for instruction of their
subjects, they do never rule above them for their profit.
and salvation of your subjects, above whom else shall never the holy Ghost
acknolledge, that you rule in justice for their proffit. If ye pretend to
possess the kingdom with Christ Jesus, ye may not take example neither by
the ignorant multitude of Princes, neither by the ungodly and cruel rulers of
the earth, of whom so^me pass their time in sloth, insole^tie, and ryote
without respect had to gods honor or to the salvation of their brethren:
and other most cruelly oppress with proud Ni^rod such as be subject to them.
But your pattern and example must be the practice of those, whom God has
approved by the testimony of his word as after shall be declared.

Of the premises it is evident that to lawful powers is given the sword for
punyshement of malefactors, for maintenance of innocents, and for the profitt
and utility of their subjects. Now let us consider, whether the reformation of
religion fallen in decay, and punyshement of false teachers do appertain to
the civil Magistrate and nobility of any realm. I am not ignorant that Satan
of old time for mentainance of his darkness has obtained of the blind world two
chief points. what Satan has obtained of the blind world.
Former, he has persuaded to Princes, rulers, and magistrates, that the
feeding of Christ's flock appertains nothing to their charge, but that it is
rejected upon the Bishops, and estate ecclesiastical: and secondarelie that
the reformation of religion, be it never so corrupt and the punishment of
such, as be sworn soldiers in their king dome, are exempted from all civil
power and are reserved to them selves, and to their own cognition. But that no
offender can justly be exempted from punyshement, and that the ordering and
reformation of religion with the instruction of subjects, does especially
appertain to the civil Magistrate, shall gods perfect ordenaunce, his
plain word, and the factes and examples of those that of God are highly
praised, most evidently declare.

When God did establish his Law, The matters and reformation of religion
appertain to the care of the civil power Exodus 21. 24. 25, etc.
statutes and ceremonies in the midst of Israel, he did not exempt the
matters of religion from the power of Moses, but as he gave him charge over the
civil polity, so he put in his mouth and in his hand: That is, he first
revealed to him, and thereafter commanded to put in practice whatsoever was to
be taught or done in matters of religion. Nothing did God reveal particularely
to Aaron, but altogether was he commanded to depend from the mouth of Moses:
Yea nothing was he permitted to do to him self or to his children either in his
or their inauguration and sanctification to the preesthode, Note.
but all was committed to the care of Moses, and therefore were these words so
freque^tly repeted to Moses,

Thou shall separate Aaron and his sons from the midst of the people of
Israel, Exodus 28.
that they may execute the office of the Preesthode, thou shall make unto them
garments, thou shall annoynte them, thou shall wash the^, thou shall fill their
hands with the sacrifice.

And so forth of every rite and ceremony, that was to be done unto the^,
especial commandment was given unto Moses, that he should do it. Now if
Aaron and his sons were so subject to Moses, that they did nothing but at his
commandment, who dar be so bold as to affirm that the civil Magistrate has
nothing to do in matters of religion? For seeing that the^ God did so straytly
require, that even those, who did bear the figure of Christ, should receive
from the civil power as it were their sanctification, and entrance to their
office, and seeing also that Moses was so far preferred to Aaron, that the one
commanded and the other did obey, who dar esteem that the civil power is now
becomed so profane in Gods eyes, that it is sequestered from all intromission
with the matters of religion. The holy ghost in diverse places declarethe the
contrary.

For one of the chief praecepts commanded to the king, when that he should be
placed in his throne, was to write the example of the book of the Lords law,
that it should be with him, that he might read in it all the days of his life,
that he might learn to fear the Lord his God, and to keep all the words of his
law, and his statutes to do them. This praecept requires not only, that the
king should him self fear God, keep his Law, and statutes, but that also he as
the chief ruler, should provide that gods true religion should be kept
inuiolated of the people and flock, which by God was committed to his charge.
And this did not only David and Solomon perfectly understand, but also sum
godly kings in Judah after the apostasy and idolatry, The factes of Godly
kings are an interpretation of the law and declaration of their power.
that infected Israel by the means of Jeroboam, did practice their
understanding and execute their power in sum notable reformations. For Asa
and Iosaphat kings in Judah, fynding the religion altogether corrupt, did
apply their hearts (says the holy ghost) to serve the Lord, and to walk in
his ways: and thereafter does witness that Asa removed from honors his mother,
sum say gra^dmother, because she had committed and labored to mentaine
horrible idolatry. 2. Paral. 14. and 17.
And Iosaphat did not only refuse strange gods him self, but also distroying
the chief monuments of idolatry, did send forth the. Note.
Levites to instruct the people, whereof it is plain that the one and the
other did understand such reformations to appertain to their duties. But
the factes of Ezechias, and of Josias do more clearly prove the power and
duty of the civil Magistrate in the reformation of religion. Before the
reign of Ezechias so corrupt was the religion that the doors of the house of
the Lord were shut up, 2. Paralip 29.
the lamps were extinguished, no sacrifice was orderly made, but in the first
year of his reign the first month of the same, did the king open the doors
of the temple, bring in the Priests and Levites and assembling them together
did speak unto them as folloeth. Aduert that the king takes upon him to
command the priests.
Hear me o ice Levites and be sanctified now, and sanctify also the house of
the Lord God of your fathers and carry forth from the sanctuary all filthynes
(he means all momuments and vessels of idolatry) for our fathers have
transgressed and have committed wickedness in thee eyes of the eternal our God,
they have left him and have turned their faces from the tabernacle of the
Lord* and therefore is the wrath of the Lord co^med upon Judah and Jerusalem.
Behold our fathers have fallen by the sword, our sons, daughters and wifes
are led in captivity, but now have I purposed in my heart to make a couenante
with the Lord God of Israel, that he may turn the wrath of his fury from us.
And therefore my sons (he swetely exhorts) be not faint, for the Lord has
chosen you to stand in his presence and to serve him. Such as be not more then
blind clearly may perceive that the king does aknolledge, that it appertained
to his charge to reform the religion, to appoint the Levites to their charges
and to admonish the^ of their duty and office, which thing he more evidently
declares, writing his lettres to all Israel, to Ephrtaim, an Manasses, and
sent the same by the hands of messingers having this tenor.

You sons of Israel return to the Lord God of Abraham Isaac, 2. Pa. 30.
and Israel, and he shall return to the residue that rests from the hands of
Assure. Be not as your fathers and as your brethren were who have tra^sgressed
against the Lord God of their fathers, who has made them desolate as you see.
Hold not your heart therefore, but give your hand unto the Lord, return unto
his sanctuary, serve him and he shall show mercy unto you, to your sons,
and daughters that be in bondage, for he is pitiful and easy to be entreated.

Thus far did Ezechias by lettres and messingers provoke the people, declined
from God to repentance, not only in Judah, where he reigned laufull king, NOTE.
but also in Israel, subject then to an other king. And albeit that by sum
wicked men his messingers were mocked, yet as they lacked not their just
punishment (for within six years after Samaria was destroyed and Israel led
captive by Salmanazar) so did not the zealous king Ezechias desist to prosecute
his duty in restoring the religion to Gods perfect ordenance, removing all
abominations.

The same is to be red of Josias, who did not only restore the religion, but
did further distroy all monumentes of idolatry, 2. par. 34.
which of long time had remained. For it is written of him, that after that the
book of the law was found, and that he had asked counsil at the prophetess
Hulda, he sent and gathered all the elders of judah and Jerusalem, and standing
in the temple of the Lord he made a conuenant, 2. Reg. 23.
that all the people from the great to the small should walk after the Lord,
should observe his law, statutes and testimonies with all their heart, and all
their soul, and that they should ratify and confirm, The king commanded
the priests.
what soever was written in the book of God. He further commanded Helkias the
hic priest, and the priests of the inferior order, that they should carry
forth of the temple of the Lord all the vessels, that were made to Baal, which
he burnt and did carry their powder to Bethel. He did further distroy all
monuments of idolatry, yea even those that had remained from the days of
Salomo^. He did burn them, stamp them to powder, whereof one part he scattered
in the broke Kidron and the other upon the sepulcres and graves of the
idolaters, whose bones he did burn upon the altars, where before they made
sacrifice not only in Judah, but also in Bethel, where Jeroboam had erected his
idolatry: yea he further proceeded, and did kill the priests of the hie
places, who were idolaters, and had deceived the people: he did kill them, I
say, and did burn their bones upon their own altars, and so returned to
Jerusalem. This reformation made Josias, and for the same obtained this
testimony of the holy Ghost, that neither before him neither after him was
there any such king, who returned to God with his hole soul, and with all his
strength according to all the law of Moses.

Of which histories it is evident that the reformation of religion in all
points, together with the punishment of false teachers does appertain to the
power of the civil Magistrate. For what God required of them, his justice must
require of others having the like charge and authority: what he did approve in
them, he can not but approve in all others, who with like zeal and synceritie
do interprise to purge the Lords temple and sanctuary. what God required of
them, it is before declared, to wit: that most diligently they should observe
his Law, statutes and ceremonies. And how acceptable were their factes to God,
does he him self witness. For to sum he gave most notable victories without
the hand of man, 2. Par. 32.
and in their most desperate dangers did declare his especial favors
towerdes them by signs supernatural: to other he so established the kingdom,
that their ennemies were compelled to stoop under their feet. And the names
of all he has regestred not only in the book of life, but also in the blessed
remembrance of all posterities sense their days, which also shall continue
till the coming of the Lord Jesus, who shall reward with the crown of
immortality not only the^, but also such, as unfeignedly study to do the will
and to promote the glory of his heavenly father in the midst of this
corrupted generation. In consideration whereof ought you, my Lords, all delay
set apart, to provide for the reformation of religion in your dominions and
bounds, which now is so corrupt that no part of Christ's institution remains
in the original purity, and therefore of necessity it is, that spedely ye
provide for reformatione or else ye declare your selves, not only void of love
to werdes your subjects, but also to live without care of your own salvation,
yea without all fear and true reverence of God. Two things perchance may move
you to esteem these histories before briuely tuched to appertain nothing to
you. First because you are no Jews but Gentiles: and secondarely because you
are no kings, The factes of the godly kings in Judah do appertain to the
powers among the gentiles professing Christ
but nobiles in your realm. But be not deceived. For neither of both can excuse
you in gods presence from doing your duty, for it is a thing more then
certain, that whatso ever God required of the civil Magistrate in Israel or
Judah concerning the observation of true religion during the time of the Law,
the same does he require of lawful Magistrates professing Christ Jesus in the
time of the Gospel, as the holy Ghost has taught us by the mouth of David,
saying Psalm. 2.

Be learned you that judge the earth, kiss the son, lest that the Lord wax
angry, and that ye perish from the way.

This admonition did not extend to the judges under the law only, but does also
include all such as be promoted to honors in the time of the Gospel, when
Christ Jesus does reign and feight in his spiritual kingdom, whose ennemies
in that psalm be first most sharply taxed, their fury expressed, and vanity
mocked: and then are kings and judges, who think them selves free from all law
and obedience, commanded to repent their former blind rage, and judges are
charged to be learned: and last are all commanded to serve the eternal in
fear, to rejoice before him in tremblyng, to kiss the son, that is, to give
unto him most humble obedience, whereof it is evident that the rulers,
Magistrates and judges now in Christ's kingdom are no less bound to obedience
unto God, the^ were those under the Law. And how is it possible that any shall
be obedient, who despise his religion, in which stands the chief glory, that
man can give to God, and is a service, which God especially requires of kings
and rulers? Epist. 50.
Which thing saint Augustine plainly did note, writing to one Bonifacius a man
of war, according to the same argument and purpose, which I labor to persuade
your Honors. For after that he has in that his epistle declared the
difference betwixt the heresy of the Donatists and Arrians, and has somewhat
spoken of their cruelty, he shows the way how their fury should and oght to
be repressed, and that it is lawful for the iniustly afflicted to seek support
and defense at godly Magistrates. For thus he writes:

Either must the verity be kept close, Aduert.
or else must their cruelty be susteaned.

But if the verity should be concealed, not only should none be saved nor
delivered by suchsile^ce, but also should many be lost through their decept.
But if by preaching of the verity their fury should be provoked more to rage,
and by that means yet sum were delivered, and made strong, yet should fear
hinder many weakli^gs to follow the verity, if their rage be not stayed. In
these first words Augustine shows three reasons, why the afflicted Church in
those days called for the help of the Emperor and of godly Magistrates
against the fury of the persecuters. The first,

The verity must be spoken or Note well.
else mankind shall perish in error.

The second, the verity being plainly spoken provoke the adversaries to
rage. And because that so^me did allege that rather we oght to suffer all
injury, then to seek support by man, he adds the third reason: to wit that
many weakones be not able to suffer persecution and death for the truethes
sake, to whom not the less respect oght to be had, that they may be won from
error and so be brought to grater strength.

O that the rulers of this age should ponder and wey the reasons of this godly
writer, and prouid the remedy, which he requires in these words foloi^g, Now
when the Church was thus afflicted if any think that rather they should have
sustained all calamity, Augustines words.
then that the help of God should have been asked by Christian Emperors, he
does not well aduert, that of such negligence no good co^ptes or reason could
be given. For where such, as would that no just laws should be made against
their impiety, allege that the Apostles soght no such things of the kings
of the earth, they do not consider that then the time was other then it is now,
and that all things are done in their own time. What Emperor then believed in
Christ, that should serve him in making laws for godliness against impiety?

whill yet that saying of the prophet was co^plete, why has nations raged, and
people have imagined vanity? The kings of the earth have stand up, and
princes have conuented together against the Lord, and against his anointed.
That which is after said in the same psalm, was not yet comme to pass. And
now understand, o you kings, be learned you that judge the earth, serve the
Lord* in fear, and rejoice to him with tremlinge. Aduert the mind of Augustine.
How do kings serve the Lord in fear? but in punishing and by a godly
severity forbidding those things which are done against the commandment of
the Lord. For otherwise does he serve in so far as he is man, other wise in so
far as he is king.

In so far as he is man, In two sorts oght kings to serve God
he serves him by living faithfully, but because he is also king he serves
establishing laws, that command the things that be just, and that with a
convenient rigor forbid things contrary. As Ezechias served distroying the
groves, the temples of idols and the places, which were builded against gods
commandment. So served also Josias doing the same: so served the king of
Ninevites compelling the hole city to mitigate the Lord: so served Darius
giving in the power of Daniel the idol to be broken, and his ennemies to be
cast to the lions: so served Nabucadnezer, by a terrible law forbidding all,
that were in his realm, to blaspheme God. Herein therefore do kings serve the
Lord in so far as they are kings, when they do those things to serve him, which
none except kings be able to do. He further proceeds and concludes, that as,
when wicked kings do reign, impiety can not be brideled by laws, but rather
is tyranny exercised under the title of the same, O that the world should
understand.
so is it a thing without all reason, that kings professing the knolledge and
honor of God, should not regard nor care, who did defend, nor who did oppugn
the Church of God in their dominions. By these words of this ancient and
godly writer your Honors may perceive, what I require of you, to wit, to
repress the tyranny of your Bishops, and to defend the innocents professing
the truth. He did require of the Emperor and kings of his days professing
Christ, and manifestly concludes, that they can not serve Christ, except that
so they do. Let not your Bishops think that Augustine speaks for them,
because he names the Church. Let them read and understand, that Augustine
writes for that Church, which professes the truth and does suffer
persecution for the defense of the same, which your bishops do not, but
rather with the Donatistes and Arrians do cruelly persecute all such, as boldly
speak Christ's eternal verity to manifest their impiety and abomination.
But thus much we have of Augustine, that it appertains to the obedience and
service, NOTE.
which kings owe to God as well now in the time of the Gospel, as before under
the Law, to defend the afflicted for matters of religion, and to repress the
fury of the persecuters by the rigor and severity of godly laws. For which
cause no doubt does Esaie Esaie 49.
the prophet say, that kings should be norishers to the Church of God, that
they should abbase their heads, and lovingly embrase the children of God. And
thus I say your Honors may evidently see, that the same obedience does God
require of rulers and princes in the time of the Gospel, that he required in
the time of the Law. An answer to the second objection.


If you do think, that the reformation of religion and defense of the afflicted
does not appertain to you, because you are no kings, but nobils and estates of
a real me, in two things you are deceived: former, in that you do not aduert,
that David requires as well, that the princes and judges of the earth be
learned and that they serve and fear God, as that he requires, that the kings
repent. If you therefore be judges and princes, as no man can deny you to be,
then by the plain words of David you are charged to be learned, to serve and
fear God, which ye can not do, if you despise the reformation of his religion.
And this is your first error. The second is, that ye neither know your duty,
which ye owe to God, neither yet your authority, which of him ye have
received, if ye for pleasure or fear of any earthly man despise gods true
religion, and conte^ne your brethren, that in his name call for your support.
Your duty is to hear the voice of the Eternal your God, and unfainedly to
study to follow his precepts: who, as is before said, of especial mercy has
promoted you to honors and dignity. His chief and principal precept is, that
with reverence ye receive and embrace his only beloved son Jesus: that ye
promote to the uttermost of your powers his true religion: and that ye defend
your brethren and subjects, whom he has putt under your charge and care. Now
if your king be a man ignorant of God, ennemie to his true religion, blinded by
superstition, and a persecuter of Christ's members, shall ye be excused, if
with silence ye pass over his iniquity? Be not deceived my Lords, ye are
placed in authority for an other purpose then to flatter your king in his
folly and blind rage: to wit, that as with your bodies, strength, riches, and
wisdom ye are bound to assist and defend him in all things, which by your
advise he shall take in hand for Gods glory and for the preservation of his
commune wealth and subjects, so by your grauities, counsil and admonition ye
are bound to correct and repress whatsoever ye know him to attempt expressedly
repugning to Gods word, honor, and glory, or what ye shall epsy him to do,
be it by ignorance or be it by malice, against his subjects great, or small.
Of which last part of your obedience if ye defraud your king, ye commit against
him no less treason, then if ye did extract from him your due and promised
support, what time by his ennemies iniustly he were pursued. But this part of
their duty I fear do a small number of the nobility of this age rightly
consider: neither yet will they understand, that for that purpose has God
promoted them. For now the common song of al men is, We must obey our kings
be they good, or be they bad, for God has so commanded. But horrible shall
the vengeance be, that shall be powered forth upon such blasphemers of God his
holy name, and ordinance. For it is no less blasphemy to say, that God has
commanded kings to be obeyed, when they command impiety, then to say, that
God by his precept is auctour and mentainer of all iniquity. True it is, God
has commanded kings to be obeyed, but like true it is, that in things, which
they commit against his glory, or when cruelly without cause they rage against
their brethren the members of Christ's body, he has commanded no obedience,
but rather he has approved, yea and greatly rewarded such as have opponed
them selves to their ungodly commandments and blind rage: as in the exampls
of the three children, of Daniel, and Abdemelech it is evident. The three
children would nether bow nor stoop before the golden image at the
commandment of the great king Nabuchadnezar. Daniel did openly pray, his
windoes being open, against the established law of Darius and of his counsil:
and Abdemelech feared not to enter in before the presence of Zedechias and
boldly to defend the cause and innoce^tie of Jeremy the prophet, Jeremy 38
whom the king and his counsil had condemned to death. Every one of these
factes should this day be judged foolish by such, as will not understand what
confession God does require of his children, when his verity is oppugned, or
his glory called in doubt: such men, I say, as prefer man to God, and things
present to the heavenly inheritance, should have judged every one of these
factes stubburn inobedience, foolish presumption and singularity, or else
bold co^trolinge of the king and his wise counsil. But how acceptable in Gods
presence was this resistance to the ungodly commandments and determinations
of their king the e^d did witness. For the three children were delivered from
the furnace of fire, and Daniel from the den of lio^s to the confusion of their
ennemies, to the better instruction of the ignorant kings, and to the
perpetual comfort of gods afflicted children. And Abdemelech in the day of
the Lords visitation, when the king and his counsil did drink the bitter cupp
of gods vengeance, Ierem. 39
did find his life for a pray, and did not fall in the edge of the sword,
when many thousands did perish. And this was signified unto him by the
prophet him self at the commandment of God before that Jerusalem was
destroyed. The promise and cause were recited unto him in these words, I will
bring my words upon this city unto evil and not unto good: but most
assuredly I shall deliver thee because thou have trusted in me, says the Lord.
The trust and hope, which Abdemelech had in God, made him bold to oppone him
self, being but a man, to the king and to his hole cou^sill, who had condemned
to death the Prophet, whom his conscience did acknolledge to be innocent. For
this did he speak in the presence of the king sitting in the port of Beniami^:
My Lord the king, says Abdemelech, these men do wickedly in all things, that
they have done to Jeremy the Prophet. Aduert and take heed my Lords, that the
men, who had condemned the Prophet, were the king, his princes, and counsill,
and yet did one man accuse them all of iniquity, and did boldly speak in the
defe^se of hi^ of whose innoce^tie he was persuaded. And the same, I say, is
the duty of every man in his vocation, but chefely of the nobility, which is
joined with their kings to bridel and repress that folly and blind rage.
Which thing if the nobility do not, neither yet labor to do, as they are
traitors to their kings, so do they provoke the wrath of God against them
selves and against the realm, in which they abuse the authority, which they
have received of God to mentaine virtue and to repress vice. For hereof I
would your Honors were most certainly persuaded, that God will neither excuse
nobility nor people, but the nobility least of al, that obey and follow their
kings in manifest iniquity, but with the same vengeance will God punish the
Prince, people, and nobility conspiring together against him and his holy
ordenances: as in the punishment taken upon Pharao, Israel, Judah and Babylon is
evidently to be seen. For Pharao was not drowned alone, but his captayns,
charetes, and great army drank the same cup with him. The kings of Israel,
and Judah were not punished whitout co^pagny, but with them were murdered the
counsilers, their Princes imprisoned and their people ledd captive. And why?
because none was found so faithful to God, that he durst enterprise to resist
nor against and the manifest impiety of their Princes. And therefore was Gods
wrath powered forth upon the one and the other. But the more ample discource of
this argument I differ to better opportunity: only at this time I thought
expedient to admonysh you, that before God it shall not excuse you to allege,
We are no kings and therefore neither can we reform religion, nor yet defend
such as be persecuted. Consider my Lords that ye are powers ordened by God
(as before is declared) and therefore does the reformation of religion, and the
defense of such, as iniusty are oppressed, appertain to your charge and care,
which thing shall the law of God, universally given to be kept of all men,
most evidently declare: which is my last and most assured reason, Deuteronomy. 12.
why I say ye oght to remove from honors and to punish with death such as God
has condemned by his own mouth. After that Moses had declared what was true
religion, to wit, to honor God as he commanded, adding nothing to his word,
neither yet diminishinge any thing from it, and after also that vehemently he
had exhorted the same law to be observed, he denounces the punishment against
the tra^sgressours in these words, If thy brother, son, doghter wife or
neghbour, whom thou love as thine own life, solicitate thee secretly,
saying, Let us go serve other gods, Deuteronomy. 23. and 27.
whom neither thou, nor thy fathers have known, consent not to him, hear him
not, let not thine eye spare him, show him no indulgentie or favor, hide him
not, but utterly kill him, let thy hand be the first upon him, that he may be
slain, and after the hand of the hole people. Of these words of Moses
are-two things, apperteani^g to our purpose, to be noted. Former, that such, as
solicitate only to idolatry oght to be punished to death without favor or
respect of person. Idolatry oght to be punished without respect of person.
For he that will not suffer man to spare his son, his daughter, nor his
wife, but straightly commands punishment to be taken upon the idolatours (have
they never so nie conjunction with us) will not wink at the idolatry of
others, of what estate or condition so ever they be.

It is not unknown, If any estate might have claimed privilege, it was the
prophets.
that the prophets had revelations of God, which were not commune to the
people, as Samuel had the revelation, that Eli and his posterity should be
destroyed, that Saul should first be king and thereafter that he should be
rejected, that David should reign for him. Micheas understood by vision that
Achab should be killed in battle against the Sirians. Elias saw that dogs
should eat Iesabel i^ the fortres of Iesrael. 1. Sam. 3.
Eliaesus did see hunger come upon Israel by the space of seven years. 1. Sam.
9. 15.
Jeremy did foresee the destruction of Jerusalem and the time of their
captivity, 1. Reg. 22
and so diverse other prophets had diverse revelations of God, 1. Reg. 21.
which the people did not otherwise understand, 2. Reg. 8.
but by their affirmatio^, and therefore in those days were the prophets
named Seears, because that God did open unto the^ that, which was hid from the
multitude. Now if any man might have claimed any privilege from the rigor
of the Law, or might have justified his fact, it should have been the Prophet.
For he might have alleged for him self his singular prerogative, that he had
above other men to have gods will revealed unto him by vision or by dream, or
that God had declared particularely unto him, that his pleasure was to be
honored i^ that manner, in such a place, and by such means. But all such
excuses does God remove, co^mau^di^g that the Prophet, that shall solicitate
the people to serve strange gods, shall die the death, notwithstanding that
he allege for him self dream, vision, or revelation. Yea although he promise
miracles, and also that such things as he promises come to pass, yet I say
commands God, that no credit be given to him, but that he die the death,
because he teaches apostasy, and defection from God. Hereof your Honors may
easily epsy, that none provoking the people to idolatry oght to be exempted
from the punishment of death. For if neither that inseparable conjunction,
which God him self has sanctified betwixt man and wife, neither that
unspeakable love grafted in nature, which is betwixt the father and the son,
neither yet that reverence, which gods people oght to bear to the Prophets,
can excuse any man to spare the offendour or to conceal his offense, what
excuse can man pretend, which God will accept? Evident it is that no estate,
condition nor honor can exempt the idolatour from the hands of God, when he
shall call him to accomptes, or shall inflict punishment upon him for his
offense: how shall it then excuse the people, that they according to gods
commandment punish not to death such, as shall solicitate or violently draw
the people to idolatry? And this is the first, which I would your Honors
should note of the former words. To wit, that no person is exe^pted from
punishment, if he can be manifestly co^uicted to have provoked or led the
people to idolatry: and this is most evidently declared in that solemned oath
and co^uenante, which Asa made with the people to serve God and to me^taine his
religion, adding this penalty to the tra^sgressours of it: To wit, that
whosoever should not seek the Lord God of Israel, 2. Par. 15.
should be killed, were he great or were he small, were it man or were it
woman. And of this oath was the Lord co^pleased, he was found of the^ and gave
the^ rest on every part, because they soght hi^ with their hole heart, and
did swear to punish the offe^ders according to the precept of his Law without
respect of persons. And this is it, which I say I would your Honors should
note for the first, that no idolatour can be exempted from punishment by
gods Law. The second is, that the punishment of such crimes as are
idolatry, blasphemy, and others, that tuche the majesty of God, does not
appertain to kings and chief rulers only, but also to the hole body of that
people, and to every membre of the same according to the vocation of every
man, and according to that possibility and occasion, which God does minister
to revenge the injury done against his glory, what time that impiety is
manifestly known. And that does Moses more plainly speak in these words,

If in any of thy cities, Deuteronomy. 13.
says he, which the Lord thy God gives unto the to dwell in them, thou shall
hear this brute, There are so^me men the sons of Belial passed furthe from
thee, and have solicited the citizens of their cities by these words, Let us
go and serve strange gods, which you have not known, search and inquire
diligently, and if it be true, that such abomination is done in the midst of
thee, thou shall utterly stryke the inhabitants of that city with the sword,
thou shall destroy it and whatsoever is within it, thou shall gather the spoil
of it in the midst of the marketplace, thou shall burn that city with fire,
and the spoil of it to the Lord thy God, that it may be a heap of stones for
ever, neither shall it be any more builded. Let nothing of that execration
cleave to thy hand, that the Lord may turn from the fury of his wrath, and be
moved to werdes thee with inward affection.

Plain it is that Moses speaks nor gives not charge to kings rulers and
judges only, but he commands the hole body of the people, why every man in
Israel was bo^^^d to obey gods commandment.
yea and every membre of the same according to their possibility: and who
darbe so impudent as to deny this to be most reasonable and just?

For seeing that God had delivered the hole body from bondage, and to the hole
multitude had given his law, and to the twelve tribes had he so distributed the
inheritance of the land of Canaan, that no family could complain, that it was
neglected. Was not the hole and every membre addetted to confess and
acknolledge the benefits of God? yea had it not been the part of every man to
have studied to keep the possession, which he had received? which thing God did
plainly pronounce they should not do, Deuteronomy. 28. and 30.
except that in their hearts they did sanctify the lord God, that they
embrased, and inuiolably kept his religion established: and finally except they
did cut out iniquity from amongst them, declaring them selves earnest
ennemies to those abominations, which God declared him self so vehemently to
hate, that first he commanded the hole inhabitants of that country to be
distroyed and all monuments of their idolatry to be broken down, Deuteronomy. 7.
and thereafter he also streatly commands, that a city declininge to
idolatry should fall in the edge of the sword, and that the hole spoil of
the same, Godds judgments to the carnal man appear rigorous.
should be burned, no portion of it reserved. To the carnal man this may
appear a rigorous and severe judgment, yea it may rather seem to be
pronounced in a rage, then in wisdom. For what city was ever yet, in which to
man's judgment were not to be found many innocent persons, as infants,
children, and sum simple and ignorant souls, who neither did nor could
consent to such impiety? And yet we find no exception, but all are appointed
to the cruel death. And as concerning the city and the spoil of the same,
man's reason can not think, but that it might have been better bestowed, then
to be consumed with fire, and so to profitt no man. But in such cases will God
that all creatures stoop, cover their faces, and desist from reasonyng, when
commandment is given to execute his judgment. Albeit I could adduce diverse
causes of such severity, yet will I search none other then the holy Ghost
has assigned. First, that all Israel hearing the judgment should fear to
commit the like abomination: and secondarely, that the Lord might turn from the
fury of his anger, might be moved towerds the people with inward affection, be
merciful unto them, and multiply them according to his oath made unto their
fathers. Which reasons as they are sufficient in gods children to correct the
murmuring of the grudging flesh, so oght they to provoke every man, as before
I have said, to declare him self ennemie to that, which so highly provoke
the wrath of God against the hole people. For where Moses says,

Let the city be burned, and let no part of the spoil cleave to thy hand,
that the Lord may return from the fury of his wrath, etc.

He plainly does signify, For the idolatry of a small number is gods wrath
kindled against the multitude not punishing the offe^dours.
that by the defection and idolatry of a few gods wrath is kyndled against
the hole, which is never quenched till such punishment be taken upon the
offenders: that what soever served them in their idolatry, be brought to
destruction, because that it is execrable and accursed before God. And
therefore he will not, that it be reserved for any use of his people. I am not
ignorant that this law was not put in execution as God commanded. But what did
thereof ensue and follow histories declare: to wit, plage after plage till
Israel, and Judah were led in captivity, as the books of kings do witness. The
consideration whereof makes me more bold to affirm, that it is the duty of
every man, that list to escape the plage and punishment of God, to declare
him self ennemie to idolatry not only in heart, hating the same, but also in
external gesture, declaring that he lamenteth, if he can do no more, EZech. 9.
for such abominations. Which thing was showed to the prophet Ezechiel, what
time he gave him to understand, why he would destroy Judah with Israel, and that
he would remove his glory from the temple and place, that he had chosen,
Ezech. 8. and 9.
and so powerfurth his wrath and indignation upon the city, that was full of
blood and apostasy, which became so impudent, that it durst be bold to say,
the Lord has left the earth, and sees not. At this time, I say, the Lord
revealed in vision to his prophet, who they were, that should find favor in
that miserable destruction. To wit, those that did murne and lament for all
the abominations done in the city, in whose foreheades did God command to
print and seal Tau, to the end that the destroyer, who was commanded to stryke
the rest without mercy, should not hurt them, in whom that sign was found.
Of these premises I suppose it be evident, that the punishment of idolatry
does not appertain to kings only, but also to the hole people, yea to every
membre of the same according to his possibility. For that is a thing most
assured, that no man can murne, lament, and bewail for those things, which he
will not remove to the uttermost of his power. NOTE.
If this be required of the hole people, and of every man in his vocation,
what shall be required of you, my Lords, whom God has raised up to be
Princes and rulers above your brethren, whose hands he has armed with the
sword of his justice? yea whom he has appointed to be as bridels to repress
the rage and insolency of your kings, when soever they pretend manifestly to
transgress gods blessed ordenance? An answer to an objection.
If any think that this my affirmation, tuchinge the punishment of idolaters,
be contrary to the practice of the Apostles, who fynding the Gentiles in
idolatry did call them to repentance, requiring no such punishment, let the
same man understand, why no law was executed against the Gentiles being
Idolaters.
that the Gentiles, before the preaching of Christ, lived, as the Apostle
speaks, without God in the world, drowned in idolatry, according to the
blindness and ignorance, in which then they were holden as a profane nation,
whom God had never openly auowed to be his people, had never received i^ his
household, neither given unto them laws to be kept in religion nor polity: and
therefore did not his holy Ghost, calling them to repentance, require of them
any corporal punishment according to the rigor of the law, unto the which
they were never subjects, as they that were strangers from the commune wealth of
Israel. Ephe. 2.
But if any think, that, after that the Gentiles were called from their vain
conversation, and by embrasing Christ Jesus were received i^ the nombre of
Abraham's children, and so made one people with the Jews believing, if any
think, I say, that then they were not bound to the same obedience, which God
required of his people Israel, what time he confirmed his leage and conuenante
with them, the same man appears to make Christ inferior to Moses, and
contrarious to the law of his heavenly father. For if the contempt or
transgression of Moses law was worthy of death, what should we judge the
contempt of Christ's ordenance to be? (I mean after they be once received.) And
if Christ be not commed to dissolve, but to fulfill the law of his heavenly
Father, shall the liberty of his Gospel be an occasion, that the especial
glory of his Father be trodden under foot and regarded of no man? God forbid.
The especial glory of God is, The especial honor, which God requires of his
people.
that such, as profess them to be his people, should harken to his voice, and
amongst all the voices of God revealed to the world, tuching punishment of
vices, is none more evident neither more severe, then is that, which is
pronounced against idolatry, the teachers and mentainers of the same. 1. Sam.
15.
And therefore I fear not to affirm, that the Gentiles (I mean every city,
realm, province, or nation amongst the Gentiles, embrasing Christ Jesus and
his true religion) be bound to the same leage and co^uenant, that God made with
his people Israel, what time he promised to root out the nations before them
in these words.

Beware that thou make any co^uenante with the inhabitants of the land, Exodus
34.
to the which thou come, lest percha^ce that this comme in ruin, that is,
be destruction to the: but thou shall destroy their altars, break their idols
and cut down their groves. Fear no strange gods, worship them not, neither
yet make you sacrifice to them. But the Lord, who in his great power, and
owtstretched arm has brought you out of the land of Egypt, shall you fear, him
shall you honor, him shall you worship, to him shall you make sacrifice, his
statutes, judgments, Laws, and commandments you shall keep and observe.
This is the conuenante, which I have made with you, says the Eternal, forget
it not, neither yet fear ye other gods: but fear you the Lord your God, and
he shall deliver you from the hands of all your ennemies.

To this same Law, I say, and co^uenante are the Gentiles no less bound, then
sometime were the Jews, when soever God does illuminate the eyes of any
multitude, province, people or city, and puts the sword in their own hand
to remove such enormities from amongst them, as before God they know to be
abominable. Then, I say, are they no less bound to purge their dominions,*
cities and countries from idolatry, then were the Israelites, what time they
received the possession of the land of Canaan. And moreover I say, if any go
about to erect and set up idolatry or to teach defection from God, after that
the verity has been received and approved, that the^ not only the
Magistrates, to whom the sword is co^mittet, but also the people are bound by
that oath, which they have made to God, to revenge to the uttermost of their
power the injury done against his Majesty. In universal defections, and in a
general revolt, such as was in Israel after Jeroboam, there is a diverse
consideration. For then because the hole people were together co^spired against
God, there could none be found, that would execute the punishment, which God
had commanded, till God raised up Iehu, whom he had appoi^ted for that
purpose. And the same is to be considered in all other general defectio^s,
such as this day be in the papistrie, where all are blinded, and all are
declined from God and that of long continuance, so that no ordinary justice
ca^ be executed, but the punishment must be reserved to God and unto such
means, as he shall appoint. But I do speak of such a no^bre, as after they
have received gods perfect religion, do boldly profess the same,
notwithsta^di^g that so^me or the most part fall back: (as of late days was i^
England) unto such a no^bre, I say, it is Laufull to punish the idolatours with
death, if by any means God give them the power. For so did Joshua and Israel
determine to have done against the children of Rube^, Gad and Manasses for
their suspected apostasy and defectio^ from God. And the hole tribes did in
very deed execute that sharp judgment against the tribe of Be^iamin for a
less offense then for idolatry. And the same oght to be done whersoeuer
Christ Jesus and his Eua^gill is so received i^ any realm, province, or city,
that the Magistrates and people have solemnly auowed and promised to defend
the same, as under king Edward of late days was done in England. In such
places, I say, it is not only lawful to punish to the death such, as labor to
subvert the true religion, but the magistrates and people are bound so to do,
onles they will provoke the wrath of God against the^ selves. And therefore I fear
not to affirm, that it had been the duty of the nobility, judges, rulers,
and people of England not only to have resisted and againstanded Marie that
Iesabel, whom they call their queen, but also to have punished her to the
death with all the sort of her idolatrous Priests, together with all such, as
should have assisted her, what time that she and they openly began to
suppress Christ's Euangil, to shedd the blood of the sai^cts of God, ad to
erect that most devilish idolatry, the papistical abominatio^s, and his
usurped tyranny, which ones most justly by common oath was banished from that
realm. But because I ca^ not at this present discuss this argument, as it
appertains, I am compelled to omit it to better opportunity, and so
returning to your Honors, I say, that if ye confess your selves baptized in
the Lord Jesus, of necessity ye must confess, that the care of his religion
does appertain to your charge. And if ye know that in your hands God has put
the sword for the causes above expressed, the^ ca^ ye not deny, but that the
punishment of obstinate and malepert idolatours (such as all your bishops
be) does appertain to your office, if after admonition they co^tinew obstinat.
I am not ignorant, what be the vain defe^ses of your proud prelates. They
claim first a prerogative and privilege, that they are exempted, and that by
consent of Councils and Emperors from all jurisdiction of the temporaltie. And
seco^darely, when they are co^uicted of manifest impieties, abuses, and
enormities as well in their manners as in religion, neither fear, nor shame they
to affirm, that things so long established can not suddenly be reformed,
although they be corrupted, but with process of time they promise to take
order. But in few words I answer, that no privilege, granted against the
ordenance and statutes of God, is to be observed although all Councils and men
in the earth have appointed the same. But against gods ordenance it is, that
idolatours, murtherours, falls teachers, and blasphemers shall be exe^pted from
punishment, as before is declared, and therefore in vain it is, that they
claym for privilege, when that God says: The murderer shall thou riue from
my alter, that he may die the death. And as to the order and reformation, which
they promise, that is to be looked or hoped for, when Satan, whose children and
slaves they are, can change his nature. This answer I doubt not shall suffice
the sober and godly reader. But yet to the end that they may further see their
own confusion, and that your Honors may better understand, what ye oght to do
in so manifest a corruption and defectio^ from God, I ask of them selves, what
assurance they have for this their immunitie, exemption, or privilege? who is
the auctour of it? and what fruit it has produced? God is not auctour of any
privilege granted to papistical bishops, that they be exempted from the
power of the civil sword.
And first I say that of God they have no assurance, neither yet can he be
proved to be auctour of any such privilege. But the contrary is easy to be
seen. For God in establishing his orders in Israel did so subject Aaron (in his
preesthode being the figure of Christ) to Moses, that he feared not to call him
in judgment, and to constrain him to give accomptes of his wicked deed in
consenting to idolatry, as the history does plainly witness. For thus it is
written,

Then Moses took the calf, Exodus 32.
which they had made, and burned it with fire, and did grind it to powder, and
scattering it in the water, gave it to drink to the children of Israel*
declaring herebie the vanity of their idol and the abomination of the same,
and thereafter Moses said to Aaron, what has this people done to the, that
thou should bring upon it so great a syn?

Thus, I say, does Moses call and accuse Aaron of the destruction of the hole
people, and yet he perfectly understood, that God had appointed him to be the
high Priest, that he should bear upon his shoulders and upon his breast the
names of the 12. tribes of Israel, for whom he was appointed to make
sacrifice, prayers, and supplications. He knew his dignity was so great, The
dignity of Aaron did not exempt him from judgment.
that only he might enter within the most holy place: but neither could his
office nor dignity exempt him from judgment, when he had offended. If any
object, Aaron at that time was not anointed and therefore was he subject to
Moses, I have answered, that Moses, being taught by the mouth of God, did
perfectly understand, to what dignity Aaron was appointed, and yet he feared
not to call him in judgment, and to compel him to make answer for his wicked
fact. But if this answer does not suffice, yet shall the holy Ghost witness
further in the matter. Salomo^ removed from honor Abiathar being the high
preeste, and commanded him to cease from all function, and to live as a
private man. Now if the unction did exempt the priest from Jurisdiction of the
civil Magistrate, Solomon did offend, and injured Abiathar. For he was
anointed, and had carried the ark before David. But God does not reprove the
fact of Solomon, neither yet does Abiathar claim any prerogative by the
reason of his office, but rather does the holy Ghost approve the fact of
Solomon, saying,

Salomo^ eiected forth Abiathar, 1. Regu^ 2.
that he should not be the Priest of the Lord, 1 Samuel 3.
that the word of the Lord might be perfurmed, which he spoke upon the house of
Eli.

And Abiathar did think that he obtained great favor, in that he did escape
the present death, which by his conspiracy he had deserved. If any yet
reason, that Abiathar was no otherwise subject to the judgment of the king,
but as he was appointed to be the executour of that sentence, which God before
had pronounced, Note well.
as I will not greatly deny that reason, so require I that every man
consider, that the same God, who pronounced sentence against Eli, and his
house, has pronounced also, that idolaters, Gal. 4.
hooremongers, murderers, 1. Tim. 3.
and blasphemers shall neither have portion in the kingdom of God, neither
oght to be permitted to bear any rule in his Church and congregation. Now if
the unction and office saved not Abiathar, because that gods sentence must
needs be perfurmed, can any privilege granted by man be a buckler to
malefactors, that they shall not be subject to the punishments pronounced by
God? I think no man will be so foolish as so to affirm. For a thing more then
evident it is, that the hole preesthode in the time of the Law was bound to
give obedience to the civil powers. And if any membre of the same was found
criminal, the same was subject to the punishment of the sword, which God had
put in the hand of the Magistrate. And this ordenance of his father did not
Christ disanul, Mat. 17.
but rather did confirm the same, commanding tribute to be paid for him
self and for Peter. Who perfectly knowing the mind of his master, thus
writes in his epistle,

Submit your selves to all manner ordenance of man, 1. Pet. 2.
(he excepteth such as be expressly repugnyng to gods commandment) for the
Lords sake, Act. 4. and 5.
whether it be to king as to the chief head, or unto rulers as unto them, that
are sent by him for punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them,
that do well.

The same does the apostle saint Paul most plainly command in these words,

Let every soul be subject to the superior powers. Romans 13.


Which places make evident that neither Christ neither his Apostles has given
any assurance of this immunitie and privilege, which men of Church (as they
will be termed) do this day claim. Yea it was a thing unknown to the primitive
Church many years after the days of the Apostles. For Chrysostom,
Chrysostom upon the 13. to the Romans
who served in the Church at Constantinople four hundredth years after
Christ's ascension, and after that corruption was greatly increased, does yet
thus write upon the foresaid words of the Apostle,

This precept, Let Papists answer Chrysostom.
says he, does not appertain to such as be called seculars only, but eue^
to those, that be Priests and religious men.

And after he adds: Whether thou be Apostle, Evangelist, Prophet, or
whosoever thou be, thou can not be exempted from this subjection.

Hereof it is plain that Chrysostom did not understand that God had exe^pted
any person from obedience and subjection of the civil power, neither yet that
he was auctour of such exemptio^ and privilege, as Papists do this day
claim. And the same was the judgment and uniform doctrine of the primative
Church many years after Christ. Your Honors do wonder, I doubt not, from
what fo^taine then did this their immunitie, as they term it, and singular
privilege spri^g. I shall shortly tuch that, which is evident in their own law
and histories. When the Bishops of Rome, the very Antichrists had partly by
fraud, and partly by violence usurped the superiority of some places in
Italy, and most iniustly had spoiled the Emperors of their re^tes and
possessions, Let their own histories witness.
and had also murdered sum of their officers, as histories do witness, the
began Pope after Pope to practice and devise, how they should be exempted from
judgment of Princes and from the equity of laws, and in this point they were
most vigilant, till at length iniquity did so prevail in their hands,
according as Daniel had before prophesied of them, that this sentence was
pronounced,

Neither by the Emperor, The mouth of the beast speakinge great things.
neither by the clergy, neither yet by the people shall the judge be judged.
God will, says Symmachus, that the causes of others be determined by men,
Distin. 9. quest. 3.
but without all question he has reserved the Bishop of this seat,
understanding Rome, Their laws do witness.
to his own judgment.

And here of diverse Popes, and expositours of their laws would seem to give
reasons. For says Agatho, Did. 19.


All the precepts of the apostolik seat are assured, as by the voice of God
him self.

The auctour of the gloss upon their canon affirms, that if all the world
should pronounce sentence against the Pope, yet should his sentence prevail.
For says he, Cap. de translatione titul. 7.


The Pope has a heaue^lie will, and therefore he may change the nature of
things, he may apply the substance of one thing to an other, and of nothing he
may make somewhat, and that sentence, which was nothing (that is) by his mind
falls and unjust, he may make somewhat that is true and just. For, says he,
in all things, that please him, his will is for reason. Neither is there any
man, that may ask of him, why do thou so. For he may dispens above the Law,
and of injustice he may make justice. For he has the fulness of all power.

And many other most blasphemous se^te^ces did they pronounce every one after
other, which for shortnessake I omit, till at the end they obtained this most
horrible decrie: that albeit in life and conversation they were so wicked,
Distinct. 40.
and detestable, that not only they condemned them selves, but that also they
drew to hell and perdition many thousands with them, Note the equity of this
commandment.
yet that none should presume to reprehe^d or rebuke the^. This being
established for the head (albeit not without sum contradiction, for sum
Emperors did require due obedience of them, as gods word commanded, and
ancient Bishops had given before to Emperors, and to their laws, but Satan
so prevailed in his suete before the blind world, that the former sentences
were confirmed, which power being granted to the head) then began provision to
be made for the rest of the members in all realms and contries, where they
made residence. The fruit whereof we see to be this, that none of that
pestilent generation (I mean the vermin of the Papistical order) will be
subject to any civil Magistrate, how enormious that ever his crime be, but
will be reserved to their own ordenarie, as they term it. And what fruits have
hereof ensued, be the world never so blind, it can not but witness. For how
their head that Roman Antichrist has been occupied ever se^ce the grau^ting
of such privileges, histories do witness, and of late the most part of Europa
subject to the plage of God, to fire and sword, by his procurement has felt
and this day does feel. The pride, ambition, envy, excess, fraud, spoil,
oppression, murder, filthy life, and incest, that is used and mentained
amongst that rabble of Priests, freers, monks, channons, bishops and
Cardinals, can not be expressed. I fear not to affirm, neither doubt I to
prove, that the papisticall Church is further degenerate from the puretie of
Christ's doctrine, The matter is more then evident.
from the footesteppes of the Apostles and from the manners of the primative
Church, the^ was the Church of the Jews from gods holy statutes, what time
it did crucify Christ Jesus the only Messiah, and most cruelly persecute his
Apostles. And yet will our Papists claim their privileges and ancient
liberties, which if you grant unto the^, my Lords, ye shall assuredly drink
the cupp of gods vengeance with them, whosoever me^taineth the privileges of
Papists, shall dri^k the cupp of gods vengeance with them
and shall be reputed before his presence compagnions of thieves and me^tainers of
murderers, as is before declared. For their immunitie and privilege, whereof
so greatly they bost, is nothing else, but as if thieves, murderers or
briggandes should conspire amongst them selves, that they would never answer
in judgment before any laufull Magistrate, to the end that their theft and
murder should not be punished, even such I say is their wicked privilege,
which neither they have of God the father, neither of Christ Jesus, who has
revealed his fathers will to the world, neither yet of the Apostles nor
primative Church, as before is declared. But it is a thing conspired amongst
them selves, to the end that their iniquity, detestable life, and tyranny
shall neither be repressed nor reformed. And if they object, that godly
Emperors did grant and confirm the same, I answer that the godliness of no
man is, or can be of sufficient authority to justify a foolish and ungodly
fact, such I mean, as God has not allowed by his word. For Abraham was a
godly man, but the denial of his wife was such a fact, as no godly man oght
to imitate. The same might I show of David, Ezechias and Josias, unto whom I
think no man of judgment will prefer any Emperor sense Christ, in holiness
and wisdom, and yet are not all their factes, no even such, as they appeared
to have done for good causes, to be approved nor followed. And therefore, I say,
as error and ignorance remayn all ways with the most perfect man in this
life, so must their works be examined by an other rule, the^ by their own
holiness, if they shall be approved. But if this answer does not suffice, then
will I answer more shortly, that no godly Emperor sense Christ's ascensio^
has granted any such privilege to any such Church or person, as they (the
hole generation of Papists) be at this day. I am not ignorant, that so^me
Emperors of a certain zeal and for so^me co^sideratio^s granted liberties
to the true Church afflicted for their mentainance against tyrants, but what
serves this for the defense of their tyranny? If the law must be understood
according to the mind of the lawgeuer, then must they first prove the^ selves
Christ's true and afflicted Church, before they can claim any privilege to
appertain to them. For only to that Church were the privileges granted. It
will not be their glorious titles, neither yet the long possession of the
name, that can prevail in this so weghtie a cause. For all those had the
Church of Jerusalem, which did crucify Christ, and did condemn his doctrine.
We offer to prove by their fruits and tyranny, by the Prophets, and plain
scriptures of God, what trees and generation they be, to wit unfruitful and
rotten, apt for nothing, but to be cut and cast in hell fire, yea that they
are the very kingdom of Antichrist, of whom we are commanded to beware. And
therefore, my Lords, to return to you, seeing that God has armed your hands
with the sword of justice, seeing that his Law most streatly commands
idolaters and falls prophets to be punisshed with death, and that you be placed
above your subjects to reign as fathers over their children: and further seeing
that not only I, but with me many thousand famous, godly and learned persons,
accuse your Bishops and the hole rabble of the Papistical clergy of
idolatry, of murder and of blasphemy against God committed: it appertains
to your Honors to be vigilant and careful in so weghtie a matter? The
question is not of earthly substance, but of the glory of God, and of the
salvation of your selves, and of your brethren subject to your charge, in which
if you after this plain admonition be negligent, there rests no excuse by
reason of ignorance. For in the name of God I require of you, that the cause of
religion may be tried in your presence by the plain and simple word of God:
that your Bishops be compelled to desist from their tyranny: that they be
compelled to make answer for the neglecting of their office, for the substance
of the poor, which unjustly they usurp and prodigally they do spend, but
principally for the false and deceauable doctrine, which is taught and defended
by their falls prophets, flattering freers, and other such venomous locustes.
Which thing if with single eyes ye do (preferring gods glory and the
salvation of your brethren to all worldly commodity) then shall the same God,
who solemnly does pronounce to honor those, that do honor him, power his
benedictions plentifully upon you, he shall be your buckler, protection and
captain, and shall repress by his strength and wisdom, whatsoever Satan by
his suppostes shall imagine against you. I am not ignorant, that great troubles
shall ensue your enterprise. For Satan will not be expelled from the possession
of his usurped kingdom without resistance. But if you, as is said, preferring
gods glory to your own lives, vnfeanedly seek and study to obey his blessed
will, then shall your deliverance be such, as evidently it shall be known,
that the angels of the eternal do watch, make war, and feght for those, that
unfeignedly fear the Lord. But if you refuse this my most reasonable and just
petition, what defense that ever you appear to have before men, then shall God
(whom in me you contemn) refuse you. He shall pourefurthe contempt upon you,
Deu. 28.
and upon your posterity after you. Leuit. 26.
The spirit of boldness and wisdom shall be taken from you, your ennemies shall
reign, and you shall die in bondage, yea God shall cut down the unfruitful
trees, when they do appear most beautifully to flourish, Esa. 27. and 30.
and shall so burn the root, that after of you shall neither twigge, nor
branch again spring to glory. Hereof I need not to adduce unto you examples
from the former ages, and ancient histories. For your brethren the nobility
of England are a mirror and glass, in the which ye may behold gods just
punishment. For as they have refused him, and his Eua^gil, which ones in mouth
they did profess, so has he refused them, and has taken from them the spirit
of wisdom, boldenes, and of counsil. They see and feel their own misery, and
yet they have no grace to avoid it. They hate the bondage of strangers, the
pride of priests, and the mo^striferous empire of a wicked woman, and yet are
they compelled to bow their necks to the yock of the Devil, to obey what
soever the proud Spaniards, and wicked Iesabel list to command, and finally
to stand like slaves with capp in hand till the servants of Satan the shaven
sort call them to counsil. This fruit do they reap and gather of their former
rebellion, and unfaithfulness toward God. They are left co^fused in their own
counsils. He, whom in his me^bres for the pleasure of a wicked woman they have
exiled, persecuted and blasphemed, does now laugh them to skorn, suffers the^
to be pyned in bondage of most wicked men, and finally shall adiudge the^ to
the fire everlasting, except that spedely, and openly they repent their
horrible treason, which against God, against his son Christ Jesus, and
against the liberty of their own native realm they have committed. The same
plages shall fall upon you, be you assured, if ye refuse the defense of his
servants, that call for your support. My words are sharp, but consider, my
Lords, that they are not mine, but that they are the threatenings of the
omnipotent, who assuredly will perfurme the voices of his Prophets, how that
ever carnal men despise his admonitions. Let England and Scotland both aduert.
The sword of Gods wrath is alredie drawn, which of necessity must needs
stryke, when grace offered is obstinatly refused. You have been long in bondage
of the Devil, blyndnes, error and idolatry, prevailing against the simple
truth of God in that your realm, in which God has made you princes and
rulers. But now does God of his great mercy call you to repentance, before he
power forth the uttermost of his vengeance: God calls to repentance before he
strike in his hot displeasure.
he cries to your ears, that your religion is nothing but idolatry. he
accuses you of the blood of his saints, which has been shed by your
permission, assistance, and powers. For the tyranny of those raging beasts
should have no force, if by your strength they were not mentained. Papists had
no force, if Princes did not mentain them.
Of those horrible crimes does now God accuse you, not of purpose to condemn
you, but mercifully to absolve, and pardon you, as sometime he did those, whom
Peter accused to have killed the son of God, Act. 2.
so that ye be not of mind nor purpose to justify your former iniquity.

Iniquity I call not only the crimes and offenses, which have been and yet
remain in your manners and lives, but that also, which appears before men
most holy, with hassard of my life I offer to prove abomination before God: No
true servant of God may communicate with the papistical religion.
that is, your hole religion to be so corrupt and vain, that no true seruante
of God can communicate with it, because that in so doing he should manifestly
deny Christ Jesus and his eternal verity. I know that your bishops
accompained with the swarm of the papistical vermin shall cry, A damned
heretik oght not to be hard. An answer to the old objection, that an heretik
oght not to be hard.
But remember, my Lords, what in the beginning I have protested, upon which
grou^nd I continually stand, to wit, that I am no heretic nor deceauable
teacher, but the seruante of Christ Jesus, a preacher of his i^fallible
verity, innocent in all that they can lay to my charge concerning my doctrine,
and that therefore by them, being ennemies to Christ, I am iniustly damned.
From which cruel sentence I have appealed and do appeal, as before mention is
made: in the mean time most humbly requiring your Honors to take me in your
protection, to be auditors of my just defe^ses, grau^ting unto me the same
liberty, which Achab a wicked king and Israel at that time a blinded people,
granted to Helias in the like case. That is, that your bishops, and the hole
rabble of your clergy may be called before you and before that people, 1. Reg.
18.
whom they have deceived: that I be not condemned by multitude, by custom, by
authority or law divised by man, but that God him self may be judge betwixt me
and my adversaries. Let God, I say, speak by his law, by his prophets, by
Christ Jesus or by his Apostles, and so let him pronounce, what religion he
approves, and then be my ennemies never so many, and appear they never so
strong and so learned, no more do I fear victory, then did Helias, being but
one man against the multitude of Baales priests. And if they think to have
advantage by their councils and doctors, Tuching councils and doctors.
this I further offer, to admit the one and the other, as witnesses in all
matters debateable, three things (which justly can not be denied) being
granted unto me. First, that the most ancient Councils nighest to the
primitive Church, in which the learned and godly fathers did examine all
matters by gods word, may be holden of most authority. Secondarely, that no
determination of Councils nor man be admitted against the plain verity of
gods word, nor against the determination of those four chief Councils, whose
authority has been and is holden by them equal with the authority of the
four Evangelists. And last, that to no doctor be given greater authority,
then Augustine requires to be given to his writings: In prologo Retract.
to wit, if he plainly prove not his affirmation by Gods infallible word,
that then his sentence be rejected and imputed to the error of a man. These
things granted and admitted, I shall no more refuse the testimonies of
Councils and doctors, then shall my adversaries. But and if they will justify
those Councils, which mentaine their pride, and usurped authority, and will
reject those, which plainly have condemned all such tyranny, negligence, and
wicked life, as bishops now do use: and if further they will snatche a
doubtful sentence of a doctor, and refuse his mind, when he speaks plainly,
then will I say, that all man is a liar, that credit oght not to be given to an
unconstant witness, and that no Cou^cils oght to prevail, nor be admitted
against the sentence, which God has pronounced. And thus, my Lords, in few
words to conclude I have offered unto you a trial of mie innocence: I have
declared unto you, what God requires of you, being placed above his people, as
rulers and princes: I have offered unto you, and to the inhabita^tes of the
realm, the verity of Christ Jesus, and with the hasard of my life I presently
offer to prove the religion, which amongst you is mentained by fire and
sword, to be falls, damnable and diabolical. Which things if ye refuse,
defending tyrants in their tyra^nie, then dar I not flatter, but as it was
commanded to Ezechiel boldly to proclaim, Eze. 33.
so must I cry to you, that you shall perish in your iniquity, that the Lord
Jesus shall refuse so many of you, as maliciously withstand his eternal
verity, and in the day of his apparition, Mat. 24 and 26.
when all flesh shall appear before him, that he shall repel you from his
compagnie and shall command you to the fire, which never shall be quenched,
Dani. 12
and then neither shall the multitude be able to resist, Mat. 25.
neither yet the counsils of man be able to prevail against that sentence,
which he shall pronounce.

God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ by the power of his holy spirit so
rule and dispose your hearts, that with simplicity ye may consider the
things, that be offered, and that ye may take such order in the same, as God in
you may be glorified, and Christ's flock by you may be edified and comforted to
the praise and glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, whose omnipotent spirit rule
your hearts in his true fear to the end.

Amen.
TO HIS BELOVED BRETHREN THE communaltie of Scotland John Knoxe wishes grace,
mercy and peace with the spirit of righteous judgment.
What I have required of the Queen Rege^t, estates and nobility as of the
chife heads (for this present) of the realm, I can not cease to require of
you dearli beloved Brethren, which be the co^munaltie and body of the same. To
wit, that it (notwithstanding that falls and cruel sentence, which your disgised
bishops have pronounced against me) would please you to be so favorable unto
me, as to be indifferent auditors of my just purgation. Which to do if God
earnestly move your hearts, as I nothing doubt, but that your entreprise shall
redounde to the praise of his holy name, so am I assured, that ye and your
posterity shall by that means receive most singular comfort, edificatio^, and
profit. For when ye shall hear the matter debated, ye shall easelie perceive
and understand, upon what ground and foundation is builded that religion,
which amongst you is this day defended by fire and sword. As for my own
conscience I am most assuredly persuaded, that, what soever is used in the
papistical Church is al together repugning to Christ's blessed ordinance, and
is nothing but mortal venem, of which whosoever drinks, I am assuredly
persuaded, that therewith he dri^keth death and damnation, except by true
conversion unto God he be purged from the same. But because that long silence
of gods word has begotten ignorance almost in all sorts of men, and
ignorance, joined with long custom, has confirmed superstition in the hearts
of many, I therefore in the name of the Lord Jesus desire audience as well of
you the communaltie, my Brethren, as of the estates and nobility of the
realm, Petition.
that in public preaching I may have place amongst you at large to utter my
mind in all matters of controversy this day in religion. And further I desire,
that ye co^curring with your nobility would compel your bishops and clergy
to cease their tyranny, and also that, for the better assurance and
instruction of your conscience, ye would compel your said bishops and falls
teachers to answer by the scriptures of God to such obiectio^s and crimes, as
shall be laid against their vain religion, falls doctrine, wicked life, and
sclanderous conversation. Here I know, that it shall be objected, that I require
of you a thing most unreasonable. To wit, that ye should call your religion in
doubt, which has been approved and established by so long continuance, and by
the consent of so many men before you. Answer to an objection.
But I shortly answer, that neither is the long process of time, neither yet
the multitude of men a sufficient approbation, Lactanti.
which God will allow for our religion. Firmian.
For as sum of the most aunncient writers do witness, Tertulia^.
neither can long process of time justify an error, Cyprian.
neither can the multitude of such, as follow it, chau^g the nature of the same.
But if it was an error in the beginning, so is it in the end, and the longer
that it be followed, and the mo that do receive it, it is the more pestilent,
and more to be avoided. For if antiquity or multitude of me^ could justify
any religion, then was the idolatry of the Gentiles, and now is the
abomination of the Turks good religion. For antiquity approved the one, and a
multitude has received and does defend the other. But otherwise to answer,
godly men may wonder, from what fontaine such a sentence does flow, that no
man oght to try his faith and religion by gods word, but that he safely may
believe and follow every thing, which antiquity and a multitude have approved.
The spirit of God does otherwise teach us. John 5. and 7.
For the wisdone of God Christ Jesus him self remitted his adversaries to
Moses, and the scriptures, to try by them, whether his doctrine was of God or
not. The Apostles Paul and Peter command men to try the religion, Acts 17.
which they profess, by gods plain scriptures, 2. Pet. 1.
and do praise men for so doing. 1. John 4.
S. John straytly commands, that we believe not every spirit, but wills us
to try the spirits, whether they be of God or not. Now seeing that these
evident testimonies of the holy Ghost will us to try our faith and religion
by the plain word of God, wonder it is, that the papists will not be
content, that their religion and doctrine comme under the trial of the same.
If this sentence of Christ be true (as it is most true, seeing it springs from
the verity it self) who so evil does, hates the light, John 3.
neither will he come to the light lest that his evil works be manifested
and rebuked, then do our papists by their own sentence condemn them selves
and their religion. For in so far as they refuse examination and trial, they
declare, that they know sum fault, which the light will utter: which is a
cause of their fear* and why they claim to that privilege, that no man
dispute of their religion. The verity and truth, being of the nature of fine
purified gold, why Papists will not dispute of the ground of their religion.
does not fear the trial of the furnace, but the stuble and chaf of man's
inventions (such is their religion) may not abide the flame of the fire. True
it is, that Mahomet pronounced this sentence, that no man should in pain of
death dispute or reason of the ground of his religion. Mahomet and the Pope do
agree.
Which law to this day by the art of Satan is yet observed amongst the Turks
to their mortal blindness and horrible blasphemyng of Christ Jesus, and of his
true religion. And from Mahomet (or rather from Satan father of all lies) has
the Pope and his rabble learned this former lesson. To wit, that their
religion should not be disputed upon, but what the fathers have believed, that
oght and must the children approve. And in so diuising Satan lacked not his
foresight. For no one thing has more established the kingdom of that Roman
Antichrist, then this most wicked decrie. To wit, that no man was permitted to
reason of his power, or to call his laws in doubt. This thing is most assured,
that whenever the papisticall religion shall comme to examination, it shall be
found to have no other ground, then has the religion of Mahomet. To wit
man's invention, devise and dreams ouershadowed with sum color of gods
word. And therefore Brethren seeing that the religion is, as the stomach to the
body, which, if it be corrupted, does infect the hole members, it is
necessary that the same be examined, and if it be found replenished with
pestilent humors (I mean with the fantasies of men) then of necessity it is,
that those be purged, else shall your bodies and souls perish for ever. NOTE.
For of this I would ye were most certai^ly persuaded, that a corrupt religion
defiles the hole life of man, appear it never so holy. Reformation of
religion belongs to all, that hope for life everlasting.
Neither would I that ye should esteem the reformation and care of religion
less to appertai^ to you, because ye are no kings, rulers, judges, nobils,
nor in authority. Beloved Brethren, ye are gods creatures, created and
formed to his own image and similitude, for whose redemption was shed the most
precious blood of the only beloved son of God, to whom he has commanded
his Gospel and gladtidinges to be preached, and for whom he has prepared
the heavenly inheritance, so that ye will not obstinately refuse, and
disdainefully contemn the means, which he has appointed to obtain the same:
to wit, his blessed Euangile, which now he offers unto you, to the end that
ye may be saved. For the Gospel and gladtidinges of the ki^gdome truly
preached is the power of God to the salvation of every beleuer, Romans 1.
which to credit and receive you the communaltie are no less addetted, then be
your rulers and princes. The subject is no less bound to believe in Christ,
then is the king.
For albeit God has put and ordened distinction and difference betwixt the
king and subjects, betwixt the rulers and the commune people in the regiment
and administration of civil policies, yet in the hope of the life to comme he
has made all equal. For as in Christ Jesus the Jew has no greater
prerogative, Galat. 3.
then has the Gentile, the man, then has the woman, the learned, then the
unlearned, the Lord, then the seruante, but all are one in him, so is there but
one way and means to attain to the participation of his benefits and
spiritual graces, which is a lively faith wurking by charity. And therefore
I say that it does no less appertain to you, beloved Brethren, to be assured
that your faith and religion be grounded and established upon the true and
undoubted word of God, then to your princes, or rulers. For as your bodies can
not escape corporal death, if with your princes ye eat or drink deadly poison
(althoghe it be by ignorance or negligence) so shall ye not escape the death
everlasting, if with them ye profess a corrupt religion. Yea except in heart
ye believe, and with mouth ye confess the Lord Jesus to be the only Saluiour
of the world (which ye can not do, except ye embrace his Euangile offered) ye
can not escape death and damnation. Abac. 2.
For as the just lives by his own faith, Marc. 16.
so does the unfaithful perish by his infidelity. John. 3.
And as true faith is engendered, norished, and mentained in the hearts of
gods elect by Christ's Eua^gile truly preached, so is infidelity and
unbelief fostered by concealing and repressing the same. And thus if ye look
for the life everlasting, ye must try if ye stand in faith, and if ye would be
assured of a true and lively faith, ye must needs have Christ Jesus truly
preached unto you. And this is the cause (dear Brethren) that so often I repeat,
and so constantly I affirm, that to you it does no less appertain, then to
your king or princes* to provide that Christ Jesus be truly preached amongst
you, seeing that without his true knolledge can neither of you both attain to
salvation. And this is the point, wherein, I say, al man is a equal,

That as all be descended from Adam, Wherein all man is equal.
by whose syn and inobedience did death enter into the world, Romans 5.
so it behooved all, that shall obtain life, to be ingrafted in one, that is,
Isa. 53.
in the Lord Jesus, who being the just servant, does by his knolledge justify
many: John 3. and 5.
to wit, all that vnfeanedly believe in him.

Of this equality, and that God requires no less of the subject, be he never
so poor, then of the prince and rich man in matters of religion, he has
given an evident declaration in the law of Moses. For when the tabernacle was
buy lded, erected, and set in order, God did provide, how it, and the things
appertaining to the same, should be sustained, so that they should not fall in
decay. And this provision (albeit heaven and earth obey his empire) would he
not take from the secret and hid treasures, which lie dispersed i^ the veins
of the earth, Exodus 30.
neither yet would he take it from the rich and potent of his people, but he
did command, that every man of the sons of Israel (were he rich or were he
poor) that came in count from twenty years and upward, should yearly pay
half a sicle for an oblation to the Lord in the remembrance of their
redemption, and for an expiation or clensing to their souls, which money God
commanded should be bestowed upon the ornaments and necessaries of the
tabernacle of testimony. He furthermore added a precept, that the rich should
give no more for that use, and in that behalf, then should the poor, neither
yet that the poor should give any less, then should the rich in that
consideration. This law to man's reason and judgment may appear very
unreasonable. For sum rich man might have given a thousand sicles with less
hurt of his substance, then so^me poor man might have paid the half sicle.
And yet God makes all equal, and will that the one shall pay no more then the
other, neither yet the poor any less then the rich. This law I say may
appear very unequal. But if the cause, which God adds, be observed, we
shall find in the same the great mercy and inestimable wisdom of God to
appear, which cause is expressed in these words,

This money received from the children of Israel thou shall give in the service
of the tabernacle, Exodus 30.
that it may be to the children of Israel for a remembrance before the Lord,
that he may be merciful to your souls.

This cause, I say, does evidently declare, that as the hole multitude was
delivered from the bondage of Egypt by the mighty power of God alone, so was
every member of the same without respect of person sanctified by his grace,
the rich in that behalf nothing preferred to the poorest. For by no merit, nor
worthynes of man was he moved to chose, and to establishe his habitation and
dwellinge amongst them. But their felicity, prerogative and honor, which
they had above all other nations, proceeded only from the fontaine of his
eternal goodness, who loved the^ freely, as that he freely had chosen them to be
his preestlie kingdom and holy people from all nations of the earth. Exodus 19.
Thus to honor them, that he would dwell in the midst of them, he neither
was moved (I say) by the wisdom of the wise, by the riches of the potent,
neither yet by the virtue and holiness of any estate amongst them, but of mere
goodness did he love them, and with his presence did he honor that hole people,
and therefore to paynt out the same his common love to the hole multitude, and
to cut of occasions of contention, The presence of God represented in the
tabernacle.
and doubts of conscience, he would receive no more from the rich, then from
the poor, for the maintenance of that his tabernacle, by the which was
represented his presence, and habitation amongst them. If the rich had been
preferred to the poor, The presence of God represented in the taber nacle.
then as the one should have been puffed up with pride, as that he had been
more acceptable to God by reason of his greater gift, so should the conscience
of the other have been troubled and wounded, thinking that his poverty was an
impediment, that he could not stand in so perfect favor with God, as did the
other, because he was not able to give so much, as did the rich, to the
mentenance of his tabernacle. But he, who of mercy (as said is) did chose his
habitation amongst them, and also that best knows, what lies within man,
did provide the remedy for the one, and for the other, making them equal in
that behalf, who in other things were most unequal. If the poor should have
found him self grieved by reason of that tax, and that as much was imposed
upon him, as upon the rich, yet had he no small cause of joy, that God him
self would please to compare him, and to make him equal in the mentena^ce of
his tabernacle to the most rich and potent in Israel. If this equality was
commanded by God for mentena^ce of that transitory tabernacle, which was but
a shadoe of a better to come, Hebr. 9.
is not the same required of us, who now has the verity, which is Christ
Jesus? who being clad with our nature is made Immanuel, that is, God with us.

Whose natural body albeit it be received in the heavens, Isaie 8.
where he must abide till all be complete, Act. 3.
that is forespoken by the Prophets, Mat. 28.
yet has he promised to be present with us to the e^d of the world.

And for that purpose, and for the more assurance of his promise he has
erected amongst us here in earth the signs of his own presence with us, his
spiritual tabernacle, the true preaching of his word, and right administration
of his sacraments. To the mentenance whereof is no less bound the subject,
The spiritual tabernacle and signs of Christ's presence with us.
then the prince, the poor, then the rich. For as the price, which was given
for man's redemption, is one, so requires God of all, that shall be partakers
of the benefits of the same, a like duty, which is a plain confession, that
by Christ Jesus alone we have received, what soever was lost in Adam. Of the
prince does God require, that he refuse him self, and that he follow Christ
Jesus: of the subject he requires the same. Of the kings and judges it is
required, that they kiss the son, that is, give honor, subjection, and
obedience to him. And from such reverence does not God exempt the subject, that
shall be saved. And this is that aequalitie, which is betwixt the kings and
subjects, the most rich or noble, and betwixt the poorest, and men of lowest
estate: to wit, that as the one is oblished to believe in heart, and with mouth
to confess the Lord Jesus to be the only savior of the world, so also is the
other. Neither is there any of gods children (who has attained to the
years of discretion) so poor, but that he has thus much to bestow upon the
ornaments, NOTE.
and maintenance of their spiritual tabernacle, when necessity requires:
neither yet is there any so rich, of whose hand God requires any more. For
albeit that David gathered great substance for the buylding of the temple: 1
Par. 29.
that Solomon with earnest diligence and incredible expenses erected and
finished the same: 2. Para. 3. 4. and 5.
that Ezechias and Josias purged the religion, 2. Para. 29. 30. and 35.
which before was corrupted, yet to them was God no further dettour in that
respect, then he was to the most simple of the faithful posterity of
faithful Abraham. For their diligence, zeal, and works gave rather testimony
and confession before men, what honor they did bear to God, what love to his
word, and reverence to his religion, then that any work proceading from them
did either establishe, or yet increase gods favor toward the^, who freely
did love the^ in Christ his son before the foundation of the world was laid.
So that these forenamed by their notable works gave testimony of their
unfeigned faith, and the same does the poorest, that vnfeanedly and openly
professes Christ Jesus, that does embrase his gladtydinges offered, that does
abhor superstition, and fly from idolatry. The poorest; I say, and most
simple, that this day in earth in the days of this cruel persecution fermely
believes in Christ, and boldly does confess him before this wicked generation,
is no less acceptable before God, neither is judged in his presence to have
done any less in promoting Christ his cause, then is the king, that by the
sword and power, which he has received of God, wrooteth out idolatry, and so
aduanceth Christ's glory. But to return to our former purpose, it is no less
required, I say, of the subject to beleu^ in Christ, and to profess his true
religion, then of the prince and king. And therefore I affirm, that in gods
presence it shall not excuse you to allege, that ye were no chief rulers, and
therefore that the care and reformation of religion did not appertain unto you.

Ye dear Brethren (as before is said) are the creatures of God created to his
own image and similitude: to whom it is commanded to hear the voice of your
heavenly Father, Mat. 17.
to embrase his son Christ Jesus, to fly from all doctrine and religion,
which he has not approved by his own will revealed to us in his most blessed
word. To which precepts and charges if ye be found inobedient, ye shall
perish in your iniquity as rebels and stubborn servants, that have no
pleasure to obey the good will of their sovereign Lord, who most lovingly does
call for your obedience. And therefore, Brethren, in this behalf it is your
part to be careful and diligent. Note.
For the question is not of things temporal, which allthoghe they be
endaungered, yet by diligence and process of time may after be redressed, but
it is of the damnation of your bodies and souls and of the loss of the life
everlasting, which once lost can never be recovered.

And therefore, I say, that it behooves you to be careful and dilligent in this
so weghtie a matter, lest that ye, contemnyng this occasion, which God now
offers, find not the like, althoghe that after with gronyng and sobbes ye
la^guyshe for the same. The offer of John Knoxe to his native realm.
And that ye be not ignorant of what occasion I mean, in few words I shall
express it.

Not only I, but with me also diverse other godly and learned men do offer unto
you our labors faithfully to instruct you in the ways of the Eternal our God,
and in the synceritie of Christ's Euangil, which this day by the pestilent
generation of Antichrist (I mean by the pope, and by his most ungodly clergy)
are almost hyd from the eyes of men. We offer to ieopard our lives for the
salvation of your souls, and by manifest scriptures to prove that religion,
which amongst you is mentained by fire and sword, to be vain, falls and
diabolical. We require nothing of you, but that patiently ye will hear our
doctrine, which is not ours, but is the doctrine of salvation revealed to the
world by the only son of God: what he requires.
and that ye will examine our reasons, by the which we offer to prove the
papistical religion to be abominable before God. And last we require, that by
your power the tyranny of those cruel beasts (I mean of preests and freers)
may be brideled till we have uttered our minds in all matters this day
debateable in religion. If these things in the fear of God ye grant to me,
and unto others, that vnfeanedly for your salvation, and for gods glory
require the same, I am assured, that of God ye shall be blessed, whatsoever
Satan shall devise against you. But and if ye conte^ne or refuse God, who thus
lovingly offers unto you salvation and life, ye shall neither escape plages
temporal, which shortly shall apprehend you, neither yet the torment prepared
for the devil, and for his angels, except by spedie repentance ye return to
the Lord, whom now ye refuse, if that ye refuse the messingers of his word.

But yet I think ye doubt, An answer to two questions.
what ye oght, and may do in this so weghtie a matter. In few words I will
declare my conscience in the one and in the other. Ye oght to prefer the glory
of God, the promoting of Christ his Euangil, and the salvation of your souls
to all things, that be in earth: and ye, althoghe ye be but subjects, may
lawfully require of your superiors, be it of your king, be it of your lords,
rulers and powers, that they provide for you true preachers, Subjects may
lawfully require true preachers of their rulers.
and that they expel such, as under the names of pastors devour and destroy
the flock, not feeding the same as Christ Jesus has commanded. And if in this
point your superior be negligent, or yet pretend to maitaine tyrants in their
tyranny, most justly ye may provide true teachers for your selves, be it in
your cities, towns or villages: them ye may maitaine and defend against all,
that shall persecute them, and by that means shall labor to defraude you of
that most confortable food of your souls, Christ's Euangil truly preached.
Ye may moreover withhold the fruits, and profetts, which your falls Bishops
and clergy most iniustly receive of you, unto such time as they be compelled
faithfully to do their charge and duties, which is to preach unto you Christ
Jesus truly, ryghtly to minister his sacraments according to his own
institution, and so to watch for the salvation of your souls, as is
commanded by Christ Jesus him self and by his apostles Paul, Joan. 21.
and Peter. Act. 20.
If God shall move your hearts in his true fear to begin to practice these
things, and to demand and crave the same of your superiors, which most
lawfully ye may do, the^ I doubt not, but of his great mercy, and free grace
he shall illuminate the eyes of your minds, that his undoubted verity shall be
a lantern to your feet to guide and lead you in all the ways, which his
godly wisdom does approve. Things, that may draw men back from the
synceritie of Christ's euangil.
He shall make your ennemies tremble before your faces, he shall establish his
blessed Eua^gil amongst you to the salvation and perpetual comfort of your
selves, and of your posterity after you. But and if (as God forbid) the love
of friends, the fear of your princes, and the wisdom of the world draw you
back from God, and from his son Christ Jesus, be ye certainly persuaded, that
ye shall drink the cupp of his vengeance, so many I mean as shall contemn and
despise this loving calling of your heavenly father. It will not excuse you
(dear Brethren) in the presence of God, neither yet will it avail you in the
day of his visitation, to say, We were but simple subjects, we could not
redress the faults and crimes of our rulers, Bishops, and clergy: we
called for reformation, and wished for the same, but Lords brethren were
Bishops, their sons were abbottes, and the friends of great men had the
possession of the Church, and so were we compelled to give obedience to all,
that they demanded. These vain excuses, I say, will nothing avail you in the
presence of God, who requires no less of the subjects, then of the rulers,
that they decline from evil, and that they do good, that they abstain from
idolatry, superstition, blasphemy, murder and other such horrible crimes,
which his law forbids, and yet nottheles are openly committed and
maliciously defended in that miserable realm. And if ye think that ye are
innocent because ye are not the chief auctours of such iniquity, ye are
utterly deceived.

For God does not only punish the chief offenders, but with them does he damn
the consenters to iniquity: Romans 1.
and all are judged to consent, that knowing impiety committed give no
testimony, that the same displeases them. Note.
To speak this matter more plain, as your princes and rulers are criminal with
your Bishops of all idolatry committed, Princes, and Bishops are a like
criminal.
and of all the innocent blood, that is shed for the testimony of Christ's
truth, and that because they maintain them in their tyranny, so are you (I
mean so many of you, as give no plain confession to the contrary) criminal and
gyltie with your princes and rulers of the same crimes, because ye assist and
maintain your princes in their blind rage, and give no declaration, that
their tyranny displeases you. How subjects offend with their Princes.
This doctrine I know is strange to the blind world, but the verity of it
has been declared in all notable punishments from the beginning. When the
original world perished by water, Genesis 7. and 19.
when Sodom and Gomorrha were consumed by fire, and finally when Jerusalem was
horribly destroyed, Josephus. Aegesippus.
does any man think, that all were a like wicked before the world? Evident it
is, that they were not, if they shall be judged according to their external
factes. For sum were young, and old not be oppressors, neiher yet could
defile them selves with unnatural and beastly lusts: so^me were pitiful and
gentle of nature, and did not thrist for the blood of Christ, nor of his
Apostles. But did any escape the plages and vengeance, which did apprehend the
multitude? Let the scriptures witness and the histories be considered* which
plainly do testify, that by the waters all flesh in earth at that time did
perish, (Noah and his family reserved) that none escaped in Sodom and in the
other cities adjacent, except Lot and his two daughters. And evident it is,
that in that famous city Jerusalem in that last and horrible destruction of
the same none escaped gods vengeance, except so many as before were
dispersed. And what is the cause of this severity, seeing that all were not a
like offenders? Let flesh cease to dispute with God; and let all man by these
examples learn betymes to fly and avoid the society and compagnie of the
proud contemners of God, if that they list not to be partakers of their
plages. The cause is evident: if we can be subject without grudging to gods
judgments, why all perished in the flood, in Sodom, and Gomorrha.
which in them selves are most holy and just. For in the original world none
was found, that either did resist tyranny and oppression, that universally
was used, either yet that earnestly reprehended the same. In Sodom was none
found, that did against and that furious and beastly multitude, that did
compass about and besiege the house of Lot. None would believe Lot, that the
city should be destroyed. And finally in Jerusalem was none found, that
studied to repress the tyranny of the Priests, who were coniured against
Christ and his Euangil, but all fainted, (I except ever such, as gave witness
with their blood, or their flying, that such impiety displeased them) all kept
silence, by the which all approved iniquity, and joined hands with the
tyra^tes, and so were all arrayed and set, as it had been in one battle
against the omnipotent, and against his son Christ Jesus. For whosoever
gathers not with Christ in the day of his harvest, is judged to scatter. And
therefore of one ve^gea^ce temporal were they all partakers. Which thing as
before I have touched, oght to move you to the deep consideration of your
duties in these last and most perilous times. The iniquity of your Bishops
is more then manifest: their filthy lives infect the aier, the innocent blood,
which they shed, cries ve^gea^ce in the ears of our God: the idolatry and
abominatio^, which openly they commit, and without punishment mai^taine, does
corrupt and defyle the hole la^d: and none amongst you does unfeignedly study
for any redress of such enormities. Will God in this behalf hold you as
innocents? Be not deceived dear Brethren. God has punished not only the
proud tyrants, filthy persons, and cruel murderers, but also such, as with
them did draw the yoke of iniquity, what subjects shall God punish with
their Princes.
was it by flattering their offenses, obeying their iniust commandments, or
in wynking at their manifest iniquity. All such, I say, has God once punished
with the chief offe^ders. Be ye assured, Brethren, that as he is immutable of
nature, so will he not pardon in you that, which so severely he has punished
in others, and now the less, because he has plainly admonished you of the
dangers to come, and has offered you his mercy before he pourefurth his wrath
and displeasure upon the inobedie^t. God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who is father of glory, and God of all consolation, give you the spirit of
wisdom, and open unto you the knolledge of him self by the means of his dear
son, by the which ye may attain to the esperance and hope, that after the
trubles of this tra^sitorious life ye may be partakers of the riches of that
glorious inheritance, which is prepared for such, as refuse them selves, and
feght under the ba^ner of Christ Jesus in the day of this his battle: that in
deep consideration of the same ye may learn to prefer the invisible and eternal
joys to the vain pleasures, that are present. God further grant you his
holy spirit, righteously to consider, what I in his name have required of your
nobility, and of you the subjects, and move you all together so to answer,
that my petition be not a testimony of your just condemnation, when the Lord
Jesus shall appear to revenge the blood of his saints, and the contempt of his
most holy word. Amen.

Sleap not in syn, for vengeance is prepared against all inobedie^t. Fly from
Babylon, if ye will not be partakers of her plages.

Be witness to my appellation. Grace be with you. From Geneua The 14. of July,
1558. Your brother to command in godliness JOHN KNOXE.

AN ADMONITION TO ENGLAND AND Scotland to call them to repentance, written by
Antoni Gilby.
Where as many have written many profitable admonitio^s to you twain, (O
England and Scotland, both making one Island most happy, if you could know
your own happiness) sum against the regiment of women, wherewith ye are both
plaged, sum against unlawful obedience, and the admitting of strangers to be
your kings, sum declaring the vile nature of the Spaniards, whom thou, o
England, to thy destruction mainteinest, sum the pride of the Frenchmen,
whom thou, o Scotland, to thy ruin receauest: and many hundrethes with pen,
with tongue, with word, with writing, with ieopardie and loss of lands,
goods, and lives, have admonished you both twain of that ca^kred poison of
papistrie, that ye foster and pamper to your own perdition, and utter
destruction of souls and bodies, of your selves and yours for now and ever. I
thought it my duty (seeing your destruction to man's judgment to draw so near)
how much or little so ever they have prevailed, yet once again to admonish you
both, to give testimony to that truth, which my brethren have written, and
specially to stir your hearts to repentance, or at the least to offer my
self a witness against you: for the justice of God and his righteous
judgments, which doubtless (if your hearts be hardened) against you both are at
hand to be uttered. Thus by our writi^gs, whom it pleases God to stir up of
your nations, all men, that now live, and that shall comme after us, shall have
cause also to praise the mercy of God, that so often admonishes before he do
stryke, and to consider his just punishment, when he shall pourefurth his
vengeance. Give ear therefore betymes, O Britanie (for of that name both
reioyseth) whiles the Lord calls, exhorts, and admonishes, that is the
acceptable time, when he will be found. If ye refuse the time offered, ye can
not have it afterward though with tears (as did Esau) ye do seem to seek it.
Yet once again in gods behalf I do offer you the very means, which if God
of his mercies grant you grace to follow, I doubt nothing but that of al your
ennemies spedely ye shallbe delivered. Ye rejoice at this word, I am sure, if
ye have any hope of the perfourma^ce. The^ harke^ to the matter, which I do
write unto you not forth of men's dreams nor fables, not forth of profane
histories painted with man's wisdom, vain eloquence, or subtle reasons, but
forth of the infallible truth of gods word, and by such plain
demonstrations, as shall be able to convince every one of your own
consciences, be he never so obstinate. I will ask no further judges. Is not
this gods curse, and threatninge amongst many other pronounced against the
sinful land and disobedient people?

That strangers should devour the fruit of thy la^d, Deu. 28.
that the stranger should clyme above the, and thou should comme down and be
his inferior, he shall be the head and thou the tail. The Lord shall bring
upon the a people far of, whose tongue thou canste not understand, thy strong
wales, wherein thou trusted, shall be destroyed etc.

And does not Esaie recke^ this also as the extremity of all plages for the
wickedness of the people to have women raised up to rule over you? Esa. 3.
But what says the same prophet in the beginning of his prophecy for a
remedy against these and all other euilles?

Your hands are full of blood, says he, O you princes of Sodom, and you
people of Gomorrha, but wash you, make you clean, take away your wicked
thoghts forth of my sight. Cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek judgment,
help the oppressed etc. Then will I turn my hand to the, and try out all thy
dross, and take away thy tynne, and I will restore thy judges, as before time,
and counsilours, as of old.

And Moses said before in the place alleged.

That if thou will hear the voice of the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 28,
and do his commandments, thou shall be blessed in the town, and blessed in
the feelde. The Lord shall cause thine ennemies, that rise up against the, to
fall before the. etc. Lo the way in few words, O Britanie, to win gods
favor, and therefore to overcome thine ennemies. But to prynt this more deeply
into your hearts, o ye princes and people of that Island, whom God has
bego^ne to punish, seek I warn you no shifting holes to excuse your faults,
no political practices to resist gods vengeance. And first I speak to you (o
Rulers and Princes of both the realms) repent your treason, and bewail your
unthankfulness. For by no other means can you escape gods judgments. You
stomach I know to be called traitors, but what shall it avail to spare the
name, where the facts are more then evident. You has God erected amongst your
brethren, to the end that by your wisdom and godly regiment your subjects
should be kept as well from domestical oppression, as from bondage and slavery
of strangers. But ye alas declininge from God are made the instruments to
betray and sell the liberty of those, for whom ye oght to have spent your
lives. For your consent and assistance is the cause, that strangers now
oppress and devour the poor within your realms: who shortly, if God call
you not to repentance, shall recompense you, as ye have deserved. For the cupp,
which your brethren do now drink, shall be put in your hands, and you shall
drink the dreggs of yt to your destruction. And wonder it is if ye be beco^me
so foolish and so blind, that ye think your selves able long to continue, and
to be safe, when your brethren round about you shall perish: that you can
pack your matters well enough with the princes, that ye can make you strong
with marriages, with flateries, and other fond practices, or that with your
multitude or strength ye can escape the days of vengeance, or that you can
hide your selves in holes or corners. Nay thoghe you should hyde you in the
hels, God can draw you thence, if you had the egles wings to fly beyo^de the
east seas, you cannot avoid gods presence. Submitt your selves therefore unto
him, which holds your breath in your nostrels, who with one blast of his
mouth ca^ destroy all his ennemies. Embrase his son Christ, lest ye perish,
and for your obstinacy against him and his word repent betymes, as we all do
admonish. Repent for your cruelty against his servants and the contempt of
his word so plainly offered, as it was never sense the beginning of the world.
Repent we cry repent. For repentance is the only way of your redress and
deliverance. Did God ever long spare any people, whom he has taught by his
Prophets, without sum evident repentance? or uses any father to pardon his
child, whom he has begone to chastise, without sum token of repentance?
Consider how the Lord has entreated Israel and Judah his own people: how often
they trespassed, and how he gave them ower into the hand of their ennemies. But
whenever they repented and turned again to God vnfeanedly, he sent them
judges and deliuerers, kings and Saviors. This way then of repentance and
vnfeaned turning to God by obedience is the only way before God accepted and
allowed. Therefore was Noah sent to the old world to bring this doctrine of
repentance, and all the old prophets, as Elias, Elisaeus, Esaias, Ieremias and
Malachias, and he, who excelled all the prophets, John Baptist. Any of whose
styles, and sharp rebukes of sinners if I should now use, it would be thought
full strange and hardely would be suffered: yet were any of their lessons,
wherebie they called to repentance, most mete for our time and age, and
nothing disagreinge from this my present purpose. For the same spirit still
strives against the malice of our times, thoghe in diverse instruments and
sundry sorts and fashions. Noah pronounces, that within an hundredth and
twenty years all flesh should be destroyed. We have many Nohaes, that so
cries in our times, yet no man repe^teth. All the time, that Noah was
preparing for the arc to avoid gods vengeance, the multitude derided this
holy prophet, as the multitude of you two realms does at this day deride all
them, that by obedience to gods word seek the means appointed to avoid gods
judgments. Then the people would not repent, but as they should live for
ever, they married, they banketed, they builded, they planted, deriding gods
messe^ger. Do not you the like? I appeal to your own consciences. You marie,
but not in God, but to betray your countries, you ba^ket and build with the
blood of the poor.

The Lord calls to fasting (says the prophet Esaie) to mortify the^
selves, and to kill their lusts, but they kill sheep and bullockes. Jeremy
cries for tears and lamentation, they laughe and mock. Malachie cries to the
people of his time, Turn unto me and I will turn to you, says the Lord of
hosts, and they proudly answer, wherein shall we return? Are ye not such? Do
not ye ask wherein shall we return, when ye will not know your sins? when
ye can not confess, nor acknolledge your faults, thoghe ye go a hooringe in
every street, town and village with your idols? thoghe the blood of the
oppressed cry every where against you for vengeance? So that seeing no token
of repentance I can not cry unto you with John Baptist, Qye generation of
vipers who has taught you to fly from the wrath to comme?

O that I might see so good tokens, that ye would fear gods wrath and
vengeance. But this must I say to you both to your confusion, and shame, that
ye are such vipers and serpents, until I see better tokens. You do what ye can
to destroy your parents, you cast of God your heavenly father, ye will not
fear him calling you to repentance, you destroy and banishe your spiritual
fathers, which once had begotten you as spiritual children by the word of
truth, you consume your country, which has given you corporal life, you
sti^ge with tounges and tails all, that would draw you from your wickedness.
Finally man, woman, and child are either venemed with your poisons or stingged
with your tails. In you are fulfilled the words of David.

Their throat is an open sepulcher, with their tou^ges they have deceived, the
poison of aspis is under their lips, their mouths are full of curse and
bitterness, their fete are swift to shedd blood, destruction and wretchedness are
in their ways, and the way of peace they have not known, the fear of God is
not before there eyes, etc.

I do know your tender ears, you can not be grated with such sharp sentences
of comdemnation, that thus prick you to the hearts: howbeit thus it behooves,
that ye be taught to judge your selves, that in the end ye be not damned with
the wicked world. But I will wound you no more with the words of the
Prophets, with the sayings of David, or of this holy saint of God John the
Baptist, but with our savior Christ's two most sweet parables of the two sons
and of the tilme, to whom he set his vineyard, I will labor to set before
your eyes your rebellion, hypocrisy, and cruelty, if so I ca^ bring any of
you to repentance. Our savior Christ puts forth this parable,

A certain man had two sons, and he came to the first, and said son go and
work to day in my vineyard. Who answered, I will not, but afterward repented
and went. Then came he to the second, and said likewise, and he answered, I
will sir, but went not.

Wherein a wonderful comfort first is to be considered, how the Lord our God
maker of heaven and earth does humble him self not only to be called a man, a
husband man, a householder, and such like, but he abaseth himself of mercy to
us vile earth and ashes, that his son becomes man to make mankind glorious
in his sight, to make all those, that do not refuse his grace offered, of the
slaves of Satan his sons by adoption. You are his sons, you are his
vineyard, you are as dear unto him, as the apple of his eye, as Moses speaks,
if you can believe it: he swears that you shall be his inheritance, and he
will be yours, if ye will only receive his grace and believe him, when he
swears. Will ye call his truth into doubt? his glory into shame by your
misbelefe? Better it were, that all creatures should perish, heaven, man and
angels, then that God should not have credit, or that his glory in the least
jot should be diminished. He has called you by his word now many a time to
work in his vineyard, I ask what you have answered: your conscience can
witness and all the world sees it. So^me of you have said plain like
rebellious children, that ye would not do it, that ye would not work in your
fathers vineyarde. Shall I apply this part to Scotland? I may right well do
it, and also to a great part in England. But Scotland in deed called most
plainly and evidently through the mercies of God both by their own faithful
country men, and also by earnest trauail of our English nation to comme to the
Lords vineyard in the time of king Edward, has to the damage of both
continually refused, as the conscience of many this day bears witness. That
time, as ye know, the vineyarde in England by the children of God was not all
together neglected, and the^ most earnestly were ye (O Brethren of Scotland)
required to join hands with us i^ the Lords work, but Satan alas would not
suffer it. His old fostred malice, and Antichrist his son could not abide,
that Christ should grow so strong by ioynynge that i will together in perfect
religion, whom God has so many ways coupled and stre^gthended by his work
in nature: the papists practiced all their fine crafts in England, Scotland,
and in France, that the Ghospellers should not with so strong walls be
defensed, lest this one island should beco^me a safe sanctuary, as it began to
be, to all the persecuted in all places. They move sturdie stomachs, they
dispens with periuries, they work by their crafty co^fessions, they raise up
war in the end, whereby ye (dear Brethren of Scotland) were sore plaged. Of
all these traiterouse sleghtes ye can not be ignorant. For yet it is not passed
the memory of man, that your king made promise to have met king He^rie the
eght at York* whose purpose (albeit in other things I do not allow him) in
that case was most godly and praise worthy. For it was to make an end of that
ungodly war, and cruel murder, which long had continued betwixt the two
realms. Your king, I say, made promise to mete him: the breche whereof as it
was the occasion of much trouble, so is it evidently known, that your
Cardinal, and his clergy labored and procured the same. For it is not
unknown to sum amongst you, how many thousand crowns the churchmen did
promise for maintenance of the war, I suppose they paid little.
which king Henry did denou^ce by the reason of that breche. Superfluous it
were to me, to recite all the causes moving your pestilent priests to
solicitat your king to that infidelity. But this is most evident, that they
feared nothing, but the fall of their glory, and the trouble of their
kingdom, which then in England began to be shaken by suppressing of the
abbaies. This moved your priests ernestly to labor, that your king should
falsely break his promise. But what affliction ye sustained by that and other
their practices, your selves can witness. For your borderrs were destroyed,
your nobility for the most part were taken prisoners, and your king for
sorrow suddenly died. But these your miseries did nothing move your priests to
repentance, but rather did inflame them against God, and against the propfit of
their native realm. For when again after the death of your ki^ge, your
friendship and favors were soght, first by king He^rie, and after his death by
king Edward his son, and by him, who the^ was chosen Protector, how
craftily, I say, did the^ your priests undermine all, ye are not ignorant.
When your Gouernoure with the consent of the most part of the nobility had
sole^nely sworn i^ the abbay of Haliroode house, sir Raphe Sadler the^ being
ambassador for England to perfurm the marriage co^tracted betwixt king Edward
and your young queen, and faithfully to stand to every point concluded and
agreed (...) perfurma^ce of that vnio^, when seals were interchanged, and the
ambassador dimissed, what sturr, tumult, and sedition raised your Cardinal in
that your realm, it is not unknown. To wit, how that by his craft and malice
the realm was divided, the Governor compelled to seek his favor, to violate
his oath, and so to becomme i^famous for ever. And finally by the pride of the
papists was that leage broken. But what did thereof ensue? Edinburgh, Leith,
Du^die, yea the most part of the realm did feel. Your ships were stayed,
your gooddes were lost, your chief towns were burned, and at the end the
beauty of your real me did fall in the edge of the sword, the hand of God
manifestly feghting against you, because against your solemn oath ye did feght
against them, who soght your favors by that godly conjunction, which before
was promised. But still proceaded your ennemies the clergy, and their
adhere^tes in their purposed malice. Wonder not that I term them your
ennemies. For albeit they be your country men, yet because they seek nothing
more, then the mai^taina^ce of their own ki^gdome, which is the power of
darckns, and the king dome of Antichrist, they are becomme co^iured ennemies to
every city, nation or man, that labor to comme to the knolledge of the
truth. That pestilent generation, I say, did not cease, till they obtained
their purpose, by deliueringe your young queen to the hands of the French
king, assuredly mindinge by that means to cut for ever the knot of the
friendship, that might have ensued betwixt England and Scotland by that godly
conjunction. What the papists feared is manifest. For then Christ Jesus being
more purely preached in England, then at any time before, would shortly have
suppressed their pride and vain glory: and therefore they raged, that he
should not reign above them also. But what is like to apprehend you, for
because ye did not betymes withstand their most wicked cou^sils, wise men do
consider. How heavy and unpleasant shall the burden and yock of a Frenchman
be to your shoulders and necks, God grant that experience do not teach you.
But to return to my former purpose, by all those means rehearsed, by his
messe^gers, by the blood of his saints shed amongst you, by favors and
friendship, by war and the sword, yea by famine, and pestilence, and all other
mea^s, has God your merciful father called you to labor in his vineyard, but
to this day, alas, we hear not of your humble obedience, but still ye say with
stubburn faces, we will not labor, we will not be bound to such thraldom, to
abide the burdens of the vineyard. Ye think percha^ce I am to sharp, and that
I accuse you more then you deserve. For amongst you many do know the will of
your father, and many make profession of his Ghospel, but consider, Brethren,
that it is not enoug he to know the commandment, and to profess the same in
mouth, but it is necessary, that ye refuse your selves, your own pleasures,
appetites, and your own wisdom, if ye shall be judged faithful laborers in
the Lords vineyard, and that ye bear the burdens togiter with your brethren,
and suffer heat, and sweat, before ye taste the fruits with them. God will
not stand content, that ye look over the hedge, and behold the labors of your
brethren, but he requires, that ye put your hands also to your labors, that
ye trauail continually to pluck up all unprofitable wedes, albeit in so doing
the thorns prick you to the hard bones: that ye assist your brethren in their
labors, thoghe it be with the icopardie of your life's, the loss of your
substance, and displeasure of the hole earth. Except that thus ye be minded to
labor, the Lord of the vineyarde will not acknolledge you for his faith full
servants. And because this matter is of weight and great importance, I will
speak so^what more plainly for your instruction. It is bruted (to the great
comfort of all godly, that hear it) that sum of you (dear Brethren of
Scotland) do desire Christ Jesus to be faithfully preached amongst you, which
thing if from the heart you desire and with godly wisdom and stowt courrage
follow your purpose and enterprise, ye shall be blessed of the Lord for ever.
But in the beginning ye must beware that ye follow not the example of your
brethren of England, in whose hands albeit the work of the Lord appeared to
prosper for a time, yet because the eye was not single, we see to our grief the
over throw of the same. They began to plant Christ Jesus in the hearts of the
people, and to ba^nish that Romish Antichrist, they did drive out the fylthie
swyne from their dens and holes (I mean the monks and other such papisticall
vermin from their cloisters and abbayes). This was a good be ginning, but alas
in the one and the other there was great fault. For the banishi^g of that
Romish Antichrist was rather by the fear of the laws pronounced against him
by acts of parlame^t, the^ by the lively preachi^g of Christ Jesus, and by
the discoueri^g of his abominatio^s. And the suppressio^ of the abbaies did
rather smell of avarice, the^ of true religion. Those venomous locustes, which
before were holde^ within their cloisters, were then set abroad to destroy all
good and grene herbs. For superstitious freers, ignorant mo^ks, and idle abots
were made archbishoppes, bishops, persons, vicars, and such as oght to feed
the souls of men* who thus set at liberty did continually wrootup the Lords
vineyard. And one crafty Gardener, whose name was Stephen, having wolflik
co^ditio^s, did mai^tai^ many a wolf, did sow wicked seed in the garden, and
cherished many weeds to deface the vineyard. And his maid Marie, who after was
his mastres, now married to Philip, wa^ti^g no will to wickedness when she was at
the weakest norsto make to do evil, when she gatt the mastrie did cherishe
many weeds. Those two I say have so broken the hedges of the same vineyarde,
(God so punishing the sins of those, that oght to have made better provision
for the same) that the husbandmen are hanged up, the diggars, dressours, and
planters are banished, prisoned and burned. Such hauock is made, that al wild
beasts have power to pollute the sanctuary of the Lord. O heavens behold
her cruelty, o earth cry for vengeance, o seas, and deserte mountains
witnesses of her wickedness, break furthe against this monster of England. But
whether do I run by the bitterness of my grefe? I must needs leave the o
Scotland, after that I have advertised the of this, that thou follow not the
example, as I have said, of England: but in the bowels of Christ Jesus I
exhort the, that if thou prete^dest any reformation in religion, which is the
chief labor of the vineyarde, that thou do it at the first with a single eye,
and all simplicity, that from year to year thou be not compelled to change,
as was England, but let thy reformation be full and plain, according to gods
holy will and word without addition. Let all the pla^tes, which thy heavenly
father has not planted, be rooted out at once, let not avarice blind the,
neither yet wordlie wisdom discourage thy heart, let none bear the name of a
teacher, that is known to be a fosterer of superstition, or any kind of
wickedness. And thou so doing shall move God of his great mercy to send unto
the faithful work men in abundance, to bless the work, that thou prete^dest
in the vineyarde, and to preserve the to the glory of his own name, and to thy
everlasting comfort. Thus must thou Scotland repent thy former inobedience, if
that thou will be approved of the Lord. And now do I return to the (O England)
I do liken the to the second son in the parable which answered his father
with flattering words, saying, I go father, but yet he went not at all.For
sense the time, that I had any remembrance, our heaue^lie father of his great
mercies has not ceased to call the in to his vineyard, and to these late days
thou have said always, that thou would enter and be obedient. In the time of
king Henry the eght, when by Tyndale, Frith, Bylnay, and other his faithful
servants God called England to dress his vineyard, many promised full fair,
whom I could name. But what fruit followed? nothing but bitter grapes, yea
breeres and brambles, the wormwood of avarice, the gall of cruelty, the
poiso^ of filthy fornication, flowing from head to foot, the contempt of God
and open defense of the Cake Idol by open proclamation to be red in the
Churches in the stead of gods scriptures. Thus was there no reformation, but
a deformation in the time of that tyrant and lecherous mo^ster. The bore I
gra^te was busy wrooting and digging in the earth, and all his pigges, that
followed him. But they soght only for the pleasant fruits, that they winded with
their long snowtes. And for their own bellies sake they wrooted up many weeds,
but they turned the ground so, mi^gling good and badd together, King Henry
his book against Luther is noted.
sweet and so wre, medecin, and poison, they made, Isay, such co^fusio^ of
religion and laws, that no good thing could grow, but by great miracle, under
such Gardners. And no meruail, if it be rightly considered: for this bore raged
against God, against Devil, against Christ and against Antichrist, as the foam
that he cast out against Luther, the racing forth of the name of the Pope, and
yet alowi^g his laws, and his murder of many Christian soldiers, and of many
papists, do clearly and evidently testify unto us. Especially the burni^g of
Barnes, Jerome, and Garrat three faithful preachers of the truth, and ha^gi^g
the same day for maintaina^ce of the Pope Powel, Abel, and Fetherstone, does
clearly paynt his beastlynes, that he cared for no manner of religion. This
monstrous bore for all this must needs be called the head of the Church in
pain of treason, displacing Christ our only head, who oght alone to have this
title. Wherefore in this point (o England) ye were no better then the Romish
Antichrist, who by the same title makes him self a God, sits in me^nes
consciences, ba^nysheth the word of God, as did your king He^rie, whom ye so
magnify. For in his best time nothing was hard, but the kings book, and the
kings procedings, the kings homelies in the Churches, where gods word should
only have been preached. So made you your king a God believing nothing, but
that the allowed. But how he died, I will not write for shame. I will not name
how he turned to his vomet. I will not write your other wickedness of those
times, your murders without measure, adulteries and incestes of your king,
his Lords, and co^munes. It greueth me to write those evils of my country,
save only that I must needs declare, what fruits were found in the vineyarde
after you promised to work therein, to move you to repentance, and to justify
Godds judgments, how grievously so ever he shall plage you hereafter. Wherefore
I desire you to call to remembrance your best state under king Edward, when all
men with general co^s^t promised to work in the vineyarde, and ye shall have
cause I doubt not to lament your wickedness, that so conte^ned the voice of God
for your own lusts, for your cruelty, for your covetousness, that the name of
God was by your vanities evil spoken of in other nations. I will name no
particulare things, because I reverence those times, save only the killing of
both the kings uncles, and the prisonnement of Hoper for popish garments.

God grant you all repentant hearts, for no order nor state did any part of
his duty in those days. But to speak of the best, whereof ye use to boast,
your religion was but an English matyns, patched furthe of the popes portesse,
many things were in your great book supersticious and foolish, all were
driven to a prescripte service like the papists, that they should think their
duties discharged, if the no^bre were said of psalms and chapters. Finally
there could no discipline be brought into the Church, nor correction of manners.
I will touch no further abuses, yet willing and desiering you to consider the^
in your hearts, that knowing your negligence ye may bring forth fruits of
repentance. For this I admonish you (o ye people of England) wheresoever you
be scattered or placed, that onles ye do right spedely repent of your former
negligence, it is not the Spanyardes only, that ye have to fear, as rods of
gods wrath, but all other nations, France, Turkey, and Denmark, yea all
creatures shall be armed against you for the contempt of those times, when your
heavenly father so mercifully called you. To what contempt was gods word
and the admonition of his prophets comme in all estates, before God did
stryke, sum men are not ignorant. The preachers them selves for the most part
could find no fault in religion, but that the Church was poor and lacked
living. Truth it is, that the abbay lands and other such revenues, as before
appertained to the papistical Church, were most wickedly and ungodly spent,
but yet many things would have been reformed, before that the kitching had
been better provided for to our prelates in England. It was most evident, that
many of you under the cloak of religion served your own bellies: sum were so
busy to heap benefice upon benefice, so^me to labor in parlame^t for
purchesing of lands, that the time was small, which could be found for the
reformation of abuses, and very little, which was spent upon the feeding of your
flocks. I need not now to examine particular crimes of preachers. Only I say,
that the Gospel was so lightly esteemed, that the most part of men thought
rather, that God should bow and obey to their appetites, then that they should
be subject to his holy commandments. For the communes did continue in
malice, and rebellion, in craft and subtlety, notwithstanding all laws, that
could be devised for reformation of abuses. The merchants had their own souls
to sell for gains, the gentlemen were becomme Ne^rods and Giants, and the
nobility and cou^sile would suffer no rebukes of Gods messe^gers though their
offenses were never so manifest. Let those, that preached in the court, the
lent before king Edward deceased, speak their conscience, and accuse me, if I
lie, yea let a writing written by that miserable man, then duke of
Northumberland to master Harlow for that time Bishop of Harford, be brought to
light, and it shall testify, that he ashamed not to say, that the liberty of
the preachers tongues would cause the counsile and nobility to rise up
against them: for they could not suffer so to be entreated. These were the
fruits even in the time of harvest a little before the winter came. And of the
time of Marie what should I write? England is now so miserable, that no pen
can paynt it. It cease to be in the number of children, because it openly
dispiteth God the father. It has cast of the truth known and confessed, and
follows lies and errors, which once it detested. It buyldeth the buylding,
which it once destroyed* it raises up the idols, which once were there
confounded: it murthereth the saints, it mainteineth Baals prophets by the
commandment of Iesabel. Such are the evil husbands, that now haunte the
vineyard, so that this is true, that our Savior Christ, says:

The Lord him self has planted a fair vineyard, he hedged it round about,
and builded a toure, etc. And when the time of the fruit drew nere, he sent his
servants to the tilmen to receive the fruits thereof, but they caught his
servants, they bett one, they killed an other, and stoned others. Again he
sent other servants mo, and they served them like wise.

What need any exposition to apply this unto England? All is fulfilled, that
is spoken in that parable, onles they do wait for the son him self, for to
comme, that they may handle him likewise, as they have done his servants. But
all is one, says our Savior Christ.

That, which ye do to one of these little ons, Mat. 25.
the same ye do to me, be it good or bad. Why do thou persecute me, says
Christ to Saul, when he was, as he now is, at the right hand of God his father
in the heavens. Therefore they persecute, they banishe, they burn Christ the
son of God in his members. The judgment therefore now remains, which the
wicked then gave against them selves,

That the Lord of the vineyarde will cruelly destroy those evil persons, and
will let forth his vineyarde unto other husbands.

And the confirmation of the same by the sentence of the chief judge, that

The kingdom of God shall be taken from such, and given to a people, that
shall bring forth the fruits thereof.

The which judgment is begone in England, and shortly alas will be fully
executed and finished without right spedie repentance. Sum hope is in
Scotland, which has not showed forth any such cruelty, and has not contemned
the known treasures: but like wanton children have contemned the commandment
of their father, partly of frailty, partly of ignorance. But England the
seruante, that knew the will of his Lord and master, which was once lightened
with most clear beams, which has tasted of the swetenes of the word of God,
and of the joys of the world to comme, which has abiured Antichrist, and all
idolatry, which has boasted to profess Christ with great boldness before all
the world, must be beaten with many stripes, it can not be avoided.

But to be short this only remains for both these nations, that they repent
and return into the vineyarde with the first son. For neither shall
ignorance excuse any land or nation, as is plain in the first to the Romans,
neither can any people be received without the fruits of repentance, as John
Baptist proclaims.

The fruits of repentance I call not only to know your sins, and to lament
them, but to amend your lives, and to make streght the Lords paths by
resisting Satan and sin, and obeying God in doing the works of righteousness,
and executing gods praecepts, and judgments, so long amongst you
contemned.

For even now is the axe put to Mat. 3.
the root of the tree, so that every tree, that brings not furthe good
fruit, shall be hewe^ down, and cast into the fire. The Lord has now his fan
in his hand, and will purge his flore, and gather the wheat into his garner,
but will burn the chafe with vnque^chable fire.

Repent therefore, whiles ye have time, before ye be fanned, hewe^ down and
fiered. When I do behold both your two realms, I see the fan, I see the axe.
But this I am suer is the beginning of your ruin, that ye do mary with
strangers, and give your power to foreign nations, such as fear not God, but
are open idolaters, blasphemers, persecuters of the saints of God, that cares
neither for heaven nor hell, God nor devil, so that they may win lands,
towns and countries. God shall hew you down by the^ therefore, as he has
done other nations by like means and causes, and they shall fan you furthe
of your own husks and homes, to make you vagaboundes and beggars, and after
possess your lands and goods, as God threatened by Moses, as was before
alleged. Trust not to thy strength afterward, when thy ennemy is settled, if
thou have no strength to resist his begynnynges, no more the^ thou can
overcome a canker, that has ouerrunne many members. That God would not have
you to trust to your force of men, towns, or castles, there is enough
examples, that you both have felt to your grefe. And I can not write without
murnyng. For how little auayled the multitude, and stowt courrage of you (dear
Brethren of Scotland) at Musselburgh, or Pinkefield, the carcases alas of many
thousands, who that day fell in the edge of the sword, may teach you. And how
vain be all strengthes, (be they judged never so strong, or inexpugnable)
let Calice lately taken admonish you.

But I do leave such examples to your considerations to teach you to call to
the living Lord, who offers him self, as a merciful father unto you, still
calling you to repentance by words, by writings, and most gentle corrections,
if ye will not be hard hearted.

Yet here have we to lament the miserable state of mankind, which is so
seduced by the subtle serpent, that he can not know his misery, when he is
admonished, nor perceive his perdition, when it draws so nere. When the
servants of God set furthe his truth, they are charged to trouble realms,
and countries, as was Elias: when they warn men not to join hands with
wicked kings and princes, they are counted traitors, as was Esaias and
Ieremias. Such is man's malice. But if there be a God, that is first of all to
be soght, and without whom nothing can be profitable unto us, but without him
all things are unhappy and accursed: if the kingdom of God and the
righteousness thereof must first be soght, and then all things shall be
ministered: if our heavenly king must before man be obeyed, then all such
doctrine, as calls us from man to God, is easy to be perceived, and oght not
to be resisted. Wherefore I do admonish and exhort you both in the name of
the living God, that how so ever you have hitherto showed your selves the
servants of men to bear and to flatter with the world, that now ye learn in
gods cause to despise the faces of men, to bend your selves against this
wicked world, neither regarding the visars of honors, vain titles nor
dignities any further, then they seek God his only glory. For his glory
will he not suffer to be contemned for any cause. No he will power contempt on
those princes, that strive against his truth: but those, that glorify him,
will he glorify. And what king dome, realm or nation so ever it be, that will
not seek to sanctify his name, they shall in the day of gods grievous
visitation, which is now at hand, be utterly confounded, their strength shall be
straw, their honors shall be shame, and all their idolatrous priests, in
whose lies they delight, together with their idols, with whom they are
bewitched, shall be stubble and brymstone to burn together, when the wrath of
the Lord of hosts shall set them on fire. The priests shall not save their
gods, nor the gods their worshippers, but both alike accursed shall the^
perish for ever. And thoghe our merciful father has long suffered heretofore
in the time of ignorance, yet now in the end of the world he calls all
people so plainly by his word to repentance, that he must needs take spedie
vengeance, if his calling be contemned: especially because the day can not
long be delayed, wherein he has determined to judge all people and nations of
the whole world, and to put an end to wickedness.

Wherefore to conclude, behold, your only remedy remains to repent your
time of ignorance, of stubburnnes, of cruelty, of idolatry, wherein ye have
so long continued. And now with all diligence to seek for knolledge of the
word of God, and openly to profess the Gospel, which is the power of God,
whereof ye oght not to be ashamed. Cease at the last from your old
stubburnnes, wherbie ye have deserved vengeance, and labor in the vineyarde
with all mekenes, that ye may receive mercy and grace: cease from your
cruelty against Christ's members, and learn to suffer for Christ's sake, if
ye will be true Christians: banishe all idolatry and popish superstition from
amongst you, else can ye have no part in Christ's kingdom, no more then
Christ can be partaker with Antichrist. Pray to the Lord of hosts and armies
to give you the courrage, strength, and means. The Lords arm is not
shortened now, no more then of old. Be strong therefore in the Lord for the
defense of the truth, though all the world rise against itt. Now when the
battle is fierce against the living God for dead idols, (even for the vile
wafercake, the most vain idol, that ever was) against the Ghospel of Christ
for the inventions of Antichrist, against Christ's me^bres for Popish
ceremonies, can any of you, that will be compted gods children, still halt of
both hands? If that cake baked in iron tongues, not able to abide a blast of
wind, be the aeternal God, follow it: but if he only be God, that has created
the heavens, abhor such vile idols, that have no force to save the^ selves:
if Christ's Ghospel and doctrine be sufficient to salvation, and by receiving
of it ye are called Christians, away with all Antichrists inventions brought
into your Romish churches: if you hope to have any part with Christ, cherishe
his me^bres and maintain the^ against their ennemies the papists, and the
bishop of Rome the very Antichriste. What strength, what force, what power,
what cou^sil so ever ye have of God, bend all to this end and purpose, as ye
will make answer to your heavenly king for the talent received. If you have no
regard of those pri^cipal points, which only, or chiefly should be before
your eyes, go to with your foreign marriages, join France to Scotland, and
Spain to England, if it be possible, yet shall ye all be confounded. The Lord
shall plage you one with an other, until you be consumed, your strength,
wherein ye trust, shall be shaken to naught, your courrage shall be cowardice,
your wisdom shall be folly, and the Lord of hosts by your ruin and
destruction will be renowned and praised, and his just judgments through out
the earth shall be honored and feared. Where of the contrary if you will
maintain Gods truth in the earth, he will receive you as his children into
the heavens, if you confess his Christ before this wicked generation, Christ
shall confess you before his father in the heavens, in the presence of his
angels. But if you persiste stubburnly to banishe gods word, and his son
Christ in his members forth of your earthly kingdoms, how ca^ ye look for any
part in his heaue^lie king dome? much more if ye continue to murder his
messi^gers, what ca^ ye look for emo^gst your selves, but that ye should dig
one i^ another belly to be your own murderers? So that if ye will still
remain after all these admonitio^s in your murders and idolatries, be suer,
that in this world ye shall have enoghe of your idolatries, and you shall be
filled with blooddy murders and in the end ye shall be judged without the
gates of the heavenly Jerusalem amongst the dogs, Revel. 21.
enchaunters, hooremo^gers and murderers and idolaters with all those, that
loves lies. But he, that overcomes all these, shall inherit all things, and
I will be his God, says the Lord, and he shall be my son. Where as the
fearful in gods cause, the unbelieving, the abominable, the murderers,
hooremongers, sorcerers and idolaters shall have their part in the lake, that
burns with fire and brymstone.

Lo here is the choice of life and death, of misery and welthe offered unto
you by gods mercies, and the means how you may win gods favor opened,
wherebie only ye may prevail against your ennemies. God grant you hearts
to answer as the people did to Joshua offering the like choice. Iosu. 24.
God forbid (say they) that we should forsake God, we will serve the Lord our
God and obey his voice, for he his our God.

And we your banished brethren by the power of God to provoke you forward, will
thus pronounce with Joshua.

That we and our families will serve the Lord God, thoghe all nations run to
Idols, thoghe all people do persecute us. We know that Satan has but a
short time to rage, and that Christ our captain right spedely will crown
his soldiers, to whom, as he is the eternal God with his father, be all
honor and glory for ever and ever. So be it.

JOHN KNOXE TO THE READER.
BEcause many are offended at the first blast of the trompett, in which I
affirm, that to promote a woman to bear rule, or empire above any realm,
nation or city, is repugnant to nature, contumely to God, and a thing most
contrariouse to his revealed and approved ordena^ce: and because also, that
sum has pomised (as I understand) a confutation of the same, I have delayed
the second blast, till such time as their reasons appear, by the which I
either may be reformed in opinion, or else shall have further occasion more
simply and plainly to utter my judgment. Yet in the mean time for the
discharge of my conscience, and for avoiding suspision, which might be
engendered by reason of my silence, I could not cease to notify these
subsequent propositio^s, which by Gods grace I purpose to entreat in the
second blast promised.

1 It is not birth only nor propin quitie of blood, that makes a ki^ge
lawfully to reign above a people professing Christ Jesus, and his eternal
verity, but in his election must the ordenance, which God has established, in
the election of inferior judges be observed.

2 No manifest idolater nor notoriouse transgressor of gods holy precepts
oght to be promoted to any public regiment, honor or dignity in any realm,
province or city, that has subjected the self to Christ Jesus and to his
blessed Eua^gil.

3 Neither can oath nor promise bynd any such people to obey and maintein
tyrants against God and against his truth known.

4 But if either rashely they have promoted any manifest wicked person, or
yet ignorantly have chosen such a one, as after declares hi^ self unworthy
of regiment above the people of God (and such be all idolaters and cruel
persecuters) most justly may the same men depose and punish hi^, that
unadvisedly before they did nominate, appoint and elect.

MATTHEW. VI. If the eye be single, the whole body shall be clear. PSALM OF DAVID
XCIIII, turned in to meter, by W. Kethe.
O Lord since vengeance does to thee,
and to none else belong:
Now show thy self (o Lord our God)
with speed revenge our wrong.
Arise thou great judge of the world,
and have at length regard,
That as the proud deserve and do,
thou wilt them so reward.
How long (o Lord) shall wicked men
triumph thy flock to slay?
Yea Lord, how long? For they triumph
as thog he, who now but they.
How long shall wicked doers speak?
their great disdain we se,
Whose boasti^g proud does seem to threat
no speech but theirs to be.
O Lord they smite thy people down,
not sparinge young or old:
Thine heritage they so torment,
as strange is to behold.
The widdowe and the stranger both
they murder cruelly:
The father less they put to death
and cause they know none why.
And yet say they: tushe, tushe, the Lord
shall not behold this deed,
Ne yet will Jacobs God reuolue
the things by us decreed.
But now take heed ye men unwise,
among the folk that dwell:
Ye fools (Lsaye) when will ye way
or understand this well?
He that the ear did plant and place,
shall he be slow to hear?
Or he that made the eye to see,
shall he not see most clear?
Or he that whipte the hethen folk,
and knolledge teaches men,
To nurture such, as went astraye,
shall he not punish then?
The Lord our God, who man did frame,
his very thoghts does know,
And that they are but vile and vain,
to him is known also.
But blessed is that man (o Lord)
whom thou do bring in awe,
And teacheste him by this thy rodd
to love and fear thy law.
That patience thou may him give
in time of troubles great,
Until the pit be dug up
the ungodly for to eat.
For why, the Lord will never fail
his people, which him love:
Ne yet forsake his heritaunce,
which he does still approve,
Till righteousness to judgment turn,
as it must be in deed,
And such as be full true in heart
to follow it with speed.
Who now will up and rise with me
against this wicked band?
Or who against these workers ill
on my part stowte will stand?
If that the Lord had not me holpt,
Dowtelesse it had been done,
To wit, my soul in silence brought,
and so my foes had won.
But though my foot did swiftly slide,
Yet when I did it tell,
Thy mercy (Lord) so held me up,
that I therewith not fell.
For in the heaps of sorrows sharp,
that did my heart oppress,
Thy comfortes were to me so great,
they did my soul refreshe.
Will thou (vain man) have ought to do
with that most wicked chair,
That museth mischief as a law
with out remorse or fear?
Against the souls of righteous men
they all with speed convent,
And there the giltlesse blood condemn,
with one most vile consent.
But my refuge is to the Lord
in all these dangers deep,
And God the strength is of my trust,
who allwaies does me keep.
He shall reward their wickedness,
and in their wrath them kill,
Yea, them destroy shall God our Lord,
for he both can and will.
FINIS.

