

A RELATION OF SEVEN YEARS SLAVERIE UNDER THE Turks of Argeire, suffered by
an English Captive Merchant.

Wherein is also contained all memorable Passages, Fights, and Accidents, which
happined in that City, and at Sea with their Ships and Galleys during that
time.

Together with a Description of the sufferings of the miserable Captives under
that merciless Tyranny.

Whereunto is added a Second Book containing a Description of Argeire, with
its Original, manner of Government, Increase, and present flourishing Estate.

-- Pertot discrimina rerum Tendimus in Patriam* -- BY FRANCIS KNIGHT.

LONDON, Printed by T. Cotes, for Michael Spark Junior, and are to be sold at
the sign of the blue Bible in Green Arbor. 1640.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, AND WORTHY HONORED KNIGHT, Sr. PAVL PINDER.
Noble Sir, the Renown of your Illustrious Virtues in Foreign Nations, by
exemplary Piety at home, has been so apparent to me, though a stranger to my
Native Country, that I have presumed to present your Worship with his Treatise,
^^iessing my ardent affection for the enlargement of the Multitude of my poor
Countrymen, groaning under the merciless yoke of Turkish thraldom; and the
rather my self having there suffered, loss of my estate, and the misery of 7.
years slaverie in chains, and in the Galleys of Argeire, its not unknown to
your Worship, having been Resident in those parts, what their sufferings are,
as scoffs, threats, blows, chains, hunger, nakedness, with innumberable
others, and which is most deplorable, their danger of falling from the
Christian and most holy faith, of which sort. I have known many who through
the extremity of their sufferings has renounced their Savior, and embraced
the Mahomitan and diabolical Imposture, these miseries and innumerable others,
having been presented to my eyes, though now by the mercy of God, happily
escaped, do still increase my zeal for their liberties, which your worship
being an eminent personage in this flourishing Kingdom, may be a worthy
instrument to accomplish; I fear to be too presumptious in craving your
worships Patronage to this impolite discourse, and therefore humbly beseech
your Worships pardon, and implore the Divine Majesty to conserve your person
and honor, in making them long and happy in earth, and in fine to reward you
with Eternal happiness,

Thus prays he that is your Worships most humble Suppliant FRANCIS KNIGHT.

To the Reader.
THe Subject of this following discourse, need no Apology to make way for its
entertainment; seeing none, to my knowledge, has ever devulged in Print, the
estate and condition of Captives in that place of Argeire. I have undertaken
thus meanly to present them to your sight, let the Courteous Reader pardon the
faults, both of the Author and the Press, some whereof are observed in the
Errata following, Farewell.

ERRATA.
PAge 9. line 21. for Geneva read Genava, and l. 24. for Challery, r. Callerie,
p. 10. l. s. for town r. tower, and l 7. for Cap^ and Colpe, and l. 18. r.
days they returned, and l. 33. for began r. Bogiva^^. p. 11. l. 9. for
acclamation r. accumelation, and l. 22. for Gr^m^oy^ r. ^^annoys, and l. ult.
r. concentedly, p. 12. l. 11. for Abdera Mourine, r. Alderam. ^ Rice. p. 14. l.
3. for declared r. declaro, and l. 24. for seeming r. seeing, and l. 28. for
pertner r. patron. p. 15. l. 1. r. afterward a, and l. 34. for watched, r
weighed, and l ult, for trouble r. travel. p. 16. l. 17. f. Forts r. For^es,
and l. 35, for messe^ r. messia, l. 36. for Castle r. Coast.

Bable-^eight Castle
Emperors Castle.
Ta^c^ine Castle.




A True and strange Relation of seven years slavery under the Turks of
Argeire, suffered by an English Captive Merchant.
VIcicitudes are incident to Kingdoms, to Cities, and to men, and was to me,
in my age of 23. years and five months of my life: And in the year of grace
1631. On the ninth day of December, when it pleased Almighty God to give power
to the Infidels to prevail over me, whereby I became Captive, and interdicted
the company of those of my consanguinitie; prohibited of divine Oracles, and
detained from my native Country (to which I am yet a stranger) but (praised be
God) in way to survive, to see the natural place of my habitation, and to
re-expostulate with those, one with me in proximitie of blood, in the familiar
language of our loves.

Having passed those calamities, which as I want imagination to conceive, so am
more defective to devulge.

January the 16. day, in the year before nominated; I arrived in that City
fatal to all Christians, and the butchery of mankind, not that I so term it
in respect it serves as a purgation, to evacuate the Turkish country of
superfluous people; my condolation is for the loss of many Christians, taken
from their parents and countries, of all sorts and sexes. Some in Infancy, both
by Land and Sea, being forced to abuses (most incorrigible flagitions) not
only so, but bereast of Christian Religion, and means of grace and
repentance. How many thousand of the Nazarian nations have been and are
continually lost by that monster, what rational creature can be ignornnt of?
But far worse is their condition from whom these pieces had their extraction,
in whom their unhappy parents once delighted themselves, with hope they might
prove soldiers in the Lords battles. To which intent they fed them with their
sweat, nourisht them with their blood, and made their sole joys; what
affliction is like theirs? that such living pieces of their bodies should be
extorted from them. And by whom? buriby a people unknown, monsters more like
then men, where they not only have their natural condition changed, and are
made their Corrasive: but they do wilfully prove their countries greatest
enemy. Who can but religiously condole their misfortunes, whose so prepellent
hopes should be turned to despaires? Who would not wish his loins dry rather
then fruitful in such wickedness: these are not only the greatest Caxdiators
in Barbary, but in all others, not in places of obscurity, But in the great
Turks Soray, who are his Courtiers? who his Counselors? who his Vissiers? who
his Bashawes? who his greatest instruments, but these denyers, the sons of
Christians. What has been the advancement of their glory? but our neglect, I
mean in the slightings of many poor souls, that in their agony despaired,
and with Noah in a fit of their folly discovers these secrets that were hid
600. years before. Thus madly do many of them cast themselves upon the point
of those dangers, whereby they have seen so many miscarry: But being forced to
that experience which they cannot redeem, expiate all shame. I do religiously
lament the shipwreck of some of them who were of my acquaintance. To whose
denyalls I have been an occular witness. Lord how facile do these profess
the new Religion, priding themselves in Turkish ceremonies, and in a faith once
execrable unto them; whereto, not confidence but vice invokes them. Had they
but the grace of a common woman, who with unloosing her Pettycoate loses
shame, but recovering it takes it up again: there might be hopes of them, that
at the hearing of the Cock crow they might with Peter remember their sins,
get out of them and weep bitterly. There is honey to be taken out of the Lion,
and such a plague is opportunity, that many aregular man is forced to
solicit their friends, and dearly to esteem of their acquaintance, as well
as to the peril; I will ascribe to the Jeat stone his due. The obligation I
owe to some of them I have a just propension to requite them for, but I am not
obliged to duske their vices nor contrarily will maliciously profess
calumnies against them, but condoling their destinies with them grace. I was
two years and fix months a slave to one of them: in which terminie I knew not
what sufferings was only aflicted by being an occular testator of the
calamities of others, I was not employed in the least servility. His presence
did not disturb me, but I was most a Allegerie in his company, and sure then
to fare best; none of my actions but was to his content, and none so acceptable
to him as my self. My affability, freeness of speech, and boldness had so
obliged his affections to me as almost the world could not expiate. And
indeed, he was an honest moral man.

Opportunity gave me occasion sufficient to register the passages of those
times happening in that City.

The first accident famous for memory in this terminie was in the year 1634.
on Friday the 20. of June, in blowing up the Cassaba or house of Council, and
chief foretresse of that City. Nature if it once degenerates grows more
monstrous and extreme then dispositions borne to cruelties; many years past
the Turks upon surmises of Treason plotted against them by the Collolies,
their own children, for so are they by them called, banished all such of them
as were of the Council, as by denomination Bulla Bashees and Odds Bashees, and
performed it with no little subtletie. No word passed in the City of these
suppositions, nor had the Collolyes any thought that their so secret plots had
been the Turks intelligences, who knowing the danger neglected, no time to
remedy so great a threatened mischief; all rested private, until the first
Duanna day, or day of great council; when 60. of the primest of them were
banished; strange that the Colloly should not know his guilt, and more strange
it is that the Turks should banish a faction more powerful then themselves in
number, in friends, and in estates, and equal dignities, all speaking one
language; yet the banished departed at the Turks pleasure, without demanding
the cause and knowledge of their offense.

The pollitique Turk ordained the place no further then Bugea the next port
town to the Orient, but with two Commissions given the Captains, to whose
charge they were committed, and appointed to open one after the other. Wherein
they were commanded to transport them to Tunnis, a City absolute. Until the
next Council day, all rested without clamor, and now 200. more of them are
banished. The Bellages, Citizens and Natives Murmured, but dare not make
complaints of their griefs. They neglected their accustomary course of trade.
The Turks by Proclamation commanded all men to open their shoppes, buy and
sell, and not to have any missupposition of their intent or doings, past or to
come, betwixt them and their children as being differences among themselves,
also giving hopes to the banished in short time to be recalled to Argiere, and
raise them to their former dignities. The third great Duanna or Council day
was banished 500. more of them, without any insurrection or stir made by the
Collolyes; and in fine on the fifth day all the rest, consisting of 1574. men,
chiefest in the City for esteem; in that they were descended from the ancient
Turks, which conquered that country, and in substance the richest hope is of
that noble and couragions faculty that it commonly brings more then it carries
away. No advertisement all this time came to Argiere of the banished
transportation from one port to another, nor their friends any way suspecting
them to be so far banished as Tunnis. But time the mother of all truth
untaught the Collolyes error, and now by the experience of many years see
themselves frustrate of all hopes to return in a fair way to that terrene
paradise. They now combinde with difficulty to possess themselves of that
city, which once they being possessed of, might facily make retention. 60. of
them, of a more undaunted resolution then the rest vowed to surprise the
Cassaba, prime fortress of the City; the stratagem to affect it was thus:
They went thither in women's apparel, wearing long Mantles to the ground, and
their faces covered as is the fashion of that country, and having Cemitaries,
coyertly entered the Cassaba, crying Sherillah or demanding Justice; the day
was Friday, and the time the morning. A great advantage to the Collolyes: for
it being the Turks Sunday, most of them that kept the sald Cassaba were in the
City visiting their friends; in brief, some one way, and some another:
besides it was the 15. day when the Bashaw makes a feast to the whole Duanna.
In this manner 23. of the Collolyes enters this Cassaba, the other 37. of the
confederacy not present; the Turkish Bulla bassawes which carelessly kept the
gate, not thinking them to be other then women, the Collolyes now to embrace
their opportunity, draw their Curlesses, kills all they find in the Cassaba,
shuts the gate, and for a while are masters of this sumptuous Fortress, and
now displayes their Banners upon the walls: which sudden revolt coming to be
the intelligence of the Aga, General of the Soldiers, and Bashaw, vice King
under the great Turk; Yet not informed who they were that had surprised their
Cassaba, some conjectured them to be the Cookoose, whose mother and son to
that King was then prisoner in that Cassaba. The jealous Turk makes
Proclamation upon pain of death every Collolye to keep his house, nor any
more Allarbyes or Tagarens, subjected people, to take Arms or wear a knife;
so poasted to the Cassaba, and found them to be Collolyes, men polliticke in
war, powerful in faction, as being thousands of them unbanished, which never
had borne office, having also the Allarbyes and Tagarens to their devotion, all
supposed enemies to the Turk, who now give the assault. The Collolyes defended
from six of the clock in the morning to ten, at which time usually on all
their Churches on Sundays is hoysted up that ragge of Mahomet, a geene Flagge.
The Turks offered them pardon, and the restoration of their goods detained
from them, they deny all composition, and resolve not only to defend what they
had gotten, as their own patria, but to get more if they could. The Turk now
impatient, and well knowing the ensuing danger, if they made not some speedy
way before night; assuring themselves, that all that were weary of their
government, malcontents and others, then would stir; and themselves
doubtful of one another Loyalties, resolved to make Otote, Obote; something
or nothing: They bring Scales to the walls and enter. The defendants seeing
themselves desperated, and unable to make any longer resistance, fired 20000.
Quentalls of powder, blew a piece of Ordinance out of the Castle to the
Fishgate, a mile in length spoiled many houses and had destroyed the whole
city, but that this Cassaba is seated upon a stupendous mountain, and the
City lying all down right under it, and the nature of powder to evaporate
into a regular elevation, the Sky was darkened with smoke and dust, and
nothing heard but clamours in the streets (as if the day of general account
had been then) Had those ignoble spirits, that lived in worse Ignominy then
the Jews, but stirred, they might without an aching finger have extirpated the
glory of the Turk there, and honored themselves with the Lordly command of
the most flourishing City of Africa, 6000. souls perished by that blow, but of
the Collolyes he only that fired the powder, 22. of them being taken alive
were most cruelly tortured, some were crucified, others having their bones
broken, were drawled along the streets at horse tails, others had their
shoulders stabbed with knives, and burning Torches set in them dropping down
into their wounds; The Turks biting of their flesh alive, so dyed, and some of
them being walled in were starved to death. A guilty conscience projects
terrible things. What perplexity the other Collolyes of the City were in I
need not recount. All censured them dead persons, but the council disagreeing
in themselves, their fortunes were better then their deserts. The Turks now
will not permit the Soldiers marriages, and by that means extinct so
monstrous a Liniage: some of the counsel in detestation of that Race offered
to kill their own children, upon condition all others to do the like, but
others in the surplassage of their loves, countermanded that bloody Decree and
unnatural Acts; only inqiusition was made for certain women which had given
entertainment to those Collolyes and were condemned to be all thrown into the
Sea; but being packed from one place to another and not to be found, at last
was published a revocation of the sentence of their deaths, and they escaped
and enjoyed their ancient privileges.

These combustions, soon came Solicitours to the King of Cokoose, who takes
present occasion to lay siege to a Castle which the Algiers kept to his great
annoyance in that country, as speedily came news to the Algiers of the
Castles besieging, who were then studious to fetch off 200. of their Soldiers
in Garrison there, and also ceremonions to conserve their honor, sent for both
a Hamper or general Army, consisting of 5000. foot Turks, and 3000. Swayv^s
horsemen: The King of Cokoose, Semper idem, continued the siege, containing his
Forces within the mountains, whereon is situated the Castle, the Turks then
according to their old custom trusted more to policy than valor. They knew
well the danger to assault the enemy at such an advantage, and therefore
propounded terms of peace, and fortune helped them, the Turks were licenced
to depart the Castle with honor, and the Army returned to Argiere in peace,
and were received joyfully. In August next they enlarged the Prince of that
country, giving him amongst other presents, a Spanish Christian woman, whom
according to the custom of that religion he took to wife, and the Queen,
mother of that King, and Grandam to the Prince, which also was a runagate of
the Spanish nation, and had been long prisoner in Argiere, They set at
liberty.

In July 1635. there arrived Mounsieur de Sampson, French Ambassador in a
Polacta of Mercellis, with his Kings Flagge aloft bravely. This gallant comes
ashore, with his retinue consisting of other Messers visited the Council and
King, his action was stately, The Agga or General called a Counsel, sends a
Chewse or Sergeant for the Ambassador, who came before them, they demanded his
Embassage; he answered he was sent by his King to demand his Majesty's
Subjects, by virtue of that interchangeable league mutually conserved betwixt
his Majesty and their Emperor, they answered they knew none to command them in
their government. And if his King had sent him to treat for the enlargement
of those French which upon just occasion they detayned, or for such slaves as
were of that nation, he should have the sole reference unto them.

347. Free French men were then in Argiere, being all taken without fighting,
and therefore unsold. But in far worse condition than those that were, 400.
Turks and Moors were in the Mercillian Galleyes, which Mounsieur offered to
exchange for his freemen and the slaves, which were 600. more, which they
refused; but offered Mounsieur the slaves for the price they were sold for in
the Market, referring the freemen to the dispose of the Bashawes. Mounsieur now
treats with the Bashawe; He demands ten pieces of eight per head for them,
Mounsieur storms (as I think he had good cause to do) having promised his
King miracles in the accommodation of the French affairs. He demands a second
conference, and it is granted him, the slaves are offered him for the moneys
they cost in the Market, but the freemen raised to 20. pieces of eight per
head; Mounsieur according to the French fury boyles and illustrates the
puissance of his King, Fire and Towe meets together, the Turks fury is as
much as the French chollor, and he is now more affronted; the Slaves are now
become importunate, vexing Mounsieur as the poor widow did the unrighteous
Judge, but his answer to them was Imperial, he had brought no moneys for
them. The freemen do now solicit his propence affection, and implored his
Christian care of their estats, they offer to pay the said 20. pieces of eight
per head with interest, and the principallest of them, to come in band for
satisfaction and security; and in sum, every person to give particular band
to those which had so obliged themselves. Sure it was most piteous to see how
many sufficient men of that Nation were put to most vile services, where at if
they had been sold, many had means to have given for their infranchisment,
which upon these differences were detained, and most of them unable to comport
with such barbarous indurances, miserably perished. Mounsieur demands a third
conference, and is admitted, he demands an absolute answer, for that he meant
in all have to be gone; the Slaves are offered him upon the former terms, but
the freemen now exhausted to 30. pieces of eight per head, Mounsieur departs
without any further treaty: the Counsel sends to him to take in his Flag; he
bids them do it; they take his Sails from the Yard, and Ruther, all which
they carry into their Magazine, and with a Branos anissetim leaves him his
Flag. Mounsieur demanded license to depart, they deny him, and having detained
him four months after, and cost him some pieces of eight, he is licenced and
departs: the poor French having made songs of freedom, and extolled the glory
of their grand Chevellier to the skies, are now lest to condole and to new make
their forward reckonings, whiles they are derided of all nations, and the
Turks adding Mulct unto them. No man can promise to himself an immutable
condition, it is two years and a half since I fell from my Runagatha to
Mahomet Agga, a man of the Armenian nation, and heheae now dead without wife,
or child, whereby I am slave to Vsuph Basshaw, being February the 16. 1637. and
the 13. of June with other slaves of his was embarked on the Galley of Norilla
Bay, at midnight as the custom is after the book was made, we lanched from
Argiere, the 16. dicto near Colla; The Turk having eight Galleys, met with
six of the great Duke of Tuscans Galleys, who at first made an Italian bravada,
but in fine, with Sailors and Oars ran away.

The Turk now proud that the Argiere Galleys, had chased away the best Galleys
of all the Christians, in the height of their spirits, they rounded both Islands
of Sardena, and Corceoa, taking many Towers upon each of them, burning and
taking Pollaceas, Saitease, and other Navigation: and now the second time met
with the Dukes Galleyes, who would not endure the sight of them; the Turk
pursuing his resolution 19. days after our departure from Argiere, took a
Town in the Bay of Geneva, where besides rich spoils they brought from thence
365. persons, and in their return burned a Flushener, being a brave new
ship, having 18. pieces of Ordnance, laden with Challery Cheese: and being
now in their return, met the third time with those Legorne Galleys, and chased
them, but could not fetch them. In fine this voyage ended in 28. days, when
they returned in safety to Argiere with no little riches, glory and applause
of the people: and now is come a new Bashaw to that City, and as custom is,
the old must pack and be gone. He put off all his English, French, and Dutch
to Ally Pichellin general of Argiere, a great man in substance, having besides
his Lands and other riches 800. Christians slaves; and a great Tirant. He
respected no man above another, and in truth we were all exquisitely miserable
that were his slaves. The 23. of August, Anno 1637. we were re-inbarked on the
Galley of Norilla bay: And the first of September they took Colpe in Spain, a
little town eight leagues to the orient of Allicants; they landed when first
Aurora gave her light, and continued the fight till one or two of the clock in
the afternoon, besides the spoils, they brought from thence 315. Christians;
the women and children the next day they sent upon a Galley for Argiere, but
put all the men to the Oar; the third dicto they took the town of Cape Paul,
which resisted from morning till four a clock in the afternoon; in all which
time neither there nor at Cape appeared one man either for resistance, or
intelligence: they harrowed the Castle, took all the Towers to the Castle of
Guardell mare, and so westward, till they came to Titewone in Barbary, where
the general took in sixty thousand pieces of eight for his account proper.
And after they returned for the cost of Spain, as a terror, and had done much
more damage to the Spaniard, but they were twice prevented by English Ships,
they returned for Calpe, and gave Scala Franca to the Spaniards, who visits
their forlorn friends, and the unhappy men made spectators of that place where
they received their disaster. In sum, good quarter was performed to them,
when at the fine of 30. days returned to Argiere with acclamations of joy of
the inhabatants, all the house tops being covered with women crying Allaluah,
Allaluah, with salutation of Canons and general rejoicing of the people: it
was now October, and we hoped that years toil was past, for so has been
their custom to repose the winter; I mean from Galley navigations, and to the
slaves advantage, for although they work hard all day on land yet they rest at
night, and enjoy their fills of water (which is precious in the Galleys) but
what is not too little for the unsatiable gulf fo unhumaine desires. Ally the
General would ingrosse the whole world to himself, plus habeo, plus careo.
Another voyage must be made this year, and was with six Galleys, but ended in
the expense, of what they had formerly gotten, their best fortune was, they
safely returned to their homes: two Galleys were detained in the port to carry
Soldiers to the orient garrisons, and my lot fell to go upon one of them; and
now preferred, began the worst condition of Gally Slaves: our furthest port was
but 100. Leagues, to Boma; a goodly Moors City, and famous country, I mean
for its fertility as abundant in all necessaries for the life of man, and I
say famous, in that being a City where Saint Augustine was borne, from whence
129. Soldiers were to go for Constantina, founded by Constantine the Great,
our Country man, and first Christian Emperor; in which City are yet so many
apparent footsteps of Christianity, over whose walls and gates are so many
verses, written both in Greek and Latin of excellent esteem, for rare
antiquities, many whereof were sent me by Runagathars, which went thither of my
acquaintance, but my escape has left them, and that happily in Argiere, as
never meaning to return for their acclamation; being glad I have so escaped:
sudden and unexpected events are those that cause most admiration. Mounsieur
de Ma^^ie, French general is now at Sea with 15. of his Kings ships, and
commission to infranchise the French Slaves, yet it seems the god Neptune was
wrath with them, for with a storm at Sea, their Fleet was separated, and most
of them forced to return for Mercelles. Having spent their Masts, and received
other misfortunes; yet all Commissioned if accident should separate them,
Argiere Road should be their randevoos: 400. Turks and Moors they brought
with them to exchange for their French; very confusedly arrived some of them to
the Port. First two sail, one of 36. pieces of Ordnance, whereof Bro^^noy of
Rochell was Captain, and another of 28. pieces of Ordnance, good quarter was
offered them by the Algiers: Gromnoys Purcer comes ashore, without a hostage,
professing a visit to the French Council: at the instant was in the Road, and
ready to depart two ships of Argiere, the one of 40. and the other of 28.
pieces of Ordnance, both bound for Alexandrea in Egypt, and well known to
Forans Purcer; two such ships never went out before from Argiere, for besides
the excessive Riches of their loading, and passingers of greatest wealth of
that City, bound in pilgrimage to the solemnities of the Meco, one ship of
them had known in her above three hundred thousand Soltanies in Gold, each
Soltanie worth their seven shilling English, the Purcer returns to his
ships, who were both riding without Command, the Council sends the Trugman
to have them come in, or depart their Road, to which they presently obeyed; nor
can I give them any term of better grace; they stand to the West, and within
an hour after weighes the Turks, who since have ended their voyage
continently, and returned to Argiere with great riches. Three days after being
the 11. of October arrived that noble Captain, and glory of the French nation,
Mounsieur de Mautie in a goodly ship of 58. pieces of Brass Ordnance alone,
and anchored without command. The Duana or Council sends to know what he came
for, he answered to demand his Kings subjects, which they dislegally detained;
with answer returned, the Turks resends their Trugman, commanding Mounsieur
presently to depart, or come under command, other ways he should know more
from them. Captains were convocated, and the Duana determined Abdera Manrine,
of the Moors nation, a right valiant, and expert Seaman, should be presently
armed to go forth and fetch him in: but Monnsieur weighed, put out his bloody
Flagge and departed. The 13. dicto came in another of the same Fleet, and put
out a white Flagge, using many other signs to parlie, but in the night went
out two Galleys, whereupon the French distrusting the worst, let slip her Cable
and Anchor; and was the next day weighed by the Turk, and carried to their
Magazine, which saved them a labor.

Ill news has wings, its now the 18. dicto, when advertisement comes to
Argiere of the taking Asatiea of Ally the Generals, and they make it the common
cause, alleging the French met with her upon the coast of Barbary. A goodly
prize she had been, for in her, besides rich loading, was in ready Cashe
70000. pieces of Eight. The whole inhabitants now boyles, the French Council
is sent for, and without any litigation of his cause is by the great Duana or
Council adjudged to be burnt at Babelwach gate. Also Iacus Santo, that paid
the rents of the Bastione condemned to be hanged at Babashon, usual places of
Christians martyrdom; 18. thousand pieces of Eight a year paid the said
Sancto to them; A man which formerly had swayed, a person of great experience
in the Country, and well studied in the Art Machivell, and much hated by the
poor French Captives as a perturber to their infranchisments. In fine, no rod
is so fit for a mischievous man as his own, through ^mour of death, they both
would have turned Turks, but not permitted nor could any thing assuage the
fury of the Duana, but their deaths; yet some gave the word, that if they would
dye Turks, they should be permitted, and that for the saving of their souls.
Ally the General, for so is this gallant called, powerful in the City, and
the Turks glory, interceded for them, giving many pertinent, and powerful
reasons for their remission. The damage said he that is done is to me, as being
sole owner of the said vessel, and her essentialls, for which I desire no
revenge for my own particular: but as I am yours, and all I have obliged to
this City, if your honors think it requisite to revenge the affront done us,
by this late General which with one only ship outbraved us in our most
happy and invinceable Port, famous for virtue, and Ianezaries, whose valor
has shaken, and been a terror unto the mes-beleevers of all Nazarine
Nations, more then 100. years. I have a just propention and am most prompt to
adventure my life and substance in this most noble Cities quarrel, and that
the time of the year is now improper to invade any of the French territories.
I esteem it most convenient there be presently armed six Sail of Galleys, for
the surprising of the Bastione, to make a spoil of what they find there, as
well of people as others, which will be sufficient satisfaction to us for the
present, and a real demonstration to that Traleuian nation, how little we
esteemed them. This oration highly esteemed was received as an Oracle, and the
Duana commands the expedition of the Galleys, who in two days were provided,
and the 19. of December at noone, without making book, thy rowed from Argiere,
and in three days arived at the Bastwin; no sooner Anchored, but Mounsieur the
Governor with other Messuers comes aboard to kiss the hand of Ally the
General: in fine many Madmoyssells, and the people there were curious to see
so great a man; the visit and complement ended, the Governor began to take
leave of the General, who now demands entertainment in the Bastione:
Mounsieur promises no man more welcommer, they go on land together; but
instantly followed such a crew of Turks as they presently became masters of
the Bastione. Mounsieur that had Ciceroes ears, diffident of the event, of so
unusual a change, shifts himself from the General, takes Horse, and happily
recovered to Barko, a Castle of the Ienewayes, and escaped captivity, 312.
were then captivated with 120. thousand pieces of eight in ready moneys, 400.
Hogsheads of wine was there staved, the lose redowning to the French more then
100. thousand pounds sterling besides the benefit which they made by the Scale
of 100. thousand Ductets a year declared, and so much for the French affairs
with Argiere. Servility and bondage to an ingenious spirit is worse then death,
which is common to all, this to the miserable. The danger of the Seas now
keeps the Turks at home, and we Gally slaves not to be idle, are set to
hayling the Cart in lieu of Horses, some to sell water, to chop the Vineyard,
and others to build houses: in the interim I am devising some course of way to
effect my liberty: five of us combines together to take a Boat some two miles
from the Town which frequently loaded Ballast; there having constantly but one
Turk and two Christians Roars in her; more Oars must be gotten, a Mast and
Sail, otherwise it had been madness, and to plunge our selves into more
mischief: in fine, four Oars, a Mast and Sail, Boraches for water, Bread
and Compass was provided, but all the difficulty was to get them out. For a
piece of Eight and half I got a French man native of Saint Mallo, who had a
good Mule to carry all, he and I loaded it, our act was just, but none of the
wisest; and the French man fit for the purpose, we went in company to the town
gate without question, but the ward overthrew the carriage, as too suspicious,
and laid hands of the French man, who doubting nothing of the sufficiency of my
warrant, having told him they were to be carried to my patrons Garden: in sum,
I seeming all desperate whiles the French man was looking about for me to make
answer, I left him, who could not accuse me, as neither knowing my name, my
patron, nor where I dwelt. The poor man afterward with his partner, and a
Rogue mearely maintained to prevent the escape of Christians, sought me, but I
kept house till the wonder was over, and was truly grieved for the detriment
the poor man suffered by blows, not any ways worthy blame in me, as seeking
my liberty; the poor man afterward diverse times met me, drew his knife and
would have killed me, to which he ever made deep protestations with a great
deal of French fury, which my English resolution cared not for; its not the
ill event of an action that can disanimate a good Spirit, the weak faint with
every succeeding trouble, but the good heart recollects a double courage: In
affliction we were afterward more jolly company, being 13. and all English,
who did join and make a Purse of 60. pieces of eight; our desire was to build
a Boat, my self the man elected to provide all necessaries, and made sole
treasurer. My first inquisition was for a convenient Garden, and such a one as
was manured by English men; a very commodious one was found, 27. Deal boards I
bought, and had them sawed and carried forth, our Vessel flowred, pitched and
chalked; when within two nights we should have been all ready to depart,
unfortunately one of our Carpenters discovered himself by carrying his Rule
open in his hand, when coming without the gate, he thrust it up under his
Doublet, was espied by a Moore, who gave advice to Dell Ishaw the Spy, who
with his company tracked him into the Garden, the subtle Rogue taking his best
advantage hid himself until the evening, and then came upon us naked, he and
his crew came armed, took six of us, and carried us to the Bashawes prison,
where our patrons redeemed us paying 5. pieces of eight per head, three of my
poor Country men were cruelly beaten, whereof one dyed, my patron then being
Armenie Mahamet Agga bid me welcome without giving me one blow, but if it had
been Ally the General, I had lost my ears, and nose which is his custom. I
was conscious to the calamities of my poor Country men, not that we could
impute blame to one another, for I account every Christian obliged to use all
possible attempts for the effecting his liberty; for a man does not only
discover a pusilanimous heart, and indocible disposition in neglecting the
least opportunity, but also commit a sin against God, who has not given us
wings to outflie our enemies, but reason to devise stratagems and hands to
execute them.

It is many years since Charles, the first Roman Emperor of famous memory
assaulted that city where he received the loss of many of his Galleys, and his
Army dissipated, and its now the 27. of March 1638. when by a Diver was
discovered much of the ruins of that Armado, and watched by the Algiers, the
whole side of a Galley entire, and the Timber as new, besides three pieces of
Brass Ordnance, and five pieces of Place, all without hurt or bruise, to which
I was an oculer witness. Ambition is ever in trouble, and finds no
intermission of painful throws, until it has brought forth its abortive
desires: my patron and master of 800. Christian slaves is devising more then
usual employments, and such as caused great admiration amongst the people, and
to add to his greater fame; he sends for the most esteemed and best Architects
of those countries, and commences most rare and sumptuous architectures, or
edifices for the lodging of Soldiers, the thought of which caused a
languishing dejection in all of us his slaves, as none of us exempted from
those toils which was to us an interminable vexation, (only the divine
goodness that might prevent it) neither was this our sole Mulct, but greater
was our castigation in being subject to so many Masters; as Builders,
Gardiners, all spectators were our Commanders, and we obliged to obey. Lord
what passions were in us miserable wretches, what with the impertinencie of our
detectores, and our assidious labors, as is no marvel that all things seem
offensive to a crased body: Maledictions wanted not to countermaund the period
of those Fabrickes; its time and truth that conquers, what the future of it may
be, is beyond my thoughts to determine: in a vast and confused manner we left
it when we were imbarqued on the Galleys, the ninth of May, 1638. and the
eleventh, lanched from Argiere for that presupposed golden voyage, for that now
Ally had promised to do wonders.

Prosperity begets pride, and pride goes before destruction; combination was
timely made the last winter with the Algiers, and Tunessians for the uniting of
their Sea Forts, and for what end, but for the performance of some great
exploit, eight Galleys of the one, and as many more of the others were
prepared, and armed. Who should be General Commander was not questioned; as
who would oppose Ally of Argiere, for greatness renowned in all Africa: not
only Turks presumed to do wonders, but also the Christians feared it; the
one presuming on their strength, proudly boasted, they feared not all the
Galleys of the Messen nations: In sum, Jews and all made account the whole
Orient of the Mediterranian Castle of Christendom should by this Fleet be
destroyed, and the common Merchants of Christian slaves, prepared moneys to
buy, as if so many Slaves had been ready then in the Markets to be sold. But
to the purpose, Tunnis being in the way, the Algiers consent to go thither and
so much the timelier, because Ally would show himself in every Port by the
way; the Alerbes flock from all parts to him and he being ambitious takes no
little pride* and glory in it. On the fourth of June we came to Besert, but
the Tunnis Galleys were gone from thence three days before with Ordnance and
other munition to fortefie Susea. Alley, too great to enter the gates of this
inferior Town, was welcomed by the Senators or Council without the wall,
where he took Horse and poasted for Tunnis, whose King and whole Duana meets
him upon the way, which was a great addition to his arrogance, and received him
into Tunnis a goodly City, and was smmptuously entertained and feasted; the
inhabitants thought themselves honored that might have the sight of his person
and to raise his glory to the height he is made by the Council General of the
whole Navy, and authorized to go whether he pleased. The Tunnis Captains all
obliged to his command none mollopolised against him; Ally sent for his Fleet
to Tunnis or the Galletta otherwise the ruins of Carthage: we must not be
seen there but in the morning, and that with Flagges, Standards and Streamers
waving, command was given to the Slaves to row proudly, which is with a long
stroke one in half a quarter of an hour; the action, their heads bowed to
the Oars Geroone, their fall with a caper, a princely sport to the spectators,
and most royal of navigations, but the most vile of all slaveries to the
subjected; Presents came from the City to the Galleys, white bread was not
valued, there came such abundance that it fell to the Slaves Pallat, we having
been there seven days most welcome to the Tunnessians. The Tunnies Galleys
were arived, who were no sooner discryed, but the Algiers waighes to use the
complement of meeting; and then he was the bravest Gallant that could show most
Silk: And certainly their standards were (for their worth and curiosity of
rare verses written in them in Letters of Gold in the Turkish language) to be
admired. They gave each other their valleys of small shot and their Ordnance,
and so ended their salutation.

Their thoughts traveled within them as a woman-in labor, who finds no rest
till she be delivered. And they to hasten their designs went to Porta ferinea
to tallow, and with all celeritie set forward for the Christian shore. The
first ship we met withal was the Love of London, near the I Will of
Pautallereia, she was a goodly ship and the weather fair, but the Turk had
nothing to say to her, we were next in chase of five Christian Galleys who
nimbly got from us: In the morning we arrived at Strombello, where we put
ashore a Frigate of Naples, the men all ranashore, three of them whether
wilfully or otherwise I know not, but were devoured by those afrighting fires
perpetually burning, able to invoke remorse in the most Flagitious and obdurate
hearts, the noise being like the roarings of Hell. The others advised the
Turks that those Galleys which they had chased were of the City of Naples:
and not only so, but which is most to be lamented to see how voluntary
Christians are to discover the greatest secrets though to the ruin of their
own countries, for what places has the Turk taken but by the information of
spies, natives of those places, who casting off grace, after their information
receive rewards and turn Turk, and are instruments to ruinate their whole
posterity. I have known three that have Pilated the Turk to the place where
they were borne, and been instruments in the captivating of their own fathers
and mothers and all their Lineage, taking their parts of the price for which
their Parents were sold for in the Market, which served them for spending
money, on whores, in Tavernes, and for worse vices. These Neapolitanes advised
the Turks of two Galleys of that City, laden with Silks* whose Cargassoones
were of excessive value, and bound for Ienemay, and must pass that way and
that within three days, but God turned that counsel to foolishness, for had
they attended the time they could not have missed them.

Ocootr^, a City in Galabria, and in the kingdom Naples was next aimed at as
a place of riches, and in it esteemed 3000. people at mid day; having stroke
down their Masts, they Boaged for that place, yet made such delays as that
they came not thither till fair day, but landed boldly; the people that could,
did run away; the Turks took the City and rifled it, and brought away 115.
persons, one whereof was the Bishop of that place, and 15. Nuns, the chief
of which was Cosen German to the Prince of Rochella, the other were impotent
and aged people: then was the whole Coast in an uproare, and as we were passing
by, they let fly their Ordnance at random, but the Turk to amplify his
glory to the ignominy and reproaches of the Italian, passed through the valley
of Messena, that City thundered but to little purpose, only to show the Turk
what they could do if they were nearer; the bold Turk landed upon the maine,
and set on fire their houses, burnt fisher boats, passage boats, horses, and
travelers, provision, without fear, haryed all the Coasts, killing beeves,
and other Cattle, and setting whole fields of corn on fire and committing many
other outrages, to the great damage of the Country: insomuch, as it was
disliked by some Turks themselves, and being now come to Rochella, they met
with a Neapolitane ship of 20 gunnes, and having discharged 3. of them, they
took his, and afterward set fire on her, and then being insolent were ready to
attempt any thing, their prosperity made them mad. Mallapane a Renegado of the
Greek Nation, who run away with a Gally of the great Turks, which he sold
in Tunnis, for 26000. pieces of eight, informed them of a City lately sunk:
wherein of many thousand Souls which perished by that disaster, there only
remained about 400 persons possessing great riches, living in cottages errected
for their present necessities; his information was most joyfully received, and
the projector not a little proud to be the Instrument of so great a benefit.
The attempt was prosecuted, and at midnight 1500 Turks Landed to captivate and
spoil those imagined more than distracted and forlorn people: Malapane was
general conductour and he brought them to the City, which the day showed them
to be standing, and sumptuous, who sent them such Orators, as made them use
more haste back than good speed. This City was well known to Allie Captain
Bashaw, who with 80. Galleys, and a power on Land, battered it 3. days and
returned with shame, it is called Cotroone, and lies within 6. leagues of Cape,
St. Mary's, the entering in of the Gulf of Venice.

Thus was Italy the eye of Christendom infestred by these Rovers. The Levant
wind being high caused them to continue ^kale there for 7. days space within a
league of that City, in which time the Turk foreaged the Country, took many
of the inhabitants that lived in villages, and remote houses, their Galleyes
heads all day on Land and they cutting wood, making water, and dressing pillow
a chief dish, pleasing their pallats: no Native appeared in all this time for
resistance, therefore by imagination they Reigned Kings, the wind calming
withal celeritie they advance, for their great explot: but he that with his
incomprehensible eye sees the actions and discerns the intentions of all
men, disposing things according to his Divine Will, as celeriously sends an
obsticle to perturbe their way. Such a Levant wind as for security they were
forced to return to their former place of Randevous. The next intermission of
such huge and unwonted gusts, they again set forward, when not having rowed
four leagues, were repulsed by the like occasion; no sooner re-ankared, but
that furious Element, converts it self to calm mildness, and now the third
time attempts the accomplishment of their high Ambition, and are repulsed, had
they not been more insensate than errationalls, they could not but have
repaired to the consideration from whence their so often countermand proceeded:
in sum, God reserving them for a greater castigation, calmes the wind, and
they joyously advances, and now got Cape S. Mary's, the most orientalist part
of Italy, and not to be discovered, strikes the Galleys Maste into the Cushea,
or downeupon the Deck, and each rows who shall be the formaste, to arrive to
that middle Island in the Gulf of Venice, or as the Italian calls it Ill Isella
de Methia, the 3000. Christians promised them by the spy, a man of more than
sixty years of Age, and one that had lived a Christian in a Captives estate,
37. years, this great booty is now in an attained aggetation, stately Catria,
a City in Sclavonia, occulerly presents her self unto them, the bag or
stroke of the Oar is reinforced to no little ditrament of the poor
Christians; the All-sufficient God conscious to their indurances, commands the
wind to Countermand the inexorable cruelties of their oppressors, by whose
fury the Turk is desperated of better fortunes, nor had any of them the least
hope but to have perished in that tempest: the Turk ignorant of the coast in
this ecstasy, implors the knowledge of some Christian, to whom the danger of
death was alike equal, and obtained, all consenting for the preservation of so
many Christians lives, they harbored them in the port of Vollonia in the
Duchy of Albaine, but man that is not so sencible of the perfects health, as
of the least sickness, so no sooner was this dangerover, having recollected
good tackling, with other necessaries, they reconsulted whether to go; all of
them deeply protesting never to return to Argere without sufficient purchase,
answerable to so many difficulties endurances, and so great an adventure, their
first project ever approved the best, for that in that Island there were at
least 300. Christians; beside rich pillage and no difficulty in taking it, as
being unfortified, yet others contrary opinioned, opposed, alleged the danger
of the sea, which for a time caused a demurre in some of them; yet concluded
that when that should fail, they would fall upon some Greek Town, which
lived under the Great Turks obedience, and let his greatness take it how he
would, they cared not, Sollymon Agga governor of the Country, advertised Allie
the General the neernesse of Corfue, and of 2 Gallie asses, and 20. Galleys
always kept there by the state of Venice to deffend their seas, who without
all question, would soon come to have intelligence of their being there, but
Allie bravely replies, not to care for all the Galleys of Venice much less for
those in Corffue* Mahomet Bey a man better considerate and Captain of the
Tunise Galleys, with other Captains of both Cities intreates him to get some
other Port for better security, but all Council, the purchaser of goodness
is contemned by him, news is at Corffue of these Gallants being in Vollonia.
Marino Capella Proveditore or general of the Armatha, withal religious care
uses more than ordinary expedition, for the Arming his Navy; in a day and a
night they are provided and ready, and Saturday morning, June 8. arrives in
that Port with his whole Armatha: the Turkish Galleys then at skale, their
powers upon the Land; this Vollonia is a great Bay of 5 Leagues deep or long,
Land locked on both sides, it has in the plain a great Castle and well
fortified, and in it a great number of excellent brass Ordnance; upon the hill
or mountain of exceeding great height is another Castle over-seeing a great
part of the Country, and far discovering at Sea; which Castle discovering the
Venetian Navy, shot a warning piece, the word now forratendo, for we had then
our tents up to keep us from the weather, which then rained, thundered, and
lightened in most terrible manner, it is now time the Turk look about
himself, they let slip their Cables, and road under the great Castle, there
being in sight those that before they cared not for now fears them: it is too
much to be a speaker and a dooer, the deepest waters are the least heard,
whereas the shallowest makes the greatest noise; the Turk is now consulting
for best order of defense, and by general consent brings their poopes to the
shore, and their prowes to the Sea, their Galleys lashed one to another, only
leaving distance for the slaves to use their Oars, for the Galleys order; the
foul weather and abundance of rain made the Venetian all improper to give an
assault that day. Sunday morning after the performances, and rites of
Christianity, they put abroad their flagges, and standard, and with drums and
trumpets, advances in the front where the two Gallyasses thundering with their
Artillery, before the smaller Galleys Ordnance could do execution. Allie the
General now solicits the verteous Mustapha Captain of the Castle to defend
his Navy and people from the violence of the Naizerian misbeleevers, which
with store of pieces of eight he effected, as the French Proverb says,
silver answers to all; it is so powerful a prevailer with that Nation of the
Turk, that giving them money with one hand, they may put out their eyes with
the other; powder and Gunners are sent into the Castle, which is not a trivial
one but contains an English mile in curcumference: in sum, it is a place
strong both by Art and Nature, having in it more than 150 pieces of brass
Ordnance; the best that ever I saw. Mustapha, the Captain now displayes the
Horse Tail, or royal insigne of the great Turk, and stoutly defends the
Barbariscos party, the fight is hot on both sides, and in spite of the
Castle, had the Venetian continued it but half an hour longer the
Barbariscoes had all lept into the Sea, and left their Galleys and 4500.
Christians captives to their virtue, but as to the unfortunate there never
wants succeeding troubles; in the interim this disaster befell us, one of the
Captains of the Gallyasses lost his arm, upon which she retired, dissension
falling betwixt the Venetians, the major part of the Captains commanded a
retreat, contrary to the will of that noble General Marine Capella, who for
his worth and valor may be ranked amongst the greatest Captains of those
times. Thus ended that fight which had continued near three hours to the
glory of the Turk for that present, who for joy gave their feesses or out
cries, Alla, Alla, Mahomet, and Rosallah, which is God, God, alone; and Mahamet
his prophet thundering with their great Ordnance and valleys of small shot, in
derision of the Christian virtue, whiles the Venetian retired to their place of
first ankoring; Immediately sent a Gally for Venice to advise the Serinissimo
Prince and illusterous Sinate, what accurred; Demanding their future pleasures
concerning those Turkish Pirates: there is many Snake lies hid under Stawbury
leaves for all this great flash of the Turkish glory; they are yet timorous
what the event will be, and to prevent the worst, the same night they
difinbarqued all their Christians, carries them a mile into the country, and
erected Tents in the field for their randavowes, being all well coupled ten
and ten together in chains, they also makes a Trench opposite to their
Galleys to play the brave fellows in, and having been blocked up by the
Venetians near a month grows weary and distastefull of such command ^ in
sum the one and the other having their especialls of each others condition;
the Turk is informed the Venetian to be very slenderly manned, as not having
one Gally with another above forty, some but thirty Soldiers, which indeed
was true: the Turks are now ashamed, and blames somes cowardlinesse, and
withal haste tallowes and prepares their Galleys which are soon accommodated,
but before a supply of Soldiers is come to the Venetians from Corffue, but
without the Turks knowledge they now call a council and concludes to send
Mustapha Captain of the Castle to treat with the Venetian General, and under
that pretense to spy out and discover their Forces. Mustapha goes to them,
parlies with Marine Cappella, and according to their wonted custom, falls to
dissimulation, exhibits Allies letter to that General; demands by his
permission and favor free passage, for that he came not thither prepensedly,
but being bound for Constantinople to serve his Emperor was put into their
Seas by extremetie of weather, and to authenticate it, exhibited to the
Venetian General, the great Turks letter, but Marine Capella Semper Idem,
refuses all treaty with them, and had good cause of incredulity by good
intelligencers. Mustapha returns with this answer, that if they would come
forth they should be most welcome, and courageously received, but to their
own perils; and that if it fortuned they to carry him, he must have patience:
but if it fortune he to carry them, as he hoped in the mercy of Jesus and the
virtue of their patron S. Mark he should, they must have the like; he also saw
the Venetians well armed, and having delivered this answer to Ally he is not a
little perplexed; the Venetian on their parts as vigellent as the Turk, had
there especially some Turks, others Albinesses, and Jews of the country, by
whom he got daily information of the Turks proceedings, excellently well
played on their parts; they employed Turks averse in religion and condition to
the Christians, who without suspicion every day eat and drank with the enemy:
Consequently the better able to inform the Albinesses and Jews they employed
to accuse the validity or invaliditie of the Turks, reports the Venetian
conformable to good intelligence, orders his Armatha, the Gallyasses were
placed where the Turks must pass, if they attempted it; and every night
having their Frigates and Boats which came under the Castle walls, and to the
very Prowes of the Galleys which so daunted the Turks that they now utterly
dissisted from their resolution of combat, and all amort are devising a new
way to secure the Slaves, if the Venetian should land his Forces, and aim to
fetch them off by force: 500. of us were put into a Tower in the Castle; all
lying 10. and 10. in chains, a place as dark as Pitch, and a foot thick in
dust, but its now seven weeks since the arrival of the Venetian Armatha in
this Port, and their Gally sent to Venice for further order is returned, the
Prince and Sinod authenticats Marine Capellas doings, that what his excellence
should do, should be well done, nor does he omit any time to illustrate his
zeal to the divine majesty and valor to ruenate so many miscrante enemies to
the faith of Christ: who as break of day commences a second battle with
thundering off great Ordnance, and valleys of small Shot; for although the
Venetians carries not so many Soldiers in their Galleys as the Turk does, yet
have they this advantage of them, that upon any occasion they arm their
Bonavollies and condemned men, who upon promise of liberty or other reward
will fight bravely; the Turk leaves their Galleys and runs into the Castle,
Christians they force to be Gunners, the two Galliasses with 4. other smaller
Galleys, batters that Castle whilst the others board the Turkish Galleys, lay
their fasts to them, and roaes them away; thus Nobly did the Venetian end this
fight in less than an hour, to their glory and the infamy of the
Barberiscos: great murmerings were now amongst the Turks against Ally their
General, who has no other way to escape their fury and revenge, but by open
handed liberality, wherein he promised to relieve the Soldiers present
necessity: In sum his generositie is universal to the relief of that
ruenated company, as well Christians as Turks, and he promised the
remuneration of all the Captains, by refurnishing them with as many Galleys as
they had lost. The hurleburly with these glorious proffers being over; Ally now
seeks all the coast, and recollects the greatest shot the Venetians had made
against them, which he since presented to the great Turk, whom he intercedes
for remuneration and revenge, urging a breach of peace, in that the Venetian
surprised their Galleys in one of his Masters Ports. But three days after that
fight he marched from Volloniea to Sellenico in Arcadia, leaving behind him
only fifty eight Christians in great indisposition, whereof my self was one,
so feeble as accounted a dead man; but such is the goodness of God as indureth
daily: It pleased the divine Majesty to keep me in a languishing sickness.
I was three times recovered, and three times down in relapse of a most violent
Fever, but thanks be unto God that has not given me over as a prey to their
teeth; in 35. days after returned a Bullabash of Argiere, with order from our
Patron or Master Ally, to carry us all for Arcadia, but the Bullabash returned
thither only with seventeene men, which were indifferently recovered, some
being dead, and the rest very sick, but God so provided for me, that I was
consciously commisserated by the Bullabash^, who left me to receive better
fortune.

Certain Turks were left with us a Guardians or Keepers, others to over-see
those materials belonging to the Galleys, landed before their surprisall,
whereof the chief was Murate, by a Renegatha of the Corceca nation, a person
of great honor in Argiere, Lieutenant General of the Armatha, a father in
Law to Ally the General, a man of an hundred and four years of age, whose
desire was to die in the face of Christians fighting the battle of Mahomet;
three days after the Bullabashes departure dyed in Volloniea.

God that had preserved us in so many inevitable dangers, did also restore some
of us to more then an ordinary strength of body, from so great feebleness and
such poor means for recovery: no sooner were we able to stand upon our
legs, but we are studious how to bring to pass our liberty; fourteen of
us being in reasonable strength resolves to give the attempt, yet some
pusellanimous, base spirit proves a Traitor, informs the Guardion of our
intentions, and not only so, as being resolved to run away, but also to kill
him; for his report we are all Castigated, and our case pittious. Command was
given to the Soldiers of the Castle to look vigilently unto us; that death is
better then so base a life, nor could this deter or disanimate us from our
resolution to attain liberty or death, no time so fit as the present, come
what will come.

All were in chains, four and four except a Spaniard, the supposed dear
friend of our Guardion, and my self dispencer of the house; it fortuned our
Guardion to go to the next town, called by them Deshera some mile off, in
whose absence we used such Art as we got all the rest out of chains, and the
Locks again so put in, as to be taken out with our fingers; in the evening
returns our Keeper, well fudled or well drunk, whereby no search was made to
our Fetters that night: It being Saturday, the 22. of October 1638. betwixt
twelve and one hours in the night we rose together, two rouses the ablest men
amongst us, throw their Coats over their faces and would not go: A Gersie
man, and by trade a Cooper, was so drunk that he could not go, but my grief
is for those poor souls, whose indisposition was such as they could not go;
I was conscious to their pittious moanes but could not help them, what became
of our Keeper I cannot tell, my consorts told me they had not done him any
violence; he had good clothes and some pieces of eight, of which we took not
any with us, but left all, as a testimony of our generosities as to contemn
all terrene materials, preferring penurious liberty before Fetters of Gold:
our provision was some bread, and we also carried a Boracha for water, and a
double Rope, with which we scaled the Castle walls: In this manner we
departed, four English men, one Welsh man, a Gersie man, two French men, one
Spaniard, one Majorcine, a Neopolitane, a Greek, and a boy of Malta; in our
passing through the Castle, although it be full of houses and people, we heard
only the barking of a Dog, and having gone near two miles, took the shore
side for our director. God that never fails those that trust in him, so
provided for us, that we found two Boats, one of them having a Maste standing,
her we embraced, and sunk the other, to prevent their persuing after us; and
having rowed two nights and a day, we recovered the I Will of Corfue, and landed
at a Monistary called Saint Catterines, where we were courteously received by
the Greek Fathers; at noone we rowed to the Monestery of Madone, where we
had intelligence of a Gally being some two miles from thence cutting wood, and
that night to go for the City of Corfue. The Captain Illustricemo de Molimea
entertained us with all courtesy received us into his Gally, and carried us
for that City and presented us to the providitor of the Island; who after our
examination not a little to his content, sent us to the general Gally of
Venice, where we had a supper and lodging that night, and the next day a Pass,
and imbarcation for Venice: being now to render thanks unto the Lord who has
done this great work for me in delivering me from such an inextrecable
labarinth of misery, blessed be God that has broken that snare, and set my
fecte in a large room, not unto us O Lord, let unto thy name be the glory; I
am now in my way to Venice upon the Gally of Counterine; the first skale we
made was at Budway in Epire; our second at Catriea, a sumptuous City in
Sclavonia; our third at Rogousea, famous for antiquity and strength, being an
absolute Sinurie, having many other Cities to her obedience, and in joying an
ample patrimony, only its her misery to be tributary to the great Turk, to
whom for dismollistation they pay yearly 40000. pieces of eight: our fourth
ankering was at Lessena, our fifth at Spellata, our sixth at Sabainica. a sweet
City famous for her Port and invincible Castle in the Sea; our seventh at
Zara, a sumptuous and spacious City; we are shortning our way and come to
Saint Peter's in Dalmathiea, and also passed other Cities not so remarkable as
the rest, I do therefore omit to nominate, at Polla in Istra we met with the
general Gally of Argiere, and sometime the glory of Barbary, which with one
more presented by the Venetians to the Pope are all that remains of that 16.
Galleys of the Turk, the rest being sunk in Corfue: we are come to Ruena, a
pretty City and most fertile Country, and from thence to Perenca, a City
destroyed by the Popes excommunication: In sum with sight of other Cities I
arrived in Venice, where I embarked upon the great Charles of Bristoll, and
having been at Sefelenea and Zaunt, am in agetation to survive to see the
natural place of my habitation.

Thus have I recorded a plenary memorial of my seven years bondage, but not
the several accidents of my indurances, there wanting in me ability to
devulge them, for as there is no calamity can befall a man in this life which
has the least parallel to this of Captivity, neither are the indurances of
Captives equal, although the least without the divine assistance were
insupportable; yet are they all easy in Comparison to that of the Galleys
which is most inhumane and diabollicall and such as does rather, imperverse men
then Repleate any good humor in them; good fortune to me is a singular mutive
to modesty, and a forcible spur to moderation; prayers win me, menances
reject me, favors relent me, fears imperverseth me: alas, such are their
ditraments, as causes them to curse the day of their Nativities, and the
parents that engendered them, and if it were to dye to curse God himself, I
speak it with awful timour: in their passions they renounce heaven, S. Peter,
and all sanctity; in their agonies or discontents, they vessially spit against
the wind, disputing whether God and Nature be conspired against them, when it
is either calm or contrary; for a drop of water they would pawn their souls,
and often are constrained to drink of the Salt Oceans; their repast at best
but bread and water, and for want of sleep are in continual ecstasies; the
strokes of the Oar is dollerous, and with its ausideousnesse many splits their
hearts at it, in this misery all things makes against themselves: the
scorching heat now penetrates their brains, their flesh is burned off their
backs, when anon they are as much pinched with cold: strong fetters are their
nearest consorts from which they are never exempted, unless for equal
miseries; their repose, when they have any, is sitting, their pillow the bank
up right, and that dubble, not having so much room as to stretch their legs;
their sleep when they have any is an hour in twelve, and that at night, when
the one half Roaes and the other slumbers: a call of a Whisell awakes them all
three hundred or more of them, their audiance and leap must be altogether; the
discpline take Oar in hand, the stroke regular and punctiall, their heads
shaved unto the skull, their faces disvigured with disbarbing, their bodies all
naked, only a short linen pair of breeches to cover their privities, they
Mount and fall like Appe and Camille, for so is the command: from Poop to Prow
nothing but excecrations and passing of blows: Who has not his head and face
broken, all their bodies pearled with a bloody sweat? Nay, which of their
senses is not a window to let in sorrow? if chased by the Christian Galleys, by
whom they may be relieved, they are then forced to put might and maine, to
run from them, the Turks standing with drawn sables over their heads, and
if by feabelnes any faints, has his Arms or head Cut off: they are beaten to
put on their clothes and beaten to take them off, they are beaten, to eat,
drink, sleep, and wash, and are beaten for doing any of these; what shall I
say more of these exorbitant men, who had they the virtue of patience, reposing
sure confidence in the Divine Majesty, I presume, God would deliver them, so
wishing them grace, whilst lamenting their estates, left in those torments,
many of whom I love most dear, do end this discourse, desiring God to send
them liberty.

The End of the First Book.
THE SECOND BOOK:
Wherein is contained the description of Argere, its first rising to this
Greatness, its Government, the particular denomination of its Governors, its
Revinewes, its Forces by Sea and land, its Victories, its Inhabitants, its
Lands, Territories, and Riches.
HOw many thousand of the Europian people have not only lost their estates and
been utterly ruinated; but also what an innumerable Company of Christian
souls, has been perverted by the City of Argere, is by miserable
experience, known unto most people: so her fame on the contrary has spread it
self unto all the Mohammedan Nations, insomuch as Chinese, and those other
Esterne people have been allured unto her, in all parts of the Great Turks
Dominions, and amongst the fierce and warlike Tartars, she is termed Sultan
Iossier the Golden and King of Cities: here Soldiers are of the bravest and
most desperatest of all Turks, so esteemed for valor and that with the grand
Segniour himself, who ascribes them the preexcellence of virtue above his own
Ianissaries, this City was in the year of Grace, 1414. taken from the
Christians by Barba Rosha, and other 32. Turks Pirates in a Frigate
accedentally putting into that Port, yet has for its situation, bordering to
the West, the Kingdom of Muritaniea, East the Kingdom of Cokosse, South the
Zara, and North the Meditaranian sea: situated 5 leagues in the Bay called
Monta Fusa and is built on the side of a hill presenting it self to the
spectators at Sea, East, West, and North, 8. or 10. leagues, in form of a top
sail hoysed, her houses built staire-like one over the other, enjoying a most
wholesome air and pleasant situation: scarce any house of the City but has
the prospect of the Sea, there are in her many stupendous and sumptious
edifices, though outwardly for the Major part present themselves but simple and
rude; her cercuite does not exceed 3. Miles, in which circumference are a
multitude of people, and excessive Riches, in gold, plate, and household
furniture her women for beauty give place to none. So for their immunities are
not to be paralleld by ^y, they have an Indies in diamonds, pearls, gold
chains, and other rich vestures, insomuch that it occasioneth a Proverb
amongst the Turks, who says there is three things that distroyes the world;
the Christians in Law, the Jews in Feasts, and they upon their wives. But
having spoken in general of the wealth of this City, I will also inform you
who are the possessors of it; the Turk is he that fights for all, both by Sea
and Land, and by his power as Conqueror keeps all the other sort of the
inhabitants as Vassals in great subjection, yet in substance is but a slave
unto them, as possessing goods by imagination, and the others possessing the
essentialls: for the Moors and Tageriens are the owners of Lands and ships,
and the only Armorers of them, whom I may compare to the maine Sea, and the
Turks but as Rivelets or small streams to empty themselves in the great
Ocean, for besides their pay and shares, they get at Sea, they enjoy for the
Major part but little others, of which the Tavernes Whores, and worse Vices
serve to spung them: in sum, they are slaves to the toils and hazards of
Fortune and their aussiduous travells, and have no free exemption from them,
until they come to be Bullabashes, and when Musullagaes, having passed all
offices and made all benefits, which their youthly toils may infe^^e them in,
they shoot their Arrows and unbend their bows and are exempted from all,
having 40. shillings a month pay with houses, and enjoy a life void of all
cares, yet some Turks there are of them, that are excessively rich, yet but
few.

Of its Description in General.
THis City, on all parts, to the Land, is walled, and of sufficient strength,
it is also moted and trenched, besides being situated upon a hill, that has on
the West side of it so great a dale and asscent, as by ordinary conjecture,
there is no means possible to assault her on that side. She has a most
sumptuous mould, and on it built a Castle of excellent workmanship, in the
midst of it, North upon a tide from the Sea gate, in which is planted 16.
pieces of brass Ordnance, the chiefest and strongest Fort to the Sea is that
called the Tapona, in which are 12. pieces, of great weight, and goodness;
many other block-houses, are on that side, but the City generally unwalled to
the sea, where shipe of greatest burden may come within Musket shot and batter
her: nor can any shot be in vain, her edifices being as I have before
rehearsed, and are all built with brick, and that very slender, her streets
narrow, and she infinitely populour, so that if ever she be forced, it must be
with a good fleet by sea, and also sufficient Land Forces, must be necessarily
required, her walls are abundantly stored with brass Ordnance: and upon two
Mountains she has as I may term them the bridle and the saddle, two Castles,
the one commenced in a night by Charles, the fifth Roman Emperor, the other
built by the Tageren^, each commanding the other, and both the City; there is
also the stirrups, which they call the Alcassaba, in which they hold their
great Council; it is also their Magazin or great store house, of Ammunition and
Provision, and Treasure, in which is yearly laid up for their future
occasions, 500000. dubles, accounting each duble to the just English shilling,
and this great place of strength is only kept by 200. Bullabashers chief men
in Council: to the West near half a mile, without the City is also
Bab^lwaite Castle, built at the charge of a certain Bashaw or vice King, of
the Rowse Nation. When it was taken by Barba Rosha, it was no other, than a
vast wilderness, but he following his pirassis, and getting wealth by that
trade, had in short time great companies of Turks and Allarbies resorting to
him, whereby it greatly increased it, not to fame, commodiousnesse, nor beauty,
until Phillip the third, King of Spain banished the Morisc^^s, from his
Country, of which sort many came unto this City, whereby it increased in
ingenuitie of Arts in Fortifications, in buildings, in planting fruits not
known there before; in Arming ships with great allacritie, to do spoil upon
Christians, in exhausting the price of Captives, adding new torments to them,
and by exacting great ransomes from them, to sponge them to the dregs, since
whose arivall to her, that City has flourished to the Admiration of the Turk
and is now become famous, for her high hand carried over all the Christian
Navigations, and her great booties gotten daily from them, for her buildings,
and they so compact, as there is not a foot of waste ground, or garden in all
the City: commodious for her abundance of Fountains, in all parts of her, and
concavitie for the passage of ordure and excrement from all houses and corners;
honored with Artificers, beautified with rich shops, and adorned with the
abundance of all necessaries, worthy the regallaring so Noble a City; all
which she enjoyes by the industry of the Tagerins, and its perminencie by
favor of the great Turk, whereby she has so long reigned by the ruins of
all Christians uncontrouled: the great Turk lodging this thief in his house,
to no other purpose, nor will permit any Christian-Prince to take revenge
against this City, putting them off with imperative answer, that it is his,
where although he Commands least, only receiving from her 20000. pieces of
eight a year, which is not paid him as a Tribute, but merely as a reward, to
this dissimulation in tollerating and protecting them in their most contested,
inexecrable and infamous doings, participating in their Robberies, receiving
besides other presents of boys, which if Gentlemen are customarily presented
to him, for all which he rewards them with the honor of wearing his fools
coats, and their Captains by sending them flagges, and other favors, as his
greatness pleases to bestow upon them.

Of its Government.
THey have for their gimause Ecclesiastical or Church government, chief of all
other sorts of Priests, a Muftie which custom they have taken from the
Christians, and has the title amongst them of an Archbishop, and is of the
Arabian Nation; many other sorts of Priests are amongst them; different to one
an other, as their several habits do demonstrate, which commonly goes under
the name of Tollops, excepting their Marabotes esteemed men of greatest
sanctity by the Arabians, and the Dervises, of greatest estimation with the
Turk. The chief in temporal matters is the Cadie or chief Justice, but to
speak of those that sway in government, the greatest personage in that City,
is the general of the Galleys, who has his place for term of life and
yearly, 40000. shillings revenew: there are also four other personages as
their Byes, Alcaides, or Generals of their Campe^^ the greatest person in
Council or other ways, their sole director in matters of state is their
Hossia or Secratary; yet all of these obliged to the wills of the Duanna, or
Council, at whose pleasure are their preferments, honors, estates, and lives;
they of the Council being so absolute in themselves, as that they have
infallabilitie and deffectabilitie, power to make laws and obtrude them,
whereby all those before nominated officers are but as Ciphers, serving only as
interpreters to them, whose will is their reason: they have no written Laws,
but observe tradition and customary statutes for their government; they seldom
Judicate upon mature deliberation, but do all in a fury: their custom is
first to execute the delinquent, and after judge him: to conclude, they have no
certain rules of Justice, but what their fancies leads them.

Of their Governors.
THey have a Bassha or Vice-King, who comes from Constantinoble, and by Nation
must be a Renegado, and one bred and educated in the great Turks Surray or
Court; he represents the Grand Signiours person, yet not elected by him, but
buys the place of the Captain Basshaw, who for 10000. pieces of eight gives
him a flagge which he presents to the great Turk, who has not at any time,
been known to contradict the Captain Basshaws grant herein, but Authenticates
his election, gives unto the new Basshaw letters of credit, unto that common
wealth, so goes for Argere, his time limited but for a year, yet fortunes to
remain there in dignity of Basshaw 3. or 4. years, as it frequently
accidents, some to die by the way, or some other disaster to befall them: his
intent is profit, and not honor; at his dubling the point of Mountafous he is
obleiged to discharge a piece of Ordnance as notice to the present Basshaw, to
depart the Palace with all his materials, for such is their custom, that all
that the new Basshaw finds in the Palace, to seize upon it as his own: The
Argeres ever receiving the new with joy, for that every Soldiers pay is then
raised to a duble in the month. The Duanna with all reverence meets him upon
the Mould, from whence they conveigh him to his Palace on horseback; his
Secretary riding before him, carrying the horse Tail, or Royal Ensign of the
Great Turk, his Music also on horseback; but the Council of the City
rides not on horseback only, the Aga General of the Soldiers, his Kaiea or
second, with the 24. Aiabasshes, with many other Bullabashes on foot, their
coats loose and long, their hands laid one upon the other, and both upon their
girdles, their eyes dejected to the ground, 120. Oddabasshes follows them,
having sterts of gold, half a yard long, and Palm broad, set on their heads,
wearing feathers in a round hoope, which covers all their bodies, (60) of these
carrying naked Cimitaries, up right against their breasts; the other (60)
carrying Carbines of excellent workmanship, and great value, (6) Chouses or
Pursevants goes before to make way for their passage, which is the manner of
welcomming this Kingly fellow to that City, and a naked Palace, and himself
as naked: the great men of the City presents him for three days, many dishes
of meat, which many of them have received, as honey in their mouths, but it
ever proves gravel in their throats; yet hope is of that noble faculty as it
is able to replenish his masters indigency and necessity with all things, its
rare that any of them goes away with almost a coat to his back; two of them
in my time went away miserable poor, having after the expiration of their
times, and the arrival of a new Bashaw, lain many months prisoners in
chains, and their Equipage as fatal, for three treasurers to Mustapha Bashaw,
a man of 104. years of age, succeeding one another in place, did likewise
succeed each other in the manner of their deaths, who in 17. days time
poisoned themselves one after another, wanting money to give the soldiers pay,
and s^aring what the fury of the Duanna would do unto them. Durg^ot^ Bashaw,
for the like cause they pounded in a Mortar, never went any away fairly. But
Vsuph Bashaw sometimes my Patron, who was thought to carry substance with him,
yet in his Vice-gerenele was three times forced to take the Marabont house for
sanctuary to save his life, and had not fortune extraordinarily helped him had
other ways inherited the miseries hereditary to those Bashawes: yet wants
there not those who solicit and make friends, and give moneys to obtain the
place, such biters are that nation at the golden hook, that I presume if it
were at hell for gold they would not refuse that bait. He now interests
himself in wretchedness, his place calls him to give the pay, and the
Soldiers will have it, 600. Musallagas. 800. Bullabashes, 424 Oddabashes, and
the number of Soldiers uncertain. Imperially demands it, he has not a
certain number of Soldiers to pay, for they receive all the Turks that came,
all free Christians that turn Turks and Renegadoes, whose masters makes them
to turn Turks; provided he has his masters consent thereto, for it is in
their pleasures to keep them slaves perpetually, and their posterity; the
number of them in dead pay is also uncertain, being according as children are
borne, for that every soldiers son at his birth day is entered into two
shillings a month pay, his charge is augmented by 1200. Swayes or horsemen
which chiefly follows them for hope of spoil; for a Turk may not pillage
any thing of the conquered, for if he saw a Crown of Gold lying at his feet
and should go to take it, the next Soldier to him upon pain of death is
obliged to cut off his head, referring the spoil to the base and undeserving,
but that a Turk should account the honor of victory, the greatest recompense
of reward, and those ignoble sort of Soldiers have but four shillings a
month pay; this Bashaw is also obliged to maintain the Bullabashes in the
Cassaba with victuals, with Horses, when they go in Camp; and also to the
Soldiers to carry their Baggage, the Cooks Kettles and to furnish them with
Powder, Shot, Tents and other necessaries, and once in 15. days to make the
whole council a feast, to maintain the household expenses of the Agga or
General of the Soldiers: Besides giving him if he sit but three days in that
Chair 1000. shillings and if two months no more, for so their manner is to
abide in that dignity, yet few of them have been known to have continued
that time of two months. Of their elder Bullabashes they elect their 24.
Ayabashes, and of their elder Ayabashes they make their Kaia, and this Kaia is
made Agga; yet he upon sufficient reason given may excuse himself of the
place, yet with consent of the Duana or Council. I have known many to sit
down; and immediately rise again, and in a day four or five of them to do
the like, at such time as any great difference or stir has been amongst
them: I knew one of them a man of good esteem, through timour and conscience,
a great matter of importance being to be iudicated, made an appollogicall
excuse and refused the place; but the Duana took him down, gave him 200.
blows and after with less ease made him resit in the chair to do justice;
from which when they are dismissed, turn Mussullagas, and are then exempted
from all toils, troubles, or Duana matters, and are only called thither at
such times as some infrequent matter is presented, and the like has not passed
in their Bullabashes times. When they send for the ancients of the Mussallagas,
to know if any such had occured in his government, who gives his answer and
opinion and departs; the third in place are the Oddabashes, who are the last in
council, nor do these enjoy an equal pay, but according to their service;
for if there be a nation that retains the discipline of the Romans they are
these; no man is preferred to place by descent or valor; as well the Sheep as
the Lion: First they are Soldiers, and have but four shillings a month pay,
and four breades, which they raise by service, for every time they go in the
Army; to a shilling upon the Nativitie of every son of the great Turke^ to
another upon any victory that the great Turk has, to another for every
enemies head they cut off, to another upon the coming of a new Bashaw, to
another from a Soldier they rise to Avichellhage or steward, to Anodabasshe,
and so to Abullabasshe, to an Ayabasshe, to a Kaya, and in fine to Agga, and
then Mussould or turned out; so that it is fortune that brings them in place,
but not in pay, a new soldier by the death of his Officers come to place but
it is Service that advances their pay; the Soldier has but 4. breads a day,
the Oddabashe the like, the Bullabashe 8. the Ayabasshe 24. provided they be
not married, for when they marry they lose their bread and houses: most of the
Bullabashes have houses Rent-free, yet gets them by favor, for when a
Bullabasshe is very sick, sends word to his best friend, that is destitute of
a house, for his Cimitary, which he gives order to have drawn, whereby if he
dies, his friend is put in possession, according to their custom and proverb;
for they say they rose by the sword, they live by the sword, and they shall end
and perish by the sword: the most profitablest places are those of the Ch^wsses
or pursevants, who must be natural Turks, and are in Number 6. Continuing in
Office six years, during which term they enjoy many privileges, and at the
expiration of their times turns Bullabashes, having passed a life free of
care, and gotten many thousand pieces of eight. The next to them in matter of
profit, are the Archesse or cooks, and are in Number 120, who succeed one
another in place till they be Archabasshes or Arch-Cookes, when they turn
Oddabasshes, and their last year of Service in that Office worth them, 1500.
pieces of eight, during which time they are interdicted the company of women: I
knew one of them taken in company of a women, by one of his fraternity, had
presently his turbant torn off his head, and was led as a malefactor, before
the Duana, whose first demand to him was whether there wanted boys. In sum,
they degraded him, and mulcted him with 500. blows, for transgressing these
Ancient customs. In fine the Basshaw is but a figure, and received by them
mearely to take that charge and trouble upon him, which all of themselves of
the great ones refuses: there are four Allcaids or Generals of Camps; which
by Nation must be Renegadoes, and these are excessive rich, for all they can
extort from the Moors above the Kings tribute they put into their own purses,
for which the Allarbies exhibites continual comp^^^ts against them; one of the
chiefest of them in my time was in council like to be to^e in pieces, nor
have they any other way to prevent the like accident, but by keeping themselves
indebted to the treasury and chiefest men in Council: great obligation had
Caide Muxate to Ha^sa Hosiea, who in that hurly burly, wherein the whole Duana
were in a confusion; after a sign and beckoning with the hand, (...) in this
manner unto them; Fathers, brethren, and sons* this accused person is
indebted to the common treasury 200. thousand dubles, wherefore look well
what you do, and take notice of the first man that offers him violence, that
he may pay his debts; upon which they desisted and the Alcaide escaped that
danger. With them is no pleading or capitulating of causes, for a mere oration
does but bring a man's life into question, the word with them is, shall it be so
or shall it not be so, geller gellimesse, shall he come or not come, they
stand in ranks passing the word by a Chouse or Pursevant; their action, their
hands upon their bellies, jetting each other with their arms or elbowes,
raising their voices as they are in Choler, or as a pot boileth with the
addition of fire, until they are many times all in a cumbustion; they have a
wise prevention of a greater mischief, so that these two particulars are
commanded by them upon deepest paine^ not to drink wine, or any strong liquors
before their coming to (...) house or place of Duana, or to wear or carry a
Knife thither, (...) ancient proverb causes I believe these cautions; for they
say that blood shall begin at that Duana place, and run down into the Cava
which is a thousand paces; I have known them so much divided, as their Agga,
24. Aiabasshes and Cadie, all turned out of places at one time: in brief it is
such a government as the like is no where else in the world, yet are they that
governes in their actions otherwise grave, wearing their turbants, in
greatness, and their beards in length as they are in office; but what is most
to be admired at, is that when they are but Common Soldiers, they are most
publicly flagitious, taking shame as no enormity, but when they come to the
place of Duana men, they are present Metamorphosis, which were it not so
popular were more to be admired; they are generally illiterate, yet are their
doings famously esteemed in the grand signiours Court, as appears by this,
that when his greatness is any ways discontented and that none of his Visseares
dare speak unto him, they repleate a good humor in him by presenting to his
sight the government of Argire. They have two great Duana days weekly,
Saturday in the Allcassaba, and Sunday morning in the Basshawes house; how ever
they sit every day in Council: if a Christian has any matter of importance,
it must be treated in the Allcassaba, yet is no Christian permitted to enter
that place, but must stand at the door, send in his demands by the Trugman or
Interpreter, who is a Renegado, by whom they return their answer; not is a
Christian permitted to speak publickely in Duana, nor will they have any
matters delivered them but in the Turkish tongue, and by a Trugman.

Of Governers in particular.
THe Agga who is General of the Soldiers and Chief in Council.

The Kaiea his second.

The 24. Ayehasshes or 24. in place of Council.

Bullabasshes are 800. these sway in Council.

Addabasshes are 424. and wear a red cloth in their Cappes in manner of a
tongue, with a wrested Turbant, a long Coat, and are not permitted to wear
any other garment.

The Hassia, their only Councellor, whose advice they receive as an Oracle.

Six Ch^wsses all wearing vestes like the Oddabashes, and are apparelled in
green coats, made of a fashion peculiar to themselves for their better
knowledge; they have the sole power to apprehend Duanna men, provided they have
a warrant from the Agga; nor may they take a soldier by any part of his body,
but by the girdell, nor does the Soldier upon pain of death dare resist him:
infinite privileges do these soldiers enjoy, for i^ a Tagerine or Moore
strickes one of them, he has his hand immediately cut off. I knew a Sheriff, a
Sect that Lineally derives themselves from Mahomet, being most egrediously
abused by a soldier, in his choler struck him, he was presently apprehended:
for this custom is amongst them, that any of them crying sherellah, which
signifies, Gods Justice, and the contrary party shall refuse to go, to the
place where Justice is administered, all persons present are obleiged to assist
the plaintiff, so that ordinarily they dragge such as makes any wilful
resistance: this Shireffe being for his offense brought before the Council,
interceaded by way of privilege and respects of blood, but he only obtained
this courtesy, that they cut off his left hand, whereas usually they cut off
the right hand of all others that offend in like nature. Whiles these soldiers
live unmarried, they all live in Courts of Guard, called by them Cassheries,
pieces of excellent workeman-ship and commodity; nor may any of them lie out
at night without leave of their Lieutenant, whom they call their Oddabashe,
who has power to castigate them for any offense they do commit, so it be not
criminal, yet has the Soldier this privilege, that if he conceives his
Lieutenant to envy him, to appeal to the Duana, which however if any of them
do, are sure to suffer a double Jerking: for that in the Courts of Guard they
may not give more blows than did the Jews to Paul, forty save one, and those
must be given by the Leivetenant himself, and that upon his knees, and he
obliged upon like castigation, not to carry his Arm above his head, yet so
obedient are these Soldiers to their Commanders, that after beating they rise
and pray for the perpetuation of the faith of Mahomet, and prosperities of the
shadow of God, their Emperor. Of their Basha, their Fathers, the governors
and Commonwealth of Arger^, and kiss their Officers hand and head, thank him
for his favor in Correcting them, and promise for future time to live more
regular, and being premonished by the Leivetenant, he is discharged: for
criminal causes they are carried to the Alcassaba, where they are mul^ted
according to their offense. I have known many there beaten to pieces, in matter
of Duana men, upon the least suspicion or accusation, they are instantly
strangled and thrown into the sea, where having lain 24. hours, they are
weighed by their friends and buried: other Officers there are, but have no
voice in Council, as the Arches or Cooks, and are 124. their duty is to
purvoy the City with flesh; the Admiral of their ships and Sea Captains
are in great estimation, yet have no voice or command in Counsel, and are all
once a year obleiged to go to sea, otherwise are sent into the camps, where
they are no more privileged than the common Soldiers.

Of its Revinewes.
THey send out 4. Camps yearly into the Country, exacting from the Allubies
excessive Tributes, who were it not for their own civil dissentions, and they
politiquely stirred up by the Turk for their own advantage, were not otherwise
able to put their faces out of the gates of Argiere, but making this
oppertunitie the Moors plague, they Martch many hundred miles, triumphing over
Millions of the Natives the Allarbies, and that not with thousands of Soldiers
but with a handful of men, and they without discipline; I mean of postures,
or common probability, they receive from their Camp called Tittere, being
North East from Argere, bordering upon the Kingdom of Cook^^e, from which King
they receive no Tribute but from the Allarbies inhabiting the plains,
Vicenteres, to that Prince they dubles. have yearly. 200000.

From their second Camp, called Piscarie in the sandy deserts bordering upon
the Zara and Nigars Country 24, days in their March thither. South upon a
line, in which Country grows do Corn grain, their sole feeding being Rice
and Dates, pays them yearly 200000.

They also by this Camp receive tribute from the Nigars who send them yearly
200. of their Children.

Thirdly, Sharke, extending West as far as Bot^yea, and the Kingdom of
Muritanea or Tremassine pays 400000. Gorbe, extending its teritorie as f^er in
the Orient as Tobarco. A Castle in possession of the Genousa pays. 400000.
From their Garissins, as Constantina. 050000. From Bonna, a Port town. 050000.
From the, Bastyone when it was in possession of the French. 090000. From
Tobarco they receive yearly. 010000. From Colla a Port Town. 040000. From
Gigerie a Port Town. 015000. From Buggea a Port Town. 040000. From Shershell
a Port town they receive yearly. 40000. From Massagan a Port Town 50000.
From Massagonem, a Port Town. 50000. From Trimassin, Metropolitan City of the
Kingdom of Murita^iea they yearly receive. 100000. From the Allarbies of
Monteger^, and the vale of Medea, and the farms of the Citizens. 800000. From
the Gardens a joining near the City being 16000. 800000. By the Gates of the
City. 040000.
They have rent from all shoppes in the City proportionally as they are let to
those that occupies them, which must be very great; yet I could never come to
the true knowledge of it. For their Sea revinues they are uncertain, they
being as purchase comes in, of all goods and people that are taken; the Bashaw
has the eight part, and all ships or other vessels solely to his own
particular, with all other provision and Ammunition appertayning to them. They
have no constant trade, but with the Legornesses, and they when most comes, but
two small vessels in a year: other trade they have, the chiefest being for
Alexandria in Egypt, yet most performed by a people called Iarbines; all paying
12. and a half purcenta: in sum, for their Camps, Garrisons, Gardens and the
like to my knowledge, by good information they have certain Rent 3475000.
dubles, accounting each duble to the just shilling English, and is 34750000

Of their Sea Forces.
THeir Sea Forces chiefly consisted of their Galleys, yet never exceeded the
number of nine at one time: Ally Pichelline, with the fool in the Gospel,
resolved in the year 1639. to have brought them to twelve, and to have built a
Gally Groce, but one was in the same year lost at Bonna by a tempest, and the
other eight all taken by the Venetians; so that at that present there was never
a Gally remaining in that City, nor can I conceive that ever Ally will return
thither, from the Levant where he now is to build more. So that their Sea
Forces at the present consistes altogether in ships, which are sometimes
more, sometimes less. When I was first brought thither, in the year 1631.
They had 90. vessels of all sorts, which they Armed in robberies, but in three
years after they had not 30. and were utterly disanimated to arm their
ships in reprisall voyages, nor would upon any terms of advantage deal
with an English ship of force, until a certain Allerbie borne in the
Mountains of Cokoose Captain of a Pinke of 26. pieces of Artillery belonging
to the Bashaw, unfortunatly met with the Adventure of London, a ship of 21.
pieces of Ordnance, and 45. men, which this Moore boarded, and immediately
mastered she being richly laden for the account of Gennonesses, which has
since imboldned that captain to take diverse English Ships of good force, and
refuses to fight with none that he meets withal: Thus much of their Sea
Forces and ships, which may be at present 80. Sail, most Flemish ships,
some carrying 40. pieces of* Ordnance.

Of their Land Forces.
NO Tagarine or Moore of the City may be a Soldier or go in Land service,
they are only allowed Arms in their houses to defend the City if it should
be invaded; in their four Camps they send out 2400. men, they have in their
Garrisons 1000. more: in my time in their Hamper or General Army, which in
1633. they sent against the King of Cokoose, when all their ships were in port,
and all their soldiers at home, beside those in Garrison they could make but
4500. Soldiers, beside Bullabashes and Oddabashes their Commanders. I will
allow for sick men and others in Merchant voyages 1000. more, so that in my
judgment they cannot have above 5000. Soldiers in pay, and although there be
Christians that daily turn Turks and Turks which daily comes out of the
Lavante which are presently put in pay; so by their fights on Land and at Sea,
there are daily killed more or less of them, and that to the benefit of the
Bashaw, for if a Soldier dies without children, he inherits his goods; they
have also a people which follows them for spoils, called Swayves or Horsemen:
besides all these there are perminently in the City, of Gentlemen, Tagerines
and Moors above 50000. able men to draw Sword; and thus much of their Land
Forces.

Of their Victories.
THe virtue of this people does appear by the large and ample patrimony which
in that Country they command, in despite of millions of their enemies, and
they a people framed to war, able of body, fierce of nature, and cruel of
disposition, the most excellent horsemen of the world, I mean the Moors: In
1542. with Ally their Bashaw they marched to the very gates of Fesse, one of
the most famous Cities of Africa, and returned having made composition, and
received of the Citizens for each day to each Soldier, as long as they had
been from Argiere, a Ducate a day: their officers advanced their reward as
they were in dignity, and the Bashaw by their relation returned with excessive
riches to his own particular. They did in the year 1620. fight many battles
with the King of Cokoose, beat him out of his country, only leaving him a
mountain, which by its unpassable ways and difficult assent was the sole
refuge he had to keep himself from their Swords, they having burned his
Cities of England, of France, Spain, Portugal, Sicelia, Naples, Rome, Venice,
Allimania, and others which were and are yet called according to these
principal places of Christendom.

In the year 1626. they conquered the Kingdom of Muritania, from the
Marrabote, named Sedeabdelcadder, and called by them Antichriste; and that
sumptuous City of Tremessine, Metroppolis of that kingdom, which Marrabote by
his conjurations, for so I esteem them, and that with good reason, to be
Cunjurors, Charmers and Witches, did by his Art Magique many miracles whereby
he became famous amongst those indocible and superstitious people: the Moors
who flocked to him not only as the man that would defend them and that
Kingdom, but also by his extraordinary virtue and power, get more, and heaven
for them also, they esteeming him as the man of God, for so are they still led
to believe; the greatest Exorcist with them is the greatest Saint. The Duana of
Argiere sends out an Army against him, consisting of 6000. Turks Foot, and
2000. Swayves Horsemen; the Tagerines and Bellagees Citizens, with other
superstitious people of the City lamented that the blind Turk would
apparently run into an inevitable destruction: the Turks wives condoles
their husbands presumption as to go to conquer such a man of God. The Turk
semper idem set forwards; the General of the Army was a Colloly, and the man
that since blew up their Cassaba; they incountered this great Prophet, having
with him an Army of above 20000. men; joins battle, but his art failing,
great numbers of his Soldiers slain. In fine he was abandoned of all his
people, taken prisoner, the Algieres fleaed him alive, and stuffed his skin
with straw and sent it for Argiere, where it was carried in triumph in all
public places of that City, to the glory of the Turk and infamy of all
superstitious Moors: the Turk pursued his advantage, made a final conquest
of that country, only Tremassine was an obsticle in their way, which the
Turk besieged, and after diverse skirmishes it was yielded to them, they put
200. Soldiers in Garrison in their Alcassaba, and triumphiously returned to
Argiere, where they were received with glory. Most famous is this City, and of
all others proud in her good fortune against the Soldiers and state of Tunis.
In 1627. when upon differences between them, about a certain Castle the
Algieres built, whom they of Tunis challenged to be built in their territories
and jurisdiction. Subsitudes were appointed on both parties to treat and
ratify some relugar way betwixt them, and that the difference should not be
only judicated by Turks, but rather by Moors, natives of the country, to
whose experience the right was better known. Long time was spent in Commission
to effect it, but neither the one nor the other would turn their affections to
that good use. In fine, it came to be the intelligence of the great Turk, who
did strive to accommodate a stabilitie of peace betwixt them, nor could his
greatness herein prevail; the Commissioners deputed by both Commonwealths,
returned unaccorded; the grand signiour Pope-like, by book and candle
excommunicated them both, if they disobeyed his pleasure therein, which they
least set by, and casting away all legal Capitulations, Armed on both sides:
they of Tunise raised an Army of 8000. foot of the Turkish Nation, with
volentaries, admitting and accepting all Gentlemen of the Collollies that would
go to that Service: Henissha, a great Prince of the Allarbies confederated
with them, and for old injuries vowed revenge upon the Algerers, who on their
parts neglected no oppertunitie, stayed their Land Forces, and ships from
Navigation, levied 6000. Turks, nor would they admit volentaries, as Gentlemen
of the Collollies or others not in pay. Ben Allie a Prince of the Orient and of
the Moorish Nation great enemy to his Vicentere henissha, the other Prince
confederated with the Adverse party, brought unto their assistance 7000.
horse, the combination with the Tunistens, and Prince Henissha was made with
strong promises and protestations of love, one unto the other, confirmed with
deep vows to be allegated in an indisolvable and perpetual obligation, both
promises upon victory to Martch to the gates of Argere, and not only so, but
to make a final extirpation of those incorrigible people of that City, by
mutual condition, the spoils were to be given to Prince Henesha and his
Soldiers, but the Lands and Cities Conquered to be the reward of the Tunisers,
who to effect matters answerable to so great expectation, carried 40. pieces of
brass Ordnance of all sorts in their Army, and 8000 soldiers Turks;
Henessha, brought to their assistance, 11000. Horsemen, of his own subjects:
the Allgerers with an undaunted resolution, advanced to their new-built Castle,
as far in the Orient as Tobarco, 130. leagues; carried not one piece of
Artillery with them, nor did their own Forces exceed the Number of 6000.
foot Turks, Benn Allie their confederate brought to their assistance, 7000.
horsemen, of their own people Allarbies, notwithstanding the great
disadvantage, on the enemies part, as being in horse and foot, many thousand
more than they were: besides, having so many pieces of Ordnance, Martches into
their territory, found their enemies, with whom they joined battle, the
Allgerers first made at the Ordnance of their enemies; and after a hot skirmish
being valiantly resisted, the fight increasing on all sides, the victory a long
time doubtful, yet by general opinion like to have fallen to the Tunessins:
the two Princes of the Allarbies had as hard bickering on their parts, as now
the time to show (that king of passions) their Malice one against the other;
the Allgerers impatient, took their usual fury, gives the word every
Soldier to throw down his Musket, and to end the quarrel by dent of sword;
which doing, they entered upon the Ordnance of their enemies, and by their
valor gained them, which they now turned as a rod of mischief to whip their
first masters, and like a torrent makes farther into the Army of the enemy,
who for a long time made valliant and Noble resistance, but the virtue of the
Allgerers prevailed, and the Conquered fled, leaving behind them 3500. of their
Companions dead upon the ground of their Turkish Soldiers; 4^. pieces of
Artillery, many Banners of great curiosity and value, with rich pillage, which
fell to Ben Allie, and his All^rbies, beside his glory of victory obtained
against his mortal enemy Prince Henesha. The Allgerers returned with this
glory to their City, and are by the inhabitants received with Joy and
triumph, whiles they of Tunis lamented their disgrace, were perplexed what more
mischief the Allgeres, purposed to do unto them, to whose mercy certainly
they were, their lives, their goods, and their City; and the greater was
their terror, for the arivall of 40. Argere ships at the Galletta, or Port
Carthage^ but they were upon the first advertisment of victory recalled by the
Council of Argere, without doing them of Tunis the least damage, and they
utterly demolished that Castle which had caused that difference betwixt them;
how many battles they have fought with the Allarbies, were too tedious to
recount: they have diverse times overthrown the Armies of Ben Allie, and
Henessha, with other great Princes of the Moors, and are in continual and
daily skirmishes with them, to whom they are a terour, and their fame spread in
all Africa.

Of its Inhabitants.
SHe is proud in Citizens, consisting of 28000. Families, besides Jews
unaccounted, who cannot be less than 30000. souls; her inhabitants consists
of four sorts of people. Of Bellages Natives, and first inhabitants of the
City of Tagerines, a people banished Spain by Philip the third; and Jews,
all which are but tenants at will to the last, and that is the Turk, from whom
is also extracted two other sorts of people; one the Collollies their children
Natural, and the Renegatha, their adoptive Children, of which three sorts of
men are the Soldiers of Argiere: as for the condition and manners of this
people, excepting that which tend to the upholding of their state and
Commonwealth, I mean their government Millitary, they are so depraved as they
have no good Custom amongst them, for although in all their doings, they begin
with the first mover, if it be but in cutting a piece of bread, and that in
their way they wash and pray five times a day, and are very ceremonious in
their law; yet are they incorigibly flagitious, they are said to commit Sodomie
with all creatures, and tolerate all vices; so their women for their parts are
most impudent and addicted to all kinds of unnaturallnesse, yet greedy lovers
of money; they make no scruple of murder, neither of infants is it enquired
after: so on the contrary does the Soldier upon discontent, jelousie, or
displeasure, cut their throats, throw them out at windows into the Sea, and
in the open streets without remorse of conscience or inquisition of Justice, to
say so much as what have thou done. There is no Natural love from the man to
the Wife, nor from the woman to her husband; they marry without sight one of
another, and their aim and intent only intrest: they buy their wives, paying
half their dowry in hand, and the other upon divorce, for upon least
difference they turn away each other: the man obleiges himself to maintain
his wife, with a precise form of allowance, which if he any ways fails to
perform, its frequent and legal the woman to abandon her husband, and that
without scruple, although in their abode together they have had many children,
(like to like as the Devil said to the Collier) for they are as well rewarded
in their children, whose disobedience is such, that to defame and buffet them
is usance, and their parents count it a favor to do them service: so is the
Jew, a most execrable people, and a like hateful to all Nations; bloody
hearted, living by defraudes, and notwithstanding their knowledge of the Law,
are as disobedient to their parents as the other. There is yet another sort of
people and they are Christians, whose case is to be pitied, that lies groaning
under the yoke of Turkish, tyranny, who Martyr them daily by their most
contested, most inexorable, and unhumane creuelties, whose number and virtues
were they armed, were not only enough to master Argere, but to make a final
conquest of all Africa; they are esteemed to be 60000. truly I think them
little less, for by common probability, there being 16000. Gardens, and one
with another, having a Christian, some two, three, and four, besides so great
a Number as are in the City, put to all vile and base services, others that
go to Sea, they doing nothing that tends to labor themselves, so that it
carries too great a probability to be that Number: but those that I must
lament, and nature obliges to be most indulgent to, is for more than 1500. of
my miserable Country men, who are there plunged in the most vile and greatest
detriments, certainly a fair course would effect their enlargement, and
without all doubt be most acceptable to Almighty God, and bring a benediction
upon his Majesty, his Royal posterity, people and dominions; they have a
most confident opinion of his Majesty's gracious favor toward them, and are
credulous that his Royal bounty will be no less propence to them, than it
has been to those that were in Moroco and Sally; they blame the wills of some
ill affected persons, who they say have long countermaunded that beniffecence
which would have been their remuneration; here are those indeed that pretend
if those men should be redeemed, upon like hopes others would not fight, and so
give away Merchants estates, which alas it is a weak assertion; we all know it
is not the common sort that swayes, but the Captain which if a Lion, a sheep
will follow him: in Corporal diseases, if the head be ill, how is all the body
distempered, but what rational man is there that would yield himself into a
14. or 15. years slavery, although he knew certainly at the end of that
terminie, to be redeemed. Who does us all this mischief but Christians,
consider the unwonted damages we daily receive by them, premeditate what may
more ensue, if some speedy course be not taken to releeve them; those poor
souls who in anguish of their hearts, bereft of all Christian consolations,
and means ordinary to reviste their Patria, many having wives and Children,
whom they love most dear, so that like a Bear robbed of her whelps, they are
forced to take revenge, despairing of better Fortunes, and suppose by doing
great spoils to Anticepate their infranchisment; such men they are that had or
may his Majesty have occasion to use Seamen, a 1000. of them were better than
the best 3000. in England; pardon me for the comparison, for they have had
custom to beget boldness, and experience to do execution, many of them have
been there 11. some 12. years; fighting to them is as ordinary as to us
carousing: in sum, they are excellent men, either for offense or defense, in
Sea Services, and so accustomarily expert, that by judgment of their eye, they
will eschew and avoid a great shot: It is further pretended, if they should be
enlarged, and a peace established, those Pirates of Allgere would never conserve
and keep it; I am certain that the last peace was broken by the English, by
whom those of Argere received many injuries and long suffered them before they
sought the least revenge, and the first English ship brought thither, caused
many differences betwixt themselves in Duana, nor would they consent to have
the company sold, till they saw the poor men so neglected, as no man
interceaded for them; I am confident that if his Majesty should send for those
his poor, but most Loyal subjects; that the Turks would give them upon
honorable terms, and have a just propention to a good firm and constant
peace, which the better to obleige them to observe, in my opinion the way were
to establish a conncell in that City, which should be allowed sufficient
maintenance, by those that shall settle a Factorie there: it is also
necessarily required in the person so subsituted, to be moderate, methodicall,
and sufficient, and that the Allgerers on their part send hither one of their
Bullahasshawes a Turk by Nation, which will be a powerful means to obleige
them to keep and concerve the peace; the trade will be as beneficial as any
Skall in Barberie, although lately it has not so proved, the cause was not in
the City, or inhabitants, but in the instruments employed in the negotion
which wanted experience in the Country: besides the Bastion is now vacant which
long has been in hand of the French, worth 200000. duccats per annam declaro,
gotten by fishing of Curell, wherein if any desire further satisfaction I will
resolve them: in sum, as these Nations and Kingdoms of ours, are this day
the most happiest and flourishing in the whole world, envied by most
Christians, and admired by all Turks, who ascribes a preexcellencie of
wisdom, prudence and virtue, to our Kings Majesty now reigning (long may he
live to Reign over us) and to the Right Honorable Lords of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, absolutely to be the most wisest and most virtuous
Prince, and Counselors in the Universe; I do implore the Majesty Divine to
be their Counselor, by whose assistance as long to the admiration of the
world, they have been guided, so they may be ever to the maugering of all
those that bear them envy; whiles let it be our consolations against all
enemies and maligners, that there is no greater figne of the mercy and favor
of God, to any Nation or people, than when the hearts of public governers are
raised up to the punishment of Vice, reward of virtue, and for the Commanding
of pious and Restoritive actions: in fine, I make no question, but at time
convenient, these poor afflicted people shall be thought on, commiserated, and
releeved. I was lately solicited by certain personages, to give my advice
concerning them, and the state of Argere, and by discourse do collect that a
certain Gentleman intends to prove means and friends to get a Lotterie, by
which he doubts not to get more than 200000. pound sterling, and with the one
part pretend to redeem the Captives, and with the other to make himself a
complete man; these and such like rediculous projects are to be derided, as
preposterous, and the event expected to speed there after; a better, more
laudible, and speedy way may be taken to prevent many ensuing dangers,
threatened upon our Navigations, and people. 30000. pound turned or employed in
such materials, as would advance profit in the Country, imposed in men's hands
experienced, will by Gods mercy and his Majesty's favor, infranchise them.

Of their Lands, and Territories.
THe greater the Enemy, the more worthy the Conquest, the lesser the number of
the Conquerours, the more Renowned and Honorable the Victory; since Barba
Rassha his time, of 120. years, who took this City with 32 men, from so
mean a beginning, and from so base obscurity has this City raised her glory
in most parts of the known world, and extends her magnitude and territory to
the Orient, as far as Tobarco, 130. leagues, to the South; as far as the
Zara, and burning zoan of the Nigars Country, to the Occident; as far as
Botoyca, and to Tituon, 130. leagues; and at Sea is a terror to most
Navigators, and a scourge to all the Meditarenian Cost of Christendom.

Of their Riches.
NO man may be incredulous or marvel at her excessive essentialls and
materials of gold and silver, having lived upon the Spoil of all
Christendom, more than 120. years; what abundance of riches has been since
that time brought into her, is known by miserable experience to most
Christians, the substance of whole Cities and Islands has been involved into
her Gulf; nor is she alone enriched by these; but also by all sorts of goods
which they take, and sell to Christians and Jews, Merchants, for ready money;
excessive riches they get by Captives, exacting from them great ransomes; the
poorest and which of themselves have nothing, of the Spanish Nation, are
usually redeemed in a thousand shillings; and for Genowayes, if under 22.
years of age, the Signiors of Tobarco are obleiged to free them to a hundred
pound sterling; nor does there want diligence in them to perform and effect
their inlargements, it is anniversary; for the Spanyard by collections, called
amongst them Lemossena, to infranchise 3. or 4. hundred men, and for ready
moneys paid in pieces of eight: besides, her yearly tributes, which they get
from the Allarbies, not being less than 200000. pound sterling, insomuch that
she is an Indies or mineral, for that of all that is brought into her, none is
carried out again; as for corn and other necessaries, which obleiges the life
of man, the Citizens have all the land of many days Journey of their own, so
that they having engrossed so great a part of the Country, they do not only
furnish themselves with provisions, but also with money which they get of the
neighboring Allarbies for provision; and surely for oil, figs, and the
like, which the Cabills of the Kingdom of Cookose brings them, they leave the
principal, and product for trivall commodities, which their indocible
capacities cannot furnish themselves with, and for what commodities are brought
thither from Mercellies and Legorne, in way of trade they leave all behind
them, and brings much money also, whose coming thither is only for redeeming
Captives, and buying reprisall goods. Thus have I accomplished the Capitals,
and given a true relation of that flourishing City, whose only rich stones,
Dyamonds and Pearls is sufficient to answer the charge of that Navy and
Army that shall be sent to Conquer her; besides what fetters of gold, gold
chains and the like are daily to be seen in her streets, it being so
popularly known, I need not speak of: as for her riches, in present coin of
plate and gold, I have sufficiently demonstrated to satisfy any reasonable
Judgment. Oh that I might live to be an actour in a Marshall way, to see her
Conquest, they fear none so much as our English Nation, neither is it
difficult or doubtful, with a good fleet of ships, and an Army, of 30000.
Soldiers on Land to pluck down her pride, she having many enemies within
her, and enough to effect her ruin; and most of all, her oppressions, and
sins, which cry to the heavens for Judgment against her; so having ended
with that City I think it also requisite to nominate the Equipage of the
Basshaw, or their Vice-King, which I omitted to intermixe with the other
Officers of the Duana, because they have no voice in their Council nor Command
in the City; and to speak truth, the only privilege the Bassha has, is that
he has power over the Moors of the City, in matter of Justice, yet
tolerated by the Duana, to exact great sums of money from them, the better
to enable him to give them their pay.

Of the Bassha his Officers and Retinue.
THe Bassha must be a Renegado, bred in the great Turks Suray or Court.

His Kaia or Treasurer, his second, a Renegado to some Visscere in Turkey.

His Allimene or Receiver, and is for Maritane affairs, an inferior Renegado.

His Hoossiea or Secretary, and may be of either sort Turk or Renegatha.

His Chamberlain, and by the Grand Signiors command must be a natural Turk.

His Agga or Captain of his Horse, a Renegado.

His Tollope or Priest must be a Natural Turk.

His Chillabies or Gentlemen attendants, and are all Renegathes, boys of
finest beauty and comeliness.

6. Player on Cornets, and 2. Sackbuts, Renegathes.

4. Players on kettle-Drums, Nigars.

40. Sollackes appointed by the Duana, for his Guard gives daily attendance at
his Palace gate, and are of the oldest Odabasshes, or Corporals of the
Council.

His Guardian over his Christians slaves, a Rogue of the Moorish Nation, and 2.
other Nigars.

26. Chousses or Serjants to Arrest men indebted, provided they be Moors, for
that a Soldier may not be imprisoned for debt; and these Serjants are all
Moors Natives of the Country; the rest of his household as Cooks Scollions
and the like are Christian slaves.

FINIS.

