THE FIRST BLAST OF THE TRUMPET AGAINST THE MONSTRVOVS regiment of women.

Veritas temporis filia.

M. D. LVIII.

THE KINGDOM APPERTEINETH TO OUR God.
VVonder it is, that amongst so many pregnant wits as the I Will of great
Britanny has produced, so many godly and zealous preachers as England did
sometime norishe, and amongst so many learned and men of grave judgment, as
this day by Iesabel are exiled, none is found so stowte of courage, so
faithful to God, nor loving to their native country, that they dare admonish
the inhabitants of that I Will how abominable before God, is the Empire or Rule
of a wicked woman, yea of a traiteresse and bastard. And what may a people or
nation left destitute of a lawful head, do by the authority of Gods word
in electing and appointing common rulers and magistrates. That I Will (alas) for
the contempt and horrible abuse of Gods mercies offered, and for the shameful
reuolting to Satan from Christ Jesus, and from his Gospel ones professed,
does justly merit to be left in the hands of their own counsel, and so to
come to confusion and bondage of strangiers. But yet I fear that this
universal negligence of such as sometimes were esteemed watchemen, Negligence of
watchemen.
shall rather aggrauate our former ingratitude, then excuse this our universal
and ungodly silence, in so weighty a matter. We se our country set furthe for
a pray to foreine nations, we hear the blood of our brethren, the me^bres of
Christ Jesus most cruelly to be shed, and the monstrous empire of a cruel
woman (the secret counsel of God excepted) we know to be the only occasion
of all these miseries: and yet with silence we pass the time as though the
matter did nothing appertein to us. But the contrary examples of the ancient
prophets move me The diligence of the old prophets of God.
to doubt of this our fact. For Israel did vniuersalie decline from God by
embrasing idolatry under Jeroboam. In which they did continue 1.Reg. 12
even unto the destruction of their common welthe. And Judah with Jerusalem did
follow the vile superstition and open iniquity of Samaria. But Ezech. 16.
yet ceased not the prophets of God to admonish the one and the other: Yea
even after that God had poured furthe his plagues upon them. For Jeremy Ierem.
29
did write to the captives in Babylon, and did correct their errors, plainly
instructing them, who did remain in the midst of that idolatrouse nation.
Ezechiel Ezech. 7,8,9.
from the midst of his brethren prisoners in Chaldea, did write his vision
to those that were in Jerusalem, and sharply rebukinge their vices, assured
them that they should not escape the vengeance of God God always had his people
amongst the wicked, who never lacked their prophets and teachers.
by reason of their abominations committed.

The same prophets for comfort of the afflicted and chosen saints of God, who
did lie hyd amongst the reprobate of that age (as co^monlie does the corn
amongst the chasse) did prophecy and before speak the changes Isaie 13.
Ierem. 46 Ezech. 36
of kingdoms, the punishments of tyrannes, and the vengeance which God would
execute upon the oppressors of his people. The same did Daniel and the rest of
the prophets every one in their season. By whose examples and by the plain
precept, which is given to Ezechiel, commanding him that he Examples what
teachers oght to do in this time.
shall say to the wicked: Thou shall die the death. We in this our miserable
age are bound to admonish the world and the tyra^nes thereof, of their sodeine
destruction, to assure them, and to cry unto them, whether they list to hear
or Ezech. 2. Apoca. 6.
not. That the blood of the saints, which by them is shed, co^tinuallie cries
and craves vengeance in the presence of the Lord of hosts. And further it is
our duty to open the truth reveled unto us, unto the ignorant and blind
world, vnlest that to our own condemnation we list to wrap up and hyde the
talent committed to our charge. I am assured that God has reveled to some in
this our age, that it is more then a mo^stre in nature, that a woman shall
reign and have empire above man. And yet with us all, there is such silence,
as if God there with were nothing offended. The natural man, ennemy to God
shall find, I know, many causes why no such doctrine oght to be published in
these our dangerous days. Three chef reasons, that do stay man from speaking
the truth.
First, for that it may seem to tend to sedition: secondarilie, it shall be
dangerous not only to the writer or publisher, but also to all such as shall
read the writings, or favor this truth spoken: and last it shall not amend
the chief offenders, partly because it shall never come to their ears, and
partly because they will not be admonished in such cases. I answer, if any of
these be a sufficient reason that a truth known shall be co^celed, then were the
ancient prophets of God very fools, who did not better provide for their
own quietness, then to hasard their lives for rebuking of vices, and for the
opening of such crimes, as were not known to the world. And Christ Jesus did
injury to his Apostles, comma^ding them to preach repentance and remission of
sins in his name to every realm and nation. And Paul did not understand
his own liberty, when he cried, woe be to 1.Cor. 9.
me, if I preach not the Euangile. If fear, I say, of persecution, of
sclander, or of any inconvenience before named might have excused, and
discharged the servants of God, from plainly rebuking Mat. 26. Act. 18, 21.
the sins of the world, just cause had every one of them to have ceased
from their office. For sodeinlie their doctrine was accused by terms of
sedition, of new learning, and of treason: persecution and vehement trouble
did shortly come upon the professors with the preachers: kings, princes and
worldly rulers did conspire against Psalm. 2. Act. 4.
God and against his anointed Christ Jesus. But what? Did any of these move the
prophets and Apostles to faint in their vocation? no. But by the resistance,
which the devil made to them by his suppostes, were they the more inflamed to
publishe the truth reveled unto them and to witness with their blood, that
grievous condemnation and Gods heuie vengeance should follow the proud
contempt of graces offered. The fidelity, bold courage, and constancy of those
that are passed before us, oght to provoke us to follow their footsteppes,
onles we look for an other kingdom then Christ has promised to such as
persevere in profession of his name to the end. If any think that the empire of
women, is not of such importance, that for the suppressing of the same, any man
is bound to hasarde his life, I answer, that to suppress it, is in the hand
of god alone. But to utter the impiety and abomination of the same, I say, it
is the duty of every It is necessary for every man to open the impiety,
which he knows to hurt his co^monwelth.
true messager of God, to whom the truth is reveled in that behalf. For the
especial duty of Gods messagers is to preach repentance, to admonish the
offenders of their offenses, and to say to the wicked, thou shall die the
death, except thou repent. This, I trust, will no man deny to be the propre
office of all Gods messagers to preach (as I have said) repentance and
remission of sins. But nether of both can be done, except the conscience of
the offenders be accused and convicted of transgression. For how shall any man
repent No man can repent except he know his sin.
not knowing wherein he has offended? And where no repentance is found, there
can be no entry to grace. And therefore I say, that of necessity it is, that
this monstriferouse empire of women, (which amongst all enormities, that this
day do abound upon the face of the hole earth, is most detestable and damnable)
be openly reveled and plainly declared to the world, to the end that some may
repent and be saved. And thus far to the first sort.

To such as think that it will be long before such doctrine come to the ears
of the chief offenders, I answer that the verity of God is of that nature,
that at The property of Gods truth.
one time or at other, it will pourchace to it self audience. It is an odor
and smell, that can not be suppressed, yea it is a trumpet that will sound in
despite of the adversary. It will compel the very ennemies to their own
confusion, to testify and bear witness of it. For I find that the prophecy
and preaching of Heliseus was declared in the hall of the king of Syria by the
servants and flatterers of the same wicked king, making mention that Heliseus
declared 2.Reg. 6.
to the king of Israel, what so ever the said king of Syria spoke in his most
secret chamber. And the wondrous works of Jesus Christ were notified to
Herod, not in any great praise Mat. 14.
or commendation of his doctrine, but rather to signify that Christ called
that tyranne a fox, and that he did no more regard his authority then did
John the Baptist, whom Herod before had beheaded for the liberty of his
tongue. But whether the bearers of the rumors and tidinges were favorers of
Christ or flatterers of the tyranne, certain it is that the fame, as well of
Christ's doctrine, as of his works came to the ears of Herod: even so may the
sound of our weak trumpet, by the support of some wynd (blow it from the
south or blow it from the north it is no matter) come to the ears of the
chief offenders. But whether it do or not, yet dare we not cease to blow as
God will give Romans 1.
strength. For we are debtors to mothen to princes, to wit, to the multitude
of our brethren, of whom, no doubt a great number have here to fore offended
by error and ignorance, The ignorant multitude has set up the authority of
women not knowinge the danger
giving their suffragies, consent and help to establishe women in their
kingdoms and empires, not understanding how abominable, odious, and
detestable is all such usurped authority in the presence of God. And therefore
must the truth, be plainly spoken, that the simple and rude multitude may be
admonished.

And as concerning the danger, which may hereof ensue, I am not altogether so
brutishe and insensible, but that I have laid mine account what the finishinge
of the work may cost me for mine own part. First, I am not ignorant how
difficile and dangerous A very dangerous thing to speak against old errors
it is to speak against a common error, especially when that the ambitious
minds of men and women are called to the obedience of gods simple
commandment. For to the most part of men, laufull and godly appears, what
soever antiquity has received. And secondarilie, I look to have mine
adversaries not only of the ignorant multitude, but also of the wise,
politic, and quiet spirits of this world, so that as well shall such as
oght to maintain the truth and verity of God become ennemies to me in this
case, as shall the princes and ambitious persons, who to maintain their unjust
tyranny do always study to suppress the same. And thus I am most
certeinlie persuaded, that my labor shall not escape reprehension of many. But
because I remember Acco^ptes will be had of Gods gifts.
that accomptes of the talentes received must be made to him, who nether
respects the multitude, nether yet approves the wisdom, policy, peace, nor
antiquity, concluding or determining any thing against his eternal will
reveled to us in his most blessed word, I am compelled to cover mine eyes,
and shut up mine ears, that I nether se the multitude, that shall withstand me
in this matter, nether that I shall hear the opprobries, nor consider the
dangers, which I may incur for uttering the same. I shall be called foolish,
curious, despitefull, and a sower of sedition: and one day parchance (although
now I be nameles) I may be The cause moving the author to write.
attainted of treason. But seeing that impossible it is, but that either I shall
offend God, daily calling to my conscience, that I oght to manifest the
verity known, or else that I shall displease the world for doing the same,
I have determined to obey God, not withstanding that the world shall rage
thereat. I know that the world offended (by Gods permission) may kill the
body, but Gods majesty offended, has power to punish body and soul for
ever. His majesty is offended, when that his precepts are contemned, and his
threatninges esteemed to be of none effect. And amongst his manifold precepts
given to his prophets, and amongst his threatninges, none is more vehement,
then is that, which is pronounced Ezech. 33.
to Ezechiel in these words: Son of man, I have appointed the a watchman to
the house of Israel, that thou should hear from my mouth the word, and
that thou may admonish them plainly, when I shall say to the wicked man: O
wicked, thou shall assuredly die. Then if thou shall not speak, that thou
may plainly admonish him, that he may leave his wicked way, the wicked man
shall die in his iniquity, but his blood will I requier of thy hand. But and
if thou shall plainly admonish the wicked man, and yet he shall not turn
from his way, such a one shall die in his iniquity, but thou have delivered
thy soul.

This precept, I say, with the threatening a^nexed, together with the rest, that
is spoken in the same chapter, not to Ezechiel only, but to every one, whom
God places whatchman over his people and flock, (and watchmen are they whose
eyes he does open, and whose conscience he pricketh to admonish the ungodly)
compels me to utter my conscience in this matter, not withstanding that the
hole world should be offended with me for so doing. If any wonder, why I do
concele my name, let him be assured, that the fear of corporal punishment is
nether the only, nether For the Authors name.
the chef cause. My purpose is thrice to blow the trumpet in the same matter,
if God so permit:t wife I intend to do it without name, but at the last
blast, to take the blame upon my self, that all others may be purged.

THE FIRST BLAST TO AWAKE WOMEN degenerate.
To promote a woman to bear rule, superiority, dominion or empire above any
realm, nation, or city, is repugnant to nature, co^tumelie to God, a thing
most contrarious to his reveled will and approved ordinance, and finally it is
the subversion of good order, of all equity and justice.

In the probation of this proposition, I will not be so curious, as to gather
what soever may amplify, set forth, or decore the same, but I am purposed,
even as I have spoken my conscience in most plain and few words, so to stand
content with a simple proof of every membre, bringing in for my witness
Gods ordinance in nature, his plain will reveled in his word, and the
minds of such as be most ancient amongst godly writers.

And first, where that I affirm the empire of a woman to be a thing repugnant
to nature, I mean not only that God by the order of his creation has spoiled
woman of authority and dominion, but also that man has seen, proved and
pronounced just causes why that it so should be. Man, I say, in many other cases
blind, does in this behalf see very clearlie. For the causes be so manifest,
that they can not be hid. For who can deny but it repugneth to nature, that
the blind shall be appointed to lead and conduct such Causes why women should
not have preemine^ce over men.
as do see? That the weak, the sick, and impotent persons shall norishe and
keep the hole and strong, and finally, that the foolish, mad and phrenetike
shall govern the discrete, and give counsel to such as be sober of mind? And
such be al women, compared unto man in bearing of authority. For their sight
in civil regiment, is but blindness: their strength, weakness: their counsel,
foolishenes: and judgment, phrenesie, if it be rightly considered.

Private examples do not break the general ordinance.
I except such as God by singular privilege, and for certain causes known
only to him self, has exempted from the common rank of women, and do speak
of women as nature and experience do this day declare them. Nature I say, does
paynt them furthe to be weak, frail, impacie^t, feeble and foolish: and
experience has declared them to be unconstant, variable, cruel and lacking
the spirit of counsel and regiment. And these notable faults have men in all
ages espied in that kind, for the which not only they have removed women
from rule and authority, but also some have thought that men subject to the
counsel or empire of their wives were unworthy of all public office. For thus
writes Aristotle in the second of his Politikes: what difference shall 2.
Politicorum Aristotelis.
we put, says he, whether that women bear authority, or the husbands that
obey the empire of their wives be appointed to be magistrates? For what insueth
the one, must needs follow the other, to wit, injustice, confusion and
disorder. The same author further reasons, that the policy or regiment of
the Lacedemonia^s (who other ways amongst the Grecians were most excellent)
was not worthy to be reputed nor accounted amongst the nombre of common
welthes, that were well governed, because the magistrates, and rulers of the
same were to much given to please and obey their wives. What would this writer
(I pray you) have said to that realm or nation, where a woman sits crowned
in parliament amongst the midst of men. Read Isaie the third chaptre.
Oh fearful and terrible are thy judgments (o Lord) which thus have abased
man for his iniquity! I am assuredly persuaded that if any of those men,
which illuminated only by the light of nature, did see and pronounce causes
sufficient, why women oght not to bear rule nor authority, should this day
live and see a woman sitting in judgment, or riding from parliament in the
midst of men, having the royal crown upon her head, the sword and scepter
borne before her, in sign that the administration of justice was in her power:
I am assuredly persuaded, I say, that such a sight should so astonishe them,
that they should judge the hole world to be transfformed in to Amazones,
Amazones were monstruouse women, that could not abide the regiment of men, and
therefore killed their husbands. read Iustine.
and that such a metamorphosis and change was made of all the men of that
country, as poets do feyn was made of the companyons of Ulysses, or at least,
that albeit the owtwarde form of men remained, yet should they judge that their
hearts were changed from the wisdom, understanding, and courage of men, to
the foolish fondnes and cowardice of women. Yea they further should pronounce,
that where women reign or be in authority, that there must needs vanity be
preferred to virtue, ambition and pride to tempera^cie and modesty, and
finally, that avarice the Arist. 2.Politic.
mother of all mischefe must needs devour equity and justice. But lest that we
shall seem to be of this opinion alone, let us hear what others have seen and
decreed in this matter. In the rules of the law thus it is written: Women Lib.
50. de regulis iuris.
are removed from all civil and public office, so that they nether may be
what women may not be.
judges, nether may they occupy the place of the magistrate, nether yet may
they be speakers for others. The same is repeted in the third and in the
sextenth 3. 16.lib. Digestorum.
books of the digestes: Where certain persons are forbidden, Ne pro aliis
postulent, that is, that they be no speakers Ad Senatus consul. Velleianu^.
nor advocates for others. And among the rest are women forbidden, and this
cause is added, that they do not against shamefastnes intermedle them selves
with the causes of others, nether yet that women prefume to use the offices
Lib. 3. de postulatione, Tit. 1.
due to men. The law in the same place does further declare, that a natural
shamfastnes oght to be in womankind, which most certeinlie she loses, when
soever she takes upon her the office and estate of man. As in Calphurnia was
Calphurnia
evidently declared, who having license to speak before the senate, at length
became so impudent and importune, that by her babbling she troubled the hole
Assembly. And so gave occasion that this law was established.

In the first book of the digestes, it is De statis hominum Titul. 8.
pronounced that the condition of the woman in many cases is worse then of the
man. As in jurisdiction (says the law) in receiving of cure and tuition, in
adoption, in public accusation, in delation, in all popular action, and in
motherlie power, which she has not upon her own sons. The law further will
not permit, that the woman give any thing to her husband, because it is against
the nature of her kind, being the inferior member to presume to give any
thing to her head. The law does more over pronounce womankinde to be most
auaricious (which is a vice into lerable in those that should rule or minister
justice). And Aristotle, as before is touched, does plainly affirm, that
whersoeuer women bear dominion, there must needs the people be disordred,
living and abounding in all inte^perancie, given to pride, excess, and
vanity. And finally in the end, that they must needs come to confusion and
ruin. From women power is taken away by the Civil law over their own
children. Dig. lib. 24. de donatione interviru^ and faeminam. women be
covetous, therefore unmeet governors Lib. 1. Digest. de le gib. and senatuscon.
Titul. 3. Politic. 2. England and Scotland beware.


Would to god the examples were not so manifest, to the further declaration of
the Great imperfectio^s of women.
imperfections of women, of their natural weakness, and inordinat appetites, I
might adduce histories, proving some women to have died for sodein joy, some
for vnpaciencie to have murdered them selves, some to have burned with such
inordinat lust, that for the quenching of the same, they have betrayed to
stra^giers their country and city: Romilida the wife of Gisulphus betrayed to
Cacanus the dukedom of friawl in Italy.
and some to have been so desirous of dominion, that for the obteining of the
same, they have murdered the children of their own sons. Yea and some have
killed with cruelty their own husbands and children. Jane queen of Naples
hanged her husband. Athalia, 4.Reg. 11 Hirene, Anton. Sabell.
But to me it is sufficient (because this part of nature is not my most sure
foundation) to have proved, that men illuminated only by the light of nature,
have seen and have determined, that it is a thing most repugnant to nature,
that women rule and govern over men. If the less things be denied to women,
the greater ca^ not be granted.
For those that will not permit a woman to have power over her own sons, will
not permit her (I am assured) to have rule over a realm: and those that will
not suffer her to speak in defense of those that be accused, nether that will
admit her accusation intended against man, will not approve her, that she shall
sit in judgment crowned with the royal crown, usurping authority in the
midst of men. But now to the second part of nature: In the which I include
the reveled will and perfect ordinance of God, and against this part of
nature, I say, that it does manifestly repugne that any woman shall reign or
bear dominion over man. For God first by the order of his creation, and after
by the curse and malediction pronounced against the woman, by the reason of her
rebellion, has pronounced the contrary. First, I say, that woman in her
greatest perfection, was made to serve woman in her greatest perfection was
made to serve man 1.Cor. 11.
and obey man, not to rule and command him: As saint Paul does reason in these
words: Man is not of the woman but the woman of the man. And man was not
created for the cause of the woman, but the woman for the cause of man, and
therefore oght the woman to have a power upon her head (that is a couerture in
sign of subjection). Of which words it is plain that the Apostle means,
that woman in her greatest perfection should have known, that man was Lord
above her: and therefore that she should never A good comparison.
have pretended any kind of superiority above him, no more then do the angels
above God the creator, or above Christ Jesus their head. So, I say, that in her
greatest perfection woman was created to A new necessity of woman's subjection
be subject to man. But after her fall and rebellion committed against God,
there was put upon her a new necessity, and she was made subject to man by
the irreuocable sentence of God, pronounced in woman by the sentence of God,
subject to man. Gene. 3.
these words: I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy co^ception. With
sorrow shall thou bear thy children, and thy will shall be subject to thy
man: and he shall bear dominion over the. Herebie may such as altogether be not
blinded plainly see, that God, by his sentence, has dejected all woman from
empire and dominion above man. For two punishments are laid upon her, to
wit, a dolor, anguishe and pain, as often as ever she shall be mother: and a
subjection of her self, her appetites and will, to her husband, and to his
will. From the former part of this malediction can nether art, nobility,
policy, nor law made by man, deliver womankinde, but who soever atteineth to
that honor to be mother, proves in experience the effect and strength of
gods word. But (alas) ignorance of God, ambition, and tyranny have studied
to abolishe and destroy the second part of Gods punishment. For women are
lifted up to be heads over realms, and to rule above men at their pleasure
and appetites. But horrible is the vengeance, which is prepared for the one and
for the other, for the promoters, and for the persons promoted, except they
speedily repent. For they shall be dejected from the glory The punishment of
women unjustly promoted and of their promoters.
of the sons of God, to the sclauerie of the devil, and to the torment that
is prepared for all such, as do exalte them selves against God. Against God
ca^ nothing be more manifest, then that a woman shall be exalted to reign
above man. For the contrary sentence has Gene. 3.
he pronounced in these words: Thy will shall be subject to thy husband, and
he shall bear dominion over the. As God should say: forasmuch as thou have
abused thy former condition, and because thy free will has brought thy self
and mankind in to the bondage of Satan, I therefore will bring the in bondage to
man. For where before, thy obedience should have been voluntary, no we it shall
be by constreint and by necessity: and that because thou have deceived thy
man, thou shall therefore be no longar maistresse over thine own appetites, over
thine own will nor desires. For in the there is nether reason nor discretion,
which be able to moderate thy affections, and therefore they shall be subject
to the desire of thy man. He shall be Lord and governor, not only over thy
body, but even over thy appetites and will. This sentence, I say, did God
pronounce against Heua, and her daughters, as the rest of the Scriptures does
euide^tlie witness. So that no woman can ever presume to reign above man, but
the same she must needs Let all women take heed.
do in despite of God, and in contempt of his punishment and malediction.

I am not ignorant, that the most part Answer to an objection.
of men do understand this malediction of the subjection of the wife to her
husband, and of the dominion, which he bears above her: but the holy ghost
gives to us an other interpretation of this place, taking from all women all
kind of superiority, authority and power over man, speaking as follows, by
the mouth of saint Paul: I suffer 1. Tim. 2.
not a woman to teach, nether yet to usurp authority above man. Here he
names women in general, excepting none, affirming that she may usurp
authority above no man. And that he speaks more plainly, in an other place
in these words: Let women keep silence 1. Cor. 14.
in the congregation, for it is not permitted to them to speak, but to be
subject as the law says. These two testimonies of the holy ghost, be
sufficient to prove what soever we have affirmed before, and to repress the
inordinate pride of women, as also to correct the foolishnes of those that have
studied to exalt women in authority above man, against God, and against his
sentence pronounced. But that the same two places of the apostle may the better
be understand: it is to be noted, that in the latter, which is written in the
first epistle to the Corinthes the 14.chapitre, before the apostle had
permitted that all persons should prophecy one after an other: addinge this
reason: that all may learn and all may receive consolation. And left that any
might have judged, that amongst a rude multitude, and the plurality of
speakers, many, things little to purpose might have been affirmed, or else
that some confusion might have risen: he adds, the spirits of the prophets
are subject to the prophets: As he should say, God shall always raise up some,
to whom the verity shall be reveled, and unto such ye shall give place, albeit
they sit in the lowest seats. And thus the apostle would have prophesying an
exercise to be free to the hole church, that every one should communicate with
the congregation, what God had reveled to them, prouidinge that it were
orderly From a general privilege is woman secluded.
done. But from this general privilege he secludeth all woman, saying: let
women keep silence in the congregation. And why I pray you? was it because that
the apostle thought no woman to have any knowledge? no he gives an other
reason, saying: let her be subject as the law says. In which words is first
to be noted, that the apostle calls this former sentence pronounced against
woman a law, that is, the immutable decree of God, who by his own She that is
subject to one, may not rule many
voice has subjected her to one member of the congregation, that is to her
husband. whereupon the holy ghost concludes, that she may never rule nor bear
empire above man. For she that is made subject to one, may never be preferred
to many, and that the holy ghost does manifestly express, saying: I suffer
not that woman usurp authority above man: he says not, I will not, that
woman usurp authority above her husband, but he names man in general,
taking from her all power and authority, to speak, to reason, to interpret,
or to teach, but principally to rule or to judge in the assembly of men. So
that woman by the law of God, and by the interpretation of the holy ghost, is
utterly forbidden to occupy the place of God in the offices before said, which
he has assigned to man, whom he has appointed and ordained his lieutenant in
earth: secluding from that honor and dignity all woman, as this short
argument shall evidently declare.

A strong argument.
The apostle takes power from all woman to speak in the assembly. Ergo he
permits no woman to rule above man. The former part is evident, whereupon
does the couclusion of necessity NOTE.
follow. For he that takes from woman the least part of authority, dominion
or rule, will not permit unto her that which is greatest: But greater it is to
reign above realms and nations, to publish and to make laws, and to co^mande
men of all estates, and finally to appoint judges and ministers, then to
speak in the congregation. For her judgment, sentence, or opinion proposed in
the congregation, may be judged by all, may be corrected by the learned, and
reformed by the godly. But woman being promoted in souereine authority, her
la was must be obeyed, her opinion followed, and her tyra^nie
maintained:supposing that it be expreslie against God, and the prophet of the
commonwealth, as to manifest experience does this day witness. And therefore
yet again I repete that, which before I have affirmed: to wit, that a woman
promoted to sit in the seat of God, that is, to teach, to judge or to reign
above man, is a monstre in nature, contumely to God, and a thing most
repugnant to his will and ordinance. For he has deprived them as before is
proved, of speakinge in the congregation, and has expreslie forbidden them to
usurp any kind of authority above man. How then will he suffer them to
reign and have empire above realms and nations? He will never, I say, approve
it, because it is a thing most repugnant to his perfect ordinance, as after
shall be declared, and as the former scriptures have plainly given testimony.
To the which, to add anything were superfluous, were it not that the world
is almost now comen to that blindness, that what soever pleases not the
princes and the multitude, the same is rejected as doctrine newly forged, and
is condemned for heresy. I have therefore thought good to recite the minds of
some ancient writers in the same matter, to the end that such as altogether be
not blinded by the devil, may consider and understand this my judgment to be
no new interpretation of Gods scriptures, but to be the uniform consent of
the most part of godly writers, since the time of the apostles. Tertullian
Tertullian. de habitu mulieru^
in his book of women's apparel, after that he has she wed many causes why
gorgious apparel is abominable and odiouse in a woman, adds these words,
speaking as it were to every woman by name: Do thou not know (says he) that
thou art Heua? the sentence of God lives and is effectual against this kind,
and in this world of necessity it is, that the punishment also live. Thou art
the port and gate of the devil. Thou art the first tra^sgressor of gods law,
thou Let women hearken what Tertullian an old Doctor says.
did persuade and easily deceive him whom the devil durst not assault. For
thy merit (that is for thy death) it beho ued the son of god to suffer the
death, and does it yet abide in thy mind to deck the above thy skin coats? By
these and many other grave sentences, and quick interrogations, did this
godly writer labor to bring every woman in contemplation of her self, to
the end that every one deeply weying, what sentence God had pronounced
against the hole race and daughters of Heua, might not only learn daily to
humble and subject them selves in the presence of God, but also that they
should avoid and abhor what soever thing might exalte them or puff them up
in pride, or that might be occasion, that they should forget the curse and
malediction of God. And what, I pray you, is more able to cause woman to forget
her own condition, then if she be lifted up in authority above man? It is a
thing very difficile to a man, (be he never so constant) promoted to honors,
not to be tickled some what with pride (for the wind of vain glory does
easelie carry up the NOTE.
dry dust of the earth). But as for woman, it is no more possible, that she
being set aloft in authority above man, shall resist the motions of pride,
then it is able to the weak reed, or to the turning wethercocke, not to bow
or turn at the vehemency of the unconstant wind. And therefore the same writer
expreslie forbids all woman to intremedle Tertull. lib. 8. de virginibus
velandis.
with the office of man. For thus he writes in his book de virginibus
velandis: It is not permitted to a woman, to speak in the congregation, nether
to teach, nether to baptize, nether to vendicate to her self any office of
man. The same he speaks yet more plainly in the preface of his sixte book
written against Marcion, where he recounting certain In procemio 6. lib. contra
Marcionem.
monstrous things, which were to be seen at the sea called Euxinum, amongst
the rest, he recites this as a great monstre in nature, that women in those
parts, were not tamed nor embased by consideration of their own sex and kind:
but that all shame laid a part, they made expenses upon weapons and learned
the feats of war, having more pleasure to fight, then to mary and be
subject to man. Thus far of Tertullian, whose words be so plain, that they
need no explanation. For he that takes from her all office apperteining to
man, will not suffer her to reign above man: and he that judges it a monstre
in nature, that a woman shall exercise weapons, must judge it to be a monstre
of monstres, that a woman shall be exalted above a hole realm and nation. Of the
same mind is Origin, and diverse others. Yea even till the days of Augustine,
whose sentences I omit to to avoid prolixitie.

August. lib. 22. co^tra Faustum.c. 31.
Augustine in his 22. book written against Faustus, proves that a woman oght to
serve her husband as unto God: affirming that in no thing has woman equal
power with man, saving that nether of both have power over their own bodies.
By which he would plainly conclude, that woman oght never to pretend nor
thirst for that power and authority which is due to man. For so he does De
Trinitat. lib. 12 cap. 7.
explane him self in an other place, affirming that woman oght to be repressed
and brideled be times, if she aspire to any dominion: alleging that dangerous
and perilous it is to suffer her to proceed, although it be in temporal and
corporal things. And thereto he adds these words: God sees not for a time,
nether is there any new thing in his sight and knowledge, meaning thereby,
that what God has seen in one woman (as concerning dominion and bearing of
authority) the same he sees in all. And what he has forbidden to one, the
same he also forbids to all. And this most euide^tlie yet in an other In
quaect. veteris Testamenti, quaest. 45.
place he writes, moving this question: how can woman be the image of God,
seeing (says he) she is subject to man, and has none authority, nether to
teach, nether to be witness, nether to judge, much less to rule, or bear
empire? These be the very words of Augustine, NOTE.
of which it is evident that this godly writer, does not only agree with
Tertullian before recited, but also with the former sentence of the law,
which takes from woman not only all authority amongst men, but also
every office apperteining to man. To the question how she can be the image of
God, he answers as follows. Woman (says he) compared to other creatures is
the image of God, for she bears dominion over them: but compared unto man,
she may not be called the image of God, for she bears not rule and lordship
over man, but oght to obey him etc. And how that woman oght to Lib. de
Co^tinentia, cap. 4.
obey man, he speaks yet more clearlie in these words: the woman shall be
subject to man as unto Christ. For woman (says he) has not her example from
the body and from the flesh, that so she shall be subject to man, as the flesh
is unto the spirit. Because that the flesh in the weakness and mortality of
this life, lusts and strives against the spirit, and therefore would not the
holy ghost give example of subjection to the woman of any such thing etc.
This sentence of Augustine oght to be noted of all women, for in it he plainly
affirms, that woman oght to be subject to man, that she never oght, more to
desire preeminence above him, then that she oght to desire above Christ Jesus.
With Augustine agrees in every point S. Ambrose, who Ambros. in Hexaemero,
lib. 5.c. 7.
thus writes in his Hexaemeron: Adam was deceived by Heua, and not Heua by
Adam, and therefore just it is, that woman receive and acknowledge him for
governor whom she called to sin, lest that again she slide and fall by
womanly facility. And writing upon the epistle Cap. 5.
to the Ephesians, he says: let women be subject to their own husbands as
unto the Lord: for the man is head to the woman, and Christ is head to the
congregation, and he is the savior of the body: but the congregation is
subject to Christ, even so oght women to be to their husbands in all thin ges.
He proceeds further saying: women are commanded to be subject to men by the
law of nature, because that man is the author or beginner of the woman: for as
Christ is the head of the church, so is man of the woman. From Christ, the
church took beginning, and therefore it is subject unto him: even so did woman
take beginning from man, that she should be subject. Thus we hear the agreing
of these two writers to be such, that a man might judge the one to have stolen
the words and sentences from the other. And yet plain it is, that duringe the
time of their writing, the one was far distant from the other. But the
holy ghost, who is the spirit of concord and unity, did so illuminate their
hearts, and direct their tongues, and pens, that as they did conceive ceiue
and understand one truth, so did they pronounce and utter the same, leaving a
testimony of their knowledge and concord to us their posterity. If any
think that all these former sentences, be spoken only of the subjection of
the married woman to her husband, as before I have proved the contrary, by the
plain words and reasoning of S. Paul, so shall I shortly do the same, by
other testimonies of the forsaid writers. The same Ambrose Ambros. super 2. c.
1. epist.ad Timoth.
writing upon the second chapitre of the first epistle to Timothy, after he
has spoken much of the simple arrayme^t of women: he adds these words:
woman oght not only to have simple arrayme^t, but all authority is to be
denied unto her: for she must be in subjection to man (of whom she has taken
her original) as well in habit as in service. And after a few words he says:
because that death did enter in to the world by her, there is no boldenes that
oght to be permitted unto her, but she oght to be in humility. Hereof it is
plain, that from all woman, be she married, or unmarried, is all authority
taken to execute any office, that apperteineth to man. Yea plain it is that all
woman is commanded, to serve, to be in humility and subjection. Which thing
yet speaks the same writer, more plainly in these words: It is not
permitted Ambros. in 1. epist. ad Corin, cap. 14. Genes. 3.
to women to speak, but to be in silence, as the law says. What says the
law? Unto thy husband, shall thy conversion be, and he shall bear dominion
over the. This is a special law (says Ambrose) whose sentence, lest it
should be violated, infirmed, or made weak, women are commanded to be in
silence. Here he includes all women. And yet he proceeds further in the same
place saying: It is shame for them to presume to speak of the law in the
house of the Lord, who has commanded them to be subject to their men. But
most plainly speaks he writing upon the 16. chapitre of the epistle of S.
Paul whose house I pray you oght the parliament house to be, Gods or the
deuilles? Rufus is by S. Paul saluted before his mother.
to the Romans, upon these words: Salute Rufus and his mother. For this
cause (says Ambrose) did the apostle place Rufus before his mother, for the
election of the administration of the grace of God, in the which a woman has
no place. For he was chosen and promoted by the Lord, to take care over his
business, that is, over the church, to the which office could not his mother
be appointed, albeit she was a woman so holy, that the apostle called her his
mother. Hereof it is plain that the administration of the grace of God, is
denied to all woman. By the administration of Gods grace, is understand not
only the preaching of the word and administration of the sacraments, by the
which the grace of God is presented and ordinarily distributed unto man, but
also the administration of civil justice, by the which, virtue oght to be
maintained, and vices punished. The execution whereof is no less denied to
woman, then is the preaching of the Euangile, or administration of the
sacraments, as herafter shall most plainly appear.

Chrysostom amongst the Grecian writers of no small credit, speaking in
rebuke of men, who in his days, were becomen inferior to some women in wit
and in godliness, says: Chrysostom. homil. 17. in genes.
for this cause was woman put under thy power (he speaks to man in general)
and thou wast pronounced Lord over her, that she should obey the, and that the
head should not follow the feet. But often it is, that we see the contrary, that
he who in his order oght to be the head, does not keep the order of the feet
(that is, does not rule the feet) and that she, that is in place of the foot,
is constitute to be the head. He speaks these words as it were in
admiration, that man was NOTE.
becomen so brutish, that he did not consider it to be a thing most
monstruouse, that woman should be preferred to man in any thing, whom God had
subjected to man in all things. He proceeds saying: Never the less it is the
part of the man, with diligent care to repel the woman, that gives him wicked
counsel: and woman, which gave that pestilent counsel to man, oght at all
times to have the punishment, which was given to Heua, sou^ding in her ears.
Homil. 15 in Genes.
And in an other place he induces God speaking to the woman in this sort:
Because thou left him, of whose nature thou wast participant, and for whom
thou wast formed, and have had pleasure to have familiarity with that wicked
beast, and would take his counsel: therefore I subject the to man, and I apointe
and affirm him to be thy Lord, that thou may acknowledge his dominion, and
because thou could not bear rule God grant all wome^s hearts to understand
and follow this sentence.
learn well to be ruled. Why they should not bear rule, he declares, in
other places, saying: womankinde is imprudent and soft, (or flexible) imprudent
because she can not consider with wisdom and reason the things which she
hears and sees: and soft she is, because she is easelie bowed. I know that
In Mat. cap. 23. homil. 44.
Chrysostom brings in these words to declare the cause why false prophets
do commonly deceive women: because they are easelie persuaded to any opinion,
especially if it be against God, and because they lack prudence and right
reason to judge the things that be spoken. But hereof may their nature be
espied, and the vices of the same, which in no wise oght to be in those, that
are appointed to govern others: For they oght to be constant, stable, prudent
and doing every thing with discretion and reason, which virtues women can not
have in equality with men. For that he does witness in an other woman can not
have virtue in equality with man. Ad Ephe. cap. 4. sermon 13.
place, saying: women have in them selves a tickling and study of vain
glory, and that they may have common with men: they are sodeinlie moved to
anger, and that they have also common with some men. But virtues in which they
excel, they have not common with man, and therefore NOTE.
has the apostle removed the^ from the office of teachinge, which is an
evident proof that in virtue they far differ from man. Let the reasons of
this writer be marked, for further he yet proceeds: after that he has in many
words lamented the effeminate manners of men, who were so far degenerate to
the weakness of women, that some might have demanded: why may not women teach
amongst such a sort of men, who in wisdom and godliness are become^ inferior
unto women? He finally concludes: that not withstanding that men be
degenerate, yet may not women usurp any authority above them, and in the end,
he adds these words: These things do not I speak to extolle them (that is
women) but to the confusion and shame of our felues, and to admonish us to take
again the dominion, that is mete and convenient for us, not only that power
which is according to the excellency of dignity: The body lackinge the head,
can not be well governed nether can commonwealth lackinge man.
but that which is according to providence, and according to help, and
virtue. For then is the body in best proportion, when it has the best
governor. O that both man and woman should consider the profound counsel and
admonition of this father! He would not that man for appetit of any vain
glory should desire preeminence above woman. For God has not made man to be
head for any such cause: but having respect to that weakness and imperfection
which always lets woman to govern. He has ordained man to be superior,
and that means Chrysostom, saying: then is the body in best proportion,
when it has the best governor. But woman can never be the best governor, by
reason that she being spoiled of the spirit of regiment, can never attein to
that degree, to be called or judged a good governor. Because in the nature of
all woman, lurketh such vices, as in good governors are not tolerable. Which
the In ca. 22.Ioh. homil. 87.
same writer expresses in these words: woma^kind (says he) is rash and
foolhardie, and their covetousness is like the goulf of hell, that is,
insaciable. And In Ioh. homil. 41.
therefore in an other place, he will that woman shall have no thing to do in
judgment, in common affairs, or in the regiment of the common wealth, because
she is impacie^t of troubles, but that she shall live in tranquillity, and
quietness. And if she have occasion to go from the house, that yet she shall
have no matter of trouble, nether to follow her, nether to be offered unto her,
as commonly there must be to such as bear authority. And with Chrysostom
fully agrees Basilius Magnus Basilius Mag. in aliquot scripturae locos.
in a sermon which he makes upon some places of scripture, wherein he reproves
diverse vices and amongst the rest, he affirms woman to be a tender creature,
flexible, soft and pitiful: which nature, God has given unto her, that she
may be apt to norishe children. The which facility of the woman, did Satan
abuse, and thereby brought her from the obedience of God. And therefore in diverse
other places does he conclude, that she is not apt to bear rule, and that she
is forbidden to teach. Innumerable mo testimonies, of all sorts of writers
may be adduced for the same purpose, but with these I stand content: iudgeing
it sufficient to stop the mouth of such as accuse and condemn all doctrine,
as heretical, which displeases them in any point that I have proved, by the
determinations and laws of me^ illuminated only by the light of nature, by
the order of Gods creation, by the curse and maledictio^ pronounced against
woman, by the mouth of saint Paul, who is the interpreter of Gods sentence,
and law, and finally by the minds of those writers, who in the church of
God, have been always holden in greatest reverence: that it is a thing most
repugnant to nature, to Gods will and appointed ordinance, (yea that it can
not be without contumely committed against God) that a woman should be promoted
to dominion or empire to reign over man, be it in realm, nation, province or
city. Now rests it in few words, to be showed, that the same empire of
women is the subversion of good order equity and justice.

Augustine defines order to be that De ordine lib. 1.c. 10
thing, by the which God has appointed and ordained all things. Note well
reader, that Augustine will admit no or dre, where Gods apointment is absent
and lacks.

And in an other place he says, that or De ciuit. Dei, lib. 19cap. 13.
dre is a disposition, giving their own propre places to things that be
unequal, which he terms in Latin Parium and disparium, that is, of things
equal or like, and things unequal or unlike. Of which two places and of the
hole disputation, which is contained in his second book de ordine it is
evident, that what soever is done either whithout the assurance what soever is
done withowt the appointment of Gods will, is done withowt order.
of Gods will, or else against his will manifestly reveled in his word, is
done against order. But such is the empire and regiment of all woman (as
evidently before is declared) and therefore, I say, it is a thing plainly
repugnant to good order, yea it is the subversion of the same. If any list to
reject the definition of Augustine, as either not propre to this purpose, or
else as insufficie^t to prove mine intent: let the same man understand, that
in so doing, he has infirmed mine argument nothing. For as I depend not upon
the determinations of men, so think I my cause no weaker, albeit their
authority be denied unto me. Provided that god by his will reveled, and
manifest word, stand plain and evident on my side. That God has subjected
womankinde to man by the order of his creation, and by the curse that he has
pronounced against her, is before declared. Besides these, he has Two mirrors,
in which we may behold the order of nature.
set before our eyes, two other mirrors and glasses, in which he will, that we
should behold the order, which he has appointed and established in nature: the
one is, the natural body of man: the other is the politik or civil body of
that common wealth, in which God by his own word has appointed an order. In the
natural body of ma^God has appointed an order, that the head shall occupy the
uppermost place. And the head has he joined with the body, that from it,
does life and motion flow to the rest of the me^bres. In it has he placed the
eye to see, the ear to hear, and the tongue to speak, which offices are
appointed to none other member of the body. The rest of the me^bres, have every
one their own place and office appointed: but none may have nether the place nor
office of the head. For who would not judge that body to be a monstre, where
there was no head emine^t above the rest, but that the eyes were in the hands,
the tongue and mouth beneth in the belie, and the ears in the feet. Men, I say,
should not only pronounce this body to be a mo^stre: but assuredly they
might conclude that such a body could not long endure. And no less
mo^struous is the body of that common wealth, where a woman bears
Commonwelthes under the rule of women, lack a laufull head. Idol.
empire. For either does it lack a laufull head (as in very deed it does) or
else there is an idol exalted in the place of the true head. An idol I call
that, which has the form and appara^ce, but lacks the virtue and strength,
which the name and proportion do resemble and promise. As images have face,
nose, eyes, mouth, hands and feet painted, but the use of the same, can not
the craft and art of man give the^: as the holy ghost by the mouth Psalm. 115.
of David teaches us, saying: they have eyes, but they see not, mouth, but
they speak not, nose, but they smell not, hands and feet, but they nether
touch nor have power to go. And such, I say, is every realm and nation,
where a woman bears dominion. For in despite of God (he of his just
judgment, so ge uing them over in to a reprobat mind) may a realm, I
confess, exalt up a woman to that monstriferous honor, to be esteemed as head.
But impossible it is to man The empire of a woman is an idol.
and angel, to give unto her the properties and perfect offices of a laufull
head. For the same God that has denied power to the hand to speak, to the
belly to hear, and to the feet to see, has denied to woman power to co^mande
man, and has taken a way wisdom to consider, and providence to forsee the
things, that be profitable to the commonwealth: yea finally he has denied to
her in any case to be head to man: but plainly has pronounced that man is head
to woman, even as Christ is head to all man. 1. Cor. 11.
If men in a blind rage should assemble to gether, and apointe them selves an
other head then Jesus Christ, (as the papists have done their romish
Antichrist) should Christ therefore lose his own dignity, or should God give
to that counterfeit head power to give life to the body, to see what soever
might endamage or hurt it, to speak in defense, and to hear the request of
every subject? It is certain that he would not. For that honor he has appointed
before all times to his only son: and the same will he give to no creature
besides: no NOTE.
more will he admit, nor accept woman to be the lauful head over man, although
man, devil, and angel will conjure in their favor. For seeing he has subjected
her to one (as before is said) he will never permit her to reign over many.
Seeing he has commanded her to hear, and obey one, he will not suffer that she
speak, and with usurped authority command realms and nations. Chrysostom
explaning these words of the apostle: 1. Cor. 11.
(the head of woman is man) co^pareth God in his universal regiment to a king
sitting in his royal majesty, to whom Mark the similitude of Chrysostom.
all his subjects commanded to give homage and obedience, appear before him,
bearing every one such a badge and cognizance of dignity and honor, as he
has given to them: which if they despise and contemn, then do they dishonor
their king. Even so says he oght man and woman to appear before God, bearing
the ensigns of the condition, which they have received of him. Man has
received a certain glory and dignity above the woman, and therefore oght he to
appear before his high majesty, bearing the sign of his honor, having no
couerture upon his head: to witness that in earth man has no head, (beware
Chrysostom what thou say, thou shall be reputed a traitor if English NOTE.
men hear the: for they must have my souereine lady and maistresse, and
Scotland has dro^ken also the enchantment and venom of Circes, let it be so to
their own shame and confusion, he proceeds in these words) but woman oght to
be covered, to witness, that in earth she has a head, that is man. True How
women be covered in England and Scotland.
it is (Chrysostom) woman is covered in both the said realms, but it is not
with the sign of subjection, but it is with the sign of superiority, to
wit, with the royal crown. To that he answers in these words: what if man
neglect his honor? he his no less to be mocked (says Chrysostom) then if a
king should depose himself of his diadem or crown and royal estat, and cloth
him self in the habit of a sclaue. What, I pray you, should this godly father
have said, if he had seen all the men of a realm or nation fall down before
a woman? If he had seen the crown, scepter, and sword, which are ensigns of
the royal dignity, given to her, and a woman curfed of God, and made subject
to man, placed in the throne of justice, to sit as Gods lieutenant? What, I
say, in this behalf, should any heart unfeigned lie fearing God have judged of
such men? I am assured that not only should they have been judged foolish
but also enraged, and sclaues to Satan, manifestly fighting against God and
his appointed order. The more that I consider the subversion of Gods order,
which he has placed generally in all living things, the more I do wondre at
the blindness of man, who does not consider him self in this case so degenerate,
that Brute beasts to be preferred.
the brute beasts are to be preferred unto him in this behalf. For nature
has in all beasts printed a certain mark of dominion in the male, and a
certain subjection in the female, which they keep inurolate. For no man ever
saw the lion make obedience, and stoop before the lioness, nether yet can it
be proved, that the hind takes the conducting of the heard amongst the
hearts. And yet (alas) man, who by the mouth of God has dominion appointed to
him over woman, does not only to his own shame, stoupevnder the obedience of
women, but also in despit of God and of his appointed order, reioyseth, and
mainteineth that monstruouse authority, as a thing lauful and just. The
insolentioy, Insolent joy brings sodein sorrow.
the bonefiers, and ba^keting, which were in london and else where in England,
when that cursed Iesabell was proclaimed qwene, did witness to my heart, that
me^ were becomen more then enraged. For else how could they so have reioysed
at their own confusion and certain destruction? For what man was there of so
base judgment (supposing that he had any light of God) who did not see the
erecting of that monstre, to be the overthrow of true religion, and the
assured destruction of England, and of the ancient liberties thereof? And yet
never the less, all men so triumphed, as if God had delivered them from all
calamity.

But just and rightuouse, terrible and fearful are thy judgments, o Lord!
For as some times thou did so punish Romans 1.
men for unthankfulness, that man ashamed not to commit villainy with man: and
that because, that knowinge the to be God, they glorified the not as God, even
so haste thou most justly now punished the proud rebellion and horrible
ingratitude of the realms of England and Scotland. For when thou did offer
thy self most mercifully to them both, offering the means by the which
they might have been joined to gether for ever in godly concord: then was the
one proud and cruel, and the other unconstant, and fikle of promise. But yet
(alas) did miserable England further rebel against the. For albeit thou
did not cease to heap benefit upon benefit, during the reign of an
innocent and tender king, yet no man did acknowledge thy potent hand and
meruelouse working. The stout what robbed God of his honor in England in the
time of the Gospel.
courage of capitaines, the wit and policy of cou^selers, the learning of
bishops, did rob the of thy glory and honor. For what then was heard, as
concerning religion, but the kings procedinges, the kings procedinges must be
obeyed? It is enacted by parliament: therefore it is treason to speak in the
contrary. But this was not the end of this miserable tragedy. For thou
did Gods benefits she wed to England.
yet proceed to offer thy favors, sending thy prophets and messagers, to call
for reformation of life in all estates: For even from the highest to the
lowest, all were declined from the (yea eue^ those that should have been the
lanterns to others) some I am affured did qwake and tremble, and from the
botome of their hearts thirsted amendment, and for the same purpose did
earnestly call for discipline. But then brust forth the venom which before
lurked: then might they not contain their despiteful voices, but with open
mouths did cry: we will not have such a one to reign Discipline refused in
England.
over us. Then, I say, was every man so stout, that he would not be brought in
bondage: no not to the, o Lord, but with disdein did the multitude cast from
them the amiable yoke of Christ Jesus. No man would suffer his finne to be
rebuked, no man would have his life called to trial. And thus did they refuse
the, o Lord, and thy son Christ Jesus to be their pastor, protector and
prince. And therefore have thou given them over in to a reprobat mind. Thou
have taken from them the spirit of boldness, of wisdom The nobility and the
hole realm of England, castle the^ selves willingly in to the pit.
and of rightuous judgment. They see their own destruction, and yet they have
no grace to avoid it. Yea they are becomen so blind, that knowing the pit,
they headlong cast them selves in to the same: as the nobility of England, do
this day, fighting in the defense of their mortal ennemie the spaniard.
Finally they are so destitute of understanding and judgment, that although
they know that there is a liberty and fredome, the which their predecessors
have inioyed: yet are they compelled to bow their necks under the yoke of
Satan, and of his proud ministres, pestilent papists and proud spaniardes.
And yet ca^ they not consider that where a woman reigns and papists bear
authority, that there must needs Satan be prefident of the counsel. Thus have
thou, o Lord, in thy hot displeasure revenged the contempt of thy graces
offered. But, o Lord, if thou shall retain wrath to the end, what flesh is
able to sustain? We have sinned, o Lord, and are Confession.
not worthy to be releued. But worthy art thou, o Lord, to be a true God, and
worthy is thy son Christ Jesus, to have his Euangil and glory advanced:
which both are trodden under foot in this cruel murder and persecution,
which the builders of Babylon commit in their fury, have raised against thy
children, for the establishing of their kingdom. Let the sobbes therefore of
thy prisoners, o Lord, pass up to thine ears, consider their affliction: and
let the eyes of thy mercy look down upon the blood of such as die for
testimony of thy eternal verity: and let not thine ennemies mock thy
judgment for ever. To the, o^ Lord, I turn my wretched and wicked heart: to
the alone I direct my complaint and groans: for in that I Will to thy faintes
there is left no comfort. Albeit I have thus (talkinge with my God in the
anguishe of my heart) some what digressed: yet have I not utterly forgotten my
former proposition, to wit, that it is a thing repugnant to the order of
nature, that any woman be exalted to rule over men. For God has denied unto
her the office of a head. And in the entreating of this part, I remember that
I have made the nobility both of England and Scotland inferior to brute
beasts, for that they do to women, which no male amongst the common sort of
beasts can be proved to do to their females: that is, they reverence them, and
qwake at their presence, they obey their co^mandementes, and that against God.
Wherefore I judge them not only subjects to women, but sclaues of Satan, and
servants of iniquity. If any man think these my words sharp or vehement,
let him consider that the offense is more heinous, then can be expressed by
words. For where all things, be expressedly concluded against the glory and
honor of God, and where the blood of the saints of God is commanded to be
shed, whom shall we judge, God or the devil, to be president of that counsel?
Plain NOTE
it is, that God rules not by his love, mercy, nor grace in the assembly of
the ungodly. Then it rests, that the devil, the prince of this world, does
reign over such tyrannes. whose servants, I pray you, shall then be judged,
such as obey, and execute, their tyra^nie? God for his great mercies sake,
illuminate the eyes of men, that they may preceiue in to what miserable bondage
they be brought, by the monstriferous empire of women.

NOTE.
The second glass, which God has set before the eyes of man, wherein he may
behold the order, which pleases his wisdom, concerning authority and
dominion, is that commonwealth, to the which it pleases his majesty to
apoint, and give laws, statutes, rites and ceremonies not only concerning
religion, but also touching their policy and regiment of the same. And against
that order it does manifestly repugne, that any woman shall occupy the throne
of God, that is, the royal seat, which he by his word has appointed to man.
As in giving the law to Israel, concerning the election of a king, Deuteronomy. 17.
is evident. For thus it is written: If thou shall say, I will apoint a king
above me, as the rest of the nations, which are a boute me: Thou shall make
the a king, whom the Lord thy God shall chose, one from amongst the
midst of thy brethren, thou shall apointe king above the. Thou may not
make a strangier that is not thy brother. Here expressedly is a man appointed to
be chose^ king, and a man native amongst them selves, by which precept is all
woman and all stra^gier secluded. What may be objected for the part or
election of a strangier, shall be, God willinge, answered in the blast of the
second trumpet. For this present, I say, that the erecting of a woman to that
honor, is not only to inuert the order, which God has established: but also
it is to defile, pollute and profane (so far as in man lies) the throne and
seat of God, which he has sanctified God has appointed man his ministre and
lieutenant.
and appointed for man only, in the course of this wretched life, to occupy
and possess as his ministre and lieutenant: secluding from the same all
woman, as before is expressed. If any think Answer to an objection.
that the fore written law did bind the Jews only, let the same man
consider, that the election of a king, and apointing of judges, did nether
apperteine to the ceremonial law, nether yet was it mere judicial: but The
election of a king flows from the moral law.
that it did flow from the moral law, as an ordinance, having respect to
the co^seruation of both the tables. For the office of the magistrate oght to
have the first and chief respect to the glory of God, commanded and contained
in the former table, as is evident by that, which was enjoined to Iosue by
God, what time he was accepted and admitted ruler and gouerner over his people,
Iosue 1.
in these words: Thou shall divide the inheritance to this people, the which
I have sworn to their fathers, to give unto them: so that thou be valiant and
strong, that thou may keep and do, according to that hole law, which my
servant Moses has commanded the. Thou shall not decline from it, nether to
the right hand, nether to the left hand, that thou may do prudentlie in all
things, that thou take in hand, let not the book of this law depart from
thy mouth, but meditate in it, day and night: that thou may keep and do,
according to every thing, that is written in it. For then shall thy ways
prosper, and Rulers should take heed to this.
then shall thou do prude^tly etc. And the same precept gives God by the mouth
of Moses, to kings, after they be elected, in these words: when he shall sit
in Deuteronomy. 17.
the throne or seat of his kingdom, he shall write to him self a copy of
this law in a book, and that shall be with him, that he may read in it all the
days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, and to keep
all the words of this law, and all these statutes, that he may do them etc.
Of these two places it is evident, that principally it apperteineth to the
king or to the chief magistrate, to know the will of God, to be instructed in
his law and statutes, and to promote his glory with his hole heart and study,
which be the chief points of the first table. No man denies, but that the
sword is committed to the magistrate, to the end that he should punish vice,
and maintain virtue. To punish what vices magistrates oght to punish.
vice, I say, not only that, which troubles the tranquillity and quiet
estat of the commonwealth by adultery, thest or murder committed, but also
such vices as openly impugn the glory of God: as idolatry, blasphemy, and
manifest heresy, taught and obstinatly maintained: as the histories and
notable acts of Ezechias, Iosaphat, and Josias do plainly teach us. Whose
study and care was not only to glorify God in their own life and
conversation, but also they unfeignedly did travel to bring their subjects to
the true worshipping and honoring of God. And did destroy all monumentes of
idolatry, did punish to death the teachers of it, and removed from office
and honors such, as were mainteiners of those abominations. Wherbie I suppose
that it be evident, that the office of the king or supreme magistrate, has
respect to the law moral, and to the conservation NOTE.
of both the tables.

The ge^til no less bound to the law moral the^ the Jew.
Now if the law moral, be the constant and unchangeable will of God, to the
which the gentil is no less bound, then was the Jew: and if God will that
amongst the gentiles, the ministres and executors of his law be now appointed,
as sometimes they were appointed amongst the Jews: further if the execution of
justice be no less requisite in the policy of the gentiles, then ever it was
amongst the Jews: what man can be so foolish to suppose or believe, that God
will no we admit those persons, to sit in judgment or to reign over men in
the commonwealth of the gentiles, whom he by his expressed word and ordinance,
did before debar and seclude from the same? And that women were secluded from
the royal seat, the which oght to be the sanctuary to all poor afflicted,
and therefore is justly called the seat of god (besides the place before
recited of the election of a king, and besides the places of the new testament,
which be most evident) the order and election which was kept in Judah and
Israel, does manifestly declare. For when NOTE.
the males of the kingly stock failed, as often as it chanced in Israel and
sometimes in Judah, it never entered in to the hearts of the people of chose and
promote to honors any of the kings daughters, (had he never so many) but
knowing Gods vengeance to be poured forth upon the father by the away taking
of his sons, they had no further respect to his stock, but elected such one
man or other, as they judged most apt for that honor and authority. Of which
premises, I conclude (as before) that to promote a woman head over men, is
repugnant to nature, and a thing most contrarious to that order, which God
has approved in that common wealth, which he did institute and rule by his
word. But no we to the last point, to wit, that the empire of a woman is a
thing repugnant to justice, and the destruction of every common wealth, where
it is received. In probation whereof, because the matter is more then evident,
The first argument that the authority of women repugneth to justice.
I will use few words. First, I say, if justice be a constant and perpetual
will to give to every person, their own right (as the most learned in all
ages have defined it to be) then to give, or to will to give to any person,
that which is not their right, must repugne to justice. But to reign above
man, can never be the right to woman: because it is a thing denied vuto her by
God, as is before declared. Therefore to promote her to that estat or dignity,
can be nothing else but repugna^cie to justice. If I should speak no more, this
were sufficient. For except that either they can improve the definition of
justice, or else that they can entreat God to revoke and call back his
sentence pronounced against woman, they shall be compelled to admit my
conclusion. If any find fault with justice, as it is defined, he may well
accuse others, but me he shall not hurt. For I have the shield, the weapon, and
the warrant of him, who assuredly will defend this quarrel, and he commands
me to cry:

What soever repugneth to the will of The second argument.
god expressed in his most sacred word, repugneth to justice: but that women
have authority over men repugneth to the will of God expressed in his word:
and therefore mine author commands me to conclude without fear, that all
such authority repugneth to justice. The first part of the argument I trust
dare nether Jew nor gentile deny: for it is a principle not only
universally confessed, but also so deeply printed in the heart of man, be his
nature never so corrupted, that whether he will or no, he his compelled at one
time or other, Nature does confess that repugnancie to Gods will is
injustice.
to acknowledge and confess, that justice is violated, when things are done
against the will of God, expressed by his word. And to this confession are no
less the reprobat coacted and constrained, then be the chosen children of god,
albeit to a diverse end the elect with displeasure of their fact, confess
their offense, having access to grace and mercy, as did Adam, David, Peter,
and all How the reprobat confess Gods will to be just.
other penitent offenders. But the reprobat, not withstanding they are
compelled to acknowledge the will of God to be just the which they have
offended, yet are they never in wardlie displeased, with their iniquity, but
rage, complain and storm against God, whose vengeance they can not escape: as
did Cain, Genes. 4. Mat. 27.
Judas, Herod, Julian called apostata, Yea Iesabel, and Athalia. For Cain no
doubt was convict in conscience, that he had done against justice in
murdering of his brother, Judas did openly, before the high priest confess
that he had sinned, in betraying innocent blood. Herod being stricken by the
angel, did mock those his flaterers, saying unto them: behold your God
(meaning of him self) can not now preserve him self from corruption and
worms. Iulianus was compelled in the end to cry, O galilean (so always in
contempt did he name our savior Jesus Christ) thou have now ouercomen. And
who doubts but Iesabel, and Athalia, before their miserable end, were
convicted in their cankered consciences, to acknowledge that the murder, which
they had committed, and the empire which the one had six years usurped, were
repugnant to justice: Even so shall they I doubt not, which this day do
possess and maintain that woman's authority brings forth monstres.
monstriferous authority of women, shortly be compelled to acknowledge, that
their studies and devises, have been bent against God: and that all such
authority as women have usurped, repugneth to justice, because, as I have
said, it repugneth to the will of God expressed in his sacred word. And if
any man doubt hereof, let him mark well the words of the apostle, saying: I
permit 1.Tim. 2.
not a woman to teach, nether yet to usurp authority above man. No man I
trust will deny these words of the apostle, to be the will of God expressed in
his word: and he says openly, I permit not etc. Which is as much as, I will
not, that a woman have authority, charge or power over man: for so much
imports the greek word (...) in that place. Now let man and angel conspire
against God, let them pronounce their laws, and say, we will suffer women to
bear authority, who then can depose the^? yet shall this one word of the
eternal God spoken by the mouth of a weak man, thruste them every one in to
hell. Iesabel may for a time sleep quietly in the bed of her fornication and
hoordome, she may teach and deceive for a season: but nether shall she Apoca.
2.
preserve her self, nether yet her adulte rous children from great
affliction, and from the sword of Gods vengeance, which shall shortly
apprehend such works of iniquity. The admonition I differ to the end.

Here might I bring in the oppression and injustice, which is committed against
realms and nations, which some times lived free, and now are brought in
bondage of foreign nations, by the reason of this monstriferous authority and
empire of women. But that I delay till better opportunity. And now I think it
expedient to answer such objections, as carnal and worldly men, yea men
ignorant of God, use to make for maintenance of this tyranny (authority it is
not worthy to be called) and most unjust empire of woman.

First they do object the examples of Iudic. 4. Para. 34.
Debora, and of Hulda the prophetess, The defenses of the adversaries.
of whom the one judged Israel, and the other, by all appearance, did teach and
exhort.

Secondarily they do object the law made by Moses for the daughters of Number. 27
zalphead. Thirdly the consent of the estates of such realms as have approved
the empire and regiment of women. And last the long custom, which has
received the regiment of women. Their valiant acts and prosperity, together
with some papistical laws, which have confirmed the same.

Answer to the first objection.
To the first, I answer, that particular examples do establishe no common law.
The causes were known to God alon, why he took the spirit of wisdom and
force from all men of those ages, and did so mightily assist women against
nature, and against his ordinary course: that the one he made a deliverer to
his afflicted people Israel: and to the other he gave not only perseverance in
the true religion, when the most part of men had declined from the same, but
also to her he gave the spirit of prophecy, to assure king Josias of the
things which were to come. With these women, I say, did God work pote^tlie,
and miraculouslie, yea to the^ he gave most singular grace and privilege. But
who has commanded, that a public, yea a tyrannical and most wicked law be
established upon these examples? The Examples against law have no strength
when the question is of law.
men that object the same, are not altogether ignorant, that examples have no
strength, when the question is of law. As if I should ask, what marriage is
laufull? and it should be answered that laufull it is to man, not only to
have many wives at ones, but also it is laufull to marie two sisters, and to
enjoy them both living at ones, because that David, Jacob, and Solomon,
servants of God did the same. I trust that no man would justify the vanity of
this reason. Or if the question were demanded, if a Christian, with good
conscience may defraude, steal or deceive: and answer were made that so he
might by the example of the Israelites, who at Gods commandment, deceived
the Egyptians, and spoiled them of their garments, gold and silver. I think
likewise this reason should be mocked. And what greater force, I pray you, has
the former argument? Debora did rule in Israel, and Hulda spoke prophecy in
Judah: Ergo it is laufull for women to reign above realms and nations, or to
teach in the presence of men. The consequent is NOTE.
vain and of none effect. For of examples, as is before declared, we may
establishe no law, but we are always bound to the law written, and to the
commandment expressed in the same. And the law written and pronounced by God,
forbids no less that any woman reign over man, then it forbids man to
take plurality of wives, to mary two sisters living at ons, to steal, to
rob, to murder or to lie. If any of these has been transgressed, and yet
God has not imputed the same: it makes not the like fact or deed lawful unto
us. For God being free, may for such causes as be approved by his inscrutable
wisdom, dispense with the rigor of his law, and may use his creatures at his
pleasure. But the same power is not permitted to man, whom he has made subject
to his law, and not to the examples of fathers. And this I think sufficient
to the reasonable and moderate spirits. But to repress the raging of womans
madness, I will descend somewhat deeper in to the matter, and not fear to
affirm: that as we find a contrary spirit in all these most wicked women,
that this day be exalted in to this tyrannouse authority, to the spirit that
was in those godly matrons: so I fear not, I say, to affirm, that their
condition is unlike, and that their end shall be diverse. In those Antithesis
betwixt the former matrones, and our Iesabelles.
matrones we find that the spirit of mercy, truth, justice and of humility
did reign. Under them we find that God did show mercy to his people,
delivering them from the tyranny of strangiers, and from the venom of
idolatry by the hands and counsel of those women: but in these of our ages,
we find cruelty, falshed, pride, covetousness, deceit, and oppression. In them
we also find the spirit of Iesabel, and Athalia, under them we find the
simple people oppressed, the true religion extinguished, and the blood of
Christ's members most cruelly shed. And finally by their practices and
deceit, we find ancient realms and nations given and betrayed in to the
hands of strangiers, the titles and liberties of them taken from the just
possessors. Which one thing is an evident testimony, how unlike our
mischeuous Maryes be unto Debora, under whom were strangiers chased out of
Israel, God so raising her up to be a mother and deliverer to his oppressed
people. But (alas) he has raised up these Iesabelles to be the vttermoste of
NOTE.
his plagues, the which man's unthankfulness has long deserved. But his secret
and most just judgment, shall nether excuse them, nether their mainteiners,
because their counsels be diverse. But to prosecute my purpose, let such as list
to defend these monstres in their tyra^nie, prove first, that their souereine
maistresses be like to Debora in godliness and pity: and secondarilie, that the
same success does follow their tyranny, which did follow the extraordinary
regiment of that godly matrone. Which thing although they were able to do (as
they never shall be, let them blow til they brust) yet shall her example profet
NOTE
them nothing at all. For they are never able to prouc that either Debora, or
any No godly woman did ever claim authority over man by reason of her birth
and blood.
other godly woman (having the commendation of the holy ghost within the
scriptures) has usurped authority above any realm or nation, by reason of
their birth and blood. Nether yet did they claim it by right or inheritance:
but God by his singular privilege, favor, and grace, exempted Debora from the
common malediction given to women in that behalf: and against nature he made
her prudent in counsel, strong in courage, happy in regiment, and a blessed
mother and deliverer to his people. why God sometimes works by extraordinary
means.
The which he did partly to advance and notify the power of his majesty as
well to his ennemies, as to his own people: in that that he declared himself
able to give salvation and deliverance, by means of the most weak vessels:
and partly he did it to confound and ashame all man of that age, because they
had for the most part declined from his true obedience. And therefore was the
spirit of courage, regiment, and boldness taken from them for a time to their
confusion and further humiliation. But what makes this for Mary and her match
Philippe? One thing I would ask of such as depend upon the example of Debora,
whether she was widow or wife, when she judged Israel, and when that God gave
that no table victory to his people under her? If they answer she was widow,
I would lay against them the testimony of the holy ghost, witnessinge that she
was Iudic. 4.
wife to Lapidoth. And if they will shift, and allege, that so she might be
called, not witstanding that her husband was dead, I urge them further, that
they are not able to prove it to be any common phrase and manner of speech in
the scriptures, that a woman shall be called the wife of a dead man, except
that there be some note added, wherbie it may be known that her husband is
Luc. 2.
departed, as is witnessed of Anna. But in Iudic. 4.
this place of the judges, there is no note added, that her husband should be
dead, but rather the expressed contrary. For the text says: In that time a
woman named Debora a prophetess, wife to Lapidoth judged Israel. The holy
ghost plainly speaks, that what time she judged Israel, she was wife to
Lapidoth. If she was wife, and if she ruled all alone in Israel, NOTE.
then I ask why did she not prefer her husband to that honor to be capitain,
and to be leader to the host of the Lord. If any think that it was her
husband, the text proves the contrary. For it af firmeth that Barak, of the
tribe of Neph talie was appointed to that office. If Barak had been her husband:
to what purpose should the holy ghost so diligently have noted the tribe, and
an other name then was before expressed? Yea to what purpose should it be noted,
that she send and called him? whereof I doubt not, but that every reasonable
man does consider that this Barak was not her husband, and thereof likewise it is
evident, that her judgment or government in Israel was no such usurped power,
as our queen's unjustly possess this day, but that it was the spirit of
prophecy, which rested upon her, what time the multitude of the people had
wroght wickedlie in the eyes of the Lord: by the which spirit, she did rebuke
the idolatry and iniquity of the people, exhort them to repentance, and in
the end, did bring them this comfort, that God should deliver them from the
bondage and thraldom of their ennemies. And this she might do, not withstanding
that an other did occupy the NOTE.
place of the supreme magistrate, (if any was in those days in Israel) for so I
find 2. Reg. 22.
did Hulda the wife of Sallum in the days of Josias king of Judah speak
prophecy and comfort the king:and yet he resigned to her nether the scepter,
nor the sword. That this our interpretacion, how that Debora did judge in
Israel is the true meaning of the holy ghost, the pondering and weying of the
history shall manifestly prove. When she sends for Barak, I pray you, in
whose Dobora commanded not as princes use to command.
name gives she him his charge? Does she speak to him as kings and princes
use to speak to their subjects in such cases? No, but she speaks, as she
that had a special revelation from God, which nether was known to Barak nor
to the people, saying: has not the Lord God of Israel commanded the? This is
her preface, by the which she would stir up the dull senses of Barak, and of
the people, willing to persuade unto them, that the time was comen, when God
would show him self their protector and deliverer, in which preface she
usurps to her self, nether power nor authority. For she says not, I being
thy princes, thy maistresse, thy souereine Jadie and queen, command the upon
thine allegiance, and under pain of treason to go, and gather an army. No, she
spoileth her self of all power to command, attributing that authority to God,
of whom she had her revelation and certitude to apoint Barak capitain, which
after appears more plainly. For when she had declared to him the hole
counsel of God, apointing unto him as well the nombre of his soldiers, as the
tribes, out of which they should be gathered: and when she had appointed the
place of the batel, (which she could not have done, but by especial
revelation of God) and had assured him of victory in the name of God, and yet
that he fainted and openly refused, to enter in to that journey except that
the prophetess would accompany him, she did use against him no external power,
she did not threaten him with rebellion and death, but for assurance of his
faint heart and weak conscience, being content to go with him, she pronounces,
that the glory should not be his in that journey, but that the Lord should sell
Sisera in to the hand of a woman. Such as have more pleasure in light then in
darkness, may clearlie perceive, that Debora did usurp no such power nor
authority, as our queen's do this day claim. But that she was endued with the
spirit of wisdom, of knowledge, and of the true fear of God: and by the same
she judged the factes of the rest of the people. She rebuked their defection
and idolatry, yea and also did redress to her power, the injuries, that were
done by man to man. But all this, I say, she did by the spiritual sword, that
is, by the word of God, and not by any temporal regiment or authority,
which she did usurp over Israel. In which, I suppose, at that time there was
no laufull magistrate, by the reason of their great affliction. For so
witnesses the history, saying: And Ehud being dead, the Lord sold Israel in
to the hand of Iabin king of Canaan. And he by Sisera his capitain afflicted
Israel greatly the space of twenty years. And Debora her self, in her song
of thanks giving, confesses that before she did arise mother in Israel, and
in the days of Iael, there was nothing but confusion and trouble. If any
stick to the term, alleging that the holy ghost says, that she judged
Israel:let them understand, that nether does the Ebrue word, nether yet the
Latin, To judge is not always understand of the civil regiment. Isaie 2. Isaie
42. Mich. 4. Isaie 5.
always signify civil judgment, or the execution of the te^porall sword,
but most commonly is taken in the sense, which we have before expressed. For
of Christ it is said: he shall judge many nations. And that he shall pronounce
judgment to the gentiles. And yet it is evident, that he was no minister of
the temporal sword. God commands Jerusalem and Judah to judge betwixt him and
his vineyarde, and yet he appointed not them all to be civil magistrates. To
EZech. 20 Ezech. 22 Ezech. 34
Ezechiel it is said: shall thou not judge them son of man? and after:thou
son of man, shall thou not judge? shall thou not judge, I say, the city of
blood? and also: behold, I shall judge betwixt beast and beast. And such places
in great nombre, are to be found thrughout the hole scriptures, and yet I
trust no man will be so foolish, as to think that any of the Prophets were
appointed by God to be politic judges, or to punish the sins of man, by
corporal punishment. No the manner of their judgment is expressed in these
words: Declare to EZech. 22
them all their abominations, and thou shall say to them: Thus says the Lord
God: a city shedding blood in the midst of her, that her time may approach
and which has made idols against her self, that she might be polluted. Thou
have transgressed in the blood which thou have shed, and thou art polluted in
the idols, which thou have made. Thus, I say, do the prophets of God judge,
pronouncing the sentence of God against malefactors. And so I doubt not but
Debora judged, what time Israel had declined from God: rebuking their
defection, and exhorting them to repentance, without usurpation of any civil
authority. And if the people gave unto her for a time any reverence or honor,
as her godliness and happy counsel did well deserve, yet was it no such empire,
NOTE.
as our mo^stres claim. For which of her sons or nerest kinsmen left she
ruler and judge in Israel after her. The holy ghost expresses no such thing.
Whereof it is evident, that by her example God offreth no occasion to establish
any regiment of women above men, realms, and nations.

An answer to the second objection.
But now to the second objection. In which women require (as to them
appears) nothing but equity and justice. Whilst they and their patrones for
them, require dominion and empire above men. For this is their question: Is it
not lauful, that women have their right and inheritance, like as the daughters
of Zalphead were commanded by the mouth of Moses to have their portion of
ground in their tribe?

I answer, it is not only laufull that women possess their inheritance, but I
affirm also that justice and equity require, what woman would not gladly hear.
that so they do. But therewith I add that which gladly they list not
understand: that to bear rule or authority over man, can never be right nor
inheritance to woman. For that can never be just inheritance to any person,
which God by his word has plainly denied unto them: but to all women has
God denied authority above man, as most manifestly is before declared:
Therefore to her it can never be inheritance. And thus must the advocates of our
ladies provide some better example and strongar argument. For the law made in
favor of the daughters of Zalphead, will serve them nothing. And assuredly
great wonder it is, that in so great light of Gods truth, men list to
grope and wander in darkness. For let the daughters of Zalphead desired to
reign over no man in Israel.
them speak of conscience: if the petition of any of these fore named women was
to reign over any one tribe, yea or yet over any one man within Israel. Plain
it is, they did not, but only required, that they might have a portion of
ground among the me^ of their tribe, lest, that the name of their father should
be abolished. And this was granted unto them without respect had to any civil
regiment. And what makes this, I pray you, for the establishing of this
mo^struous empire of women? The question women may succeed to inheritance but
not to office.
is not:if women may not succeed to possession, substance, patrimony or
inheritance, such as fathers may leave to their children, for that I willingly
grant: But the question is:if women may succeed to their fathers in offices,
and chiefly to that office, the executor whereof does occupy the place and
throne of God. And that I absolutely deny: and fear not to say, that to
place a woman in authority above a realm, is to pollute and profane the
royal seat, the throne of justice, which oght to be the throne of God: and
that to maintain them in the same, is nothing else, but continually to rebel
against God. Number. 36
One thing there is yet to be noted and observed in the law made concerning
the inheritance of the daughters of Zalphead, to wit, that it was forbidden
unto them to marie without their own tribe, lest that such portion as fell to
their lotte, should be transferred from one tribe to an other, and so should the
tribe of Manasses be defrauded and spoiled of their just inheritance by their
occasion. For avoiding of which it was commanded by Mofes, that they should
marie in the family or household of the tribe and kindred of their father.
Wonder it is that the advocates and patrones of the right of our ladies did not
Our patrones for women do not mark this caution.
consider and ponder this law before that they counseled the blind princes
and unworthy nobles of their countries, to betray the liberties thereof in to
the hands of strangiers. England for satisfying of the inordinat appetites of
that cruel monstre Marie (unworthy by reason of her bloody tyra^nie, of the
name of a woman) betrayed (alas) to the proud spaniarde: and Scotland by the
rash madness of foolish gouerners, and by the practices of a crastie dame
resigned like wise, under title of marriage in to the power of France. Does such
translation of realms and nations please the justice of God, or is the
possession by Realms gotten by practices are no just possession.
such means obtained, lauful in his sight? Assured I am that it is not. No
otherwise, I say, then is that possession, whereunto thieves, murderers,
tyrannes and oppressors do attein by theft, murder, tyranny, violence,
deceit, and oppression, which God of his secret (but yet most just) judgment
does often permit for punishment, as well of the sufferers, as of the violent
oppressors, but does never approve the same as laufull and godly. For if he
would not permit that the inheritance of the children of Israel should pass
from one tribe to an other by the NOTE.
marriage of any daughter, not witstanding that they were all one people, all
spoke one tongue, all were descended of one father, and all did profess one
God, and one religion:If yet, I say, God would not suffer that the commodity
and usual fruit, which might be gathered of the portion of ground limited and
assigned to one tribe should pass to an other: Will he suffer that the
liberties, laws, commodities and fruits of hole realms and nations, be given
in to the power and distributio^ of others, by the reason of marriage, and in
the powers of such, as besides, that they be of a strange tongue, of strange
manners and laws, they are also ignorant of God, ennemies to his truth, deniers
of Christ Jesus, persecutors of his true members, and haters of all virtue? As
the odious nation of spaniardes does manifestly declare: who for very despit,
which they the spaniardes are Jews and they brag that Marie of England is of
the route of Ieffe.
do bear against Christ Iefus, whom their forefathers did crucify (for
Jews they are, as histories do witness, and Note the law which he has
proclaimed in France against such as he terms Lutheria^s
they them selves confess) do this day make plain war against all true
professors of his holy gospel. And ho we blindlic and outragiouslie the
french king, and his pestilent prelates do fight against the verity of God,
the flaming fires, which lick up the innocent blood of Christ's members, do
witness, and by his cruel edictes is notified and proclaimed. And yet to these
two cruel tyrannes (to France, and Spain I mean) is the right and possession
of England, and Scotland appointed. But just or laufull shall that possession
never be, till God do change the statute of his former law: which he will
not do for the pleasure of man. For he has not created the earth to satisfy
the ambition of two Act. 17.
or three tyrannes, but for the universal feed of Adam: and has appointed and
defined the bounds of their habitation to diverse nations, assigning diverse
countries as he himself confesses, speaking Deuter. 2.
to Israel in these words: You shall pass by the bounds and limits of your
brethren the sons of Esau, who dwell in mount Sier. They shall fear you.
But take diligent head, that ye show not your selves cruel against them. For
I will gene you no part of their land. No not the breadth of a foot. For mount
Seir I have given to Esau to be possessed. And the same he does witness of the
sons of I ot, to whom he had given Deuteronomy. 32.
Arre to be possessed. And Mosesplainlie affirms, that when the almighty did
distribute, and divide possessions to the gentiles, and when he did disperse,
and scatter the sons of men, that then he did apoint the limits and bounds
of peoples, for the number of the sons NOTE.
of Israel. Whereof it is plain, that God has not exposed the earth in pray to
tyra^nes, making all thing laufull, which by violence and murder they may
possess, but that he has appointed to every feuerall nation, a feuerall
possession, willing them to stand content (as nature Cicero offic.lib. 1.
did teach an ethnik to affirm) with that portion, which by lotte and just
means they had inioyed. For what causes God permits this his distribution
to be troubled, and the realms of ancient nations to be possessed of
stra^giers, I delay at this time to entreat. Only this I have recited to
give the world to understand, that the reign, empire, and authority of
women, has no ground within Gods scriptures. Yea that realms or provinces
possessed Realms gotten by marriage, is unjust conquest.
by their marriage, is nothing but unjust conquest. For so little does the law
made for the daughters of Zalphead help the cause of your queen's, that
utterly it fights against them, both da^ning their authority and fact. But
now to the third objection.

The consent, say they, of realms and Answer to the third objection.
laws pronounced and admitted in this behalf, long consuetude and custom,
together with the felicity of some women in their empires have established
their authority. To whom, I answer, that nether may the tyra^nie of princes,
nether the foolishnes of people, nether wicked laws made against God, nether
yet the felicity that in this earth may hereof ensue, make that thing laufull,
which he by his word hat manifestly condemned. For if the approbation of
princes and people, laws made by men, or the consent of realms, may
establishe any thing against God and his word, then should idolatry be
preferred to the true religion. For mo realms and nations, mo laws and
decrees published by Emperors with co^mmon consent of their counsels, have
established the one, then have approved the other. And yet I think that no man
of sound judgment, will therefore justify and defend idolatry. No more oght
any man to maintain this odious empire of women, although that it were approved
of all me^ by their laws. For the same God that in plain words forbids
idolatry, does also forbid the authority of women over man. As the words
of saint Paul before rehearsed do plainly teach us. And therefore whether women
be deposed from that unjust authority (have they never usurped it so long) or
if all such honor be denied unto them, women may and oght to be deposed from
authority.
I fear not to affirm that they are nether defrauded of right, nor
inheritance. For to women can that honor never be due nor laufull (much less
inheritance) which God has so manifestly denied unto them.

I am not ignorant that the subtle wits of carnal men (which can never be
brought under the obedience of Gods simple precepts to maintein this
monstrous empire) have yet two vain shifts. First they allege, that albeit
women the fourth obiecteon.
may not absolutely reign by the^ selves, because they may nether fit in iud
gement, nether pronounce sentence, nether execute any public office: yet may
they do all such things by their lieutenantes, deputies and judges substitute.
Secondarilie, say they, a woman borne to rule over any realm, may chose her a
husband, and to him she may tra^sfer and give her authority and right. To both
I answer in few words: First that from a corrupt and venomed fountein can
spring no wholesome water: Secondarilie that no person has power to give the
thing, which does not justly appertein womi^ can make no laufull officer.
to them selves: But the authority of a woman is a corrupted fountein, and
therefore from her can never spring any lauful officer. She is not borne to rule
over men: and therefore she can apointe none by her gift, nor by her power
(which she has not) to the place of a laufull magistrate. Let England and
Scotland take heed.
And therefore who socuer receives of a woman, office or authority, are
adulterous and bastard officers before God. This may appear strange at the
first affirmation, but if we will be as indifferent and equal in the cause of
God, as that we can be in the cause of man, the reason shall sodeinlie appear.
The case suposed, that a tyra^ne by co^spiracie usurped the royal seat and
dignity of a king, and in the same did so establish him self, that he
appointed officers, and did what him list for a time, and in this mean time,
the native king made streit inhibition to all his subjects, that none should
adhere to this traitor, nether yet receive any dignity of him, yet never the
less they would honor the same traitor as king, and beco^me his officers in all
affairs of the realm. If after, the native prince did recover his just honor
and possession, should he repute or esteem any man of the traitors apointeme^t
for a laufull magistrate? or for his friend and true subject? or should he not
rather with one sentence condemn the head with the members? And if so he should
do, who were able to accuse him of rigor? much less to condemn his sentence
of injustice. And dare we deny the same power to God in the like case? For
that woman reigns above man, she has obtained it by treason and co^spiracie
committed against God. How can it be then, that she being criminal and guilty
of treason against God committed, can apointe any officer pleasing in his
sight? It is a thing impossible. Wherefore let men that receive of women
authority, honor or office, be most woman in authority is rebel against God.
assuredly persuaded, that in so mainteining that usurped power, they declare
them selves ennemies to God. If any think, that because the realm and estates
thereof, have given their consentes to a woman, and have established her, and
her authority: that therefore it is laufull and acceptable before God: let the
same men remember what I have said before, to wit, that God can not approve the
doing nor consent of any multitude, co^cluding any thing against his word and
ordinance, and therefore they must have a more assured defe^se against the wrath
of God, then the approbation and consent of a blinded multitude, or else they
shall not be able to stand in the presence of the consuming fire: that what the
nobility oght to do in this behalf.
is, they must acknowledge that the regiment of a woman is a thing most odious
in the presence of God. They must refuse to be her officers, because she is a
traitoresse and rebel against God. And finally they must study to repress
her inordinate pride and tyranny to the uttermost of their power. The same is
the duty of the nobility and estates, by whose blindness a woman is promoted.
First in so far, as they have most haynouslie offended against God, placing
in authority such as God by his word has removed from the same, unfeignedly
they oght to call for mercy, and being admonished of their error and damnable
fact, in sign and token of true repentance, with common consent they oght to
retreat that, which unadvisedly and by ignorance they have pronounced, and
oght without further delay to remove from authority all such persons, as by
usurpation, violence, or tyranny, do possess the same. For so did Israel and
Judah after they had revolted from David, and Judah alone in the days of
Athalia. For after that she 2. Reg. 11
by murdering her sons children, had obtained the empire over the land, and
had most vnhappelie reigned in Judah six years, Iehoiada the high priest called
together the capitaines and chief rulers Mark this fact, for it agrees with
Gods law pronounced.
of the people, and showing to them the kings son Ioas, did bind them by an
oath to depose that wicked woman, and to promote the king to his royal seat,
which they faithfully did, killinge at his commandment not only that cruel
and mischeuous woman, but also the people did destroy the temple of Baal,
break his altars and images, and kill Mathan Baales high priest before his
altars. The same is the duty as well of the estates, as of the people that
has been blinded. First they oght to remove from honor and authority, that
monstre in nature (so call I a woman cled in the habit of man, yea a woman
against nature reigning above man). Secondarilie if any presume to defend that
impiety, they oght not to fear, first to pronounce, and then after to execute
against the^ the sentence of death. If any man be afraid to violat the oath of
obedience, which they have made to such mo^stres, let them be most assuredly
persuaded, that as the beginning of their oaths, proceeding from ignorance was
sin, so is the obstinate purpose to keep the same, nothing but plain
rebellion against God. But of this matter in the second blast, God willing, we
shall speak more at large.

And now to put an end to the first blast, seeing that by the order of nature,
by the malediction and curse pronounced against woman, by the mouth of S. Paul
the interpreter of Gods sentence, by the example of that commonwealth, in
which God by his word planted order and policy, and finally by the judgment
of the most godly writers, God has dejected woman from rule, dominion,
empire, and authority above man. Moreover, seeing that nether the example of
Debora, nether the law made for the daughters of Zalphead, nether yet the
foolish consent of an ignorant multitude, be able to justify that which God
so plainly has condemned: let all men take An admonition.
head what quarrel and cause from hence further they do defend. If God raise
up any noble heart to vendicat the liberty of his country, and to suppress
the monstrous empire of women, let all such as shall presume to defend them in
the same, most certeinlie know, that in so doing, they lift their hand
against God, and that one day they shall find his power to fight against their
foolishnes. Let not the faithful, godly, and valiant hearts of Christ's
soldiers be utterly discouraged, nether yet let the tyrannes reioise, albeit
for a time they triumph against such as study to repress their tyranny, and
to remove them from unjust authority. For the causes alone, why he suffers
the soldiers to fail in batel, whom nevertheless he commands to fight as
sometimes did Israel fighting against Benjamin. The cause of the Israelites was
most just:for it was to punish that horrible abominatio^ of those sons of
Iudic. 20
Belial, abusing the levites wife, whom the Beniamites did defend. And they
had Gods precept to assure them of well doing. For he did not only comma^de
them to fight, but also appointed Judah to be their leader and capitain, and yet
fell they twice in plain batel against those most wicked adulterers.

why God permits sometimes his own soldiers to fall in batel.
The secret cause of this, I say, is known to God alone. But by his evident
scriptures we may assuredly gather, that by such means does his wisdom
so^times, beat down the pride of the flesh (for the Israelites at the first
trusted in their multitude, power and strength, and sometimes by such
overthrows, he will punish the offenses of his own children, and bring them
to the unfeigned knowledge of the same, before he will give them victory
against the manifest co^te^ners, whom he has apoi^ted nevertheless to
uttermost perdition: as the end of that batel did witness. For although with
great murder the children of Israel did twice fall before the Be^iamites, yet
after they had wept before the Lord, after they had fasted and made sacrifice
in sign of their unfeigned repentance, they so prevailed against that proud
tribe of Benjamin, that after 25. thousand strong men of war were killed in
batel, they destroyed Iudic. 20
man, woman, child and beast, as well in the fields, as in the cities,
which all were burned with fire, so that only of that hole tribe remained
fix hundredth men, who fled to the wilderness, where they remained four
months, and so were saved. The same God, who did execute NOTE.
this grievous punishment, eue^ by the hands of those, whom he suffered twice to
be ouercomen in batel, does this day retein his power and justice. Cursed
Iesabel of England, with the pestilent and detestable generation of papists,
make no little brag and boast, that they have triumphed not only against Wyet,
but also against all such as have entreprised any thing against the^ or their
procedinges. But let her and them consider, that yet they have not prevailed
against god, his throne is more high, then that the length of their horns be
able to reach. And let them further consider, that in the beginning of this
their bloody reign, the harvest of their iniquity was not comen to full
maturitie and ripenes. No, it was so grene, so secret I mean, so covered, and
so hid with hypocrisy, that some men (even the servants of God) thought it not
impossible, but that wolves might be changed in to la^bes, and also that the
vipere might remove her natural venom. But God, who does reuele in his time
appointed the secrets of hearts, and that will have his judgments justified
even by the very wicked, has now given open testimony of her and their
beastly cruelty. For man and woman, learned and unlearned, nobles and men of
baser sort, aged fathers and tender damiselles, and finailie the bones of the
dead, as well women as me^ have tasted of their tyra^nie, so that now not only
the blood of father Latimer, of the mild man of God the bishop of Ca^torburie,
of learned and discrete Ridley, of innocent lady Jane dudley, and many godly
and worthy preachers, that can not be forgotten, such as fire has consumed,
and the sword of tyranny most unjustly has shed, does call for vengeance
in the ears of the Lord God of hosts: but also the sobbes and tears of the
poor oppressed, the groninges of the angeles, the watch men of the Lord, yea
and every earthly creature abused by their tyranny do continually cry and
call for the hasty execution of the same. I fear not to say, that the day of
vengeance, which shall apprehend that horrible monstre Iesabel of England, and
such as maintein her monstrous cruelty, is alredie appointed in the counsel
of the Eternal: and I verelie believe that it is so nigh, that she shall not
reign so long in tyranny, as hitherto she has done, when God shall declare
him self to be her ennemie, when he shall pour forth contempt upon her,
according to her cruelty, and shall kindle the hearts of such, as so^times did
favor her with deadly hatred against her, that The authority of all women, is
a wall without foundation.
they may execute his judgments. And therefore let such as assist her, take heed what they do. For assuredly her empire and reign is a wall without
foundation: I mean the same of the authority of all women. It has been under
propped this blind time that is past, with the foolishnes of people, and with
the wicked laws of ignorant and tyra^nous princes. But the fire of Gods
word is alredie laid to those rotten proppes (I include the Popes law with
the rest) and presently they burn, albeit we epsy not the flame: when they
are consumed, (as shortly they will be, for stuble and dry timbre can not
long endure the fire) that rotten wall, the usurped and unjust empire of women,
shall fall by it self in despit of all man, to the destruction of so many, as
shall labor to uphold it. And therefore let all man be advertised, for the
trumpet has ones blown.

Praise God ye that fear him.

