THE INCOMPARABLE JEWEL. Showed*

In a Sermon, which was preached in the Church of B. in S. at the solemnization
of a Marriage, had between W. B. and E. S. the Daughter of I. S. of London,
Merchant.

WHEREIN* Is recommended to every good and well disposed mind the matchless
worth of a virtuous Wife; and wherein also is discovered the hateful company
and hellish condition of a vicious --

EZRA. 9. 14. Should we return to break thy Commandments, and to join in
Marriage and affinity with people of abominations?

LONDON, Printed by Robert Young, and are sold by G. Lathum. 1632.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL his worthy Neighbors, ABRAHAM DAWES and WILLIAM
WYMONDESOLD, Esquires, a pair of faithful Friends, Patterns of godliness,
Patrons of goodness, and Patriots of Worth; Holiness, health and happiness be
continued, multiplied and perfected in Christ Jesus our Lord.
More than much beloved,
VVHatsover Antiquity has left in record touching the admired effects and
fruits of true friendship between Patroclus and Achilles, Theseus and
Pirithous, Nisus and Eurilaus, and others, seems all but fained and fancied
in comparison of that paritie, purity, and raritie of singular and endeered
affection (which lately came to my view) between Nicholaus Barbadi^ and Marcus
Trivisanus, two true friends, Gentlemen and Patriots of the Republique of
Venice. The historical Narration calls for not only a Tullian Orator, but for
a Tertullian, to show it to life; and that requires a just volume too. For, if
there be a Mercuriall Quilibet, who can in his Quodlibeticall Capacity
comprehend an immensitie, or in his sublimated brain define an infinity, or in
his stupendous presumption dares take upon him to relate an infandum, (and of
such an Vtopian Morus I utterly despair) then may it be as well showed how two
minds may breathe in one breast, and one mind may live in two hearts.

True it is, that ( Ubi amat anima, ibi animat) The soul lives where it loves;
yet all is but strength of imagination I am not ignorant also, that the
Starre-gazers fancy a Sign in the Zod^aque, and call it Gemini, one of the
twelve Signs (in semblance Twins) but their Conceptions are as their
Eccentriques and Epicicles, not Essences; fantasies, not sentences: but this
pair of friends was a true, real and actual seal ( Gemini) Twins on earth,
like those of Hypocrates, both actively and passively, as if they had bin (
iidem numero) numerically the same. The Astrologers Gemini were fancied fires
and stars, these most honest, hearty, and faithful loves in abstracto. The
Sun, and Moon are the two greater lights among the Planets; these were as two
resplendent Suns, gloriously shining, and graciously spreading their rays
among, and above all the Magnifico's in the firmament of Venice.

So strong marveils, and so strange Metamorphoses as their sincere friendship
did produce and propose to the worlds view, seem not to be the effects of the
rare amity and individual love of Nicolaus Barbadicus, and Marcus Trivisanus,
but of Nicolaus Trivisanus and Marcus Barbadicus. For assuredly their Natures
being so heartily mutual, their Names may be respectively communicable.

If any could set forth but in sum that their rare, admirable and matchless
friendship, with the lightsome and delightsome rays and effects of the same,
it would put that piece of ^ully concerning the friendship of Scipio and
Laelius to a nonplus.

For there was in this rare pair of friends a great disparitie in some things,
and a greater paritie in the most things; yet I say not one the greater for
this, nor the other the better for that, but ( iidem non iidem, ipsi nec ipsi)
the same not the same, themselves not themselves.

Trivisanus succors and saves Barbadicus at the point to perish, Barbadicus
redeemes Trivisanus from the very gulf of sinking wherein he was plunged; the
one prodigal of his blood for his friend, the other of his goods.

Trivisanus only sollicitous for Barbadicus, Barbadicus shakes hands with all
his own delights only to please and to pleasure Trivisanus. This love-strife,
this friendship-fight, this mutual ambition in this pair of friends to serve
each other, Venice saw* the world is amazed at to read, and posterity will be
amused to hear. For two strive all in good for the good of each, and both are
victorious. O rare trophee! By this Thesis (mine endeered friends) you may
guess at the Hypothesis: if I should apply it, as I both can, and justly may;
yet some spiteful hypocrite, and malevolent spirit would not stick to say I
did flatter. But it is so well known, that in all my course of life, both in
City, Court and Country; I have and do naturally hate adulation, and account it
the slavery and baserie of baseness; and surely it dwells in none but in a
poor, base, and ignoble breast; yea it is well known, that I never suffered
more in all my life, than for my plainness and freedom of speech and spirit;
for I am a right Macedonian, I must call a spade a spade (whatever come of it)
and I cannot mince it, and say Sibboleth for my heart, but I must needs say
heartily and with aspiration Shibboleth. Judge. 12.

Therefore this is that I must say, for it is truth, and all that now I will
say, that I may not displease you, That more sweet consent, better content,
faster union of minds, firmer conjunction of concord, to love together, to live
together, to do all good offices each to other in your private, and all good
that did occur for the public welfare of others in the place where you
live, and elsewhere; I never met withal, or observed in any part of the world
where I have lived. Does any Malcus with his left ear itch to hear this? or
does any Momus with an envious eye blinke to read this? and so say a Mumpsimus
to himself? assuredly did I know them, I should trench and trespass somewhat
deeper upon your patience and modesty, and especially show that which might
make their itching ears to tingle, and their envious eyes to water; yea and to
hear and see yet more, and yet more, until rumperentur ilia bonorum osoribus.

But the sincerity of my witnessing the truth, and the integrity of my cause
staves off all black-mouthed curres, and for mine own part I wave them as I
do the stinking and muddiewater in a common seure or sink.

That which I lately delivered in a Sermon in the voice of a living man to a
Christian auditorie, assembled at the solemnization of a marriage, I have in
this Treatise laid it open to scanning and censure, and buried it in a dead
letter of less efficacy, and made it yours: Not that you desired it; for you
heard it not, neither did any of the Auditorie request it that I know, (as some
men use to feign and apologize in their Dedications) but I have done this of
mine own accord truly and sincerely, to express in part, what observation I
have taken of you (for the space of seven years, seven months, and some days
whiles I was your Pastor.) What joy I took to behold you and your whole
people so fairly, so friendly, and so freely to live and cohabite together in
such extraordinary Christian bearing and forbearing, as the Apostolic phrase
is, And also I have done this to manifest my observance, respect, and
thankfulness unto you for all your former favors, courtesies, and kindnesses
showed toward me and mine, expressed in a generous* free, and noble manner.

I little respect or regard the conceits or censures of those, who fancy
nothing but faction in Church and State; for their Chimeraes are likest Tobacco
of any thing in the world: For, as that is quickly kindled, makes a stinking
smoke, and quickly goes out, but leaves an inherent stink in the nostrils and
stomachs of the takers, not to be drawn out, but by putting in a worse savor,
as of Onions and Garlic (according to the proverb). The smell of Garlic
takes away the stink of dung-hils; so their choler is like Gunpowder, touch
it with a spark of fire, and it is in your face; their speeches, like
offensive smoke, soon droven away with the wind, but their unsavouriness
which they leave behind them is like Mephitis, and the stinking Lacus
Asphaltites; and for ought that I can perceive, the stink they leave behind
them and their venom, cannot be countermanded but by the common seures and
lay-stalls of the most beastly and most noisome dung-hils.

Yet, forsooth, these busi-bodies, born under Mercury, must be a reforming all
the world: and how think you? by taxing it, as if they were Augusti Caesares,
and perpetual Dictators; but what would they reform? all the world, (I say)
as Augustus taxed it; And how far think you? surely so far as the Duke of
Florence his fool pilled an Onion. This Duke caused an Onion to be given to
his Cousin Natural, and bad him pill it; he pulls off one skin, and then
another, and so forth, at last comes to the Cloves of the Onion; he supposing
these to be skins also, albeit somewhat thicker, off they go, from one to
another, and at last when the Duke calls for his pilled Onion, what was left
think you? A thing called Nothing like an Onion; So these masters, if they
were left to their folly and foolerie, in their fancied reformation, though
they take much pains in the pilling and poling, that their eyes watered
again, yet so poor a pittance would remain of their Platonian, Plutonian,
Eutopian Church and Republique, that the ancient and graver sort might have
just cause to weep, wail, and lament, as the Israelites did, who had known
the first Temple built by Solomon, when they beheld the second rebuilt in the
time of Nehemiah: Oh quantum distabat ab illo! But what do I blot paper with
their fancies? I know you are no such Alchymists: The Church of England is your
mother, and from her breasts you are persuaded that your selves and all yours
with all others that live therein, may suck the sincere milk of the Word, and
drink the saving knowledge of the Cup of Salvation.

And when you do receive and drink of that Cup of Salvation, you do it,
kneeling with humiliation of body and humility of heart, as becomes sober and
moderate Christians; you are none of those who have Elephantine knees, that
will not bow, fancying a cause-lesse fear of Bread-worship, as you know some
stallions of late amongst us have endeavored. I know you hate the blasphemy of
them, who stick not to say in plain terms (such high and hellish conceits have
they of themselves) that they, forsooth, are fit companions for Christ Jesus.
It matters not for them, hold you on your godly courses, and as God has united
your hearts, and the hearts of your children, to love and like one another in
the state of marriage, Gods blessed Ordinance, so continue in your true and
Christian fellowship, without which what is this world but a vast desert and
wild wilderness? your true loving friendship shall multiply your joys and
mitigate your griefs. Let others dissemble, they will find it painful, and
full of travises, and they that embrace such, shall find them all for that
which fools call Fortune and not Nature; and such shall want true friends as a
reward of their perfidious Natures. Let it be your glory to say, We are
open-hearted the one to the other; we have singled each other from the
generality of those with whom we live, and shall ever make one another the
portion of our own wishes. Let others admire at an eclypse of the Sun or
Moon, and gaze at a blazing Star; do you regard and understand the sweet
motions and wholesome exhalations of your own affections, and temper and
regulate them to Gods glory and the consolation of your own souls.

To which end, your poor Levite and votarie shall never cease (whiles we live
together in this vale of vanity) earnestly and heartily to desire the Almighty
God long to keep, preserve and continue you and all yours in holiness, health,
happiness, and prosperity, to Gods glory, to your own true comfort and
consolation in this world, and to your everlasting salvation and glorification
in the world to come, through the mercies of God, and the merits and saving
grace and favor of Jesus, in whom, and for whom I am*

Wandesworth, Aug. 13. 1632. Yours to be commanded, W. L.

THE INCOMPARABLE JEWEL.
PROVE. 31. 10. Who can find a virtuous Woman? for her price is far above
Rubies.
THe Wisdom of God, purposing to set out, and show forth unto the sons of men
the gracious endowments, and virtuous conditions of a good Woman, seems to
me in this Text, to put the cause to hands; that those, who by seeking have
found, and by findding experimentally, know this blessing, may subscribe; and
the daughters of men, who have been sued and sought unto, might understand,
and always call to mind, what an incomparable blessing they should be to
those, by their virtuous deportment, who with so much suing, and seeking have
found them, and have labored all the world over to find one good, every one
for his own self.

It also pleases the wisdom of God to open it self unto us in this Oracle,
First, by a Quaere; Who can find a virtuous woman? Secondly, by a Quare; For
her Price is far above Rubies.

The Quaere as an Inlet, runs into four Rills. The first is the
Indefinitenesse of the Question: Who? Who I say among all? Secondly, the
Difficulty of the Question: Who can? Which, albeit it be difficult, yet it is
feasible: for an Act tending thereunto is implied; Who can find? which implies
Seeking. Some by seeking find them sans question; the reason is manifest; for
the Evangelicall Precept Seek, has an Angelical Promise annexed, and ye
shall find. Thirdly, the Subject, or rather Object: What? A Woman. Who can
find a Woman? Alas, what more easy to find than that Creature? She is no
Ostium Nili: yea but that is not all. The Quality is the Question, and that is
the knot: Who can find a virtuous Woman? which is the fourth Rill that the
Quaere runs into.

The Tigurines render the Quaere thus; Who can find a strong Woman? And why
so? for that nothing is stronger, or more prevailing than virtue. A virtuous
woman prevails with God, for she is gracious with him; prevails with Men, for
she is compliable toward them; prevails with both, for she is not only of
Israel, but a true Israelite; not a Christian woman Numero only, in the rout,
as one should say among many; nor Numero and Professione only, among the rout,
and in the outward semblance; but a true, real, virtuous, gracious Christian
woman Numero, Professione, and Electione; who is made partaker of that Grace,
which wins infallibly, holds inseperably, and leads indeclinably in the
ways of eternal blessedness. This is the Quaere, wherein I find a Raritie;
These virtuous Women Apparent rarae nantes in gurgite vasto.

The Quare is rational, and discloseth it self into five parcels. For,
besides the estimation of a good woman in the whole Text, and the price of a
good woman; who is Quantivis praetii in all good men's judgments; her valuation
with God weighes down all. For first, Gods wisdom resembles her to a Jewel,
in the General: Secondly, to a Rubie, in Particular: Thirdly, in Plurality,
to Rubies: Fourthly, Superlatively, Above Rubies: Fifthly, and lastly,
Super-superlatively, Far above Rubies. This is the Quare, and herein I find
Pricelesnesse.

From the rills of the Quaere, and from the parcels of the Quare results this
Proposition.

A gracious virtuous wife is a rare, and choice Jewel Propositio.
of incomparable valuation.

In the first place I shall endeavor to show this Raritie by enumeration of
places, persons, and by putting of the case more plainly.

First, for Places. Many places afford few good ones, and in the latitude and
extent of place they are rare and singular. Canaan affords a good Sarah, (Rara
fuit illa Sarah) and a faithful Abraham found her. The Captivity yielded an
Hester that shrunk not, but hazzarded her blood for the people of God her
Countrymen. The Wilderness had an holy Miriam. The Israel of God one good
woman, the wife of Phinehas, that takes to heart the loss of God's Ark, taken
by the Philistines. In all Israel one Deborah, ( Mulier consultissima) that
knew the mind of God. In all the Land of Moab, but one resolute Ruth, that
forgoes, forgets, and forsakes her Country and kindred, for the God of Israel.
And in all the Territory of Sidon, but one poor widow of Sarepta, who
entertaines the Servant and Prophet of the Lord. Thus much for the Places:
Women, ye see, are sowed very thick, but virtuous women are reaped very thin,
and are long a coming up, like Coteswoll Barley.

Secondly for Persons. If any one might find this good one, in all
probability, the prime man in the Primitive time might find her; but Adam
found a tempting Evah. Holy Job found a blasphemous foolish consort to his
wife: Potent Ahasuerus a disloyal Vashti. Strong Sampson a perfidious Dalilah.
Magnificent Ahab found in his Ivorie Palace a false-hearted, whorish, painted
Iesabel. Evangelizing Ananias a Saphira, a consort and companion in evil: and
prudent Solomon, not one inter omnes. Thus for the Persons.

If then neither in manifold Places, nor among many Persons this Jewel can be
found, but rarely, as has been showed; you may quickly resolve the point of
raritie, by putting the case your selves. And you, O men and mortals, who have
woeful experience of this raritie, may pitifully complain, and say in the
words of the Prophet: Woe is us, that these virtuous Mich. 7. 1.
gracious Women are like the gleanings after harvest, and like the clusters of
grapes after the vintage. In the Quaere then there is raritie sans Question.

In the Quare, which is the second parcel of the Text, I find Pricelesnesse;
I do not say Peerlesnesse, nor yet pettish and peevish Preciseness. These
will be subject to reproof in their places. But the Pricelesnesse of a good
wife, I endeavor to show from the pieces of the Context, first Positively, and
then Privatively.

Positively: A virtuous wife is a Cordial to her husband. First, to his heart,
for that trusts in her. Secondly, to his bones; she makes him a glad man, and
a glad heart fatteth the man, and makes him batten. Thirdly, to his reputation:
He sits with the Elders of the City, and is with them of good esteem. And
fourthly, to his state, by her care, frugality, and housewivery. Doubtless
this Cordial Consort is Pricelesse.

Secondly, I show it Privatively. A virtuous wife does her husband no evil, as
wicked wives do: wicked, and vicious wives are Corrasives to their husbands,
and not Cordials. First, to their hearts, by dolor, palpitation, and
doubtings. Secondly, to their bones, by their insatiable Intemperance, which
brings rottenness to his bones. Thirdly, to his reputation: He sits, good man,
and sigheth among his Neighbors, and they cannot discern what ayleth him.
Fourthly and lastly, to his state and condition of life; she brings that to a
morsel of bread, and to a corn of salt. Assuredly such a wife is a curse, and
a deadly corrasive to the heart of her husband.

Whereas the virtuous wife does her duty, not by fits and slashes, but
constantly and continually, for so Exeat urtica, and paricella sit in^us amica.
speaks my Context (and I dare not omit it): and so she becomes a
continual feast, and cordial unto his heart. She is never in the sorry
moodes; either in the Indicative, complaining, murmuring, or grudging; or in
the Imperative, commanding her husband, and domineering; but ever in the
Optative, wishing, and woulding with meekness, and sobriety.

In the second place. As a virtuous woman is a Cordial to her husband; so is
she as a skillful Palinurus, a Pilot to her children. She bears, brings, and
breeds them up in the fear and nurture of the Lord. So did Lois, Timothie's
Grandmother bring up her Daughter Eunice, and Eunice Timothy her Son. The
benefit of this her bringing, and breeding them up she reapeth; for they prove
not stubborn, and disobedient children, nor incorrigible caitiff^s, but they
rise up, and call their mother blessed; and they are her choice Jewels. As a
godly, gracious, and virtuous Lady of this Kingdom answered another Lady a
Neighbor of hers that came to her a How doing, as they term it: this
religious Lady had been with her said Neighbor not long before, and she
having showed her all her Plate, Chains, Carkenets, Rings, Jewels, and other
pretty knacks in archivis, said, that after some few days she also would
come and see what Jewels and Rarities she had: this good Lady replied, she
should be welcome. Come she did some few days after, but in the afternoon of
the day, for some reasons besides good manners, quas dicere nolo; She was
accosted with fair salutes, and comely comportments: many words passed, and
much time spent, as is usual in such visits; It drew toward night, and time of
departure. At last, quoth this visiting, and How doing Lady, You told me the
other day, that you would show me your Jewels when I should come to see you, I
pray you now do so according to your promise. That shall I willingly do, by
Gods favor, quoth the godly Lady. And telling her a pretty tale or two to
prolong the time, anon her children came in from school. These, these, quoth
this good Lady (as once that thrice noble Roman Lady Cornelia, the mother of
the Gracchi said) are my Jewels. As for the other vanities which you showed me
the other day, are in respect of these my Children of no valuation at all. O
Heroina vere heroica, and hero digna.

In the third place. A virtuous wife is a true Lady (note the signification of
Lady in the Saxon tongue, from whence the name of Lady with us is derived)
toward her Domestics, or household servants. She sets them their taskes, they
eat not their bread in idleness. And for their wholesome food and raiment,
they surpass other men's servants.

In the fourth place. She is an helping hand to the Poor. She labors, that
she may give them. She spares at home, that the poor abroad may have some
taste of her thrift, and she eats not her morsels alone: she is no idle,
nor idol gossip, that spends idly and vainly more in one month, than she
bestows on the poor in a whole year, yea perhaps in seven years.

In the fifth place. She is an eye to her neighbors by her good example; for
her good works so shine, that her neighbors may see them, and glorify her
Father, which is in heaven.

In the sixth place. She is a Saint to her God; with whom she has found
favor; and with whom both her life is precious, and her departure hence: Right
deer in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. If their deaths be so
precious with him, doubtless their lives are so also; either Temporal life,
or Eternal, as shall most conduce to Gods glory.

Lastly, She is in and to her self an inestimable Pearl, which when the
Merchant had found, he sold all he had, and bought it; in respect of the sweet
repose she has in the incomparable content of a quiet Conscience. For chaste
she is in body; composed in soul and spirit: she opens her mouth in
discretion, and under her lips is the Law of Grace.

Where lives that wight that can match this pricelesnesse? She weighs like the
Shekle of the Sanctuary, wherein twenty Gerahs go to one Shekle; twenty and
twenty to that cannot equalize her. The Platonists extol the Idaea of Virtue,
that if it might be seen per se, all the earth would be in love with the
beauty thereof: but if the gracious, and virtuous wife had a cunning and
curious Dissector to anatomize her, she would be a Quintess^ unto the most
profound Naturalist; Et admirabiles amoris excitaret affectus; Imo, Impiger
extremos curret Mercator ad Indos: ut potiatur hac.

If therefore you take a view of this gracious virtuous wife; either
Positively, as she is a Jewel; or Comparatively, as she is a Rubie; or
Pluralitively, as she is resembled to Rubies; or Superlatively, above Rubies;
or Super-superlatively, far above Rubies, you will conclude with me in the
cause, considering the Premises, That a gracious virtuous wife is a Jewel of
incomparable valuation.

The Reasons are manifest; For she is the Gift of Prove. ^. Ibid. 12. Ibid. 18.
God; she is the Crown of her husband, albeit he be her head; nay she is a
Transcendent. For she is Res bona, beyond all Predication, not bounded within
the limits of any Predicament, Predicable, or Topicall Predicate.

Mistake not now in all this Explication, that albeit I call her pricelesse, I
do not say she is peerlesse. Many doubtless there are of these virtuous
wives; yet I dare say, that the paucitie of the one is rare, in respect of the
plurality of the other: that is to say, a paucitie of pearls, a plurality of
peebles. Pearls few, fit to be worn by the best; peebles many, good for
nothing but to be trampled under foot: yet that God, who has given Man
commission to seek, has also granted permission to find, such an one as the
Text means.

Furthermore, albeit I say she is pricelesse, yet I do not Cavenda est
pernic^es, tum z^z ^niorum, tum praec. sorum de vita Domini sarmentorum. Aug.
say she is precise. The Text says not, who can find a precise wife? There
are too too many of them, who cannot be content to be Master at home, but they
will play Rex, taxing Caesar; they will play Lex, saying, The Parliament was
ill advised to make such and such a Law; yea and Grex too, imposing upon their
silly neighbors.

As I am a man, and consider things equally, I can find no great reason, why a
man should seek, sue, and woo a woman. For, in reason, the weaker should seek
for supportation of the stronger; and not the contrary. Only I remember in the
Creation, I find that the woman was made of the rib of a man; and so happily
the man, conceiting that he wants something, is occasioned to go seek his
lost rib, until he find it.

But as I am a Christian man, and look above my self and all the world, and
hope for a better being in feeling the powers of another life; then I see
Marriage is honorable Heb. 13.
among all men, and the ^ed undefiled; but Whoremongers, and Adulterers God
will judge.

I see God the Father to be the first Priest to marry the first couple, and
that in Paradise in the time of Man's Innocence. I see God the Son honoring
marriage with his first miracle in Cana of Galile. God the Holy Ghost
overshadowing the blessed Virgin, espoused to Joseph, in the wonderful mystery
of the Incarnation. I see it honored of the whole Trinity, both in word and
deed. In word, by resembling the Kingdom of Christ's Church to a Marriage on
Earth; and in deed, by saving in the Deluge eight married persons, and no other.

I observe the blessed Virgin, and the holy Disciples of Jesus, to be present
as guests at a marriage feast. I find it honored of the Fathers of the
Church, who call marriage, Ecclesiae Seminarium, filling the Earth with People,
and Heaven with Saints. I find it honored of Jews, who kept it tied to their
tribes, and had it in great reverence; yea and I read that marriage is honored
of the very Gentiles, and that in a great deal of strictness, and austeritie.
In a word, I observe it honored of all, except Heretics and Papists. The old
Heretics, called Cathari, damned second marriages; and the new heretical
Papalins, who with Pope Siricius, that great Don of Rome, interpret that of the
Apostle (Romans 9. They that are in the flesh cannot please God) most carnally
and grossly. At dicam falli eos, qui negant Sirici^m istum Papam os ha^uisse,
and a foul one too; who by his cursed gloss, which corrupts the Text, and his
cursed head that understands it not, yet sets this his private stamp upon it,
saying, They that are in the flesh, that is to say, They that are married,
cannot please God*

O res digna joco, and risu celebranda bimestri. All this while I have spoken
to your heads by way of Explication; give me leave now to exemplify the Text
by speaking to your hearts and best affections by more particular Application:
and for that we will not wander at large, we will endeavor to show what
estimation is to be had of a virtuous wife, and what detestation of a vicious
wife.

Of a virtuous wife: First, in the estimate of Jewels. Secondly, in the quaint,
and fit resemblance that she is likened to Pearls. Thirdly, of a vicious
wife; whose price is resembled and matched with the price of a Dog. Fourthly,
as the Text referres to all of either sex Husbands, and Wives. And lastly, as
the Text reflects upon the Bridegroom and the Bride, and they upon it.

Touching the first point. The Question is not, Who can find a fair woman?
For favor is deceitful, and favor is no such Jewel, seeing a gleame of the
Sun will discolor it, the fit of an Ague dis-fashion it, and the wrincles of
old Age make it very uneven, with unhandsome furrows to see to. Neither is the
Question, Who can find a rich wise? for that blessing is the care and ability
of the parents. In which point, the School resolves very neatly. There are
three sorts of things here beneath. Of the first sort, some are so good, that
God bestows them upon none but his own dear ones; as justifying Faith,
sanctifying and saving Grace, Repentance to Salvation, and the like. Of the
second sort, some are so bad, that none have them, but the wicked and
reprobates; as Infidelity, Hardness of heart, Contempt of Gods Word, final
Impenitencie, and the residue ejusdem farraginis, vel potius furfuris. Of the
third sort, some are Adiaphoricall, or indifferent, which are given
promiscuously both to the good, and to the wicked; for that they are neither
good, nor bad in themselves, but only in their use; and these are Riches. For,
Abraham the faithful, and Lot the righteous, were wealthy; and so was also
Nabal the sottish, surly, and foolishchurle; with the namelesse Epicurean
Glutton in the Gospel. So then you see the point, Good men and evil possess
them, and they prove either a curse, or a blessings even as the owners, make
use of them. A rich wife may be the gift of rich Parents, but a gracious and
virtuous wife is the gift of God; and she is the woman to be so highly prized.

Her price therefore is the price of Jewels pricelesse, it is far above
Jewels: Only herein lies the difference. Jewels oft-times are overvalued,
their worth lying only in opinion, and so is nominall; but her worth is real.

The estimation of Jewels and Pearls have been evermore very precious.
Cleopatra Queen of Egypt had from the Kings of the East two Pearls, valued at
an hundred Sestertium, which is, two hundred Tun of Gold. And Julius Caesar
had one only Jewel, valued at the same rate.

But what make I mention of profane stuff? Solomon the great when he would
express a matter of incomparable Prove. 3. 15.
value, he does it by the resemblance of a Pearl.

Christ Jesus, the true Solomon (whereof the other was but a Type) when he
would declare the pricelesnesse of the Kingdom of Heaven, sets it forth in the
resemblance to a Merchant, that seeking goodly pearls, finding one Mat. 13.
of incomparable worth, sells all he has and buys it. Thus you have the
estimation of Jewels; see the fitness, and elegancie of the resemblance to
Pearls. First, in the Generation of Pearls. Secondly, in their union, or
oneness. Thirdly, in their Appearance. And fourthly, in their Efficacy.

The Generation of Pearls, especially the Oriental, is properly engendered
from the deaw of heaven. For, at a certain season the Conchae, or mother of
pearls opens, and receives in the deaw, whereof the pearls in due time are
perfected. The gracious and virtuous woman in my text, minding heaven and
heavenly things, is intent and looks for all her blessings from heaven; whence
every good and perfect gift descends, by the influence and inspiration of the
Holy Ghost. The deaw of her birth in the act of Regeneration, is from the womb
of the morning.

The Union of pearls is always only one. Therefore the Latins call them
Unions, not Plures, as mostly one. The Motto of this good woman is Semper
eadem, and the The word of the honorable family of the C^cils.
word of an honorable Family in this Land. Cor unum, viauna, is her
Resolution and Disposition. For, albeit this good wife have a consort, an
husband; yet they two are one flesh. One heart of faithfulness she has to
her husband, one way of integrity to walk in; and be her husband absent, or
present, she is even the same. Harlots, and vicious women have two, yea
twenty, and can as well be content with one man, as with one eye.

The Quantity of pearls in appearance is very small, but in their operation
great, and virtuall. The virtuous wife is lowly, and nothing in her own eyes;
and speaks as the blessed Virgin in her Magnificat, The Lord has looked upon
the lowliness of his hand-maiden. Yea pearls will cast lustres, being broken
into the least parcels, sparks, and pieces: This virtuous wife at the lowest
ebb, will then most of all show forth her gracious and enobled resolutions.

Lastly, for the efficacy and virtue of pearls is mavelous. For Pearl is
cordial, especially the Rubie, to which pearl this priceles creature is
resembled. Cordial is the pearl Rubie against the disease called the Cordiaca
Passio, which is a wringing of the heart. This virtuous wife dilates the heart
of her husband, which does trust in her fidelity, and so he is not troubled
with any Dubitation.

Cordial also is this pearl the Rubie against the disease of the heart;
called Cordis Syncopen, which is the swouning of the heart. This good virtuous
wife, like to the virtuall and powerful Rubie, cures the drooping heart of her
careful husband, and fortifies it against all assaults in the broils and
turmoyles of this world, both by her sweet company, which is compliable in
sympathizing with him, as also by her good counsel, which is prudent,
provident, and perpetual.

I have read, and have received credentiall relation of those that knew a
great, and prudent Peer of this State, who in his days was reputed the Oracle
of the time; and yet would often say to his familiar friends and intimates,
that he would not leave the advice, counsel, and foresight of his wife which
he had in one year, for half his Revenue. Thus you see the estimation that is
made of pearl, with the fitness of the resemblance. Descend we now from this
land of Goshen, where is light, and let us (though against our wills) look
down unto Sodom, Seboim, Adama, and Gomorrha covered with stinking Sulphur.

Turn the Text, and read it thus. Who can find a vicious woman? for her price
is nullius pretii; unless it be the price of a dog, an hog, an hyaena,
serpent, or surrepent gloe-worme, or the like. Who can? Quis non? Who not?
Vbiquest abulant: Infinitus stultorum numerus; yet one grain of the tree of
life is incomparably more worth than all the whole bulk and body of Medicine.
One grain of gold more worth than a ditch-full of snow, or a chest-full of
pumpeons.

A vicious woman need not be sought for: she is in the open street with an
whores behavior; she lies wait in every corner to entice thee. Her feet
cannot abide in her house: she will be heard if not seen, for she is babbling
Prove. 6. Ibid 7.
and loud, and with an impudent face, and flattering lips she entiseth the
fool, that is taken with her allurements; who is led like an Ox to the
slaughter, and like a fool to the stocks for correction. Her house is the way
to the grave, which goes down to the chambers of death. She will bring a man
to a morsel of bread, and Ecclus. 23.
will hunt for his precious life. She despises her maker, trespaseth against
her husband; and begets her children by another man.

She infrigidates, and dries up the body, makes the heart of man to apostate
(as the wiseman says) diminishes Amittunt gratiam, perdunt gloriam, incurrunt
aeternam damnationem. Aug.
the brain, rots the bones, and ruins the state of a man. Pleasant at first
she is, like Dioscorides Rhododaphne, fair to the eye, but poison to the
taste; and as bitter as worm wood in the side. They that find such a vicious
vermin, are in danger to lose grace, destroy their hope of glory, and incur
eternal damnation.

A vicious woman knows neither good, nor bad, be Neque ju^, neque bonum,
neque aequum, sciunt melius, pejus, prosit, obsit; nihil vident nisi quod
libido suggeret. Unus ^berinae vir suffic^t? Ocvus illud exto^quebis, ut haec
oculo contenta sit uno. Iuven.
it better or worse, beneficial, or hurtful they will do what they lust. As
she is vicious, she is also various; like the Sea, she ebbes and flows. An
husband is a cloak for her villainy; once married, she may fly out at her
pleasure, the name of an husband is a sanctuary to make all good.

What Is a vicious woman? A whore. What Is she? A gulf to devour youth, a
ruin of mankind, a consumer of patrimonies and matrimonies, a downfall of
honor, fodder for the Devil, and a supplement to hell. A bitter honey she
is, sweet poison, delicate destruction, a voluntary mischief, a puddle, and a
dunghill.

Lucretia, a notable queen, confessed, that gluttony, anger, envy, pride,
sacrilege, slaughter, were all borne that day, that a whore began her
profession; for, as she follows it, her pride is greater than a rich churles;
she is more envious than the plague, as malicious as melancholy, and as
covetous as hell. If from the beginning of the world any were Mala, pejor,
pessima: Bad in the Superlative degree, a whore is Long pessima,
Super-superlatively naught. How many (says this prodigious Curtisan) have I
undone, caused to be wounded, and slain? O Antonia, thou feast what I am
without; but within God knows I am a puddle of iniquity, a sink of sin.
Thus Lucretia to Antonia.

Such a wife is a fever Hecticke (as Scaliger says) cured only by death. Mare
haud mare, vos Mare acerrimum (said one by woeful experience of such women). An
Irish Sea; which is called Mare portentosum, is not so turbulent and raging as
a vicious woman. A vicious woman yet one may eschew, but a vicious wife cannot
be avoided, one being once married; which made the Devil, as most Divines
hold, when he had taken away Jobs goods, health, children, friends, to
persecute him the more, used the help of his wicked wife to vex and gaul him,
worse than all the fiends of hell; as knowing the conditions of a vicious woman.

What price then do you take this Creature to be of? Any, or none? If any, it
is the price of a dog, an hog, an hyaena, a crocodile, a camelion, a dragon, a
serpent. See what estimation wise men make of such.

I had rather dwell with a Dragon, or a Lion, than keep house with a vicious
woman: I had rather dwell in a wilderness; no wickedness like to hers: she
makes a sorrowful heart, an heavy countenance, a wounded mind, weak hands,
and feeble knees. A vicious woman, and death, are two of the bitterest things
in the world. The case is all one with the Comique conceit; The day that a man
marries such an one, is all one, as if his friend should bid him go home and
hang himself.

Such a monster as she is, shall be brought out into the Congregation, and
examination shall be had of her children; her children shall not take root, and
her branches shall bring forth no fruit; a shameful report shall she leave,
and the stink of her reproach shall not be put out. A vicious woman in her
choleric mood, is a Pyromantick Devil; in her melancholy and sullen fits, a
Geomantick Hob-goblin; in her phlegmatic disposition, a Hydromantick Hydra; and
in her sanguine and best condition, an Aeromantick Mushrome, Concipit aethera
mente; Men's levior vento, tossed up and down with every fancy. I have read of
Cardanus his father, how he conjured up seven Devils at once: He that
marries a vicious wife has no need to send to a Conjurer; he shall see the
seven deadly sins ruling, reigning, and raging in his Empousa, as the seven
Devils in Mary Magdalen, whiles she was yet no convert. The poor man then
has no remedy but prayer and patience, and fast he must too; for this kind
of Devils goes not out, but by prayer and fasting.

Blessed is the man that never sees this vicious Creature, more blessed that
never hears her, and most blessed that never touches her. So much for this
Quaere. Non quaerendo, sed execrando potius.

Nolo igitur ulterius hanc, vel potius istanc movere camerinam. Valeat illa,
imo longum valeat cum Ila: A virtuous woman is my Theme: the vicious one is a
sink for the Devil to rake in. But what shall we say to the parties of either
sex, as was proposed? First to husbands, and then to wives.

To Men then, as they are husbands. If your wives shall at any time boast, and
brag, as oft-times many pimpernells do, without cause, that they are pearls,
and ought to be esteemed so; do you do no more but bring them to the trial,
as Lapidaries do in the trial of their precious stones.

Four ways they use to try, and discern the true pearl from the
countetfeit. First, by weight: Secondly, by the file: Thirdly, by the form: And
fourthly, by the fire.

First, when they weigh them, they find that the counterfeit 1
stone is many grains lighter than the true one, albeit it be of the same
quantity. The virtuous wife is of a gracious stayedness in her gate, speech,
and whole comportment; she is no giddie, minsing minion, no skittish,
squeamish, light houswife.

Secondly, when Lapidaries bring their precious stones 2
to the file, the touch of the file cannot taste the true one. It abates and
dulls the sharpest, and keenest edged file. This true pearl, this gracious
woman, is such an one; she cannot be touched, she cannot be tasted, she
cannot be tainted by the most imperious, or impetuous Tempter; she is terrible
and dreadful unto them, soon does she abate their keen courage: no wily
wink, no lure of letter will she stoop to, nor to any other wicked and wanton
enticement; no Philtrum, no folly, no fancy can work on her in any kind.
She resists all base conditions, and like a marble pillar, she retorts into
their faces all those arrows (or fools bolts rather) of foolery, wantonness,
and lust fullness that are shot at her.

3ly, when Jewellers try their pearls by their form, they 3
find, that it is impossible for a counterfeit to be of that form and fashion,
that a true one is of. Now it is known, that Forma dat esse rei. The truth is,
that pearls indeed do, by their aspect, satisfy the beholder, but never
satiates them. The true gracious wife so demeanes her self in Mood and Figure
to her husband, that he always leaves her, with appetite to come to her
again: whereas the counterfeit piece (or patch rather) when she has wearied
her self and her husband, nondum satiata recedit.

Lastly, when Lapidaries try the precious from the counterfeit, 4
by fire they find, that the counterfeit moulders away to nothing; whereas the
true pearl will not be the worse. The fiery trial of sorrow, sickness,
poverty and sharpest afflictions daunts not the virtuous wife. She shrinkes
not in an hard time; she is true to her husband ( Melle and fell) in
prosperity and adversity, in weal and woe, in life and in death.

Weigh them then, good men, you that have them, and see, if in the weight they
be not found too light, like Belshazzar Dan. 5.
the grandchild of Nebuchadnezzar.

If they prove counterfeit and light, surely they are not pearls, but bugles,
light every way. In their heels, like the cork there; in their heads, like
the feather in their Caps; and in their hands, like their foolish fan. If you
meet with such, sing

Quid levius Pluma? Flamen: quid Flamine? Flamma: Quid Flamma? Mulier: quid
Muliere? o. Bring them to the file. If they be as weak as water, apt to
receive any impression, as pliable to take any form as Virgins wax; take them
not, esteem them not for pearl; Non sunt, they are very trash and counterfeit
stuff, fit for nothing but to be trampled and trod under foot, and to be cast
out unto the dunghill.

And if, like Swallows, they will honor you, love you, and respect you,
whiles the sunshine of prosperity shines warm upon her; and in time of
affliction slinke, shrink, and sink from her obedience, duty and debonaire
behavior, she is a counterfeit dissembler, Projecta vilior alga. Thus much to
the good husbands, and now to the good wives.

If your husbands, or any other shall say unto you by way of overture, or
cavillation, that the woman was first in the transgression, and so forth, with
such like true objections. Answer you again, but with a great deal of temper
and moderation, saying; Be it so, that the woman was first in the revolt from
God, yet this sore, you know, is salved, and that great breach made up,
repaired and perfected; in that Christ, the world's Savior, was made Gal. 4.
^. Pet. 3. Luke 24.
of a woman; women are made coheirs with men in Christ, partaking of the same
grace and favor of God, and the resurrection of the dead, which is the key of
the Scriptures, was first revealed to a woman. Are not women pearls then?

Oh spare a little, lift not up your head too high, and speak not with a
stiff neck; for, if you grow proud, let me entreat you to put on your
spectacles, call to mind the ancient time; and look back, lest while you plead
your own cause, you implead your husbands. Have you not heard of a lascivious,
treacherous Dalilah, of a disdainful Michol, of a painted Iezabel? and yet
these counterfeits looked for the estimation of Pearls and Jewels; whereas the
world knows there is no such matter; unless they be like pearls in the eye, a
blemish, a bane, and a burden.

Learn your lesson then, and labor to become pearls indeed; you all know,
that then you may justly challenge your right, and stand upon your worth, and
there is good reason for it. A Jewel is an ornament to the best man that
lives on the earth, and so is a virtuous wife. It is Doctrine Apostolical.
The woman is the glory of the man, 1. Cor. 11. Prove. 12.
and the crown of her husband. But this, not every woman, Ex quolibet ligno
non sit Mercurius. Not that woman or wife, who delights in nothing else, but to
deck and pranke up her self with dawbing of gold and silver, and such like;
but that woman who is precious with God for her holy faith; and gracious with
Man, by her discreet and wise carriage, adorning her self with the fear of
the Lord, with chastity, with purity, with humility, and with sincere
obedience. These are the Margaritae, the mother of pearl; these are the true
Conchae, ((...)) as the Graecians call them, true Housewives. The
Hierogliphiques describe, and pourtraite a woman sitting upon a shell-snaile,
when they would signify a good housewife; for, as that Creature carries an
house upon its back, so the good housewife will keep her house over her head,
and stay within doors, unless she have urgent occasions abroad. She is not
of the Tribe of Gad, to be a gadder abroad caulesly, as commonly they do who
are such gadders, and come home cracked, as did wandering Dinah, the daughter of
Jacob, when she went gadding to see the fashions of the Country.

But why does this good woman content her self at home, and keep house so
much? Because she finds true contentment in her self; Virtus est seipsa
contenta, Virtue is content with it self: So is she with reflecting upon her
self, and the gracious favors God has given her. She envieth no other
woman's gift, nor other woman's gown; every one, she knows, have their proper
gift of God, some after this manner, and some after that, 1 Cor. 7. 7. then
none have all. That woman is fair, like Rachel, yet not fruitful; another is
fruitful, yet not fair. Moses was prudent, not eloquent; Solomon wise, not
chaste; Nabal rich, but a fool; Iephtah valorous, but a bastard; Naaman
honorable, but a leper. She observes among her neighbors; One is rich, but
foolish; another wise, but unsucces-full; one witty, but unsettled; some have
one gift, some another, none have all; she therefore is content with that
gift, which God has given her. If she have no children, she murmurs not, for
God, she knows, is a free donor, and a wise disposer of all things, who
divides to every one severally as he will: 1 Cor. 12. She takes notice also
as well of her defect, as of her gifts; by the notice of the one she is
humble, by the other thankful. She is no murmurer to grumble at Gods gifts,
but lets him alone with his own, both wise and gracious dealing. She can
answer all grumblers, with that in the Gospel: Is it not lawful for God to do
what he will with his own? Be it preferment, be it riches, be it honors; may
not he do what he will with his own? She is no malcontent; she sits and
considers, the gifts she has, how small soever they seem, are the free gifts
of Gods mercy, the least whereof she can no ways deserve; and for every one,
she owes praise and thanksgiving: for she can say to her self, What have I,
that I have not received? 1 Cor. 4. 7. And howsoever it is with her, she rests
contented in the Lord, and waits his good pleasure. If she be afflicted, she
resolves, that it is good for her that she should be so, that so she may
learn the statutes of her God. If she live in a private state, she assures
her self it is good for her, that so she may serve God, and be free from the
temptations of better places. If she live in mean estate, she knows that is
good for her too, that so she may serve God without the cares, and
distractions, that great riches do bring with them. It is good for her, if
she have a crazie and sickly body, that so she may remember her end, and
prepare for her departing out of this world. And so in all other cases, she is
still content with her self, and thinks that best, which God allotteth her,
and resolves her self, that if her provision had been better in the world,
her condition might have bin worse toward God. Give me then but a gracious
virtuous wife, and her price is far above Rubies. I read of twelve precious
stones in the Breast Plate of Aaron, of twelve gates in the heavenly Jerusalem,
that are twelve pearls. Give me a gracious virtuous woman, and her worth is
more precious than these. See her super-superlative worth, far above Rubies.
Precious stones have but their several, singular, and individual properties,
splendours and operations; but she alone has them all.

The Ametist drives away Drunkenness, she is sober; and if she have a
drunken Sott to her husband* yet her sweet modesty, sobriety, and Christian
counsel, is* daily admonition, and holy means to reclaim him from that
beastly Sin. The Berill has six angles; she is settled, composed, and steadfast
at all times, and in all places. The Calcedon cures the frantic fantasy;
she, by her stayed deportment, makes a humorous husband to see his lunatic
fits of folly and frenzy. The Chrysoperase quenches lust; she is chaste,
and gives temperate example in the marriage bed. The Chrysolite shines in the
dark, so glittereth she with her rare endowments, albeit she be matched in
the midst of a froward, untoward, and crooked generation: And the Emerald is
always green, she flourishes in her goodness like a Palm tree. The Jasper
is ever pliable in its aspect to the beholder, and is bright and discolored,
as the wearer is either well, or ill affected; she, this gracious wife, like
Hippocrates twins, smileth and weepeth, rejoices and is sad, as she observes
her husband to be disposed. The Iacinth works gentleness and man sweetness in
Nature; nothing more compliable, and more facile to her husbands bent than she
in all things that are good. The Sapphire is of an azure hue, of the color of
the firmament of heaven; her pious mind thinks of nothing more than of heaven
and heavenly things. The Sardis stone is dreadful to wild beasts; she is
awful to all wild tempting beasts of exorbitant and extravagant lust. The
Sardonix works by inclination to sincerity; she does all things with an open
heart, and plain breast, with the integrity of her loyal heart, and the
discretion of her housewife-like hand. And the Topaz operates perseverance;
she is always the same at home and abroad, in her husbands absence as in his
presence. Her Motto is, Semper eadem, as was said before.

Its past dispute then, that this virtuous woman is in her price, worth, and
true repute above Rubies, yea far above Rubies. Singular and several pearls
have singular and several properties; she alone has all these rarities. Et
quid vultis amplius?

Question it not therefore, O ye Sons of men; for, if there be a Summum bonum
here on earth, which may be Christianly named a secondary chief good, it is
(sans question) a gracious and virtuous wife. The reasons are manifest. First,
Nature does nothing in vain, therefore the God of Nature does nothing in
vain. Secondly, All men's actions tend to a primarie end, and there they rest,
otherwise the progress of men's actions would go in infinitum. Thirdly, Man is
a Creature subject to infelicitie, especially in the contrary of this
particular, that must lie so near him; to wit, If a man find a vicious woman,
Quarum infinitus est numerus, and therefore man is capable of happiness,
otherwise he were the most miserable creature of all. Fourthly, to conclude
this point, Man is furnished with a Mind intelligent of honesty and felicity,
and with a Will capable of virtue and goodness.

Many and manifold have been, and are the differences of opinions touching the
Chief Good here in this world; but as long as blindness of mind in the
corrupted heart of man reigns, and the study and musing of crossing and
cross-biting one another does remain together, with the affectation of vain
and vile glory (which is Paramount) this difference will continue until the
second coming of Shilo; for albeit in this life there is no perfect happiness
to be found, no not in the chiefest good, yet we may attain to some degrees
therein; and among other blessings here beneath, a virtuous wife is an
especial help.

Talk with the vulgar, and they will tell you, that the chiefest good here on
earth is no where to be found but in riches, but ah me, they are quite beside
the matter: For, riches may be gotten by unjust and unlawful means; but this
blessing of a virtuous wife can be had by no means, but by good and godly
seeking her in Gods fear, and craving his favor. The owners of riches may be
the scumme of the people; but of this sweet blessing none, but those whom God
loves. Riches are abused to all kind of voluptuous vitiousnesse; this
virtuous Creature will not be abused to any evil turn. Riches are uncertain,
this most certain. Riches satisfy not, this creature does. And in a word,
Riches are not desired for themselves only, but for another end and purpose;
whereas a virtuous wife is desired for her self only, and for no other
purpose.

Talk with a politician, or a Military man, all their Tenet is Honor and
Glory for their chief good; but their Tenet is also most absurd. For, honor
and glory may be achieved by most unworthy grooms; but this blessing cannot.
Honor is fickle, this fast. Honor is more in honorante, than in honorato:
that is to say, More in the power of him that gives the honor, than in him that
receives it. But this transcendent is in the power of the possessor.

Talk with the Learned, and they will tell you, that the Epicures sought to
find their happiness in Pleasure; which opinion, among the Ancient, was
understood in the gross and carnal sense; but the Modern and latter learned
have gone about to mollify, and modifie that conceit; and by Pleasure,
understand not that Pleasure which mortals have common with beasts, but they
thereby understood a pure Contentation, and oblectation of mind, abstracted
from corporeal and gross conceits, arising up in the mind of man from the
knowledge of excellent rarities, and from the actions of honest things.

In the former sense, for a man to marry a wife only for corporal and
carnal pleasure, as the end of his mixing himself with her, is most bestiall,
and most unworthy a Christian. For, man knows right well, that that pleasure
is common also to brute beasts; brings with it tediousness, and woeful effects
in the excess thereof; makes a man effeminate, and unfit for masculine and
brave undertakings; stirs up a man oft-times to most desperate and damnable
designs; may be hindered by diseases, old age, and many other occurrences; and
it does fight against all vertu^s, especially against Temperance and Modesty.
True it is, that all living Creatures desire that pleasure in the sensitive
appetite; but for a Christian man to set his aim, end and bent upon that,
which is common also to brute beasts, and to seek his Summum Bonum in the
inferior, ignoble and sensual part of man, Non sani est hominis, non sanus
juret Orestes.

For, a Christian man will soon resolve the case plainly, knowing, that bodily
pleasure was not in the Creation of man; for, in the primitive purity, the
sensitive part was subject to an holy and heavenly mind, made and framed
according to the image of God; but this sensual pleasure came from corruption
and sin in our revolt from God, and fettered our Nature, insomuch, that the
mind of man, becoming destitute of its former sanctimony, neither would, nor
could command the sensitive power, unless that breach be made up by God in
Christ, or restrained, as we note it was in diverse Heathen; as in Lucretia,
the Roman Lady; and in Penelope, the Grecian Dame, and the like.

Talk with all the ancient learning of the Stoics, Peripateticks, and
Academicks, and they will tell you by common consent ( choro consono) that the
chiefest good is no where to be found, but in virtue. And albeit they had a
seeming difference about the habit of virtue, and the exercise thereof; yet
they agree in this, that virtue beautifies the best part of man, that is, his
mind, makes him most like to his God, cannot be taken from him by any means
but by the permission of God, and causes all inferior and subordinate
favors, as Riches, Honor, Health, and the like, to be at his service, and to
become blessings unto the owners.

So then, whether a man begin with the Stoics, and place his felicity in the
habit of virtue: or with the Peripateticks go on to the action and exercise of
virtue, it may easily be reconciled. For, as the one thought not the habit of
virtue only to be sufficient to happiness, unless it went on to the action: so
the other thought no action of virtue to be good, unless it issued from the
internal habit; for that the purpose of doing well is never hindered, much
less taken away from a virtuous creature, but still upon every emergent
occasion, a virtuous man or woman is ready to proceed from the habit to the
act, and exercise thereof with all cheerfulness and alacrity. It is not
therefore (good women) either health, or beauty, or nobleness of birth, or
riches, or honor, and so forth, that makes you virtuous; but when you labor,
and study, and strive to be good in your selves, and to do good to others. It
is not the Pearls and Jewels that you lade your selves withal, and think you
shine with them, that makes you the more esteemed with wise husbands, or with
other wise men; but the habit of your virtuous mind, and the excellency of
your virtuous actions, these makes you gracious with God, and glorious with
men, and so to be prized far above Rubies.

But do you think your selves ever the more virtuous, ^no filo villa^um
in^unt precia. Hie^on.
or more precious with God or good men, when your ropes of pearl are so rich,
that upon one rope hang the prices of diverse Lordships? as St Hierome tells us
in the life of Paul the Eremite.

Or do you repute your selves ever the better, when Tertul. de Habitu mulieb.
Sueton. Sen^c. de vita beata.
your tender neck carries woods and Islands upon it, and at your ears do hang
dangling Jewels worth the Revenues of a rich Family? or when your mad fancies
this way bring your husbands into base servilitie by your hanging two or three
patrimonies at each ear? And do Plini^.
you boast and brag, that a pearl is a woman's sergeant to wait upon her, when
she shows her self abroad?

Or do you suppose, that any wise man can make account of you, when you do
not blush to paint your cheeks only, but your eyebrows also? when you frisle
your hair, and curle it too with hot irons? or when you dye your hair, or wear
that which is bought, in stead of your own, and so carry a lie in sight upon
your heads? or when one shall come into your chambers, and find infinite boxes
filled with loathsome trash of sundry kinds of colors and compositions for the
dawbing and hiding of your deformities, the very sight and smell whereof is
able to turn a man's stomach?

O ye fond and foolish daughters of men, can ye suppose, that your niceness
in your apparel and dressing makes you the more respected with good and godly
people? that if but an hair be amiss, or a paultrie pin, you must call a
Counsel about you for the reforming of it, as if your credit, or your life in
question were; nay, if but any little crannie appear through any part or hole
of your fan, or if a fly chance to sit upon it, you presently complain, that
you were not borne among the Cimmerians.

Do you think, that you are virtuous women in these Sardonichas, Smaragdos,
Adamantas, Jaspidas u^o, versat in articulo Stella (Severe) men's. Mar^.
and such like fantasticks? or when you get upon one joint of your least finger
a Sardonix, a Smaragd, a Jasper, and a Diamond, as the fond, foolish,
fantastic Courtier Stella in Martial is said to wear? or when, like Lollia
Paulina, ye go beset and bedeckt all over with Emrauds and Pearls ranged in
rows one by another round about your Tires, Caules, Borders, Peruges of hair,
Boongraces, Chaplets, Carcanets, upon your wrists in Bracelets, upon your
fingers with Rings, that ye glitter and shine again as ye mince along? What
with all these can you make of your selves, but idle housewives and idols of
vanity?

Will you hear the Prophet of the Lord round you in the ear? The Lord says,
Because the Daughters of Es. 3. 16. etc
Sion are haughty, and walk with stretched out necks, and De^ pimur specie,
gemmis, anroque teg^tur omnia: Pars mini^a est ipsa puel^a sui. Ovid.
with wandering eyes, walking and mincing as they go, and making a tinkling
with their feet; Therefore shall the Lord make their heads bald, and discover
their secrets, and bereave them of their slippers, caules, round tires, sweet
balls, bracelets, bonnets, borders, tablets, earrings, mufflers, vailes,
wimples, curling-pins, glasses, fine linen, their hoods, and lawnes: And
instead of sweet savor there shall be stink, instead of an ornament a rent,
instead of braiding their hair baldness, instead of a stomacher sackcloth,
and instead of beauty burning, and for their jollitie and mirth, they shall
sit in desolation upon the ground.

For, in the old time, the women (says St Peter) that trusted in God, did not
thus attire themselves in all outward bravery, but their virtue was such as to
look that 1 Pet. 3. 4.
the hid man in the heart might be uncorrupted, clothed with a meek and quiet
spirit, which is before God a thing much set by. Herein you may rejoice if you
be thus minded, otherwise all your pert and proud boasting is vile and vain:
and so I leave you to ponder these things, and if you be virtuous you shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord.

Yea, if you be the strong woman, as the Text is rendered, and your strength be
the comfort of your age, and wit the grace of your strength; yet virtue is the
guide of your wit; for, your age without strength is tedious, strength without
wit dangerous, and wit without virtue hurtful and pernicious. For, virtue is,
like a rich stone, best plain set, and surely virtue is best set in a comely
body, albeit not of delicate or delicious feature. Virtue gives and gets
favor; beauty has the only color, and that is the best favor, which a
picture cannot express, for that beauty makes virtues shine, and vices blush.
And there I leave you, good women, and return again to the men.

What if I read my Text in favor and behalf of the good women, and make a
Quaere: Who can find a virtuous Man, or Husband? and put in the Quare, for his
price is far above 1000000000 millions of millions, or what can be thought
on, in the latitude and extent of man's invention: Doubtless the masculine
virtue out-strippeth the feminine multis parasangis.

For, the soul of a virtuous man is the proper subject of virtue; the powers
whereof in the rational part do command, and in the irrational part do
obey. In his rational part, the understanding in the Theorie conceives of
things aright, and in the practice does them rightly.

His memory, which is servant to his understanding, records things in
general, as Notions of good and evil; and in special, either does, or not
does, as the Objects be either good or evil. His other part of the reasonable
soul is his Will; which follows, or avoydeth that, which his right reason
judges to be done or undone. This Will of this virtuous man respects the end
of all his actions, yea and the means too that conduce to the end.

The Affections of this virtuous man, are the Object of virtue, in the
moderation and subjection whereof his masculine virtue is chiefly busied. He
also is well aware, that the cause of virtue is not in the temperature of the
body, as Galen, and some other Philosophers thought, as if a choleric
complexion caused men to be of a fierce and fiery condition; a melancholic,
made men sad and thinkeative; a sanguine, merry and compliable; a phlegmatique,
lazy and sleepie. True it is, that the temperature of the body, be it either
complete or crasie, may incline a man; for we see by experience, that choler
in a man, being vehemently kindled, drives him often into a frenzy, to much
melancholy, into madness; abundance of phlegm that is redundant casts a man
into sottish foolerie.

These, I say, may incline a man, but by education, custom and learning they
may outwardly be corrected, and inwardly, by the inspiration and influence of
divine grace, they may be amended. For, we see by experience, that many men
are wise, and of great temperance and moderation, whose complexion does show
the contarie.

Men are learned, and their knowledge in learning stirs them up to masculine
and virtuous undertakings. For, by knowledge and learning, the masculine mind
of a man is inured to turn it self from the gross and muddie things here
below, and from the objects of fond affections, by which means occasions are
cut off, that oft-times draw the mind to vicious courses. Secondly, by his
learning he knows the Nature and Causes of things, and can esteem of them
as they are; and so knows how to magnify things of worth, and to vilify
vain things: yea, and those things, which to the vulgar seem admirable and
dreadful, he knows are unworthy his cognizance or respect. Thirdly, in his
notice of things natural and supernatural, he sees many causes and
enforcing reasons, why a man should be inflamed to virtue, and to detest and
abominate vicious living. For, he understands the Nature and Excellency of
the Creator, and labors to be like him, as knowing, that all things under the
Sun are created of God for man; and therefore man is stirred up to serve, and
to be thankful to his so gracious a Benefactor. Besides, man's learning shows
him in the very Creatures the impressions of virtue; in some of temperance, in
others of valor and chastity* in all a natural instinct and industry to
undergo those parts and duties which are proper unto them; whereby he is
moved to think how unworthy and unjust a thing it is for man to be wanting in
his duty. Lastly, learning prescribes and sets forth the true form of virtue,
proposes the precedents of worthy men, who by their excellent virtues have
achieved honor, glory, and rewards of great account; and contrariwise,
sets out the woeful ends, and ignominious deaths of such as have sold
themselves to all kind of vitiousnesse; whereby the masculine mind of a
virtuous man is easily endued, and at the last vanishes with the love and
admiration of virtue, and with a detestation of vice and vanity.

Moreover, this virtuous man knows where to seek for virtue, even in the
midst of a number of vices. For, as in a circle there is one only center in
the midst of the circle; and all the points running from the center are not
centers, but make a recesse from it; so virtue being but one and singular, and
vice being various and manifold, is to be sought in the midst of vices, or if
you will, in the midst of affections, and not in their extremities.

And for that this Medium, or Mean, wherein this masculine virtue is to be
sought and found, is either Arithmeticall or Geometrical; this virtuous man
knows that it is not found in an Arithmeticall mean, which is Equality of
Excesses, but in a Geometrical mean, which is Equality of Proportions. He
also knows the reason hereof. For that virtue does not always make unequal
recesse from either extreme; but it often falls out, that virtue makes a nearer
access to the vice which is in the excess, than to the vice in defect, and
often times the contrary. As for example sake: The virtue of valor draws nearer
to boldness, than to cowardice and base fear. Temperance another virtue more
inclines to abstinence which is in the defect, than to intemperance which is in
the excess.

This neernesse also is either greater or lesser, as the occasions and several
objects do require, which this virtuous man knows are seven comprised in one
verse.

Quis, Quid, Vbi, Quibus auxilijs, Cur, Quomodo, Quando. Which circumstances he
diligently weighes and considers, to the end, that every virtuous act of him
may be directed according to the rule of right reason, and the golden mean of
comely and equal proportion; the Law of God being his only and exact rule to
square all and every one of his actions by* yea, but stay you there a little,
by your leave, says the feminine sex. Where may we find the man thus
accoutred? I answer, That there lives not the man but has his defect, yea and
fault V^s memo sine nascitu^: O^timus ille est, qui minimis urge^ur.
too if you will: he is best yet that has fewest faults, and whose virtues
do surpass his vices; which a fond and foolish woman cannot judge of, nor
discern neither.

Whence comes all that sweet concord and cohabitation of contraries, that are
matched together as man and wife, in the whole world? Is it not from the sweet
virtue of one of them, or of both? O how unequally are some yoaked?

This man is unequally yoaked with a daring, audacious and impetuous dame; had
he not virtue of bearing and forbearing, both in his christian and civil
carriage, what issue could be expected, but ruin and wretchedness? Better
therefore is the patient man, than the stout and strange; and he that by his
masculine virtue subdues Prove. 16. 3^.
himself, than he that takes a City.

Another is unequally yoaked with an intemperate, lustful and unsatiable
patch, which makes the very marriage bed loathed and abominable; all delicates
cannot satisfy her delicious, luxurious and lascivious palate; and commonly, a
liquorous and sweet-mouthed taste has a leacherous touch of the same quality,
and a smack of the same smoke at the other end of the house. If now this
masculine, gracious, and virtuous man had not moderation to modifie, and
temperance to order and guide things in a golden mean, what would or could
ensue but penury?

A third is unequally yoaked, either to a base scraping and avaritious scrat,
or to a profuse, prodigal and prodigious unthrift. If then the masculine
virtue of a good, free and liberal husband did not intervene to gain and get
a state (whence it ought) by honest labor and a godly calling (not by dice,
lust, or usurie) and to use it when it is gotten with moderation and measure,
and in bestowing his beneficence to erogate it to none but to honest persons,
and for honest causes, to proportion that which is given, to give it to whom
and when it ought, as to those that are indigent and want our relief, or to
such as have well deserved of us, or to such whom vicinity, community, and
society of commerce do commend unto us, to give it cheerfully (that we do
give) and without regret; and to give out of thy cisterne, not out of thy
fountain, lest that thereby become dry and exhausted: If then I say, this
gracious virtue of this good husband did not intervene, what could be expected,
but that the prodigality of the one would soon bring a Noble to nine pence, a
fair Estate to a morsel of bread, and make a Farmer a beggar; and the
baseness of the other make them and their progeny to be hated? and if they be
left rich with such proling, scraping, and penurious patcherie, they are left
but as a prize to the next birds of prey that dwell about them.

A fourth is unequally yoaked with an immodest piece, who can do little but
open her mouth wide most petulantly, either in her own praise, or in the laud
of her other husband, without any respect of time, or place, or persons, to no
purpose in the world but to vent some of her venom to her present occasion:
whether would her tongue walk, think you, had she not a modest, moderate,
and verecundious husband, to restrain and overawe her over-daring, saucy, and
impetuous world of evil in her mouth, with the sweet rules of masculine and
matchless modesty? would she not make the whole world (that knows her) to be
weary of her petulant prating, and foolish Pharisaicall boasting? willing her,
to bethink her self of the precepts and counsels of wisdom. Let the mouth of
a stranger praise thee, not thine own mouth; Prove. 27. 2.
and the lips of another, and not thine.

A fifth is unequally yoaked to an angry, fretfull, and revengefull fury, who
is like gunpowder; touch it with fire, and it is presently in your face; touch
her once with the least coal, down into the Gunner-roome gets she, and lets
fly her broad sides at you; being thus suddenly moved, she is enraged,
implacable and cruel: Did not now this masculine man of virtue interpose, that
nothing should be rashly done, but as Athenodorus gave the rule to Alexander,
if at any time his mind began to be stirred up and moved to anger, he should
not speak until he had tacitly to himself repeated the letters of the
Greek Alphabet, that so his mind might in the interim settle and be more
composed, and then he might answer and reply with judgment. And as blessed
Ambrose the Bishop of Millaine gave in rule to Theodosius the Emperor, that
he should at no time sign his imperial mandates for the execution of
capital offenders, but he should ever respite the execution for thirty days
after the mandate was out, that in the mean time the heat of his offended
mind might be appeased, the justice of the decree of death might be weighed;
and, if there were cause, he might revoke, and call back his sentence.

A sixth is unequally yoaked to an unfriendly, lying, and uncivil slut. In the
first, she is wayward in all congresse, in conference difficult and tetrick,
in counsel contentious, and in colloquie a perpetual dictator. In the second,
she is a palpable dissembler: No Popish Emissarie has more aequivocations; no
Jesuit more mental reservations; no scoffing Ismaelite more frumps and
ironicall dashes, carrying one thing glib in her tongue, and another thing hid
in her heart: arrogance and vanity are the whelps of this spiteful hypocrite.
In the third, she is scurrulous, rusticke, and unsavorie. Did not the masculine
virtue of a gracious husband stay the bells, what would become of her? His
sweet and man-suete affability to all, his civil (not Logical or
Metaphysicall) truth as it refers to the life of man in all things, his
urbanitie, festivitie, and fair debonaire behavior, condemns, if not corrects
all that misshapen, miscreant-like, and mischievous hodg-pot and medley of her
lewd, lying, uncivil, and brainsick tongue.

For, he well knows, that fair language, and a faithful Pro. 22. 11.
heart is the delight of a King. That a foolish man Pro. 11. 12.
will despise and despite his neighbor, but a wise man is as a deaf man to
all evil report. That a prudent man Pro. 17. 27.
will restrain his talk, and an intelligent person is of a cold and temperate
spirit. That as vapors and wind Pro. 25. 14.
wherein is no rain (and so do no good) is a foolish body that boasts of that
which is not. That a Bard or Pro. 25. 11.
fool breathes out all his spirit at once, but a wise man will stay it back.
That a joyous heart is physic to the Pro. 17. 22.
body, but a melancholic disposition dries the bones. That the masculine
mind of a prudent man does muse Pro. 15. 14.
of knowledge, but the mouth of a fool feeds himself Prove. 15. 14.
fat with fooleries.

A seventh is unequally yoaked to a shameless, beastly, and incorrigible
brute, who is neither capable of counsel, nor willing to be reformed, nor
cares for instruction; but she despises all restraint of her madness, and
has cast the Law of God and good manners behind her back: Impudent she is,
and has steeled her whores forehead, that she stands in awe of nothing that
may shame her. And for that this her excess does further make recesse from the
golden mean, the more incurable she is: And, Cui pudor perijt, is perijt
antequam perijt. But this virtuous husband steps in and would pluck her out of
the fire, but she will not, Curavit Babylonem, and non est sanata: yet his
verecundiousness blusheth for her impudent behavior, and his just conceived
displeasure for her incorrigibilitie is restrained with limits: for, we should
not be incensed with wrath because of evil doers, nor fret at the notoriously
wicked; in that there is no end of evil, Prove. 24. 19.
and the lamp of the cursed shall be put out.

But of all things take heed, O ye Sons of Men, that you be not yoaked with a
fool. For, bray a fool in a mortar, and he will not leave his foolery; and
of all fools beware of a she fool, as of all Bears take heed of a
shee-Beare. Talk with such an one and persuade her to wisdom, she has no
capacity for that; but either out of the concavity or convexity of her hollow
scull she frames Chimaeraes, and so buries her self and the poor man in
mis-lead error, mizeeled ignorance, and voluntary blindness: Deal with such
an one, she deals with thee summo jure, cavilling at thy cleerest judgment
with an idle interpretation of her own foolish fancy.

Not unlike the Thracians, who (as Strabo relates it) making truce with the
Boeotians for some certain days, did notwithstanding depopulate and spoil
their territories in the night season. Or not unlike as when Papilius, in the
Capitulations of peace made with Antiochus, had condescended and capitulated,
that the Romans had left half the shipping to Antiochus, did afterward cut the
ships in two, and left one half so divided to Antiochus, and burnt up the
other. No knowledge, or skill, or prudence, or understanding, or wisdom of
thine can beat any goodness into her fools hide; but happily when she is
inwardly touched with her own folly, she does shake her idle head, and so
you have a fool for your labor.

In the last place, let the case be put, that this virtuous man finds a
virtuous wife. O how sweet is that conjunction? the blessing is doubled to
either, the relation is Cherubicall, the reflection Seraphicall, the
consummation of their loves Angelical. And so I am by Gods favor come to the
last point premised in my division of the practique and useful part of this my
Labor, to wit, as my Text reflects upon the Bride and Bridegroom; and first
to him and then to her.

He ought first seriously and sadly to consider, that Pearls and precious
stones are not to be found upon every shore; for there is a plurality of
peebles, but a paucitie of pearls, as I have said more at large before. Have
you touched on a happy shore? stoop down and take up your pearl with all
cheerfulness and gladness of heart.

In the second place, having found this Jewel, it requires your best skill to
know how to wear it. (...): Many can drive the plough, but few can hold and
guide it aright.

In the third place, Have you found a virtuous wife? lose her not by
negligence, or by giving her an evil example, or reading her a lewd lesson, as
too too many do.

In the fourth place, Is she a Pearl? tread her not under foot, so do hogs;
and in a word, be you ever mindful how injurious you are to God your Donor,
that gave her unto you the Donee, so incomparable a donation, lest you provoke
the Almighty to displeasure, and he take her from you, and you take another
that will be a pearl of vexation, and trouble to your eyesight, and she become
an eyesore unto you, and an heartsore too.

In the fifth place, call to mind your happiness, and be cheerful in it: you
have God in this your great business as Efficient in your marriage, who has
made you two one ( consensu Partium) by consent; and this is the essence of
your conjunction. Your spouse and you, being Gods workmanship, and created male
and female, are the matter in this union. The lawful joining of you together
in the face of Gods people, Consensu Parentum, with consent of Parents, is the
form and congruitie of your blessing: The fear of the Lord, which is clean,
and the procreation of Children, whereby God may by glorified, and the kingdom
of Christ increased, is the end of your marriage. Comfort your self in this,
for these be the causes of all your future happiness.

In the sixth place, remember happiness never comes to a man without holiness;
and conceive, that a good (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) means and
outward estate be thought to dull and take off the edge of Ecclesiastical
persons from their sacred offices and performances? The same might, and
sometimes did befall of old; so prone is man to sin: but Ecclesiastical
persons have (and should make use of) their religious knowledge to use
temporal things aright; if they do not, good Laws established in a Christian
Commonwealth are of force to prevent or cure that malady. The Gospel by Gods
great goodness as it has brought unto us a better covenant, and better
promises; so it has bettered and enlarged the temporal means of all estates:
Is it fit here to make the Ecclesiastical estate an exception from the
general? Let that, I pray you, be duly considered: God, thanks be unto him
for his gracious goodness, has now made room enough for his people, as for
Israel in Canaan: and what needs ships having sea room at will to clash and
fall foul one against another? God is good unto all, and can open the windows
of heaven and pour out a blessing on all estates. Only let the civil and
spiritual estates, as two strong pillars, mutually conjoyne their forces, and
in Christian love support the whole frame of the building, and so make each
other the more steady and strong.

But further, Is it fit that our ecclesiastical persons should be termed
Lords?

Answer, first, It pleased God (as above was showed) to vouchsafe titles of his
own to Civil and Ecclesiastical persons; as these to the ecclesiastical,
Sar Prince, Nasi Prelate, Rosh head, Architecton chief builder, etc. These, as
also the term Adon, (...), Lord, are in the highest and most eminent sense due
to God only, for he is a Lord doing what ever he pleases of his own
authority: yet in an inferior and subordinate sense, Sara called Abraham Lord;
so did the Hittite, Genesis 23. Abraham's servant is called Lord, Genesis 24.
18. So is any master of servants, Exodus 21. 5. Col. 4. 7. and (which comes
home to this present objection) one of the four and twenty Presbyters. Apoc.
7. 14. is called Lord: And if so, then this term is not denyable to Bishops.

Secondly, as others in chief places subordinate to Princes are high and
honorable Lords, so may the chief Ecclesiastical persons be venerable and
reverend Lords: because in all times, from the worlds beginning until Christ's
days, Ecclesiastical persons were of great esteem: in the primitive times
they were chief governors of the Church under Christ; and for their sacred
employments sake, being men answerable to their calling, ought doubtless to
have a near subordination to Christian Princes; and if the kingdom of God by
their vigilance be first and chiefly sought, all other matters of this world
will be the more prosperous.

Thirdly, Though God in some sense (as above) does deny certain titles to men,
yet he never was against words of due respect and observance to superiors; nor
indeed are such words blame worthy: so that they be not As Judas his Hail
Master.
bare and mere complement, and not cordiat: or As was Herod's applause. Acts 12.
19.
hyperbolicall to puff up men with pride. Yea, I know not whether due titles
be not now more studiously and frequently fitted to men's persons: Because, 1.
Some sects set themselves to vilify them. 2. Because it is not amiss thereby
to put some great ones in mind to be Lords, defending the innocent, as well as
to have a title to rule over others in the Lord: to be Lords providing for the
welfare of all under them, as well as to have a power commanding them. God has
been bountiful to Ecclesiastical persons many ways, and they who truly
consider that, will not be strict handed to them.

What has been here spoken in their behalf, was occasioned by some, who upon
faulty arguments (as I conceive) judge amiss of their places and callings:
These have (as Saint Paul in like case said) compelled me to speak what I by
Gods word find to be truth in this point, and submit whatsoever I have herein
written to the religious, grave, and mature judgment of all who be grown men
in Christ, and by reason of use have their senses exercised to discern both
good and evil.

FINIS.

