CORONA MINERVAE. OR A MASQVE Presented before Prince CHARLES HIS HIGHNESS,
The Duke of York his Brother, and the Lady Mary his Sister, the 27th of
February, at the College of the MVSEUM MINERVAE.

LONDON, Printed for WILLIAM SHEARES. 1635.

Corona Minervae. A Masque PRESENTED BEFORE Prince CHARLES his Highness, The
Duke of YORK his Brother, And the Lady MARY his Sister, the 27th. of February,
at the College of the Museum Minervae.
A Curtain being drawn, there is discovered a Frontispice, whereon the Image
of Minerva is seen sitting upon a stone, placed betvveene two Returns of a
broken Arch, supported by two Brass statues of Mars, and Mercury, standing in
neeches of Corinthian Work: Under, within a Prospective is seen, a paved
Gallery environed on either side and terminated with Dorike Columns, which
flying away, Minerva presents her self attired in her proper Habit.

Over the Entrance in a Square was Written

Corona Minervae.

Minerva. WHat rare unvaliew'd Jewels are here sent,
As if the Gods themselves strived to present
Minerva with their choicest Gems, and Grace
Her cabinet, as yet too mean a place
To hold such Deities, who more adorn
This presence, than the rosy fingered Morn
(Guiding the East for the uprising Sun)
Does beautify his Carre, ready to run
His daily Circle round. It has been said,
The Friends and Servants of the Iove-borne Maid
Are poor, except those, whom Bellonas hand
Enrols for Soldiers of Mars warlike band,
Who sometimes want their pay too: But now see
A treasure here deposited with me,
Out-valuing all the Riches of the Earth;
Three Pledges of sweet Peace, whose happy Birth
Blesses this present Age, and Crown's it so,
That former Ages past, could they but know
How fortunate this is, they all would mourn
They past so soon, or else would back return,
To see an Age, wherein both Arms and Arts
Flourish at height, and both share equal parts.

Time enters here to Minerva in a Party colored Robe half White, half
Black, fringed with Silver, with one wing of a Swan, another of a Batt. Time.
Great Mistrisse of both Arms and Arts, it is true,
Your exploration of their praises due,
They are the Blessings, which the Ages past
Fell ignorant, and unworthy-of to taste.
And I old Time, that of those Ages saw
The first, and last, till now could never draw
Air, that so pleased me, as in this blessed Clime,
That Crown's with Youth the old-old head of Time.
All breath's Panchaian here: nay only this
Is the clear Western that Favonian is,
Perpetual Spring creating. Gods here
Your twofold Discipline, in which you were
So late distracted by the world's neglect,
Shall reassume it is ancient fair respect.

Minerva. Time, you speak comfort to me.


Time. And no more
Than my glad Daughter Truth is spreading over
This happy Monarchy, whose supreme head
(In highest Heaven his name is registered)
By Power and Wisdom, will the use advance
Of Arms and Arts, above dispight and chance.

Minerva. Time, thou have made me happy.


Time. No, it is he
That has felicitated you and me,
Who has already by defensive Arms,
Beat back the boasts, that were intended harms,
Which Industry is crowned with a peace,
That daily will bring forth the Arts increase;
You may observe the assurance of it here
In these, who he is pleased (to grace your Sphere)
Should leave their own; each an illustrious gem,
Proper to his Imperial Diadem;
I could with Joy and wonder dwell an age
Under their smiles; from an old man, turn Page
To wait upon their persons: break my Glass,
And pick up sand by sand, ere I would pass
From their divine aspects; use all delay
Had not the Fates decreed Time must away.

Minerva. But not so fast, good Time, your haste may make
Their Graces leave me too.

Time. I Will undertake,
Sacred Minerva, they will not, but grace
You and your Arts, whilst there is time and place,
Yet ere I go, for I must stay a while
In this fair presence, and my haste beguile
With a report of an unlook't for crew,
Coming to see your Princely guests and you.

Minerva. Time, what are they?


Time. The seasons of the year
Having discovered the convention here,
All equally possessed with an ambition,
To see and to be seen without commission
From me, or from the Months, or powerful Sol,
That wont is to infranchise, or control
Them at his pleasure, now are altogether
Broke loose, and filled with gladness, posting hither.
Cold Winter stretching out his cramped up nerves,
Strives to outstrip the Jolly Spring, who serves
Summer the like, and with her nimble feet
Runs through her heat, till they with Autumn meet;
At last, they all conjoined come on their way,
Like the whole year contracted in this day,
Each season has a several present too,
In which they strive each other to outdo,
As if by general warrant from their Fate,
They all were always to attend this State.

Minerva. It Is welcome news.


A Confusion is here heard of several voices of Birds, and Beasts, such as are
peculiar to every season. Again here several noyses and voices are heard
confusedly of Birds and Beasts, as exactly performed to the life, that no man
could distinguish them. Upon which, Time. Hark, they are all at hand,
And all their Heralds, both by air and land,
The Birds and Beasts of every season met,
In a most singular discord; hark how they set
Throat against throat; the Wren and Red-brest swel
To be above the Lark and Philomell.
The Cuckoo with the Howlet strives, and now
The bleating Lamb joys against the lowing Cow,
All in confusion, and so shall you see,
Will the contention of the Seasons be,
Till I be stickler. See they come, standby.

Here enter the four Seasons rushing in, Winter, Spring pulling him back,
Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter striving for precedence. Springs habit was
of green Taffata, fringed with silver; and figured with flowers, a Chaplet of
several flowers upon her head. Spring. VVinter, keep back, I claim priority.


Winter in a long Gown of freeze, his hair and beard all made of Icicles, a
Garland of Hollies and Ivy intwin'd upon his head. Winter. No wanton Girl, I
must have first access,
My age and honor can require no less.

Summer in a straw colored Robe of Taffata, with a Garland of Corne-flowers,
and blew Bottles upon his head. Summer. I claim it from you both.


Autumn his garment of Peuke-colour, a pruning knife in his hand, as a
Vintiger, a Chaplet of Grapes and Damosens upon his head. Autumn. Why, Summer
you?
The place to Autumn properly is due.

Spring. How can that be? Look into every race,
Do you not find, that Youth takes the first place.
Was not the whole world young before 'twas old?

Winter. And what of that, proud girl? thy reason's cold,
Colder than is my Frost. Did not the Spring
Of the old world rise from an elder thing,
What else was Chaos? hah?

Spring. I mind not that.


Winter. Fond Lass, thou mind'st, say, do, thou know not what.


Summer. I do: for Summers strength is at full growth,
Like middle age in man.

Antumne. I would be loath
To give the knowledge of declining Age
Which Autumn shadows, for the Summers rage.

Winter. You Are all against me, and yet it does appear,
None is another Friend.

Spring. Yet to the year
We all do grateful Service, thou do none.

Winter. I would hear that.


Spring. In me the Spring, it is known,
The Grass, the Grain, the Leaf, the Flower, the Fruit,
The Birds that sing, the Beasts, the Fishes mute
Take their beginnings.

Summer. Make no tedious tale,
You begin well, I ripe and perfect all.

Spring. In that you wrong me Summer: For you do
Out of my hands take Work and Credit too.

Summer. I wrong not you so much as Autumn me;
For he gets all the Crop from me and thee.

Autumn. But all the store I gather for the year,
Winter devours, or spoils.

Winter. Pray Sirs forbear,
You increase all, you ripen all you say,
You gather all, I spend all, and best may.
I am the careful Husband of the Earth,
That gives her comforts after every Birth,
In which you wear her out, or bring her low
Past hope, that from her teeming womb should grow
Ever more timely Fruits: I kindly then
(That she may live and propagate again)
Quench her feint thirst with plenteous showrs of rain
Wherewith I fill her veins, and drown her pain.
Then having made her bed as soft below,
I cover her with Swan down, you call Snow,
Which keeps her warm, so lay I her to rest:
And for her lying-in make many a Feast
Of her late store, for mortals that do pray
To see her blithe again another day.

Spring. Which day would never come, were not with me.


VVinter. Nor thou with it, did not I set her free.


Summer. This strife will grow unto an endless fit.


Autumn. Would we had Time here to determine it.


Time. Time is at hand, who gives an instant charge
Distinctly, that each one of you enlarge
Himself by practice, show what you can do,
Before the Presence you aspire unto.
What Presents, or what Pastimes you have brought
To please these Glories, whom all you have sought
T'endeere your service to.

All Four. I have the best.

Here every one offered Baskets of fresh Fruits and Flowers.
Time. Nay one at once, for whilst you all contest
Each to be first, you but confusion make;
Let Time then govern you, for order sake:
Seasons, I promise you both first and last,
And all shall equally their favors taste.

All four. We all obey.


Time. Then thus I order ye,
Out of your discord to raise harmony,
Presents you have brought I see of fruits, and flowers,
Leave them with me; whilst from their Caves and Bowers,
Each season summon forth and here advance
A pair of his attendance in a dance,
To move delight.

All four. Immediately it is done.


Here as Time speaks, the Seasons go off. First, Spring, then Summer, Autumn
next, and last Winter, and immediately, as they depart, the several voices are
heard distinctly, and in order according to the words of Time. Time. First
Spring lead you the way, then every one
In order follow, let your Heralds sound
Each to his season, as the year goes round:
The Spring begins her part already, hark!
The evening Lamb, and morning early Lark
Lead her her way, the merry Cuckoo too
Busy in's office; Summer, now go you,
Now mark the Joy the Fawn and Swallow takes,
Of which there is more then one a Summer makes,
To welcome her; now Autumn take your turn,
Lest Summers too long reign your Harvest burn:
The Thrush now chaunts her notes at his approach,
And the glad Bore-pig having escaped the broach
At the last Fair, runs wild about to taste
The scattered grain, and the sweet fatting maste.
Now follow Winter whilst your Robin sings,
Over the half dead earth, to wake the Springs,
In her cold veins, hark how the hoarse grown Cow
Low's for her fodder, and to whit to whow
Madge Howlet cries, for cold she'as in her feet,
But other music now for Dauncers meet.

Here enter to dance, Emblem of the Spring.
a Frog followed by a Fisherman. To them, Of the Summer.
a Sheepsherer leading a Ram. To them, Of the Autumn.
a Drunken Butcher holding a Pig by the tail. Of Winter.
To them a Chimney-sweeper and a Cat. All to several strains of agreeing
music. At length all being entered, they join in a Dance. The Dance ended.
Time. Creatures be gone, and let your Muses meet
With fluent numbers, and harmonious sweet
Voices, to sing, of all their presents here
The worth and rarity, and let the near
Adjoining Woods, Rocks, Valleys, Caves, and Hills
Resound their ecchoing helps to grace their skils,
While I their several presents over-view,
The Spring brings here all that is rare, and new,
Of early flowers and fruits, such as to name
In other seasons might beget a blame,
For longing Ladies sakes. The Summer brings
Gifts no less dainty, for her offerings;
So Autumn, and so Winter, so all bear
At once, the rarities of all the year.
Yet let not my dull talk attempt to wrong,
T'anticipate the Subject of their Song,
But let the woods, rocks, etc.

Here are sung the several Songs by several voices, with Symphanies betwixt,
and a Chorus: during which, Time peruseth the several presents, as he
discovers them orderly: All which are expressed in the Song. The Seasons Song.
Spring. Those Flowers your Infancy did crown,
Spring does again to you resign,
Which now are yours, no more her own,
The Prim-rose, and sweet Eglantine,
The Daisie, Pinck, and Violet blew,
All which received their sents from you.
May Blossoms now shall never fade,
You have May everlasting made.

Chorus. All hearts rejoice, which now behold
Again the happy Age of Gold.
For Time to us has brought far more
True joys, then feigned were heretofore.
Three Royal Blossoms to us he does bring,
Whose looks and sweetness, make eternal Spring.
May Cherries plasht up to the wall,
The Dew-berries, that in valleys grows,
Kept in your lips, shall never fall,
The Lady Grass, and the Musk Rose,
Which were your Mantle swathing band
You make yet flourish freshly, and
Sweet Fennel, for Court flatterers fit
Lives under you, you above it.

Chorus. All hearts rejoice, etc.

Summer. To keep the Summers heat away,
Which Earth from the young Sun receives.
The Elm, the Siccamore, and Bay
Still shade you with their lasting Leaves.
The Lillies, and the Damask Rose,
The sheets and bed, when you repose,
More white, more sweet, more soft have bin
Since they did touch your whiter skin.
To sleep when your fair eyes incline,
Hiding from Men their dearest light,
Let hearts ease, Flowers of Iessamine,
And Rose-marie your couches dight.
The holy Thistle down shall fill
Your Pillowes, Boulsters, and until
You rise like Gemini, arm in arm,
Levander cotton keep you warm.

Chorus. All hearts rejoice, etc.

Autumn. Rising from Beds of July flowers
With Hyacinthus, and Narcissus spread
Into your lap Autumnus powers,
The Mul-berries, and Raspis red,
Pomona in her Basket bears
Apricocks, and Bon Christian Pears.
And Bacchus forth his hand will reach
To pluck the Damson, Fig, and Peach.
And for digestion, Candian wines
Will skinke out of his Indian gourd
Mellecottones, and Nectarines
He brings you from his mellow hoord,
That you shall wish, while you them taste,
Autumn and Spring may ever last:
Or, that, except them two, there were
No other Seasons of the year.

Chorus. All hearts rejoice, etc.

Winter. Cold Winter brings to crown your Age
Many happy years are told.
The Myrtle, Savory, and Sage,
The semper viva, never old,
To Crown your high victorious brows
Green laurel Garlands, Arbute boughs
With Palms, and Olives, whose increase
Are emblems of your lasting peace.
Nor is cold winter yet at all
Less frolic, then the wanton Spring:
The Robin red Breast in the Hall
Picking up crummes at Christmas sing
When winds blow cold, and ways be foul
In Barnes, and sheep coats sits the Owl,
Whose note the husbandman delights
When as she h^ots in frosty nights.

Chorus. All hearts, etc.
The Songs being ended.
Minerva. Here is discovered the Temple of Minerva supported upon Doricke
columns standing in a grove, before the Temple gate an anticke Greek Altar
whereon was a Crown placed. SEasons I thank you, that have all so well
Strived by your loves each others to excel
In honor of these Princes. Now by you,
Time, let my service be presented too.

Time. TIme takes your charge, and swiftly will declare
What the devotions of Minerva are.
To you great Prince, and to each blessed Bud
Of the same Royal Stock, and linked in blood
With you, Minerva gratefully imparts
Full knowledge, and true use of Arms, Arts,
And that she, bound unto this gratitude
I by fames Trumpet will make understood
Her reason through the World, for thus she says,
Whereas of old she was sole patroness
Of Arms, and Arts, and former ages through
Had reverence, and adoration due
To her divinity; she by blind chance
Has been of late, and blinder ignorance
Rudely opposed, oppressed, and lastly thrown
By violence from her proper mansion
Altars, and Temples, that were dedicate
To her of old, are now laid ruinate,
And she forlorn to give the World a view
Was all to seek of house, and patron too,
Laboring with that distress, unto this I Will
More gracious made by the most gracious smile
Of its most royal Sovereign, then the day
In other Lands, by Phoebus brightest ray,
She bent her course, and here she was received
By the most gracious, bounteous King releiv'd,
Planted, and raisd to a magnificke State,
Above the reach of her malignant Fate:
For which unequal grace, she can no less
Here a cupid descending with a light in his hand shows unto the Prince a
Crown, which is placed on Minerva's Altar, and reserved by her for his
highness. Then yield her self to be his votaresse,
Of all her gifts devoting the renown
A due addition to his fourefold Crown.
In pledge whereof, first branch of that fair stem,
High Prince, here is a Royal diadem
Brought from her old, here to her Athens new
By your propitious Fate reserved for you
Upon Minerva's Altar, it is noe slight
Or fabulous thing that Time shall now recite;
Hippocrates divinanatura preditus nonus a Chrisamide Rege, decimus et octavus
ab AEsculapio. Vigesimus a looe ex Patre Heraclida, ex matre Paxithea
Phaenaretes silia ex familia He aclidarum, quare ex utroque se. mine a Diis
ortum habet divinus Hippocrates, ut qui a patre quidem Asclepiades est, a matre
Heraclides. didicit arta^tuma Patre Heraclidatu^ ab avo Hippocrate and proinde
iust^ssime, in multis terrae locis divinos honores etiam ipse c^nsequutus est,
et tisdem donariis cum Hercule et AEscula pioab Atheniensi bus dignu^ factus
est. paetus in epistola ad Regem Regum Magnum Artaxerxem. Heraclidae erant
Gigantes, in oratione Thessaliad Athenienses. Hippocrates genere et art
conjunctus est Aesculapio, hic vero Herculis est ex fratre nepos. in Epistola
senatus Populique Abderitarum.
It Is found in my records' among ancient rules
That were observed in Minervas Schools
That those of Physic were not held the least
But rather most Divine of all the rest,
And that of old Physicians had relation
Among Princes, and the gods, and adoration
Given to their person, and their memories.
Then shined Minerva's Altar, when her wise
Athenians there, to add his renown,
Gave Hercules an Aesculapian Crown:
And after him, when by the same decree
Great skilled Hippocrates upon his knee
Received the like, and was sent crowned thence
Physicians, and Philosophers, high Prince,
This Crown still reserves in store
Great Sir, to add unto your future four.
To this, as to the rest, you are Princely heir
Prince of Physicians borne your titles fair
And I find it ( Time shall do noe wrong)
In rendering truth, though his discourse be long.
In Florence the first Dukes to crown the name
Of Cosmus, who most piously became
Patron of christian cures successively,
Were (the Physicians art to dignifie)
Through many reigns called Cosmus, latter days
Have crow'nd the Medici with flourishing Baies,
All of them still employing, that they are
Patrons of all Physicians regulare:
And from the illustrious Florence Medici
You draw a line from France to Britanie
It Was first the honor of the Florence Crown
To take its fair denomination
From physics Art, and that but rational
In France to physic supernatural.
That titles linckt, and both in one brought ore
Met the miraculous cure was here before
In the thrice happy England, so you are
By virtue of descent apparent heir
To the Physicians crown, who both inherit
Of rational, and miraculous cures the spirit.
That those of physic. Hippocrates divina natura praeditus est, nonus quidem
a Crisamide Rege: etc, Hippocrates is endowed with a Divine Nature the ninth
truly by de^cent from King Crisamides, the eightteenth from Esculapius, the
twentieth from Jupiter: by his mother Praxithea the daughter of Phaenaretes. he
is of the family of the Heraclides, by his father an Asclepiad, so that by both
his parents divine Hippocrates has his offspring from the gods, and for his
Art most justly has in many places of the earth obtained divine honors and
with Hercules and Esculapius, he has by the Athenians bin made worthy of the
same gifts etc: Petus Proconsull in his Epistle to the great King of Kings
Artaxerxes.
For which, and for the favors done to her
Minerva must on you this Crown confer.

Minerva. Here the music sounds for the dance of the 4. Nations of England
Scotland, France and Ireland. TIme while you strive to show my gratitude
I fear you are thought tedious if not rude
To press so far. But hark this Music says
Each Nation, that subjectingly obeyes
Their Majesty's, and you are come to show
With nimble feet the duty, that they owe
Visum est, ac decretum senatui and populo Atheniensium ut gratiam condignam
Hippocrati pro benefactis referat, ipsum public magnis mysteriis initiare
quemadmodum Herculem f^ium lovis, and Coronare ipsum Corona aurea mill
anreorum, et ipsam Coronam quatriis magnis Minerva festis, in Gertamine gymnico
per praeconem proclamare. in Decreto Atheni, ensium. Ab initio Dei unde genus
nostrum esse gloriamur Aes^ulapius et Hercules in hominum utilitatem
prognatisunt. Et ho^ proptervirtutem quam exercuerunt, omnes de^rumloco habent
Oration Thessali ad Athenienses.
All in their kind to express their skill in dance.
Glad England first, blithe Scotland, sprightly France
And civilized Ireland shall in order trace
And do their best to gain a greater grace.

Enter the Dancers who having ended their dance Minerva speaks to the Princes.
Minerva. NOw Princely ones may't please you to advance
And your aspects on fresher objects glance
Of Arms, and Arts.

Time. Pray you be pleased to walk
and pardon Time, old folks are full of talk.
The Prince, and the rest are here conducted by Minerva, and Time toward the
Chamber of Arts, and Arms, by the way Minerva turning to the Prince speaks.
Minerva. GReat Britains Prince, since that your innate love
To learning does so soon your highness move
To view Minerva's mansion, and to be
Admitted one of hers. Behold, and see
How I begin (out of a tender care
Complying with your years) books to prepare
Fit for your studies, now from which by sense
You may extract the sweetest quintessence
Ego nunc cum mea sobole, oleaeramulis coronotus ad Mineruae aram supplex
consisto. Oration Hippocratis ad aram consistentis Coro. illa aurea
investrotheatro i^ posita ad sum. a^m aemulatione^ac felicitatem patrem meum
evexit: sed et hoc beneficium superastis, dum et patrem et me public Cereris
et Proserpinae mysteriis ac sacris initiastis. Thessalus in ora^. ad
Athenienses. Thessalus filius Hippocratis aurea corona coronatus ab
Atheniensibus Theodoret.
Had by allusion to each Authors name
To sweeten learnings root so as the same
To others bitter might prove sweet to you
Then freely taste, and tasting cast your view
Upon each Authors name, whereby you may
Be more acquainted with them day by day.
And, as your better part shall shine more clear
I Will from themselves still make you better cheer.

The Princes, and the rest being entered. Time. HOw now, what mystery is this?
How dare you use the Prince thus, schoole-mistris?
Are the arms, and arts you promised to his view
To be picked out of books? This is a new
And a course way of entertainment too.
A banquet had been fitter.

Minerva. Such is this
TIme, if you knew but what sweet learning is
Composed in these plain books, your self would say
Both for delight, and health his Highness may
Not only taste, but as his meat devour them,
And so become a Helluo librorum.

Time. YEt by your learned leave, Minerva, let
Before his taster here the books be set
What Author's this? pray let us here begin
Suetonius says his out side: but within
All sweet meats. Oh sweet Suetonius!
What Is his next neighbor? Aulus Gellius,
All gellies, as I am true Time. What lurkes
Here in this volume? It Is Friar Bacons works
Most sweetly interlarded. And here is Cato
In biscuit cakes, and sugar plates in Plato.
Erasmus full of preserved Raspices,
Delicate Authors all. Now what are these
Damesins in Damascenus, and preserved
Lemons here in Levinus Lemnius served.
Aples in Apuleius. All Is good cheer.
But stay Minerva, what good drink ha'ye here
To wash it down? oh here I see are brought
Nine Amphora's of glass; in each a draught
Of several waters, sent from several wells
And fountains, where the sacred Muses dwelles,
As their nine names, which are inscribed thereon
Do plainly show. See first from Helicon
Clio a clear immortal liquour sends,
Urania Eridanus commends,
Thalia of Ionian pleasant streams
A drink has sent. The ancient Poets Theames
Bacchus Minervas botle-man did bring
This sweetest Nectar from the Thespian spring,
A present from Erato: this pure clean
Fresh water seems to come from Hippocrene
Euterpe's gift: and here, and please you, sip ye
Of the clear brook, that runs from Aganippe,
Sent by Melpomene, so of the rest,
Whose liquours come to dignifie the feast,
So may you eat, and drink, and carry more
Of learning hence then Pallas keeps in store.
The banquet being ended Minerva turning to the Prince speaks for a conclusion
thus.
Minerva. NOw (royal Prince) with thanks let Pallas say;
Sh'has by your brightness had a glorious day:
But you declining your Phoebean light
Will leave her shrouded in perpetual night,
Unless to show^ you are pleased you leave for grace
A smile, which may illuminate the place.
So shall Minerva give a glad adieu
Withal her Atmes, and Arts to wait on you.

For the Banquet were provided little Angels holding Candles to give light unto
the Princes: which hung in the air could no way be discerned. The Banquet
which Minerva gave was enclosed in Artificial books, so handsomely made that
no man could know but that they were very books indeed, disposed and placed
according to their several volumnes: between which by these nine several
amphoras of Glass were placed, full of 9 several sorts of Wines as sent from
the 9 Muses. The Authors that Minerva showed the Princes were many, but the
first that fell into the Princes hands were these, which follow named: and in
the frontispeece of them were found these Verses following. In Suetonius these
MY title is Suetonius, but within
A history of sweet meats does begin,
Which so may please (Illustrious Prince) your taste
As your life may all Caesar's Acts out last.
Aulus Gellius.
LEt the lamp wasting student, who delights
In reading Aulus Gellius Attike nights,
Make himself pale: here for a Courtiers wit
Is nourishing strong gelly much more fit.
Friar Bacons works.
Friar Bacons works my inside well may be
Now Conjured into Collops: and yet see
There is no Puritan but would desire
Like to the devil to devour this Friar.
Lucius Florus.
See Lucius Florus from his history
Renders you nothing but a Prophecy
Upon your flower deluces, which he says
Shall grace your crown bove all his Emperors bays.
Levinus Lemnius de occultis naturae miraculis.
IF for Levinus Lemnius you do find
Dried canded Lemons, or a Citron rind,
Here soon read over: for at once you look
On all the hidden secrets of his book.
Apuleius.
NOt Apuleius golden Asses story
(Glory of Princes) here is set before ye:
But golden apples of the Hesperides
Are brought your taste, as well as sight to please.
Quintus Curtius.
MY outside's Quinius Curtius (gracious Princes)
But see within my leaves are curious Quinces
This transposition well excused may be:
Books and their titles do not still agree.
Origin.
IF (curious reader) you desire to know,
Why the inside and the title differ so:
As Origin and Orang, make no doubt,
The Anagram's within of what is without.
Damascenus.
OLd Damascenus says you are to young,
Sweet Prince, to read or taste of Physic strong:
Therefore which better may your palate suite,
Praescribes you damsens your liege Country fruit.
Erasmus Roterodamus.
When with Erasmus you hereafter meet,
You Will find him like this Raspis sharp and sweet
Sweet like Almond butter, which never came
From any butter box of Roterdame.
Cato.
CAto from Sugar Cakes not differs far,
Since into distickes both divided are.
Plato.
VOuch safe of Platoes works to taste a piece,
Though not of Greek, yet full of Ambergreece.
Manuscripti.
AMongst so many books it is not ore slip't,
That you have here a Manuscript.
You may well see by what you do find in it,
'Twas done by hand and never yet in Print.
Hermolaus Barbarus.
OF Hermolaus Barbarus the sense
Is harmeles; barberies, like Eloquence:
Which though it is sweet, has tartnes mix't among
Witness each wanton witty woman's tongue.
Cardanus.
Cardanus works these are, as some do say,
But it seems rather that they were his play.
Littleton.
HEre Littleton is set before your eyes,
Because law's common, little shall suffice:
Yet is that little much to be regarded,
Because an old Coke has it interlarded.
FINIS

