THE BLESSEDNESS OF BRYTAINE, OR A Celebration of the Queens Holyday,
Containing, A Brief rehersall, of the inestimable Benefits, generally had and
enjoyed, not only all England over, but also in foreign Parts, through the
gracious Bounty, and incomparable blessed Rule of our Royal Queen ELIZABETH.

Composed, and set forth, in due Reverence, and joyful Memorial, of her
Majesty's present entrance into the Thirtieth year of her most triumphant
reign, with hearty prayer, for the long continuing, and prosperous preserving
of the same: by Maurice Kyffin.

Deum Timete. Regem Honorate.

1. Pet. 2.17. Fiant preces pro Regibus and Principibus, vt tranquillam and
quietam vitam degamus, cum omnipietate and honestate.

1. Tim. 2.2. Published with Authority.

LONDON. Imprinted by John Windet, dwelling in Adling street, at the sign of
the White Bear, near Baynardes Castle.

1587.

Plura Posthac.

TO THE RIGHT HONORBLE and Renoumed in all Heroical Virtues, Sir Robert
Devreux Knight, Earl of Essex and Ewe, Vicount Hereford, and Bourgchier, Lord
Ferrers of Chartleigh, Bourgchier and Lovain, and Master of her Majesty's
horse.
THE faithful love, and duty, (Right honorable) long since deservedly born,
by my deceased Father, both to your lordships Noble Graundfather, and likewise
to the famous and worthy Earl your Father, (unto whom for diverse respects, he
was much bounden being alive, and being dead, left the like Bond of duty, in
us his Children toward your Lordship) has the more emboldened me, (presuming
on your Lordships great Courtesies) To publish, under your favorable
protection, these my unpolished verses, of her Majesty: wherein, though I have
but showen my leaden skill, in a Golden Cause, yet has the same proceeded from
such ardent desire, and devotion in me, as thereby it may seem, in some mean,
to merit Tolleration, especially, since it carries a duitifull remembrance, of
her Majesty's most prosperous and peaceable reign over us: which having run
the full, and Blessed Course, of Nine and Twenty years; does now, begin the
Thirtieth, to the great joy, and in speakeable comfort of this her royal
Kingdom; In reverend regard whereof, this poor Poem is most chiefly intended:
I humbly therefore, present it to the Courteous acceptance of your most
Honorable Lordship: Whom I be seech the Highest to bless, and enriche, with
increase of all perfect Honor, long life, and ever during felicity.

Most humble at your good Lordships commaundment. Maurice Kyffin.

D. P. To the Reader.
TWO things make blisfull Realms, Religion pure and Peace:
Which Two our England has enjoyed, long time with large increase.
The God of peace be praisd, who grauntes our Birth and Being,
In this same Realm, with this Rare Prince, these gladsome Seasons seeing.
And pray we God likewise, this State still to defend:
Preserving it, in perfect Peace, till that the world take end.
The Author of this book, deserves a during fame,
Who chose a good Ground, for his work, and wrought well on the same.
T. LL. In praise of this book, and the Author.
WHo list to see her Noble deeds displaid,
Whose golden gifts, each creature does adore,
Whose Virtues Rare, have hauty hearts dismayed,
Whose Name, and Fame, increases more and more:
Let them peruse this Poem, with Advise.
By Kyffins pen, put down in perfect wise.
A work of worth, beseeming well his Art,
So fitly framd, and fraught, with tried Truth.
As may Rejoice, each loyal subjects heart,
To hear, and see; which hidden had bin Ruthe.
Our Queens long Reign, to our still during joy,
The King of Kings, preserve free from Annoy,
J. H. In commendation of this work, and the writer.
THe Persian Cyrus, Xenophens pen, Achilles, Homers found:
King Alexanders valor great, did Curtius style resound,
Their worthy fame, those worthy wits, to skies aloft do send,
Those worthy wits, cake by their fame themselves to fame commend.
Though skillful Muses notes, come short to sound this Princes praise,
Her Princely gifts, her Justice mylde, her Peaceful lasting days:
Yet Kyffins Muse in stately style, has shot so near the same,
That by resounding worthy praise, himself deserves fame.
R. Cook, in commendation of his friend Mr. Kyffin.
THe fruitful Muses seem, to have conspird, with full assent,
Vplifting Kyffins lore, with weighty words to work Content:
The subject of his Verse, is sacred, firm, and full of grace,
Whereon his Web is wrought, whose learned skill, none can deface,
Momus the carping God, to Cavil here can find no cause,
And Zoylus spiteful wretch, has here wherewith to stop his jaws.
THE BLESSEDNESS OF BRYTAINE.
PEarce Clio Muse, my weak, unworthy wit:
Caliope, set forth my style with strength;
Unfold her Fame (with words forth sounding fit,)
Whom Kings adore, and Lords in worldly length:
Whose Sacred Hand the Stately Scepters hold,
And Royal, Rules her Realms in Crowned gold.
A Monarch Maiden Queen adorned rare,
With Regal Heavenly dowres, of diverse kind;
In whom, who list dame Natures Works compare,
With those rich Thewes, and Virtues of her Mind,
Shall much admire, at such a Myrrour sheene,
At such a Prince, at such a Peereles Queen.
The Star of Women Sex, Grave Wisedoms store:
Sententious, speaking Tongs in filed phraze,
Profoundly learnd, and Perfect in each Lore,
Her Fame, no Rav'ning Time, shall ever Raze:
Hater of Wrong, high Refuge eke for Right,
Concord, and Peace, continuing by her Might.
What should I Nymphs, or Goddesses Recount?
Or Egypt Queens, or Roman Ladies Befides that such manner of Reciting
strange and Hethenish Names, were here altogether inconvenient, The author does
also of very purpose, somewhat shun that bea ten high way, to fill paper with
pestring Names of fained Gods, Goddesses, Nymphs, Persians, Grecians, Romans,
etc. Being a thing of some sometimes used, too too much, and to little effect.
name?
Since as Supreme, our Sov'raigne does surmount,
In choice of Good, the chief of all those same?
For to compare the Great, with simple small,
Is thereby, not to praise the Best at all.
Elizabeth, Large Light of Sov'raigne Seat,
Whose Justice, Prudence, Temprance, Fortitude,
Ingrafted young, are grown forth spreading Great,
Throughout the world, mong Nations wise and rude:
No land, but lauds this right Resplendant Rose,
Tutor to Friends, and Terror unto Foes.
As Shyning Sun recleeres the darkened Sky, The reestablishing of the Gospel,
by her Majesty, a work of inestimable worth, everlastingly famous for ever and
ever. Primaris Principis Cura, Religio. David. 1. P. 13. Asa. 2. Par. 14.
Ichos. 2. P. 17. Ioosh. 2. p. 23. Josias, 2. Reg. 22. Hezechiah, 2 Par. 29.

And forth recalles each thing, from shivering Shrowds,
So has our Second Sun, both far and nigh,
by brightning Beams, outcleerd erroneous Clouds:
Apow'rfull Prop of Christ's Euangell pure,
One whose Support, it rests Reposed sure.
Our Current Coin was Metal base and mean, Argentum tuum Scoris. Isaiah.
1.22.

Till her most princely Grace, the same put out,
By perfect Gold, and pured Silver clean, Base Coins abolished by her highness.

Which pass for common Coins, her Realms throughout.
A Deed, deserving her Perpetual Praise,
And Publik Profit, to this Land always.
Ad hereto Armor, and Artillery, The royal increase of Armor, and Artillery,
by her Majesty for the defense of the Realm. Foelix est ea Resp. quae tempore
pacis, Bella inactat. Laur. Gr^nal. de optimo Senatore fol. 71.

Of her most Royal Charges cheefely found;
As store of Arming steel defensiuely,
And Roaring Gunnes, far rendering fired sound;
A furth'ring Strength for Peace, and safe Repose:
And Means, resisting Rage, of Warring foes.
I may not here omit in Silent sort, The incomparable Navy Royal, built and
maintained by her Majesty. Pericles Athen, ait: Vna^ pecunia para^da rationem
put and am, Naues quamplurimas habere, alias vero extra eam rations, nallius
momenti existimandas.

Her Royal Ships strong wrought for stearnful war,
(Whereof all worldly Realms do raise Report)
Through raging Seas discovering Regions far:
A Scowre-sea Navy all bright and bravely burnisht
Forth spowting fire, fair, huge, and fully furnished.
When floorisht Learning to such Type of height? Plentiful exercise of
Religion, perfection in all kind of learning, and right whole some laws,
enjoyed by her Majesty's most gracious means.

Or purefull Preaching, when had it more place?
When was Gods word so known to every weight,
Which heretofore, did suffer such Deface?
When raignd Religion so deuoyd of crime?
Or rightful Laws, as in her Royal time?
When was this Realm so rich of glittring Gold, The Realm wonderfully
enriched with Gold and Silver. The earth most abundantly blessed with
sertilitie, And every man quietly enjoying his own, under her highness
prosperous gouetnement.

Of plated Silver, pearl, and precious stones?
When was more Tillage on this fertile Mold?
Or more rich streaming Graces grown at ones?
Or more Concordant life, in Country and Town,
Then since her Regal Highness came to Crown?
Her Sacred Senate by their grave foresight, The vigilant Care, and incessant
travel of her Majesty's most honorable privy Council.

Provide for Publik Good and Ev'ls prevent,
Conseruing Common weal, from Perils plight,
In Rightful Ruling, Concord, and Concent:
A Senate well besitting Such a Charge;
Prudent, and prompt in Lore and Wisdom large.
From Wrathful War, her People rest in Peace: The most blessed and
peaceable state of her Majesty's subjects in comparison of other Nations, round
about them. Strangers graciously received, and reseeued by hae Highness, within
her own king, dom.

From wasting VVoes, her Subjects live Secure:
And yet our Neighbor Nations VVarres not cease,
Their dire distress, and wailfull VVoes still dure;
The Most of Might, eke makes her Realm a Tower
Strangers to shield, from many a balefull Shower.
A Mighty Queen, pure with Compassion pressed, Her Majesty's gracious aid unto
her distressed neigh bours abroad. Regia (credo mibi) res est succurrere
laplis, Conuenit vt tanto, quantus es ipse viro. Ovid. li. 2. do Pon.

Rendering Relief, to Neighbor friends forlorn:
Her helping Hand, holds up the weak distressed,
And has the haughty, dreadful, often downborn:
Whereof Records, full rife re naining store;
Note Scotland, Low Countries.
Belgia, and many places more.
Lib'rall Rewarder of Heroical Acts; Her Highness bountiful liberality. Her
Mercy toward offenders. Imperi^ duobus potissiman contine^tur, Nempe, Proemio
and Pana^ test Solone. Iusticia sine Misericordia Crudelitas. Misericordia
sine Iustitia fa^^ittas.

Rich in Reward, large giving Gwer dons great;
Prone eke to pardon, many offending facts,
Yea though the same, concern her Regal Seat;
Rigor of Justice, in Revenging Laws,
Mylde by her Mercy, wreaks not each Cause.
A Blessed Branch of Brutus Royal Race; Her Majesty Princess of Wales, where
the Inhabitants enjoy Gods word in their own language, through the mere grace
and goodness of her highness.

To Brytish wightes a Blisfull worldly joy,
Puissant Princess of Their Native place,
To shield their Earthly lives from all annoy:
And to their Sickly Souls, a Sov'raigne Leche,
Granting Christ's Gospel, in their Country speech.
Princely Possessor of this Realm full Right,
And Heir apparent to the Heavenly Crown:
Assigned to serve Gods Truth, with Maine and Might
Vpraising Virtue, Vice depressing down:
Fruitful in Faith, though fruteles, wanting feere:
Such brings she A perpetual memory of her manifold goodness, in stead of
Sons and daughters. Praferre patr^^ liberis Regem decet. Seneca in Tr.
Fruit, in stead of Children here.
Such Rare, Renowned Deeds, Omnis la^^ virtutis in Action consistis Arist.
our Queen has don
And more than my poor power may well express:
Violenta nemo Imperit continuit diu. Sen. in T.
Long has her Reign, this Glorious Race forth run
Long may it last, forth bringing fruits no less:
Great is the Good, thus grown forth, from her Grace:
Great good shall grow, through her like le^gthned space.
Owretched Wights, that would this Queen enharme, A reproof unto Traitors.

By close contryuing of her Cruel Death;
What cursed Circes, could their minds so charm, They rewarded me Evil for
Good: for they have privily laid their Net to destroy me without cause. Psalm.
35.

As not to recke, to reaue their Liege of breath?
Fell Raging Rome, all this is long of thee,
From whom, no Troubling Treasons, here are free.
Our kingly Rooted Rose, fresh flowring stands;
Guarded by Gods great Power, and Providence:
A masing much, all Traitors trembling hands,
Which plye to pluck this Plant by violence:
Yea Magna est veritas, and Prau^let. Esdras. 3. c. 4.
Truth down treading Treason unto shame,
Victor suruiues, by vanquishing the same.
Thrice happy Land, whose Sov'raigne Ladies life,
The Lord enlengthning, saues from soddein haps;
Though Civil Bronds, and foreign Furies rife,
Conioyning erst, have threatened Thunder claps,
Yet Maugre Malice, Si Dent nobiscum, quis contra Nos. Paul. 8. Romans
Foes are put to foil,
And safe remains, our Sov'raigne, and our Soil.
Thrice happy Queen, The Angel of the Lord tarryeth about them that fear him,
and that put their trust in him. Psalm. 34. There is no King that can be saved
by the multitude of an Host, etc. Behold the Eye of the Lord is upon them that
fear him, and that put their trust in his Mercy. Psalm. 33.
acknown of God so dear,
Against whom, what secret Mischeefs have bin sought,
But that the same, would presently appear,
By means Miraculous, as yet unwrought?
A Sured Sign, whom God protects to Joy,
No lurking Ev'l, can thereto work Annoy.
O Glorious Ruler of the glistring Hev'n,
Prolong her Health, with Heaps of happy Years,
That as her Rule has Raignd twice Lev'n and Sev'n, The prayer and wish of all
good Sub.

So may she still, surpas all Potent Peers,
To live, and long time wield the Civil sword,
As far, as course of Nature can afford.
Far Foreign lands, be are witness of her Name;
Far surging Seas, have felt her warlik Ships;
Both Seas, and Lands, forth thunder out her Fame, Fama manet fact^, posito
velamine, conrunt; Et memorem Fama^, qui been gessit habet. Ovid. l^. 2. Fast.

Through force of flowring Acts, free from Ecclips:
Elizabeth's due praise shall never dye,
In Earth, nor Seas, nor in the starrie Sky.
Right Reu'rend Princess, rare is thy Renown,
Though Spiteful Envy, spue forth poysned gall;
Naught shall it crase, thine Acts Eternal Crown,
Nor minish much, thy sound success at all:
No Best may shun fell Ars prima Regni, est posse Inuidians pati. Sense. in
Here. fur.
Enuies sowrfull stench,
Whom Kezars, Kings, and Queens, have faild to quench.
As Highest Hills, bide fiercest force of VVeather,
And Tall Trees tops, be are greatest stresse of VVinde,
As finest Black, yelds show of smallest fether,
And in Pure White, the least black More we find:
So Enuies shaft, is shot at Summa petis liuor, perflant altissima venti. Ovid.
Highest Mark;
And pries in Purest Things, whereat to bark.
No Ruler Such has weld this Realm of yore,
Few Realms have ioyd, so long a Iniq^a nu^quam regna, perptuo manent. Senec.
in Med.
Peaceful Rule:
No Realm is read, to have Rul'de bin heretofore,
By such a Queen, safe quelling Civil Brule;
Who reigning still, a Prince withouten peer;
Her highness now, holds on her Thirtieth year.
Adore Nouembers sacred More fit to be solemnized, than many other days noted
in the Calendar.
Sev'nteenth Day,
Wherein our Second Sun began her Shine:
Ring out loud sounding Bells; on Organs play;
To Musikes Mirth, let all Estates incline:
Sound Dru^mes, and Tru^pets, renting Air and Ground
Stringd Instruments, strike with Melodious sound.
Ye Mighty Men of Mars ennobled Knights,
Advance your selves, on fiery foming steedes:
Revive This Times Remembrance, with all Rights,
In Armor bright, and gorgeous warlik weeds:
At Tylt, and Turnay, trying Martial Might;
And Battring strokes, at Barriers forcefull fight.
Ye Cuntry folk, forth stalking in your feelds,
Loud Carols sing, to celebrat This Time;
Show Signs of joy (as Cuntry manner yeldes,)
In Sporting Games, with Dance, and rural Ryme:
Each Swayne, and Sheppard, sound his piping Reed,
For joy, enjoying Feelds, and Flocks to feed.
Ye Bryttish Poets, Repeat in Royal Song,
(With weighty words, used in King Arthurs days)
The Imperial Stock, from whence your Queen has sprung;
Enstall in verse your Princess lasting prays:
Masters in the Science of Music.
Pencerddiaid, play on Ancient Harp, and Crowde:
Expert men in singing.
Atceiniaid, sing her praises pearcing loud.
Let Hills, and Rocks, rebounding Echoes yield,
Of Queen Elizabeth's long lasting Fame;
Let woody Groaues, and Watery Streams be filled,
And Creeks, and Caves, with sounding of the same:
O Cambria, stretch, and strain thy utmost breath,
To praise, and pray for Queen Elizabeth.
Her Third time Ten years Reign, we now possess;
Thrice three times Ten, (...) every faithful subject say ^^m^^.
god grant her grace may reign
To this her Realms long wished for wealfulnesse,
Whereby, each long erst Loss, it may Regain:
And so Redound, the happiest Realm for ay,
Vnturnd from Truth, even till the Latter Day.
God Preserve Queen Elizabeth.
O Jerusalem praise the Lord: Psalm. 147.
Praise thy God, o Sion. For he has strengthened the Bars of thy Gates: And
has Blessed thy Children within thee. He has made all thy Borders Peace: And
with the good Nutriment of Wheat does satisfy thee, etc. He has not done thus
to every Nation else: Praise we all the Lord therefore. Amen.

FINIS.

