THE Trial of Truth, wherein are discovered three great enemies unto
mankind, as Pride, Private grudge, and Private gain, which corruptions are
the disturbers of ^^^^s, cities, commonweals, and peoples.

Jmprinted at London at the three Cranes in the vintree, by Thomas Dawson, and
Thomas Butter. 1580.

To the most great and highest soucraigne Christ JESUS.
Having written this small Treatise under the protection of thee most reverend,
most sweet, and almighty IESV (which I did begin with intention to line out
and direct a way unto thee the author of all truth and goodness) taking the
cause upon the greatest abuses of the world, reigning and raging every where
at this day: and continuing, concluded the same with exhortation of amendeme^t
of life according to thine express word and commandments, as well by thine
own self pronounced out of thy most sacred mouth, at what time thou were
conuersaunt in this miserable vale, and anguished with the iniquities of
Ierusulem, Corasm, Bethsaida, the whole land of Judah, yea and all the world,
and continually be fore that by the holy Prophets which have bin since the
world began, whose books are so full of declamatio^ against sin: and like
arguments to exhort the retourning unto the Lord with haste, and so laborious
to prepare the way unto thee. The greatest matter the^ rested in hand to whom I
should direct the same, who might take the protection in hand of this my work
to defend it against the maleuolent and malicious worldlings, who furnished
with all the suggestions of Satan that old enemy, who seaseth nullum non
mouere lapidem against thee and thy truth: Resting upon this consideration, I
found the great men of the world were busied, the richemen had no disposition,
the mean men were afearde, the simple men might answer me, they could not
judge. And so not to trouble the great, nor to hazard the small, I determined
to offer the same unto thee (OIESV) which I present unto thy Divine Majesty
with bowed knees, joined hands, and all simplicity of mind, beseeching thee
mercifully to look upon mine infirmities who for the multitude of my sins am
unworthy to lift up mine eyes to thy mercy seat, and unable to imagine any
thing worthy of thine acceptance, but stayed on the foundation of thy word,
wherein it appears how thou did accept of the widows myte, and how thou
did condemn the servant of sloth for hyding his tallent, are sufficient
assura^ces of thy favorable, fatherly and comfortable acceptance to such as
with good intent of the fruits of their labor yield aught unto thee, as
sacrifice proceeding from the purity of heart whereof thou only ar^ the
searcher, unto whose tuition I do most humbly submit my self body and soul.

To the Christian Reader.
Reverend Reader, after it had pleased God to touch me diverse ways, to what
intent I know not (to reform I hope) I committed me unto the same our eternal
God, who pronou^ceth himself to be the way, the truth, and the life, and
under his protection and favorable assistance, I determined as time would give
me leave to proceed and try by my travel and observance a straighter course of
life, and for my better proceeding therein for mine own instructions, I began
to compare and make difference betwixt the spirit of truth and the spirit of
error, and having collected sundry notes to the intent aforesaid, as I passed
by and judged the^ ought worth, I set the^ down to help memory with inte^tio^
to have brought the^ into form to the absoluing of the matter which I had in
hand. Whereupon a friend of mine viziting one at my chamber, and finding me so
solitary exercised and perusing my notes conceived so good liking of mine
endeavor and the discourse thereof, as he did not only entreat me to persevere
therein, but afterward at sundry times very earnestly required me to put the
same in print: insomuch as after my often denial has importunacy was such, that
unless I could have been content to hazard his frieudship and bear the
great reproach of ingratitude, I might not avoid him, and so oppressed yielded
and granted. Whereunto I did the rather incline, considering mine imminent
danger surprised with deadly sickness, joined with dispositio^to do some thing
plausible to the good. In which my meaning by deferring thereof I might have
been prevented, seeing the life of man is so uncertain, and thus by that
necessity joined with good will like the poor farmer who plucketh the fruit
before it be seasonable or ripe, because he would be said to have presented
of the first fruit of the yo^g sapling, I was forced to publish this mine
abortiue yo^gling full of faults and blemishes, in part whereof as I cannot
excuse my self, so must I needs impute some fault too the Printer
notwithstanding howsoever it fall out, the giuers mind, and not the thing is
that which is presented: which construction of this my simple labor, if I shall
receive at your friendly hands in this work, that might have required a workman
of greatest skill to have treated, I shall think my self happy: and ymagining I
have already so done, I will use no further entreaty heerin, then I think
stands with good manners, which consists in fewest words uttered with
best meaning, the fruit hereof shall be that al in general may receive the use
of that which I had written for mine own observance and private instruction,
whereby every one may be moved to the consider atio^ of their faults to the
dismasquing of their ill colloured actions, and be appointed to dew regard
of the heanenly mansion prepared unto the rightuouse for their everlasting
comfort. In which respect I called this little book the Trial of Truth,
leaving the whole contents thereof to the world, and the censure to the good.
Beseeching the Almighty that it may please him in his mercy to give unto every
one that profess his name, an understanding heart, to the attainment of a true
judgment: As that after this our pilgrimage and this life ended, we may
together be made partakers of the life eternal.

Edw. Knight.

The Trial of Truth.
THree things undid the Romans reign viz. Young heads, Private grudge, and
Private gain, as the principal causes of the destruction of that great
Empire. And I do greatly lament it, whilst I do behold so great evils in this
our age, raging among the people every where, in such lamentable manner, that
what true Christian living is there not touched with the due consideration of the
deformitte of the people: but that if he had not a flood of tears, he could
do no less then shed them forth in the beholding such daily provoking and
irritating of God too his heavy wrath, for their so grecuous disobedience, and
concempt, committed against him and his word. As the Prophet Jeremy was
moved and sore grieved with the beholding of the sins and wickedness of the
people committed against God in that former age, insomuche as he brake forth
into these speeches, All my b^nes shake for very fear of the Lord, (...)
word, because Jeremy. 24.
the land (...) Adulterers, and through (...) mourns. Ye and that way (...),
is wicked and the (...) nothing like the holy (...). Verily is I (...)
^^kednesse of this our (...) sins of that (...) should every of us blushe a^^
(...) therea^ unless we be (as it (...) ^eede (...) sort of us (...) hardened
and set against the ^^orde (...) manifest and (...) contempt.

Wherefore it behooves to rowse our selves our of the drowsy sleep of
security and to cry with this good Prophet, Turn thou us good Lord, so shall
we be turned, Convert thou us, and so shall we be converted, and so become
careful (...) appease Gods high displeasure, wh^^e (...) his Omnipotency does
forbear in his mercy, from proceeding to justice looking for a time of
repentance and amendment of all such as seem to be plunged in sin and
wickedness, and so fa^^e from true returning to God; as it appears that there
are many such, who neither do respect their own harms, nor yet do regard
the plagues threatened generally for sin, which may happen unlooked for, at
what time the wicked and disobedient may not have time to say, That the Lord is
God, which no man can do, but by the holy Ghost. In the mean time it is to
be noted how many people, do measure their unruly affections by the liberty
of the time, saying, the day of the Lord is far from us. Unto, such
stiffnerked people, the Prophet Ezechicll writes Ezechi. 18.
thus, There is a by word among you, Tush the day of the Lords far of, but that
bywoorde I shall make to cease, says the Lord. And yet euer^ man prosecuteth
his own ways, and corrupt affectious, discovering their own sham^ (...)
hasting their own destruction, whichis much to be feared, wyllas hastily fall,
unless that the more speedye haste. be made in returning to God from all such
wickedness, as does not only infect the bodies, but also does distemper the
souls of men. The due consideration whereof has moved many godly persons to
desire to be loosed out of the body of this life, for that they have found the
same the stage of all sorrow, care and calamity, for as soon as one misery and
trouble is passed, an other comes by and by in place, and yet the first
during to the dismaying of the afflicted, albeit such is the way that leads
unto Christ, to eat the bread and drink the drink of affliction. But such
doctrine may hardly be endured of the worldly minded: for man's repugnancie
has always been such, as neither gods laws nor public authority, could
ever keep the people in their due obedience: for the maintenance, and fensing
in of Christian amity, as the very bounds of peace. Insomuche as it is now a
common speech, that the world is bad, which may not be denied, and it
follows that the people are much worse, for it is true that the world is the
people. In whose conversation if there might appear amendment, the world
that now so much is complained of, would soon be better. So as the lives of the
people might be framed thereunto accordingly: as now in time to wind up the
ba^ners yt solong have bin displaied against God and his word, seeing that
his Omnipotency is content through his mercy still to offer peace: which while
we do seem to contemn and set light by, God is provoked to high
displeasure, (and the people in a lamentable case) where their frowardness is
such, as they do rather choose to be obscured in darkness, then to walk in
the brightness of the light. In the consideration whereof, it will in this
small treatise appear in what deformity and froward ways, the most part of
the people in this age do walk in. What returning God respects, what
punishmente is threatened for sin, and with what loving kindness God
requires obedience unto him, and his word, extending his bountiful mercies
unto al those that in time will return unto him by amendment of life, and so
to be made partakers of the benesites which he so graciously affereth:
notwithstanding, the pride of man is such, as that many can not abide too have
their ears rubbed with such a medicine, but yt if the quick be once touched,
all the body will forthwith be out of frame, whereby GOD is moved to
displeasure, as it is evident by the sequel. And now I will come to the first
trial.

Against the vain pridings of men and women.
IN how outrageous deformity pride is grown unto, it plainly appears by the
strange behauiors of ye people in this our age. Insomuch as many young men are
become effeminate in respect of manhood: and the shamefastness which ought to
be found in young women, is in many become manly, in respect of womanhood:
insomuch as many years past, who so had bin seen in such strange attire and
apparel, as now is worn by many young men and women, were judged to be of a
light conversation in living: but now there are many both men and women grown
so far out of square, and are become so heavy in sin and wickedness, as it is
much to be feared that when such shall come to be tried in the ballaunce of
good and evil, there will too many be found much too light and the money
which by many one so wastefully is consumed might be better employed, then so
to abuse it to their own harms. Who ought not to be ignorant, that it has been
an Adage in England That pride will have a fall? which is to be feared may be
so great, as much sorrow may not counteruaile the woe, with may happen through so
great evils, as god forbid: for it cannot be denied, but that pride was the
beginning of sin, for pride in the beginning of things did stir the creature
against the Creator that fourmed and made him, The Angel against God: but God
threw him down from heaven: because he continued not in the truth, he was
first thrown from the state of innocency into sin, and from sin into misery:
And he is now become the king of the children of pride, insomuche as the
Prophet Esaias says thus much of his fall, O Lucifer which diddestrise in the
morning, Esaias. 14. Apoc. 11.
thou which did wound all nations, art now fallen into the earth. Whose
disciples many one do seem to have chosen to be, not only manifested by
apparel but also in sum their speeches many do declare of what religion
they are of, when as in their daliaunce and pleadinges of love matters, they
seem to honor the Saint who^ they profess to show. In such a lamentable
sense, as God often times is much thereby dishonored: and in such wise as
husbands rau^ging from their wives, wives from their husbands, maidens
unshamefast, and young men shameless.

For pride is always desirous of new things, and the things with any long time
have been accustomed, that they account wecrinesse, as to ocupie themselves in
any Godly exercises. But this doctrine is so vngreeable unto the children of
pride, as it seems the most part of the people have so framed their faces to
look God in the face most impudently feeding their ownelicentious appetites
with all new fangled fantasies, in making the Sabbath day profane, and
agreeable to their own lusts and liking, with vigilant eyes, and attentive
ears, to understand where and new devised folly or tidings is to be learned,
when as there can be no better tidings to rejoice in, then the glad tidinges of
the Gospel. To the hearing whereof many do require discipline, to the end too
bring them into a better compass of obedience, whereas to spend their time in
vain delights, there shall need no such strickt order to move them
thereunto, as daily experience teaches.

God grant all such a more consideration of themselves, and a perfiter
judgment of such examples, as are left unto us by the saered word of God
against pride, and all other froward and wicked ways. Whereunto ignorance
may not be pleaded, for that will not serve our turns to excuse us in the day
of the Lords visitation, as the examples are many, wherein it appears how
much God has been from the beginnig offended by pride, Pride ouerthrewe the
Tower of Babylon, Pride hanged up Haman, Pride was the destruction of
Antiochus, Pride murdered Zenacherib, Genesis 11. Match. 15. Exodus 14. Reg. 18. 17.
the king of Assyrians in the temple of his false God. Whereby it is manifest
that God has not left pride unpunished in the offenders: For sort is written
in the Prophet Esaias, The day of the Lord of Hastes shall came upon every
proud Esaias. 23.
and high minded man, and upon every arrogant person, and such shall be cast
down and be made low, and the stoutnesse of the valiant and courageous shall be
abated: Therefore has Hell increased his power, and has enlarged his mouth,
and shall devour all the proud and vain glorious persons.

The Lord has determined this to out of the pride of the insolent. As it is
written by S. Luke, that the rich man that was clothed in purple and silk, was
buried in Hell. Dina the daughter of Jacob, Genesis 34.
before she went forth to buy ornaments of foreign women, as Josephus
writes, continued her virginity: but afterward Sichem son of the king of
the Amonites violently ravished her: for which his odious fact the sons of
Jacob slew Sichem, and his father Hemor the king with all the Male in his City
Salem, and spoiled the same. As the examples of such are sundry, who for their
Dani. 13. Genesis 3.
hyre have received like reward, with the two wicked Elders, who falsely
accused Susanna. Wherefore let never pride have rule in thine heart, for in
pride began al destruction.

Woe be unto the proud wealthy in Sion, to such as think themselves sure upon
Amos. 6. Luke. 6.
the mount of Samaria, which hold themselves for the best of the world, and
rule the house of Israel, even as they list. Behold, is the borders of the
Philistines wyder then yours: Ye are taken out for the evil day, eue^ that
sit in the schole of wilfulness, ye that light upon the beds of Iuory, and
use your wantonness upon your Cowches, Ye that eat the best Lamb of the
Fold, and the fattest Calves of the Droues, ye that sing too the Lute and
playing to the Instruments compare your selves to David, Ye that drink wine
out of Goblettes, and annointe your selves with the best Oil, but no man is
sorye for Iosephes hurt.

And in the Prophet Esaias it is written this Jerusalem and Judah must decay,
Esaias. 3.
because both their words and councels are against the Lord, to provoke the
presence of his maistie unto anger, the changing of their countenance
bewraieth them: yea they declare their own sins themselves, as the Sodomits
did, and hyd them not. Woe be unto their souls, for they have rewarded evil
unto themselves. Bid the righteous dowel, for they shall enjoy the fruits of
their studies: and woe unto the ungodly and unrighteous for they shall be
rewarded after their works. And in the Prophet Ezechiell it is written,
Behold the sins of Sodom were pride, fulness Chapt. 16.
of meat, abundaunce of idleness, t^^^se things had she and her daughters,
be sides that, they reached not their hands to the poor and needy, but were
proud, and did abominable things before me: therefore I took them away,
when I had seen it, neither has Samaria done half the sins, yea thou have
exceeded them in wickedness.

Moreover thus says the Lord, seeing the daughters of Sion are become so
proud, and have walked with stretched out necks, and with vain wanton eyes,
seeing they come in so nicely tripping with their feet: Therefore shall the
Lord shave the heads of the daughters of Sion, and the Lord shall discover
their shame. In that day shall the Lord take away the gorgeousnes of their
apparel, and Spanges, Chains, Partlettes and Collers, Bracelets and hoopes
of Gold, the goodly flowred, wide and broyded raime^t, Ouches and Head bands,
Holy day clothes, and Vales, Glasses and Scarfes, and insteede of good smelling
there shall be stink among them: And for their Gyrdles there shall be loose bands,
and for well set bear, shall be baldness, and in steed of a stomachet, a
Sackcloth, and for their beauty, wither nesse and Sun burning: your husbands
and mighty men shall perish with the Swoorde in battle. At that time shall
their Gates mourn and complain, and they shall sit as desolate folk upon
the earth.

And unto men the same Prophet in his 2. Chapter writes thus, And therefore
get thee in some Rock, and hide thee in the ground for fear of the Lord, and
for the glory of his majesty, which casts down the high looks of the
presumptuous persons, and brings low the pride of man. And the Lord only
shall be exalted in that day, for the day of the lord of Hosts shall go over all
pride, and lay man's presumption full low, upon al the^ that exalte them
selves, and shall bring them all down, both costly Towers and strong walls:
and upon all Ships of the Sea, and upon all things that is glorious and
pleasant to look upon. Then shall man cast away his gods of silver and his
gods of gold, which he nevertheless had made to honor them. And they shall
creep intoo the Caves and rocks, and into the cliftes of hard stones for fear
of God, and for the glory of his Majesty, when he arises to condemn the
earth. Fear ye not then any man whose breath is in his nosethrilles, for what
is he of reputation:

Wherefore, says Samuel, Talk not Samuel 2.
much proudly, let old things depart out of your mouths, for the Lord is
a GOD of knowledge, and his purposes come to pass. And in the same Chapter it
is written, If one man sin against another. Dayesmen may be Judges, but if a
man^ sin against the Lord, who will be his Dayesman? For this says the Lord,
Them that worshipp me, I will woorship: and they that despise me shall come to
shame.

In the Prophet Esdras it is also written, Esdras 4. 8.
that things present are for the present, and things for too come, for such
as are to come: For thou lackst yet much seeing thou may love my creature
above me, I have often drawn nigh unto thee, but never unto the unrighteous:
In this also thou art marvelous before the highest, in that thou haste humbled
thy self, that thou art had in such honor among the righteous. Therefore shall
great wretchedness and misery come upon them that in the latter day dwell in
the world, because they have walked in great pride.

And the Prophet Sophony says, Be Sopho. 1.
still at the presence of the Lord God, for the day of the Lord is at hand.
Yea the Lord has prepared a slain offering, and calls his guestes
thereunto. And thus shall it happen in the day of the Lords slain offering: I
will visit the Princes the kings, and all such as wear strange clothing.
In the same day also will I visit all those that tread over the thresholde so
proudly, which fill their houses with robbery and falsehood. At the same time
says the Lord there shall be heard a great cry from the fish port, and a
great murder from the hills, Howl ye that dwell in the mylle, for all the
Merchaunte people are gone, and all they which were laden with silver are
rooted out.

How much good men have been offended by the beholding of pride, appears,
that in the time as it were of ignorance, in comparison of these wherein
Christ is so professed in words and more contraryed in deeds. It is said
of Aristotle that on a time he seeing a young man proud, who was endued
neither with learning nor virtue: whereupon the said philosopher used this
manner of reproving, I would my self be no better the^ thou think thou art,
nor my foes to be no worse then thou art indeed.

Also it is written of one Pambo, that when he beheld a woman proud and very
costly apparrelled, and attired in strange fashion, he wept and sobbed: and
being demanded the cause thereof, he answered, that there were two things that
moved him so to do, in beholding of the woman: The one, to see the woman so
cast away, The other, for that I that bear the name of a Christian, do not so
endeavor with innocence of life too please God, as this woman does with her
gay attire to please wicked and naughty persons.

What examples have been in former ages, of Gods disliking of strangeness of
apparel, It is noted in our Chronicles, that in Oxfordshyre, near unto a
Town called Chipping Norton. there was found a Serpence having two heads and
two faces, one face was attyred after the new fashion of women's attire: the
other face like the old array of women, and had wings like a Back or
Flindermouse, wything that such examples should not be lightly set by: for
that the same God which was then offen ded by such abuses committed in that
former age, is now grieved by the like in this present age.

But me thinks I do hear some in tempore E. 3. An. Re. ^3.
say, what has any man to do too find fault or to be grieved at our
liberty: is it not lawful for me to do with mine own what me lists: if
I spend and waste my goods in evil condition, the harm is mine own. To whom
I answer, it is not so lawful: as for example admit yt some unruly, and
unstayed young person, having of his own possessions left him by his friends
a house in the midst of the City, and that such untamed person, would of a
vile disposition and desperate manner set fire on his said house at his
pleasure, to the indangering of the whole City, were it not needful and the
duty of every Christian man notwtsta^ding that he were not an officer in that
behalf, too the uttermost of his power to use the best means that in him
lies for the restraining and repressing of so great a danger as might grow
there by, and speedily to require the reformation to be provided for by the
governors of every City and place, where as such evils are carefully to be
looked unto and prevented: as causes m^s^e necessary lest the offenses come
over all, and so to be partakers of such plagues as by sufferance might
happen, as God defend.

In the explaning of the vanity of pride, it is written thus in the book of
The. 5. Chap
Wisdom, What good has our pride done us: or what profit has the pomp of
riches brought us? Al those things are passed away like a shadow, and as a ship
that passes the Sea, which when it is gone by, the trace thereof may not be
found, and as a messenger running before us.

Even so fares it with us miserable Creatures: for as soon as we are borne we
begin to draw to our end. The days of our life are few and short: thou O GOD
have appointed an end which I shall not pass: naked and bare I came out of my
mothers womb, and naked and bare I shall return again. Truly all men
living, are vanity, whereby we are admonished that no man should so consume
away in sin and wickedness showing nor leaving no token of virtue behind
him: Albeit it is a strange case to be considered how many of late time have
so far ouershot them selves, too have their names shut up in the Merchantes
and Usurers books, by bonds and otherwise, thereby to serve their present
turns to the feeding of their vain delights. In consideration whereof, if
the parties them selves were as well touched to discern their own follies in
that behalf, as it is a grief and sore heart eating unto many their good
friends, it would partly or most of all avoid so great inconveniences, as
minister grief unto so many, and to some extreme misery. And it is cause of
rejoicing unto many rich worldlinges, who smile in their sleeves, to see the
world so go about: although such will make the matter very strannge, to
credit any man that shall in such sort seek unto the^, either upon lands, or
bonds, until the need and necessity of the party be well discovered. And so
having found the length of his foot, he shall be fitted with an Instrument of
proof. In such sort as then the Title of the lands must be^ brought in
question, which being skanned, some fault is found that the price must be
abated, till at length the party being caught with the golden and silver
hooks, he may go play thereon. But in the mean time he must give place to
such an owner as that the same was never meant to by the forpossessed elders,
and must be removed in one day, out of the possessions which his Ancestors,
had continued in many score years, to the utter impayring of many a one their
credites, and names of worship.

To the reformation whereof (if all The way that Gentlemen may continue their
ancient possessions.
Gentlemen would so refourme themselves, as to plant in them such worthy
minds, as I have read the Roman Gentlemen sometimes to have borne, in such
sort as after the like deformity sprung up amongst them, the consideration
thereof did so nearly touch the^ being moved thereunto, as it should seem by
that good Emperor Alexander Seuerus, That the Gentlemen in short time did
grow into such a disliking with them selves, and of the manner of the dealing
betwixt them, and the rich Citizens, and Usurers: as that they did count it
such an abasement to the name of a Gentleman, to be bound unto any rich
Citizen or Usurer: As rather the Gentlemen did choose too take upon them all
painful exercises, such as were most consonant unto the title of Gentlemen,
both in martial feats and other actiuities, and to content themselves to fare
honestly, not delicately, too go apparelled Gentlemanlike, comely, although
not sumptuouly, unless it were in case of triumph, for the honor of their
Prince and Country: And so did testify the true valor which should remain
in Gentlemen: whereby the signs and tokens of bearyng of Arms might rightly
be demerited, so gained unto themselves through their valiant stomachs and
politic wits, Some by framing themselves to become good Counselors at home,
And some by atchiuing of worthy enterprises by their Martial service abroad,
both tending to the commodity and benefit of their native Country.

Lo here you may see what Persons may condingly bear the signs and tokens
of arms: Most contrary to one bare reason, that the fatnes of the earth does
put in good liking the serviceable steed, and the millers hackney vnagreeable
with the true rules and accident of arms, which ought to be followed by the
steps of virtue, and worthy deserving without desire of vain glory.

A dehortation to private grudge, as the second cause of the destruction of
the Romans reign.
THis evil is such as may hardly be avoided and repressed, by reason that
the same is covered by many under the vile cloak of deep dissimulation, as
Hypocrites bearing Honey in their mouths, poison in their hearts, and
deceiptes in their deeds, and so shall receive the reward with ungodly
persons. As it is a lamentable age, where the people say they cannot live,
without the foul vice of dissimulation: and that appears in this, that where
we do think that goodness should harbor, therefrom proceeds all kind
of sin and wickedness, and where we believe truth to be lodged, there
sleeps deep deceue, I mean out of the frowardnes of the heart of man, most
contrary to this good doctrine, Mercy and righteousness should kiss each other,
Love Faith, and charity, should join hands with concord and unity, which
God grant for his mercies sake speedily to confirm in the hearts of all
Christians especially of the people of England according to such examples, as
are written, for our understanding.

Also it is written of one Salust, who at his death warned his sons to agree
within themselves, alleging unto them, that by concord and unity, small
things may be increaced, but by discord the greatest things that ever were
will decay, and be brought too naught.

Also it is noted of one Lycurgus, that certain Citizens writing unto him too
know how they might best resist their enemies: his answer unto them was, If
you shall be content to live poor as you are in the fear of God, and to
abstain from mutual dissension. By which reasons it is apparent, and most
certain that to fear God and obey his word, with a constant faith, is not
only the very key of Religion, but the same is also an assured wara^tise, of
the prosperous success of all Councels, and matters so taken in hand, without
any further distruste of Gods providence, without the which if a Sparrowe light
not upon the house top, how much more will he safely conduct the enterprises
and affairs of all such as do not attempt or take any thing in hand, but
that first the fear of GOD, and the advancement of his word is chiefly
regarded, in such wise as the good success of all other our external actions
ought not to be doubted of. For wavering and distrusting minds, do manifest the
weakness of the faith of the people, from whom the evil nature of private
grudge ought to be abandoned. Albeit that the rebellious nature of man is
such, as that some will not know, and some will not understand, that brethren
divided among themselves may not endure: Nor a City divided in it self,
cannot stand. As for example, if a man take a Faggot in his hands and assaye
to break, the Faggot being bound fast together, it is a thing impossible,
albeit the same be but little and short. But once disseuer the band and knot
where with it is tied, and then the sticks severally are subjected to be
broken easily: which being so, then it is behoofull for christian brethren to
be firmly joined in the ba^ds of concord and unity, without being
acquainted with distrustfulnesse of Gods providence, and that no man having
built his faith upon Gods word, and truly depending on Christ, should not
need to doubt of a perfect peace. So long as they continue in the fear of god
and do enjoy the same our most gracious sovereign Queen, whom God in his
mercy has vouchsafed to place so myraculously to be his chosen of ye seed of
David, for the deliverance of his little flock of England, for the
preservation whereof, her Majesty has had so great a care hitherto as it is
evident, that the mighty hand of God from time to time has bin her director.
And so no doubt of it, the same our eternal God will continue his good
blessings toward her gracious goodness, as to protect her in all the rest of
the course of this life, to the maintenance of a continual peace, whereof all
her loving subjects may the better assure themselves if they do abstain from
mutual dissension, without murmuring or grudging with the disobedient
Israelites, what time God wrought so great benefits and wonders for them, by
the hand of his servant Moses. And again, how those people notwithstanding
by their murmuring Exodus 16.
and grudging, provoked the highest to be displeased with them, for their
disobedience, which is included in three special points or principles. The
first is, that his people should fear too offend and provoke his
omnipotency: in the second principal is conceined the due obedience that all
people and nations do owe unto their natural Prince, Superiors, and
Governors. And in the third is contained, the love which we do owe unto our
neighbors, and no self love to our selves, for avoiding the punishments,
threatened for the contrary. For where any people or nation are repugning unto
those three principles, there God is not duly praised, and the Prince and
Rulers are as frowardly obeyed, and the people do seem altogether to depend
upon their corrupt affections. But what followed, where God at any time in
former ages has so been contemned, and disobeyed: Ye shall find it written,
in the fourth book of Esdras, And like as the death was in Adam: So was the
water floods also in the time of Noah, namely Noah and his household being
lest, of whom came all righteous men. And it happened that when they that dwelt
upon the earth began too multiply and had gotten many children and were a great
people, they began too be more ungodly then the first. Now when they all
lived so wickedly before thee O God: theu did choose thee a man from among
them, whose name was Abraham, him thou louedst, and unto him only thou
shewedst thy will, and made an everlasting couenaunte with him, promysing him
that thou would never forsake his seed: and unto him thou gave Isaac,
and unto Isaac also thou gave Jacob and Esau: as for Jacob thou did choose
him, and put back Esau and Jacob became a great multitude. As it happened that
when thou leddest his seed out of Egypt.

And it follows, how God did for those people great wonders, and yet god
took not away their wicked heart, where in Adam transgressed and was overcome,
and so be al they that are borne of him. And in consideration thereof, this
good Prophet in this Chapter in his co^plaining of the wickedness of the
people, says thus: When my soul saw so many evil doers, in the thirtieth
year, my heart failed me, for I saw thou sufferedst them in such
ungodliness, and sparedst the wicked doers: but thine own people have thou
rooted out, and preserved thine enemies, and this have thou showed me. This
part of Scripture may justly stir a fear in us of this age, who all would be
accounted Gods people, and yet in the manner of many our lives far ods. For
proof whereof, how many masters in London and else where do give unto their
servants wicked examples, in lading their brethren with deceaueable wares,
such and in such deformed sort as nothing degressing from the nature of
Usury, as by the reckoninges and accountes, wc I have both known and heard
such ill conscioned persons do make more gaynefull returns by such their
wicked and deceivable means, then many honest trauayling Merchantes by their
tedious travails and aduenturing into foreign and far countries. So that by
such perverse means, the bounds of Christian amity are much impeached, and
as it were in a manner laid waste too the increasing of discord and private
grudge. Unto whom are joined in League many evil disposed walking mates, of
whose several euilles you may try and discern at large as follows.

Against the corrupt nature of Usury, taking the original of the evil seed
of Private gain,
THE greatest evil that can be thought upon, crept into the heart of man, is
this that a great number in London and else where, do so play their part in
such execrable and cursed manner, to the aduaunsing of that damnable trade: as
it may be thought that all such have been taught in that wicked profession in
some diuelyshe school, from whence such scholars, are grown expert and
cu^nyng in that profession, as it seems most of them have so far proceeded
in such sort as their damnable scholemaister can teach them no further: inso
much as many of them have more shifts of such school points, then the
Devil himself, whose disciples all Usurers do show themselves to be. By
the which deformity, they do disguise and defame themselves: as I have read
that Harphilus and his adherentes were the strongest thieves that robbed on the
Sea: So the Usurers of late years are so monstruously grown up in England
that they exceed al thieves on the land, as one of that trade by the like
words acknowledged of himself, in saying that he had been a Thief too all
the world, and so dyed desperately, greatly thereby prouooking Almighty God
too hasten his heavy vengeance, too the cutting of of Satan's cruelty, who
hathvsurped as it were in bewitching of the hearts of men, by such vyllanous
means as he finds men most subject to his thraldom: as fitting to his
purpose, he has not left unmindful the vile trade of usury, which so rightly
is expounded, by the Greek and Hebrew definitions, who do apply usury unto
the biting and eating up of men's flesh, and as it were to bray and bruise their
bones in a mortar. And yet usurers will not cease to run on, more like
Helhoundes then Christians, As though there were no punishmente threatened from
GOD for so grievous offenses committed against him and his word: for no
obedience to GOD nor duty to their Prince can restrain them from their
abomination: But that they will needs hazard more then the laws of the
realm can provide for, for repressing of their wickedness. For some of them
will not let to hazard both bo^^ (...) soul and all that ever they have: where
by it may appear that oftentimes such are not excuseable of murder, for that
many a good man by such wicked means have bin so ouerlade^ by the oppression
of Usury. Insomuch yt some so ouercharged have taken thought and dyed, leaving
their wives and children in distress too cry for vengeance for so horrible a
fact. The end whereof no doubt of it unto all the practicioners, will be
destruction and endless damnation, unless all such do speedily return
unto God, not only by repentance: but also with making of restitution as is
required in the book of Numbers Cap. 5. and 6. And as it appears how some
have lived insole^tly, and dyed miserably. So here may you read of one that
confessed him self penitently and recovered mercifully having grace offered him
in the time of his extreme sickness, confessed himself as follows, in the
presence of diverse woorshipfull and of good credit.

Seeing I must die, wc I assure you I never thought would have come to pass by
this disease wherewith it has pleased GOD too touch me: I do now most
heartily desire you in the reverence of God, and for Christ's sake to suffer me
to speak until I be dead, that I may discharge my conscience, and yield
myself wholly unto almighty God my Savior and redeemer: upon whose justice
when I behold, I am condemned eternally: But on the other side, if I look upon
his mercies, then I trust he will show unto me as unto the worst sort of
men, among who^ I assure you I account my self one: for never man had so much
showed him as I have had, and so little regarded it, as I have done: Wherefore
good masters for Christ his sake give ear unto me, and I will tell you
strange things the wc strange things, I do assure by the faith that I bear
unto God, I speak not of vayng lory, or praise of my self or any other cause,
but only tha^k god for his great mercies showed unto me diverse and sundry
ways, and also too accuse my adversary the Devil.

It is so that when I was a child I was brought up with a good father and
good mother, who used me and other their children virtuously, and kept us for
an hour or two every morning at prayers: and when prayers were done, at our
books. And in the after noone we were wont to play in an Orchard near
adjoining unto my fathers house. Where as oftentimes for the space of three
years there appeared unto me in a thick hedge a goodly and comfortable vision
too behold, so lovingly and tenderly, as ever any man living might desire and
wish, showing such especial tokens of Gods great goodness and mercies
toward me, as I think never mortal man could wyshe the like, which I have
ever kept secret to my self until this present time, for mine own comfort
and consolation. Now good masters for Christ his sake give ear unto me, and
continue in prayers still. So it is that long after I came here to London,
where I was married, sithe^s which time I assure you I have offended my Lord
and Savior Christ Jesus so sore and manyfoldly, by committing of such
abominable usury as I am afraid I shall be condemned eternally: and indeed one
great occasion was, because I never gave my self too prayer as I was wont to
do, but spent my time in ouermuche worldliness, for which my conscience did
oftentimes accuse me, which striving within me brought me into a marvelous
great fear of mind, so that never man was in such a case of long time. And
in this last Term being in great trouble of mind, the self same vision
appeared unto me again, and put me in remembrance of Gods especial
goodness and graces before offered unto me, and also in respect of many other
things, wylled me too leave the trouble of the law, and all the business of
the world. Sithe^s which time I assure you, I have left of all, and so
disposed my self to live with that which the Lord has sent me notwithstanding
I will show you stranger things, insomuche that the second night after I fell
sick of this my present sickness, being of perfect memory, and in my bed
broad awake, there appeared unto me such strange and fearful things
which greatly amassed me, and put me in a wonderful fear, I cannot tell what
I should term them or call them, but as I remember they were like Puppets
which ran up and down my chamber, my bed, and upon my body, tossed me,
pulled me, stirred me, and so vexed me as I was never in my life so troubled,
showing me so terrible and fearful sightes, that I was almost brought to
destruction utterly, so far forth that I could not tell what too do. Yet at
the last remembering my self calling too mind the wonderful graces, that my
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, had at diverse and sundry times showed me, I
said in my self (O good Lord) what do all these things mean? With that
there appeared unto me my former vision again, and showed me in writing all
the sums of usury money which I had received in my life time, so plainly that
I read the^: And indeed the sums were true and every man named with who^ I
had occupied that trade, and the several sums, showing me so plainly every
thing as I assure you I much marueiled at it. At the last I made answer too my
vision and said, O Lord all these things be true indeed, what shall I do to
it? Then my vision made me answer, and comforted me very much, and commanded
me too repaye all the Usury money again to every man as he had showed me the
sums which came unto 18. hundred pounds. Then he bad me pay again fifty
pound which I had gained for buying of a house, and a hundred and twenty pounds
which I had gotten by strangers as Italians and such like, and because I knew
not where the said strangers dwelt, to give it to good prisoners, and good men
that were in Prisons. And masters I cannot tell of what religion you be of,
nor to tell you the truth I care not to the end too accuse my adversary the
Devil: So as indeed I have restored some part already, and will render al, God
willing, and will pay all the money gained by Usury as my vision commanded
me, and do so intend God willing to do tomorrowe if I live so long: If not,
I will desire a special friend of mine as my trust is in him, to see the same
discharged, and presently to pay out the same, that my soul may abide no
perrill therefore. And these things have justly happened unto me, for I assure
you I have not used to pray as I was wont to do, nor never went to the Church
at time of common Prayer, because it condemned mine own conscience, for
suffering me to commit such abominable sins of Usury, and others most
detestable against the will of my heavenly Father, who of the largeness of his
mercy so manyfold and sundry times did show me such evident and singular
tokens of his graces and mercies. And thus my visionleft me, sithence which
time I assure you I have had as much quietness as any man can wish, and have
seen such comfortable sightes, as neither heart can think, nor tongue can
express. And so this reconciled person desired the minister being present to
say the vii. Psalm, Glory be to God on high, and then he thought to have
died. But the^ the breath being given him, he revived again, and fell to
prayer, and gave himself wholly to quietness, but shortly after he departed
this life. And as I find of this one so reconciled to God, so I can not
learn, but that as the number of such are very rare and contrary to many such
as God has suffered to perish through that sin as appears unto what
miserable end, the trade of Usury brought many Jews who occupied the same
trade in this land in former ages, in such wise as it is affirmed in our
chronicles. Thatthere were certain Jews inhabiting in ye City of York.
Insomuch as for some one of their profession exacted upon a Christian An. 2.
Richa. 1.
for lone of money, certain of the inhabitaunts of the same City, erected
themselves to be avenged in such sort as they distressed all the said Jews
into a Tower of the Castle there: which the Christians assailed, and the Jews
proffered money to be in sauegard, but the people would not accept it: In
somuche as it is said that through the wicked counsel of one of their men of
law, all the said Jews so distressed agreed too cut the throats of al their
wives and children, and to cast their dead bodies over the Walls upon the
Christians heads, which horrible fact they having desperately performed the
rest not so slain set fire on the Tower wherein they were, and consumed
themselves by fire. Lo here a just reward for so damnable a trade,
themselves to be the executioners of their own wives and children heaping
vengeance upon them selves in a damnable manner: So as it is noted 600. Jews
besides their wives and children thus miserably dyed. And as it seems by the
story that they undertook so too dye for their law: But Englishmen are
Christians, then let such do the deeds of christianity, being forbidden by
gods law, and politic laws, have so ordained, that no man should win or
obtain a pray by an other man's simplicity or ignorance, nor by any false
means, or malice, contrary to the dealings among the people in this age, where
no difference seems to be made betwixt honest and lawful bargaining, and
corrupt bargaining. Whereupon Plato writes, that that which is separated from
justice, is rather to be called craftiness then wisdom: In especially
practiced by those that profess Christ, who ought to know that all such as
follow men's traditions and their own inventions, do as it were forsake God and
his word, by the measuring of his word by their own corrupt wills and
affections, tempting god thereby.

And as a false Diamo^d is not set in a Ring without a subtle foil, in such
wise as the deceit of the deceiuer may hardly be discovered without the help of
an expert Lapidarie: So Usurers are not without their subtle shifts and
arguments for to color and defend their false and deceivable practices.
Insomuchas some of the^ dosay that such places of the scriptures as are written
in reproouing of Usury, is not so intended nor to be applied against their

For then say they, that no man may buy and sell without committing of Usury,
and so they do dwell upon a nyse point of definition what Usury is, albeit
the evil nature thereof does demonstrate and declare it self contrary too the
condition of such commendable buying and selling as ought to be orderly
performed in the fellowshipp of men, without the compass or having to do with
Usury. As it is manifest, that when any honest Merchaunt or Retayler of wares,
do put the same to sale, the manner thereof is put in use in open market, and
that by some known sign, without the sinister dealings that usurers do
practice, whose dwelling places are not easy to find out from other men's, for
want of a Sign, which is not so agreeing to their profession, as experience
teaches, for as much as the name of an Usurer, is not only hateful to all
good men, but also lothsom unto the Usurers themselves: So as their dwelling
places are as subtle as the lurking of the Serpent that lies hidden under
green leaves, and Usurers by their apparel may as hardly be discerned as a
Strumpet from an honest woman, only the difference rests in the trial of
their several conuersations and manner of living: Insomuche that it is noted in
a Parliament holden by the famous King Edward the first of England, yt
amongst other things Usury was An. Reg. ^.
forbidden to the Jews, and that they might be known from Christians, the
King commanded them to wear a Table the breadth of a palm upon their outmost
garment.

The examples are not few whereby Christians are forbidden the vile trade of
Vsurye, as testifies the word of God.

Jeremy in propheciyng of the miseries of the Jews, and the causes, says
thus, O mother alas that ever thou did bear me, an enemy and hated of
the whole land, though I never lent nor received upon usury, yet all men speak
evil upon me. And the Lord answered lead not I then unto good?

Thou shall occupy no Usury to thy Deuteronomy. 23. Exodus 22. Leuit. 25.
brother, neither with money nor food, neither with any manner of thing that
Usury may be used withal, that the Lord thy God may bless thee in all that
thou take in hand.

If thou lend a poor body, says God, thou shall not lie down too sleep with
his pledge, but shall deliver him his Deuteronomy. 23.
pleadge again, when the Sun goes down: That he may sleep in his own
raiment and bless thee. So shall the same be reckoned unto thee for
righteousness before the Lord thy God.

God speaking by the mouth of his Prophet Ezech. 22.
says, Thou have received gifts to shed blood: thou have taken usury and
increase: Thou have oppressed thy neighbor by extortion, and forgotten me
says the Lord.

Moreover it is written, if a man be godly, and do the thing that is equal
and right, he greeueth no body, he gives Psalm. 14.
his debtor his pledge again, he parts his meat with the hungry, he
clotheth the naked, he lends nothing upon Usury, Ezech. 18.
he withdraws his hand from doing wrong, he handeleth faithfully bebetweene
man and man, he shall surely live faith the Lord God.

And to try the Usurers ungracious substance, to be geathered most agree
able too the nature of swines feeding, that as those beasts do soonest
increase their fatty substance in time of year The manner of usurers gathering
of their substance,
when Acorns are aptest to be had, not forcing what trespass they do too
any neighbor, according too their beastly kind. So fares it with Usurers, who
so long as they may increase their corrupt money either by lands, iewelles, or
plate, they will not be unoccupied that ways, And some of the^ be so basely
minded, as if Acorns be past their reach. Then will they listen with attentive
ear, where any Swill or Draffe is too be had whereon they may satisfy
their greedy appetites, with deceaueable Wares, which they call Commodities,
householdstuffe, Apparel, and such like, as nothing comes amiss too such
monsters. Insomuche as it is too be thought that if the Devil should come to
an Usurer and demand his share of interest, that the usurer would put it in
practice to defeat his partner. for it is not to be thought otherwise, but
that he who has so many shifts too check his Christian brethren, will not be
unprovided of one shift to mate the Devil. In the mean time till they come to
scratching for the game, the Usurers neglect not the help of their ungracious
Brokers, to the end they may not forsloe no time upon Bills of sales, and
otherwise to help to draw the Usurers into Hell, wyshing all such while they
have time and space too pray too GOD, that it may please him in his mercy, so
too touch their hearts with such a repentant mind speedily to return from
committing such abominations, least that such their facting do turn to
their own harms, and too the Deuilles profit. For it is most true that those
things, which have been men's delights in this life, as causes of offenses
shall eftsoons be made the instruments of their torments in time to come,
unless the grace of God in this life may move them more duetifully to
obedience toward GOD and their Prince, with love to their neighbors, as
every Christian man ought to do.

As floods that flow against their kind,
are best restrained by contrary wynd:
So such as rise inordinately,
must be repressed by policy.
But unto such as after many warnings from God and his word, delivered by the
mouth of his ministers: and nothing may move the frowardnes of the Usurer to
return, from hallyng sin together, as it were with Cartropes: Then may it
rightly be said to all such. O ye foolish Galathians, who has bewitched you:
O ye generation of Vipers, Matthew. 12.
who has taught you to flee from the vengeance to come: In deed ye may flee,
but ye shall not escape: for God has a cup prepared for such, and they shall
drink the bitter draught of his vengeance, and receive the reward of
iniquity. In dislyking of which woeful estate, God be thanked, there are a
number in London and else where, whose appetites may not be framed, neither
would if they might feed on such evil conditioned substance, as is
accumilated and gotten together by the wicked trade of Usury, but do rather
abhor the same, as too loathsome a feeding for a Christian man's profession:
by reason of the ill disgestion which the same does carry with it: for
experience teaches yt such unprofitable substance may not well agree nor
continewe with those who do fill and cloy their stomachs therewith. And
surfiting thereby, can not be at quiet till such time as they have discharged and
unladen them selves thereof again, although to their great indangering both of
body and soul. For assuredly such ill gotten substance is of an infectious
condition and evil operation.

As appears by this doctrine of S. Luke, where it is written. Take heed lest
at any time your hearts be overcome Luke. 21.
with surfiting and drunkenness, and the cares of this worlds life: and so the
day come upon you unawares. For as a suare shall it come upon all them that
dwell on the face of the whole earth. Watch you therefore continually and
pray, that ye may escape al those things that shall come, and that ye may
stand before the Son of man: and the better to draw on all Usurers and all
ungodly persons, to the end that their deformities might become loathsome unto
them selves: I would to God that every one did bear it written in the
forehead of their hearts: As it is written in the Prophecy of Abdy. Like as
thou have done, so shall thou us done with all.

For so is the way to find grace and mercy with God, that every one both man and
woman do refourme the^ selves, and refrain from having to do with the
fellowship of ungodliness, as that no man to lie for his own avail, to accuse
wrongfully, to prevent deceitfully or frawdule^tly. So rich men should not be
envied for their riches, nor poor men oppressed by reason of their poverty,
and the^ should mutual love be maintained in a common wealth, far different to
such evils as the evil nature of private grudge, and private gain has
enforced in the hearts of men which works much trouble amongst the people,
where so great evils have araied themselves against the peace of the land, as
more plainly appears by the manifold contentions dailye moved and slyred
among the people, in their going too law one with another, yeldyng them selves
to every vain passion of their minds, as it is to be noted by the abuse in
that behalf.

Against the frowardnes and absurdity of Clyents at the Law.
ALthough it be true that the law is necessary in every common wealth, for
keepyng of the people in their due obedience, and that every man may enjoy his
own, according to the peace of the land, yet the abuse of the law is not so
expedient: for oftentimes it so falls out, that what some Lawyers do so
gainfully get, many their Clyents forgoeth more peruersly. As for insample may
be discerned by the tide Boats, in the passing too and fro London: How one
comes up with the wind, by easy labor: an other goes down against the
tide by painful toil, and not without danger of shipwreck: so to be put to
their shifts, especially when a sudden storm arises unlooked for, with a
contrary wind: for in such cases passengers are most subject to be
endangered and indamaged: which notwithstanding it fares not so with those
that do come up the very self same tide, keeping the Lee shore, having both
wind and tide, with them, seldom sustaining any damage in their course, be
the wind never so contrary to others that go down. Albeit, such as come up
are not freed of all misfortune, as some times subject to be ouerrunne by a
greater ship or vessel, or such like casualties: which as they do seldom
happen, by reason of the good conducte of the Lodesman: yet it can dot be
denied, but that such casual blastes may happen, as are most too be feared,
when the wether waxes dark and glummy.

But for better proof, that the evil of private grudge and private gain,
does more profit to the Lawyers then unto any other profession, it is easy to
be discerned by the diligence that is used by a great number of people
traueiling from far, to the end to help the Lawyers in with their harvest,
which is four Terms or seasons of the year: during which times, many Lawyers
are diligent husbands for them selves, in their attending and gathering of
their private gain. But how stack many of them be, in dispatchyng of their
Clyentes causes does manifestly appear by the prolonging of their suits by
all dilatory means: Insomuch as notwithstanding it is to be thought, that there
is no Counselor at the law worthy so to be allowed, but that upon perfect
instructions delivered unto him, he is able to say or should say, of his
learned knowledge, whether the case so put unto him be in right and truth to be
maintained or not. But this Maxim with many is a Fallax in the law, for that
the same is not agreeing with many of that profession. So to play the part of
expert and cunnyng Surgions, who sounding the depth of their patients wounds,
will forthwith minister a speedy curyng salve: But rather too many have
cunnyng to play the part of an ill conditioned Surgion, who having sounded
his Patients grief, and upon trial finding, that his Patient has any store
of herbs in his Gardeine, straightway will apply a detractiue plaster
thereby to try their cunnyng, and so does practice the same so long as they
find their Pacient to have any such herbs as will work to their minds.
And in the mean time such bears his poor Patient in hand, that his grief
had been sooner cured, if some time one impediment, some time an other had not
hyndered the cause in working, according to the quilities and slintes of the
law, till such time as all his Patientes herbs are spent, by the froward
means of such Surgions, and many a man so left comfortless, and void of hope
of recovery of that which by good means might better have been helped, or else
not to have been taken in hand at all.

Notwithstanding it is certain, that herbs do work much in curing, but the
better if they be applied in their right nature and condition: in such sort as
men can not use the Surgions practice, without much pain to be endured by his
patient, especially if the Surgion be indurate of heart: So assuredly men can
not go to law one with an other with such quietness of mind, as it is by
some supposed. For proof whereof, if men would examine in them selves how
difficult a thing it is, for Christian brethren too spend their time in
following law matters: It will easily appear, that for the most part, such
common posting to law as now a days is used, is not performed without great
grief and vexation of the mind. As first either the party plaintiue or
defendaunt, or both enter not into suit without offense and grudge of
conscience. And nextly, their money in their purses will not be at quiet till
their proper owner be eased thereof by Lawyers: although with the more pain
if the Clyents are dwelling far from London, following oftentimes their own
evil affections, as they are moved through the vain passions of their mynds,
leaving their more needful affairs at home undone, not only to their own
harms, but perhaps sometimes to the want of some of their pore wives and
children, in need of that which some fond husbands do so wastfully and
wilfully consume in a desperate manner: without their more due consideration,
what inconveniences may grow unto them selves, by feeding their vain humors,
in attempting the law for every frivolous matter, whereupon action will lie,
and oftentimes upon no ground at all, stirring matters of contention where no
cause is. As a strange case that sensible men should delight to weary their
bodies by traueyling from far: to the end to depart from their goods in so
ill condition, wherein truly the Lawyers are not so much to be blamed in the
attentiveness of their private gain, as many fond Clyents by procuring their
own pain. For before the Lawyer was troubled with such Clients and their
troublesome causes, and fraighted with their hard gotten money, the Lawyer did
sit, and perhaps might sit quietly at his book: and in the winter to call for
a fire to warm him: whereas now the over much folly of many Clyents has and
does maintain the Law. yers to be both warm within and abroad: while many
harebraynde Clyents must tarry and attend without, having forgon that by their
own frailty and wilfulnes, which would have kept them selves warm at home
many a cold day, and eased them of many a paynefull journey. For proof
thereof, my self have learned by experience, included in these verses following:

Who so that is forced the law to pursue,
must offer the Lawyer more the^ his due:
But such as can keep them selves therfro,
shall find relief of troubles and woe:
Qui ante no^ cauet, to late may repent,
Wherefore with thine estate be thou co^te^t.
Whereby it is to be noted, the ignorance wherein many do show them selves
to be blinded, with the little confidence which one neighbor seems to have
in an other. In so much as I have thought both my self and many others
deceived in that behalf, who setting a part the trust of affiaunce, which
ought to be reposed in honest and discreet neighbors, have obstinately
thrown them selves into great charges, with the discommodittes before
rehearsed. Albeit, daily experience teaches, that after long and tedious suit
maintained, the end of all issues grow to one of these two points, that
either the parties are persuaded by, friends, or by their Lawyers to put the
matter in comprimyse, or else the nature of the law does award a Jury of
twelve men to try the issue, in such wise as perhaps no one of the said
twelve are known, neither unto party playntyue, or defendaunt: or if to the
one, yet not to the other. Whereupon I deem this old adage did grow, That as a
man is befriended, so is the law ended. So as often times it falls out, that
those carrye away the blows, who least distrusted their cause: far
contrary to their expectations: In such sort, as were it not much better that
such unskillful persons had never hazarded them selves in the fray. As often
the matter does hang a year or two doubtful, in whom the victory shall rest:
and yet in the end one word may be so taken at the vantage, as the spending
of many a pound may not cure the wound made thereby.

And by such means the bounds of christian amity is much impaired. In so much
as Christian love and neighbourhead appears to be very cold, where the people
may not be persuaded so to frame the^ selves, as to commyt their common causes
of controversy, to the hearing and deciding of the worshipful Gentlemen nere
unto them adjoining, or unto their honest discreet neighbors. For it is very
unlike that a stranger who dwells far distant from us, and altogether
ignorant of our dispositio^s and conuersations, should sooner provide a redemie
the^ our known neighbors, and such as we are daily conversant with all: and
unto whom our inclinations and manners of living is better known.

As also no sensible man ought to be ignorant, that honest neighbors will hold
themselves more thankfully content with one friendly intertainme^t after their
trauayles used in such behalf, then the Lawyers will account of their many
fees. But me thinks, I hear some say, mine adversary dwells far distaunt
from me: unto whom I answer, not so. But that if thou account any thy
Christian brethren for thine adversary, then take heed of thy Adversary the
Devil, for he is nearer unto thee then thou art aware off: And appears not
to be far from such, as have chosen to dwell in malice and grudge of
conscience many years, yea, perhaps to their ending day.

And again me thinks I hear some say, that my neighbors upon some grudge may
be corrupted, which I can not deny: But then it must needs follow, that the
people are very evil disposed, and in a badde case, where corruption may so
take place in the hearts of such as profess the name of God: that so many may
not be found to speak in true judgment betwixt neighbor, and neighbor,
brother and brother: to the vnityng and norishing of brotherly love and
fellowship, in such sort as ought to be desired among all such as bear the
names of Christians: As we are taught in sundry places of the scriptures. In
so much as S. John writing in his first Epistle and John. 2.
second Chapter. This is the tidings that ye heard from the beginning, that
ye should love one another, not as Cayn, which was that wicked, and slew his
brother: And wherefore ^^ue he him: Because his own works were evil, and his
brothers good.

And again it is written in the same Chapter: God is love, and he that
dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him. Herein is ye love perfect in
us, that we have trust in the day of judgment: for as be is, even so are we
in this world. There is no fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear,
for fear has paynefulnes, for he that fears, is not perfect in love.

We love him for he loved us first: if a man say he love God, and yet hate
his brother, he is a liar. For how can be that loves not his brother, whom
he has seen, love God whom he has not seen? And this commandment have
we of him: that he which loves God, should love his brother also.

Lo here the true form, what brotherly love is required at our hands from
God: whereunto we should the rather bend our selves, for that as in the old
law they had the sacrifices: So now God be thanked, and so gra^ious a Queen,
England does possess the true sacraments: to the endless comfort of all such
as have in them selves a (...) ^esire unto true judgment and ryghteousnes,
which I pray God to plant in the hearts of the people: And so being performed,
I am persuaded that there would not be so many froward suits maynteyned in
England, even as it were for stirring of strawes, upon every frivolous
clause. In so much as if the people could discern ryghtlye in them selves
what small goodness comes of frowardnes, maliciousnes, and deceitfulness. I
judge that there would not be such throng in Westminster Hall, as in this our
age is now followed with greediness, in weariyng the Lawyers in trudging from
bar to bar, whereunto they are not easily hired. Neither the Notaries and
Scriueners, should not need to occupy and busy their heads in devising and
framing large instruments of writings, with covenant upon covenant, and
bond upon bond, and all to little, as now things are abused in such
lamentable wise, that oftentimes in place of true dealyng and keeping of
promise betwixt man and man, now one couyn follows an other, and deceit is
met with the like, in such odious manner as if hell were broken loose, and the
wicked spirits raging every where, inanimatyng the people to become like them
selves. Albeit, it is most true, that the Devil is the father of all lies
(whereupon the Prophet Micheas has set down unto us an excellent form, how
all such as profess Micheas. 6.
Christ should behave them selves, and to flee deceitfulnes: Speaking thus, I
will show thee O man, what is good, and what Miche. ^
the Lord requires of thee: namely to do right, to have pleasure in loving
kindness, to be lowly, and to walk with God, that thou may be called a
City of the Lord, and that thy name might be righteousness. Hear O ye Tribes,
who would else give you such warnyng, should I not be displeased, for the
unrighteous good in the houses of the wicked, and because the measure is
diminished: or should I justify the false Balances, and the bag of deceitful
weightes, among those that be full of riches, unrighteously gotten: where the
Citizens deal with falsehood, speak lies, and have deceitful tongues in their
mouths? Therefore will I take in hand to punish them, and to make thee
desolate because of thy sins. Thou shall eat and not have enough: thou shall
flee, but not escape?

And in the prophet Esai, Christ, reproving Esai. ^
the wickedness of evil doers, says, O all ye false of promise, companions of
thieves, that love gifts altogether, and gape for rewards. Therefore says
the Lord God of hosts, I must ease me of mine enemies, and avenge me of mine
Adversaries.

By which doctrine all Christians are willed to avoid so great threatenynges
from God: and hereby we learn, that no man can keep his hands clean from
deceites and bribes, except he first wash away the covetous desires from his
heart, and so shall we obtain a true judgment: In so much that where the
people have no feelyng desire in them selves of such judgment, let them the^
beware of Christ's judgment, and learn in time to be more careful how to
frame them selves toward God and their neighbor, both in heart and tongue.

As for ensample, if a prisoner being brought before a Judge to be tried by
the laws of this realm, and that the prisoner standing upon his trial should
let pass some speech, making against him self, which being so taken in trip
by the Judge, the prisoners life might be hazarded thereby, would not such a
one gladly wish in his heart that he had refrained his tongue from such his
unadvised speech, tending to his destruction. How much more ought we,
miserable creatures fear to commit so great (...) and wicked deeds worthy of
death, (...) excusable before the high majesty o^ our eternal God.

And to the end that no man should so flatter him self, as to say, that God
is no such severe Judge, let every one take unto him self the ensample of the
ten virgins spoken of in the Gospel, of whom Matthew. ^5.
five were so negligent, as having no oil in their Lamps, whereby to have
entered in with the Bridegroom, who passing by, and findyng five of them so
unprovided, as that they were excluded their entering in with the bridegroom,
when as the other five wise, entered in with joy, having oil in their vessels,
and lights in their Lamps, and were made partakers of the promised reward,
whereas the other five were sequestered from the benifit thereof: as unto them
reckoned for folishnesse by reason of the sudden coming of the Bridegroom.
And in so much as those folish virgins after coming unto ye gate said, Lord,
Lord, open unto us: but he answered and said, verily I say unto you, I know
you not, watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor yet the hour (...)
the Son of man shall come. Which ignorance of those foolish could not excuse
nor avail the^ in saying would to God we had done as the other did, for they
came too late, and the gate was put too. But me thinks I hear some say, that
it concerns not me to have taken in hand the handelyng of so weighty
causes: unto whom I answer this, Admyt, that any one would say, that
salvation belonged not unto me, should I yield thereunto: No God forbid: for
although I am no Public Minister, yet am I a publyke Christian. Although some
light disposed persons will not let to say thus, by any whom they perceive to
be godly and better disposed then them selves, Lo he is touched and sauoureth
of the spirit, but we are of the world, and must live after the manner of the
world, To such I say, that this worlds provisions and actions, must so be
tempered with virtue and godliness: as that the one be not distempered by the
over much follye committed in the prosecuting of the other, for there is godly
sorrow, and a worldly sorrow: and two contraryes may not well agree to be
joined together. No man Matthew. 6.
can serve two masters. No man can serve God and Baall. By which reasons all
those that do profess to love God, should hate and shun all things, that are
contrary to his divine will and pleasure: for God is of power to make frustrate
what soever is repugnant to his will. But this doctrine seems to be separated
so far from the most of the people in this age: As it appears, that when
God does touch many with bodily sickness, loss of goods or friends, how
careful every one shows him self, even very pensive and heavy. And yet how
light seems to be set by many grievous and loathsome diseases of the soul,
daily experience teaches. In so much as where it is used in London, in time
of Gods visitation of the plague, to shut up the doors and wyndowes, as a
necessary means to keep the infection of the sick from the sound: even so
assuredly it is a most needful rule, and the best preservative against the
plague that can be used, that every householder would shut out of their
doors. The sin and wickedness that does abound, wherewith not only the
people, but also sometime the very air is infected, with the iniquity that
can by no means be kept down, but will needs break forth like a flaming
fire. Although all people ought to know and remember, that the same God that
is of power to send health and sickness, wealth, and poverty, does command
all men to flee and avoid sin, and to live after his commandments, as a
perfect rule or direction: which God grant may in time, work such effect,
that sin and wickedness may so be banished, not only out of London, but
also out of all parts whereas God is professed, as that his name may be truly
glo^i^^^d

Against the corrupt dealings of retaylers of wares, and such like.
NOtwithstanding that it may be thought sufficient has been said in the
former treatise of the evil working of private gain among the people, yet the
nature thereof, will not be hyd in some retaylors of wares, as may more easily
appear in the packyng which many of the^ do use with deceites, in every their
several professions, in the vending of their wares, to the abridging of this
adage, That that realm stands best, wherein most members are provided for.
Wherein it is to be understood that such are best to be accounted of, that
do best deserve in profiting their country with their paynful travails,
which in my simple opinion is well performed by three several vocations, yt is
the husba^dma^ which tilleth the ground, and by his diligence as God gives
increase, he from time to time lets no season pass till he have atteyned
the fruit of his painful labor, to the comfort of the commonwealth. Secondly,
the Clothier, who by his diligence sets a work a great number of people,
to the maintenance of the countries where as they are planted, and to the
profit of the whole realm. And thirdly, the Merchaunt aduenturer, a member
that may not be spared, for by them the commodities which may best be spared,
are transported into other countries: and the commodities, which to their
natyue country is most wantyng, that bring they home by way of exchange and
return. As God has given and distributed to every Nation and country, a
several blessyng, for which England is not the least indebted unto God, above
any other nation, in respect of the large measure of Gods sundry benifites
received in such wise: as it may rightly be said, what is most needful for
the supplye of man's necessity, but that England is ple^tifully furnished
withal, especially of food for man's sustenance, and the commodity of wool.
which being transported into cloth, or otherwise according to the laws of this
realm, yeldeth great good to most sorts of people: for which other Nations
can not but think them selves to be rightly beholding unto England, as
appears by the intercourse, sought to be maynteined with England by foreign
Princes: In respect whereof, the fellowship of the Merchant adventurers, have
always declared the^ selves worthy members. As by their sundry careful
endeavors them selves have, and do dailye manifest, not only in adue^nturing
of their substance, in the prosecutyng of their paynfull affairs, with the
benifit which by them is brought into their Princes Coffers, which is not
easily compassed, The property of good Bees.
nor without adventure of their lines, like unto good and profitable Bees, who
in their trade do much differ from the idle Drones, and such as make great
buzzing to the disturbance of the good trauellyng Bees, whose inclination upon
examination you shall find more profitable then the dronishe ones. To try all
whereof let it be noted how every company of good Bees being separated from
their hiues in gathering of their provision far from home, who upon their
several returns again, no one will covet any other hyue but their own
proper, and that which is incident unto them selves, neither should be suffered
if they would, for that by nature as it should seem, every company of Bees
does so hold together, in such wise, as every one of them does in the
winter possess the fruit of their painful labor gathered in the somer.
Being performed by equal labor not without danger to be crossed in their
travail, some time by one means, some times by an other. In so much as it
appears in the fellowship of good Bees, that the want of the out, is not the
prosperity of the other: And that it seems that their provision is gathered
by them with an indifferent care. Albeit, that there are some, that do
travail further from their home then other some: and as there are both great
and small, so each of them do express forth their goodness by the yeldyng of
their increase: In the perfourmaunce whereof, the good will of each one, seems
to be well allowed, not only to the comfort of their own fellowship, but also
to every common wealth, whereas they are settled and cherished, declaryng the^
selves so worthy to be accounted of, contrary to Wapses, not without evil
stinges in the gathering of their badde provision: And that often times does
appear by the shrewde harm and damage that many an honest man does sustain
by dealyng with such unprofitable cattayle: whose separation is, not only
required from among good Bees, but also their company from among me^.
Nevertheless many of that sort would be thought and reputed as good and
profitable Bees, although no honest bare faced man can well away to have to do
with that sort. From whom it may be thought that many people in this age have
taken ensample, to deal shrewdelye and unjustly with their neighbors, as
daily experience teaches. In somuche as it was a common saying among the
people not long since, that where any one intended to do damage to any
other their Christian brethren or neighbors, it was speeched in a barbarous
manner thus: I warrant you to be overtaken with a crooked measure, by having
to do with such a one: which God knows appears yet to be too too truly
performed by the common practice thereof, contrary to this one good insample.
For the true measuring of corn in all incorporate Cities and Towns in
England, where the true measure is well known to be fastened in a certain
place near unto the market, where as every one may at their pleasures, have
the true use thereof, and not denied to any: which notwithstanding, the
greatest number of the people in their common buiyng and sellyng, do seem to
have set a part to deal in true measure, as hardly to be persuaded to take
so little pains as once to step over the way, or to their next neighbors
door, to the end to speak or deal in truth and true measure, by reason
that the crooked measure is every where so ready. As often times it falls
out too true, that many a true meaning man is overtaken, and some times undone
by such like evil crooked and deceivable means, and yet the Lord has
said, Luke. 3
that all crooked things shall be made straight, and all rough ways shall be
made plain, and all flesh shall see the salvation of their God.

And although all men can say, plain Chapmen or retaylers of wares.
meaning and plain dealyng is best, as in very deed and in truth none can
deny it, so few do follow it. As when any Retaylors, or chapman of wares, do
buy at the Merchauntes hands to sell again. Then such can say, it is naught
it is Pron. 20.
naught, but when he has it, he does praise the same, and that in such
deformed wise, as that many in doubling the falshoode of their tongues,
forbear not to swear in a deceivable manner, that it cost them thus much,
and that they may not aford it under thus much: when as in deed, such their
buying and sellyng tends to deceit: In so much as when some of them have
been reproved for taking Gods name in vain, some such there have been so
impudent as in defense of their evil doing, have answered, that in time of
their swearyng they have deteyned their thoughts in their hearts. Although
all such ought not to be ignorant that God is a searcher of the hearts and
raynes. But what may be said then to such horrible monsters, for I may not
term them men: If there be such as I have heard to be, who will not let to
swear upon a book, and that before any Judge, being hired thereunto for
money. And such are called by the names of Knights of the post, more fitter
for the Gallows, then to live in a common wealth where Christ is professed.
For by such wicked and damnable means, truth is oftentimes put to silence,
and the law is subverted contrary to this doctrine, that who so lists to
live, and would feign see good days, let him refrain his tongue from evil,
and his lips that they speak no guile. But it may well be, that we in this
age do draw nearer unto Gods judgments: which the rather does appear, when
in every ones mouth, yea by the youth every where it is now a common speech
intaking Gods name in vain, for every trifling thing, when it is said, as
Christ shall help me, and as Christ shall judge me, in such deformed sort as
many seems not to take knowledge in what manner Christ shall come in
judgment bringyng wyfull tidings to all such as shall be found to have clean
hearts and undefiled hands. But in a wo^ull and doleful time unto the wicked
whose bearres are corrupted, and hands distained with abominations: as we are
taught in the second Epistle of S. Peter. This first understand, that there
shall come Peter. 3.
in the last days mockers in deceitfulnes which will walk after their own
Iustes: and say, where is the promise of his coming: for since the teachers
dyed, all things continue in the same estate wherein they were at the beginning:
For this they know not and that wilfully, how that the heavens a great while
ago were, and the earth out of the waters appeared up through the water, by the
word of God: by the which things, the world that then was perished, being
ouerrunne with water: but the heavens and earth which are now, In Noah's days,
the old world perished through water: But this world is reserved for fire.
be kept by his word in store, and reserved unto fire against the day of
judgment, and perdition of ungodly men.

Dearly beloved, be not ignorant of this one thing, how that one day is with
the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day. The Lord
that has promised is not slack, as some men count slacknesse: but is patient
to usward. Forasmuch as he would have no man lost, but will receive all men to
repentance. Nevertheless, the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the
night, in the which day, the heavens shall pass away in manner of a tempest,
and the Elements shall melt with heat: the earth also and the works that are
therein, shall burn. Seeing then that all these things shall perish what manner
persons ought ye to be in holy conversation and godliness: looking for, and
hastyng unto the coming of the day of God, by whom the heavens shall perish
with fire, and the Elements shall melte with heat. Nevertheless, we according
to his promise, look for a new heaven and a new earth, wherein dwells
righteousness. Wherefore dearly beloved, seeing that ye look for such
things, be diligent that ye may be found in peace without spotte and
undefiled, and suppose that the long suffering of the Lord is salvation.

By this doctrine every Christian ought not to be ignorant how there is a
great difference betwixt ye record of God and the witness of men, and that
every one should so grow in grace and knowledge of our Lord and savior Jesus
Christ: As that we be not plucked away through the error of the wicked. In
respect whereof to the end that all men may have a due consideration what
manner of dealing God allows among his people in their buiyng and selling, I
have here set down such certain notes as the word of God does direct us unto.

When thou sellest aught to thy neighbor or buiest any thing of him, deceive
Deuteronomy. 25.
nor oppress him not.

Deal not wrongfully with thy neighbor, Leui. 19.
with meateyeard, weight nor measure.

A false Balance is an abomination Prou. 11.
unto thy Lord God. Moreover thou shall not have in thy bag two manner of
weightes, a great and a small: neither shall thou have in thy house two manner
of measures a great and a small. That thy life may be long in the land which
the Lord thy God gives thee: for who so does contrary, is an abomination
unto the Lord God.

Have therefore a regard unto this doctrine, lest that God beholding your
misoemeanour toward him and your neighbor, say this unto you, These people
draw unto me with their mouths Math. 15.
and honor me with their lips, howbeit their hearts are far from me: but
in vain do they serve me.

Moreover it is written, if any man among you seem devout, and refrain not
his tongue, but do deceive his own heart: this man's devotion is in vain.

By which doctrine we are learned, that the eyes of the lord are over the
righteous, and his ears are open to their prayers: and the face of the Lord
beholds all those which do evil and wrong. Whereby it is to be noted, in
what dread men do sometime stand in of their superiors, lest that for some
contempt or disobedience, the transgressors are subject to be sent to ward,
in such wise as in such cases men do seem to be very circumspect. And yet a
great number, through their neglecting their duty and obedience to God, do
unto him stand subject every hour, to be cast into a woeful prison: where it
will be too late for such to say, I would other my friends were warned by me.
For then that may neither avail thee, nor amend them. As we find it written:
That when Dives desired that his other Luke. 16.
brethren might have knowledge of his torments: It was answered him: They have
Moses, the law, and the Prophets.

By which ensample all people are admonished, yt in this life while they have
time and space every one both men and women, to do nothing against a good
conscience, and to examine in them selves, how they do delight to live in the
fear of God, and by their innocence of life, do endeavor them selves to
obtain Gods favor, and so to be brought into the fold mentioned in S. John.
Wherein it is noted, John. 10.
how the sheep of Christ are marked: and with what seals they are sealed
against the day of the Lord: By which parcel of scripture, Christ does
acknowledge his: In that he says, My sheep hear my voice, I know them,
and they follow me, and I give unto them eternal life, which is to be
obtained by earnest repentance, and mortifling of our earthly members, framyng
our felues to be obedient unto the voice of that good shepherd of our souls.
Seeing we feed all in one green pasture under so good a shephearde next
under God: as our gracious Queen, of whom rightly it may be registered in
perpetuu^, That by the permission of God and his protection, her Majesty has
reigned the peaceable Queen and shephearde over the little shepcoate of the
people of England. Wherefore it behooves the people to be as simple as sheep,
and in their yelding like due obedience to God, and our so blessed a
gouernesse, and not to set light by the calling of the Pastors, who watch for
our souls even as those that must give account therefore, and unto such we
owe a duetifull reverence, especially if they be such Pastors and Ministers as
are required in so weighty a business: and whatsoever the Minister be, be he
good or badde, whose conversation if we will needs look upon, yet we must so
look, that our looking be rightly. And although we are forbidden to do as some
of them do: yet we are not forbidden to follow the doctrine which by them is
delivered unto us, out of the word of God. And to try whether our followyng
be rightly, and how we do profit every man in the course of this our
pilgrimage, Let us examine it by these two rules. First, as husbandment can
make no perfect reckoning of his painful labor and travail, The means
whereby each man may eramin in himself how he grows rich to godward.
nor of the increase of his seed sow en in the ground, until he have had some
certain trial of the yield which oftentimes is hindered in the coming up,
in so much, as although it have a prosperous time, first in growyng green and
pleasant to look upon, which notwithstanding it is apparent, that in that
season may happen great imperfection, as to be choked with weeds or blasted.
And albeit, it grow to a more forwardness to earyng, yet it is seen
oftentimes that a tempest comes and beats it down. And if there remain a
hope of plentiful increase, yet the same is not certainly known, how much
it will profit the husvandman, until it be housed in the barn.

And again as the Merchant aduenturer can not perfect their accomptes before
the dangerous adventures be returned in safety, to their wished and desired
port: So as after their merchandise and commodities being vended, then fall
they to casting and Ballaunsing of their recconings. Upon the examination
whereof, they do discern, what and how much they have profited or lost in
their voyage or adventure: and if they find that they are brought behind
hand, and fall short of their recconing, then they examine the cause, which
being found, they become more careful in their; next aduenturing. An such
wise, as by their diligence, and God his blessyng of their trauayles, in so
good co^ditio^, as their former losses oftentyme is restored again with double
increase, to their great comfort and the discouraging of all such as do
fraudently deceive or wastfully consume their goods, and so become bankerupt.

These examples I would wish all men to imitate, by examinyng every one in
him self, how they do grow rich in the perfityng of their account to God
ward. Although it is apparaunt that there are some men which wax rich
otherwise, who show them selves not to know what it is to hear the Lord God
speaking to them by his Prophets: and in this our age delivered unto them by
the mouths of many learned and godly Preachers, whose calling if they may not
be heard and received, according as it is written in the Revelation. He that
has ears let him hear, That is to hear rightly, and with joy, and to
express the fruit thereof in a life agreeable to the same, which if rich men
do refuse to practice, then let it be examined how, and what such and their
posterity shall be the better for riches unlawfully gotten: seeing that the
more they have, the more they want. And that which they have so gotten and
scraped together, shel one day be a witness against them. For it is true,
that although we have here many days, God shall have one day. As the word of
God testifies, That the day of the Lord shall come upon all flesh. And as it
is written in the Gospel of Saint Mark. Except that the Lord should shorten
those days, no man should be saved: Mark. 13.
but for the elects sake which he has chosen, he has shortened those days.
etc.

Moreover it is written in the same Chapter, Thus says the Lord. Til these
things be done, heaven and earth shall pass, but my words shall not pass.
But of the day and the hour knows no man: No not the Angels which are in
heaven, neither the son of man him self, save the father only. Take heed,
watch and pray, for ye know not when the time is. As a man which is gone into
a strange country, and has left his house, and given authority to his
servants, and to every one his work, and commanded the Porter to watch:
watch therefore, for ye know not when the master of the house will come,
whether at even or midnight, whether at the Cock crowing, or in the dawnyng:
Lest if he come suddenly, he should sinde you sleeping.

And that I say unto you, I say unto all men, watch and pray.

The due consideration of this doctrine has moved many good and godly men to
become steadfast in the faith of Christ, as the best means to the attainement
of salvation. But this faith that is required, must be no idle faith: for a
perfect Faith is of a forcible effect. and the stay of our life.
faith is as a consumyng fire to burn up all infidelity, sin, and wickedness.

And as faith of it self
Is the sum of our Creed:
So good works are not excluded,
in word nor indeed.
As testifies these necessary places of scriptures. Thou have faith, and I
have deeds: show me thy faith by thy deeds: belieuest thou that there is one
God? thou do well: The Devils also believe and James. 2.
tremble.

If a brother or a sister be naked, and be destitute of daily food, and one of
you say unto him, depart in peace: God send you warmenesse and clothing.
Notwithstanding, ye give them not those things that are needful to the body,
what shall it help: Even so, faith if it have no deeds is dead in it self. As
for ensample, a needle is a needful thing to make the way, but a thread with it
more prositeth the workma^.

And Saint Paul to the Hebrews writes, Faith is a sure foundation of Hebr.
11.
things which are hoped for: and a certainty of things that are not seen.
For by it the Elders obtained a good report. By Faith Abel offered a more
plentiful sacrifice then Cayne: by which he obtained witness that he was
righteous, God testifiyng of his gifts.

And in his Epistle to the Galathians, Gal. 6.
Bear ye one an others burden, and so fulfill the law of Christ, for if a man
seem to him self that he is somewhat, when in deed he is nothing the same,
deceives his own mind. Let every man prove his own works: for whatsoever
a man sows, that shall he also reap. For he that sows in the flesh, shall
of the flesh receive corruption: And he that sows in the spirit, shall
reap life everlasting. Let us not be weery of well doing, for when the time is
come, we shall reap without weariness: While we have therefore time, let us
do good unto all men, especially unto them which are of the householde of
Faith: for so shall we live and not dye.

And that I write not these things forth of men's dreams or fables, nor out of
profane histories painted with vain eloquence, but forth of the infallible
truth of Gods word. As by the authority of Saint Peter in his first Epistle
does Pet. 1.
lead unto. Know this, that no Prophecy in the scriptures has any private
interpretation, for the Scriptures came never by the will of man: But holy men
of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost.

Notwithstanding, it is a thing much to be lamented, that any people that do
profess Christ, should so love this worlds possessions, as to leave God and
their neighbor vnbeloued. And yet such ought not to be ignorant that the
virtue of riches do take their leave in this life, whereas the end of
godliness never dies: but does ascend up unto Heaven before the high
Majesty of GOD, who rewards every one according to his works. In so much as
Christ only, having overcome all things, has prepared a Crown of glory, for
all those that walk in his ways, and five after his commandments and
ordinances: So shall it never repent any of well doing. As if all rich men
did so love and fear God, as to fear him for his justice, and love him for
his graces and mercies extended: Then would rich men cease to work sin
with greediness: who as they will take unto them the ensamples of the godly,
rich Abraham, David, and Job. Whose manner of godly living, all rich men
should also imitate, and set before their eyes, practizing the same in their
conuersations, as a perfect trial to know a good rich man by, assuring our
selves that that which Gods word warranteth, is a perfect touchstone to prove
the testimony of a good conscience.

But God knows with what sorrow it may be said, O miserable world, whereas
riches do remain: and virtue and godliness in the most part of the people
appears to be fled, which is to be lamented in this wise: O little labor
for a man to know him self. O little faith in seeking to ^^eepe Gods
commandments. And yet a strange thing how loath every on^^ is to dye: and
yet a number dead in deeds, and yet living. As it is recorded in the
scriptures of the rich widow, that while she lived, in all pleasure and
sensuatie it was said of her, let her alone, sheep dead.

As also so long as the prodigal child lived in his prodigality raunging at
his pleasure, so let run at large: during which time his father accounted him
as lost, until he returned being touched with the consideration of his
miserable estate, and acknowledged his own infirmity and weakness in that he
had obeyed unto his own lust in treading of the paths of ungodliness wherein
he being weried confessed him self to have been worthily chastened, doing the
duty of a child in yeeldyng of due obedience. By which means he was
reconciled and received again into his fathers favor. God grant the like
retourning, not only of all the disobedient children of England, but also of
all such as are old enough to know what it is to disobeye God, and that many
such as neither will refourme them selves, nor look to be refoutmed.

Against extortyng Farmers and Grasiers, depending on private gain.
ANd that the evil seed of private gain, is sown and has taken root, as
well in the country as in Cities and Towns, it is evident by the practice
that many rich Farmers and Erasiers do use in this age, in place of such as
God allotted unto Adam, saying -- In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat thy
bread, till Genesis 3.
thou be turned again into the ground, for out of it was thou taken, in as
much as thou art dust, and into dust shall thou be turned again. And the Lord
God sent him forth from the Garden of Eden, to dress the ground that he was
taken out off: whereby it is apparent that this profession was it, that then
well pleased God, in the first creation of things. But the evil nature of man,
with the consent of private gain, has so corrupted the way, as God has been
much grieved and moved thereby. As the ensample of the rich man spoken of in
the Gospel does well declare, where God speaking in this wise, said: Luke.
^^.
Take heed and beware of covetousness, for no man's life stands in the
abundance of the things which he possesses: and he put forth a similitude,
saying: The ground of a certain rich man, brought forth plentiful fruits,
and he thought within him self saying, what shall I do? because I have no
room where to bestow my fruit. And he said this will I do, I will destroy my
barnes, and build greater, and therein will I gather all my goods, that are
grown unto me: And I will say unto my soul, Soul thou have much goods
laid up in store for many years, take thine ease: eat, drink, and be merry.
But God said unto him, thou fool, this night will they fetch away thy soul
again from thee. Then whose shall all those things be which thou have
provided: So is it with him that gathers riches to him self, and is not rich
toward God.

By this part of Scripture it appears how some men have grown in wealth and
yet do contrary to Gods liking, which notwithstanding it is manifest that
many rich Farmers and Grasiers have perverted the way of such as God requires,
and as themselves ought to be. For it is true that with many of them, all is
too little to the enlarging of their borders, as though they would live alone
upon the earth: Insomuch as some one of that profession have incroched into his
hands the occupation of two or three Farms mainteyning hardly thereupon so
many persons as any one of those Farms mainteyned before time, when as they
were occupied by several householders, in such wise as many serviceable men
were thereuppon mainteyned in few years past being now supplied with a
shepherd and his dog, wherein many have found so great gain to the
increasing of their deceiuable wealth, by converting their lands into
passuring and seedyng of sheep, that many Landlordes have been content tolet
the dwelling housen of their Farms fall down, to the end to enlarge their
borders by laying the lands of two or three Farms all into one: reseruyng one
Cottage or house thereunto.

The which evil of late years has grown the rather by many evil disposed
and greedy minded rich Farmers, who to the increase of other private gain
seems not to force what damage such do unto their more honest plain meaning
neighbors, in so confused and preposterous manner: that often times it so
falls out, that by the lewd practice and forecasting of some one, a great
many are cast behind hand. By their being made destitute of thatwhich their
auncesters had the use of many years before. And that in such reasonable
manner, as one honest neighbor might be relieuing and ayding unto an other,
and in good case to furnishe their Prince according to every one in their
calling. But now say they the case is altered, and many of their state
shrewdely abated. In such sort as they can not do as their ancestors have
done in time past, in the seruite of their Prince, nor yet so to furnishe the
markets with the fruit of their labors, as many their good effects do desire
to perform, which impediment they say is the rather happened unto them: by
reason of late, that such have paid a great fine to their Landlord, for
accomplishing whereof, such oftentimes are constrained to sell their more
needful stock from their ground, or else they must pay a more greater rent
then before time.

Whereof in this age so many do complain and say, that by reason of so great
evil. They must moyle and turmoyle all days of their lives and all to little,
to the answeryng of their Landlordes rentes. The rather by the dishonest and
greedy minds of some such rich Farmers and Grasiers as of late have seemed
to be more careful in their attentyuenesse of the term of their neighbors
Leases, then either God or humayne nature allows: with posting and trying all
means possible whereby to remove the good meaning of the Landlordes from his
honest Tenant or Farmer, by vrgyng the Landlordes to hearken to the evil
nature of private gain: So as many a such unconscionable rich cormorant Farmer
lets slyppe no opportunity and time to practice the effect of his wicked
intention in offering a more larger fine or greater rent then before the
Landlorde made account of, in so evil condition as the evil operation of
private gain has moved many Landlords to hearken so to the subtle workyng
thereof, as the same has wrought many their honest Tenauntes and Farmers great
damage, and greater is like to work, unless it may please God so to touch
the hearts of Landelordes, as by setting a part the evil condition of private
gain, they may avoid so great evils as may happen through so great an abuse.
Whereas in refourmyng of the evil, if Landlordes would retain to their
Farmers, their honest Tenants and their posterity, in so good condition. as
not being over burdenous unto them: So should Landlords not only bind unto them
the hearts of their honest tennants and Farmers: But also thereby shall do a
deed commendable in the sight of God and man. The contrary no doubts of it
has always been a thing displeasaunt unto God and all good men: as appears
in former ages. In so much as it is written, That Job in the relating of his
innocence says thus. But if case be that Job. 31.
my land cry out against me, or that the forowes thereof make any complaynt,
if I have eaten the fruit thereof unpaid for: then let thistles grow in
stead of my wheat, and Cockle for my Barley.

And in the Prophet Ezechiel it is written thus: Behold all Souls are Ezech.
18.
mine, like as the father is mine, so is the son mine also: the soul that
sins shall dye. The fathers have eaten sower Grapes, and their childrens
teeth are set on edge. If a man be godly and do the thing that is right: he
eats not upon the hills: he lifts not his eyes to the foul Idols of
Israel: he defiles not his neighbors wife: he greeueth no body: he gives
his debtor his pledge again: he takes none other man's goods by violence: he
cloatheth the naked: he lends nothing upon usury: he takes nothing over: he
withdraws his hand from doing wrong: he handeleth faithfully betwixt man and
man: he walks in my commandments and keeps my laws and perfourmeth them
faithfully. This is a righteous man, he shall surely live says the Lord God.
And that every rich man ought to have respect unto his neighbors well doing,
It appears in this part of scripture of Saint Paul to the Corinthians. Now
therefore Cor. 8.
as ye are rich in all perfectnes in faith, in word, in knowledge, in all
feruentnes and in love, that ye have to us: Even so, see that ye be plenteous
in benevolence also. This say I not in commaundyng, but because of feruentnes I
do allow the vnfeignednesse of your love toward other men. For ye know the
liberality of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet for your
sake he became poor: that ye through his poverty might be made rich.

But such there are in this age, whose hearts are so framed to dwell in
frowardness, as to say, that these be not the days of innocence, what shall
it then follow: that their wickedness would make them the days of
craftiness: God forbid, from which evil we are forewarned in the fourth
book of the Prophet Esdras. God speaking unto Esdras, showing unto him the
punishments which he threateneth to come upon evil people, and how he
would have all that profess his name to avoid the plague.

Who so keeps my commandments and precepts, says the Lord God, Let not
your sins way you down. and let not your unrighteousness be lifted up. Woe
be unto them that are subdued unto their sins, and tangled in their
wickedness: like as a field is hedged in with busshes, and the path thereof
covered with thorns, and so be taken and cast into the fire and burnt.

Hereby all that profess Christ are admonished to flee such evil ways, as
lead to the destruction of all those that travail therein, and respecting
their own private gain, seem not to make any account of wrong doing. As for
ensample, how many now in this age are so greedily set upon covetousness, as
to incroche into one man's hands so many tenements and houses as by all means
possible he may compass, either in buying the feesimple, or else the
graundelease over the tennantes heads, in such wise as having obtained the
same, and doing some small reparations thereupon: then does the new Landlord
not only inhaunce the rent for which such Tenements went before time: But also
the Tenant must give a large fine, besides some reparations left undone for
him to do, for the easement of the house, although the poor Tenantes purse
be so wronged thereby, as oftentimes it so falls out, that all the shifts
that he can make, may hardlye recover so chargeable a sickness as happens
to many by such ill means, in such sort as sometimes the tenant grows in so
weak a case as not able to abide the air, or to go out of the dooers, by
reason of the infection of private gain: being an evil in this case not much
different from usury: and so much the more to be sorowed, where the people can
apply themselves to no better trade, then having compassed a piece of money
before hand, to frame thereby a heavy burden wherewith to lade their poor
brethren, as it is too too true, that there are many such, as have weak
hands, and feeble knees to do good, but are strong enough to keep down their
weaker brethren. And very few is the number that do labor truly in the Lords
pathwayes in any their vocations, but from time to time it is too manifest how
the Lords ways have been perverted by the corrupt nature of mankind in all
ages. By means whereof, Christ his religion has been grievously hindered, as
it is evident by one notable ensample as hereafter follows.

Sometime there was a great Turk An ensample of a great Turk.
whose name was called Soldanus Egypti. who was touched with the consideration
of the profession of Christ his religion: as that he was moved and stirred in
mind, to have forsaken his abominable error and become a Christian: So as he
might be ascertayned that the lives of Christians were agreeable to their
profession. Whereupon in the consideration of his intention, after he had long
pondered with him self how he might best be resolved in so weighty a
cause, he determined to break the matter unto one nere about him, in whom he
had most confidence, and unto him the said great Turk declared the some of his
intention, and findyng his trusty friend ready to accomplish his request:
who secretly was furnished about that business: So that in short time he arrived
in some parts of Italy, as a part of Christendom: to the end there to discover
the manners and behauiours of the people, where be found the manner of their
living, so far vnagreeable to the profession of the names of Christians, as
the said messenger of the. Turks, had no need to make any long abode in
those parts, for any better trial. So as he having attained the effect of
his message which he had given in charge, he returned again from whence he
came, and made relation unto his master the great Turk in this wise. True it
is, that those people where I have been in Christendom, and that bear the
names of Christians, do in their outward appearaunce profess to serve a
Godwhom they know note, and otherwise their lives in deeds, are distayned
with all abominable loathsome sin and wyekednesse. Whereupon the said great
Turk having taken some pause, brake out in these speeches or the like. And is
it so, then I decest and defy them and their religion. In such odeous and
reproachful wise as may be an ensample to all parts of Christendom, where as
Christ is professed in words, and contemned in deeds. In so much as we are to
pray to GOD to keep the Turks spies out of this part of Christendom,
until a more vnifourme order of living may be found joined with our
profession, in such godly conversation, as that England especially may
become a Lantern to other our neighbors, who have not as yet so large measure
of Gods loving kyndnesse, as it has pleased him in his mercy to extend unto
England, above other nations. For the which England is the more indebted and
accomptable unto God: in the consideration whereof, every member ought to be
so heedefull in yelding their due obedience: as that if it were possible, the
very Turk may be moved to acknowledge Christ. And that the enemies spies may
have no just cause to use any such manner of reproouyng the people of
England. But that every one of the congregation, may be stirred to frame
their lives in godly conversation, and not to delyght to take ensample of evil
doing: but rather to be doing that which is good, and to edify with all. As
not compelled thereunto, but of love and zealous affection unto God, who by his
word has left unto us perfect ensamples, how to behave our selves in
obedience unto him, our Prince and rulers. As Saint Paul to the Romans
plainly sets down. Let every soul be subject to the Superior powers.

And again in his Epistle to Titus, he has set down special exhortations,
how those that profess Christ should behave them selves in godly conversation
of life.

(But alas) there are a number of people in this age, both men and women, who
by the setting on of the covetous Devil, and the consent of dilobedience, do
not cease to take in hand many wicked deeds and evil actions, the most part
whereof are yet untold. In so much as it may be said, who might offend, and
has not offended? Wherefore let every one in time refrain from their froward
ways, and to cease from committyng of sin with greedines. And not so to
ouerweene or think of them selves, to be such as in deed they are not. For it
is true that although any man or woman do possess beauty or riches or any
other good gift, yet such things are imperfect in us, so long as we do
remain in this veil of miseryes, as our sundry imperfections do declare. But
all are as a lump of clay lying upon the face of the earth remaining at the
choice and will of the Potter to apply and work it at his pleasure: who
oftentimes in the workyng, finds the clay to fram^ but badly to the workemans
mind, by reason of the sundry imperfections which lie hidden therein. Whereby
the same becomes in the woorkyng so full of crackes and flawes, not sitting
to the use for which it was me^t in the workemans beginning.

And so oftentimes it falls out with The heart of man may be compared to a
pair of writing tables.
the hearts of men, which ought to be prepared as a pair of writing tables,
which serve for to noate in all remembra^ces. and as in infancy none can write,
so long are they easy to be kept clean. But once being grown to judgment to
discern of good and evil: If we have blotted the tables of our hearts with
evil things: the same must first be clean wyped out before we may write
good things therein: which being so orderly kept, using the same to all good
intentes and purposes, in which application, we shall find the same as a
ready mean to bring us unto such perfect knowledge in our age, as we have
noted therein in our youth. For the perfourmance whereof, the pen of Gods
spirit is herein required. But it is much to be feared, that there are too
many that in their youth have written and do daily to write, so many evil
and perverse notes, with the pen of vanity, in so much as when they come to
age, they find them so full, as no roumeth is left to write that which good
is, being possessed by such as may not be persuaded to put out the evil yt
has been confusedly written therein: to the end that goodness might be placed
in stead of evil, and virtue in stead of vice:

All which notwithstanding, man's heart seems oftentimes to be so wrapped in
ignorance and disobedience, as hardly many may be brought to yield unto the
truth. Wherein is to be remembered, that GOD has so ordained that weeds and
thistles should grow up among good corn. To the end that when the harvest
comes, the good and just husbandman may cleanse the good corn from the
Tears and Fetches. The good corn with joy to be housed in the barn, and the
Tares and Fetches to remain for everlasting fire.

Even so has God placed upon the face of the earth, of people, wicked and
froward, good and bad, rich and poor, not to the end that any should vaunt
them selves of their larger measure distributed through Gods mercyes. Whereby
rich men are forbidden to lift up them selves in the glory of their riches, and
pore men not to be dismayde or discouraged through their poor poverty. For
what God has done his omnipotency has done yt same with a condition which he
will have held firm unto him self. That is, that every man shall again forgo
the things which in this life he now possesses, be it little or much, at a
time appointed, with a promise that he will give unto every one new
possessions, and to every man according to his deseruyng. The consideration
whereof, of late years has seemed to be out of most peoples thoughts, as
may easilye be discerned, by reason. That notwithstanding, it does rest in
the pleasure and displeasure of almighty God, to take the advantage of every
condition broken, and forfeiture: Yet note I pray you the precise dealings
betwyxt worldly men, how strickt they are in executyng the penalties of
bonds, against such as are indebted unto them, and in making of contractes
and bargaynes to their own avail how careful such will be touching bonds
with conditions, some times in taking advantage of the penalty, lettyng no day
nor hour over slyp in that behalf. Albeit, concerning many their more
duetifull care unto God, in keepyng covenant with him, such show themselves in
a manner careless. In so much as it is to be feared, that all those that do
so wilfully throw them selves indebted unto God, and thrall to Satan, some by
one sin, and some by an other: who in the end, unless they look better
unto them selves in time, will be driven to play the parts of ill debtors, who
upon knowledge of their creditor, his being near at hand upon coming, will
seek to hyde them selves, to shun his presence, for auoidyng of so great
penalties as many in this age, do seem wilfully to subject them selves unto.
Being warned to avoid so great ignorance, as that any creature may hide him
self from the presences of the almighty, for our own sins will find us out,
at what time God shall he of power, even in the twinckeling of an eye, to take
the advantage of all penalties, and thereupon to awarde a heavy sentence for
inuiolating and breaking his couenauntes and commandments, which when we
wretched creatures do examine in our selves how we have performed them, we
shall find our selves so guilty by our manifold transgressions and
disobedience, and so unprovided to make satisfaction, that when we shall be
summoned to answer to the plaint which shall be laid against us in the great
day of the Lord, where every one shall hear it said thus unto them, how
haste thou lived, render account of thy Bailiwicke, and how thou have bestowed
thy Talent. Whereunto we shall not be able to plead one word against a
thousand. In so much as I see no way but that here in this life while we are
in the way, that every one do seek in time to agree with so merciful a
creditour before we come to exegent of outlawry, which we may with less cost
do, the^ to put in a Super sedeas at the common law. For he is a merrifull
Judge and easy to be entreated. But if we let the matter run to far, the
charge will be the greater, and the pleadyng of ignorance will be nothing
auayleable. As to say, that we were deceived, as Eve answered unto God, for
the same shall rather be a witness against us, because yt by her came the
first fail, from innocence into sin. Whereby we are forewarned that where
she fell once in eating of the forbidden fruice, we sinful creatures do
fall every day and hour. In so much, as here I may say, Who is he that can
number his own sins. Wherefore seeing that no man may escape the day of the
Lord of Hosts: Let us ail while he offers him self unto us, seek by all
means possible to shake of the fetters of our sins, wherein we are bound. And
this is to be done by no other means then wholly to commyt our selves unto
the mercyes of our eternal God, and by our earnest and daily prayers to
endeavor our selves to obtain his favor by repentance and mortification,
refrayning from committing of sin and wickedness: for late repentance falls
out sildome to be true repentance. Wherefore in this time of grace, it
behooves us to be thankful to God, and kind to our neighbors: According to
this doctrine of Toby, My son do good Tob. 4^
in thy life of that thou have, and give the Lord his due offerings. Do good
to thy neighbor and friend before thou dye, and according to thine ability
reach out thy hand and give to the poor: For God beholds and has a respect
unto the giver, and him that receives: To him that deceives, and him that is
deceived.

A brief remembrance for the poor afflicted.
FOrasmuch as GOD will have it known what a ready means affliction is, to
come unto Christ: It must not be understood, but that afflictions do as well
happen to rich as unto poor: for none does always enjoy such freedom but
that at sometimes are touched with some greeuance or affsiction either in body
or mind. Albeit, the poorer sort do bear it in a more harder manner, by
reason of their poor poverty, not having wherewith to withstand the cold,
nor to feed their hungry bodies in so large a condition as many rich have.
And as there are many rich that seem not to know what it is to be rich in
God, so are there many poor that do abuse their poverty, and as Hypocrites
do deceive, and as it were rob from the good poor, the charitable devotion
of godly disposed people touched with a pitiful affection unto all. But often
it falls so out that there are some such as do declare them selves
hypocrite poor, that can handle their profession in so loathsome a manner, as
such are hardly to be discovered, because of their decestable and ungracious
practice, under the vile cloak of deep dissimulation, in making an occupation
of their more miserable estates. And such ought to be sifted out of every
common wealth, as chafe from among good corn: And the cause to be examined,
how every such has grown into so miserable estate, which being found to be
by any evil practice or behavior, then a condign punishment to be ministered:
and to be set to some work and labor whereby to earne their living, and being
found to be framed to any goodness, then such to be dealt with all according
as God has wrought the like effect of late in London, whereas such are
provided for, to the great commendation of the same City, in relieuyng the
lame and impotent, and reforming the abuses of such evil persons as may not
otherwise be reclaimed. And that poor children might supply the places which
now the devices of turnspits and Dogs do furnishe. And that it should not
be lawful for the parents of such children to entice them away being once
placed, nor to depart till they had continued the full term of years, for
which such were bound, and the^ to make choice what faculty such will follow
for their better provision of living, according to their towardness. For it is
written, if one of thy brethren among you be Deuteronomy. 15.
poor within any of thy gates in the land which the Lord thy God gives thee.
Thou shalt not harden thine heart, nor shut too thine hand from thy poor
brother: But open thine hand unto him, and le^d him sufficient for his need,
which he has, and beware that there be not a wicked point in thine heart,
that thou would say: The seventh year, the year of freedom is at hand,
and therefore it greeueth The Lord loves a cheerful giver.
thee to look on thy poor brother, and give him naught: and he then cry
unto the Lord against thee, and it be sin unto thee: but give him and let it
not grieve thine heart to give unto him. Because that for this thing ye Lord thy
God shall bless thee in all thy works, and in all that thou put thine hand
too. The laud shall never be without poor: And therefore I commau^d thee saying:
thou shall open thine hand unto thy poor brother that is needy and poor in
the land,

If thy brother an Ebrew sell him self unto thee, or an Ebruesse, and serve
thee six years, the seventh year thou shall let him go free from thee, and
when thou sendest him out free from thee, thou shall not let him go away
empty: but shall give him of thy sheep, of thy corn, and of thy wine: and
give him of that wherewith the Lord thy God has blessed thee. And remember
that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt, and the Lord thy God delivered
thee thence, and therefore this thing I command thee this day:

And the same God has commanded children to do their duties with diligence,
As it is written in Saint Paul to the Ephesia^s, in his first Epistle: Children
Ephe. 6. To children.
obey your fathers and mothers in the Lord, that is the first commandment
that has any promise, that thou may be in good estate and live long in the
earth: and ye fathers move not your children unto wrath, but bring them up
with nurture and information unto the Lord.

Servants be obedient unto your earthly masters, with fear and trembling, in
Servants.
singlenes of your hearts, as unto Christ: not with service in the eye sight,
as men pleasers, but as the servants of Christ, dooyng the will of God from
the heart, with good will serving the Lord, and not men. And remember that
whatsoever any man does, that shall he receive again of the Lord, whether he
be bound or free.

For with God there is no respect of persons. And to the end that every one
in general, both men and women, should have a due consideration of the
benifites done unto mankind in his first creation. God has placed mankind
here upon the earth, making him capable of reason, with his eyes so framed, as
in the course of this mortal life, every one both rich and poor, high and
low, Publican and Pharisie, should not be forgetful of the wonderful
omnipotency of God in our beholding the Heauers, with the ornaments thereof.
Where the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, do all observe their course in
due order, to the end to put all mankind in remembrance of our obedience
whereunto we were framed in our first creation: which benifite of creation, as
it was and is denied to all other creatures besides: who as they are void of
reason, whereof and wherefore they were made and created. So do they take their
turns in coming upon the earth, and passing again without any further
memory to be had of any of them. But man ought not to be ignorant, that seeing
almighty God has dealt so bou^tifully with him, as to make him Lord over all
other creatures in obeying him: So is man him self bound to the more
strickter form of obedience unto God, for so many and sundry his benefits
received: whereby all mankind is admonished, that forasmuch as all other
things are ordained for the necessity and use o^ man: so should man be more
careful for the things apperteyning to the hungering of our sinful souls:
then for the feedyng and pampering of our carnal and mortal bodies, which in
Spanishe is so rightly applied, where a man is called Vmbra, which by
interpretation is a shadow, which notwithstanding daily experience teaches,
that a more estimation and care is had for so unstable a body, neglectyng the
provision of our souls, which ^ught to be provided for, and esteemed above all
the Jewels in this miserable world.

And thereupon Christ in his rebuking Matthew. 23.
the Scribes and Pharisees, says thus, Woe be unto you ye Hypocrites, for ye
make clean the outward side of the cup and of the platter, but within they are
full of brybery and excess. Thou blind Pharisie cleanse first that within the
cup and platter, that the outside of them may be clear also. Woe be unto you
Scribes and Pharisees, ye Hypocrites, for ye are like unto painted Sepulchers,
which indeed appear beautiful outward, but within are full of dead men's
bones, and of all filthiness.

Even so are there many in this age, who do seem outwardly to be righteous and
so would be reputed and taken: but within are full of all fainednesse and
iniquity.

Upon such like occasion, S. Peter in Pet. 2.
his first Epistle says, Wherefore lay aside all maliciousness, guile, and
dissimulation, envy, and all backbityng, and as new borne babes desire that
reasonable milk which is without corruption, that ye may grow therein: if so
be that ye have tasted how pleasant the Lord is, to whom ye come as a living
stone disallowed of me^, but chosen of God, and precious: but ye as living
stones, are made a spiritual house: and an holy priesthood for to offer up
spiritual sacrifice acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.

As it is testified in the scripture, Behold I put in Sion an head cornet
stone, elect and precious: and he that believes on him, shall not be ashamed:
unto you therefore which believe, he is precious, but unto them which believe
not, the stone which the builders refused, the same is made the head stone in
the corner: and a stone to stumble at, and a rock to offend them which
stumble at the word, and believe not that, whereon they were set.

Wherefore to the end that we may The reedifiyng of London Bridge, compared
to the building and reedefiyng of the house of God.
examine in our selves how every one is framed agreeable to Gods good
pleasure, against the day of his visitation, I have here thought good to set
down the manner of the reedifiyng of the new Arch of London Bridge. Wherein may
be noted the difference be twixt a private work, and a work for a commonaltie
and commodity of the people in general. The manner of the proceeding in the
said work. First, the old frame of building was taken down to the ground,
which to most men's judgments, as travelers by, would have judged the foresaid
old building of sufficiency to have continued the charge which the same had
before supplied of long time: whereupon diligent search was made, and the
ground work was found so imperfected, by reason of the sundry
imperfections that were found therein. In so much as it was thought needful
by those that had the over sight thereof, that the foresaid old building
should be taken down as it was, for avoiding of further danger: having a
respect unto the time of the year, when the visiters and founders did take the
same in hand. In so much as all the old defaulted buildyng being rydde out
of the way, and expert workmen being come to searching of the foundation,
they found the old pyles whereon the stone work stood in so evil co^ditio^,
as it was thought most needful that many should be displaced out of their
seats, which appeared not to be done without paynefull labor. And being
brought to pass, new Pyles of the perfectest wood that could be provided was
ordained and set in the seat and places of the old. For the better
perfourmance whereof, every pyle so set, was not don without like tedious
labor, cuerye one being armed and calked with Iron. To the end to make their
way the perfecter: So to withstand any impedimentes which might have hindered
their entrance: which was performed in as hard a manner as if the same had bin
a new forceable work. For by reason of continuance the old ground work was
loath to yield. Albeit, that now by the perfect experience of cunning workmen,
there is placed upon the well grounded foundation of Pyles, a durable
stonewoorke to the defense of all stormy tempests: so workmanly handled as one
stone is fastened to an other in their ioynyng together with Iron catches,
thereby to keep them from startyng out of their offices, being pointed in the
joints with Sowder, Rozen, Tallow, and Pitch, as a compound of forceable
effect, needful about such a work, to the end that no impedunent should
grow or enter in between the joints, being prevented by such good means.
In such sort as now upon the said foundation, there is erected a well
conditioned and substantial frame.

Wherein is to be noted, the fruit of the workmens diligence. In the
perfourmance whereof, it does appear, each workman to have well and
sufficiently discharged their several charge and vocations, to the well likyng
of the Founders and beholders.

In such wise, as when it is considered what benifite and commodity is like in
short process of time to grow to the fou^ders thereof: Then is it not to be
thought to have been more chargeable then in time the same may be profitable.

Which stately building being compared with the reedifiyng and building up of
the house of God, which consists not in Temples made with stones, according
to the traditions of men: Albeit, God Act. 7.
requires a house of prayer, whereas the people may in all reverence,
congregate themselves together. As in the Church there in all obedience to be
in a readiness with attentyue ears, and rejoicing hearts: to hear the divine
service of God, and that our hearing may be rightly with a gladsome desire to
hear Christ speak unto us by the mouth of the minister and godly Preachers,
out of the word of God, thereby to learn to follow Christ by obedience, in
honest conversation of life. For Christ has always allowed better of
obedience, then of sacrifice: As appears in the first Book of Samuel. Ring.
15.


When it repented God that ever he had made Saul King by reason of his
disobedience. Albeit, Saul had spared the best of the sheep and of the Oxen of
the Amalekites, to sacrifice them unto the Lord. Wherein Saul obeyed and
hearkened unto the voice of the people, and turned away from the word of the
Lord. In so much as it was told Saul by Samuel. That forasmuch as he had
cast away the word of the Lord. The Lord would cast away Saul, and rent away
his kingdom from him. In which parcel of scripture it is woorthely to be
noted, how much God has been pleased in former ages with obedience, and
displeased with the contrary.

As this one exsample may lead us unto. That the voice of a man may awake one
out of sleep: So that he begins to start and arise, but then if he
straight ways falls a sleep again, until we see him stand and go, we
may not truly say he is perfectly awaked.

Albeit, in following and obeying Christ, it is not meant that we neither can,
nor must do all things that he has done before us: but to follow him in godly
conversation of life and obedience as near as we may, otherwise what does it
avail to profess much, and to practice little. Whereby we are admonished to
join practice with our profession, in the repairing and building up of the
house of God, in all godliness and humility: and with more diligence and care
then was used in and about the reedifiyng of the foresaid building of London
Bridge, which as you may perceive in the former discourse was not easily
performed without great cost and labor. So ought all Christians to bend them
selves to the uttermost of What form ought to be observed in the perfiting of
Gods house.
every their powers, all to agree in one general consent and unity of
brotherly love, whereby the Lords house might speedily go forward: And not
as Manasses, against Ephraim, and Ephraim, against Manasses, and both against
Judah: Lest God beholding such a confusion, come and say unto thee, as unto the
fig Matthew. 11. Luke. ^5.
tree, Never man eat fruit of thee hereafter while the world stands: Yet
Christ him self hungering.

In consideration whereof, it is to be noted, that although the founders under
God of his house here in England, which God ever mainteyne and increase, are
now willing, and have been of long time with the advice of the best workmen
that might be had, in so careful a work, and about so weighty a cause, such
as God be thanked have not seassed to take great pains in England, for the
perfecting of so worthy a work, and therein many good people about London
and in other places have and do declare them selves very studious and paynfull
to have the same performed. In so much as God be praised there are some
certain, that willingly and gladly do show them selves to be faithful
laborers in the house of God. But the greater number besides, seem to be
such as in very deed would be accounted good laborers in Gods Vineyarde, who
in deeds do appear plain, to be but Loyterers, when as the master of the
Vineyarde shall come to trial. It is true, he will not deny his good
Stewardes, Bailiffes, and faithful servants their due reward: At what time
all the contrery will be found to be too too negligent in such their
duetifull business, some of obstinate, froward, and malicious minds, and
some by foolish ignorance, like unto the five foolish Virgins. And many
such as do flatter Matthew. 20.
themselves with the parable of those who^ the good husbandma^ was willing to
retain in his Vineyarde: and gave unto him for his hyre that came at the
third hour of the day, as large as unto those which entered at the first
hour, and did bear the heat of the day. Whereby it is manifest, that the
same good husband man who is our Savior Christ, has always had a like care
for all in general, and will deny none of their hyre, that came unto him in
any time, in mind to be accepted.

But alas, what may be said or thought of such as do defer and set off
their coming into the Lords Vineyarde, even until their last hour. And
then perhaps do as it were look over the hedge, and do commyt their good
deeds to be sent after them by Executors, in hope to receive their reward with
the first. Wherein is not to be forgotten, that although our heavenly
husbandman, has dealt and does deal so favorably in his mercyes, with so
many as he finds sorrowful and careful to live with him. And not obstinately
or willingly to pine them selves away for want of a little pains taking, whereby
to procure unto themselves food and reward, which I do so much the more
lament, while I do behold a number whose lives do bewray that they care not
to have to do with God nor his house, such as may not be persuaded to enter
into the same, and other some such and that for the most part, who if they
happen a little to enter in, they soon wax weary, and so steals forth
again. In so much as it is very doubtful, that any such shall have any part
of reward with the true laborers: but rather shall want food when as they
shall be hungrye and thirsty, and shall always be dry. And so in case to
perish for want of that which they so contemptuously and negligently refused,
when the large measure was offered unto them through Christ his merits and
loving kindness. In so much as rather it is to be desired that all those that
have any feeling desire in them selus to come into the Lords Vineyarde, and to
dwell with God in his everlasting ma^sion, may refuse no pains to be joined
unto him in joyful gladness of Ghostly rauishing, which is to be sought from
the high to the low, with all due humility and reverence unto God, love to
our neighbors, and obedience unto our sovereign, vdder whose protection next
under God, we do enjoy our being and continuyng in so good a work, for the
which every true member of England is bound daily and hourly to pray unto God,
that so good a foundation of the house of GOD may become so well framed and
perfected, as to increase and remain unremovable, to the everlasting comfort
of all the professors: As is testified by the scriptures. The earth shall
fail, and all things Matthew. 5.
therein contained: but the word of God abides everlasting, and one iotte of
his word shall not fail. And when we have done all that ever we can do, yet
shall we be but unprofitable servants.

By these words, some may doubt what they ought to do in so weighty a matter,
it is in these few words declared. That we ought to prefer the glory of A
special note for all that profess Christ.
God, the promotyng of Christ his Euangil, that is, his word, and the salvation
of our souls, above all things in the earth.

So shall we be sure that though all the world besides were in an uproar and
troubles: Though wars and contentions, plagues, and pestilence, and all
inconveniences were round about us, yet should we be defended and protected. For
so is Gods loving promises unto so many, as with willing and obedient hearts
do seek to be preserved in his fold, expressing their inward desires, by
their outward conversation and actions. By reason whereof, many have been
stirred to forsake their froward ways: and return unto the Lord, by ensample
of King Ezechia, as follows. And Ezechia sent In the 2. book of the Chro.
Chap. 30.
to all Israel and Judah, and wrote letters to Ephraim and Manasses, that they
should come to the house of the Lord at Jerusalem, and offer passover unto the
Lord God of Israel. And the King held a counsel with his Lords, and all the
congregation at Jerusalem to keep the feast of passover in the second month.

And the tenor of his letters was this:

You sons of Israel, return to the Lord God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
and he shall return to the residue that rests from the hands of Assure. Be
not as your fathers, and as your brethren were, who have transgressed against
the Lord God of their Fathers, who has made them desolate as you see. Hold
not your hearts therefore. But give your hands to the Lord, return to his
Sanctuary, serve him and he shall. show mercy unto you, to your sons and
daughters that be in bondage, for he is pitiful and easy to be entreated.
Thus far did Ezechias by letters and messengers provoke the people declined
from God, to repentance, not only in Judah where he raygned lawful King, but
also in Israel, subject then to an other King. And albeit, that by some wicked
men, his messengers were mocked, so lacked they not their just punishments:
For within six years after Samaria, was destroyed, and Israel led captyue
by Salmanazar. So did not this zealous King Ezechias desist to prosecute his
duty in restoring the religion to Gods perfect ordinance, remauyng all
wickedness.

And again, in the Prophecy of Ezechiel, it is written thus: If a man now
Ezech. 34.
hear the noise of the Trumpet, and will not be warned, and the Steward come
and take him away, his blood shall be upon his own head: for he heard the
sound of the Trumpet, and would not take heed, therefore his blood be upon
him. But if he will receive warning, he shall save his life. Moreover, if the
watchman see the sword come, and show it not with the Trumpet, so that the
people is not warned, if the sword come then and take any man from among them,
the same shall be taken away in his own sin: but his blood will I require
at the watch man's hand.

So is it required at the hands of all good Governors in this age, that the
order An order of planting or graftyng.
of plantyng may be observed in such form, that every tree may be so orderly
planted and ingraffed, that there may be no confused growyng. For it is
written, that such as are not ingraffed in Christ, shall be pulled up by the
roots: wherefore it behooves that every good Tree may be framed to be
comfortable and defencible to the other his neighbor and stander by, being all
of one Orchard, the higher to the lower, and the lower not to be slack in
upright growyng, to the end to do their office, duty, and good will, unto
the higher. For so is it required by the word of God, and no politic wisdom
rightly may deny the same: as that when any stormy weather should happen to
blow up, that then such as before would have been judged Oaks, should not
show them selves as tottering reeds, subiecting them selves to be ouerrunne
with every sickle and sithe. But that rather against the time, that god shall
please by his providence to call us unto him more nearer, by any Cross of
tribulation: that we the people of this age may rather go forward to meet
with God in all reverence, and valiantly to fight under his banner. Then that
we should go backward with faintyng hearts, and seek to hide our selves
from his presence which no man may escape, for that his glorious presence is
every where, both on high upon the Mountaies, and beneth in the valleys. How
much more ought we miserable creatures to be vigilant, and that by continual
prayer and watching, thereby to move his Godhead not to be grieved nor
displeased for our disobedience in transgressing of his Commandments: And
that it may please him in his mercy to accept of our contrition in our
returning every one, forsaking his froward and ungodly ways. And that with
such repentance and mortification, as sin may be abandoned and have no place
any longer to dwell in our mortal bodies: And not to seem too have more care
of things temporal, then of things eternal. For so now is it required at
our hands in good earnest, thereby to stop the mouths of all enemies, as that
other nations beholding the perfect form of our returning, may have just
cause so to say of England:

Lo these are the people whom God has chosen unto him self, and that the
troubles of our neighbors may sound a continual watch word in our ears,
to amendment of our former evil living, or else we may assure our selves, that
we do but hasten the like measure of Gods displeasure toward us, which I
pray God grant to keep far from England.

And in the manner of our returnyng, let us take and set before our ties,
this wholesome doctrine of Saint Paul to Timothy, in his first Epistle. Tim. 2.


I exhort therefore that above all things, Prayers, supplications,
intercessions, and giuyng of thanks be had for all men: For Kings and all that
are in authority, that we may live a quiet and a peaceable life, with all
godliness and honesty. For that is good and expedient in the sight of GOD our
Savior, which will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge
of the truth: For there is one God and one Mediator, betwixt God and man:
Even the man Christ Jesus, which gave him self a ransom for all men. That it
should be testified at this time, I tell the truth in Christ and lie not.
Being the teachers of the Gentiles with faith and verity. I will therefore
that the men pray every where, liftyng up pure hands without wrath or
doubting. Likewise also the women, that they array them selves in comely
apparel, with shamefastness and discreet behavior, not with broydered hear,
either gold, or pearls, or costly array: but as becomes women that profess
godliness through good works. Let the women learn in silence with all
subjection, in such wise as all such as pray, may obtain the benefit of
prayer, which ought to be framed in all zealous manner, and with such a dutiful
obedience as we do owe unto God in making our prayers and supplications: As we
have sundry ensamples set own unto us by the word of God.

First, how Christ him self when he prayed unto God the Father, that if it
were his will, the bitter cup of his passion might pass away from him, not for
that Christ was afraid of death, but that he would leave unto all his
Disciples the true form of prayer, desiryng nothing but that which is good,
and to edify with all, and always to commyt our wills unto his will: not
that our will be done, but that his will be done, and fulfilled, with such
obedience as Christ, when John. 1^
he prayed, lifted up his eyes unto heaven.

And also Moses and Aaron when they prayed for the people of Israel, it
appears that they did it with their hands holde^ up, and their eyes lookyng
up unto heaven, Number. 11. 1^. 15.
as a true testimony that their hearts were thereunto framed and settled. But
when Moses ceased from lifting up of his hands and eyes, those people were
overthrown. And how much prayer of good men has always prevailed. The
ensamples are not few: As when Moses Exodus 9. 10.
prayed for Pharao, the plagues seized.

Abraham liftyng up his eyes, saw Genesis 22.
the place where God had appointed him to offer up his Son Isaac.

Abraham for the Sodomytes, Moses for the fathers that sinned in the
wilderness: Samuel, and David, for the destruction: and Solomon, for them that
came into the Temple: and Elias, for them that Esdras. 4. ^ooke.
received rain: and for the dead, that he might live: and Ezechias, for the
people in the time of Senacharib. And all those received the fruit of their
prayers. And in this our age, no doubt of it, by the good prayers of godly men
powered out before the Lord God, for the beholding of the people of England,
in such an acceptable a time, as God has been moved in his mercyes to
protect his flock hitherto in a miraculous wise, with now full twenty years
past of returnyng, which large time no doubt of it, has pleased God in his
mercy to vouchsafe to assign unto us the people of England, the rather for the
good affection which he has and does bear unto our so gracious and sovereign
Queen, under whom by Gods permission we do enjoy such good blessings, as
Moses gave unto the Tribes of Israel, in time of their continuing in Gods
commandments and ordinances, who is like unto the people. Thou art saved in
the Lord, which is the shield of thy help, and sword of thy glory. Thine
enimyes have lost their strength to thee ward, and thou shall tread upon the
height of them. But then it follows, that when Exodus 19.
as God did behold the grudging and disobedience of the Israelites, he
appointed Moses to command them that they should not presume to come up unto
the Lord lest be destroyed them. And let the Priests which come unto the Lord,
sanctify them, lest the Lord destroy them. Whereupon God gave forth the
Table of the ten Commandments, left unto all that should come after, to
follow them as children of obedience.

And for that cause do all the godly Preachers cry out daily forth of the
word of God, Repent betymes as we all do admonish ye, repent, for your
contempt and wickedness so plainly committed, in so blessed a time as God was
not more professed in words in many years before. But alas, too too far
out of the way in deeds: wherefore we are still called to repent, for repentance
is the only way of our redress and deliverance. For, did God ever so long
spare any whom he has taught by his Prophets without some evident
repentance: Or uses any father to pardon his child, without some token of
amendment: Consider how the Lord has entreated Israel and Judah, his own
people. How often they trespassed, and how he gave them over into the hands
of their enemies. But when so ever they repented and turned again to God
unfeignedly, he sent them Judges and deliuerers, Kings and Saviors. This way
then of repentance and unfeigned turnyng unto God by obedience, is the only
way before God accepted and allowed.

Therefore was Noah sent into the old world to bring this doctrine of
repentance, and all the old Prophets, as Elias, Eliseus, Esaias, Ieremias, and
Malichias, and he who excelled all the Prophets, John Baptist, whose sharp
rebukes for sins would now be hardly abide and suffered. Yet are they not
vnfittyng to this age, for that the same spirit still strives against the
malice of our time. Albeit, in diverse sorts and fashions Noah pronounced that
within an hundredth and twenty years all flesh should be destroyed. We
have many Noah's that do cry in our times, yet few repent. All that time that
Noah was preparyng of the Arc, to avoid Gods vengeance, the multitude derided
this holy Prophet, as many now do make a scoff at all them that by
obedience to Gods word, seek the means appointed to avoid Gods indignation
and judgments. Then the people would not repent: but as they should live for
ever, they married, they banquetted, they builded, they planted, but not in God.
And so it is much to be feared, that in this age, there are many that do the
like: they marry, but not in God: they build, but not in truth and
righteousness: and therefore because their buildyng is not according to Gods
direction, they know not how soon it shall fall down. And that it may
appear how God has vse^ to call those that he would have saved in former
ages, I have thought good to set down certain places of the scriptures,
because every one has not to buy the whole book.

The Prophet Jeremy sets down a very notable ensample, what returnyng God
requires of his people, O Israel, if thou will turn thee then unto me, says
the Lord, and if thou wylt put away thine abominations out of my sight, thou
shall not be moved, and shall swear the Lord lives, in truth, in equity,
and righteousness, And the people shall be fortunable, and joyful in him. For
says the Lord to all Judah and Jerusalem, Plough your land and sow not among
thorns, be circumcised in the Lord, and cut away the foreskyn of your
hearts, all ye of Judah, and the indwellers of Jerusalem: that my indignation
break not out like fire, and kindle so that no man may quench it because of
the wickedness of your imaginations.

Here it is to be noted, that there is a great difference betwyxt the visible
fire and a painted fire.

Moreover, thus says the Lord, When I have taken in hand to rootout, Iere.
18.
to destroy, or to waste away any people or kingdom: If that people against
whom I have devised, convert from their wickedness, I repent me of the
plague which I had devised to bring upon them.

Again, when I take in hand to build, or to plant a people or kingdom, if
the same people do evil before me, and hear not my voice: I repent of the
good which I devised to do for them. Speak now unto Judah, Thus says the
Lord, Behold, I am devising a plague for you: therefore let every man return
from his evil ways, and do the thing that is good and right.

And in the Prophecy of Esai, Hear Esai. 48.
this, O thou house of Jacob, ye that are called by the name of Israel, and
are come out of the stock of Judah, which swear by the name of the Lord, and
bear the witness of the Lord of Israel: But not with truth and right, which
art called free men of the holy Cities, and are grounded upon the GOD of
Israel, whose name is the Lord of Hosts. The things that I showed you ever
since the beginning, have I not brou^ht them to pass, immediately as the^ ^ame
out of my mouth, and declared th^^, and they are come. Howebeit, I know that
thou art obstinate, and that thine neck has an iron bayne, and that thy
browe is of brass. Nevertheless, I have ever since the beginning, showed thee
of things for to come, and declared the^ unto thee or ever they come to pass,
That thou sholdest not say, my Idol has done it, my carved or molten Image
has showed it. Hear and consider all these things, whether it was ye that
Prophesied them: But as for me. I told thee before at the beginning, new and
secret things that thou knew not of, and some done now, not of old time,
whereof thou never hardest before they were brought to pass: that thou can
not say, behold I knew them. Moreover, there be some whereof thou have never
heard nor known, neither have they been opened unto thine ears before time:
for I knew that thou would maliciously offend, therefore have I called thee
a transgressont even from thy mothers womb.

Nevertheless, I have withdrawn my wrath for my names sake, and for mine
honors sake, I have over seen thee: so that I have not rooted thee out.
Behold, I have purged thee, and not as Silver: I have chose^ thee in the fire
of affuction, and that only for mine own sake: for I give mine honor to none
other, that thou should not despise me. Hearken unto me O Jacob and
Israel, whom I have called, I am even that is, I am the first and the last.

Whereby it is plain, that there is no more redeemers to be looked for, and
the Prophets are gone before. Albeit, we hear daily speaking unto us from God
him self and all his Prophets, to the end to gather together the remnaunt of
Judah.

In so much as the Prophet Ezechiel has left us these comfortes, When the
wicked man turns away from his wickedness that he has done, and does the
thing which is equal and right, he shall save his own soul and live. For in
so much as he remembers him self, and turns him from all the ungodliness that
he has used, he shall live and not dye. Albeit, the Prophet Jeremy, does in
this Iere. 5.
Chapter following, lay hard to the charge of all ungodly persons, taking
occasion first to reprove whoredom and swearing, taking Gods name in vain.
Should I not correct this, says the Lord: should I not be avenged of every
people that is like unto this: Clyme up upon their walls, beat them down,
but destroy them not utterly. Cut of their branches because they are not the
Lords, for unfaithfully has Israel and Judah forsaken me, says the Lord,
they have denied the Lord, and said, it is not he. Tushe there shall no
harm or misfortune come upon us: we shall neither see sword nor hunger. As
for the warning of the Prophets, they take it but for wind: yea there is none
of those that will tell them that such things shall happen unto them. Fear
ye not me says the Lord: are ye not ashamed to look me in the face,
which bind the Sea with the sand, so that it can not pass his bounds: For
though it rage, yet can it do nothing, and though the waves do swell, yet may
they not go over. But this people has a false and an obstinate heart, they
are departed and gone away from me. They think not in their hearts, O let us
fear the Lord that gives us rain early and late, which keeps ever still
the harvest for us yearly. Nevertheless, your misdeedes have taken from you,
and your sins have robbed you thereof: for among my people are found wicked
persons, that privily lay snares and wait for men to take them and destroy
them. And like as a Ne^^e is full of Birds, so are their houses full of that
which they have gotten with falshoode and deceit, whereof comes their great
substance and riches, whereof they are fat and well lykyng, and are run
away from me with shameful blasphemies: They minister not the law ryghtfully,
They judge not according to equity. Should I not punish these things says
the Lord? should I not be avenged of all such people as these be: Horrible
and grievous things are done in the land.

Which while the Lord did behold, See I pray you the loving mercyes of the
Lord offered unto those people, and now speaking unto us, by the mouths of
many godly Preachers, in following and obseruyng the form of the good Prophet
Osee, in daily crying out. Turn Osee. 13.
from your froward ways, and turnyng from your disobedience with the children
of Israel: saying unto the eternal God, Thou art the Lord our God, and thee
will we worship: Confusion has devoured our fathers labor from our youth up,
yea their sheep and their Bullockes, their sons and their daughters. So do
we also sleep in our confusion, and shame Act. 4.
covers us: for we and our Father from our youth up unto this day, have
sinned against the Lord our God, and have not obeyed his voice.

For reconciliation whereof it is written thus by the Prophet Joel. Make thy
Joel. 1.
moan, as a Virgin does that girdeth her self with sackecloth, because of
her Bridegroom, for the meat and drink offerings shall be taken out of the
house of the Lord. And the Priests, the Lords, and Ministers shall mourn: the
field shall be wasted, the land shall be in a miserable case. Wherefore in the
second Chapter of the same Prophet it is written thus. Turn you unto the
Lord your God, for he is long suffering and of great mercy. Proclaim a
fasting, call the congregation, and gather the people together, warn the
congregation, gather the Elders, bring the children and sucklyngs together, let
the Bridegroom go Prayers must be made out of the Closet of our hearts.
forth of his Chamber, and the Bryde out of her Closet: Let the Priests serve
the Lord betwyxt the Porch and the Alter, weeping, and saying: Be favorable
(O Lord) to thy people, let not thine heritage be brought to such confusion,
lest the Heathen be Lords thereof.

And Sainet Paul to Timothy has Tim. 2.
left unto us in this age, a probable reason, that the day of the Lord, his
translation of this world, is nearer upon coming then now seems to be made
account off. This know that in the latter Alamentable sign, even as it is
come to pass in this age.
days shall come perilous times: for men shall be lovers of their own selves,
covetous, boasters, proud, cursed speakers: disobedient unto father and mother,
unthankful, ungodly, unkind, trucebreakers, false accusers, riotous, fierce,
despisers of the^ that are good, Traitors, headie minded, greedy upon
boluptuousnesse, more then the lovers of God, having a similitude of
godliness, but having denied the power thereof, and such abhor. For of this
sort are they which enter into houses, and bring in bondage women, laden with
diverse lusts, ever learning, and never able to come to the truth.

If the consideration of such ensamples, then may not move the people in this
age to be deeply touched with repentance, let them take the loving Parables
of Christ of the two sons, and Matthew. 21.
of the tylman, unto whom he set his Vineyarde.

A certain man had two soones, and he came to the first and said, son, go
and work to day in my Vineyarde, who answered I will not: but afterward
repented and went. Then came be to the second, and said likewise, and he
answered I will sir, but went not.

Wherein is expressed a wonderful comfort: first is to be considered, how the
Lord our God maker of heaven and earth, does humble him self, not only to
be called a husbandman, a householder, and such like: But he abaseth him self
of mercy, to us vile earth and ashes, that his son became man to make
mankind glorious in his sight, to make all those that do not refuse his grace
offered, of the slaves of Saten, his sons by adoption: We are his sons, we
are his Vinyard, we are as dear unto him as the Apple of his eye: As Moses
speaks, if you can believe it, he swears that you shall be his inheritance,
and he will be yours: If ye will only believe his grace offered, and believe
him when he swears. Will ye call his truth into doubt? his glory into
shame by your misreliefe: Better it were that all creatures should perish,
Heaven, man, and Angels, then that GOD should not have credit, or that his
power and glory in the least iotte should be diminished. He has called us
his people of England by his word many years, to work in his Vineyarde. But
what many one have answered, I appeal to your own consciences, which
witnesses, and all the world sees, that some have deceitfully said like
Belials children, and answered that ye would go and work in your fathers
Vineyarde, and have not done it: and othersome like rebellious, have plainly
said they would not.

But what is in this great matter required, it only remains, that all do
repent and return unto the Vineyard, with the first Son. For never shall
ignorance excuse any land or nation, as it is plain in the first to the
Romans, neither can any people be received without the fruit of repentance,
not only to acknowledge our sin and to lament them, but to amend our lives,
and to make straight the Lords paths, and to be well guarded with obedience
unto God, in doing the works of righteousness, in executyng Gods precepts,
to the resistyng of Satan and sin.

But if neither the means of Gods mercyes offered, nor his punishment
threatened for sin, may not move obstinate people to returnyng unto the Lord
in good earnest, and that they will look for signs, like unto the Scribes and
Matthew. 12. Mark. 8.
Pharisees, temptyng Christ saying, master give us a sign, unto wheme Christ
answered: The evil and adulterous generation seeks a sign, but there shall
no sign be given them, save the sign of the Prophet Jonas. Insomuch as we of
this age need to look after no further signs or wonders then the word of God
and daily experience leads unto. For Jerusalem and Damasco, never possessed
more greater blessings then England now does, nor none of those Cities
never enjoyed more pomp then London now possesses. And it is certain, that
Christ preached three years in those two famous Cities, and the Countries unto
them adjacent. And after forty years Jerusalem was destroyed, so long a time
did God give unto them of repentance and returning from their froward ways
wherein those people so proudly walked in disobedience. And the same God of
long time has called his little flock of England, as the remnaunt of Israel,
by the largeness of his mercy offered. But the same seems to have taken so
little effect, as that a great number with the consent of disobedience, have
taken occasion by their own wickedness, to provoke Tob. 12.
almyghtie God unto displeasure, in such lamentable wise, as many are become
enemies and betrayers of their own souls, for which their so grievous
contempt none may escape the punishment: As it has been declared in all
notable punishments from the beginning. For when the original world perished
by water, when Sodom and Gomorrha Genesis 7. 19.
was consumed by fire. And finally, when Jerusalem was horribly destroyed,
does any man think that all were like wicked: it is evident that they were
not Nevertheless, although some were young, and did not know what oppression
meant, neither could defile them selves with beastly and unlawful lusts, some
were pitiful and gentle of nature, and did not thirst for the blood of Christ
his apostles. But did any in the time of Gods visitation escape the plagues and
vengeance which did apprehe^d the multitude. Let the scriptures witness, and
the histories be considered, which plainly do testify, that by the waters all
flesh in earth at that time did perish, Noah and his family reserved: That
none escaped in Sodom and in the other Cities adjacent, except Lot and his
two daughters. And evident it is, that in that famous City Jerusalem, in that
last destruction of the same, none escaped Gods vengeance except so many as
before were dispersed. And what the cause was of this Gods severity, we are
forbidden to dispute with God. But let all men by these examples learn
betymes, to flee and avoid to commit such like abominations as the proud
contemners of God do prosecute, if the residue list not to be partakers of
their plagues. And yet the causes are evident, for which GOD brought so
horrible destruction upon those Cities, manifestyng that we should be
subject without grudgyng unto Gods will and judgments, which in them selves
are most holy and just. Wherefore it behooves that we of this age, should all
humble our selves under the mighty hand of God, in such wise as he in his
mercy, beholding our humility, may be moved to turn away his wrathful
displeasure from us. For in the original world, none was found in authority,
that either did resist tyranny, or oppression, that universally was used,
either yet that earnestly reprehended the same. In Sodom, was none found, that
did gainstande that furious and beastly multitude that did compass about, and
besiege the house of Lot: None would believe Lot that the City should be
destroyed. And finally, in Jerusalem was none found, that studied to repress
the tyranny of the Priests, and therefore of one vengeance temporal, were
they all partakers. Which examples in sundry places before touched, ought to
move every one that has any feelyng judgment in them selves, to the deep
consideration of their duties, in this last age and perilous times. Seeing it
is written, that those that do not labor to their power to correct evil, do
consent to doing of evil.

And let it not be forgotten, how that Jonas the Prophet, was but three days
in his deliueryng of the Lords message unto that great City of Niniuee: That
after forty days the same City should be destroyed. And those people
knowing them selves guilty of transgression of Gods commandments, believed
the Lord, and proclaimed fasting with one accord among them all: and put on
sackcloth, as well the great as the small, the rich as the poor. The King did
cast off his costly array, yt he was wont to wear, and put on sackcloth, as
then the manner was of declaring repentance: for he feared God. In so much as
God beholding their contricion in an acceptable time, turned from his
forepurposed destruction, which was pronounced to have fallen upon that great
City after forty days, according to the message of Jonas: had not both the
King and the people been touched with so zealous affection unto God and his
word: As they believed the Lords message without any further doubtyng, and
those people found favor in Gods fight.

As God grant England, in rendering of their due obedience to do the like, in
expressing our unfeigned repentance, by our outward actions: for we can not
excuse our selves by ignorance, as to say, that we want of such like warning.
For common experience may teach sensible men, that if one man receive a hand
writing from an other, great credit is given thereunto, especially when there
is faith and confidence betwixt the party who sent the writing, and the
parties unto whom the same is sent. In so much as every man and woman ought to
examine in them selves what confidence every one does repose in God his
written word: and what zealous love every one bears in his heart toward the
same. And let us not be unmindful that there is a time to laugh, and a time to
weep, a time to go forward, and a time to go backwarde. Whereby all are
forewarned from going backwarde, like the froward nature of the Sea Crabbe.
But rather seeing that we do bear the Image of Christ, let us in time
refrain, from glutting and ladyng our selves with muddy earth, like unto the
Woluish generation: but so to frame our selves to have gladsome hearts and
willing minds: to the end, to fetch water at the lively fountain, with the
woman of Samaria, who could not deny but John. 4.
that she had met with one, who had told her all that she had done in her
time: and the same was very Christ our Lord and Savior, who now speaks unto
us out of his sacred word: be knowing from the beginning what has been done,
and what we now do, and nothing can be hyd from him so secretly, that his
ears does not hear, and his eyes behold. Who of a fatherly affection in his
mercy has left unto England, the most perfectest means that ever was, by
the prescript rule of his word, how to know what our duties are, and how we
should behave our selves in this mortal and transitory life. Always, and in
all our external deeds, to prefer his divine will and pleasure, before our
carnal wills and affections, until we come to the unspeakable joys of his
presence. In the mean time the same our God has assured us by his word, that
after Prophets or warnings there ever after followed returnyng in yeldyng due
obedience: Or else always has ensued a lamentable and fearful destruction.
Albeit, our heavenly father has and yet does deal with us his people of
England, in the large measure of his mercy, even as a good father or master
that threateneth and shakes the rod before he lays on the stry^es, which
while the disobedient dee seem to contenine and set light by, a heavy
punishment insueth: which notwithstanding, when he threateneth, he finds no
duetifull obedience in returning unto him: and when he warns, there is no
repentance for sin. For he finds some so obstinate and wicked, as to say,
the way of the lord is not indifferent: unto such it may very well be said,
Nay, is not your ways rather cursed: As God forbid, that any one of his little
flock in England should be so obstinate and indurate hearted, as to think
that so good blessings as GOD has powered upon England, are lent us in vain,
so to return from us as clouds without rayn, or as an Echo in the air,
^nlesse our own unworthiness do deserve it so to be taken from us, and to be
given unto a strange people that ye^ know not God. As God forbid, that we
should through our disobedience, so as it were, rent the mercyes of God from our
selves, and so become the scattered people. But rather let us the people of
England, seek by all means possible to redeem our evil spent time, by
earnest repentance and mortification, subduing the lusts of the flesh, with
all the evil concupiscences of the same: bearyng with us free and clear
consciences, agreeable to the will of God, for so is the way to be at one with
him, as his word does direct us: That to the clean, all things are clean,
and to the froward, all things are froward: with the godly, thou shall King.
2^.
be godly: with the vncorrupt, then shall be vncorrupt. And this I say further,
that I write according to the truth and lie not: let every man examine his
own conscience, I do desire no better witness. For where any man or woman so
lives, as having no feeling desire in themselves to be at one with God: sure
it is an evident sign, that neither God dwells in them, nor they in God.
With such God grant, that none of the people of England should at any time
join fellowship: but that all may grow and become (...) members for Christ his
Church, by one general consent: So shall there be no complainyng in our
streets, nor no leading into captivity, but all shall have a joyful peace in
conscience: Thereby to glorify God our heavenly father, unto whom with his
Son Christ Jesus, and the holy Ghost, three persons and one God eternal, be
all honor, power, and dominion, now and for ever,

Amen.
FINIS. Our Savior Christ pronounces thus much of him self, that if we
continue John. 8.
in his word, then are we his very Disciples, and shall know the truth, and
the truth shall make us free. Save Lord, and bless, with good increase, thy
church our Queen, and realm in peace.
IMPRINTED at London at the three Cranes in the Vintree, by Thomas Dawson, and
Thomas Butter. 1580.


