A TRVE AND perfect description of a strange Monstar borne in the City of
Rome in Italy, in the year of our salvation. 1585.

Under which is described both the original and triumphant state of the Holy
League, and also the sudden and desperate fall thereof in the year 1588.

With certain verses exhortatory to the King of Spayn, that he would withdraw
his persecuting hand from the Church of Christ.

Wherein are also showed some of the cruelties exercised upon our contrymen
and others in the Inquisition and Galleys of Spain.

LONDON. Printed by John Wolf for Walter Dight, and are to be sold by William
Wright. 1590.

To the courteous Reader.
THough most men may understand my purpose, in the description of this monster
without farther declaration, yet the Printer doubting least it might seem
obscure to some not well acquainted heretofore with the occasions, and
beginnings of these preset troubles in christendom, at his request I thought
good to advertise thus much. First that the name of the Pope that now last
tyra^nized was Sixtus Quintus or Sixtus, the fifth of that name, who being by
his seat Antichrist, (as other Popes his Predecessors were before him and by
his sex a man) yet I term him by the name of strumpet, This prophecy was
literally fulfilled in the time of Pope Ioane, that was a woman and anotable
harlot.
harlot. etc. as the beloved disciple of our Savior does in the Apocalips,
call that man of Sin, and agreeable to that Scripture I bring the devil in
their conference, calling him the Queen of new Babylon (the place of his
residence.) This Pope to show himself a most cruel ennemy to humane race, as
most his predecessors have been, though few in so high degree, being no sooner
seated in his bloody seat, he straight beats his brains, how to set al
christendom together by the ears, partly through the pleasure he takes in
shedding innocent blood, partly to set himself the surer in his Antichristian
chair, (now almost rotten) and wholly to extinguish and root out the glorious
and most comfortable Gospel of our Savior, with all the professors thereof,
that he might so bring it to pass, that their might be no memory remaining
of the one nor the other. And because the devil is always ready at our elbowe
to prick us forward, as soon as we have conceived any evil in our hearts, and
so much the readier, by how much the conceived mischief is the greater. So no
doubt this Pope, whose conceit being against Christ and his members, I account
the chiefest of al sins, what so ever, had no sooner laid the plot of his
vnspeable mischief in his heart, but the diuil was as dilligent to urge him to
put it in as spedy practice. And therefore Isay this monster or bloody league,
to be begotten of the devil upon the forenamed whor of Rome, as who so looks
well into the nature of the said Holy league, must needs say with me, that Hell
it self was of cou^sail to the establishing thereof. I term it untimely
birth, in respect of the strumpets eagernes in bringing it forth, for she
brought forth her misshapen creature after her coming to the Popedom, in half
the time that women commonly use to go with child, even within the compass of
four months: yet the bug showed not himself in his iollity till the year 88.
the cause whereof liudge to be a certain prophesy invented amongst the Papists,
that in the said year of 88. there should be but one king, one pastor and one
flock, the interpretation whereof they apply, the King, to be Phillip of
Spayn, the pastor to be the Pope, and the flock to be al people and nations of
our Europe, which in that year should all be thrall and slaves to that king and
pastor. Yet note by the way, friendly Reader, that this great pastor, that would
have so great a flock or rather the fleece and fell of them, and that now
vanteth to excel all kings, as much as the Sun excels the Moon, was of
late a begging gray friar, The Francisea^ Friars when they beg at the door,
they ask it for and in the name of Saint Francis himself.
going from door to door with a wallet on his back, begging bread for S.
Frauncis, but that begging estate he has as clean forgotten now, as though his
feet now cladde with purple velvet shoes, had never gone bare foot.

The king of Spayn, so enriched by his west India Mines and his reuenews so
increased through his late usurping of Portingall, and thereby also the east
India, being the chief pillar of the Popedom and without whom it could never
have stood so long, I place him for the monsters right arm, in whom the Pope
puts all his confidence, they two hang together as the pennard and inckhorne,
the Pope gives the king many bulls, which yields great profit to his coffers,
therefore the king is his cha^pion and general in all his battails, yet note,
those fat bulls come not out of the Popes meadows, he gives him but a pig of his
own sow, the Popes gift is but yearly a sheet of paper, but all the profit
that comes to the king, comes from his subjects purses, and so drunken is this
king become with the winelees of this harlots golden cup that he cannot discern
it. The late duke of Guise sometime, in respect of his bloody mind, the fittest
man in our Europe, to have a principal place amongst the Popes own children,
he being commonly called the Popes butcher, is plaste as the monsters left arm
which arm a long time was greatly feared of al men, til it pleased the Lord to
set his church free from so cruel a scourge. I describe the monstar first, as
he was in his greatest pride, but after according to his present picture, I
describe him as he lately was. I doubt not but the rest may be well
understood. Farewell.

He that wishes speedy conuertion or hasty confusion to the Monster. I. L.

The description of the Monster.
POpe Sixtus, one of the most shamlesse strumpets of all her whoorish
predecessors, beginning her reign in the year of our salvation 1585, and
seeing her dignity and revenues so far inferior to most Popes in time
past, In times past the Popes had great fees out of all kingdoms in Europe,
and this frantic Sixtus had nothing but out of Spain, Italy, and parts of
Germany, the^ wonder not that he fa^ed like one stark mad.
began to grow so melancholy, that she wanted little from falling into an
incurable frenzy: straight she sets all her wits abroach, laying sundry plots
for the repayring of the decayed dignity of the sometime flourishing chair.
The Devil a diligent attendant on any sex possessed with like cogitation,
appeared unto her in shape fittest to please the humor of so common a
curtizan, and saluting her far unlike the churlish courtesy of his infernal
Country, he gins revive her out of the dumpe with these friendly speeches. How
now brave Lady (quoth he) what, all in your dumpes? Is this a mood beseeming
the Queen of new Babylon? Is this the countenance of her that should make all
Nations of the earth drunk in her beauty, and bewitched by her bravery? May
the Kings of the earth (whom thou must allure to love thee) like of a
melancholy Lady? Has Fortune first called thee from a russet cool to a red
hatt, and from that hatte to a tripled Crown, and should thou not know how
to use Fortune that stands wholly at thy beck? Or have ever I sailed thee at
the pinch, that thou should any thing doubt now of my readiness at need?
Nay frollike fair Queen and pluck up your spirits: let not this successiue
seat fall farther to decay in you, that whylome so flourished by your most
famous foregoers: in sharpness of wit few of them ever came ueere you, and
in policy who ever was comparable? They have by degrees lost of late every
one a share, so that the famous chair is become to the state as now to our
greefes we see it in: how befitting will it then be for brave Sixtus to employ
her self, not only to recover that already lost, but also in subduing that
which as yet has little bowed under any of their banners. Shall you who by the
help of that mighty Monarch of Spain, together with your own industry, The
King of Spain has his voice in the Popes election, and bears greatest sway
of all other voices.
came to this haughty seat, seem to want either friends or policy, not
only to maintain it, but again to lift it eue^ to the clouds? Cast off these
dumpes (my love) for shame, and practice without doubting to perform what so
ever you enterprise. Do you forget that it was at first a hundred times more
difficult to establish this chair, when yet it was not, then it is now to
maintain it, having such helps? Are the coffers so stuffed to others, become so
bare and empty to thee? Let pardons purchase gold, and sale of Bulls supply
that want, raise the price of thy pardons, and force men upon pain of fire to
take thy Bulls, have thou not asword as well as the keys of Heaven? If men grow
careless of thy pardons, pardonne them perforce. Be of good cheer brave
Queen and let despair be far from thee, use my advise and doubt not all
shall be well. Her holiness starting up as from a slumber, and doubting
least she dreampt, that which afterward she perceived more plain to be the
very speeches of her sweet heart in deed: after some loving imbrasinges, she
burst forth into this heavy reply. Marvel not my best beloved, and never
failing friend at need, that you find me driven into this present dumpe, out
of which your comfortable speech and presence has even now set me free. Our
seat, sometime as you know the only wonder of the world for bravery and
pomp, having ever since the preaching of that accursed Germayne Luther and his
scholars daily diminished in dignity, I find at my first entry so unlike to
that it has been within the compass of my own remembrance, that our
Monarchy seems now scant a Molehill, to that it was wont to be in the time
of some of our more then happy predecessors, self ease so possessing our
latter Popes, that every one has lost his little, for sturring so little to
stop the soar at the beginning: and by regarding too too little the pomp and
ease of us their successor, I find to my woe, this present seat so weak, that
unless I besturre me better then they have done: I see no remedy but seat
and succession will end both in me. Thus seeing (right trusty friend) this
great charge as well for our self as our successors, depending wholly upon our
own shoulders, wonder not to see me so disquieted at the heart and vexed in
mind, till I have found some way how to repair this our ouerruinated seat.
That which at the first might have been stopped with a little and small charge,
now by running so long unstayed will cost millions and a whole Ocean of blood:
the effusion of blood is our least care, but want of those millions sticks in
our stomach. Spain, the Princes and Senioryes of Italy, the Bishoppricke of
Colen, with few others remain firm unto us, when as the rest of Europe is
either fallen quite from us, or at least so wavering, that in most need we are
likest to be deceived by the^. If the Emperie should change from the house of
Austria (as it is to be feared) and so fall to some of our professed enemies,
He means the king of Navarre, now to the Popes grief, the French king: whom
the League so pursues: but God is his defense. Here the Pope doubts not in
vain, for since this parlee between him and the devil, the Pola^ders have
elected the valiant Prince Signismundus, son to the king of Sweden, a
Protestant. Here for reverence I must let pass the filthy railing speeches,
that the quondam russer hooded Sixtus vomiteth out of his stinking mouth,
against our Princess, whom God long preserve in despite of all her foes, for
they are such as are not for any good subject to write, nor for any christian
care to brook the hearing. The discrediting of the Popes pardons is no small
hinderance to her Holiness.
what a blow were that to light on our ouerburthened shoulders. France for want
of issue, has for next successor * him that our heart most abhors, against
whom we have sent forth our curses and Bulls, but he esteems them all as
bubbles and speedes the better by how much the more he has been
excommunicated and cursed.

Poland that brooketh no successor by issue, by election, I fear, may admit
some Lutheran, and then all hope of succor from thence were clean cut off. The
Russies and Muscouites, howbeit they maintain some of our superstitions, yet
how slenderly they account of us, it is al too well known, and how soon they
will quite reject us, who can tell? And in the mean time, what by the far
distance of the way, and by the little respect they have unto us, we have no
cause to trust to their aid. England, whom with her Queen, our predecessors
have so long and deeply cursed, that there has bin no malediction against her
and hirs left vnpronounced, flourishes now more then ever, neither has Pius
Quintus and Gregory, both of famous memory, notwitstanding all their costs
and charges, bin able to hatch so many English Seminaries, to infect that
Country: but those Universities of Cambridge and Oxforde, so unhappily for us,
maintained by that accursed Queen, have sent forth such an innumerable rabble
of ministers, that not only our English Seminaries, but all our learned
Jesuits of all nations are so put to silence by their preachings and writings,
that they have not a word to say more in my quarrel: well they may brabble,
but those bishops and ministers of England so beat them with their answers,
that they are almost beaten dumb. And yet our English Seminaries have waded
further in our cause then any other Writers heretofore. And as for our pardons
they are also grown so far out of credit by the Writings and Sermons of
English and other Ministers, which still teach men where they may have pardons
gratis, and only for asking, that now there is such running to Christ for
Indulgences, and plenarie remission that not one amongst twenty comes to me
his vicar. Every sowter is now grown so malapert, that he presumes at the
first iumpe to rush even to Christ himself, without asking leave of one or an
other Saint in Heaven or Hell. Note that all Saints are not in heaven, for the
pope has canonized such a number of traitors, that hell is not vnfurnis shed
of saints such as they be.
And this is the good that we get also, in that the Scripture is in so many
vulgar tongues, for because Christ says without exception, Come unto me all
ye that labor and are heavy laden etc. Every Tinkar that is touched with a
little repentance, now by understanding the Scriptures, takes it to be spoken
also unto him, and so at the first dash runs boldly to Christ, without
offering one penny unto me his porter, or to any other of his court for his
admittance. What hope rests then in my bulls or pardons? Thus leaving to
speak of many others that are almost as sharp thorns unto our sides, as the
Queen of England is. By this little I have said, I know thou can comecture
of the rest, and so well waying the cares that vex us, together with the
ticklish state of our tottering chair, cease to blame me for sitting so
malecontent as lately you found me.

The Devil that heard nothing all this while, but that he too well knew
before, cuts off this concubines doleful tale with a loving kiss. Peace,
fair Queen, quoth he, and add no further oil ta my flame, thou renuest my
sorrows without telling me any news: Thou know to my power, I have aided
the Sorcerers, Coniurers, and Inchanters of thy predecessors against our
capital enemy of England all that I might. But he whose name I tremble to
rehearse, has put such a hook in my nostrelles, that I can go no further
then he lets me loose, it is in his hand to restrain my rage, and to give me
liberty to execute his wrath when he sees time: but whusht, be still, seeing
thy sorcerers by me, nor I by them can do no more then lifts him that rules
us all, we must cast about, and bring the other tacke aboorde, we must rake
all the corners of hell for a new device, seeing all our former practices fail
us, we will provide a remedy for all, and all shall be to our content Lady I
warrant thee. With that together they go into her holiness privy chamber, where
they laid their heads together. But what they did, or how they handled the
matter, I know not, but her holiness began to look big, and wax big, as
though the Diuelles and she had made work for the Beodles of Bridewell, and in
less space by five months at least, then ordinary course, her holiness was
delivered of her untimely birth: yet the child being alive, the tender care of
the mother so fostred and brought it up, that insmall time it wared very
strong, yea, the monster became so mighty in so little space, that most Kings
of the earth stood at the gaze, expecting with fear the event of his power.
While the dadde and damme began to rub the elbowe for joy, and their hearts
dancing within them, saying one to another, This is he shall remedy all, and
he shall advance our seat higher by a degree then ever it was: the damme sung
lullabie, and the dadde rockt the cradle, so long, till neither Rome, the
cradle, nor all Italy could longer contain him, for the stripling would
abroad to search out adventures: And therefore I will first show you his
shape, as he was in his greatest pride. He had two heads, the one altogether
like the sire, and the other like the da^me, which heads spoke proud
blasphemies against heaven, and the ruler thereof, their looks lofty, even
like the son of pride and sin, terrible like the seed of Serpents, and
fierce like the red dragon.

From his right shoulder in stead of an arm, grew out a mighty Prince with a
crown imperial on his head, to look to, full of all pomp and majesty,
seeming at the view by his rich show to be sole commander of all the gold
mines in the world, he had a sword in his hand more brave to look to, then
fearful by any sign of manly strokes given therewith, The king of Spain his
late usurping of Portingale, possesses also all such parts of the East India
as ea^st belonged to Portingale.
the scabbard most richly beset with stone and pearl, as though the East India
had lately become his slave: he cried out in the Spanish tongue, so loud, that
not only all Europe, but also great part of Africa trembled at the proud
noise, El mundo no me basta: which his speech I take to be thus much in
English, The world suffices me not. From his left shoulder proceeded also in
place of the other arm, a prince to look on very grimme, and stern, with a
coronet on his head, his arms thoroughly imbrued in blood, his sword died red
in the same, as though he had lately come from the slaughter of an infinite
number of seely lambs and sheep: his sparkling eyes seemed all enraged in
ire, his browe frowning nothing to the show but ghastly death. In fine, he
seemed wholly a hellish fury, prowdly roaring out in the French tongue this
horrible speech, En despit du Ciel. which I understand thus in English, In
despite of heaven. His body contained in the place of heart, liver, lungs,
guts, gall, and other entralles, a number of fat friars of all orders,
priests, monks and Jesuits, some laying their heads together, as debating
matter of great moment, some singing, and others faring as merry as Crickets,
the pot with Vinum theologicum, in the mean while having little rest, but
still walking from mouth to mouth, and tossed like a tenise bal, from hand to
hand, as though they purposely meante to make themselves lean for the kingdom
of heaven: there was in fine such a confused noise amongst them, of all the
languages in our Europe, that with much adooe I could hear distinctly any of
their several speeches, yet listening attentively to the English, which by
means of the multitude of other languages was hardly discerned, I heard one
cry flatly, Never such cause of joy. Be like it was some English Jesuit that
hoped shortly to become a Cardinal in England.


His tail was double like his neck, from which sproong out many mad heads,
some seeming noble, many of good birth, but most, the scumme and outcast of the
world, ready at an hours warning to serve the Devil himself for money: all
these well armed, and as it were, ready at a pinch to strike without respect of
age or sex: the Monster seeming not greatly troubled in drawing them, by
means of their great willingness, to follow of their own accord: their noise
was no less confused then that of the belly-gods before mentioned, save that I
heard not a word of English amongst them, to my remembrance, but I heard an
Italian somewhat louder then the rest, all in a bravery, and in the hoigh to
say, Hor, o may, ricco, which I take to be thus much in English, Rich now or
never.

Down from his breech on the right side stood in stead of a leg, a
Cardinal, proud in his gesture, seeming to supporte his share of the great
burden, as though he had scant sustained a fether, a brave lusty fellow,
princelike in countenance, casting a smirking look from a wanton rolling eye,
as though a window in Rome should scant escape his piercing sight, and in a
pleasant vain I heard him utter in Latin, Quis non portabit spe? which I thus
construe, Who would not bear on hope?

On the other side, in stead of the monsters left leg stood, a no less
frolike mitred Bishop, fat and better fed by odds then the Cardinal, his
belly strouting out, as though it contained the better part of a barrel of
Renishe wine, wholly despising the cares of this world, as dedicating himself
altogether to Tempus bonum, yet seeming to hope of farther preferment and ease,
I heard him say thus in latin, Fero vt quiescam, meaning this, I bear now
for after ease.

This Monster, in the shape prescribed, being then in his ruff and greatest
iollitie, put the world in such a maze that it was strange to hear every
several man's opinion, especially when her holiness (that disposes of Baptism
at her pleasure) vouchsafed to baptize her child with the name of Holy-League:
then, how many men, so many minds, some said they never saw so ugly a shape
under so reverent a name, some said the name and the person agreed as well as
(kill Bull) for a gentle woman's little fisting hound, that might be put in her
glove: others thought the better of the beast, for the respect of the name, and
many were so mad as to think ye Monstar with the name, to be both from
above, so were the multitude bewitched and wise men led into error: But all
men that looked narrowly into the proportion and force of every limme, stood
more affrayde of his might then amazed at his shape: whether he was first to
take his progress, few men knew but every man feared, for every one doubted
his own home: the greatest rumors went, that he would begin first with
France, Flanders, and England: yet Africa doubting least he would take
Barbary in his way listed not to be unprovided for his entertaynement,
neither meant Asia to sleep in security: The names of kings of the West India,
who at this present with all their subjectes live in most miserable bondage
under the Spaniards, and have so done a long time, enduring more torments then
may be well named, in so much that they are persuaded, that the Spaniardes
are a people ascended out of hell for their sins.
a horrible Monster (say you) so to scare the three corners of the world: but
had America been also in peace, where to have viewed him to the full, I doubt
not but her prowdest * Cassiques would have trembled at the sight: and so much
the sooner, because the right arm spoke in ye Spanish tongue such terrible
things, in which language the West India, (contained in America) suffered such
proud threats, and therewithal such intolerable torments, that the poor
Indians think verily that there is no other language used in Hell among the
devils. But leaving those miserable Indians in their misery and perpetual
slavery, where they are constrained daily to hear the three throated
Cerberus, barking out nothing but horror in the said language. This Monster
has begun his stately march, and gone quite thorough France and Flanders,
where in France with his left arm he did horrible things, the right arm
afflicting Flanders with unspeakable miseries, and in the year 1588. being
then in his full strength, who can declare the haughty words he threw
abroad, or describe the greatness of his looks, the sea shook, the earth
trembled, the hugie whales that wonted to sport upon the rhyme of the water,
durst not then approach within a hundred fadom of the same, the heavens were
threatened, and the whole earth should be subdued. Then he begins with
England, and goes round about Scotland and Ireland, but Jehovah be praised,
doing so little harm save to himself, that he was not a little before so
admired for his shape, great words, and big looks, as now generally
scorned for so small performance, after so many brave brags and threats, the
mountains birth proved so seely a mouse, that all fear was turned to
laughter, and tremblings to shame for so doing. And I that saw the Monster
newly crept out of the shell, and also in his greatest pride, had scantly
known him in the latter end of the year 1588. (save by his deformity) so
found I him dismembered, wounded, and humbled, beholding children that erst
durst not look him in the face, presume in sport to pluck hairs from his
beard, and to dance Antike on his great toe. No less a change, me thought
then to see a mouse presume to take a nappe in a Cattes ear. Then entered I
into consideration of the power of him that indeed is only mighty, and cried,
saying: To thee O Lord belongs all glory, power, and honor, and unto men,
shame and confusion: It is thou that throwest the proud even to the dust,
exalting the humble and meek in heart, to thee be all praise for ever.

Now therefore having described him as I saw him in his pomp and fury, I
thought good to picture him out in such sort as you see him in the beginning of
the book, being as lately he was seen by many: which may serve to revive all
such dastardes as were erst well near dead, at the only hearing of his name,
and for the comfort of all such as still trusted in God without wavering, that
the great bugge at last would prove but a very scare Crow.

I passing of late thorough a waste and desert wilderness, void of all green,
and covered only with light sand, still remoouing at the pleasure of the
unconstant wind, by chance casting my eye on one side I beheld (unlooked for)
many people of sundry Nations gathered together, their confused noise being no
less strange, then to see so desert a place so replenished with so many
people, and to rid my self of doubt I drew near, with desire to be
satisfied of a matter so strange in respect of the place, where soon I beheld
lying under a great branchles shrubbe, the great Monster before rehearsed, and
this great multitude inuyroning him round and gazing upon him with their never
satisfied eyes: Some that expected he should have wrought great wonders, stood
pitifully howling over him, others that had long feared and somewhat felt the
force of his fury, stood giving thanks to the almighty for so gracious a
deliverance: and others not caring which end of the staff went forwards, (for
there were of all sorts) stood laughing and grining and making mowes: which
sort would have been as ready to run with the hound, had the hound still
continued the chase, on hope to have pykt the bones and fed on the reuertion
of the pray. This Monsters great heads that erst spoke great blasphemies
against heaven, lay now yielding forth against the same place (and him that
rules therein) most bitter curses, in the anguish of their distempered
brains, and with deep and hollow groans, bewrayed to all men their sorrows.
His right arm hanging down the head, his crown standing a one side, more
after the falling then swearing fashion, with the rich stone and pearl of his
scabbard fallen off in many places, and his golden chape quite fallen off and
lost, yet there remained many stones and pearls, with the golden hilt upon
the leaden blade, which blade at the first thrust turned directly to his own
bosom, and being at the first drawn seemed so unsuitable to the rich scabbard
that men wondered to see so brave a show to cover so weak a weapon: his hautie
speech was altered from El mundo no me basta, to his doubtful demand: No
aprouechando Tesoro, que hare? Which in effect is thus much (if my treasure
avail me not, what shall I do?) (as though his infinite treasure wherein he
trusted, had quite deceived him): And therewith he set such a sigh, as pierced
to the quick every entraile and limme of the whole Monster, in such sort as
the whole body became so loose with the fear, that it is doubted whether the
laske may be stopped till guts and all go together into the preeuie: but in the
mean time there was old stopping of noases, and phogh quoth the beholders,
what a stinking Holy-league is this? The left arm, that lately played such Rex
in France, being the very butcher of this League, upon the Saints of God, was
now clean cut from the body, by * one, The last french king who perceiving the
purpose of this League, caused the Duke of Guize to be murdered.
who at the first sat as newter till he saw that the Monster in deed pretended
in his said progress to bereave him also of crown and life: then began Henry
of Valoys to besturre him, as one to whom a crown and life was more dear,
then so to leese either of the^: and espying his time he lays so about him
that ear ever the Monster was ware, he smote the left arm quite off his
shoulders, which in ye fall brake his sword, vomiting out with his blood, this
frantic french Cruelle mort me preuient as much in english as (Cruel death
preuents me) meaning (as it seems) that sudden death had prevented his
purpose, which reached even to the kings own life, so that he grieved more for
not effectuating his purpose, then sorrowed for conceiving so great a sin in
his heart.

The bedye, bowelles, and other inwardes of the monster, I saw so changed
from that it was (lately described) that what with their vinum Theologicum and
over soon excess in joy, but especially their suddayne and unexpected
sorrow, even when they thought all should have be'ene according to their
longing, the whole stomach of the beast, was so overcome, that his entrayles
fell a sending upward, and his stomach spewing out such blasphemy against
Heaven, and such bitter curses against the Church of Christ, that the stintch
thereof was, and yet is still ascending into the nostrelles of the Lord: which
stincke, though according to his long patience he suffer for a season, yet let
not his Church despair, for at length when the stinch is at the greatest, he
will so destroy the whole body of this monster, that not only his curssinges
and blasphemies shall cease together with his tyranny and power, but every
lymme shall suddenly vanish away, as the whole body was at the first over
hastily begotten and hatched into the world: But yet the number of Martyrs
appointed to suffer under Antichrist is not full. Well, this late myrie body
was again of late so out of tune, and in so contrary a note, that it made all
the beholders much to marvel, for in ste'ede of (Never such cause of joy)
(which was the spe'ech in the Monsters prosperity) I heard plain mumbling
amongst them (Never in like extremity.) A soddayne change, but what can not
the Lord bring to pass, how can he'e turn the joys of the wicked into
sorrow, and the crosses of the godly into swe'ete ease: as this is the Lords
doing, and it is wonderful in our eyes.

His twofolde tail trayling after and containing such a number of people of
all degre'es and ages, even from Princes pe'eres, to the most abiectes people:
the beholders also perceived woonderfully altered: the one part coming from
the mothers head, were such as were woonderfully bewitched by the charms of
the great Sorceresse of Rome, and had quaffed de'epely out of her Idolatrous
cup, whereby some of all sorts became so superstitious, that they followed
the League and Popes cause, of me'ere superstition only: but these the
simplest and smallest number: for the greatest number were wholely of the
Devil the Sire, without any religion or devotion at all, drawn only by
desire of gain and preferment, crying with the rest, Oh the holy League, the
holy League: yet they as careless and void of holiness and religion, as he
that never knew the meaning of either: even like the roagues, at the late
defacing of Lincolnes Inn, which neither cared for Prentises, nor had received
any injury at the hands of any Gentleman of the house, yet glad of the
least opportunity to rob, spoil and do any mischief what so ever, had no
thing in their mouths, but, Oh the Prentises, the Prentises, down with the
house, kill the raskalles, etc.

Such, I say, were the greatest followers of this League, hoping upon the
soddaine of vagabonds, and lubbars, to become Lords at the first dash,
whereof, no doubt, In res^ect of their wonderful mixture, and that with the
vildest nations under heaven, as with the Negro, the Jew and the Moore, in
such sort, that scant one among a hundred can prove him self free from one of
these three sorts of people, especially in Granada, Murc^a, Iaen, Andauzia,
etc,
they heard large promises made to all the followers, which made the Spanish
mungrelles, so hasty to cause their Courtizans and Wives to follow into
France their invincible Armada, promising against their coming hither to have
provided for their entertaynement, the fairest houses in London, vaunting
before the victory, to sell veluets in Cheapeside by the Rapyer, and to
measure out broad cloth by the pyke. But at length failing of their purpose,
and a clean contrary hap befalling their expectations: I saw there their
heads in ste'ede of helmets covered with coxecombes, and in ste'ede of
battleaxes, bables in their hands, so looking heavily one on another, none
being able to mock his fellow for his long noase: I listening to their chatte,
heard an Italian saying softly to himself, Cattiuo contare, sen^al hosto.
Which I take to be thus in english (ill reckoning without the host.

The legs of this ugly shape, were as quite chamged as the rest of the
members: the young lusty Cardinal on the one side, with the fat fed
Bishop on she other, that erst upon hope seemed to dance under the
ponderous burden, were now ready to sink right down under the same, as not
longer able (their hope lost) to support so great a weight: their shoulders
were become crooked, and their eyes ready to starte out of their heads,
staring as though they had been sitting three days and nights at the
Stillyeard close by the Renish winefatte, their legs stood trembling and
quaking at the knees, as though they were even ready to start one part from
the other: and the faynting Cardinal faynting in his speech, in steed of his
former, used these words: spem and laborem amitto, which I English thus (I
leese both labor and hope). And the fat mitred Bishop, making a mouth like
an Oyster cried out, Male sit oneri. As much to say (the Devil take burden
and all) It should seem every Cardinal hopes to be Pope, and every such
Bishop a Cardinal at least, justifying that saying, Nemo sua sort
contentus. Therefore it behoues all Cardinals and such Bishops to lay to
their helping hands in time, ear they with the Popedom come all tumbling
down at once: And so they do (say our Papists) and though Pope Sirtus be
dead, and so one of the Leagues heads be cut off, yet the Hydra never wants
another to spring up in the place: And so it is most true, Pope Sixtus the
fifth is dead even in the fifte year of his raygue, of whose death there goes
some doubt, some say that her Holiness was poisoned, others that she dyed even
of very grief that her misshapen Elfe had no better success in his enterprise,
either of these apinions bear show of truth, and it may be thought for most
certain, that one of these two causes was her death: but sure, it is the
Lords doing how so ever it be, for he can use what mean he thinks best,
when he thinks good to remove so cruel a scourge from his Church, we are
not to hope for any much better but a worse can not come out of Hell it self.
Some say this new Pope goes about to bring forth a new League, others no,
but that he will cure, refresh and patch again together the old League:
hoping that du Main and the Duke de Parma, will supply more amply the place of
the old Leagues lest arm, both together, then the Duke of Guyze did alone:
Once, old hold and keep there is and they that live on the spoil, cry out
for a newn League out of hand, or that the old may be repaired with all
expedition: the Cloysterers with the whole rabble of the Romish Clergy doubt
greatly least long delay might breed great danger, and therefore these
people prick the matter forward with no less haste the^ their need requires
speed: but every principal member of the old League, find themselves at
this instant so tyerde, that they desire more a little present rest, then a
great hope of much ease hereafter.

How so ever the matter falls out, whether there be a new League made or the
old renewed, let not the child of God despair or doubt, God is still one and
the same: no new League can be made stronger, neither the old be renewed and
made of greater force than the former: but could it be made a hundred times
stronger, it is all one with God to overcome with a great or small number the
greatest host that ever was. Rejoice therefore O Sion for thy Redeemer lives,
and he that keeps Israel does neither slumber nor sleep. Let the
universal Church be joyful and sing praises with one consent, for Babell is
falling, and the mighty Giant that lately defied heaven is overthrown on
earth, his bow is broken and his spear snapt a sunder, his ioints are become
feeble, and the whole body altogether out of temper: the Prince of glory has
done it and the Lord of Hoastes has heard our prayers: the righteous God has
revenged our wrongs on the prowdest of our foes, and declared to all the
world how dear the blood of his Saints is always in his sight. And as he
has overthrown the first, so let us not doubt but he will do the next.

Blessed be his name for ever, and let all them that love the peace of
Jerusalem say Amen.

^. ^. ^. ^.
VVIde open thine eyes. O mighty king, at length begin to see,
How heavens, how earth, do threat revenge unto thy realm and thee
Take pity then on thee and thine, while mercy may be found:
Before Iehouahs wrathful face, fall flat unto the ground,
Repent, return, confess and cry, for mercy at his hand.
Whose members here on earth by thee, lie scattered on the land.
Whose blood, though scorcht on cruel flame, and shed by dint of sword:
Appears fresh before his face, that is both King and Lord:
Of thee and all the earth besides, for he has made it all:
He does exalt the meek in heart, the proud he makes thrall:
His eyes sees all and he does hear, the poor that are oppressed,
And eke the blood that cries revenge, and calls to be redrest. Julian the
emperor who of set purpose did strive against Christ, and therefore grievously
afflicted the Church, at length he finding himself overcome, he threw dust
into the air, and cried, calling Christ Gallilean, thou Gallilean have
prevailed.

If still thou strive with him that strove, (yet al against the stream)
Oercome with him, at length with him, thou also must proclaim.
Thou Galilean have preuailde, for sure he will prevail,
Against all that dare resist his power, or least of his assail.
It is not thou, thy nature mild, is turnde to bitter gall.
By them that rule (nay ouerrule) thy self, thy realm and all,
With Pharaos witches they bewitch, thy senses (mighty king)
If still thou list to what they say, those witches will thee bring
To fall with Pharao and his host, who warning none would take.
Thy warnings are no less then his, God grant they may thee make,
Thy heavy hand to draw a back, from all such silly souls.
That fly for fear of Tirants thine and hide themselves in holes.
Forced leave their lands and native soil, with infants young and poor,
To save their throats and flesh from flame, they leese their goods and store:
Retain remorce (if ought be left) else seek the same to have.
Relent to shed such store of blood, which still revenge does crave:
It is not thou (as erst I said) thy witches work our woe:
Thy Inquisition works thy wrack, and thou will find it so,
They gape for blood and wait for blood, (yet all in hope of gain) The
Inquisition has the third part of every man or womans goods whom they
condemn, and the king the rest, which makes the king as willing to suffer it,
ast he bloody Inquisitors are ready to comdemn me^, for their profit, to the
fire or ^^llies.

Goods to consiscate to their use, their, credit to maintain.
They care not whom they rack or burn, so they may profit have,
So they may live in wealth and pomp, what skils who go to grave,
Or else to gallyes or to fire, their care is none at all.
They spare no sex nor age a lot, they nip both great and small.
Few nations of our Europe but, within thy Galleys rows,
With store of stripes and iron chains, of food small store God knows,
Save only bread and water thin, poor souls they have no more,
Within that Hell terestriall, their bodies ever sore.
With stripes on naked flesh and bone, by tirants wretched hands,
Whilst that they row both day and night, fast locked in iron bands,
Whereas the Turk more friendship finds, then christian poor distressed,
Of earthly aid and humane help, by torments still oppressed.
There English men free borne and unacquainted to be thrall,
In time of trade, lees trade and goods, yea liberty and all.
For no cause else but that by chance, If an English restament or any book of
prayer should be found in a ship, the whole company with ship and goods must
fall into their bloody hands, as well as he that is owner of any such book. It
is a wonder to see how without alpitty those cowards delight in ^orme^ting pore
christians that lie fast bound in chayns and how they brag of their manhod in
so doing, as though they were conquerors, but were some of them loose, that
they so beat they would as soon be bagd as once look them in the face.
some book there may be found,
Abord some ship of holy write, or other doctrine sound.
For that offense (if so offense it well may termed be)
Both ship and goods and all the rest, must pay as well as he.
That is the owner of the book, he may not pay alone.
He and his goods may not suffice, their hearts more hard then stone,
For all must to the holy House, the best must needs be slaves.
Their goods all lost and freedom to, were better in their graves,
And their thy cruel bloody roags, that dare not strike a dog,
(That goes loose and stands free from iron chain and clog)
Lay load upon our country men all naked and in bands,
Sometime with ropes that smart full sore, sometime with hazel wa^ds
And then they rule and dominier, like Princes for the time,
They iet and look as big perdy, as Bull beef in the prime.
Triumphing over christian flesh, like lion on his pray:
Their lust is law and what they do, there is none that says nay.
Their pizels of their bulls do walk, more worse then cut of sword,
And saunce remorce they still lay on, with many a bitter word.
As rascal, dog, and many such, no christian tongue would utter:
Against the image of our God, that may ne move nor mutter.
But hear and bear all what does fall, from tirants tongue and arm.
If any speak, they soon provide, to stop his speech a charm.
They hale his tongue out of his mouth, and take a cloven stick.
Twixt which they bind the tender tongue, (a cruel hellish trick)
For so they make him row and hale, enduring thirst and pain,
In torments drawing forth his lise, that dead would be full feign.
The moisture of his mouth in ropes, hangs down on fainting breast,
His son-tand hide not free the while, but still with strokes oppressed.
His sweat and tears still trickling down, with drops of blood among,
Does seem to plead forpitty and, release of open wrong,
But no release nor yet remorce, but rather bitter skornes,
Poor souls they sinde in steed of ease, naught else but pricking thorns
Then at the length when as thee see, the silly soul to sink:
And faint in thirst and sorrow such, as greeueth me to think.
They eftsoons free his fettered tongue, so swollen with the pain:
That scarce the mouth with much a do, receaues the same again.
This is the food, this is the fare, and lodging like the rest
Or food and raiment have our men, that are to Galleys pressed.
The Holy house (unholy rather) a house of ugly sin,
The Galleys next, both earthly Hels, to such as enter in,
I think their peers or else their likes, are no where to be found,
Within our Europe (well I know) nor searce above the ground.
Nor yet in Hell, because that there, the wicked men alone,
And such ne fear ne know the Lord, in torments make their moan,
But in those Spanish Hels the good, and bad endure like woe,
Homicides, roges, thieves and Turks, with good are plagued so:
There good and bad do sinart alike, small choice is made of either,
They lay on still on every side, and strike they care not whether.
And in the holy house the good, are still tormented more.
Then Sodomits, or he that has, three wives at once in store, They prefer
Sodomites and dogs before us, such is the charity of the holliest place in all
Spain, as themselves say, what then the charity of all the rest of Spain may be
^ refer me to your judgment.

For these are things that do belong, to Judgment of that place.
As well as our religion (though not in such disgrace)
For why, the filthy Sodomite, and vildest wretch that is.
Before us far they do prefer, and yet more worse then this.
They term us dogs, yea them prefer, before the best of us,
Few men would think (who know it not) that we are used thus.
But thus and worse, yea far more worse, then I can write or say.
They us torment with torments such, as does us daily slay.
The fear and grief of which does make, full many a man confess,
The word or deed he never did, or hardly thought much less,
But once confess, they have their wills, and may do what they please,
Our sobs, their smiles, our grief their gain, our torments are their ease
These things agree not with thy kind, (O king) they are to base.
For son of mighty Charles that, did last possess thy place,
He would not so have gotten gold, nor made of blood a gain.
Nor rakte up treasure to himself, so much to good men's pain.
He would have suffered such abuse, if he had lived long
Nor yet permitted Baals priests; to do such open wrong,
He would have warred on the Turks; and made the More to bow:
And not imbroode in christian blood his hands, as thou do now:
what erst was won perforce from Turk, again thou have it lost. That which
Charles and others won and kept in Barbary from the Turk, this king has lost
through the great desire he has to make wars in christendom.

Still warring where thou should aid, and that with inickle cost.
And since that God has seated thee, to wear his crown in Spain.
To yield account to God of this, thou surely shall be feign.
For what thy tirants do, thou do, since thou do give them leave,
And if thou look not well in time, they also will bereave,
Thee of thy earthly crown and rule, for that they bring in hate.
To all the world both thee and thine, with all thy royal state.
For all who erst have wronged been, and such whose friends had wrong.
Do call revenge and threat revenge, with hope ere it be long.
(If thou do not relent in time) for to perform it so,
That thou with them and they with thee, will find it to your woe.
It Is vain to trust too much in gold, or Indias silver mines,
Or else to friends that are but friends, so long as Fortune shines.
And seems to lull thee in her lap, but bend she once her brow.
Thy friends are gone ere thou beware, or scarsely know how,
For friendship forced does waver still, and waits but a time,
For to revolt, though biding yet, till things grow more in prime.
All are not friends that are thy thrall, perforce against right and will.
What show soever they do make, their hate remains still.
And still do hope but for a day, to set their shoulders free.
From servile yoke and tirants fell, appointed so by thee.
To rule and reign and bear a sway, to murder and to sposle,
Such as are under thy hard hand, in any foreign soil:
Sure God the righter of all wrongs, does limit time and age.
How long all tirants shall remain, and rule in bloody rage,
Which time and age no man shall pass, no, not a moment small.
But at the time that God appoints, King Charles the last of: that name, that
consen^ed to the massacre, died bleeding at the nose, eyes, mouth, and al other
vents in the body. The last king, and brother to Charles, being young, was by
the Guises proeurement, a chief actor in the massas cre, with D. of Guises,
was the first that altered his na ture to make him take plesare in the effusion
of blood, and therefore by the just indge meant of God he caused the Guise to be
murdered, so so daynly, that he had no time to repent.
perforce they perish all.
Let Charles of France, be in thy mind, who did but yield consent
Unto that slaughter in his Realm, whereof he did repent,
Yet by his death the Lord would show, his wrath in some degree.
His vents all bleeding till his corpse, of life and blood was free.
But the chief authors of the fact, though yet they lived long,
In time receaude their due desert, and recompense of wrong.
First, Guyes that great blood thirsty beast, and auctor of that ill:
Which never seemde to be suffisde, or have of blood his fill.
The Lord appointed at the length, when now his sin was ripe,
And grown up unto the full,, that he should have his stripe,
By his appointment, whom he taught and first inuerd to blood,
He of himself not being so, his nature was more good,
For by the Guyse he was induste, to do what so he did,
And was partaker of his sin, that else would not have slidde.
Therefore the Lord appointed so, within his secret deem,
That he alone should be the man, to send him to his toome.
Without regard of friendship past, the Guyse does seek his death,
The king it knows which to pr^uent, he stops the Guyses breath,
So makes him wallow in his gear, that erst had shed so much
Of other men's without remorce, and now his death is such.
Even like the man that taught his crow, to eat and pull out eyes,
Of Lambs and other simple beasts, her huuger to suffice,
The Crow inured still thereto, ere that the man it wiste,
She plucked an eye out of his head, while sitting on his fifte.
Such are the judgments of our God, and so he brings about,
The scholar in such ugly sin, does root the master out.
But Justice yet not fully done, though king repent the deed,
The Lord will surely be reuengde, and make all such to bleed,
As shed the blood of Innocents, and do his saints such harm.
His power is naught at all abridgd, ne shortened is his arm,
And who has he resernde in store to touch the Lords annoine: Noate.

To dare lay hands upon the king, to ioypard such a joint.
Even they advanced by him most, and whom he loved best,
And of all the other hypocrites, prefer before the rest,
The Iacobins, even those the Lord appointed for the fact,
To lay their hands upon the king, The Iacobins are an order of ^^vers, whom
the king most preserred.
they did that bloody act.
O depth vnsercht and secrets such, as never may be known,
By humane wit, till thou (O Lord) vouchsafe to have it showen,
In time, decreede by thy self, then all the world shall see.
Thy holy Judgments what they are, and what thy counsails be.
But what, shall that vngrations house, that durst to be so bold,
To lay their hands upon their King, escape so uncontrolled?
No sure, I know they all shall rue, that vile and cursed deed,
Ere it be long, as they deserve, I hope to see them speed:
As of the rest none have escapte, that were the chief of al,
In the massacre done in France, upon both great and small:
So sure the rods that whipped them, at length must into sire,
They were but great Iehouahs whips, I mean the cursed frire
With all his crew that did consent, unto King Henry's death,
Agreeing so amongst themselves, as beasts deuoyd of faith.
Bethink thee well (O King) of this, and try where thou be clear,
And innocent of such offense, as is rehearsed here.
Flying fame does say, if she say true, that Orange Prince was slain
By thee alone, since thou alone, did promise largely gain,
To him that should commit the fact, which, gain did bring to pass:
A Spaniard took the same in hand, most like a wilful Ass,
And did perform it villanously, who after had his hire,
Not of thy gold, but cruel death, as justice did require.
Fame says more, that thou art stainde, in death of proper son:
Think sure to yield account of all, what ever thou have done:
For many things are bruted more, which I dare not report,
The Lord does know them every one, both where, and in what sort,
And where thou should aid such kings, whose subjects do rebel,
How thou it do, this Realm and France, may witness very well:
Whose subjects never would have sturde, but by thy prosserd aid,
Of men and money in their need, which makes them not afraid
Of God, nor Prince, nor of the Law, that bids us all obey
Our Prince appointed by the Lord, the scepter for to sway,
But daily rise, and do rebel, and all on hope of thee,
Against their Prince protect by God, that does thy shifting see,
And will reward thee for the same, be sure, some way or other,
What is deferd, is not forgote, nor yet forgiven neither.
What do thou else, in doing thus, then teach thy subjects plain.
How to rebel against thy self, and drive thee out of Spain.
What measure that thou meat, says Christ, look for the same again:
It does but blot thy fame, O King, and bring thy name in hate:
Both thou and thine are now abhorde, in every civil state,
Save among the Papists of this Realm, and rebels up in France,
They only love thee for thy gold, on hope thou will advance,
And them prefer to high estate, when thou have conquered all:
They know thy purpose and thy drift, and so obey thy call.
But if thou still proceed in that, wherein thou art begun,
And go on still to weaue the web, that hypocrites hauespunne.
Then mark the end, nay fear the end, yea fear thy final fall,
Not only unto thee and thine, but to thy Realines and all.
Thy wealth does make thee clean forget, both God, and what thou art.
As did that mighty Babell king, till that he felt the smarte,
Of feeding in the fields with beasts, and felt the clowdy rain
Distill, upon his vnclad back, with other bitter pain:
Then in his grief he knew the Lord, that would not in his wealth
So sure thy gold does blind thine eyes, from seeking of thy health
At his good hands that gives thee gold, and makes thee so abound
In treasure, more then any prince, that lives on the ground:
But to an other use then yet, thou do the same bestow,
He gives thee gold that erst was hid within the earth below:
For thou employest it to molest, none but the Christian poor:
While craving truce with cruel Turk, to scourge our Chr. ye more,
Thou leave the Turk to live at ease, and laugh at christian harms,
While he fits frce, poor Europe is, by thee al up in arms:
By thee (O King) and by the Pope, that man and child of sin,
Which adds oil unto the flame, yea pours store therein:
Nay, he is all in all we know, and makes thee but his mean,
To mow and cut the harvest down, that he again may gleane,
And gather all the croppe himself, and laugh thee but to scorn,
When thou have spent thy wealth and sweat, and he possessed the corn.
Look well in time, for this is true, withdraw thy hand abacke
Before it be too late, and so, thou wholly go to wrack:
For Europe longer will not bear the load thou layest on,
Nor yet abide such torments as, thou layest thy thralles upon.
All christian princes smell thy drifts, and see thy haught aspire,
Thy * vbique These are the vain and proud posies of the king of Spain.
regnabo and the rest, thou prowdly do require,
Thy * non sufficit orbis, which bewrays whereto thy heart is bente
when notwithstanding at the length, thy feeble corpse once pent
And close shut up in compass of six foot, or thereabout,
That little straight must thee suffice, saus any sally out,
Till when the trumpet shrill thee warn, with every other wight,
To rise, to go, to give account, before that Judges sight,
Which only judges justly still, and will reward eachone
According to his faith and fruits: for Christ is Judge alone,
That knows the secrets of al hearts, The fruits of faith are the good works
which proceed from says.
and what our works have been,
Then good, shall good reward receive, and wicked suffer teene.
Gold then and dross of like account, then scepter bears sway
No more then Shepherds crabtree crook, in that great dreadful day,
Thy India mines, wherewith (as now) thou vnderminest all,
And daily do subvert the state, of christian Kings withal,
Will be of none effect (as then) where Judge is vncorrupt,
And that he should not justly judge, who dares him interrupt:
There is no power but only his, all flesh shall quaking stand,
Then King and beggar both alike, The Licenses that the pope felles to finne,
(...) not the fits to his chests, for there is no sin so heinous but either a
man may b^^e a license to commit it, or a pardon for the same after it is
committed: and it is not to be douted but that the king of Spain paid well
for his license, for his last incestuous marriage. Not only his friends
decay, but his wealth wastes like buttar against the sun, by paying pensions to
traitors, and buying that for money of corrupt captains which he dares not
attempt to win by valor and manhood, for his conquests consist more in
coin then in steel: and part of his Fleet that were wont to go home safely,
fall now and then either to the bottom, or into their hands that spend it as
me rily as he would employ it merrily.
must hold up guilty hand.
Then Pope that pardons others now, and license selles to sin,
Shall pardon seek, but none shall find, nor be admitted in
The golden gates of Sion sweet, whereof to have the keys
The caytife brags and boasts abroad, as lord of land and seas
To have supreme authoutie, of heaven gates and hell,
And whom he lists in either place, to put for aye to dwell.
O beast, aie kicking against the prick, how long will thou provoke
Our good long-patient righteous God, that justly might thee choke,
And stop thy most blasphemous throat, with vengeance in his ire,
yet still forbeares and lets thee live, to work thy whole desire,
Upon his church and saints on earth, till that thy time be full:
And then his wrath, yea all at once, shall light upon thy scull.
Then shall those kings and mighty men, whom thou bewitchest so,
Provoking them to be thy whippes, aye working Christians woe:
Even they shall hate thee in extreme, whom now they love so much,
And eat thy flesh (thou filthy whore) their hatred will be such:
And all the nations of the earth, shall wonder at thy fall,
And at the mighty City who so swayeth over all:
For both at once, both it and thou, shall quite be overthrown,
In that same hour, which to the Lord, as yet is only known:
Then shall the church of Christ rejoice, and cry with perfect joy,
The City and her Queen are fallen, that wrought us such annoy,
Yea sure the time is hard at hand, one king alone remains
For to uphold thy waining state, unto his cost and pains:
And he was never seen so weak, his friends still sliding back,
Maintain him well, for he once gone, then comes thy total wrack,
Who knows how soon he may be gone? or whether that the Lord
Vouchsafe him mercy at the length, and so of self accord
Reject thee quite, and hate thee more, then ever loved before:
The Lord, be sure (if so he please) can do a great deal more.
Thy kingdom whilom seated was, on many more then he,
When greatest part of Christendom, paid tribute unto thee,
Now Spain alone is all thy prop, forsakde of other Kings,
And he alone does groan to bear, himself such heavy things,
As made so many stoop before, must needs now make him bend,
As weary to support thy weight, or longer thee defend,
The time, no doubt, draws on apace, that all thy pomp must end.
Mean while bethink thee (king of Spain) and shake thy burden off,
Ere under load thou lie adowne, and so remain a scoff
To all the world, because forwarnde, thou have vin sundry times,
Both of the burden and the man, with all his filthy crimes.
Thou art not wiser then the rest, of all our Europe kings,
That so do hate the shameless whore, that naught but horror brings
To all the earth as well is seen, by blood so daily shead,
And by the wars which for his sake, ore Christendom is spread.
If thou continue him to aid, with him thou needs must fall:
For prince and people that him serve, with him must perish all:
Else should the Scripture be untrue, which never man shall prove,
For heaven and earth shall pass away, with stars and things above,
But not a lot or any word of Scripture, shall so pass,
But still remain in perfect force, as strong as ever it was.
God grant thee grace as he has done, already to the rest,
Of Europe Kings that now do live, by great Jehovah blessed:
Who bless thee too, and turn thy heart, that thou may make up one
And so be numbered with the best, and leave the Pope alone:
Whose portion shall be with the dogs, and hypocrites without,
That have their pleasures in this world, and live sans fear and doubt.
Bless still, good Lord, our Queen, and Realm, and grant thy servant long
Ore us to reign within this Realm, protect her from all wrong,
Of Pope and other bloody foes, that seek her blood to spill:
Confound them all that so conspire, and bar them of their will.
Forget not * Henry sore oppressed, The French King.
by subjects fell unkind:
Even as thou have anointed him, so have him still in mind:
The great fat bulls of Basan still, do compass him about:
They never cease him to pursue, and all to root him out,
From thence, where thou have placed him, a King by thee to reign:
Subdue their rage, and let him rule, to their despite and pain:
Let never flesh presume to strive, against thy mighty will:
But let them fall amidst their pride, and be confounded still:
Least flesh in pride do boast abroad, and say, who is the Lord,
Who is the God on whom they rest? where is his mighty sword?
That sometimes slew, such as withstood, king David and the rest,
Of Isreal's kings. So let them die, that hate, whom thou have blessed.
Thou have good Lord appointed him, in France to rule by thee.
Let noue resist thy will good God, and from thy wrath go free,
Let Parina with his Spanish rout, that so the king molest.
Feel all thy heavy wrath on him, with his and all the rest.
That so rebel against their king, let none escape thy hand.
But let them be before the wind, as chaff^ upon the lanb.
And let the king rule still in peace, in spite of whom says nay.
Lord hear thy Church in time of need, turn not thy face away.
FINIS.

