MARS, HIS TRIVMPH. OR, THE DESCRIPTION of an Exercise performed the XVIII. of
October, 1638. in Merchant-Taylors Hall

BY Certain GENTLEMEN of the ARTILLERY GARDEN London.

LONDON, Printed by I. L. for Ralph Mab. 1639.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Alderman, THOMAS SOAME, One of the Colonels of the
City, and President of the Artillery Garden, London. As also, To Captain JOHN
VEN, Vice President, Mr. WILLIAM MANBY Treasurer. And All other the worthy
Captains of the City, and Gentlemen of the Court of Assistants.
Much honored Sir, and Right worthy Soldiers,
THe GRECIANS were the first that out of variety of action, and long experience
of war, reduced the knowledge of Arms into an Art; giving precepts for the
ordering of Arms, and the embattelling of Armies. The ROMANS, who were their
Successors in time, so were they also of their precepts; breeding and inuring
their youth to hardship, the use of Arms, and the studies of the Art Military.
So that by their countenance and practice therein, they not only became
powerful and terrible to others: but in a word reigned as sole Monarchs of
this Mundane glory.

Plut. in Licur
LICVRGVS the Lawgiver to SPARTA, ordered that no Epitaph should be made, nor
man's name remembered on his Tomb, except of him who had been a Soldier; as
esteeming them only worthy of memory. The Persian ARTAXERXES, preferred Plut.
in Pelopida.
PELOPIDAS, and the Thebane friendship before the rest of GREECE. because they
were the best Soldiers. PHILIP of MACEDON, King of a poor Country, by
teaching his people exactly the exercise of Arms, and practicing a new
discipline, not only freed himself and Country from the oppression of his
enemies; but also laid the foundation of the MACEDONIAN glory.

By this, Right worshipful, you may in part discern the great esteem that
Antiquity made of those studious in this Art. And so please you to compare the
Histories of the passed times, you may as in an Index behold how that the well
disciplined have always been the very Bulwarks and impalements of their
Countries. Where to the contrary, neglect of discipline, and the Art Military
have been always the forerunners of destruction both to Province and people. I
might be infinite in examples of this nature, but then I should make my porch
larger then my house. Therefore let ROMES remissness be a warning to
posterity; who as it had a slow gradation in its arise by virtue, so had it
degrees of falling, by neglecting discipline and the Art Military, suffering it
self to be crushed and overtrodden by every Barbarous Nation.

This as it reflects upon us a necessity, so it demonstrates of how necessary
consequence the practice of Arms is: inducing and inviting all generous spirits
to endeavor the attainment of this Military skill. To acquire the which, the
GRECIANS had their Tactick masters, the ROMANS their Tribunes, and other
inferior Tutors which taught them in Campus Martius; and we our Academies and
Military Schools of war, witness our ARTILLERY GARDEN with the MILITARY and
MARTIAL grounds, wherein the choice and best affected Citizens (and Gentry)
are practiced and taught the Rudiments of our militia. In times of peace so
fitting them, that they may be able to stand in the day of battle, to Gods
glory, their own honors, and their Countries good But leaving these to your
more retired and serious considerations: be pleased to take notice that the
GRECIANS, ROMANS, PERSIANS, and other Nations, had not only their trainings
abroad, but they had also their Triumphs at home in Martial and warlike wise
all armed, treading out stately measures, to their Instruments of war. Such
Military exercises as these have you formerly performed, which induced a Rich.
Nicolls Oxon. his Londons Artillery page 37 printed in Anno 1616.
judicious writer long since to set forth your praises in elegant verse as
follows.

Behold how Londons armed Infantry,
Through practice in true Rules of Souldery
By the Drums martial Music often led
The Pyrrhic dance do now distinctly tread:
Which if industriously they do pursue,
And use that timely custom that is due
To warlike practice, in despite of hate,
Which evermore upon desert does wait;
Times Finger may engrave their Industry,
Upon Fames Pillars to posterity.
And such as this, right worthy Soldiers, was our last exercise in
Merchant-Taylors Hall, which is the subject of this book: the well contriving
and exact performance whereof, induced many of the judicious spectators to
desire copies: which through several transcriptions became so imperfect, that
I was requested by many to bring it to the Press, so to preserve its Native
purity. This I was the more willing to suffer, by reason no more were to pass
the print, then barely might serve such Gentlemen who are desirous of them,
being members of our own Company. As not being willing that so rough and
unpolisht a draught should be exposed to the public view. Therefore hoping
your wonted favors, and not doubting of your kind acceptance; withal
desiring, that as I have freely bestowed my pains, so you will as lovingly
pass by my errors, whereby you will put a further obligation upon him that is
already

Yours, WILL. BARRIFF.

MARS HIS TRIVMPH.
THe number of Gentlemen employed in this Exercise were fourscore, that is to
say, eighteen with Morions swords and Targets, which encountered 9. against 9.
Secondly, 22. Sarracens, that is to say, a Captain, Lieutenant, Ensign, one
Sergeant, Pipe, a Turkie-drum, and 16. select Sarracens. Thirdly, 40. of the
modern Arms. A Captain, Lieutenant, Ensign, 2. Sergeants, 1. Phife, and 2.
Drums, 16. Musketeers in Buffecoats, and Beaver Morians, and 16. Pikemen,
completely armed in white Corslets, whole Pikes and Morians.

Targettiers.
The Cornets having once played over, the Targettiers 9. in a company marched
into the Hall, and without delay opposed each other; drawing into figures 9.
against 9. performing 10. several forms, making their encounters and varying
their figures, all according to the distinct sounds of their music. Having
performed their several encounters upon each figure, they shook hands, and
saluted each other, then jointly together they did their obeisance to the
Nobility, Aldermen, and Gentry, and lastly fell off in the nature of a
Sillabans and so quit the Hall.

Next marched into the Hall, Captain Mulli-Aben-Achmat with his Saracens in
great state, their music was a Turkey Drum, and a hideous noise making pipe
(made of a Buffolas horn:) The one half of the Saracens were armed with short
Barbary guns and Cymiters, the other half with steel Targets, and Cymiters on
their thighs: some of the chiefest of them had broad Turkey daggers at their
girdles, and all of them habited after the Persian and Turconian manner. Their
names in their places as they marched (for the better understanding of the
Reader) are put into the English tongue.

THOMAS WHITLEY Captain. RICHARD COOPER Ensign. Sergeant Tooly. Steph. Faweett
C. John Sparks C. Richard Bailey C. William Came C John Robottom C. Thom. Lock
C. John Ienkenson C. Thomas Piper C Abrah. Shewell T. Rob. Holland T. John
Sweeting T. John Melton T Will. Roggers T. Hen. Slayde T. Will. Sparks T. Simon
Hacket T George Laws Lieutenant. Russell, Pipe. Beebe, Drum.

The Captain and Lieutenant marched with large Pole-axes in their hands,
Cymeters on their thighs, Battle Axes hanging on their arms, and broad daggers
at their girdles, after the manner of the Country. The Ensign with his colors
on a staff 10. foot long, armed with a steel half moon on the upper end. The
Ensign (as in the margin) is a pennon Azure charged with an Incressant Argent
on the dexter Angle: from the sinister Bendwaies, a motto in the Arabian tongue
and Characters, BISMI-ALLI VAL MAHOMET The English, In the name of Alli and
Mahomet.

These Sarracens marched into the Hall in form of a Hearse as in the figure 1.
entering in at the skreene, and so marching about the Hall: and being again come
to the lower end thereof, they there made an Alt; and without any directions
drew up their divisions to the right of each other: forming a Grecian Phalanx
as in figure 2. In this form he moved them some few paces, and then faced about
again, supervising them with a stately survay, they in the interim moving into
an uneven fronted battle as in figure 3. This done, he moved forwards some
few paces, and again made Alt. And his Sarracens without any present directions
(although according to his former order) drew up into the form of a decressant,
as in figure 4. In like manner observing a stately garb in his march; he made
the Cressant form as in figure 5. still keeping the same order as well in the
making as in the marching on them all successively.

C stands for Captain, L for Lieutenant, E for Ensign, S for Sergeant, P for
Pipe, D for Drum, C for Carbines (or Barbary guns) and T for Targettiers.



Having made and marched upon al these figures, on each of them demonstrating
the dexterity of his men; the Captain by a sign drew them into the second
figure. They then being at the upper end of the Hall made an Alt; The Captain
then drawing off his divisions from the left, wheeled about the front of his
body to the right, the rest of the divisions falling into their places
successively: which reduced them into the first figure again, in which form he
marched about the Hall; And being come to the upper end, the Captain first, and
the rest by Ranks successively, made their obeisance to the Nobility and
Aldermen, after the Persian manner: putting their left hands upon the tops of
their Turbants and Shashes, bowing their bodies forward, and so passed out at
the garden door.

Lastly, Captain John Ven led in the Modern Arms his Drums beating a lofty
English march, his soldiers being but 32. in number, he could march but 2. a
breast: and to that end he doubled half files to the left: so that the right
hand file of Musketeers made the first division, the right hand file of pikes
made the second division, the left file of pikes made the third division, and
the left file of Musketeers made the Reere division. In this manner they
marched once about the Hall in proper order both for posture and distance.

The second time of their coming from the lower end of the Hall, the Drums beat
a Troop, the Pikes advance, and Ranks close forwards to their distance of
order. This done, the divisions are drawn up to the left, then the pikes stand,
and the Musketeers march until their reere range even with the front of
pikes: then all stand and order Arms. When after some small pause, the Captain
and Lieutenant, take out the third Muskettier of the right hand file trooping
him up between them, near to the upper end of the Hall, where being at a
distance convenient, they make a stand, and the Drums strike an Alt, and are
silent. The Captain and Lieutenant do their obeisance to the Nobility and
Aldermen, then march off. The Muskettier in the interim of their Salute,
unshoulders and sets the butt end of his Musket to the ground, then in a
graceful manner laying down his Musket, he does his obeisance to the Nobility,
Aldermen and Gentry; turning himself half round: after a pretty pause, the
spectators being very silent begins as follows.

The Speech.
Grave Fathers of the City, that are come
Like the famed Senators of ancient Rome,
From seats of Justice, and the public cause
To hear Bellona's Drum, beat loud applause
To war and victory; Much honored men,
Behold the Soldier and the Citizen
Make but one man: these to Mars incline,
And though like fiery Comets now they shine
Threatening prodigious ruin to their foes,
Each man can gain a Conquest without blows.
For these are Stars of milder temper, when
In their own spears they do appear to men.
Not one of these, but can instruct a Band,
But each Commander, discipline a Land.
These were not made in haste, Nature has lent,
To each just mixture of each Element.
And such are made for Soldiers, else they are,
But several Instruments, ordained for war.
The truly valiant must be all, if not
'Twere happy that such valor were forgot.
Who only fights, is but a sword or gunne
Which only executes and so has done.
Wisdom, discretion, judgment, courage, art
Makes up the wreath, that crowns a Soldiers heart.
And such are these, and these are yours, that can
Govern a little world in every man.
The time has been, the rugged main was crossed
To both the Germanies with care and cost
To find a Soldier, whose experience might
Teach our Commanders how to form a fight.
But now, that trouble's saved, these are ashamed
That so much cost or dullness should be named
To soil their predecessors fair Repute:
These would deny, should such a one make suit
To give his labor, scorning to have it thought
They have not all, that may be learned or bought.
And thus resolved, they are prepared to show
To your loved Honors, what they have or know.
Not doubting when your judgments shall descry
Their love, their care, their skill, their industry,
The Kings lent honors, that your merits crowned,
Will give your Soldiers, one small piece of ground
To show their Arms in: else, in heaps of dust
Their glories will be hid; their bright Arms, rust.
Captain John Ven. Ensign Richard Gould. Front. Sargeant Salter Lieut. Gooday
Lieut. Hacket Lieut. Allen Lieut. Barriff (...) Lieut. Wolleston Walter Bosvile
John Birkenhed Tho. Levingston Rich. Bennet Thomas Head Thomas Heart Ric. Lacy
speaker George Simcocks Richard Finch Will. Coleson Edward Wallis Left flank
Lieutenant Gwin John Alford John Bowker John Davies (...) Thom. Wardley Sam.
Clerrige Raph Long Thomas Clark Lieut. Stackhouse John Smart Matt. Andrews John
Povey Charles Fowke L. Drinkwater John Smart sen. John Ashley. Lieutenant
Matthew Shepherd.

The speech being ended, obeisance done, his Arms recovered, and shouldred:
the Captain and Lieutenant, on each side of him, for his more honor (the Drums
beating a Troop) move down with him to his place, and so leave him. This done,
the Musketeers face in opposition: and close their division before the pikes.
After some small respite, the Captain and other Officers quit the body, and the
phife and drum play the posture tune once over. When the music began the
second time, the Musketeers in the front, and pikes in the reere, begun the
postures as follows.

The Musketeers stand rested, The Pikes ordered.
The Posture tune.
^

The postures divided into 3. to make them fit to keep time with the Drum and
Phife.

1 POISE YOUR MUSKETS.
1
1 Turn the butt ends of your Muskets to the right. 2 Raise up your Muskets
with the help of your Rests. 3 Sever Muskets and Rests and Poise.
2 SHOULDER YOUR MUSKETS.
2
1 Slip your left hands down from the heads of your Rests. 2 Bring Muskets and
Rests before you, placing your Rests cross the stocks of your Muskets. 3 Lay
your Muskets properly on your shoulders.
3 UNSHOULDER YOUR MUSKETS.
3
1 Slip and turn. 2 Place your right hands, behind the Scutcheons of your
Muskets. 3 Sever your Muskets and Rests and poise.
4 JOIN YOUR RESTS TO THE OUTSIDE OF YOUR MUSKETS.
4
1 Slip your left hands up to the head of your Rests. 2 Ioyn your Rests to your
Muskets. 3 Sink your Muskets and Rests by your right sides.
5 OPEN YOUR PANS AND CLEAR.
5
1 Open your Pans. 2 Raise your Muskets. 3 Clear your Pans, by blowing.
6 PRIME YOUR PANS.
6
1 Take your Primers into your right hand 2 Put powder into your pans. 3 Return
your touchboxes.
7 SHUT AND CLEAR YOUR PANS.
7
1 Shut your Pans. 2 Cast off your loose corns. 3 Blow off your loose corns.
8 BRING ABOUT YOUR MUSKETS TO CHARGE.
8
1 Step forwards with your right legs and poise by your left sides. 2 Trail
your Rests between your bodies and your Muskets. 3 Balance your Muskets in
your left hands.
9 CHARGE WITH POWDER.
9
1 Take your chargers into your right hands, and slip off the caps with your
thumbes. 2 Put powder into your Muskets. 3 Return back your charges.
10 CHARGE WITH BULLET.
10
1 Take your Bullets out of your mouths. 2 Slip up your hands by the barrels
of your Muskets and put in your Bullets. 3 Clap your hands on your Muskets to
shake them down.
11 DRAW FORTH YOUR SCOURING STICKS.
11
1 Lay hands on your Scowring sticks and draw them a little. 2 Take lower hold,
and draw them past the middle. 3 Draw them forth, and hold up the Rammer ends.
12 SHORTEN YOUR SCOURING STICKS.
12
1 Turn the Rammer ends toward your bodies. 2 Set the Rammer ends under your
right paps. 3 Slip down your hands within an inch of the ends.
13 PUT YOUR STICKS INTO YOUR MUSKETS.
13
1 Put the Rammer ends into your Muskets. 2 Take higher hold, and put them
further in. 3 Take higher hold and put them home.
14 RAM HOME YOUR CHARGERS.
14
1 Ram home. 2 With three. 3 Strokes.
15 WITHDRAW YOUR SCOURING-STICKS.
15
1 Draw forth your sticks a little. 2 Take lower hold and draw them further. 3
Draw them forth and hold up the screw-ends.
16 SHORTEN YOUR SCOURING-STICKS.
16
1 Turn the screw-ends toward your bodies. 2 Set the ends under your left
paps. 3 Shorten your sticks to an handful.
17 Return your Scouring-sticks.
17
1 Put their ends into the grooves, sliding them a little down with your
thumbes. 2 Take higher hold and thrust them further in. 3 Lay your middle
fingers on their ends and thrust them home.
18 Recover your Muskets and Rests.
18
1 Bring forwards your Muskets with your left hands. 2 Poise your Muskets in
your right hands. 3 Recover your Rests.
19 Join your Rests to the outside of your Muskets.
19
1 Slip your left hands to the heads of your Rests. 2 Join your Rests to your
Muskets, before you. 3 Sink your Muskets and Rests by your right sides.
20 Cock your Matches.
20
1 Draw forth one of the ends of your Matches. 2 Blow your coals together. 3
Place your Matches in your Cocks.
21 Try your Matches, and guard your Pans.
21
1 Draw down your Cocks, and fit your Matches. 2 Let your Cocks fly back. 3
Guard your Pans.
22 Present upon your Rests.
22
1 Blow your Coals. 2 Open your Pans. 3 Present, keeping the Muzels of your
Muskets mounted.
23 Give fire Breast high.
23
1 Level your Muskets on your Rests. 2 Set the butt-ends to your shoulders. 3
Draw your Trickers and give fire.
24 Vncock your Matches.
24
1 Mount the muzels of your Muskets. 2 Vncock and return your Matches. 3 Shut
your Pans.
Having thus performed their postures, the Phife and Drum play the falling of
Tune; in the interim whereof the Musketeers perform their Saluting posture,
and wheel of by division, two to the right, and two to the left, placing
themselves in the reere of the Pikes.

After this manner the Tune is played once over to every Rank.

The Falling of Tune.
^

At 3 Advance At 3 Shoulder At 3 Comport 3 Shoulder 3 Advance 3 Shoulder 3
Order 3 Shoulder 3 Comport 3 Advance 3 Charge Front 3 Charge Front 3 Charge to
Front 3 Shoulder 3 Comport 3 Advance 3 Charge Reere 3 Charge Reere 3 Charge to
Rear 3 Shoulder 3 Comport 3 Order 3 Order 3 Order

The Postures as aforesaid were first done with the Musketeers in the Front,
the Pikes at the same instant performing their Postures in the Reere of the
Musketeers, the body then standing as the figure under A; when the Musketeers
gave fire they stood as figure B. When the Pikes did their postures in the Van
then the body stood as under figure C.

A C M M M M P P P P M M M M B P P P P M M M M M M M M P P P P M M M M M M P P
P P P P P P M M M M M M P P P P M M M M M M P P P P M M M M M M P P P P M M M M
M M M M

The Musketeers having performed their postures, and wheeled off as abovesaid:
Then the Captain and Ensign (the Drums beating a troop) lead up the Pikes
toward the upper end of the Hall into the place, where formerly the
Musketeers stood: then the Drums strike an Alt. The Captain and other Officers
(as formerly) quit the body. And the second time that the Posture Almayn is
played over, the Pikes begun their Postures. The Musketeers at the same time,
doing their postures in the reere of the Pikes, as formerly in the Front.

Note that the first strein of the posture Almayne was played twice over: and
the last streyn twice over, after this manner, the whole tune was doubly played
twice over, wherewith consorted and ended both the postures of Muskets and
Pikes together. The Pikemen having performed their Postures, the Captain and
Ensign move to the head of the Pikes, the Lieutenant to the reere of the
Musketeers, the other Officers to their several places: the Drums beat a
troop, the Pikes advance, the Musketeers face to the right and left outward,
and march to the Angles of their Pikes, then face as before. The Pikemen in the
interim doing their obeisance and countermarching to the right, every rank
saluting as they come into the Front, and so countermarch to the right, until
the File-leaders of the pikes are come even in rank with the Front of
Musketeers: Then they again re-countermarch to the left, and march up even a
breast with the Musketeers in one Body, and make a stand near the upper D M M P
P P P M M M M P P P P M M M M P P P P M M M M P P P P M M end of the Hall.
Which done, the Body will stand as the Figure under D. The Captain, Lieutenant,
Ensign, and other Officers, having again quitted the Body, the Phife and
Drum begin the Almaine tune for the motions: and the second time the Tune is
played over, they begun their motions as follows.

The Tune for the Motions.
^

FACINGS.

The figures of number in the margent declare how many times the whole tune is
played over throughout the exercise.
With the end of the first streyne, all face to the Front again, and order
Arms.

Face all to the left and march 4 paces.
This is to bring you into the midst of the Hall: then face to the Front, and
order as before with the close of the second streyne.

Face all to the right about and march six paces.
These four facings entire.
In this motion you are to keep your Aspects to the Reere, and order Arms with
the Close of the first streyne.

Reducement. Face all about to the left, move 6 paces. The continuance of the
Tune numbered by the figures in the margent.

This done, order Arms (as before) with the end of the tune.

Left flank face about to the right, and the whole Body march.
With the first streyne of the Music, the left Flank

Reducement. Face all about to the left and March.
Upon this Motion all are to move slowly, until the proper Fileleaders be even
in Rank, then Face all to the Front together, and order Arms with the end of
the Tune.

Two first ranks face to the right, and left outward; Two last ranks face about
to the right, move all four paces.
With the first streyne of the Music, they are to face

Reducement. Face all about to the right; and close your divisions. Divisionall
Facings.

With the beginning of the second streyne, all are to face about to the right,
and to move slowly, and close their divisions, then lastly to face all to the
Front, and order Arms with the end of the tune.

The continuance of the Music playing over figured.
Musketeers face to the right and left; Pikes face to the Front and Rear, move
all.


Reducement. Face all about to the right, and close your divisions.
With the beginning of the second streyne, all are to face about to the right,
and to close their divisions, then to face all to the proper Front, and order
Arms with the end of the Tune.

Files to the right hand double.
Doublings.
Because the motion of this doubling is short, it must

For Reducement. Ranks to the left hand double.
With the beginning of the second streyne, the even ranks who are to perform
this doubling, first face to the left, then together at three steps double,
their ranks to the left, ordering their Arms with the end of the Tune.

Files to the left hand double. The continuance of the Musicks playing over.

This doubling is to be performed, as the other doubling of Files, observing
the former directions: only

For Reducement. Ranks to the right hand double.
These four doublings are to be performed very leisurely, because the motion
is so short, that so they may still end the doubling, and order Arms with the
end of the Tune.

Double your Files to the right entire advancing.
With the beginning of the Tune, the odd files (accounting

For Reducement. Front halfe-files as you wear.
With the beginning of the second streyne, the files that doubled face about to
the right, and move back into their places, face to the Front, and order Arms
with the end of the Almayne.

Right Flank, double the left Flank by division.
With the beginning of the first streyne of the Almayne, the right Flank
devideth; the Reere halfe-doubling about, The continuance of the Musicks
playing over.
and then both the Front and Reere half moving forwards until they are clear
of the standing part of the Body (being the left Flank) they are to keep

With the beginning of the second streyne, the Front division faceth to the
left, the Reere division to the right, both moving slowly, until the doubling
be performed; then face all to the Front, and order Arms with the end of the
Almayn.

For Reducement. Right Flank that doubled, march into your places.


With the second streyne, they face in opposition and march into their places,
facing to the Front, and ordering Arms with the Close of the Music.

Files double your-depth to the Right.
This doubling the depth, Reduced the body: closing to the right, made room
for the next doubling.
being they are to double, face to the Front, and order Arms, concluding all
with the first streyne of the Music.

With the beginning of the second streyne, the whole Body faceth to the right,
and closes to the right side of the Hall, to the distance of Order: then face
all to the Front, and order Arms with the end of the Tune.

Half-files double your Front to the left entire. The continuance of the
Musicks playing over.

In the first streyne of the Almayn, the half-files Advance

With the beginning of the second streyne, the half-files face to the right,
and move up even with the Front: and then order Arms with the end of the Tune.

For Reducement. Half-files, that doubled face about to the right march, forth
into your places.
In the first part of the Tune, the half-files advance

With the beginning of the second streyn, the Front half-files face to the
left, and meet the Reere half-files in the midst of the Hall (being even) all
face to the Front together, and order Arms with the end of the Tune.

Half-files double your Front by devision.
In the first streyn of the tune, the half-files advance

With the beginning of the second streine, they face all to the Front, and
march forwards until they have evened the Front, then order Arms with the end
of the tune.

For Reducement. The continuance of the Musicks playing over.
Half files face about inward, and march into your places.
With the beginning of the first streyne, the half-files

In the second part of the tune, the front half-files open to the right and
left to their open Order, the Reere half files in the mean time, placing
themselves directly after their Leaders: all facing to the Front, and ordering
Arms with the end of the Tune.

COVNTERMARCHES.
Files to the right hand Countermarch.
Countermarches.
At the Close of the first streyne of the Tune, the

With the beginning of the second streyne, they all move forwards and finish
the Countermarch; keeping their Aspects to the Reere, and order Arms with the
end of the Tune.

Files to the left hand Countermarch.


Ranks to the right hand Countermarch.
With the beginning of the first streyne, the whole Body faceth to the right,
the right hand File turning even in rank with the left hand file, The
continuance of the Music playing o ver.
the Pikes in like manner being inserted one file within the other, wherewith
ends the first streyne of the tune.

With the beginning of the second streyne the Countermarch is continued, and
perfected, all facing to the front and ordering Arms with the end of the Tune.

For Reducement. Ranks to the left hand Countermarch.
With the beginning of the first streyne, the whole

Front and Rear Half-files interchange ground.
With the first streyne of the music, the whole body

With the beginning of the second streyne, the divisions move forwards, that
division that moves toward the bottom of the Hall, must have an eye to their
followers, that so they may face all about to the left together, and Order
their Arms with the Close of the Music.

For Reducement. Front and Rear half-files interchange ground.
This second interchanging of ground is for the reducement

The continuance of the Musicks playing over.
Half-files double your Front to the left.
This last doubling by half-files (after the Countermarmarches) was to enlarge
the Front of the Body, that so the wheelings might the more properly and
commodiously be performed; facing about to the Right, and marching into the
midst of the Hall, was to gain room for the Body to wheel upon.
until the half-file leaders are even in Rank with the File-leaders, the other
Ranks being even one with another, then all order Arms with the Close of the
first streyne.

With the beginning of the second streyne, the whole Body advance their Arms,
and face about to the right, marching down toward the Skreene, until the
proper File-leaders be in the middle of the Hall. Then all face about to the
right and order Arms with the end of the Tune.

WHEELINGS.
Wheel your battle to the right upon the same ground.


For Reducement. Wheel your Battle to the left on the same ground.
Now the left Flank is to face to the right: the rest to perform in like
manner according to the former directions. The continuance of the Musicks
playing over.
This wheeling is but the Reducement of the other, and to be done to the second
streyne of the Tune.

Wheel your Front into the midst.
With the beginning of the Music, the two middlemost

For Reducement Wheel your Rear into the midst.
With the beginning of the second streyne of the Music, all face about to the
right, then wheel together as before; Lastly, face all to the proper Front,
and order Arms with the end of the Tune.

Wheel Front and Reere into both Flanks.
With the beginning of the Tune, the Body faceth to

With the second streyne Advance Arms, face in opposition, Close your
divisions, face to the Front, and order Arms with the end of the Tune.

Reducement. Wheel both Flanks into the Front and Reere.
With the beginning of the Music all advance Arms, and the half-files Face
about to the Right, then wheel together as formerly. The continuance of the
Music playing over figured.
Lastly face all to the proper Front, and order Arms with the close of the
first streyne.

With the second streyne, face all in opposition, close your divisions face to
your proper front, and Order your Arms, with the end of the music.

The end of the motions.
THE motions of the body thus ended, the Captain, Lieut. Ensign and other
officers, take their several places, the drums trooping them thither.

The Captain having saluted his Company,: The drums beat a lofty English March:
and the Captain leads the company forth in divisions once about the Hall: each
officer marching in his due place. Being at the lower end by the skreene, the
drums beat a troop, the Pikes advance, the Ranks close forwards to their Order,
and each officer leads up his division to the left. Then all together in a
fair breast, they troop forwards into the middle of the Hall, and there make an
Alt, all ordering their Arms. This being done, the Captain, Lieutenant,
Sergeants, phife and drums quit the Body again: the Ensign only remaining

After some small pause the phife and drum begin the Almain once over both
streynes, the body standing as the Figure under E.

Here begin the Firings. To make the first Figure.
second time of the musicks playing over with the beginning of the first E M M
P P P P M M M M P P P P M M M M P P P P M M M M P P P P M M streyn the
Musketeers move forwards slowly, The continuance of the Musicks playing over.
until the third Rank of Musketeers rank even with the front of Pikes, then
all stand, and order Arms with the end of the first streyne. With the
beginning of the second streyne the two first ranks of musketts, face in
opposition, close their divisions, face to the proper front, and order their
Arms, the two last Ranks of Musketts, in the interim opening to the right and
left, leaving intervalls between themselves and the Pikes, and so end with the
close of the second streyne which produces the figure under F.

The figure under F. being F M M M M M M M M E M M P P P P M M M M P P P P M M
P P P P P P P P made; This Firing reduces the Muskets to both Flanks again.
the drums beat a preparative: the Musketeers in the interim cock their
matches and present: the Pikes at the same time first advancing, then porting,
The drums beat a charge, the Muskets give fire, falling off after the usual
way of this firing: The drums continue beating, the Pikes charge, and the
Musketeers make ready again; which being done, the drums strike an Alt, and
the Pikes advance.

The continuance of the Musicks playing over.
To make the second Figure.
Almain begins again, the two first Ranks of Musketeers unshoulder and poise,
marching to the front Angles of the Pikes, there ordering their Arms with the
close of the first streyne of the tune.

With the second strein, the two last ranks of Musketeers advance their Arms,
and face about to the right, moving as before to the Rear Angles of the Pikes:
all face to the Front, and then Order Arms with the end of the Tune which
produces Figure G.

The figure G thus made, The Drums beats a preparative, the pikes advance, and
the two last ranks (as well Pikes as Musketeers) face about, the Musketeers
cock and present to the Front and Reere, the Drums beat a charge, the
Musketeers give fire, the Pikes port, the shot having fired, wheel off to G M
M M M M M M M P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P M M M M M M M M the right and
left, placing themselves in the reere of their own divisions, still preserving
the Figure, the pikes charge, and the Musketeers make ready again, then all
face to the front, and the Drums striking an Alt, all order Arms, etc.

The continuance of the Musicks playing over.
To make the third Figure.
After some small pause, the Phife and Drums begin the Almain again. With which
the Musketeers poise their Muskets, and the two first Ranks face about to the
Right, the Musketeers both of Front and Reere moving and closing their
divisions, then face all to the Front, and order Arms with the end of the
first strein.

With the beginning of the second strein, the Pikes advance, and the two last
Ranks of them face about to the right: then all the Pikes march until they are
clear of the Front and Reere of the Musketeers: lastly all face to the Front,
and order Arms with the end of the Tune which produces figure H.

The Figure H thus made, H P P P P P P P P M M M M M M M M M M M M M M M M P P
P P P P P P the Drums beat a preparative, the Pikes advance, the Musketeers
make ready, the body faceth to the right and left, the Muskets present, the
Pikes port: the Drums beat a charge, the Musketeers give fire, wheeling off by
division, and placing themselves behind their followers. The next Ranks move
forwards, give fire, and wheel off as before, still reserving the figure: The
Drums continue the charge until the Musketeers have made ready again. The
Drums strike an Alt, the Pikes advance, all face to the Front, and order
Arms.

The continuance of the Musicks playing over.
To make the fourth Figure.
Musketeers face in opposition, and close their divisions, then face to the
Front, and order Arms with the close of the first part of the Tune.

With the beginning of the second streyn, the Pikemen advance their Pikes, face
to the right and left outward, and march to the four Angles of the
Musketeers: then all face to the Front, and order Arms with the end of the
Tune, which makes the Figure I.

I P P P P P P P P M M M M M M M M M M M M M M M M P P P P P P P P K P P P P P
P P P M M M M M M M E M M M M M M M M M P P P P P P P P

The Figure I. being thus made, the Drums beat a preparative, the Pikes
advance facing to the Front and Reere, porting their Pikes, the Musketeers in
the interim cock their Matches and present to the Front, Reere, and Flanks (by
inverting the four innermost Musketeers to the right and left) the which
produces the Figure under K. The continuance of the Musicks playing over.
In which form they gave fire all together, moving again into their places as
under I the Drums and Pikes continuing the Charge, and the Musketeers make
ready again. Which being done, the Drums strike an Alt, the Pikes advance, and
all face to the front and order Arms.

To make the fifth Figure.
With the beginning of the Almain, the two last Ranks of Muskets face to the
right and left, and quickly move between the divisions of Pikes on the Flanks:
the left halfe-Ranks of Musketeers in the Front, at the same time facing about
(to the Right) marching down between the Divisions of Pikes in the Reere, just
after the Musketeers in the Front, then face all to the front, and order Arms
with the Close of the first strein.

With the beginning of the second streyn, the two front divisions of Pikes,
face about to the Right, and move down until they stand even with the front of
Musketeers; then face to the Front (this done) The two left hand files of the
Body face to the Right and Close to their distance of Order: then all face to
the front and order Arms, with the end of the Tune, which produces the figure
L.

The continuance of the Music playing over.
The figure L thus made, the L P P M M P P P P M M P P M M E M M M M M M P P M M
P P P P M M P P Drums beat a preparative, the Pikes advance, the Musketeers
Face to the Front, Reere, and Flanks: The Pikes upon the Right of each division
of Musketeers face the same way with their Muskets and Port, the Drums beat a
charge, the Musketeers give fire, wheeling of to the right, and placing
themselves in the Reere of their own divisions: The Musketeers having given
fire, the Pikes charge, and the Musketeers make ready again: which done, the
Drums strike an Alt, the Pikes advance, and all face to the proper front
ordering their Arms.

This Figure is reduced again as follows.
With the beginning of the Almaine, the Reere of Muskets, move forwards into
the Front, the two left-hand-files opening to the left (in the mean time) to
give them way, the two flank divisions of Musketeers are also to close to the
right and left inwards, and all order Arms with the end of the first streine.

With the beginning of the second streine, the Pikes in the Reere close
forwards to open order: the Musketeers in the mean time face to the right and
left outward, the Pikemen face to the right and left inwards, then all move
and interchange ground: which being done, all face to the front, The
continuance of the Musicks playing over.
and order Arms with the end of the Tune.

To make the sixth Figure.
When the Almaine begins, the Right hand file-leaders advance Arms and wheel
to the left, Cross the front of the Battle: then face to the front, and order
Arms with the end of the first streine.

With the second part of the Tune, the halfe-files of each Arms (of the left
Flank) face about to the right. The bringers up (being the Leaders of the
motion) wheel to the left Cross the Reere of the Battle: the other four
files are also in the interim to open to the right and left, that so they may
stand even with the inmost Angles of the Front and Reere divisions. Lastly, all
face to the Front, and order Arms with the end of the Tune which produces the
Figure M.

The figure M thus M. M M M M P P P P M P P M M P E P M M P P M M P P M P P P P
M M M M made, the Drums beat a preparative, the Pikes advance, the Musketeers
make ready, all facing to the Front, Reere and Flanks, and accordingly do
present. The Drums beat a charge, the Musketeers give fire (the Pikes in the
mean time porting) having fired, the Pikes move a little forwards, and the
Musketeers pass to the right, every man behind his Pikeman. The Drums
continue beating, the Pikes charge, and Musketeers make ready again. Which
being done, the Pikes advance, and the whole body faceth to the left Angle of
the front.

At this instant the Beacon is fired, and the Captain and other Officers leave
their places where they stood to see the Exercise, and repair to the Company.
The Captain coming to the left Angle of the front (to which part the Body
stands faced) marches them a little, and wheeleth them about to the right. Now
the Sentinel gives fire without in the Yard. Whereupon the Captain having
Trooped them toward the Skreen of the Hall: presently reduces his soldiers
by wheeling the front inwards to the Reere, and then Countermarching his files
to the Right. By this time, one comes crying into the Hall, Arm, Arm, the
Saracens are Landed: and by this time the Captain had intelligence that their
Battelles marched fast toward him. Whereupon he wheeleth his Battle about to
the right, and doubled half-files to the left; that done having taken a ground
of some advantage he advanced his Musketeers before his Pikes, and made the
horne-Battell as under figure N. In which form he attended the coming on of
the Infidels.

Now the N Salt. S M M M M S Perk. M M M M M M C M M M M E M M P P P P P P P P
P P P P P P P P Sarracens are entering into the Hall at the Garden-doore: by
reason of the narrowness of which passage, Mulley Achmat had drawn his Body into
the form of a hearse.

But so soon as he was entered the Hall, and saw in what form the Christians
were arranged (as you may perceive by the figure under N.) he immediately
divided his body into two divisio^s, himself leading the front division
against the right wing of Captain Ven his Lieutena^t Mulley-sheck, leading the
Reere division against the left wing, as you may perceive by the figure opposed
to the horn Battle.

They gave fire in this form one body against another, each firing with their
fallings off, varying and altering as you may perceive by the several figures
opposed to each other.

The fight continued with much dexterity and resolution on either side;
sometimes the one prevailing, and sometimes the other: and that with much
variety, as it often happens in like occasions.

The Commanders showed good proof of their skills, and experimented judgments,
by the politic and various alteration of their forms.

The Soldiers also showed themselves to be no younglings in the Art Millitary,
by their ready obedience, and active motion, on each variety. The fight
continued a long time with great obstinacy on either side, until at length
the advantage of the Christians Arms and number of their soldiers, prevailing
MULLEY ACHMAT with the Saracens, were forced to give ground. The which the
Christian Captain perceiving, he caused his Musketeers to move up between his
Pikes, and present pouring out his shot by two Ranks together. The Pikes also
at the same time, charging them home: which the Turcomen people, no longer able
to endure, they quit the Hall (the same way they entered) MULLEY ACHMAT and his
Lieutenant making good the Retreit with their Symiters in their hands.

The Saracens thus forced out of the Hall, the two last ranks of Captain Vens
Company face about, and are privately led away by Lieutenant Sheppard, either
to lie in ambush, or to attend upon the Saracens designs; as opportunity
should best offer it self.

The Captain in the mean time facing the Musketeers to the right and left
outward, the Pikes to the right and left inwards, causes them to interchange
ground (This brings the Musketeers again to the Flanks) Then the drums beating
a March, the Captain leads the Company in Divisions once about the Hall, and
marches out at the lower end by the skreene into the yard.

Mulley Achmatt having again ordered his Body in the Garden, sends a spy to
see what the Christians are doing; and finding them all gone out of the Hall,
surmised they were fled; And thereupon Mulley Achmatt returns with great
Triumph, and with much vaunting insolence marches round about the Hall, with
his Soldiers in form of a Hearse, as you may perceive by the Figure numbered
with 12. Now being at the lower end of the Hall, he made an Alt, when
immediately upon a sign given, the Turks doubled their half-files to the right
entire, the which produced Figure 13. On which form he marched, and with a
stately survay, beholding the Order of his Soldiers, and the countenance of
the Spectatours, he again made Alt, observing his former order, in making and
marching on these ensuing figures.



After that MULLEY-ABEN-ACHMAT had made and marched on all these several
Figures, at last with great insolence, he wheeled his battle about to the
left, his body being in form of the 17th Figure; He with a careless garb
viewing the Spectators, and with eyes darting forth disdain, demonstrating a
kind of haughty scorn (by the gesture of his body) against the supposed
Temeritie of the Christians, whom he believed to have been fled. But they to
the contrary all this time kept good espiall upon him, suffering him to swell
rather by opinion then fortune.

For even now when his insolence was at the highest, he heard the Christians
drums beating a March: Captain VENS Company approaching so near, that they
were now entering the Hall by the Skreen. As Soon as they were entered the
Christians drew into Battalia, the drums beating a preparative they advance
forwards, and charge the Saracens, and they perceiving their numbers to be so
small, as willingly meet them.

Captain VEN had all his Musketts in the front of his Pikes, and the enemy his
battles were ranged as in Figure 17. The shot played thick on both sides, as
sometimes being in front, sometimes on the flanks, sometimes again in the
Reere, other-whiles in the midst. The Politic Captains, still varying of their
forms on either side, as might make best for their own advantages, each
striving for the Garland of victory. But by this time the Ambush (under the
conduct of Lieutenant SHEPPARD) was ready to fall on: and therefore Captain VEN
caused his drums beat a Retrait, firing and charging Pikes retreating, thereby
to draw the Turks from their strength into disorder. The Turks perceiving the
Christians to give ground, charge fiercely on. But the Christian Captain made
but a politic retreat, thereby to draw the Turks from their advantage of
ground, that so the ambushment might have opportunity to charge them in the
Reere. This as it was contrived fell out accordingly. For the Lieutenant who
all this while had kept himself and soldiers close; now perceiving his
opportunity: Ranged all his Musketeers in front, and with all possible
secrecy, drew close up to the Reere of the Enemy; Then all on a sudden
pouring out a great salve of shot, he therewith even rent and tore the order of
the Enemy.

Now the Christians charge both in Front and Reere the Turcoman Lieutenant with
an undaunted courage, faced his half-files about, and with an unparalleld
resolution singled out the Christian Lieutenant, with his well tempered Cymiter
laying about him like a Turk. Insomuch that Lieutenant Sheppard with his
Partizan had much ado with all his skill and dexterity, to keep him at the
point. The other striving to hew out a way before him, even through steel,
fire, and flame: with his well cutting Fauchion slicing and paring the
Christian Lieutenants Partizan, as if it had been a a wodden dagger, and not a
composure of steel. Nevertheless the Christian Lieutenant perceiving the
Turcoman to be a proper personage, and not willing to destroy so goodly a
presence. He therefore stood politickly on the defensive, whilst the other
tired himself by his own fury.

All this while the Soldiers are likewise at it with their short guns, swords
and targets, against the Christians with their Muskets and whole Pikes, where
we will leave them a while striving like contrary elements, and return into the
Front to see how MULLEY-ACHMAT behaved himself against the Christian Captain,
who as I foreshewed had given back purposely to draw the Turk from his
advantage of ground, that so his Lieutenant might the more commodiously give on
in the Reere.

The which accordingly taking effect, he gave a fresh charge in the front, at
which the Saracens began to stagger, perceiving themselves to be doubly charged
in Front and Reere.

Mully Aben seeing his people began to waver, meant to do something in person,
so to reinforce his Battle, and therewithal casting away his Pole-axe,
betook himself to his Battell-ax and Target; therewith working wonders,
forcing the heads of the best armed Pikes to give him way, that so he might
encounter the Christian Captain. Who at the same time supervising his Battles
(as being careful to prevent all cross accidents of War) he saw what havoc
the Turk made in person. Whereupon singling him out, between them two began a
fierce fight.

The Turk at the first encounter, receiving a wound in the hand from the
Christian Captain, wherewithal being so much the more enraged, he endeavored
to get within him, intending to have stabd him with a This Creese is a dagger
with a waved blade poisoned according to the custom of that Country. It was
given him by the great King of Maccassar for a present, for saving his life
when they were hunting and killing the wild Bore, who had else killed the King.
poisoned Creese (which he continually wore at his side) hoping with his fall
to conclude the victory. But the wary Christian perceiving his fury, held him
close to it, still keeping the point of his weapon at his breast.

Enraged ACHMAT even foming with anger that he could not work his design:
resolved for his last refuge with the remains of his over-wearied Turks, to
break through the Battle of the Christians. But the vigilant Captain having
drawn all his Pikes in Front closely serried together, kept them so close up,
that they could not make the least penetration. Whereupon being quite out of
heart, with joint consent they cried for quarter, after the Turkey manner
casting their weapons on the ground, and laying their left hands on their
heads, with a loud voice crying, Saybe-Sallam.

The Christian Captain remembering how valiantly they had beaved themselves in
fight, took compassion on them, and disarming them, commanded them to pass
through between his Files into the Reere. Lieutenant Sheppard in like manner
with his Soldiers following them, placing his Soldiers in the Reere of the
Turks. So that the Christians had 4. ranks, 2. Ranks in the Front, and 2. Ranks
in the Reere of the Captive Turks. They being in 2. Ranks in the midst of the
Conquerors. Then the Christian Captain caused the first Rank of Turks to move
between the first and second Ranks in the Front. The second Rank of Turks,
between the third and fourth Ranks in the Reere. Being content himself to have
gained the victory, he took only the Captain MULLEY-ABEN-ACHMAT for his
prisoner. MULLEY-SHECK the Turkey Lieutenant being Lieutenant Sheppards
prisoner, ABEN-ABDELLA the Turkey Ensign being prisoner to Ensign Gould, the
rest of the Turks being equally divided amongst the Soldiers, every two
Soldiers having one Turkey prisoner between them: the Captain thus bountifully
rewarding his skillful and conquering Soldiers.

This being performed, the Captain led forth his Company again in divisions
(the Turks being pinioned with pieces of Match.) After the Captain, marched
dejected MULLEY ACHMAT; Then a division of Musketeers being but two in Rank,
and a Turkey prisoner between them, every Rank having one in like manner. Then
marched Ensign Gould at the head of the first division of Pikes, displaying
his Ensign in token of victory. ABEN ABDELLA being led, and the Saracen
Ensign being carried after him. Lastly, after the Reere division of Muskets
marched Lieutenant Sheppard, leading with him his prisoner bold MULLEY-SHECK.
In this triumphing manner, Captain VEN led his Company thrice about the Hall,
the Drums beating a March: where it was a goodly sight to see, how every
Soldier was enriched with one spoil or other, the which they carried in
triumphing manner, some having Cymiters, some Barbary guns, others having
Targets, but all some thing, besides this, the Soldiers were mightily
enriched, by the Jewels that they found about them, for these were not of those
poor roving Saracens, but a select Company that had enriched themselves by the
spoils of many others. Thus having marched about the Hall the third time,
being come to the Skreen, the Captain made a sign, the Drums beat a Troop, the
Pikes advance, and the Ranks close forward to their Order. This done, the
divisions are drawn up in Battalia, then the Pikes stand, and the Musketeers
advance into a Horn Battle. Lastly, being in this form, the Drums continuing
their Troop, the whole body advances forward into the middle of the Hall, then
the Drums striking an Alt, the whole Body makes a stand, ordering their Arms.
Then the Captain and Lieutenant as at the first take forth Mr. Richard Lacy
(the third man from the Front of Lieutenant Bariff his File) trooping him
between them into the Van before the midst of the Front of Musketeers, there
doing their several duties to the Nobility as formerly; The Soldier began
this ensuing Speech.

Unbrace your Drums, and let the warlike Phife
No more distinguish 'twixt pale death and life,
Furle up your Ensigns, let the Canon cease,
And reassume your (bravely purchased) peace.
Here are the knowing, that with judgments eye,
Look through your Actions; can at first discry
Your well weighed resolutions, and can give
That sweet reward, that makes a Soldier live,
Encouragement: which from you is praise,
Welcome as Triumph, or th'unblasted baies.
Give us but that, we can dispense with cost,
With time more precious, and with what is most
In the esteem of men; we want but ground,
Which had, you conquer; yet our hopes are crowned.
This from your bounties if we shall obtain,
Vollies of shot, shall thank it back again.
After the speech thus ended, duty being done, and the Soldier returned to his
place, the Captain caused the Drums to beat a Troop, and the Pikes to move
forwards even with the Front of Musketeers. Then the Captain makes a sign,
the Drums beat a March, and the Company marches again in divisions, The
Captain first, and the Ranks of Soldiers following, doing a short
Souldier-like obeisance to the Nobility as they past by them. The Ensign only
basing his point: In this order marching forth of the Hall, where the Turks
found so good quarter and kind usage, that now they are all turned Christians,
leaving that course of life, and are now either Merchants or Shopkeepers for
the most part.

FINIS.
Imprimatur

Tho. Wykes. Aug. 28. 1639.


