THE RESOLVED Gentleman.

Translated out of Spanishe into English, by Jews Lewkenor Esquier.

Nel piu bell vedere, Cieco. Imprinted at London, by Richard Watkins. 1594.



OMNE BONV^ SVPERNE

Maur. Kyffin to the Reader.
SEe, here, laid open to thy sight and sense,
The Error, and Terror, of this wretched Life:
Thy many Foes, the means for thy Defense;
The glorious End, succeeding all this strife.
Learn to redeem the precious Time here lent thee:
Shun false allurements, and Courts subtilitie:
Resolve herein: Of thine amiss repent thee;
So may thou vanquish Chance and Debilitie.
This Allegory, shaped first in French,
And thence transferd into Castilian verse,
Containing Rules our follies to retrench,
Lewknor, by Metaphrase, does here rehearse.
Him virtue, Arms, and Languages adorn;
Hateful reproouers he may justly scorn.
Le Temps s'en va.
Enforced cause unfeigned Love, prove both constaints in me,
To raise my Muse (Oh worthless Muse) to sing the worth of thee:
But what I sing, is that I see, what I assured ever,
Hopes of your friends are springing still, sweet Jews do still persevere.
And though nor Arms (oh loss of Arm) nor Muses now are minded,
Despair not friend, men worthy know, that now the time is blinded.
And as this perfect subject shows, the subject of thy mind:
So this pretends, unto thy friends, more rests yet behind.
Thou leaust the Wars (so wills thy friends) leave not the Muses name.
All is not lost, though now likd least, what left is unto fame.
And rest not here, but still run on, we longing are for more.
Great are thy guiftes, yet give us still, thou lesnests not thy store.
Rob. Dillington.

TO THE MOST HONORABLE AND VIRTUOUS LADY, THE LADY ANNE, COUNTESS OF WARWYCKE.
GReat Alexander (excellent Lady) in nothing more delyghted, then in the
reading of warlyke discourses, especially and above the rest, with greatest
affection he embraced the Iliades of Homer, beholding therein, as in a clear
looking glass, lively set forth and deciphred in the person of Achilles, the
excellent virtues of his own invincible mind.

Traian likewise found nothing that so much pleased him, as the moral
precepts, and phylosophicall discourses of Pliny.

Neither is this affection peculiar only to Princes, but in a manner to the
most part of men, chiefly to delight in those discourses, that to the quality
of their humors are best agreeing.

In which regard, considering the sympathy between the noble virtues of your
worthy mind, and the most pure intentions of the Author, expressed in this
Treatise, I thought I could not to any more worthyly offer the patronage of
this my poor translation, entreating of a mind virtuously resolved, then to
your Ladyship, whose piety, zeal, religion, and virtue, have placed you in
that high seat of the worlds opinion, that there is nothing among all
degrees, sorts, and sexes, more honored, nothing more admired, nothing more
applauded.

Accept therefore, good Madame, with your wonted favor this poor Translation,
the greatest part of whose best substance is your own, as lively, though under
the shadow of other names, representyng the innated virtues of your own noble
mind.

I owe you many other duties, as well in regard of your many honorable
favors, and continual readiness to do me good in Court, since my first
coming to her Majesty's service, as also of the infinite obligations, which
not only I, but also my Father, and sundry of my friends, do owe unto the
memory of your noble deceassed Husband, and his most worthy and ever memorable
Brother, which I will rather endeavor always to witness, with an ever
duetifull and obsequious remembrance, then to endeere with any vain
circumstances of enforcing words.

And thus, good Madame, wyshing you happiness and honor, to the full measure of
your virtues: and me (to my will) occasion and ableness to do you service, I
take in all humbleness my leave.

Your Ladyships ever most faithfully at commandment, Jews Lewkenor.

To the Reader.
THis Treatise was first written in French by an ancient Knight of Burgundy,
Philip de Comines, in the first chapter of his commentaries, makes mention of
Olyuer de La March, to have been a great cause of the wars between king
Jews the.xi. and the Count of Charoloys, afterward called Charles the hardy,
which shows that he was a man of no small honor and dignity.
called Olyuer de La March, a man, that both in matter of war and peace,
bare great sway with Philip Duke of Burgundy, and after him likewise with Duke
Charles, his son, whom in all his wars he never abandoned, and was lastly
with him at the unfortunate battle of Nancy in the year. 1476. where, by the
Duke of Lorayne and the Swyssers, he was overthrown and slain. After this, he
had great charge and authority under his daughter, the Lady Mary, sole
inheritrix of all the Dukes great estates and Provinces, who married Maximilian
Archduke of Austria, afterward elected Emperor: to whom, leaving two
children, a son and a daughter, she dyed shortly after, some say of the fall
from a Horse: But this Author, who bestought to know the truth, says, that
it was through the inward conceyte of an excessive sorrow: But once, such was
the grief that he conceived of her death, and of the two other before named
Princes, under whom he had been brought up, that he retired himself from
administration of great matters, to a quiet life: and in his solitariness
composed this Treatise. It has been since translated into sundry Languages,
and among the rest, by Don Hernando de Acunia into Spanysh verse, and dedicated
unto the Emperor Charles the fifth: whose translation I do here follow, because
I could never yet light on any of the French originals.

It seems that the Spanyarde in some places much altered the Authors meaning,
adding and taking away, according to his own fancy, and fitnes of the time in
which he translated it, as both by the sequel of this discourse appears, as
also by his Epistle to the Emperor, which I have here prefixed.

Some perchance may blame me, of having done the Author whom I follow wrong, by
translating into an vneloquent barren Prose, his excellent conceyte, expressed
in such heroical Verse, and beautified with so many fair Tables and
purtraictes, marvelously delighting with the variety of the one, and the
sweetness of the other, both the ear and the eye of the reader. To this I
answer, with the confession of my fault, that it is true, and withal, that
this matter being for the most part allegorical, had in deed been far
better to have been handled in verse. Nevertheless, I doubt not, but those
that do more esteem substance then shadows, will like never the worse of the
matter, for being delivered in a plain speech: Neither had mine Author, if he
were alive, any great cause to be angry with me, seeing I have bestowed an
Englysh habit upon him, such as it is, though it be no way comparable to the
beauty of that, wherewith he was in his own country language attyred.

As for new fangled and fickle conceyted heads, that whenever they read any
thing, never go farther then the rynde, my sliking of every thing, how virtuous
matter soever it conteyne, that thundreth not into their ears with a lofty
tempest of words, I would earnestly request them, and that more in regard of
their own reputation, then in defense of this poor Treatise (whose harmless
innocence shall be a sufficient shield against whatsoever calumniation) to
forbear to censure amysse thereof: for though perchance the baseness of the
style, and the shallowness of the invention, yield no harmony to delight
their delicate ears, yet it would be moderately judged of, in regard that it
conteyneth nothing but most effectual and moving examples of great piety,
laying open to our eyes the vain and deceitful instabilitie of this most
wretched and miserable world: and finally teaches nothing more, then how to
live virtuously, and dye blessedly. Besides, it makes honorable mention of
sundy excellent Princes: some of which, though long agon deceassed, yet such
was their nobleness, and piety, that their names are still entertained of the
world in all honor and reverence. Others yet living, who through the
inestimable blessing, wherewith God and nature has adorned them, are of all
the world most worthyly honored with admirable applause. As for me (like a
well mounted Cowarde in a skyrmish, that relyeth more upon the goodness of his
Horse, then his own valor: So) I hope the worthynesse of my Author, and the
zealous integrity of his discourse, shall, how faint soever I find mine own
desert, be able to free me from the reprehension of those that are wise and
well iudgeing, whom I chiefly desire to please, and to whose censure I
wyllyngly submit my self, and this poor Pamphlet.

L. Lewk.

To the sacred, Catholic, and Imperial Majesty of great Caesar.
I know not whether be greater the hardiness of the Resolved Gentleman (of
whom this book entreats) in his combats, or my presumption, in dedicating it
unto your Majesty, for so small a service, caryeth with it so great a
disproportion, that I fear, my good intention shall be accounted rashness, in
presenting so mean a travail, to so high a greatness.

But two things did chiefly encourage me to publish it under the glorious
name of your Majesty: The one, in respect of the conformity of the discourse
unto your Majesty's virtues, in whom above all the Princes of your time, the
profession and practice of true Christian and militar discipline chiefly
florisheth: The other, of communicating unto those of my nation these my poor
pains, in translation of this Treatise, which though it be little, yet if they
do attentively read and mark it, they shall therein find an excellent hydden
treasure, showing in deed the very mark, whereto the perfection of all virtue
tends.

It was first written in French by a Gentleman of great worthynesse, noble
as well in letters, as in arms: His intention was, to discourse of the
dangerous wars made unto us by our Senses, touching diverse passages of age,
through which we run, or rather to speak more properly, are by disorders
violently carried. And so under the figure of bodily combats, he lays the
spiritual so lively before our eyes, as cannot but draw the well-iudging
Reader, to great consideration of our frail estate. The translation has not
been altogether without some hardness, for that as the tongues are diverse, so
is their style and manner of phrase exceedingly different. I have left out some
things expressed by the Author, as being hystories peculiarly concerning
himself and his Country, utterly unknown, and unnecessary to us: and in
their place, have inserted others of more moment, and more famously known, not
only to our own nation, but to all the world besides, which I have not done
only by mine own authority, but jointly by advise of men of good judgment,
and great skilfulnesse in either tongue. But my intention being rather to
praise the Book, then to endeere the translation: I say, that it is such, that
both in mine, and other men's judgments, it deserves your Maiestes
protection. And so with all humbleness. I kiss your Imperial hands.

Your Majesty's humble servant and subject, Don Hernando de Acun^a.

THE RESOLVED GENTLEMAN.
IN the declining season both of the year and of my age, travailing far from
my native home and country, solitary and sorrowful all alone, my
thoughtfulnes did of a sudden waken and revive my slumbring memory, by
renewing unto her the time and history of my passed youth, and, quickening my
senses with a fresh and unusual vigor, forcibly recalling my mind to the
consideration of my present state, by suggesting thereunto, infinite and
confused discourses of my many variable and dangerous forepassed fortunes, did
begin at length to argue with me in this sort,

First, quoth she, Whosoever is forgetful, or careless of himself and his
estate, Nothing so miserable as the man that lives careless of his estate.
flies not the pitch of true honor, neither shall at any time see himself
beautified with the glorious bryghtnesse of her perfection: in which miserable
lethargy if he persevere, then is his case most lamentable, and utterly
desperate, as not only deprived of this worlds honor, but also of that
everlasting glory and eternal health, to which, blessed minds with the
wings of a virtuous industry do aspire. See thou not, quoth she, how
miserable a face of things, the now passed and gone sweet Summer season has
left unto us? The earth is now dispoyled of all her beautiful raymentes, and
glyttering ornaments, her green and fruitful flourishing herbs, her so
fayrely colored flowers, and sweet odoriferous smelles are gone: Both playnes
and mountains are now deprived of all their passed pleasures, having nothing
left them to delyght the beholders eyes, but a bare and naked barrenness. The
high stately Trees, that lately so aloft flourished (all vigor and pleasing
greenness being lost) have now neither fruit nor shadow, having yielded all
their glory to the nipping rigor of the cold, that has bereaved them of
their fragrant humor: Such as this of theirs, is thy estate, who having now
ouergon the sundry degrees and seasons, as the Spring, Summer, and Autumn of
thy age, rest assured, that thy Winter is at hand: only this is the
difference, that thou can not be again renewed in this world, as are these
vegetative creatures: for so is it by the eternal wisdom enacted, that there
is no going back from that degree of age, whereunto a man is once arrived.

It behooves thee therefore well and wisely to ponderate with thy self, that
thou now drawest on toward the exceeding dangerous horror of an inevitable
passage, kept by an ever victorious enemy, called DEATH, The passage of death
kept by two Champions, Accident, and Debilitie.
who entertayneth in his daily wages, two myghtie and puissant Champions, the
one called Accident, the other Debilitie: the cumbate with one of which, thou
can not by any means avoid. These two unvanquished Champions do keep the
great forest of Atropos, against all adventurers: the passage of which, as it
is most dangerous, so is it full of horror and amazement. For such is the
nature of their chalenges, that they never desist fight, till they see him whom
they have undertaken conquered and dead, them selves being free from death, and
careless of repose. The elder of them, and most terrible, is Accident, who
with variable and uncertain kinds of fight, bereaueth, for the most part, the
lives of brave and lusty youths, in the prime and strength of their
vnmellowed years: yea, and sometimes he sporteth himself in the death of old
men, women, and children. But hydeous Debilitie, with invisible blows, kills
only those that are weak, and languishyng. They are so nusled in blood, that
their daily exercise and practice, is nothing but to murder and destroy
mankind, neither is their puissance by any policy to be deluded, nor by any
agilitie, or stratageme to be avoided.

This being so, judge then with thy self, in how great degree, these myghtie
foes are to be feared. Thou have been long agone summoned to this battle, by
Excess, their heralde at Arms, and therefore the fight being so full of
peril, and the matter of such importance, I cannot but much marvel at this
thy careless unreadiness, especially seeing at thy very birthday thou were
waged thereunto. Thou do not exceed Sampson in invincible strength, Hercules
in valorous courage, Solomon in profound wysedom, Tullie in powerful persuading
eloquence, Diomedes in vigorous understanding, nor Absolon in delicious
beauty: yet no one of these was able to resist these death-bringing Champions,
that even now attend thee in the lystes. The farther that the uncertain race
of thy miserable life lyngreth on, the nearer approaches the hour of thy
inevitable conflict, to which attend no other trumpet, then the doleful
knowlling of a deadly Bell. Therefore with all instance I advise thee, to look
well about, and to call well all thy wits tegeather, that thou may be the
better prepared, against the hard brunt of so terrible a reckoning.

Herewith my thoughtfulness ending, Author.
I awaked, as it were out of a drowsy trance or dream, thanking her in the
highest degree for these her careful admonitions, and withal told her, that
for mine own part, I was ready to perform as much as to a true resolved
Gentleman did appertain: and therewithal, presently without delay put on my
armor, and like a Knight aduenturous, passed forth onward on my way. My
horses name was Desire, my harness tempred in the water of Puissance, my
shield, of Hope, my lance, of Adventure, and my sword, of Courage.

In this equipage, I entered into the quest of my so much renowned adversaries;
at the end of two days travail, in which I had not found any adventure
worthy the writing, I came into a very green and flourishing Medowe, the name
whereof was Worldly pleasure: The fair feeldes of worldly pleasure.
The outward show whereof presented unto my senses such pleasure and delyght,
that ravished with contentment, forgetful of my journey and undertaken
enterprise, I even determined to remain there: But suddenly I might epsy a
galant Ruffler, that came fiercely coursing along the Meadow, bidding me defend
my self, for without farther delay, he meant to just with me. I was much moved
with the roughness of his speech and iesture, as also that he had interrupted
me in the sweetness of those delyghtes wherein my senses were lulled a
sleep. I asked him if he were a Gentleman? and withal, of what name and
Country? My name, quoth he (in an ill tuned harsh and queasy voice) is Ill
Diet: Ill Diet, his property and parentage.
My office is to put all out of order where I come. My lineage is noble: for
Gluttony is my mother, and I am her eldest son: I am maynteyned with riches,
norished in delices, and hyghly esteemed in the court of Princes.

Are you then, quoth I, either of these warriors that do with such
unvanquished puissance, keep the forest of unmerciful Atropos? Neither of
them, quoth he, but yet their great familiar friend, and live by the same
chase which they do: which is, by persecutyng of life. And therewithal, Ill
diet encountreth the author in the plain of w^rldly pleasure.
he gave me such a blow with his lance of little wit, upon the bosse of my
guylded target, that I do yet full well feel the weight of his encounter:
nevertheless, pullyng my spirits unto me, with an eagre desire of revenge,
with a full carrere, I brake my Lance on his bosom: and forthwith we both
laid hands on our swords, The manner of their fight.
with which, being tempered in folly, we gave one an other mighty blows of
banquettes, bathings, quaffings, watchings, wantonness, and such like: wherein
Time, the treasure of life is consumed, and nothing hoorded up, but grief and
repentance. When he had almost weeried me with these kinds of blows, then he
let drive at me a fresh with many disorderly strokes, of dauncyng, running,
leaping, playing at tennis, immoderate exercise, sweatyng, sudden cold
taking, and other such like, so deadly and dangerous greetings, that without
all doubt he had then made an end of my days, had not a Lady, The author is
foiled by Ill diet, and succored by Reliquia Iuuentutis.
called Reliquia iuuentutis, commen to my succor, who though in a manner tired
with often helpyng me in such like combats, yet did in defense of my health,
put forth the uttermost of her force and virtue, requestyng my adversary to
leave the fight, and to give me respit, to see yet somewhat farther on in the
world. I am contented, quoth he, for the farther he runs on in the world,
and the more trust he puts in his own forces, the more certain is his
destruction: yet before he depart, because he has behaved himself so stoutely
with me, I will bestow a Cappe upon him, Ill diet presents him with a cappe.
dyed in my colors, of such operation and virtue, that it shall distyll a
fountain of rhewmes and humors, into his eyes, legs, thyghes, arms, and
joints, so that in one part or other of his body, while he lives, go where he
will, he shall have cause to remember my acquantance. In giving me which
present, he departed with exceeding haste, leaving me extremely turmoyled, and
sore in my bones with the weariness of this combat. But my greatest grief
was, that whereas in this last conflict, I had been relieved through the help
of that little youth that was remaining in me, Reliquia iuuentutis does abandon
him.
the same also being my chiefest comfort, did now of a sudden abandon me,
bidding me hereafter govern my self well, for of her I neither could nor
should receive any farther assistance.

Being thus forsaken, I followed on my way, desolate and comfortless, not
knowing whither: Only my thoughtfulness still suggested virtue and valor
unto my mind, animating me to persevere on in this important voyage.

But as my mind doubtfully wauered in sundry and diverse thoughts amidde this
uncertain way, the night drawing on, I might epsy an aged fatherly Hermit,
The author amidds his wandering, lights upon the mantion of understanding.
not far off, standing before the door of his Cell, whose grave and
courteous aspect, encouraged me to acquaint him with my wandering uncertain
voyage, and in friendly sort to entreat him of harbor for that night. The good
Hermit bade me from his heart welcome, and by his countenance and word assured
me, that I should find him a most friendly and comfortable Host. He himself
disarmed me, and bringing me into the inward part of his lodging, did cast a
warm mantle about my shoulders.

Me thought I did never behold a man of more pleasing behavior, nor one whose
conversation did more delight me. After that he had called for water to refresh
me, he led me into a little Chapel, exceedingly full of beauty, and even with
the very sight moving to devotion; in which, kneeling down at my prayers, I
saw sundry works of piety and repentance, curiously wrought and garnished
round about with sundry examples of Reformed life, all set forth in so comely
a sort, and in so lively colors, that I was even in a manner ravished with the
sight thereof, if the good Hermit, considering my passed travail, and the
latenesse of the night, had not by calling me to supper, withdrawn my mind
from the infiniteness of contemplation, whereunto the rare virtue of these
glorious sightes had moved it.

As we sat at the table, I could not withdraw mine eyes from beholding his
face. His age was not loathsome, but florishyng in virtue, and himself wise,
though not according to our common worldly conceyte, yet in the deapth of that
wisdom, that leads the soul to salvation. I could not refrain from
asking his name, and withal the cause that did move him, being so notable a
man, to live retired in so solitary a place.

To satisfy your demand, quoth he, You shall understand, that I do well
know both you and your estate, which did the more move me to give you
entertainment. As for me, I am called, Understanding, a name in the world
well worthy of honor, though it be of the most part wrested, turned, and
misdeemed. I have retired my self unto this place, to the end, that by Gods
grace and goodness, I might leave the wide way of the world, that leads to
everlasting perdition. The bread I feed upon is seasoned with sobriety, and
the wine I drink is watered with the pure liquor of sincere living: That which
suffiseth; Reason, the seat or mantion of understanding.
susteyneth me. No passion, envy, or dissension, has entrance into this house
of mine, which is called Reason. Here I hope to lead the rest of my life, and
to end my days, The end of true wisdom and understanding whereto directed.
in flying the allurementes of the flesh and the world, and seeking with my
soul, him that did with his blood redeem it.

Only the thought of sin, is bitter and grievous unto me, from occasion of
the which, as I do now live sequestered, so I beseech the guyder of the heavens
to increase in me perseverance in this life, which I have undertaken. As for
your estate, lineage, name, and condition, I am thereof well informed: likewise
of the aduenturous enquest, which in this dangerous voyage of yours, you have
undertaken. Neither am I ignorant of your native country, the marches of
Burgundy, in the miserable affliction of which, with war, desolation, and
bloodshed, vnweeried fortune seems to take such pleasure. As for your self,
seeing, like a valiant Martire, you have determined to bestow your life upon
these two tyrannizing Champions, whose cruel hands never any of your
foregoers that contended with them (how famous or warlike soever) could
escape, without bodily death and dissolution, I will give you the best and most
expedient advice I can.

First you must know, that Accident is always, Accident, always ready to
entrappe and bereave life.
and at all hours ready mounted and armed, attended upon with all sorts of
mischief, and pernicious engines, to bereave mortal men of their lives.
Debilitie helps him, as need requires: so that between them, they suffer
none to escape. But notwithstanding all this, the greatness of your enemies
puissance, and your danger, yet such is the condition of mankind, and such the
course and point whereunto you are now arrived, that fly back or retire, by
any means you may not. Therefore proceed on a Gods name with a resolved
courage: for as the danger is great, so great will be your glory, if you do but
withstand Accident alone: yea so much, that you may advance your arms, and
set forth your trophies equally with the most famous conqueror that ever was.

And insomuch therefore that heedefulnesse, and wary circumspection, is the
chiefest mean to the accomplishment of great things, I will bestow upon you a
Lance, so surely steeled with a head of good government, Good government a
sure defense against all casualties.
that if you use it rightly, and make therewith resistance at any time when
Accident shall distress you, he shall be able to do you but little greeuance. But
the surest preservative I can give you, is, every day in the morning when you
rise, to commend your self deuoutely and zelously unto almighty God, The
surest preservative against the violence of Accident.
desiring him to be a steadfast guide to your uncertain steps, in the
transitory course of this your wandering mortality: and forget not to be
thankful unto him, for the many benefits, which for his part so plenteously,
without any desert of yours, he has bestowed upon you.

With these, and such like speech, we brought supper to an end, where, after
having given thanks unto God, he brought me to my chamber: the bed he
appointed me was of Quiet security, even such, as I my self would have
desired, wherein I was no sooner laid, but that I fell into a sound sweetness
of sleep, The sleeps of true understanding are secure.
and so continued till the next morning, being awaked with the sound of a little
bell, that roung unto divine service: hearing of which I arose quickly, and
coming down, did find the Alter called Perfection, covered with the
Ornaments of Truth, and a chapleine whose name was Humility, reuested in a
Pure surples of perfect charity, beginning the holy service, which after he
had ended, and my Host finished his orizons, he saluted me, and demanded what
rest I had taken? to which I answered, as I had cause, that I never in my life
had received the like contentment and quiet repose. With that, he seeming well
appaide that I had so well liked of my lodging, opened a back door, which to
my seeming was of Remorse, the lock a clear Loking glass, and the key Desire
of knowledge: within the same was a cloister or gallerie full of strange
emblemes, pictures, and engines: to mark and understand the particularitie and
meaning of whose diverse manners and forms, I was with great wonder very
heedfull and attentive: which the gentle Hermit perceiving, did of himself
offer to explane them unto me, Understanding does here represent unto the
author, the infinite ways and weapons, wherewith Accident assayleth mankind,
and to make him have the more apprehension thereof, does lay before him the
calamitous ends of sundry worthy personages, perishing in diverse sorts, and
shows him the wepons wherewith Accident bereaved them of their lives. Cain the
first manslear. Sampson, Deianeira and Hercules.
to the end that he might make me the better acqueinted with the several kinds
of death-bringing instruments, that my adversary Accident does accustomablie
use.

First quoth he, see here this culter of a plowe: with this did envious Cain,
guided by Accident, murder his innocent brother Abel. He was the first that
did till and delue the ground: likewise the first that in the world did commit
the cruel deed of mans-slaughter.

See here the stately Marble pillars, which mighty Sampson pulld down, and
therewith the fundation of the Philistian palace, dying himself contented,
because with his ruin did also perish those his malicious enemies that had
before so insolentlie triumphed at his miserable calamity. This did he
through a noble indignation, and Accident was the only contriuer of so great a
mischefe.

See here the burning shirt, the deadly gift of a traitorous Centaure, with
which Deianeira, pore deceived Lady, thinking to procure wholly unto her self
the love of Hercules her famous husband, was occasion both to him and her self
of direful and violent deaths, and Accident hereof the only executioner.

See here the cruel poniardes, wherewith in the height of his greatness,
Julius Caesar stabbed with daggers.
most glorious Caesar, having vanquished all public enemies, was by a private
conspiracy of his dissembled friends, stabbed and murdered in the senate
house, Accident did strangely bring him to this tragical end, as most plainly
the Roman histories do make manifest.

See here the fatal Box, wherein faithless Antipater kept the virulent
poison, Alexander the great poisoned by Antipater.
wherewith he murdered admirable Alexander king of Macedone, and conqueror of
the world.

See here the great and mighty trunchon of that deathfull spear, wherewith
fierce Achilles slew magnanimous Hector, Hector slain with a spear by
Achilles.
bulwark of Troy and terror of the Grecians.

This was again the fatal bow and stedie directed arrow, Achilles slain by
Par is with an arrow.
wherewith effeminate Paris, the firebrand of his country, vnmanfullie
revenging the death of his noble brother, traitorously to death wounded the
glory of the Grecian army, when full of ragefull love, he nothing less then
death suspected.

This was the unhappy sword, Pompey beheaded by the commandment of young
Ptolomee.
wherewith the honorable head of great Pompey was cut off, by the unjust
commandment of the perjured Egiptian traitor, staining therewith his own
glory, and overthrowing the pillar whereupon Romes greatness was propped.

See here the enuenomed ring, Hannibal poisoned out of a ring.
out of which fearelesse Hanniball took his last draught of deadly poison: the
greatness of his invincible mind, choosing by his own hands rather to die,
then to yield to any the least thought of captivity, cursing, as he died, the
head and kingdom of the disloial Bithinian Prince, for having violated the
laws of hospitality.

See here the bloody Iaueline wherewith great king Agamemnon, Agamemnon
murdered by Aegistus by his wives consent.
by the wicked consent of his detestable wife, was trecherouslie slain by
Aegistus. Ten years had he warred in Asia, commanding all the united forces
of the Grekish princes, and lastly having burnt and razed Troy, returning
victoriously home, in steed of glorious reposefull happiness, with hope of
which he flattered him self, was thus by Accident requited.

See here the well sharpened Cimitarre, Holofernes slain by Judith with a
Cimitarre.
which guyded by the delicate hand of fair Judith, did divide the brisled
head of sleeping Holofernes from his huge giantlie carkas. Great was the joy of
this deed unto the Israelites, and great was herein the success of Accident.

This is the Hammer, Syzara slain by Iabel with a nail.
and therewith jointly the Nail, wherewith virtuous Iabel ended the unworthy
life of wicked Syzara, giving therewith joy to the people, and glory to the
greatness of Accident.

These were the fatal Lances of the two young Theban Princes, Etheocles and
Polinices slain with mutual wounds of eithers Lance.
Polinices and Etheocles; either of which, through ambitious desire to reign,
did bereave the other both of life and reign; whose bodies, as while they
lived did harbor divided and disagreeing souls, so did their flames after
death, when with pompous solemnity they were to be burned, refuse to join.

This was the sharp piercing dagger, wherewith dissembling Ioab mortallie to
death wounded credulous Abner, Abner stabbed by Ioab.
while he held him in his arms, embraced with a cheerful disguysed show of
gladness.

This was the well directed Stone, and this the far reaching Sling, Golyas
slain by David with a sling and a stone.
out of which the feeble hand of young David guyded it, to the fall and death
of great and puissant Golyas, who alone was a terror to the whole Israelites.

This was the well employed Halter, wherein proud Aman was strangled, Aman
strangled with a halter.
for endeavoring with damnable intent to murder and destroy the chosen and
beloved people of God, whereby the virtuous Queen Hester procured great honor
to Mardocheus, and executed in Aman the mighty power of Accident.

We had not visited the fourth part of this place, so many, so strange, and so
diverse, were the instruments that Accident used to surprise men's lives
withal, when the good Hermit withdrew me from thence, willing me not to
forget, but mindfully to consider of those his relics which I had seen.

Being thence departed, when I began with perfect judgment to consider of the
things which I had viewed, though the strangeness and variety of them were
somewhat delightful: yet could I not but feel a great tenderness and
perplexity in my mind, to consider that so many great and excellent men, had
been by Accident so cruelly murdered and made away; some, even at such
instantes, as the vain frailty of this deceauing world did promise unto them
a stable and firm estate in all glory, happiness, and contentment: withal
it was a grief unto me, that I had not seen the rest which remained, the
which in appearance was ten thousand millions of times more, then that which I
had seen.

But withal I wondered much, that among so many remarkable trophies of
Accidents victories, I had not seen any of his companion Debilitie: which my
freendly Host perceiving, told me, that if I did at my return repair unto
him, he would likewise satisfy me therein, and make me acquainted with the
wondrous puissance of Debilitie: As for now, he chiefly desired to prepare me
against the violence of Accident, as being of the two the more cruel and
sudden; and then he discoursed unto me of many great and mighty Princes, that
he had at unawares surprised and murdered, some tasting of delicious meats,
some riding and managing of proud horses, some giving audience to suitors,
Sundry princes bereaved of their lives, even in the midst of their sweetest
pleasures.
some riding in triumph to the capitol, some by sea, some by land, some by
fire, some by fall of houses, some by thunder, some by earthquakes, some in
dancing, some in singing, yea and some fast embraced in the arms of their
beloved mystres, even in the pleasingest action of their Love.

Herewith the aged Father, being loath to retain me any longer from my intended
voyage, with tearefull eyes embracing me, recommended me unto God, willing me
not to be unmindful of his counsails, and withal requested me at my return,
if I did escape with life, to come visit him: which promising him to do, I
presently put on my armor, and taking the Lance of Good government which he
had given me, I leapt a horseback, and went forth on my journey.

I had not long travailed, when I entered into a vallie, that did directly lead
me to a plain, which in appearance seemed to be above measure great and
spacious.

This plain I speak of, The plain of time.
is called Time, which though it be large and far extended, yet scarcely does
the passenger come unto it, when he is alredie beyond it; and the nature
thereof is such, The nature thereof.
that pleasure and contentment do pass through it so inconstantly, and with
such swiftness, that they leave in celeritie the winds behind them.

I was no sooner come thither, but my Horse, Desire hardly restrained.
whose name (as before I told you) was Desire, took so strongly the head,
that do what I could, I was not able to stay him, till he had brought me far
beyond the middle of the plain: where, striving to restrain his course, I
might epsy before me a fierce Champion, that seemed in guyse of skillful
warrior to bid me battaill.

His armor was of Travail, the courser that he bestradde was called Pain,
his shield resembled the Sun, in which were figured exercise and sloth,
drousie slumber, and watchful diligence. His coatarmour was of Constant
suffering; and by his outward show, it seemed that he had been in many broils,
and newly escaped out of a great battaill. He thought I could have stayed a
great while to behold him and his demeanoure; but that the sharpness of his
salutation gave me no such leisure: Here the Author encountreth age, and
strives mightyly to keep him off, but nevertheless in the end he is
constrained to yield quietly unto him.
for without delay, putting spurs to his enraged Courser, he furiously made
toward me with his Lance enrested: on the other side, I was not behind hand
to requite his kindness, but putting my Horse to the utmost of his carrere,
met him with so rude an encounter, that though he overthrew me to the ground,
yet I made him totter in his saddle: at which, growing impatient, he laid
hand on his sword, and let drive at me with all his force, wherewith he had
then without doubt given me a mortal wound, had not I kept him off, Age
strikes him with his sword of many years.
and defended my self with my Lance of Good government. Nevertheless he
ceased not to encroch still nearer and nearer in upon me, lending me so many
sturdie strokes, with his sword of Many years, that I waxed (in a manner)
unable to help my self any farther, against the heavy neuer-ceassing blows
of his irresistable arm; and at length, to make my misery the greater, my
lance of Good government flew in pieces: wherewith, and through the thumps which
he had given me, my head began to be giddie, my legs to faint, and my eyes to
dazzle; wherewith, upon my entreatie (he likewise, being in a manner breathless)
we agreed to take a little pause.

After I had a while refreshed my self, and recovered breath, casting mine eye
upon my adversary, and in my secret judgment, much commending the gravity
of his look, and the braveness of his behavior, I requested him in
kindness, to tell me his name and condition. To which answering me in very
courteous language, like a man of good judgment and settled sense: My descent
and lineage, quoth he, is of great antiquity; my proper name is, Age, true
register of every man's time, in which I do never deceive any, neither do I give
my consent to falsenesse. None can pass through the plain of Time, without
coming under my hands; and whosoever otherwise does think, is far
deceived, and in error. For under this condition were borne all those that
ever enjoyed the fair light of this world, or ever at any time shall: of
which, if any escape my hands, then can he not wander far in this feelde of
Time, but must of necessity die in the unfortunate vnripenesse of his youth:
and to this necessity are subject, as well Princes, as private men, the fair,
rich, noble, and fortunate, as those of contrary condition. Therefore, seeing
you are now so far travailed in this plain, that you are come within the
compass of my power, either without farther resistance, yield your self
quietly unto me, or you shall too late repent, with many a groaning sigh, that
ever you striued with me.

But I, not being yet so thoroughly quayled as to yield unto his persuasion,
settled my self to resistance: so that defying me a fresh, he let drive at me a
new with as great fierceness as ever he had done before, laying with his
sword, which as I told you was of Many years, so heavy lode upon me, that
all my limbs began to shake with a feint and trembling numnesse: My trusty
Lance of Government was broken before, and now also coming to the cloze, he
forcibly pulled from me my shield of Hope: finding my self in which miserable
estate, my weapons taken a way, my forces declining, and my body weak and
decayed, like a man forelorne, I began to feint in my resistance, which my
adversary perceiving, with a noble magnanimity also slacked his fight: so
that at length, He yields unwillingly to Age.
finding no other remedy, though much against my will, I was content to render
my self unto him, giving him my faith and promise to remain his true
prisoner, and to pay him any reasonable ransom that he should demand: who,
as a great Lord does his humbled servant, so received he me with signs of
love, taking from me my right gauntlet, in token of his conquest, telling me
how behouefull and honorable a thing it was for a prisoner to manteine
inuiolably his word and faith, especially being a gentleman: as for his part,
he would use me well, and grant me my liberty: but it behooved me, on peine of
perjury and dotage, Age enioyneth the author to the accomplishment of some
things upon peine of perjury and dotage.
to promise him the accomplishment of some such things, as for mine own honor
and good he would enjoin me to. To which, when I had with all willingness
agreed, First, quoth he, you shall fly from the territory of Love, whose
Lord is an abusing flatterer, whose pleasure is a secret bait, containing
under it nothing but gall and bitterness, and finally, whose sequel is
nothing but sorrow and repentance, Love.
having nothing in it that is true, but deceit only: so that it becomes not
a man of honor, being once received into my acqueintance, to apply himself to
any such follies, of which he cannot expect any other fruict, then grief of
time misspent, burden of conscience, vain expense, and derision of the world;
besides a thousand other inconveniences.

Besides, Marriage.
there is a vallie called Marriage, which take heed by any means you enter not
into, for there are perilles and troubles without number: with which I would
not have him, whom I have taken in protection, not so much as in thought
encumbered.

I would have you also leave on the left hand, Amorous dssportes.
seeing they are things to us impertinent and ill beseeming, al wanton
conuersations, dauncings, singings, and such like other amorous disportes, as
the school of idleness brings forth.

But above all I admonish you, that you keep your self sequestered and free
from the courts of great Princes, Courtly life.
where the uncertain good and honor ambitiously pursued, though obtained
(which unless you have a better spokesman then Virtue, seldom happens) yet
never lightly counteruaileth the certain losses and assured dangers, that
follow the fickleness of that subjected life.

Thither repair many gallant floorishing youths, pursuing Love and Honor, with
sumptuous attire, high looks, proud words, and disdainefull thoughts: but in
the end, foiled and overthrown with Ouer-riotous expense, reap nothing in
their fall and poverty, but laughter, mockery, and contempt, unless it be,
that perchance against their will, they learn to be humble.

But many there are of my acquaintance, who having ouergon, and spent the
poasting years of vnmistrustfull youth, either in the universities at home, or
in trauayles, or the wars abroad, and by long and paynefull diligence
obtained such virtues and qualities as to the service of their Prince and
Country are fitting, do come at length to make show of themselves, in this
most fair and magnificent market of the world, the Court, flattering
themselves with great hope of reward, honor, and advancement: and that the
rather, because they see there ietting up and down, a number of unprofitable
peacockes, that have no worthy thing else in the world to vaunt on, then only
the color of their plumes. But great is herein their error, and as rare their
preferment, as the sight of a black Swanne. I do not deny, but sometimes such
a miracle may happen: yet for the most part, Princes are not carried away with a
sudden show of virtue, neither is it requisite they should: neither do they
always dispense their favors and disgraces, according to the worth and
worthlesnesse of each one, but accordingly, as they are by great personages
that possess near places about them informed, who either through foretaken
conceit, or by envious Sycophants wrongly persuaded, or some other occasion,
do often speak the worst, or else being by many experiences warned and taught,
in such cases to be wary and circumspect, least the following behavior of the
party commended, may be such, as shall give no credit to his commender, will be
altogether silent, so that the chiefest labor must be, to win the steadfast
favor of one of these great men: which who so undertakes, good God, with what
a sea of miseries shall he find him self environed. For though he miss the
almost inevitable danger of factions and partialities, wherein many have made
shipwreck of their estate, in being by the one sharply persecuted, and by the
other but weakly defended: yet such is the number of malicious parasites, that
wait upon the fortune of great Lords; such the multitude of flatterers,
deceivers, supplanters, underminers, espialles, and such like vermin, that
attend upon their court and table, all covering their villainous pretenses,
under the mask of virtue, fidelity, and officious duty: that being often
betrayed, and abused, howsoever their outward show be honorable and courteous,
they will, and can not in wisdom otherwise choose, but beware whom they admit
into such degree of favor; as, that they will for his preferment adventure
their credit: So that the new-come Courtier, yea, though he incline to such
humors, as a mind well framed can hardly endure to embrace, shall either as
worthless be rejected, or else so feintlie favored, that he shall not at the
years end be the better two chippes for it, but perchance much the worse.

If in the mean time he Court it out among the Gallants in brave apparel, The
miserable estate of him that pursues in court.
gaming, and liberal expense, he shall be condemned as ambititious, of light
behavior, and unstayed: if otherwise, disgraced with all the titles of
baseness, as vnsuted to the royalties of a Princes court. If he speak, talk,
or write; yea, or but study matter of estate, he looks into the state, and is
dangerous: if he do neither, he is argued to be ignorant, and of no experience.
If he have travailed strange Countries, seen the courts of foreine Princes,
lived in their Palaces, or served in their wars, thereby the better to
learn and observe their manner, custom, discipline, and language, suspicion
shall attend upon all his actions, the offer of his service suspected, and his
show of zealous fidelity misconstrued. If he have none of these ornaments to
set forth him self withal, then shall he be (and not unworthily) deemed
incapable of employment in his Princes service. So miserable is his estate, who
pursues in Court, that his imperfections are hated, his virtues suspected, and
either of both a like able to bar him from preferment. Nothing more rife in
the court of Princes, then veruous men, honorlesse and unregarded.


And thus much assure your self, if my experience (which what it is, my name
declares) be any whit to be eredited, that I have not marked any thing more
rife in the courts of Princes (yea though them selves exceedingly virtuous)
then virtuous men honorlesse and vnreregarded, which happens not always
through their default, being by envy and information of others misled, but
rather by a malignitie of fortune, which still strives to depresse Virtue, or
rather of a direct antipathie between them.

Sundry excellent Princes have, by diverse their ingenious conceyts, made
manifest, that the complaynt of old decayed Courtiers against their
ingratitude, is often times unjust, and not they, but the vnthriuing Courtiers
fortune to be blamed.

Besides we see, that the great and all-ruling King of the universal palace of
this fair world, does not, in the distribution of his temporal rewards and
punishments, always respect the good or ill deserts of him, whom he honoreth
with the one, or afflicts with the other.

Seeing therefore the favor and firm affection of great men so hard to be
obtained, and hopes of courtly advancement so uncertain, and depending upon
such long merits, that the small remainder of your life shall be tired out and
ended, before you shall by long painful service be able to procure in your
princes mind a full persuasion of your virtue, loialtie, and faith: If you
will follow my counsel, leave off the Court to men of great happiness, and
bend your mind wholly to the obteining of that celestial honor and
preferment, which never fails them that do unfeignedly secke it.

Let this then suffize as touching the Courtly life, whose philosophy being a
point beyond either moral or natural: as the joys thereof are exceeding
cheerful and gladsome, The virtuous man desires advancement, only thereby
to be able to do his prince and country service.
to those that are beautified with the rays and sunshine of their princes
favor, so great must needs be the grief and discomfort to those, whose
virtues and industries are depressed, and they for lack of due favor and
encouragement, made unable to do their Prince and Country service; especially,
having wholly dedicated thereunto them selves, and the fruictes of their
experience.

But having herein been somewhat long, I will briefly conclude with the rest of
such precepts, as in respect of your honor and welfare I charge you to observe.

Seek not to find Feast or Pleasure in the wilderness of lost Time, for never
did any yet in the highest degree possess it, that did not in the end, with
many losses, and grievous pains, repent it. Apart your self therefore from
thence, and while you have leisure, use virtuously the precious, but not long
to be enjoyed, jewel of Time.

Iustes, turneis, triumphs, wearing of Ladies liueries, and other the like,
enterteined by green and flourishing years, take heed that by any means you
embrace not.

Take the better way, reserving your bodyly strength, to the combat of those
valorous Champions that attend you and your soul to your God and maker.

These my counsels, I do advise you to observe, not so much in respect of my
commandment; as of the hurt and damage that may ensue unto you in
transgressing them. To which I constantly made answer, that I would assuredly
perform as much as I had promised, and he enjoined, especially seeing the not
performance of them would turn to the greatest harm of my self.

Well, said he, I leave it to your own choice and liberty, to do as best you
likes: but for the present, because it waxes late, I would have you directly
to take your journey toward the barren desert of Old Age, so plain and
discovered a way by the course of Nature, that you cannot miss it; and there
you shall assuredly find, and perchance sooner then you expect, the adventure
you seek: As for your Horse and armor, I do frankly return them unto you
again, with free liberty to depart; and withal, in token of my acquaintance,
I will bestow upon you this present (delivering me therewith a fair silver
Gorget of Mayle) the property of which is such, Age presents the author with a
silver Gorget of maile.
that the longer you live, the more shall it conform the color of your hear
and beard in sutablenesse to the same. Which gift of his, when I had received,
he took his leave, putting his Courser to so swift a pace, that I did scarcely
hear or see the motion of his feet. And as for me, I departed on my way,
straight as a line, toward the desert of Old Age: in which sort, trauayling
upon the utmost confines of Time, I came to a high Mountain, whose descent was
a steep and speedy Downfall, so that I was in much shorter space at the
foot, then I had been in clyming to the height thereof. From thence, I
galloped apace toward the desert to which I was directed. But I had not long
travailed, when of a sudden I was in a cross way wanderingly lost, my memory
distracted, and my mind utterly forgetful of al those good aduices lately
delivered me by Age, He entrethinto the pathe of deceit.
in so much, that I entered into a wrong path, called, Deceit, whose issue is
never other then loss and repentance, though the going in, being a little
glazed over with a fair dissembled show of True pleasure, do beguile the eye
of our judgment.

Within it, was great verdure and freshness, and though the season of the
year were faded and past, yet was the ground diuersified and enamelled with an
infinite variety of sweet smelling flowers, so that it represented unto my
soone-yeelding senses, an extremity of pleasure and delight: For Deceit, who
in exterior show suggesteth a world of pleasures, did now represent unto me
all the delices, comfortes, and well sauouring joys, that ever in my youth I
had tasted.

Then again began I to acquaint my self with Careless vanity, obliuious
altogether of my former yielding, and of my vowed promise and acquaintance with
Age: I respected nothing but the present pleasure of my senses, finding my
self, by a strange metamorphosis, freshly inueygled with that error, which I
thought I had long ago lost and left behind me.

My passed pleasures of hauking, hunting, arms, love, and Ladies, al returned
with the very self same sweetness, and pleasing delightfulness, as when
they first possessed my gay, youthful, and flourishyng years. Withal, in
came Vain Conceit, buylding towers in the air, suggesting unto me False
courage, to undertake things impossible, and Credulous lightness, to believe
things utterly improbable, without reason or foundation.

My Horse went on amain with a full carrere, fearing neither bridle nor bit,
Plains and Mountains were to him alike: as for me, he saw me such a stranger
to my self, that he neither knew me, nor obeyed me.

And all this confused perturbation of my senses, was so cunningly contrived by
Well colored Deceit, that quite forgetful of my way, without finding any
error at all in my steps, I was led to the most sense-pleasing and
delightful place, that I could possibly have imagined.

Within the same stood a gorgious and stately royal palace, whose exterior
pompous and delectable show, made me verily persuade myself, that never
death, or any of his champions, could be able to approach unto a place so
beautiful and delitious. The walls seemed to be of clear refined silver, the
windows of bright transparent crystal, the pinacles of pure well burnisht
gold, that glistered like the Sunbeams, and the couerings and roofes of
radiant Amber, whose goodly fayrenesse and splendour was such, that with
amazement it dazeled the beholders eyes. Many beautiful Ladies were at the
windows, richly adorned with pompous habites, strange attires, rare devices,
and most alluring sweet behauiours. Many brave youthful Gallants were among
them, enterteining them with courtly gestures, and amorous well uttered
speeches. There was besides, a most delicious music of many well consorted
Instruments; to which, some were listening, some daunsing, some discoursing: in
fine, all was amorous, and moving unto love.

Deceit was now become so quiet, and absolute a lord and ruler of my fancy,
that I adjudged my self most fortunate and happy, in being arrived at such a
Paradise, so void of grief, and so repleate with all sorts of pleasures, as
this seemed to be: Whereupon, going to the Porter, whose name was Abusion, I
friendly entreated him, Abusion the porter of loves palace.
to tell me what might be the name of this sumptuous edifice, wherein was
assembled such a noble company of Gentlemen and Ladies, with such magnificent
variety of pleasures and delights: who briefly answered me, The palace of
Love.
that he was called the Palace of Louc. At which very name of Love, I started
back, as at a thing altogether disproportionable to my years and profession.
When Desire, suggesting again unto my senses a world of delights and
pleasures, the more I withdrew my mind, the more did inflame it forward. But
straight, Remembrance stepped in, recording unto me the history of things
passed, and crying out aloude, that I committed perjury, and withal did for
ever purchase mine own ruin and perdition, showing me therewith a clear
crystal glass, wherein, besides many of my passed matters, I saw Ancient
Age noting up all my steps, as one that meant to call me in question for
transgressing his counsels. And likewise I might therein perceive my beard to
be all mingled with silver hayres, and my head to be ouercast with snow: The
sight of which, did work in me a marvelous amazement. Desire nevertheless,
with many sweet allurementes, employed his greatest force to bring me under
Loves subjection. But Remembrance did so lively show unto me the ill agreeing
deformity thereof; persuading me, to let that pass, which was alredie passed,
rather then of new to harbor any such troublesome tirannicall guest, within
the weakened mansion of my aged senses: That howsoever vehemently swaied by
Desiers temptations, yet when I had recalled my mind to full consideration
thereof, I thought good to apart me from his counsel, as being both dangerous
and dishonorable, fully resolving, not to be at any time so overtaken again:
so that all Desires endeavors proving vain, Remembrance taking me by the hand,
guided me from that counterfeit path of Deceit, into the true way of
Goodaduice, with right direction where my journey lay: And there I took my
farewell of Love, and withal of her, for whose sake (while I was Loves
enthralled subject) the pains and torments I endured, seemed to be but
pleasures and comfortes. Who so is desirous to know her, let him content him
self with this much, that she is one, whom Nature has more richly beautified
with grace, comeliness, and perfection, then my worthless and vneloquent pen
can any way express. But the Everliving righteousness, whose wisdom is
infinite, and whose judgment impenetrable, knowing the end of my pretenses,
was pleased to assist me with his gracious goodness, so that I went on the
right way, to accomplish my faith and promise, which I had given unto Age: and
such was the haste I made to be at my iourneys end, that I found my self
arrived in the Country of Feeble old Age, The desert of old Age.
before I my self knew how. There the earth trembled* and every thing seemed
to be a quagmire. The air was dark and mistie, the smelles noisome, the
ground barren, yielding miseries in steed of fruit, and the rentes that
there were gathered, was grief and anguish.

There grows not any tree, that bears either fruit or flower; all is full
of barren briers, and withered thorns. There is not any meat of good taste,
nor herb yielding iuise: in fine, it is a destroyed part, dry, fruitless,
and consumed: in the which, there is not any nouriture, or very little, and
that, mingled with care and sorrow. The fountains there are of sufferance, and
the brokes of bitterness. The Moons brightness, and the Suns glistering,
is there obscured with darkness and fogs. The sweetest songs accustomably
used in this barren desert, are sorrowful complaints of time misspent, and for
good things passed, that can not be recovered. The longer a man lingreth there,
the less repose he finds: every thing yields grief, and Infirmity is
there enthronized as princess, and regent of the whole territory. Health has
no entry, but is thence perpetually banished: comfortable mirth appears not,
being suppressed by fretting Melancholy, one of the cheifest Lords of this
desert.

A small journey from thence, The Island of Decrepitude.
lies an Island of diseased infirmity, whose proper name is Decrepitude, where
health died, making grief and sorrow his executors, bequeathing unto them all
his rightes and possessions. I have not as yet bin there, but I am comen so
near, that the very air thereof makes all the joints and members of my body
to shake and tremble: Judge then what effect it will work in him, that shall be
therein landed and arrived?

Thence, being once entered, there is no departing, till the soul do free it
self from out the encombred bodies prison, aspiring to a better habitation.

But which of all is strangest, such is the miraculous working and vigor
thereof, that from the extremity of Old Age, it constreineth men again to
return unto the very extremities of Childehood; then the which, what wonder
can be greater. Feebleness is there so strong, that it takes from Strength,
absolutely his being.

The eyes brightness, being of man's life the chiefest comfort, is there in
such sort turned to obscurity and dimnesse, that it scarcely sees any thing
at al: and yet that little is in such imperfect dazeling manner, that all the
things discerned, seem to be but images of death.

No benefit is so great that it can yield soundness of health or comfort, and
every little evil is so efficient, that it easily becomes mortal: each
little grief offends deadly without resistance, as in a rendered overthrown
Country, where life has nothing, but only the name and appearance.

I know this Decrepite estate to be a thing fearful unto flesh: yet surely
it is a great benefit of God, by whose goodness the virtuous and patient
bearing thereof, may be a great mean to our salvation, which of his endless
mercy, I beseech him, that we may all obtain.

But to come back to my discourse, being once in this unpleasant desert of
Old Age, I could not find any path, gate, way, or issue, to get out, unless
I would enter into that of Decrepitude, and therefore I enterteined my self,
the best that I could, in that health less province: in which, after I had a
little romed up and down, I espied sundry people both men and women, Sundry
abusers of Age, and deceyuers of them selves.
that did busy them selves in the practice of strange and cosening sleightes:
some to hide and dissemble their years, filled up the wrinkled furrows of
their face with payntinges, some died their heads and beards with waters of
their own mingling, some pulled quite out the gray hears that appeared in
them, thinking so to rid them selves of those hateful messengers of decaying
life. But Old Age, would not consent unto such falsenesse, protesting against
them, that they labored in vain, for there is no possibility of turning
back one jot from that degree of his acquaintance, and subjection whereto they
are once arrived. Being once withered and decayed with Age, to florishe and
wax green again, is not granted to any mortal creature. The end of such
devices and endeavors, tends in fine to nothing, but to filling of the
Churchyardes.

But leaving this discourse, because it breeds melancholy. Old Age, as I
tell you, had so entangled me, that though I would feine have gotten out of
his jurisdiction, yet could I not by any means find any way or passage,
which at the first moved me to be very heavy and sorrowful, and that the
rather, because I saw my youth unrecoverable, and my grief remediless. But
even as the poor seely bird, newly enclosed within the prison of his Cage,
does for a time at the first, sullenly lament the loss of his abridged
liberty, till at last, seeing the bootelesnesse of his sorrow, he begins to
comfort him self, with thinking of his sweet for passed pleasures, as of the
delightful trees, and sweetly smelling briars, wherein he had harbored the
pleasant chirping of his little lovely companions with whom he had conuersed,
and such his other recreations and pastimes, whilst he enjoyed the freedom of
the fields, and even with those thoughts of comfort, forgets his
melancholy, and falls sweetly a singing: so fares it with me, who, though
my present estate moved me to heaviness and sorrow, yet considering the
necessity thereof, and with all my many passed youthful pleasures, I framed
my mind to a contentment, and so began to travail and search each part and
coast of the country through, to see if I could find any part or corner
thereof, exempted from the general barrenness of the rest, to the end, I might
there pass away my time with less grief.

Having trauayled awhile, I happened of a sudden to epsy therein a place, so
full of goodlinesse and riches, that I could not refrain from wonder in
beholding it. Within the same was a lodging of inestimable worth called Good
adventure. Good Adventure.


Then first began I to perceive the falsenesse of the worlds common opinion,
which is, that there is not in Old age any pleasure: whereas surely there is a
thing called Study, in whose virtuous exercise a vicelesse Youth passed over,
does manifest the contrary.

But you must understand, I take it, that by this study he means
Contemplation.
that I mean not the fond study of vain worldly trifles, but rather that
which teaches us to scorn and contemn the brickle (and howsoever fair
gilded) yet soon defaced alurementes of this world, and so to live and die,
that our soul once freed from the mortal bands of our heere-soone perishing
body, may through the merits of our Savior, attain to everlasting
blessedness and rest.

This I speak of, consists in fruitfully reading the sacred volume of the
holy Scriptures, and the precious works of those godly Doctors and Fathers,
whose blessed pens have divinely prescribed unto us, the way of perfect
repentance, and virtuous perfection, teaching us nothing but that, which still
we ought to contemplate with the eyes of our mind; that is, to live and die
well. For there is not any thing under heaven so happelesse, heavy, and
miserable, as for a soul sleeping carelessly in sin, to approach the dolorous
passage of Death. Of this desirable place I speak off, the walls were all
round about trimmed with Delight. The Palace of contemplation.
The Portal at which you entered, figured forth nothing but Pleasure. The
Dytches were secure, deep, and well trenched, curiously wrought in great
conformity by Good exercise. The Chapel was of Zeal, the Windows of
Charitable Love, the Gate, wherein was the entrance and going forth, of
Heedefulnesse, and the Bridge of Industrious Travail. The Vanes and Streamers
of the house were of Pleasure, which glystering aloft, showed all the passers
by, that there was the school and practice of Virtue and Learning. No
Idleness dared to approach this blessed Mansion: for Diligence was the Porter.
Only Emulation is suffered to enter, who there serves as a spur to Virtuous
operation.

In fine, the time there bestowed, is in the only learning and exercise of
that heavenly philosophy, whereto whosoever arriueth, may well be accounted
happy and blessed.

That I was desirous to enter into this blisfull place, no man needs to
doubt: but in the end, seeing the gates did not of themselves open unto me, I
was bold to go unto the porter, with earnest entreatie, that I might, by his
favor and means, be suffered to enter. To which he answered: this house, said
he, which is the very Perfection of study and enemy of ignorance, is not to be
dallied withal, or to be entered with sportfulness and scorn. For within it
is enclosed the Treasure of life, and the Riches of the Worlds wisdom: it is
kept and governed by a beautiful Princess, whom it has pleased the highest
to bless with a Happy euer-during youth: she never changes estate, living
free from deaths subjection: her proper name is Memory, Memory Lady of the
palace, of Contemplation
of all the world highly honored and esteemed. From her are derived all the
chief pleasures wherewith Old age is honored, whom through wisdom and
experience she ennobleth with regard and worship.

Where she is enterteined, she never breeds weariness, making him blessed
with whom she pleases to harbor. Some there are, whom she flies, though
they labor never so earnestly to be acquainted with her: for in her
operations, is so great and strange a secret of nature, that neither Socrates,
nor Plato, noral the deep pearcing wits of the passed Philosophers, have bin
able to define whence, or how this corruptible body of ours, is beautified with
so pure and excellent an ornament, as this of Memory. But for my part, I do
verily believe, without any doubt or question, that this being so singular a
good, proceeds only from the miraculous working of God, and not from any
settled habit or ingrafted gift of nature: for as the soul has by God her
habitation and domicile appointed her in the body, so has Memory hers in the
soul it self, whence she springs, Memory, is a thing celestial and
divine, derived only from God, without having any relation to nature.
using her qualities and operations. And seeing the soul is an invisible
peculiar frame and workmanship of God, as a spark of his divinity: It
follows then also, that my Lady and Mistress, must needs be a severed work
of God alone, without having any relation to Nature. (...) Her excellence,
nobility, and birth, considered, and withal, the notable comforts, and sweet
sauouring virtues that she in her self conteyneth, she has ever bin of all
wise men honored in high degree, as one of the chiefest beauties and ornaments
of life.

Since I first came acquainted with her service, I have bin in stead of her
servant, as it were her guardian: Diligence the porter of Memory.
My name is Diligence, and I continually accompany her, in respect of the
vehement love I bear unto virtuous study, whose true perfection without her
help is not to be obtained. The only way to see her perfectly, is through
Virtuous industry, first by exercising our minds to learn and know, and then
fastly to retain that which we have once learned and known.

But because I see you are arrived to this uncomfortable soil of Old Age,
taking compassion of your weakened forces, I will accomplish your desire,
hoping somewhat therewith to refresh and comfort the languishing of your
spirits.

Whereupon being by this industrious Porter brought to the presence of Memory,
I was of her saluted with a most pleasing and gentle behavior.

Her attire was sumptuous and rich, The attire of Memory.
embrodered in marvelous art by Cogitation round about, strangely presenting
unto my view, a large course and history of Time, both past and present. And
withal, the more to subtilize my remembrance, she made me smell to a Garlande
of Knowledge, which she ware, whose excellent and delicious odor, did so
refresh the vigor of my senses, that me thought I was not half so earthly as
before.

After some few conferences, I requested her to favor me with the sight of her
library, which I imagined could not be but rare and magnificent. But she
briefly answered me, that whosoever determined to study there, may not use any
other books or lessons, then such as Remembrance yields him: for it were
labor lost, and mere vanity, for old men to begin first then to study.
Their exercise ought rather to be in well keeping and reteyning that, which
before time they had seen and learned, and therewith in showing the fruits of
their wisdom to recreate them selves, and to counsel others.

But now tell me, said she, what is the thing that you do demand of me, and
you shall find me ready to yield you satisfaction?

Being comforted with her courteous and gentle language, I did without delay
acquaint her with the circumstances of my aduenturous enquest, telling her, how
that my thought-fulnesse had instantly moved me to visit the forest of
Atropos: which voyage I had now resolved, and withal, to enter in single
combat with either of the two famous Champions, Debilitie or Accident, to whose
guard the place is committed, beseeching her earnestly to tell me, if she had
heard, read, or found, in any ancient books, writings, or records, hidden
figures, or long remembrance of times, that any of these Champions had bin put
to the foil, by any of those worthy men that at sundry ages have lived so
puissant and conquering in their times: For if any one had at any time, or in
any age vanquished them, I would not doubt, but by Gods assistance, to go as
far, as he that had gone farthest. But in fine, howsoever the matter should
go, I told her, that I was resolved to win either glory with my sword, or
with my body death.

Memory, having with attention heard my speeches: I will not, said she
smilingly, enterteine you with long discourses, but giving you the best advise
I may, let you with your eyes behold the certain event of this most dangerous
enterprise, in which you are engaged. And opening therewith a Posterne gate,
she placed me in a great immense and spacious plain, called the Universal
Sepulcher of mankind, The universal sepulcher of mankind,
open and discovered on every side, without either Rock or Mountain, so that
there was no limit nor restraint to the eye, but that it might boldly and
frankly throw his view so far, as the sharpness thereof could pearce or
discern: and as the plain was infinite, so was the number of Graves and
Monumentes: upon most of the which of those of the right side, were Epitaphes,
and famous Figures of the name and being of humane creatures, whom Death had
swallowed and devoured.

Mark now there, said she, if you can, and note up the number of those
enterred bodies, who sometimes flourished with such applause of the world in
great pomp and honorable estate. But if your wits be not able to comprehend
them, nor no wisdom, learning, or retentiue, able to register them, then rest
assured, that the force of your adversaries are mighty, and to be feared: for
they are all the spoils of Debilitie and Accident. The Churchyard of Memory.
See there the Churchyard of Memory, wherein you shall find buried al those
whose names are in the sacred history of the Bible mentioned ( Enoch and Elyas
only excepted, of whom it pleased the heavenly wisdom otherwise to dispose.)
There shall you find all those, whose names Homers heroical verse, or Liuies
maiesticall prose, has made glorious to the world. Those that Valerius and
Orosius spoke off, lie here all in a reckoning. Old, young, rich, poor, fair
and foul, lie here altogether encoffined. The great warriors of Babylon,
the learned Philosophers of Athens, the vanquishing Graecians, and the overcome
Troyans, the Amazonian Viragos, and the Roman Matrons, being summoned by
DEATH, have all accomplished her commandment, and here their carkases do rest.

I saw there, of Queens and Princesses, Ladies and Gentlewomen, of high
degree, such a number, that it passed imagination: of which, though some had
bin glorified with regal diademes, some shined with admirable beauty, some
adorned with infinite wisdom and incomparable virtue, yet had no one of them
all bin able to defend her self against the Neuermissing Dart of Lives enemy.

There were Popes and parish Clerks, Cardinals and Carters, All degrees alike
to death.
Bishops and Beggars, Patriarchs and Pedlers, though before time in degree
unequal, Mors sceptra ligonibus aequat.
yet now to the woormes alike, who found no difference in their flesh. Their
bones, being confusedly put together, of such likeness, that one was not to be
known from another. Emperors and slaves, Kings and Ploughmen, Lords and
vacabondes, Law-giuers and Louts, were there all under Deaths clapnet. None of
them escaped, nor ever shall thence bring news to the world, of the good or
evil enterteinment he there received. Retired Virgins, new professed Nuns,
and aged Abbesses, virtuous Matrones, and wanton Curtizanes, all had there
yielded up their lives to Deaths commandment.

In fine, such was the infiniteness of the number, that my eyes were weeried
with viewing, and my spirits dulled with meditating upon them.

Of all those whose carkases I there beheld, I would gladliest, if I knew
which way, entreat of those of this present age of ours. But though it should
please God to grant unto me the life of Mathusalaem, and I should in all that
time do nothing else but write, yet should I want space to reckon up the number
of the dead inhabitants, that this plain possessed. Cruel Accident wounds,
Debilitie overthrows, and Atropos in her forest gives them free camp, and
there all humane creatures do end their lives. For so victorious is the
violent hand of Consuming Death, that whatsoever Nature buyldeth and makes, he
breaks and dissolueth; and from this lot, no mortal creature is free.

Herewith Memory seeing me at these tragical sightes oppressed with exceeding
sadness, with a cheerful countenance bad me not be dismayed: For, Fear,
quoth she, befitteth not a noble mind: but if you will follow my advise, Fear
befitteth not a noble mind.
take with you a magnanimious resolution, to die constantly, and with patience,
and so to order your soul, that it may not be subject to a second death, but
rather be received into that everlasting joy, where it shall live eternally in
glorious rest. And therewith leading me into an inner mansion, and enterteining
me still with good and virtuous counsel, I told her, that though my cause of
Fear were greater then any hope of Comfort, yet in fine, come what would, I
was resolved to prove the unavoidable adventure, let life or death ensue, as
unto the divine Almightinesse should be most pleasing. Of which my so resolved
courage, she did conceive such liking, that she offered her self to be my
guide; which I thankfully accepted, and without delay, she took her Palfrie,
and bad me follow her.

Such was the speed we made, that of a sudden, before I was well aware, we
were arrived near the fatal place, where the cruel dreadful combat, to
which I hasted, was to be ended and determined.

At our very arrival, I heard a great noise and clattering of men and armor,
as though it had bin of some well fought Turney, or warlike iusting: but the
sound thereof seemed rather plaintfull and discomfortable, then signifiyng any
pleasant triumph.

Approaching nearer, I might see certain great letters of Gold, Letters of
gold engraven in afaire table at the entry of the forest of Atropos.
ingraued in a fair register or table of Stone, containing these following
words. Here all vain worldly devises, and the life of all humane Creatures
makes an end. This is the dolorous passage, where the strength, beauty,
wisdom, puissance, and valor of mankind is vanquished and overthrown.
Atropos is Lady of this place, who mainteyneth here in garrizons two mighty
Champions, whose incomparable valor has bereaved of life all those that ever
lived in the world heretofore, and shall do the like with those that live at
this present. Accident commonly begins the fight, against whose sundry
stratagems, and strange kinds of fight, no worldly strength preuayleth: but if
at any time he chance to miss, then comes the Prince of sorrow, called
Debilitie, whose heavy comfortless blow, no Armor of proof withstandeth: So
that here in fine all humane flesh ends, leaving to the world their
possessions, vanities, pursuites, and fond desires, wherein while they lived
they did set such pleasure, flattering them selves with a foolish conceit of
longer enjoying them.

But hearing a great rumor and noise within the Steccada, I stayed no longer
here, but got me to the listes, where I found a great number of people
assembled to behold a strange and dreadful combat, that was there to be
tried, so that there was a great whispering and confused noise of voices.

Atropos beholding all, The manner and attire of Atropos.
sat aloft in a stately skaffolde, queintly clothed with a garment embrodered
round about with Putrified earth and Worms. Her gesture full of Ire and
threatening, and in her hand a Death-bringing Dart, with which she first
defieth them that least think of it: Cruelty is the marshall of her field. Her
K. at arms, Wilfulness: his coat armor of Vnrespect: her chauncelor,
Instability: and his divine, Let no man trust.

The lystes are of Sorrows, enclosed with Heaviness: her pauilion of Clamours,
her banners and streamers there wauing, all of Plaints and Wailings, her
nearest attendants, are Bitterness, Despite, and Villainy.

On the defendants side was his pauilion, embrodered round about with Heroical
bounty and High valor, and beautified with infinite streaming banerolls and
flags of Honor: his King at arms was Well-beloved: the paynting of his bawdricke
and coat armor, was all garnished with Virtuous prowess, and crowned with
True Nobility. Wilfulness in his Ladies name proclaimed Silence, commanding
upon peine of great penalties, that none should with any good or evil sign,
or with any other means, assist either of the combatters, And after
proclamation, seeing general silence, commanded the champions to begin the
fight, and to show their force. Debilitie enters the listes
Debilitie first entered, bringing with him two mighty and sharply steeled
weapons, the one of Persecution, the other of a Remediless consumption. His
upper garment or coate-armour had figured in it the Carkas of a dead Man,
miserably pined away, bare, and without flesh, hanging only together by the
bones, yielding a sight full of ghastfulnesse and horror: On the other side
came forth a most honorable Defendant, beautified with the glorious arms of
Burgundy: Honor both waited upon him and was his guide. This was the most
excellent Prince of great and famous memory, so highly for his virtues honored
and loved. Philip, surnamed the good: Duke of Burgundy.
Philip of Burgundy, of all our Western world the greatest Duke: his right
hand was armed with a Lance of Stayed advice. The fair enameled bosse of his
guylded Target, represented the Great praise, the many Friends, and powerful
dominions, that he possessed. Nothing was about him, but witnessed Truth,
Bounty, Constancy, and Courage: And finally, his Mace was of Firmness
against all adversities.

Debilitie was never at any time fuller of fear, then now, at the constant
behavior of this gallant enemy, and therefore threw at him a far off a
dart, headed with so Many troubles, that it had bin able to have daunted and
overthrown the greatest courage living. But the gentle Duke opposed him self
with so Quiet and Unblemished a mind, that it made in him no breach at all;
rather did he with his Lance, of whose temper I told you before, give his
enemy so virtuous an encounter, that he made him to stagger.

Each of them showed the uttermost of his valor, striving in this hard and
cruel combat whether of them should be superior.

Debilitie let fly at the Duke with his Pollax of Persecution: the Duke betoke
him self to his Mace of Firmness, and so avoided the blow. So that as the
fight was fierce and vehement, so was it in a manner doubtful between them.
Memory seemed to hope, that the Duke should escape victorious: But the
Destinies were against it, and the Eternal ordinance of the Almighty: For in
the end, Debilitie thrust the noble Duke into the Lungs with a deadly
Consumption, assayling him besides with many a fierce blow of other
infirmities, so that though he were him self exceedingly weeried and foiled,
yet far greater was the Defendants extremity: of whom, to make a final
end, gathering together all his force, he struck with so violent a Catarre,
that down fell the magnanimous Duke breathless, and with him the glory of
our age.

Atropos in so heavy a case (all the hearts of the beholders else throbbing,
and their eyes weeping) made no other reckoning, then as it were a Maygame, full
of laughter and scorn, no whit at all respecting his great honor, estate, and
alliance, nor the worlds general sorrow for the loss of so excellent a Prince.

The Heralds at arms laid over the dead body a rich embrodered Hearse,
garnished round about with works of Glory, and thence conveyed the same unto
the noble Mansion of Memory: where, with sacred Obits, and sumptuous
Funerals, it was most solemnly enterred: as for his blessed soul, I trust in
Gods mercy, that it is now glorified with celestial joys, free from having
hence forth any more to do either with Debilitie, or Accident.

Scarce were these mournful Obsequies ended, Accedent presents him self
armed.
when we might hear a new rumor and noise of two freshly arrived Champions.
The first was Accident, who in terrible gesture presented himself armed and
fierce on horseback in the field. His Horse was caparasoned with Arrogance
never tempered, his Lance of Unhappiness, his Harness of Ire, his Sword, with
which he has overthrown millions of men, of Ouerweening boldness, and his
Mace, with which he usually ouerturns those that are in best liking with
themselves, of Fortune.

Out comes against him, like Mars or Hercules enraged, Charles Duke of
Burgundy surnamed the hardy.
great Charles of Burgundy, the most feared, and aduenturous Prince that lived
in his age, who always made Reason attend upon his Will, (which yet never was
vnuertuous, though to him self some times domageable.) His Courser was
Fiersenesse, every piece of his Armor tempered in True courage, his Lance of
High endeavor, his Sword of Minds greatness, and his Dagger of Incredible
munificense; And surely, if we will rightly judge of this worthy Prince, there
was not any virtue that he had not in perfection, neither was there any vice,
with which the nobility of his mind was spotted, unless selfewill, and
ouer-greatnesse of courage, be to be called vice.

Where this feelde was fought, was neither tent nor pauilion, but only shrubbes
and brushes. The encounter began with great clashing and noise of armor. Great
was the fury of either Champion, and great the fiersenesse of their first
onset, either of them deadly and despitefully desiring the destruction of the
other.

Accident like a tempest or whirlewinde, The Duke three times overthrown by
the D. of Lorayne and Swyssers, and lastly slain at the battle of Naneie in
the year. 1476.
with such irresistable puissance so encountered the Duke three times, that he
overthrew him to the ground, and yet undid him not; for still in his greatest
disgrace, vndismayed, he made head again, with greater and more reuengefull
resolution then before. Yet such was the hurt of these unfortunate encounters,
that not only the Duke, but his whole house, estate, and country, was thereby
greatly weakoned.

But now was the fight grown to that heat of fury between them, Campobache
an Italian Count, chief leader of the D. horse, and of especial credit about
him, had agreed with the D. of Loraine to betray his master, which most
Iudas-lyke he performed at this battle before Nancie.
that it amazed the beholders. The Duke being full of magnanimous wrath, and
resolved to die, or to be victorious, spared no means or ways he might to
grieve his adversary, who struck him a mighty blow with his Pollax of
Conspiracy, given him by Fortune, therewith to end the life of him, whom
manly and equal virtue never could have vanquished: Yet still the fearelesse
Duke maintained valiantly the place, though Fortune, and all the world else,
had forsaken him, till at last, Accident with unworthy hands, doubling a
downright blow upon him, bare him, for whom the earth while he lived was too
little, slain and senseless to the earth: who as all his life time he had bin
great and incomparable, so was his valorous ending, even to his hatefullest
enemies, admirable. God I hope of his infinite goodness, will there grant
rest and quietness to his soul, which here his body so much abhorred.

If war be to be praised as an honorable exercise, then great ought your
sorrow to be, o soldiers, for the loss of such a prince, whose like in that
profession never lived any: yet notwithstanding all this incomparable loss, it
does not a little comfort me, in that it is to the whole world notorious, that
he was not overcome by any that were worthy of such a conquest, but only
through the divine power and permission, by which fortune holds in her
hands, and handles at her pleasure, all humane works.

For the sentence, permission, decree, and secret judgment of the heavens,
far exceeds our science, deceyueth our knowledge, and makes vain our
wisdom.

If a man live in this world fortunately, The vain instabilitie of the worlds
iudgemne.
and possess what so his heart desires, then the common opinion is, that he is
an happy man, and was borne in a good hour: but if by adverse fortune he
afterward chance to become poor, and afflicted with adversities, miseries,
or loss of honor, then every one cries out, that he is unhappy, and that it
is pity that ever he was borne.

To avoid therefore these inconveniences, and uncertainties of the world, The
surest anchor is to trust only in God.
let every mortal creature turn him self with a pure and penitent mind unto
the eternal creator of all things, to whom both heaven and earth are
obedient, and then shall he be assured, that there shall be no error in his
course; neither, being ankered upon so sure a rock, shall he need to depend
on the vain fleeting blastes of worldly so soon deceived opinions.

In fine, though Accident victoriously triumphed over this famous Prince, yet
never in any age shall the glory and valorous endeavors of great Charles be
forgotten, whose incomparable valor and magnanimity, all nations and
histories have beautified with the surname of Hardy.

But now, though with tearefull eyes, yet shall my pen proceed and leave the
woeful story of this worthy Duke unto some happier writer, whose muse may be
glorified with so great a subject. Accident presently thirsting after a new
pray, put on his armor of deepe-pirceing Despair, and with a sharp grounded
Iauelin of Misfortune, leapt out into the high way, putting to his side a Sword
of Sudden grief, which only has shortened the life of many worldly
creatures: but to make the matter more speedy, his Dagger was of Secret
melancholy, which being joined to Sickness, were able to consume a marble.

With this there began a music so well accorded, so variable, sweet, and
delicious, that it ravished with delight the hearers. To-wardes the which, as
the people joyfully flocked, to know whence, or from what cause the same did
proceed, they might behold a Litter that approached, supported by two
milke-white Unicorns, of which the one was Perfect bounty, and the other
Sweet demeanor. The riches, ornament, and sumptuousness of this Litter, was
such, that it exceeded all estimation. The Unicorns were guyded by four
Princes: the first, good Fame, the second, Flower of Youth, the third,
Nobleness of Heart, and the fourth, Disdain against villainy, and all four
linked together by Reason.

Straight followed a great troop of Cauallerie, and withal a company of so
choice, fair, and beautiful Ladies, as though each one had bin selected and
chosen out of the greatest Courts of the world.

But now it is time to say somewhat of that royal personage that came within
this sumptuous Litter, though to touch rightly her perfections, be far beyond
the compass of mine, or any mortal pen.

It was a glorious young Princess, armed at all pieces, and resolved there in
that passage, to show her power where she had received her grief. In her
seeming one would have deemed her to be a very Penthesilea, that came to
revenge the death of Troyan Hector. But cruel and unhappy Destiny, had
conspired her overthrow.

Her Harness was of Contentment, her head was armed with Virtuous Thought,
therewith the better to defend her self in this dangerous conflict. Her Sword
was Desire to do well, sharp and well poynted, wherewith she came determined
to revenge the wrongs that had bin offered her: Her Dart was of Debonairness,
and her Shield of Faithful unspotted Love, never to be altered. Mary, only
daughter and heir to Charles D. of burgundy, and wise to the Archduke
Maximilian who was afterward Emperor.
Her upper garment was wrought, and round about adorned with thousands of
virtues, who finding her pure soul free from all euilles, had therein made
their quiet and blessed mansion.

This excellent Lady, as Loyalty her Heralde at arms in loud speeches
proclaimed, was Marie, the great and puissant Archduchesse of Austria, worthy
of the worlds government. Accident stood all this while trembling, to see so
imcomparable a beauty, joined with so virtuous a courage, woondring that those
many excellent rare parts and virtues, should be all so viuely united in a
young Princess of three and twenty years, whereas they are rare and scarce
to be found in the many settled years of longer ages. But Fury, his trusty
Counsayler, seeing his amazement, bade him be of good courage, for the victory
should assuredly be his, if so be he would follow his counsel: which was, that
he should not assay her with any other weapon or stroke, then only of a deep
Hart-Sorow, which the gentle temper of her well framed mind not enduring, he
was assured, would soon overthrow her.

Accident followed his advise, and ashamed of his former faintness, with a
cruel Unkindness, gave her so deep a Sorowes-wounde, and thereupon a fervent
Ague, that the gentle Princess loosing by degrees the perfection of her
beauties, though she apposed her virtues in resistance, was finally vanquished
and taken out of this unworthy world, in prime of her years and beauty;
leaving behind to us, nothing but grief, heaviness, and compassion, though
God wot, bootelesse sorrow, and weeping tears, be of small effect and moment,
to equal so great an occasion.

Thus now has cruel Accident taken from us our rarest jewel, that precious
Palladium, which while Burgundy enjoyed, it reigned in all prosperity and
happiness: But now alas, the name of that noble house is finished, and Death
has taken away this excellent Lady, whose glory shall yet live here
eternally, and her soul there I hope in endelesse bliss.

This was she that refreshed our languishing spirits, and comforted our
former distresfull calamities, as Troilus did, who with virtue and courage bare
upon his shoulders the burden of besieged Troy, when Hector failed. And if
heaven would have granted us so much happiness, as to have left us only her
alive, we should have bin able to have suffered and endured whatsoever else
could have happened. But what I might think, and what grief might be mine, let
the compasionate Reader judge, seeing in so short a space, three Princes dead,
whom I served, and had such cause to love and honor. I was brought up young,
and nourished in their court. They were always my shelters against all
tempests, storms, and adversities: But alas, there is none now left to
shelter me from sorrow.

But returning to my discourse, at the end of the combat, when I had seen the
death of these three my so dearly honored sovereigns, my eyes being drowned
with tears, and my soul with sorrow, unwilling to ouer-liue so great a
desastre, I pulled down my beuer, and dreadlesse and careless what might
happen, nor looking nor fearing who came against me, I rushed into the listes,
defying my adversaries, to come both, or one, or how they listed, or dared.
Memory seeing me thus altered, feared least I had bin troubled with some
passion of Despair, The Author offers combat to the champion of Atropos.
and therefore willed me to recommende my self unto God; which I did, and
constantly attended the coming of my adversaries. But by and by came unto me a
fellow like a Heralde, of little stature, with a blazon of prolongation, his name
was, Sommons. Great Atropos, says he, The messenger or poursuiuant of Atropos
called Sommons.
that here governs, has commanded me to tell thee, that thy hour is not
yet come, and therefore wills thee to stay, till thou be called; which shall
not be long first. In the mean time rest contented, for there are now many
other combats to be determined of greater worth, and among the rest, especially
of five famous adventurers: The combats of five famous adventurers.
whose names and particularities, I desiring him to recount unto me, though,
said he, some of these be things to come, and the secrets of the destinies are
not to be revealed, yet for this once I will satisfy thy request.

Know then, that these five dismal conflictes I speak off here to be tried,
are such, that the only thinking of them breeds an astonishing terror both
to Atropos and her Champions; who hearing of the victorious conquestes that
are, and shall be, by these excellent adventurers atchiued, are fore-possessed
with an incredible fear and amazement. I will therefore tell thee first, what
each of the adventurers is, and then how prepared and armed they will come to
this the last combat that ever they shall make. And do not think that I do
fable with thee, in telling thee of things to come: for I do certainly assure
thee, that the event shall be as I do tell thee: for Atropos is well acquainted
with the Destinies, who have discovered the whole unto her. But because it
greeueth me exceedingly to see thee so sorrowful and sad, I would yield
willingly some comfort to thy perplexed mind. And this assure thy self, the
heavens do never deny consolation to the comfortless and distressed. As for
the three ended princes, whose untimely deaths have brought thee to such
excessive and immoderate sorrow, and these other, with the particularitie of
whose combats I have promised to acquaint thee, they shall leave behind them
such and so noble a succession, that their loss shall be to the whole world
restored. But especially the great English Monarch, Sommons does reveal unto
the Author the Secrets of the Destinies, wonderfully among the rest foretelling
the greatness of Queen Elizabeth's glory
who among the rest of his royal issue, shall leave one so excellent a daughter,
and so highly of the heavens blessed, that besides the glorifying of the frozen
poles, and the fiery equinoctials with the trophes of her invincible arms,
such shall be the worlds wonder, and admiration of her virtue, that the greatest
kings, princes, and estates of the world, shall think it the greatest
happiness that may befall them, to be shrouded under the fair spreading wings
of her Imperious government, some of them falling down at her sacred feet,
and flying into her realm for refuge, as to an unblemished Azyle and
inviolable sanctuary.

But now to enterteine thee no longer with circumstances, The Lady Isabell
sister to Henry the 4. of Castile, and wife to Ferdinand of Aragon, granmother
to Charles the fifth.
know that the first which in these listes is by Atropos so fearfully
expected, is the great and mighty princes Do^na Isabella Queen and enheritrix
of Castile: Her am I ere long time ouerpasse to sommon to the adventure of this
passage, to which as every mortal creature is subject, so shall she not be
disobedient, but presently come into the field armed and accompanied as
follows.

She shall be mounted upon a triumphall, Chariot, accompanied with innumerable
virtues, contending between them selves, In what sort she shall come to
combat with death.
which of them should have the chief possession and presidence within the
royal harbor of her thoughts. They shall attend on each side of her
Chariot, singing in her honor immortal praises. Faith and pure Zeal shall be
her Chariots guide. Four Horses, exceeding the snow in whiteness (therein
denoting her purity) shall draw the same, their names, Wisdom, Religion,
Hope, and Charity, all being blessings, and especial graces of the highest:
her armor shall be of Magnanimity, her Helmet of good Counsel, assisting her
in government. The Sword she shall be gyrt withal, shall be of an accustomed
virtue of hers called Natural Pity, the which she shall employ and put in ure
against Cruelty: Her Spear shall be of good Desert, steeled with a head of
hating Error, all her works and cogitations being thereunto incessantly bent
and directed: her Shield of Honesty, and her Coat Armor of Authority,
before which, vain Pleasure, and worldly Vanity, never dare appear. Upon her
arrival, her King at arms, called Government, shall proclayme all the
particularities of her estate, name, condition, and cause of coming. Presently
will weerilesse Accident come forth, armed with a new and fryghtfull Harness
of Amazement, his Shield of Despair, therewith to bereave the defendant of
all hope to escape, his Dart of Crueliie, his battle Axe of Impossibility,
whose blow no soundness of health, nor vigorousnesse of force shall be able to
withstand: his Sword shall be of Passion, and his Dagger of Sorrow. And thus
furnished, shall he begin the combat, half dismayed at the virtue, fame, and
estate, of so great an enemy, only encouraged by the persuasion of Fury,
that still incenseth him forward.

The gentle Princess seeing him come, shall presently dismount off her
Chariot, and with a well resolved constancy attend him, opposing against his
fierceness her Spear of good Desert. But inexorable Accident, no whit at all
thereof esteeming, shall in such sort vex and pursue this noble Lady, that
notwithstanding all the defense of her infinite virtues, he shall in the end
deprive her of life, and the world of his chief ornament. So that here shall
be seen the end of the mighty and puissant Queen, the very thought whereof
forepossesseth my mind with grief. But so firm and unvanquished shall her
virtue be, that it shall perpetually retain her name and memory in life, in
despite of Atropos that gave her death. Fame and Glory shall give her
Sepulture: and though her body be by death vanquished, yet with a far more
worthy conquest, shall her joyful freed soul, by the grace of Gods goodness,
win eternal rest in the heavens.

At the end of this woeful conflict, Philip son to Maximilian the Emperor
and father to Charles the fifth.
shall a noble and heroyicall aduenturer present him self in the lystes, by
name great Philip, heir to Austria and Burgundy: to which by marriage with
Donna Iohanna, daughter to Ferdinande, and the late remembered Q. Isabelle, he
shall adioyne the rich and mighty kingdom of Spain, Sicily, Arragon, and
Naples.

Accident understanding the arrival of this matchless Prince, shall presently
mount upon a fresh Courser, called Outrage, his Armor shall be of cruel
Chance, of a hard and vnpenetrable temper, hammered and forged by
Vnpitifulnesse, against which no bounty or valor is able to prevail. His
Shield shall be of Grief, his Mace of Discomfort, his Sword of Fury, and his
Lance of the greatest Sorrow that ever might happen to the world: in this
terrible furniture shall he come to encounter the fearelesse youthful
Defendant.

The virtuous Austrian Prince shall come royally accompanied unto this dolorous
passage, though greatly out of season, in the very flourishing spring of his age
and honor. And surely though I must needs accomplish the commandment of
Atropos my Lady and Mistres, in citing and summoning unto this feared passage
all humane creatures, yet can I not dispossess my thoughts of an infiniteness
of sorrow, in that I must be constrained to be a mean of so soon shortening
the life of this exellent Prince, depriving his people and subjects of such a
treasure, as they shall never be able to recover.

He shall enter the listes armed only with his own excellent gifts, which
over the world shall make him so renowned and glorious. But disdainefull
Fortune, enuiyng the worlds happiness, shall take him away in the sweetest
time of his life, showing us thereby a fair example of the vnsecure estate,
fickleness, and instabiltie, of all vain worldly prosperity.

His horse shall be Frankenesse, His virtues.
his corslet Sovereign bounty, his Lance True fortitude, his helmet
Assabilitie, his sword Mercy, yet tempered in meet proportion of Justice, his
targuet of High cogitation, substancially by Reason forged and perfected. His
heralde at arms, called Beloved of all, shall with loud proclamation bid give
place unto this notable prince, whose like for loveliness was never in the
world, no not Titus Vespasian, though he were called the Delices of mankind.
Fierce shall be the first encountre of these two puissant warriors. But Accident
fearing the danger of Delay, considering the undaunted valor of his
adversary, shall employ even at one instant the very uttermost of his force,
and therewith shall so mortally wound him, with the fervent blow of a Continual
burning fever, that not able to resist so great a violence, this incomparable
prince, shall yield the spoil of a glorious youth, to the cruelty of
victorious Death, whose days did worthyly deserve to be without number, so
shall the world with the shining of his rare virtues be adorned. But
merciless Atropos, thereby to increase the terror of her name, shall cut a
sunder his thread, when it was not a quarter wouen, filling the world with such
a sorrow, as it never before had tasted.

But now Accident, toiled with the greatness of these his former conquestes,
shall quit for this time the place, and ordeine Debilitie in his steed to
manteine the field, telling him of a mighty arriving King, with whom he must
encounter, willing him by any means to look well to himself, and to the
surenesse of his armor, in respect that the enemy, with whom he shall have to
do, shall be second to none of the world in glory of war and peace. With
these admonishments shall Debilitie presently come forth, mounted on a horse,
named Helpless, giving thereby to understand, that all hope of succor is
vain: his armor shall be of Grief, and his mace, which usually he accustometh
to bear, of languishing Weakness, wherewith he has subdued many millions of
people: his Lance shall be continual Ill-rest, his Sword of paynefull Disease,
his Target obscurely enamiled with sundry infirmities and grievous pains, and
many other sorrowful signs of increasing Sickness and decaying health: his
Coat Armor shall be all over embrodered with Crowns of Kings that he has
slain, as likewise he shall do to him that now comes. Dreadlesse of force or
policy he shall stand brauing at the entry of the passage, Ferdinande K. of
Spain, Aragon, Naples, and Sicilie.
when straight shall appear great Ferdinande the king Catholic of Spain:
with whom shall come a thousand memories of his great and glorius victories
obscuring and darkening those that in ancient histories were before accounted
famous. His Horse shall be great Valor, his Vamplate Felicity, either of both
being able to keep Adversity at the bay: his Lance shall be of great
Government, firm and constant in every change either of time or occasion: his
helmet of Discretion, making the effects of all his actions prosperous: his
sword Magnanimous conquest, winning him throughout the world both fear and
honor: his shield of great Power, such as fortune with all her exorbitant
excess shall not be able to diminish: his Coat Armor of Prosperous event, and
his K. at arms, Invincible, who shall upon his entry within the listes,
proclaim his titles, kingdoms, estate, and name, ennobled with so many
triumphs and victories. But at the very first meeting, Debilitie shall with
his Lance give him such an encounter of Il-rest, that the K. shall presently
find an alteration in his health and quiet; which advantage Debilitie
perceiving, shall so double upon him fierce blows of Increasing sickness and
languishing feintnesse, that in fine, notwithstanding his most constant, godly,
and virtuous resolution in that dismal combat, he shall be deprived of life, and
his enemy honored with the victory of one that never in this world before was
vanquished. But Fame shall wait upon his funerals, and with his golden
Trumpet blow about the world his Innumerable victories and virtues.

Debilitie swelling in the pride of so great an atchiued conquest, lifting up
his sight, shall presently epsy an other excellent prince, roally accompanied,
directing his steps toward this passage of Terror, Maximilian of Austria
Emperor of the Romans.
by name Maximilian of Austria, Emperor of the Occident, who shall come with a
secure countenance, and princely resolved gesture to the field, mounted and
armed as the other fore named princes, with infinite gifts of his own
natural virtues, honored besides with many warlike Ensigns and Standards,
taken from the powerful Venecians, fierce Bohemians, and warlike Frenchmen.
But pitilesse Debilitie, armed with rageful Cruelty, shall soon with a
dispiteous blow of remediless Sickness, dim the worlds light, by taking
away this honorable Prince, whose zeal, justice, and magnanimity, made him
inferior to none of the passed Emperors in greatness of true glory, never
in any perpetuity of time to be razed out of the registers of memory.

The funeralles of this great Emperor (who while he lived, Great Henry king of
England comes to encounter the Champions of Atropos.
as he did surmount all the rest of the world in degree, so did he equal the
best in virtue) shall be no sooner solemnized, when of a sudden the air shall be
broken with so terrible and martial a noise of Drums, Trumpetts, and Fifes,
that the whole forest of Atropos shall seem therewith to tremble and shake,
and Debilitie that stands glorifiyng him self in the fortunate events of
these his late conflictes, shall be sodaynely astonished with a cold and
chyllish fear, forecasting I know not what ensuing dangers in his mind. But
when the heroical wars music shall approach near, and the wauing Stremers
of banerolles appear glittering aloft richly guylded and embrodered with Lions
and Flourdelices of gold, then shall he first begin to be so fully possessed
with an unacquainted amazement and fear, that presently quitting the place, he
shall with haste repair unto the Pauilion of Atropos, laying before her, with a
wild and affrighted gesture, the great danger of her self and her estate, if
presently she did not take better order for the resistance of this puissant
arriving enemy. As for me, shall he say, I am not able to bear the stroke of
so irresistable a force: for how can I alone but fear him, whom so many
mighty Kings united, and the most warlike nations of the world, did so
dreadfully redoubt. This is he of whom the Destenies have so often told you,
that with such an ouergreatnesse should command the world.

Great Maximilian Emperor of the Roman Monarchy should serve him in his
wars, and to do him both honor and homage, should with the Englysh Rose,
adorn his Imperial diadem.

James, the most puissant and valourous King of warlike Scotland, should with
the overthrow of his royal assembled Army, the slaughter of his innumerable
Subjects, the death of his greatest Peers, the loss of al his honorable
Enseignes, Artillarie, and Munitions, and finally, with his own lives loss,
yielding him at Floddon a most famous and memorable victory, satisfy his
royal indignation, Paulus Giouius.
so justly conceived, at the disloyalty of so near a beloved kinsman and
friend.

The inuading French, should with the fearful noise of his only approaching
name, drown them selves in the Southern Seas.

Great Frauncis, whom French hystoriographers, and not unworthily, should call
their Achilles, should so fear the fortune of this invincible Prince, that he
should suffer him to range with his Army over his Country unfought withal,
to put sundry of his Towns to the sack, and lastly to return victoriously
uncontrolled.

Charles the fifth (then whom since Charlemayne there never lived a more worthy
and heroycall Emperor) though highly offended with him for his Auntes
diuorsment, yet should be so far from daring to revenge it, notwithstanding
the greatness of his Empire and many Kingdoms, that he should at length
instantly desire his freendshyp, yea and sue for it with mighty presents, and
great pensions, to such great Lords as should in those days bear sway about
him.

Charles of Burbon should receive his wages, by whose means the French King
should be taken at Pauia, Martin de Bellay in his commentari^s writes, that
K. Henry the eight gave the French K. toward his ransom. 500000. crowns,
which the Emperor did owe him, for not marying the Lady Marie accorning to
couenantes between them, and withal a Fleuredelice of gold: upon which,
Henry the.7. had lent to Philip father to Charles the.5. 50000. crowns at his
being in England. Moreover, whereas he had lent Charles. 400000. crowns, for
which he should have had the towns of Air and S. Homer in gage, he gave unto
the French K. al those writings: for it was one article of his fidelity, that
he should pay al these sums unto K. Henry the. 8.
and afterward again by the means and unspeakable liberality of this
redoubted Monarch, moved with a royal compassion should be set at liberty,
and restored to his regal Crown and dignity.

Pope Clement, being prisoner to the Imperiallistes (though afterward
unthankfully requiting so great a benefit) should be by his means set at
liberty, and once again enthronized.

But what should I stand repeating these things unto you, which you your
self so well remember were long agon by the Destinies in manner of prophecy to
you unfolded; you see your self what he has accomplyshed: what now remains
for him, having by admirable Virtues, and invincible Arms, drawn the worlds
love unto him, but aspiring to immortality to conquer death, and to make him
self Lord of this Forest. As for my self, I know mine own power, and find
the same far too weak to resist so great a puissance. Therefore I pray you,
if you be not utterly careless of my safety, and your own service, let
Accident be commanded to join with me, and withal, the uttermost of your
other forces to be assembled to succor us, if need require.

Atropos hereupon shall call for Accident, encharging him to assist Debilitie,
comforting them both with this assurance, that though this were the greatest
and most redoubted enemy that ever they encountered, yet they should not
fear: for, being mortal, the high neuer-faylyng decree of Heaven, had
ordained him to death: nevertheless she shall advise them to arm them selves
with all possible Heedefulnesse, and to be circumspect in their manner of fight.

Heerewith being somewhat encouraged, they shall arm them selves at all pieces
with the surest tempered armours, and the sharpest deadly weapons, that the
shorehouse or armorie of Atropos can yield them, and so march into the listes,
though terrified in themselves, yet terrible to all the world else, save only to
the dreadlesse Prince that shall encounter them.

And now, even like the roaring Ocean against a tempest, so shall the
cloud-breaking noise of his warrlike instruments approach with an unspeakable
terror, when presently, like the Sun out of a cloud, so gloriously from out
the loving press of his enuironing subjects, shall appear the excellent
heir of the two long divided houses Lancaster and York, great Henry the eight
of England, with an unmoved Majesty, and sure resolved look, though he see
all deaths forces bent unto his ruin.

His Courser shall be invincible Courage, sure footed, and never once stumbling
in this dangerous carreere, but bearing him smoothly thorough, without ever
starting, fearing, or blemishing, at the furious encounter of his forcible
enemy. His Corslet shall be of Fortitude, gorgiously glistring in the pure
brightness of true Nobility, as being of excellent proof against al outward
violence, so of singular virtue in defending his royal mind from all thoughts
of dishonor. His Lance, well judging Foresight, surely fastened to his rest of
great Experience, never therewith unskillfully failing or vnknightly breaking a
cross, but with a fair encounter, still striking the honorable mark,
whereunto it is by his worthy mind directed. His Sword of clear unspotted
Justice, firmly hilted in Wisdom, and ensheathed in a fair scabbard of
Mercy, out of which he shall never draw it, but when he shall be by forcible
necessity thereto constreined: His Target of Trust only in God, upon which he
shall bear the blows of all earthly violence: His fiery crested Headpeece of
high Cogitation, lyned with prosperous Effect, and adorned with a fair
beautiful penache of immortal Fame: His Coat Armor of such and so great
Renown, as never more could happen to any mortal creature: His Heralde at
arms shall be unspeakable Liberality, which shall set such a grace upon his
other virtues, and that in so loud a voice, that all the world shall hear
him. Thus honored, thus armed, thus adorned, shall this great King enter within
the compass of the fatal lystes, Virtue leading him, and Glory following him.
The eyes and hearts of all the world being fixed, and attentively bent, upon
the sequel of this admirable combat.

In fine, the Heraldes having commanded silence, and the Trumpets sounded the
cruel notes of warte, Accident not daring approach the rays of so great a
brightness, shall begin the fight a far off, thinking to terrify him with
forayne Leagues and Invasions; But the King betaking him self to his trusty
fore-remembred Lance, shall with a thundering carrere, so repress the violence
thereof, that the blow in steed of harming him, shall erect new Trophies to his
honor. Then shall he throw at the fearelesse Prince his darts of Treason and
secret Conspiracies: but he unsheathing his excellent Sword, shall turn the
danger thereof aside, and make frustrate the force thereof, so that the smart
and peril shall return to his enemies.

But then twice wounded Accident enraged, and between fear and fury
desperate, shall strike the triumphant King so cruel a blow with his Sword of
Distemperature, that though still remaining in courage inuicible, yet shall he
in his health and strength, find him self greatly impaired: Nevertheless,
drawing the weakness of his body up to the worthynesse of his mind, he shall
enforce him self still to mainteyne the fight, till traitor Debilitie,
merciless like a preuayling cowarde, shall while the King contendeth with
Accident, power down upon him with all his violence so vnreliueable a blow of
remediless Sickness, that the neuer-before yielding Prince, shall now, seeing
such he knows to be the divine pleasure (with a quiet, yet magnanimous
resolution, covering him self with his Target) enrich the earth with the noble
burden of his falling body, and the heavens with his freed soul, empouerishing
only the world; whose grief for his loss shall be such, as though, the
greatest pyller thereof being gone, it could not but attend a speedy ensuing
downefal and ruin.

But herewith as Sommons would have proceeded in his woeful history, I
feeling my very soul ouerburdened with an insupportable greatness of sorrow,
entreated him to spare my alredie enough miserable ears, and not to afflict
them with hearing of further tragedies, but if ever he would do me pleasure,
then to shorten the time of my prolonged combat.

For alas, what should I, miserable wretch that I am, desire to live, or
wherein should life be sweet unto me, seeing the glorious lights of the world
so soon extinguished: no virtue, no wisdom, no love, no honor, no beauty,
no conquest, no nobility, no goodlinesse, no scepter, no force, no prayer,
being able to stay the stryking hand of unmerciful DEATH.

Whereunto Sommons replying, I had thought fayd he, to have revealed unto you
two future Combats more, of two great and Princely adventurers: The one, of the
most valourous and towardly young Prince of the world, King Edward the. 6.
eldest son and successor to this great Englysh King: The beams of whose
sayre rising Sun, shall no sooner begin to glimmer in our Orizon, but they
shall warm the whole world with his love. Queen Marie.
The other of his eldest daughter, likewise succeding him in the royal
Diadem, who wereby Accident both soon deprived of their lives, and
dispossessed of their thrones. But seeing thee alredie of apprehensiue of
forow, and afflicted with such extremity of passion, I will forbear to
perplex thy ears with any farther grief: yet would not I have thee to repine
at the divine ordinance. For though the Almighty in his secret judgment
shall think good to deprive the world of these most excellent Princes: yet
shall he not leave it altogether desconsolate and abandoned: For he shall bless
the perished Princes with successors of such worthiness, that like true
heirs, as well of the Virtues, as Crowns of their predecessors, they shall
afresh brighten the worlds obscured face, and with the goodly shyning of their
well deserved glory, return the estate thereof into the former blissfulness.
But above all the rest, so shall he ennoble the memory of the late Englysh
Monarch, with so excellent and glorious a DAVGHTER, that in her alone shall be
seen united all the severally dispersed Virtues that made so glorious the
forenamed Princes, in so much that all the world with one agreeing consent,
shall proclayme her to be the most admirable Princess that ever lived. And, The
prophecy of the Destenies concerning Elizabeth the Queen of England.
which is a thing not of the lightest consideration, but perchance one of the
greatest wonders that ever any age has seen, In her only shall not Fortune
contend with Virtue, but, contrary to her nature, like a submisse and willing
Handmayde, attend upon her noble desires, constantly effecting them, yea,
sometimes in things most rare and marvelous. Likewise, there shall be so sweet
a consent, and so fit a proportion between the great richesse of her mind,
and the fair ornaments of her body; that as the one shall atteine to the height
and perfection of fortitude, wisdom, temperance, justice, and all other
divine virtues wherewith a royal mind should be garnished, so shall the other
in goodly lyneamentes, and beautiful features, so without all degree of
comparison surmount the rest of her sex, that the worlds eye shall never more
behold a sweeter and more lovely object, as being in deed Delitiae humani
Generis, singular in her self, and excellent beyond al comparison.

And to make up the full point of her happiness, as she shall both in rules of
government, and virtue of governing, serve to all Christian Princes as an
excellent Pattern and example, preserving her Subjects in a quiet estate, full
of reposefull blessedness, when round about her, some through the tyranous
exactions of their Prince, and some through the unskillful government of their
Prince, and some through his negligent and contemptible looseness, shall
murder them selves with mutual wounds, and be torn within them selves to
pieces: As she, I say, shall by her princely care, and prudent foresight,
maynteine her Subjects in this calm security of untroubled peace; so shall
they again, with so quiet and unmurmuring a course of faithful obedience,
Never Prince more blessed in her subjects. Never subjects more blessed in their
Prince.
love and honor her, that she, if ever any Prince, shall be blessed in her
Subjects, and they, if ever any Subjects, blessed in their Prince.

But which is strangest, coming to the royal Diadem, in the fair youthful
spring of her virgins years, she shall find the estate of her Realm divided
in faction, differing in religion, and through the troubles of the late
preceding government, exceedingly discontented: All which inco^ueniences,
being by the unfortunate success of the former government (wherein the Sword
was more employed then the Scepter) styrred up, and in appearance tending to
some fearful and dangerous issue, she shall with the sweet breathing gale of
her well tempered Mildness, so pacify, alay, and utterly extinguish, that she
shall reduce her Subjects from the deepest degree of constreyned fear, to the
highest pytch of faithful love, and duetiful obedience, that ever Prince was
honored withal.

Neither shall her invincible arms in justly undertaken Wars abroad, be
less glorious unto her, then this her admirable Peace and justice in civil
government at home. Neither shall be most warlike nations of Europe only, as
Spain, Portugal, France, Scotland, and Irelande, but even the remotest
regions, and concealed parts of either Tropique, the frozen Poles, and the
middle burning Zone, be constreyned to bow unto the victorious English
Enseignes: nothing being more rife in the mouths of men, yea as well of the
farthest Indians, and savage people, as of the proud neighboring nations,
then the name of great ELIZABETH, written in the blood of those that resist,
and the pardoned lives of those that yield, of all victories the fairest
register, and best enduring monument.

To recount unto you the several egregious victories that she shall give,
both by sea and land, to the most fierce and warlike nations that then shall
possess the world, were fitter for the large relation of a Chronicle, then
this my short discourse: But this I assure you, they shall be such, as I know not
whether any antiquity can bring forth the like.

In fine, her Kingdom shall be the secure Haue^ of Afflicted Princes, her Purse
the royal maintenance of Distressed Kings, and her powerful Arms, the yoking
bridle of Ambitious Tirants.

As for the Princely magnificence of her Court, her well expressed judgment in
the election of grave and honorable Counseylors, her well employed rewards on
those that shall be Virtuous and of merit, her bountiful liberality, and
gracious enterteinment of Strangers, her learning, languages, and skilfulnesse
in royal knowledge of such arts and secrets as to her estate are fitting, so
unable is my feeble speech to aspire unto the height of their worthynesse,
that forbearing to speak of things so far above my reach, I know no better
way then to cover them under the veil of silence, leaving the large camp of
her praises, to the excellent writers of that age wherein she shall floorish,
her rareness being such, that she shall with the highness of her virtue,
drawevp (as the heat of the Sun does vapors from the earth) the excellent
wits of her time to so high a pitch, that the following ages among millions
of other noble works penned in her praise, shall as much admire the writer,
but far more the subject of the fairie Queen, as ever former ages did Homer
and his Achilles, or Virgill and his Aeneas, such worthy, rare, and excellent
matter, shall her matchless and incomparable virtue yield them to ennoble
their pens, and to immortalize their fames.

As for me, having now made you acquainted with the former Combats, of which I
made you promise, though I have in their recital perchance seemed somewhat
prolixe, yet if you will consider the perticularitie of the mentioned Princes, I
fear you shall rather have occasion to blame my brevity. Having now, as I
say, satisfied your desire, and that truly without abusion or deceit, I will
now take my leave of you, because Atropos stands in need of my service. As
for your Combat, never trouble your self with urging it farther, for I will,
doubt you not, sommon you thereunto in time, and therefore I would wish you
even now to make yourselfe ready, seeing the hour thereof cannot be but at
hand. At the end of these speeches, he took his leave of me, and departed,
leaving me in a strange confusion, between sorrow of that which was past, and
wonder of that which was to come, my only comfort being to think of that
fortunate and golden age, wherein the branches of these deceassed Princes shall
live, especially that excellent and matchless Empress of the Ocean.

Herewith Memory, that had all this while attentively listened unto these
passed tragical discourses, seeing me still persevere in my pensiveness, used
her best endeavors to comfort me, and requested me, seeing I had such
prolongation and respite of time granted me, to return, and to take my
lodging with her, whyther she would cause the old hermit Understanding to be
sent for, of whom I might take good and firm counsel against the doubtful
issue of this dangerous Combat, which now of necessity was shortly to betide
me. I willingly accepted her gentle offered enterteinement, and turning my
Horse, was contented to follow her.

By the way, she perceiving my mind to be ouer-pressed with heavy and
melancholy thoughts, endeavored to remove me from those sorrowful
apprehensions, by recording unto me many passed pleasing Histories and
allegories, He returns to the mansio^ of Memory.
moralizing them all unto my good and comfort: So that passing on the way
without tediousness, we were soon arrived at her mansion: whither
Understanding the good Hermit was sent for; He is there visited by
Understanding.
who ready, and duetifull at her commandment, was in my Chamber at my bedside
so soon as the dawning of the next morning appeared.

I exceedingly rejoiced at his coming, because I knew him to be a counsayler
void of al fraud, and full of virtuous consolation, grave in his judgment,
and sound in his advise: God be thanked for his goodness, that gave me
happiness to have his acquaintance, and grace to bend my mind to follow the
direction of his counsayles. After many mutual congratulations between us, he
began to instruct me with many lessons, all teaching the way how to live and
die well: in which two only points consists all the height and excellence of
wisdom. Wherein consists the height of wisdom.


First quoth he, who so ever he be that is to combat either within List,
Barrier, or Steccada, he ought well to consider as well the quality of his
own forces, as of those of his enemy, and according thereunto to make his
provision of furniture and defense.

For rashly to enter unprovided unto so great an enterprise, as it could not
be but to the body dangerous, so it would be to the soul doubtful: of which,
whosoever makes a careless account, may well be termed miserable and
unhappy.

And although that whosoever is honorably challenged to single combat, may make
choice of his weapons, besides certain other privileges that he has both of
time and place: yet such is the necessity and straight limited condition of
this your fight, Death often strikes without warning.
and Atropos your adversary so full of dishonorable advantages, that he will
not give you so much as warning when, or where he means to assail you,
whether by water or by land, whether in desert or in playnes, Nothing so
uncertain as the hour of a man's death.
whether in your bed or upon your horse, but perchance even surprise you of a
sudden, when you shall be provided neither of weapon, nor defense able to avail
you.

Considering therefore the near approaching time of your combat, And therefore
nothing so behouefull as to be always in a readiness.
and withal the entrapping stratagems and cautelous wily advantages of your
adversary, I would wish you in time to make provision accordingly, and that
with such wary and heedefull circumspection, that no sodainnesse be able to
overtake you; which if you will follow these my instructions, I doubt not, but
you shall easily perform with your endless honor and welfare.

First let al your Harness be tempered in true Repentance, What Arms are fit
to encounter death withal.
so fastly forged, and beaten with the hammer, that no deadly sin be able to
teint them, nor ougly vice have power to pierce the^. Let your Vamplate be
firmly steeled with a firm resolved purpose to persevere in Well-dooing,
seeking in all your actions, with a true religious zeal the service and glory
of God. Let your Vambraces be of Virtuous Magnanimity, in not yielding to
frail worldly pleasures: and your Gantelets of perfect Charity, showing the
liveliness of your faith, in the operation of your works. Above all, let your
Headpeece be of Temperance; which though it be in the world a virtue rarely
found, and little set by, yet it is a jewel most precious, and will in this
enterprise highly stand you in steed. Let your Cuisses be of patient
Suffering, your Poldrones of Diligence, and your Greues of labor to do Well.
In this manner armed, and all the pieces of your Armor combined together in
Faith, such and so sure will be your foundation, bearing the blessed sign of the
sacrament of Baptism in your forhead, that your speed cannot be but good and
glorious. But now seeing you well provided of arms defensive, I think it not
amiss to provide you likewise of such as may hurt, offend, and terrify your
enemy.

Ordinarily whosoever is challenged, may choose to fight a foot or a
horseback, as he shall for his advantage find fittest. But so diffrent is this
your fight, from the nature of other Combats, that it is to be fought by your
self alone, and that on foot: neither, if it were otherwise, would I have you
trust to your Horse, or to any other help: But even that you do, do it of your
self: I mean, in doing works of Charity, and bestowing Alms for your
souls health, Good works done by others after a man's death, nothing at al
auailable
while your self is living: for when you are dead, small avail will the good
works done by your heirs yield you; neither, as the world goes, will they
be greatly careful of any such performance.

Always provided, that for the securer passage to the place appointed, you
take Baptism, whom at your birth you vowed never to deny, for your Padrine.
Padrino in Spanish signifies him that goes with his freende into the feelde,
or does accompany him unto a just or torney, with meaning to defend him from
wrong. It signifies also a Godfather.
He will yield you valor, courage, and contentment, and to your enemy
terror, sadness, and amazement, such and so preheminent is the force of this
excellent Sacrament. Let your Casting-dart be surely steeled with a head of
fervent Devotion: your Spear Remembrance of his Death, that with his Blood
redeemed you: your Dagger with a sharp and well pearcing point, of a pure,
vigorous, and true catholic Faith: and your Targuet of virtuous Example,
witnessed by good Works.

And seeing you want now nothing but a Sword, let the same be of Justice,
keen and well edged, doing unto others, as you would be done unto your self.
But especially, and above all, look as I said, that these your Harness and
Weapons, be without delay, yea, without the loss of one moment, tempered by
true and well grounded Repentance, who for such a conflict, is of all others an
armourer most excellent.

Stand not upon Inconveniences, nor be not pulled back with Worldly lets, nor
terrified with Charges, but be diligent, and look well about you: it is no
matter of mine, it concerns yourselfe; neither is there any freende or
kinsman in the world, how dear soever unto you, that will, or may, fight this
Combat for you.

AVTHOR.
Good father, quoth I, I heartily thank you, for these your so loving and
zealous aduertisments, which have already taken so deep an impression in my
mind, that I hope, through Gods goodness, I shall be able in some part to
execute and perform them.

Yet because there must be a preparation; and mean while, between this and
the time of my Combat, I pray you tell me how I should behave and exercise my
self, to be the better able to withstand the dreadful approach of my
Death-bringing enemy. Nay quoth he, whether there shall be any mean while, or
time of preparation given you, that only knows the Divine providence: For,
you may chance to be sommoned, even while you are now speaking. Therefore, I
wish you not to be vnresolute, or long in preparing, but to put your self
presently in readiness, seeing the thing, that by delay you do put in hazard,
is no less then the eternal weal, or woe of your soul: which is, either to
be glorified with blisfull and euer-during joys, or else to be condemned to the
ragefull neuer-ceasing torments of hell fire. Woebe unto them, that making
hereof but a skoffe and jest, do hazard so great a treasure as their soul,
upon so hard a iumpe, as to delay preparation in so important a matter,
especially the time and sodainnesse thereof being so uncertain.

Yet if it so fall out, that there be any space of preparation or amendment
(which the goodness of the heavens grant you) I would have you to spend the
same in virtuous exercise and practice of your fore-described weapons.

Adioyne unto them the often use of fervent Prayer, How a man should exercise
himself before he comes to the combat.
not only with an outward wagging of your lips, but also with an inward
weeping of your heart. Rise early in the morning, least the nights darkness at
unawares overtake you. Stop, as near as you can, your five sensual powers,
from hearing, seeing, touching, tasting, or consenting, to any Wickedness,
frail sensuality, or blasphemous impiety. Slumber not drowsilie in Sin,
but watchfully arise by true Contrition, and unfeigned Repentance. As your
appetite, so let your tongue be temperately used.

Besides, for the better enabling of your body against the endurance of fight,
I would have you still be wrestling and skirmishing against such Champions as
have the chiefest fame for strength and power: such are Pride, Envy,
Gluttony, Covetousness, Sloth, Anger, and Sensuality: which doing, and
keeping your body clean in breath, with the sober diet of a virtuous and
harmeles Life, doubt not, but cheerfully go on to the Combat; for by Gods
grace, howsoever if fares with your bodily life, your better part shall
triumph in glorious victory, and in despite of raging Lucifer, and all his
adherents, purchase eternal salvation.

If there be any ward, Who are the best masters of Fence, to instruct him
that prepares to fight this combat.
or point of defense, that you doubt off, repair unto some godly Father and
reverend Priest of Christ his Church, and he will sufficiently advise you: for
such are the Masters of Fence, whose counsel in these cases you must use.

AVTHOR.
Good Father, quoth I, I find great consolation in your speeches: but now you
have told me what manner of Arms I must use, and what exercise I should
enterteine my self withal till the time of my Combat, I pray you tell me yet
a little more, how I shall behave my self when I come to the paynefull point
within the List or Barrier.

You have not made this demand, The miserable estate of a man dying.
quoth he, without great cause and reason: for in deed, such shall be in that
perilous conflict the trouble of your senses, and terror of your enemy,
conspiring all his wiliness and force to your overthrow, that it will be hard
for you to retain a constant behavior, especially seeing your self
frustrated of all worldly help. No one of your tendrest hearted friends will
excuse you, nor help to fight on your side, yea, perchance your parents,
children, and nearest friends, shall not (at such disadvantage may you be
taken) be present to be unto you witnesses of combat, or means of comfort.

Therefore, reposing no trust or confidence in any other help or assistance,
fly only unto GOD with a fast and fervent Faith, imploring his grace, through
the precious death and blessed merits of his only Son our Savior: with the
contemplative meditation of whose holy cross and bitter passion, if you do
fortify your heart and senses, be assured, that you shall therewith easily
daunt and confound your enemy. Always desire of God to give you firm
stablenesse in Faith, whose assistance, being joined with mine, I trust that in
strength we shall be able to uphold you.

But withal, for your greater security and repose, I would have you take
with you a resting seat of Satisfaction, which is, in making Restitution, and
doing Right to whom so ever you have wronged, forgeeuing, and desiring of all
the world forgiveness.

When you come to take your Oath, The virtuous Champions oath.
swear that you received Baptism, by virtue whereof you are a Christian, in
which Faith you determine to live and die, and which quarrel you do most
willingly offer your present body to mainteyne against your adversary: who not
satisfied with the desolution of your body, will also with tempting, and
frightfull suggestion, seek the destruction of your soul.

Presently will your adversary come forth, The oath of the adversary.
and swear, full of hopeful assurance, that you are the child of Adam, and
subjected unto Death: Which ransom, for the remedy of original sin, it
pleased Christ the son of God, by taking on him our humanity, him self to
pay. And as the wary Champion, when he begins to fight, will, as near as
he can, take his advantage of the Sun: so likewise be you circumspect, so to
appear within the Listes, that you be no way offensive to the glistering of
the divine goodness,

The Judge of this your Combat, Judge of the combat.
shall be the everliving Righteousness; and therefore look that you be unto him
fearfully Obedient, firmlie and constantly Believing in him with a true
Worship and adoration of his sacred name: That shall be unto you a strong Shield
of defense against all whatsoever inconvenience; and with such a security any
feebleness is strong and forcible

If you find your self overtaken with any sudden faintness, confusion, or
amazement of your senses, fly presently to the blessed refuge of his infinite
and endless Mercy, wherein assure yourselfe, you shall find all refreshing
contentment, and quiet consolation of your unrestful senses: for who so, in
that passage of Terror forgeteth not, but remembers, with due honor and
reverence, his maker and redeemer, can never be overthrown or vanquished: such
is his own promise, witnessed in the holy Scriptures, which we must firmly
and steadfastly believe: And withal note this, that the first step to true
Life, is a godly Death.

Be not rash in your fight, but move yourselfe with a well advised and
leisurely Resolution. See that you employ well your blows, and strike not any
of them vainly at the wind: and then though your breath chance to fail you,
fear not: for if you observe these precepts of mine, I assure you the Glory of
the day shall be yours.

But first, for a sure safe conduct and protection against all mischieues, I
would have you reverently to receive the blessed Sacrament of Christ his
supper, The blessed Sacrament of Christ his supper.
and so shall you be assured to conquer your enemy, at whose sight be not
terrified or amazed, but with a patient magnanimity obey your good Angel,
whom God has appointed for your guard.

I have now no more to say, but if you do believe, and effectually follow these
my counsels, you shall be eternally safe; if not, you will incur the danger
of a double death both in body and soul.

AVTHOR.
Thus did the reverend Hermit, with zealous instructions, teach me the way to
everlasting life, when yet in my mind did arise a new doubt and question,
which but for fear to have bin accounted ouer-curious, I would have entreated
him to explane unto me, which he perceiving, willed me not to be dismayed, but
boldly and freely to utter my conceit.

Whereupon, I earnestly entreated him to tell me, if there were not any
certain signs or tokens to foreknow the time that Atropos should appoint for
trial of this combat. Debilitie, said he, will shortly send you warning hereof
by his messengers, and Accident likewise by his: But as I told you before, The
best is to be ever ready.
there is in this no certentie, for they perchance will take you so short, and
so of a sudden, The first vant-currors or messengers that sommon us to this
combat.
that you shall have no leisure to put on your armor. The best therefore is to
have a watchful eye, and to be ever ready.

The first Vant-currors, that commonly will bring you tidings hereof, will be
your eyes, when you must be feign to supply their decayed sight with
Spectacles. For nothing more evidently foresheweth the nights approaching
darkness, then the days decreasing cleernesse.

Your ears likewise when they must be furred and stopped with cotton, may serve
in steed of an Alarm bell or Trumpet, to sommon you to present your self
unto the field.

Your head also and your hands, like trusty servants, will by their
feebleness and trembling, give you warning of your approaching danger.

Neither will your legs, once so well proportioned, and with such delicate
straightness supporting the stately burden of your so much beloved body, be
behind hereof to give you advertisement, when they must crave the assistance of
a staff to perform their office.

The decaying of these limbs, senses, and members, is an assured token, that
you cannot long hold out. Therefore, still I advise you, as near as you can,
to seek with your soul those joys that will never fail nor corrupt; The
end of the body is corruption.
as for the body, the end thereof is corruption, and the truest repose the
grave. Besides these rehearsed messengers, there are thousands of griefs,
sickenesses, wounds, mischances, and infirmities, that will serve for heralds
to sommon and challenge you to this deadly point and sorrowful passage you speak
of.

Herewith the aged father ending his discourse, took his leave of me, and
departed, leaving me, though greatly comforted with his encouragements and
instructions, yet sorrowful and heavy for his departure.

But seeing there was no other remedy, gathering together in my memory all
these passed discourses, I arose and determined to write, truly and sincerely,
the passages and adventures of my life, even as I had felt and passed them: and
thereuppon I made this little treatise, which I hope will find gentle
acceptance, (though the style be barren) especially of all those that bear
virtuous minds, and are according to the title of this little book, true
Resolved Gentlemen. To them I offer it in charitable love, hoping that the
virtue of my honest meaning, shall ennoble the poorness of my gift.

Heavy thoughts, and most justly conceived grief, moved me first to begin
it: now it is ended, I beseech the almighty, that comfort, profit, and
contentment, may betide those that shall read it. I have, and in my judgment
not without some reason, adorned it with the title of the true Resolved
Gentleman, whose adventures I beseech you well to note, that do vouchsafe the
reading hereof: for even such wilbee the course of your encountres, and such
the end, as here, under the name of an other, you see represented: For in
fine, all worldly pomp, Beauty, magnificence, and what else soever the world
has goodly or admirable, turns to rottenness and corruption: and Death,
enemy to nature, equalleth scepters with mattocks, and king with beggars.

Once again I beseech you accept this little Treatise in good part, if not
for the worth thereof, yet for his sake

Qui taunt ha suffert. The Author always used this Posie.
Who so much has suffered.
La March.

This Tretise was first written in French, by Sir Olyuer de la March, in the
year of our Lord. 1483.
A brief explanation of some Histories but obscurely touched by the Author in
this Treatise, which I thought fit to annex for the greater delight of those
that shall read it, especially Gentlewomen, and those that are unacquainted
with such historical discourses. There are some sacred Histories, which I do
but briefly touch, referring the Reader (for the better understanding them) to
the holy Bible, whence they are taken, imagining that they are, or at least
ought to be, familiarly known to all.
CAIN through envy that the offering of his brother Abel was more pleasing and
acceptable unto God then his, Cain. Genesis. Chap. 4.
murdered him, and was the first that embrewed his hands with humane blood.

Sampson being by Delilah entreated to tell him wherein the greatness of his
strength consisted, Sampson. Judges. Cap. 16.
discovered it unto her, and was by her betrayed unto the Philistians, who
took him and put out his eyes, brought him down to Azzah, bound him with
fetters, and made him to grind in the prison house, and when they were merry
in a banquet, they called him one day forth in derision, and set him between
two Pillars: which, grasping in his arms, he pulled down, and together with
the same the Palace, burying under the ruins thereof, himself, and an
innumerable number of the Philistians.

Hercules the famous Grecian, Ovid. Seneca.
begotten by Jupiter upon Alcumena wife of Amphitrion, extremely loving the
beautiful virgin Deianira, daughter to Oeneus King of Calidonia, coming to
her fathers Court to demand her in marriage, with the terror of his presence,
caused sundry youthful Princes, that pursued her love, to desist their suite:
Only K. Achelaus, preferring his love to the delicious Princess before all
death and danger whatsoever, Centaures, were young men in the time of Ixyon K.
of Thessalia, who being the first that tamed horses, did upon their backs many
great exployts to the wonder of the bordering people, who judged them and their
horses to have bin all of one piece, and thervpo^ grew this fiction.
refused to yield his claim and interest to youthful Hercules, but after
scornful words, vpbrayding him of bastardie, came to join with him in
Arms: but being wounded and overthrown, was constreined to yield, and to
leave the young Lady as a reward to the victory of Hercules: who, ravished
with extreamnesse of joy, returning with his beloved pray to his fathers
Kingdom, was retarded by the ouerflowing of the River Euenus: about the
shoares of which, as he walked to see if he could find any Foorde or passage,
he met with Nessus, a Centaure, who bearing from the girdle upward the shape
of a Man, and thence downwarde of an Horse, was exceedingly enflamed with the
love of Deianira, and with an humble dissembled look, offered, so Hercules
could make shift to swim, or pass the river himself, that he would upon
his back safely transport his Lady. Hercules thankfully accepted his offer,
committing unto him his fearfully trembling Lady, and throwing off his quiver
and bow to the farther side of the river, betook himself unto the stream;
which having past, and taken up again his bow and arrows, he heard his Lady
in lamentable accent cry for help, with whom the traiterous Centaure ran away
with all possible speed: but Hercules taking heedfully his level, pursued him
in such sort with an Arrow, that he struck him in the chine of the back a
mortal wound, which Nessus feeling, and in the instant of death meditating
revenge, gave unto Deianeira the shirt which he ware, bestained and infected
with his own blood, which issued out of his body mingled with poison, because
the arrow with which he was wounded, had bin by Hercules dipped in the
contagious blood of the serpent Hydra, which shirte, he told her, that if she
should at any time send unto her husband, when he should be in love with any
other Lady, would reclame his love from the other to her alone. The Lady
received it, and with secrecy many years did keep it as a jewel of rare and
singular price. It happened after, that Hercules amid his great victories, with
fame of which he filled the world, chanced to behold the admirable Iole, the
fairest and most goodly virgin that the world in that age affoorded: Her he
honored and loved, and at length obtained. The grief of which, so deeply
wounded the gentle heart of Deianeira, that never poor Lady lived more
abandoned over to sorrow. One day it chanced, that her husband, being to do
sacrifice to Jupiter upon the mountain Ceneus, sent unto her his faithful and
trusty servant Licas for certain rich and sacred garments, that of purpose he
kept to were at such times as he did sacrifice unto the gods. The innocent Lady
sent him those superstitious ornaments which he required, and withal,
bethinking herself of the dying Centaurs gift, sent him by Licas the enuenomed
shirt, beseeching him for her sake to wear it: which he had no sooner put on,
but the venom so ragingly pearsed even to his very intrals, that thinking to
tear it of, he pulled therewith away great gobbets of his own flesh: and so
furiously laying hands upon guiltless Licas, and tearing him to pieces,
bequeathing to his dear friend Philoctetes his bow and fatal arrows, he
threw himself into a fire, which he had made upon the mountain Oeta, and
there sacrificed him self, which Deianeira hearing, after many detestations,
and maledictions of her self, concluded with a violent and desperate death, her
miserable and hated life.

Julius Caesar, having victoriously brought under the yoke of the Roman empire
Germany, Plutarcb. Appian. Lucan.
France, England, Scotland, and Spain, and filled the whole circuit of the
world with the greatness of his renown, demanded by letters the Consulship,
suborning and brybing with money in that behalf sundry great personages in
Rome: but so formidable grew the report of his ambitious greatness to the
Roman senate, that they sent him word, that if he would leave his forces
behind, and come unarmed and peaceable to the city, they would grant that or
any other his lawful request: but perticularly they commanded him not to pass
the river of Rubicon with his army, threatening him, if he should otherwise do,
to hold him as an enemy to his country: but he scornefully disdaining this
commandment of theirs, and exceedingly envying the greatness of Pompeis
glory, who bare the greatest sway and government at Rome, passed the River with
his army, and came still conquering up into Italy: the terror of whose
approach wrought such astonishment in Rome, that Pompie, with the greatest part
of the Senators and nobility fled, whom Caesar, after having taken
possession of Rome, pursued, and finally overthrew at the battle of
Pharsalia, and thence passed conquering into Fgipt, where he subdued young
Potolome the K. that rose in arms against him: he placed fair Cleopatra in
the royal seat; with whom he lived a while in amorous delights, and had by
her a son called Casario, who was afterward murdered by Octauian: thence,
having taken order with matters of the Orient, he returned in triumph to Rome,
where he used incredible liberalities to the people, pardoning his greatest
enemies, and those that had been sharpest in war against him, yea, and some
of them he honored with great dignities: as among others, Cassius and Brutus,
who were both made Pretors. But so unsure is the seat of honor, especially
being wrongfully usurped, that no following virtue can promise security to him
that therein sits: for, Caesar in the height of his glory, when he knew no
enemy to fear, was of a sudden overtaken by a secret conspiracy of his
friends, among which were also Brutus and Cassius; the first of which he loved
so well, that he had in his testament ordained him to be one of his heirs; in
fine, he was by them inhumanely murdered in the senate house, directly under a
pillar whereupon stood the statue of Pompie: he had received many
aduertisements of this conspiracy, but would not believe any, nor yet regard
the pitiful tears of his wife Calphurnia; who the night before the murder,
dreamed that he was slain and murdered in her arms: and therefore with all
humbleness on her knees besought him to stay at home that day: which if he had
done, the conspiracy had been discovered, and he delivered of danger. To
those that had warned him hereof, he made answer, that he had rather once
adventure all, then still to stand in fear, using this Latin sentence,
Satius est subire semel, quam semper cauere.

When his body was, according to the Roman rites, to be burned, M. Antonius
made his funeral oration, which he mingled with so many passionate and
pitiful speeches, and at the conclusion thereof, with weeping eyes showing his
bloody shirt unto the people, did so stir their minds to so high a degree of
commiseration, that filling the air with lamentable outcries, they took the
flaming brands, and ran about the town, setting fire on the conspirators
houses: who fearing the fury of the enraged multitude, betook themselves to
flight, but few of them, or none, escaped punishment by one violent death or
other.

Much more might be said of this worthy Prince, but his story is so common,
that I fear me this which is already done, will rather breed tediousness then
delight.

Antipater being by Alexander the great left in Macedon with the Queen
Olympias in manner as vizroy and governor of the kingdom, Alexander. Quintus
Curtius. Plutarch. Appianus de rebus gestis Alexandri.
behaved himself with such insolence and severity, that sundry complaints
were brought to Alexander of him: of which Antipater hearing, sent his son
Cassander into Asia to make his excuses, who upon his first arriual, seeing
certain Persians prostrating themselves at the feet of Alexander, and adoring
him as a god, fell into an extremity of laughter, being himself nourished in
the strict discipline of Greece, and utterly unacquainted with the Persian
ceremony in honoring their kings: at which Alexander (who now accounted his
country manner uncivil and barbarous, and delighted exceedingly in the honors
done him by the Persians) was kindled with so great a fury, that taking
Cassander in his arms, he did beat his head against the walls, rebuking him
with many bitter and taunting checkes, and did not admit the excuses which he
alleged in his fathers behalf; and withal grew into a great diffidence and
dislike both of Antipater and his two sons Yolas and this Cassander: which
Antipater hearing, and therefore mortally fearing the return of Alexander,
prepared a poison of such deadly violence, that it could not in any thing else
be contained then in the hoof of an Ass. At length Alexander after his
innumerable victories in Asia and India, having utterly overthrown the Persian
Empire, upon his return, allured with the delicacies of Babylon, betook
himself there to quaffing and banqueting, and to al manner of voluptuousness,
giving thereby opportunity to Yolas, to present him with the deadly potion
which his father had prepared: which he had no sooner received, but that he
felt himself seized over his whole body with an intolerable torment: yet
such was the constant greatness and virtuous courage of his mind, that he never
so much as once complained or groned, but with an incredible courage,
suppressing the rage of his inward horrible panges, died, as he had always
lived, with a magnanimity, amazing the beholders in the very pride of his
youth.

Yolas was afterward taken by Olympias the mother of Alexander, and put to
death by exquisite torments.

Young Paris, son to Priamus K. of Troy, Homer. Dares. Ovid. Hector.
being by his father sent as Ambassador to the Grecian Princes, about the
restitution of his Ant Hesione, was by the way enterteined at the Court of
Menelaus K. of. Sparta, where, fixing his eyes upon the marvelous beauty of
Helena the new married Queen, grew so far surprised with her love, that
forgetting the laws of hospitality, alluring her aboorde his Shipp, he hoysed
up sails, and carried her thence to Troy: Which indignity the Greekish Princes
not enduring, joining their forces together, and making Agamemnon K. of
Micene, brother to Menelaus, their general, sailed toward Troy, and among
the rest young Achilles, Prince of the Myrmidons and Epirots, who by the way
surprised the Towns of Tenedos, Lesbos, Chryse, and Lyrnessus, taking therein,
among other Captives, two young Maidens of excellent and singular beauty; the
one called Briseis, and the other Chriseida, daughter to Chriseis the Priest of
Apollo: Her he delivered to Agamemnon, reserving Briseis to him self. But
presently there ensued a great and miserable mortality in the Army, which, as
Calcas the Prophet assured them, should never cease, till the daughter of
Apollos Priest should be restored. To which delivery of so fair and so
beloved a pray, Agamemnon would not by any means consent, unless Achilles in
her steed would yield Briseis up unto him. But so impatiently did Achilles
brook that unprincely and discourteous demand, that with his sword he
would presently have slain Agamemnon, had not he bin by the other Greekish
Peers restrained: who, what with sweet persuasions, and other practices, at
length so much with him prevailed, that, though extremely against his will,
they made him deliver his fair and dearly beloved Briseis to the pleasure of
the Greekish Emperor. But when she was once gone, then began her absence to
strike and wound his heart with so excessive a sorrow, and deadly a
coffeehouse, that full of irefull melancholy, he retired himself into his
Tent, refusing to come abroad to wear Arms as he was accustomed, though every
day he saw fierce Hector come murdering and chasing the Grecians, even to their
Tents. Many means were made by the Greekish Lords, to remove him from this
settled and obstinate determination. Agamemnon offered to return Briseis
untouched, with the interest of many other rich presents, but nothing
prevailed: till one day, as Hector came victoriously beating down the Greekish
Quadrons, his dear freende Patroclus thinking with the dissembled presence of
Achilles, to terrify the Trojan troops, armed himself in the rich and
gorgious Armor of Achilles: but so cruel were his destinies, that at his
first entry into the battle, he was by Hector encountered and slain. Which
cruel tidinges had no sooner touched the ears of sorrowful Achilles, but
awaked with revenge, forgetting all other passions, he called for his Armor,
and like an enraged Lion, rushed into the thickest of the Trojans press: in
which very instant, the valiant Hector, disteyned in blood, and bathing in
swet, was with his immoderate toil welnigh sweltred in his Armor, so that he
withdrew him self out of the battle, and by the Rivers side disarmed him
self, to refresh his spirits, and to take a little air: which Achilles
perceiving, followed him, and at unawares, cruelly and dishonorably ran him
through with his Lance; and not yet therewith satisfied, caused his body with
thonges to be tied to a Horse tail, and so in derision to be thrice trained
about the walls of Troy.

Shortly after it fell out, that either side being weerie with the daily
turmoyles of Wars, agreed upon certain days of truice, in which mean time,
Achilles.
it might be lawful for the Trojans to come into the Greekish Tents, and the
Greeks likewise to enter into Troy. Among the rest, Achilles entering the
Town, chanced one day to epsy young Polixene, daughter to K. Priam: the
sight of whose admirable beauty, did so astonish him, that laying all
hostility apart, from thence forward meditated on nothing but love: which
Priamus and Hecuba the Parents of the Virgin perceiving, enterteined him with
hope, to the end that they might with the more security entrap him, to which
his often repair thither, drawn with the violence of love, yielded easy
occasion: So that one day among the rest, Paris still watching his steps,
slew him with an Arrow in the Temple of Apollo. In revenge of which treacherous
and unnoble act, afterward when Troy was taken and rased, his son young
Pyrrhus slew Priamus with his own hands, and sacrificed Polixene upon his
fathers Tomb.

Great Pompey, Pompey the great. Plutarch. Appian. Lucan.
after the unfortunate battle of Pharsalia, wherein he was overthrown by
Caesar, seeing all abandoned and lost, fled out of his Camp comfortless, and
slenderly accompanied, and disguysed with garments conuenable to his fortune,
went first to the Isle of Lesbos, to see his fair and dear Cornelia: who,
seeing her L. and Husband, that was wont to be waited on when he went by Sea
with. 500. Sail, arriving in a poor Bark, and that not his own, altogether
sorrowful and vnhonored, could not bridle the extremity of her passion, but
falling down at his feet, with most pitiful and passionate lamentations,
imputing this great adversity of her noble Husband, to his unhappy marriage
with her, did so intenerat the manly heart of Pompey, that requesting her not to
increase his miseries with her sorrow; he could not refrain his eyes from
bursting out into a river of unused tears. But seeing the speedy pursuit of
his preuayling enemy gave him no leisure long to determine, he presently
departed thence, with his constant and most virtuous Cornelia, and bended his
course toward Egypt, no whit doubting but that young Ptolome the K. would
receive him, with all courteous enterteynment and gentleness, in regard of
the infinite favors which he had done unto his father. Coming near the
shore, he advertised the King of his approach, who was then in Pelusium with his
Army, making wars against his sister Cleopatra. The king was young, and
wholly governed by one Pothinus, and Theodotus a Rhetorician, who told him,
that the receipt of Pompey could not but be dangerous, and that there was not
any way more expedient to win the good grace of Caesar, then by bereauing
Pompey of life. To which vilanous and dishonorable counsel, the youthful
abused King yielded his consent, and Achillas and one Septimius that had
sometime served under Pompey in the wars, were sent to put in execution this
dishonorable and bloody decree.

They came unto the galley wherein Pompey lay at ancher, and pretending the
coast to be full of flats and sands, and not to have water enough for his
galley, they prayed him to come into their little boat; to which Pompey agreed,
though much in his mind amazed at this slender and honorles enterteinment.
Discending out of the galley, he took leave of his loving Cornelia, with
speech and gesture as it were presaging his ensuing desaster, who with eyes
full of tears, and hands up to heaven, pursued him with her looks, till at
length they were encountered with so dismal and horrible an object, that if she
had not been by the Mariners restreined, she had thrown her self into the
sea: for when the boat even now touched the brinke of the shore, as Pompey
reached out his hand to his servant Philippus to help him to rise, Septimius
thrust him through the back with a sword, and then Achillas struck of his head
(which now white hears had made venerable) throwing his body into the sea.
Soon after, Caesar arriving in Egypt, was presented with this pitiful
spectacle of Pompeys head: But merciful and magnanimous Caesar, not enduring to
behold a sight of so great cruelty and horror, turned with a woeful gesture
his face, watring his eyes with an infinite abundance of tears, showing that
he did abhor both the vnnoblenesse of the deed, and the barbarousnesse of
the doers: Achillas and Pothinus he caused presently to be slain, Theodotus
fled, but fell afterward into the hands of M. Brutus, who caused him to be
put to a most cruel death, and Ptolome himself shortly after was overthrown
in a battle, and slain by the river of Nilus.

Anniball of Carthage, Anniball. Plutarch. Appian. Titus Liuius.
the son of Amilcar, noble in birth, and great in puissance, in his infancy
was by his father made swear upon an altar, whereon he was doing sacrifice,
that while he lived he should be a mortal enemy to the Romans, which he
failed not to perform; for after his fathers death, being in Spain created
Captain general of the Carthaginian army, in the xxvi. year of his age, he
presently drew down his army into Italy, passing the Alps with exceeding
difficulty, where he maintained wars. xvi. years with the Romans, even in
the bowels of Italy, taking from them all the plain country, and chasing
them some times even to the gates of Rome. Besides many conflictes of less
moment, he overthrew them in four famous battails, at Ticine, Trebia,
Thrasimene, and Cannas, sending to Carthage, besides many other rich despoiles,
three whole bushels of rings taken from the fingers of slain Senators and
Roman knights (For it was not lawful for any else to wear them of gold.) But
being in the end called back by the Senate of Carthage, to the defense of his
own country: he that was in Italy invincible, was in Africa, fighting even in
the sight of his city, vanquished and overthrown by Scipio.

Which brought him into such disgrace with his unthankful citizens (who were
now constrained to bow unto the Romans yoke) that fearing farther
inconvenience, he was constreined to fly unto Antiochus king of Siria: who
newly entering into war with the Romans, exceedingly rejoiced at the happy
arrival of this famous and renowned Captain, wholly for a while using his
advise and counsel in all matters of greatest weight: till at length, abused
with Roman practices, and incensedby privy whisperings of his Sirian
nobility, (who grew exceedingly envious at the familiar greatness of Annibal
with their king) he first began to distrust him, and then publicly to
discountenance him: so that poor Annibal, having all his life time lived in
the fullness of glory, was now in the extremity of his age constreined to
taste of misery, and became a wanderer. Thence he fled into Bithinia to
Prusias the king, who received him with gladness, promising him with oath, safe
abode and security within his Realm: and by his advise and conduct, gained a
famous victory by sea against Eumenes king of Persama. But shortly after Q.
Flaminius was sent by the Romans to make an atonement between him and
Eumenes; or at least, that cause was pretended: who seeing Annibal in his
Court, requested him in the Senats name to deliver him into his hands, for the
hated him deadly, as well publicly for the cause of his country, as privately
for the death of his father, who was by him slain at the battle of Cannas.

To which the K. either corrupted with gifts, or else not daring displease the
Roman ambassador, dishonorably condiscended, causing presently the doors of
Annibals lodging to be environed with his guardes. Which Annibal perceiving,
and disdayning to honor any other then himself with the glory of Annibals
death, after having with exceeding passion bitterly inueyed against the Roman
cruelty, and with horrible execrations cursed the head of Prusias and his
kingdom, he took with a fearlesse resolution a draught of deadly poison, which
for such an extremity he had always kept in store within the hollownesse of a
Ring; the violence of which was such, that it straight bereaved him of life:
His body was entombed hard by Libissa, in a Sepulcher of stone, with these
words only engraued, Here lies ANNIBALL.

Clytemnestra Queen of Micene, Clytemnestra and Agamemnon. Quid.
and wife to Agamemnon, who was Captain general, and Emperor, of the Grecian
forces in the wars of Asia, hearing that her Husband lived before the walls
of Troy, wholly abandoned to daliance and love of the beautiful Briseis:
whether to revenge his disloyalty, or else thereunto moved by the frailty of
her own incontinent desires, she allured to her love a young Grecian Lord
called Egisthus, making him pertaker of her Husbands bed, by abandoning unto
his lustful pleasure the use of her fair and delicate body; neither cared
she to cover it with any great respect: so much did the long absence of her
Husband embolden her. But when Troy was taken and destroyed, Priam slain, and
Agamemnon returning homwarde with triumph and victory, then began she to fear
least this dissoluteness of hers should not long escape unpunished, and
therefore having made him a rich and costly Garment (but out of which there
was no issue, neither for his head nor arms) at his return she prayed him to
prove it: with which, while he was struggling, Agisthus lying in ambush behind
the hangings, stepped forth and slew him with a Iauelin or Borespeare: In
revenge of which cruel part, Clytemnestra was afterward slain by her own
son Orestes.

Laius King of Thebes, Eteocles and Polinices, Princes of Thebes. Sophocles.
Statius.
being told by the Oracle that he should be slain by his own Son; so
soon as his Queen Iocasta was delivered of a Boy, he commanded a servant of
his to take the same, and to murder it in the Wooddes: who, either through
pity moved, or else through the childs destiny forced, hanging the same by
the feet to the boughs of a Tree, did leave it in the Forest behind him. It
happened that a Shepherd passing that way, hearing the child cry, took it
down, and cariing it home, gave it to his wife to be norished: who hearing
that the Queen of Corinth, wife to Polibus, greatly lamented her barrenness
and want of Children, presented her with this little Babe: which, receiving with
merueilous joy, she nourished as her own: and that the rather, because the
Boy, besides the beautiful and fair proportion of his limbs, in his looks
and gesture discovered a great Nobility. But when young Oedipus (for so they
named him) grew into years, and was certainly assured that Polibus was not his
father, he departed from Corinth, with intention to seek out his Father and
Kindred. Coming to Phocides, and understanding that the King of Thebes was
there in arms about the appeasing of cruel Wars, joining himself to the
contrary part, it was his hap to kill Laius the King his father: whence, led
by the inevitable force of his miserable Destiny, he came to Thebes, and
married Iocasta the Queen his mother, The two daughters were Antigone and
Ismene.
by whom he had two Sons and two Daughters. But at length, when the horror of
his own misfortunes, and the mystery of this monstrous marriage was disclosed
unto him, he grew into such a detestation of him self, that he tare his own
eyes out of his head, condemning him self as unworthy to behold the light.
But to the end he should not be but every way miserable in extremity, his two
sons Eteocles and Polinices adjudged him to a perpetual Prison in a dark
and obscure dungion: which unkindly cruelty of theirs, added to the terror of
his tormented conscience such grievous and unspeakable rage, that he did nothing
day nor night but power down curses and execrations upon them, wyshing
nothing to be between them but misery, mischief, and discord. But they, to
avoid this their Fathers heavy malediction, to the end there should be no
occasion of debate or strife between them, fell to this agreement, The one of
them to absent him self, leaving the royal Scepter and government of Thebes
solely to the other for the space of one full year, which being expired, he
then to deliver the Regal chair and ornaments up to his Brother, and to
depart the City till his next year of government should return: And this
order to be between them inviolable, while they should live jointly
together. The lot of the first years government befell Eteocles, who,
sweetened with the dilicious pleasures of a Crown, when the year expired,
utterly excluded his brother both from his Crown and Country: Of which
infidelity, Polinices crying to the Gods for vengeance, fled in desolate and
distresful estate to the Court of Adrastus King Argos, who so much regarded his
valor and noblenes of behavior, that he gave him one of his Daughters in
marriage: and leuying a royal Army, marched with the same in demand of his
right to the walls of Thebes. In fine, this quarrel concerning none but the
two princely brothers, they in their own persons agreed to decide it: which
coming to perform, so cruel were unto them their destinies, that each of
them dyed upon the others Spear. Whose bodies, when they were taken up, and
with magnificent and royal pomp brought to the fire wherein they were to be
burned, the fire divided it self, each Carkas casting out his flame apart.

Holofernes, being entered into Israel with a mighty puissance, Holofernes.
Judith. Chap. 12 13.
and encamped before Bethulia, had brought the same to such famine and
extremity, that the Israelites, dispayring of all hope, determined to yeede
the Town unto him. But Judith the Widow of Manasses, decking her self in rich
garments, secretly issued forth of the Town into Holofernes Tent, who
allured with her beauty (for she was exceeding fair) gave himself to mirth
and much drinking, so that through drunkenness falling into a deadly sleep,
Judith being left with him in the Tent alone, strengthened therein by the hand
of God, cut of his head with his own Fawchion, returning the same to Bethulia,
which thereby she delivered from servitude.

Sisera was Captain general to Iabin, Sisera. Judges. Cap. 4.
the great king of Canaan, and twenty years together had vexed the children
of Israel very sore, for he had with him 900. Charets of Iron; at length,
being overthrown by Barak the son of Abinoam, he fled into the house of
Heber the Kenite; whose wife Iaell, taking a Nail of the Tent, and a Hammer in
her hand, did smite the same into his temples and slew him.

After the death of Saul, Abner. 2. Sam. cap. 3.
David was anointed King in Hebron: but Abner, that was Captain of Saules
host, took Isbosheth the son of Saul, and made him king over Israel.
Soon after Abner was ouer-throwen by Ioab, and the servants of David, who
being in his flight pursued by Asahell the brother of Ioab, turned back and
slew him: For which occasion, when Abner came afterward to reconcile himself
with David, Ioab took him aside to the gate, to speak with him peaceably, and
smote him unto the heart with his dagger, so that he died.

Goliath was a Giant in the Philistian army, Goliath. 1. Samuel. Cap. 17.
of marvelous hugeness, and his weapons with which he was armed of
unspeakable terror: in so much that there was no one in the army of the
Israelits that dared answer the proud defiances and chalenges that he daily
made: till at length young David, coming from the keeping of his Sheep,
strengthened thereunto by the mighty hand of God, encountered him with his
Sling only, into which putting a Stone which he pulled out of his bag, he
smote the Giant therewith full in the forehead, and overthrowing him with the
blow, stepped to him, and with the Giants own sword cut of his head.

Haman the Agagite, standing highly in the favor of great King Ahashuerus,
Haman. Ester. Cap. 3.
because Mardocheus the Jew did not reverence unto him when he passed by the
Kings gate, obtained of the King, that all the Jews through the Kings
Provinces might be put to death. Which Ester the Queen understanding, made a
banquet to the King, inuiting Haman thereunto: in which, she pleased so the
King with her behavior and speeches, that the King sent letters throughout all
his Provinces, to revoke the sentence which he had passed against the Jews,
and caused Haman to be hanged upon a pair of gallows which he had made for
Mardocheus the Jew.

A short discourse of the Princes of Burgundy, and some other, in honor of
whom this Treatise was first written by the Author, who bewayleth their Deaths,
but speaks little of their lives.
JOHN, first of that name K. of France, Chronic. de Nicol. Gallis.
who was taken prisoner at the battle of Poictiers by the Prince of Wales, in
the year. 1356. had by his wife Bona, daughter to the K. of Boheme, Michael
Eisinger.
four sons and three daughters: Charles, which was King after him, and fifth
of that name, Jews Duke of Aniow, John Duke of Berrie, and Philippe, who being
carried prisoner with him into England, upon his delivery and return thence,
he created Duke of Burgundy.

This Philippe married Margaret daughter and heir to Malanus Earl of Flaunders
and Arthois, by whom he had three sons, John that succeeded him, Anthony
afterward Duke of Brabant, and Philippe Earl of Neuers and Estamies; which
two younger were both slain at the battle of Agincourt, by the Englishmen.
Duke Philippe died in the year 1404.

John succeeded his father, and married Margaret daughter to Albert Duke of
Bauiere, and Earl of Hollande and Zeland, by whom he had a son called
Philippe, which was he whom this Author served. This John Duke of Burgundy,
caused Jews Duke of Orleance to be murdered in Paris, who was brother to
Charles the sixth then K. of France. In revenge of which he was afterward
slain disloylly by the Dolphin of France, at a solemn meeting appointed
between them, This was that Duke Philip whom the author served, and of whom he
speaks in this Treatise. Chron. de Nicol. Gallis. Philipp de Comines. Michael
Eisinger.
after oaths and assurances taken of both sides, at Montereau in the year.
1419.

Philippe (surnamed the good) Duke of Burgundy, had three wives, the first was
Michelet, daughter to Charles the sixth king of France, the second Bona,
daughter to Philippe of Arthois, the third Isabelle daughter to John first
king of Portingale, whom he married at Bruges in the year 1429. and had by her
Charles, surnamed the Hardy. The very self same year of his marriage, he
instituted the noble order of knighthood of the golden Fleese, which the king
of Spain his successor maynteineth yet in great reputation and honor. At this
frst coming to the Dukedom, which was about the latter end of the reign of
K. Henry the fifth, he was a great favorer and maynteiner of the English
party in France, and did many notable services to the Crown of England. When
the Duke of Bedford, Uncle to king Henry the sixth, was sent over to be Regent
of France, he met him in great love at Amiens, and having with him his two
sisters, he gave the one of them in marriage to the Duke of Bedford. But
afterward, at the siege of Orleance, they of the city desired him to be a
mean for them, unto the Duke of Bedford, that the siege might be raised, in
regard of the long emprisonment of their Lord the Duke of Orleance, to whom
the counsel of England had promised in the mean time, to leave all and
every part of his lands and towns vndisquieted: whether it were so or no,
once Duke Philip dealt earnestly with the D. of Bedforde his brother in law in
that behalf: but being therein absolutely refused, he commanded by a Heralde,
all the Gentlemen of his Country, that were with the English men at that
siege, to depart thence, and from that time forward declined by little and
little in affection, and at length declared him self absolutely French. He was
a virtuous Prince, and governed his Subjects in great peace and quietness;
and finally, in the extremity of his age dyed in the year. 1466. and was with
great magnificence buried at Bruges in Flaunders.

Charles, surnamed the Hardy, son to Philip the good, Charles the hardy.
Philip de Comines. Michael Eisinger. Nicol. Gallis.
was borne at Dyion in the year 1433. he had likewise three wives, Katherine,
daughter to Charles the seventh king of France: Isabell, daughter to Charles
Duke of Burbon, by whom he had the Lady Marie that inherited his dominions: and
lastly Margaret, sister to Edward the fourth, king of England. He was a Prince
that hated rest, and was altogether inclined to unquietness and wars. His
father yet living, he overthrew in a bloody and cruel fought feelde Jews the.
11. king of France, at the battle of Montelhery in the year. 1465. with whom
making afterward peace, he warred upon those of Lyege that had chased out of
the town their Prince and Bishop being his kinseman, spoiling their
country, and taking their towns, and bringing them to such extremity, that
they were constreined to receive their Bishop again; and withal to appease
the Duke with great sums of Money. Coming thence, there fell out new
occasion of wars between him and the French king; for pacification of which
differentes; it was agreed, that the king*, and he should meet at Peronne,
there to expostulat their greefes in freendly sort one with another. And that
he should give unto the king a letter of assurance under his hand and seal:
which he did. But the conclusion hereof was, that the Duke, being advertised
how the King had by his Ambassadors secretly practiced with those of Lyege to
rebel, took him prisoner, and led him with him to the City of Lyege: which
being by straight confederation allied to the King, he caused, after all manner
of rigorous cruelty executed upon the inhabitants, to be saccaged and burnt,
and then upon new agreementes, to his own advantage, he dismissed the King.

In the year. 1474. the old Duke of Guilders, being vilanously and
unnaturally taken by his Son Adolph, and imprisoned in a dungion, moved
sundry Christian Princes to compassion: among the rest, D. Charles, who
earnestly labored to make an attonme^t between them: but his son arrogantly
refusing to hear of pacification, was by the D. of Burgundy retained in
prison: whose father shortly after dying, gave his Dukedom by Testament to
Duke Charles, who took thereof under this title forcible possession, and those
which are descended of him do yet enjoy it.

Sweetened with this Duchy, and aspiring to greater matters in Germany, he
went and besieged the city of Nuz, which was succored by the Germans and
Swissers under the conduct of Frederike the Emperor, so that he was
constrained to raise his siege: In despite of which assistance given by the
Swissers, he entered their Country with his Army, but was by them overthrown
and vanquished at a place called Granson.

This day was the first of the Dukes misfortunes, with which even until his
dying day he was perpetually pursued. Encouraged with which victory, on every
side new forces came out of Germany to the Army of the Swissers, and the D.
of Lorayne him self in person. Yet all this dismayed not the D. of Burgundy,
who having refreshed his Army, set upon them the second time at a place
called Morat, but was as before vanquished again, and was constreyned to fly,
with the loss of. 8000. of his men slain in the Feelde. Presently the Duke of
Lorayne marched in all expedition to Nansie, that held for the Duke of
Burgundy: which rendered unto him upon composition. Within two days after the
D. Charles arrived, with an vndismayed courage and full resolution to attempt
Fortune again. Among the rest that had credit about him, was one Campobache,
The horrible treason of Campobache.
an Italian Count, at home in his country poor, and of no reuenew, but by
the D. advanced to great commandment in his Army, and made Captain of.
400. men at arms: who seeing the cruel misfortunes befallen to his Master,
began presently to enter into practice with the D. of Lorayne, about the
merchandise of his Masters life; the price of which he made. 20000. Crowns,
and an Earldome: this he promised, and the same being accepted, he did as
villanously perform it. For this battle of Nansie was no sooner began, but
he with his. 400. Italian Horsemen fled to the other side: the amazement of
which, did so terrify the Duke of Burgundies Army, being twice alredie beaten
and discouraged, that they presently fled, and the Duke him self was found
in the feeld slain, and mangled with many wounds: for the villain Campobache
had hired 14. or. 15. of his cutthrote traitors to watch the Duke at an inch,
Marie, daughter and heir to Charles duke of Burgundy. Philip de Comines. 1578.
Eisinger.
to the end that he would be sure he should not escape.

Mary his only daughter and heir, succeding her father in the Dukedomes of
Burgundy and Brabant, and the Earledomes of Flaunders, Henault, Artois,
Holland, Zeland, Frizland, etc. was by the consent of her Subjects, especially
those of Gaunt, in whose hands since her fathers death she had remained, married
to young Maximilian Archduke of Austria, and son to Frederike the Emperor,
of that name the third; to whom having borne three children, Philippe,
Margaret, and Francis, 1482.
who in his infancy deceassed, she died in the fairest springing blossom of
her youth, being not above.xxiij. years of age, and lies buried at Bruges.
Some do attribute her death to the fall of an Horse; true it is she fell, but
the Author, who was of great authority about her, does rather attribute it to
some grievous impression of sorrow. Philippe de Comines likewise seems to
doubt whether she died of that fall, or no.

Don John, Isabell and Ferdenand. Chronic. de Espania. Fray Goncalo de
Yllescas. Philip de Comines.
second of that name, king of Castile, had in first marriage Mary daughter to
Ferdinand K. of Arragon, by her he had a son called Henry, that succeeded
him, and a daughter, that died young. His wife dying, he took in second
marriage Isabell, daughter to Don John, infant of Portingale, by whom he had a
son called Alonso, that died young, and a daughter called Isabell: and then
dying in the year. 1454. was by his son Henry the. 4. succeeded in the
royalty, who married Jane daughter to Edward King of Portingale, who bare unto
him a daughter likewise called Jane: who, though she proved a Princess of much
wisdom, great beauty, and many other excellent parts, yet through a rumor
of the Kings impotencie in matter of generation, Isabel sister to the king was
by her faction proclaimed Heir apparent to the Crown, and the young Princess
declared to be a bastard, begotten upon the Queen by Don Beltran D. of
Abuquerque, and by and by a marriage motioned between young Ferdinand Prince of
Arragon and the Lady Isabell: which was effected privately in Duenas. These
matters were grievous unto the king, but remedy it he could not. In the end
he died, and Ferdinand and Isabell were without contradiction obeyed in
Castile: which reproachful injury the poor Princess bearing with exceeding
patience, though many great marriages were offered her, refused them all, and
betook herself to a Monastery, wherein she ended peaceably her days. They
began their reign in the year. 1474. and continued the same many years in
great glory, both of war and peace. They expelled the Moors out of Spain,
and subdued the kingdom of Naples, delivering thereof a quiet possession to
their successors, which yet do enjoy it. They had between them a son, whose
name was John, a Prince of exceeding towardnes, or rather singular perfection.
They married him to Margaret, daughter to Maximilian of Austria by the Lady Mary
the before remembered Duchess of Burgundy, but soon after the marriage he
dyed: for whom there was made such exceeding lamentation, as by report of
sundry Authors, the like in the world was never heard of: for besides the
doleful mourning of the Nobility and Gentlemen, so general a grief was over
the whole Realm, that the very mechanical people, abandoned over to sorrow,
ceased their trades for the space of forty days, filling the air with
pitiful cries and lamentations. They had also four daughters, Isabel, Ione,
Mary, and Katherine: Isabel died young, Ione was married to Philippe, brother to
the foresaid Lady Margaret, and Katherine to Arthur prince of Wales, eldest
son to Henry the seventh of England.

Queen Isabel, after that by many noble and heroical deeds, she had over the
whole world won unto her self a reputation to be one of the most virtuous and
excellent princesses that ever lived, in the five and fiftieth year of her age
ended her days at Medina del campo, the.xxiiij. of November, in the year.
1504. Twelve years after died Ferdinand her Husband, at a little Vilage named
Madrigalecio, Philip of Austria. Fray Goncalo de Illescas. 1506.
hard by Gaudalupe: A Prince, as of singular integrity and virtue, so of a
rare and wonderful felicity and happiness in whatsoever he did undertake.

Philip, son to Maximilian and Mary, being in Flaunders, Chronic. de Espania.
Michael Eisinger. Surius.
hearing of the death of Isabel Queen of Castile, whose eldest daughter he had
married, departed presently thence toward Spain with his wife the Lady Ione,
to take possession of the Crown and Royalty: which at their arrival was
willingly by old Ferdinand to them resigned. Philip being now but.xxiiii.
years of age, was with a firm constitution of body well proportioned and
beautiful, and especially, above the rest, so courteous and affable in his
speeches and behavior, that what with his beauty and his virtue, he drue the
eyes and loves of all men to him, in so much that the Spanish Nobility and
Courtiers, forsaking Ferdinand, who thirty years had been their King, all
followed the rising son of young Philip, so that the Court of Ferdinand was
altogether solitary and unfrequented, no one of the Nobility keeping him
company, save only the Duke of Alua (who never did abandon him:) with which
inconstancy of theirs, he growing into an exceeding dislike, and with all not
pleased with his Sonne-in-lawes behavior, which by reason of whisperers, that
went between, was not so kind, loving, and reverent, as he expected, taking
with him his approved servant the Duke of Alua, he went without delay to
Arragon, and thence to Naples.

But scarsely was his back turned, when young Philip, living in as great
delitiousnesse, honor, and triumph, as either the delight of a Crown, the
pleasure of that Country, or the dutiful love of his Subjects, could yield
him, fell extremely sick of a violent hot burning Fever: of which,
notwithstanding the lustiness and strength of his young floorishing years, he
died at Burgos the.xxv. day of September, in the very year of his entry into
Spain. 1506.
Never Prince left behind him a nobler issue: for he had by his wife the Lady
Ione, two sons, and four daughters, of which the least was adorned with a
royal Diadem, viz. Charles, who besides his great succession of many
Kingdoms and Provinces, was elected Emperor of the Romans. 2. Ferdinande, who
after his brothers death, succeeded him in the Empire, and was besides created
King of Hungary. 3. Leonore, married first to Emanuel King of Portugale, and
after in second marriage to Francis the French King. 4. Marie, married to Jews
King of Hungary, 1526.
who in a battle against the Turks, died young and without issue. 5.
Katherine, married to John the third King of Portugale: and lastly Isabel,
married to Christerne King of Denmark.

Maximilian, son to Frederick the Emperor, third of that name, Maximilian
Surius. Goncalo de Yllescas. Michael Eisinger.
and Leonore daughter to Edward king of Portugale, was in his fathers time
made king of the Romans, and after his deceasse, Emperor. He was a Prince
exceedingly well learned, just in government at home, and fortunate in War
abroad. He had sundry victories against Mathias Corunis King of Hungary, from
whom he recovered Vienna, and many other of the Provinces of the lower Austria.
Likewise he recovered from the French King the Earldome of Artoys, and many
towns of Burgundy, and overthrew a great Army of his at Guignet, whereby he
recovered Cambray. He overthrew hard by Regensberg, in a memorable battle, a
great Army of the Bohemians, that came to make war upon his brother in law
Albert Duke of Bauaria.

He was with K. Henry the. 8. at the siege of Terowan, and received his wages:
during which siege, he him self in honor of England ware the Rose, and his men
the S. Georges cross. He was an exceeding scourge unto the Venetia^s; from
whom, when they were in the fullness of their glory, he took Padwa, Verona,
Vincentia, and the greatest part of Foro Iulio; and lastly, overthrew them in
a notable battle by Vincentia, where he slew of them. 5000. Taking. 24. great
Cannons, and all their Enseignes and Standards from them. In second marriage he
took Blanca, daughter to the Duke of Milan. Finally, in the. 59. year of his
age he died in Austria, some say by taking (or rather mistaking) a wrong
Potion, to prevent a sickness which he feared. He lies buried at Newstad in
Austria. 8. leagues from Vienna. He left behind him. 2. children, Philip,
whose history you heard before, and Margaret, who being by her first husband
John prince of Castile left a widow, was afterward married to Philibert Duke of
Sauoy.

It is written of Maximilian, that in his sickness he would not suffer those
that were about him to honor him with any title of dignity, but to call him
simply by his name Maximilian, protesting himself to be but a vile piece of
Earth and Clay, made of no better metal then the poorest beggar.

The last combat spoken of in this treatise, is of Henry the eight, Henry the
eight.
of famous memory: Whose noble and heroical deeds, being so fresh in the
remembrance of all men, I think it needless to make repetition of them,
neither if I would undertake it, were the labor of so high a task in any
proportion convenient to the feebleness of my slender force: Much less to
speak of her Majesty, Queen Elizabeth.
whose Princely name is lastly therein mentioned, but will leave the glorious
story of her happy reign, to those golden pens, that being dipped in the
licour of the Muses, may like Ariosto his silver Swannes, with a clear flight
bear up her sacred name, and in dispite of Time, fasten the same to the fair
pillars of Eternity, in the highest turret of the house of Fame. That which I
can do, is to pray unto the everliving Righteousness, that as he has, with
admirable goodlinesse, made her shine in gifts both of body and mind, above
all the Princes of her time, so he will preserve her unto us many, long, and
flowrishing years: For so long as we shall enjoy this our precious and sacred
Palladium, we shall need to fear neither the force of fierce threatening
Agamemnon, nor the wiles offals undermining Sinon.

FINIS.
I have in the margent of every History, noted the names of those Authors
which herein I do chiefly follow.

