coat of arms of the Honorable Artillery Company ARMA PACIS FVLCRA

VERA EFFIGIES GVLEIELMI BARRIFF AETATIS SVAE 35.
portrait of William Barriffe Though this Effigies here does Represent
and Portray forth his faces Liniament
Yet Read his Book, and you therein will find
that he has Pictured there a Soldiers mind.
G Glouer fecit.


MILITARY DISCIPLINE: OR, THE YOUNG ARTILLERY MAN.

Wherein is discoursed and shown the Postures both of Musket and Pike: the
exactest way, etc.

Together with the Motions which are to be used, in the exercising of a
Foot-company. With diverse and several forms and figures of Battle; with
their reducements; very necessary for all such as are studious in the Art
Military.

By WILLIAM BARRIFF.

PSALM. 144. 1. Blessed be the Lord my strength which teaches my hands to
war, and my fingers to fight.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, for Ralph Mab, 1635.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE
Algernonne, Earl of Northumberland, Lord of the Honors of Cockermouth and
Petworth: Lord Percy, Lucy, Poynings, Fitz-pain, Bryan and Lattimer: Lord
Lieutenant of his MAJESTY'S Forces in the Counties of Northumberland and
Cumberland; and Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter.
Right Honorable:
THe Glory of the Meridian Sun, is the more resplendently set off; by the foil
and darkness of a Shadow: which is a perpetual follower of his Light; as my
ambition in all humble service is, to be unto your Lordship: The memory of so
many Heroical Ancestors, as (in all ages) have ennobliz'd your potent Family;
together with their Martial and Renowned Achievements: do for ever stand
recorded, in the Book of Honor and of Fame. And that (were occasion fairly
offered) your Honor has Spirit and Bravery enough, in a Military emulation,
to arrive up to the height of their Glory: your constant and Noble Deportment
(as well in your private carriage; as of late days in your public Triumph,
when you were installed into that most Noble Order of the Garter) do most
evidently presage of you. This as it has attracted all eyes and expectations:
So has it encouraged my low ambition (among the rest) to esteem your Honor a
fit Patron for a Book of this Nature, your innate and inbred virtues;
together with that Courtesy, Nobleness, and Affability, (the inseparable
Companions of anciently descended Honor) speak you so easy, of access; that
my YOUNG ARTILLERY-MAN despaireth not of acceptance and admission, to kiss the
hands of your great Lordship. The first fruits, it is, of my weak endeavors:
and a Collection, merely of my private observations. Such as it is, my humble
request unto your good Lordship is, that out of the accustomed freedom and
goodness of your nature; you would be pleased to deigne acceptance of it. And
I withal beseech your Honor, to give pardon unto that presumption, which has
proceeded from devotion. I confess it an ambition in me, to soar so loftily
in my Dedication. But as Alexander (sometimes) refused not a mean Present of
fruit, from the hands of a simple Gardener: so my hope is, your Honor will
hold me excused for offering so worthless and mean a Mite to so great and
honorable a Personage. But considering that the subject of my Discourse is
intended for the bettering of the Soldiers knowledge of the trained Bands; and
that your Lordship is one of his Majesty's Lieutenants: it may prove a good
inducement to your Honors liking (who are known to be so great a lover of your
Country) to vouchsafe the protection and patronage of these my first endeavors,
whereby I shall for ever stand obliged in all humility, and remain,

Your Honors most humble and devoted servant, WILLIAM BARRIFF.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Sir Ralph Bosvile, Knight, Captain of a Select
Company of Foot in the County of Kent.
YOu may be pleased to remember (Noble Sir) how often you have Importunde me to
write something (by way of instruction) for the bettering of the judgments of
such young Gentlemen and Soldiers whose minds stand this way affected. And
although (for my own part) I can better manage the Pike then the Pen; yet that
I might not be wanting in all acknowledgement, I have taken upon me to satisfy
your request; which shall ever carry the authority of a Command with it. Expect
not (I beseech you Sir) to find my Book set forth with fine phrases, nor to
be decked with historical discourses, of foreign fought Battles: this being
the only thing by me intended in it; to set forth the exact grounds of this
our modern discipline, for the exercising of a foot Company. Nor is it to be
esteemed a small advancement to the knowledge of the art Military; even to have
Taught this little, seeing it must be confessed to have been one of the
chiefest means to make Philip from a poor Prince, to become a powerful
Monarch; and his Son Alexander amighty Conqueror. I mean his exact
observance of the true grounds of military Discipline, which begins with the
instruction of a private Company.

Add hereunto (which I have also touched upon) his frequent practice and
inuring of his Soldiers to the use of Arms: together with his well ordering
and contriving the several forms and figures of his Battles. Always (by the
way) observing how to make his advantage, either from the time, the number, or
the place, or some other such like opportunity. But not to cloy your quainter
ears with impertinent discourses: who are not only a Master of Arms, but of
Arts; also a Gentleman that has been Captain either over horse or foot; for
the space of these last forty years: and from your very infancy brought up in
the very bosom of the Muses. So that you are now become a Nestor for Counsel,
an Apollo for Music, and a Mars for the Field. But lest by acknowledging your
worthy parts, (your native modesty being such, that you never love to hear
your own due deserved praises) I purchase a frown for a recompense: I
forbear. My humble desire now is, that your Worship will be pleased to accept
of my well meaning: and although I be wanting in artfull expressions, yet to
rest assured, that I am yours in all humble and hearty affection, and shall
still continue

Your, though unworthy, yet obedient Lieutenant, WILLIAM BARRIFF.

TO THE WORTHY CAPTAINS, CAPTAIN EDWARD DICHFIELD, and Captain HENRY
SANDERS, and to all the Gentlemen of the private and loving Society of
Cripplegate meeting. W. B. wishes all health and long continuance.
Right Worthy*
Captains, it is now something morethen seven years, since the beginning of
that private and commendable exercise of Arms by your two Companies together;
how much experience it has begot in your Soldiers, your selves be the Judges.
This must be confessed, that it is so orderly contrived, as to become no
hinderance to men's more necessary callings. Yea it rather calls them the
earlier unto it: for that the Exercise continues only one hour the Thursday
of every week; and in the Summer time, ending at seven of the clock in the
Morning. Some there have been notwithstanding, that have held a prejudicate
opinion of this meeting: conceiving that it would prove an hinderance to the
Artillery ground. Nevertheless the proof has reported the quite contrary:
for that it has become a great means toward the advancement thereof. And
that by sending diverse Gentlemen thither to enter themselves therein, who
before had not the least conceit or purpose that way. As for the Soldiers of
that meeting, they neither beat Drum, display Ensign, nor discharge Musket:
But only exercise their Postures, Motions, and forms of Battle, with false
fire in their pannes. Which is the cause, that the Soldiers having attained
some little skill in the handling of their Arms: presently desire, to exercise
with more liberty; and so enter upon the Artillery Garden. Wherefore (most
worthy Captains) you shall do well to cherish your diligent and industrious
Soldiers: that so they may be heartened to persist, in so honorable and
commendable an entendment. It being such an exercise whereby God may gain
glory, the King and Kingdom, honor; your selves, credit; and your Soldiers,
skill: For my own part, I profess and acknowledge my self to be one of the
first beginners of it: and do still continue a member of the same. And this
makes me the more silent, though still I wish in heart the continuance of so
friendly a society. And therefore (fellow Soldiers) I pray you accept of my
good will for the deed: for were I as able as I am willing; I then, with the
Poet, Would consecrate your Memories to time,
That yours might Live, when I am turned to slime.


Yours in all service, WILLIAM BARRIFF.

To all worthy Commanders, and brave Soldiers.
GAllant brave Sons of Mars you must not look
That here is ought worth your reading in this Book,
Since I intend not further for to go
Then to the Letters of our Christ-crosse-row:
To show the Vowels, or to learn to spell
In Disciplines high strains I will not mell.
But if, perhaps, you have a mind to scan
Or spy faults in the Young Artillery-man,
I pray you for your credits as mine own
You Will pick no fault till you be sure it is one
And then (perhaps) when Reason taking place,
Opinion must retreit with foul disgrace.
Yet if you truly shall an Error spy
Tell me my fault, I Will not in Error die.
Then worthy Followers in great Mars his train,
That to peruse my worthless work will deigne,
Judge but the best, and you, perhaps, shall see
The next I write shall a far better be
In the, mean time, this is the best I have
Prove and approve. And more I will not crave.
W. B.

To Captain Walter Neale, now Captain of the Artillery Garden: and to all the
rest of the Worthy Captains, Lieftenants, Ensigns, Sergeants, and other
Gentlemen of that noble Society: W. B. wishes all increase of knowledge and
continuance of Love and Unity.
RIght worthy Soldiers of the Artillery,
Me thinks I see some of you look awry,
Telling me I Have done our Garden wrong
And that in Souldier-ship I am too young:
That the worst Soldier of three hundred men
Should dare in Discipline to use his Pen,
And he that the other day scarce knew a Rank
To write a Book should now be grown so cranke:
But spare your Anger for this Book you see
Can neither bring reproach to you nor me:
If for mean matter I shall be detected
From a young Soldier much is not expected:
If any say I have done pretty well
They needs must think should you write 'twould excel,
Like Lads at Wasters I but lead the way
That better Gamesters may come in to play.
Therefore be pleased if any fault be found
No shame at all can unto you redound.
If ought be good 'ith' Garden 'twas me shown
If ought be ill the Error is mine own.
Then as I from amongst you learned my skill,
So grant me love your favor and good will.
Yours ever William Barriff.

Faults escaped in the Printing.
PAge 17. line 5. for and, read ad, p. 25 l. the last, for between before, p.
34. first line of the ^1. Chap. for off, r. 10, p. 36. in the margens, for
particular, r. particle, p 64 l. 13 for arms, r. armies, p, 74. l. 9. for
also, r. all, p. 78 l. 8. for left, r. least, p. 86. l. 6. instead of for, r.
or, p. 86. l. 19. for into, r. to, p. 87 l. 8. for with, r. without, p. 87. l
23. for drawn figure, r. drawn a figure p 89. l 6. for e^ft, r. left, p. 89.
l. 17. for likewise, r. file wise, p. 97. l the last, for gratify, r.
satisfy, p. 106. l. 3. for ne, r. one, p. 108. l. 9. instead of for, r. in, p.
112 l. 4. for beh^nde, r. before, p. 117. l. 4. r. file-leaders, p. 11 ^. l. 19
and 20. instead of, or with the Chorean it holds affinity, r. and with the
Chorean it holds no affinity, p. 124. the last line, r. be as at first. p. 127.
the 2 m s which stand for the outmost file-leaders to the right, stand quite
contrary. p. 137. l. 5 for in, r. to p. 140. the figure set wrong. pa 1^2 l. 8.
or in, r. too p. 166. l. 11. for flank, r. flanks. p. 173. l. 13. for
innermost, r. outermost. p. 176. l. 32. for figures, r. figures. p. 307. l 14
for command, r. commanded. p. 217. l 4. for to, r. up. p. 290. l. 8 for figure,
r firing. p. 269. l. 18. for tm, r. them. p. 271. l. 1^. for arm, r. arms. p
2^^. l. 13. for flank, r. flanks p. 393. the title of the figure, for polium,
r. Plesium. p. 296. l. 6. for their several, r. to their several, etc. p.
297. the marginall note opposite to the ^^ line, r. instead of one file and
close. One file of Musketeers to give fire, and close, p. 302 l. the 9. for
ho^swise, r herswise, p. 306. l. 27. for Leader, r. Leaders, p 311. l. 17 for
overhead, r. overhand.

To the Reader.
COurteous Reader, although I have set forth this small Treatise, principally
aiming at the benefit of my Country, yet I know that some will not be wanting,
to disparage both the workman and the work, the matter and the manner. For
such is the misery of the times, and the malice of men; that the frothy
Depraver, shall found (in some men) an opinion of his worth, by detracting and
undervaluing other men's merits: For mine own part, I ingenuously confess, that
amongst many in our own Ground, I was the meanest both for skill and
schollership, to have undertaken a work of this nature; but being continually
pressed by my acquaintance: some for the Postures, others for the Motions, and by
some again for Figures, I being always willing to further men this way
affected; granted and gave to some men Copies, and suffered others to peruse my
Notes, which I had placed in an old waste Paper-booke. But at length, time and
men's tongues together, had begot an opinion, that I had writ a book. Which was
so freely divulged, that I was requested by some, to know when it would come
forth of the Press; when as yet I had not the least conceit, to put pen to
paper tending to this purpose. So that being engaged something in my credit,
and withal requested by a right worthy Knight, my Captain, who had power to
command: And lastly, being thrust on by the importunity of some of my familiar
friends: I have put my Card amongst the rest into the Bunch to be shuffled:
not much caring where it be dealt, so it be not mixed with the -- If any carpe
at the plainness of the style, I conceive that it fits best with the subject:
works of this nature, chiefly requiring it. If such, whom opinion has made
proud, and custom, captious; shall happen to be my Supervisors, to them I say,
that it is easier to find faults, then mend them; and to mend Books, then to
make them. But to the Courteous and skillful, whose better parts will yield
better fruits, I shall request their favorable censure, and that with their
judgments, they will mend what by oversight I have mist. For which their
loves, I shall ever stand engaged: and remain

Their thankful friend and Servant, WILLIAM BARRIFF

To my loving Friend, The Author.
HOmer eternized is for writing what
Achilles and his Myrmidons did at
The Siege of Troy. I envy not his fame,
But needs must future Ages greatly blame,
If they forget to Memorise thee too,
That show'st not what was done, but how to do.
Rowland Gwyn.

To his much esteemed Friend, and fellow Soldier, the Author.
CRitticke, observe thy distance, censure not,
Nor spend thy judgment like an Idiot
That nothing knows; If knowing, know thou then,
Thou must be rank't amongst the Envious men.
If once thou do attempt to contradict
The matter that this Book conteins in it:
The Method's plain; not decked with complements,
Those frivolous, idle, needless supplements.
The substance ponderous is; no fond conceit
Affronts thee, friend. With shame they shall retreit;
And so retrit, as not to charge again
In Front, in Reere, or Flanks. Thou shall disdain
All Formalists, that feign would Soldiers seem;
Who much expressive are, in judgment green.
Andrew Wheatley. Ex Hospitio Gray.

In Amicum Willielmum Barriff.
YOung, and so old in Martial Discipline?
Distrust will say, This work is none of thine.
But I, that know it, will aver the same
To be thine own, and not another fame.
A noble Soldier scorns to be so base
By others Worth to purchase his own Grace.
And such is BARRIFF. What his Book does speak,
It is his own: Let Envy swell and break.
Amicus H. P.

THe Art Military (how e're supposed)
Is hard like other Arts; yet here disclo'd,
In such a manner that who e're he be
That has in it but learned his A B C.
Without difficulty, with little pain,
Such knowledge in this noblest Art may gain:
That he may say, and do as much as some,
That for this Art, have traveled Christendom.
All by the learned help of BARRIFFS skill,
Learned, I say, say others what they will.
But if they speak against this he has put forth,
They will betray in them there is no such worth:
For this in him there is no fault at all.
Except in this, to teach this Art to all.
Persist then noble Friend, to the world descry
What worth lies hid in our Artillery.
And we that long to learn this Art shall say,
Thanks be to BARRIFF, he has shown the way.
Rich. Clement.

On his much esteemed friend, the Author.
AS London, Englands far famed Emperie,
In her brave Garden of Artillery,
With Reason glory may: because therein
Is exercised exacter Discipline,
By motions and apt firings; than is done
In any other Place of Christendom.
So maythat Garden as deservedly,
(Accomplished Barriff) joy and boast in thee:
Who stil'st thy self The young Artillery-Man,
Of thy abounding modesty. Yet can
Thy known experience thereby veiled be
No more than Sunbeams by a Tyffanie:
Why young? Is It cause chou'lt still a Learner be?
"Even so must all that aim at Excellency.
New Accidents, and expert men's direction,
Brings th'arte of War still nearer to perfection.
It Is said, great Alexander wept, for that
He no more worlds could find to subjugate.
And yet if He before Ostend had been,
He might have easier wept, than gotten in.
Thy practicke part of Drilling: I approve,
As meriting thy Countries thanks and love.
The rather, that I often have seen thee do
A Captains Office, and a Soldiers too.
With such exact dexterity, as none
Could say thou came short in perfection,
To foreign Discipliners (near or far,)
Though daily trained up in the School of War.
Yet as in thy assumed Title: so,
Thou Art modest in thy fair expressions too.
For thou adorn'st not thy book's Frontispiece,
With glorious Titles, to endeere its Price.
As Thou Art of War: or Soldiers Academy.
But thee confin'st within a Company,
Or Squadrons exercise. And yet a way
To set a greater Body in Array;
Thereby discover'st. Onwards then, and stead,
Thy Nation for supplying at her need.
Thy Country with large Troops well-disciplin'd,
For which, occasion will hereafter find,
A mean to crown thy merit. Whilst thy friends
Wish thy Designs, acquire their hoped for ends.
Ia. Hayward ex Hospitio Graiensij.

CHAP. I.
Concerning Postures and handling Arms.
THe first rudiments for the Discipline of Infantry ought to be an Instruction,
for the well mannaging of their Arms; whereby they may be brought, to use them
with ease and delight: whereas to the contrary (without exercise) both sorts of
Arms, will become a troublesome burden, unto the unskilful Bearers. No man is
borne a Soldier, neither can any attain, to be kilfull in the Art Military
without practice. But by practice is gained knowledge, knowledge begets courage
and confidence; few or none being fearful to execute what by frequent
practice they have thoroughly learned.

Wherefore it is necessary for every one that intends any proficiency in this
part of the Art military, to be instructed in the Postures and well handling of
their Arms; a thing much to be desired in our Trained Bands, though small hope
of amendment. Seeing the Soldiers are scarce called forth to exercise either
Posture, or Motion once in four or five years. Whose the fault is I know not,
only I pray God that it may be amended, lest shame and infamy be the least of
evils which our careless security may bring upon us: Yet pardon this
digression, for my zeal to my Countries good had almost transported me beyond
the bounds of my intent, but of this no more. I will now come to the postures
of the Musket and Pike: which, I conceive, are fittest to begin from the taking
up of their Arms, and arming the Soldiers concluding them with the laying
down of their Arms, or disarming them. But before I begin the Postures: Me
thinks I hear some already inquiring what is a Posture. Wherefore that I may
satisfy them, and not be troublesome to others. In brief thus.

Posture in a Soldier is the garb or figure, that he uses in the handling of
his Arms, consisting of several Motions for atchieving of each Posture. The
Motion being the working part, the Posture the alteration or act, either in
circumstance or matter. As to rest your Musket being one Posture, to shoulder
your Musket another, so likewise for the rest, howbeit some perchance will
object, (as formerly has bin to one of Athens, making a long Oration in the
praise of Hercules his valor) who ever doubted of it. So to me who ever
questioned these for Postures: yet I have known them not only questioned, but
written against, peremptorily concluding that there are but three Postures to
be used for the Musket, whose errors I shall easily confute. But more of this
after the Postures of the Musket. Wherefore for the more orderly proceeding
conceive their Arms to lie before them on the ground, and then the first
command will be, to stand to their Arms.

The Postures of the Musket.
TAke up your Bandeliers.

Put on your Bandeliers.

Take up your Match.

Place your Match.

Take up your Musket and Rest.

Rest your Musket.

Now if you please you may perform your saluting Posture.

Poyse your Musket.

Shoulder your Musket.

Take your Rest into your right hand, and you are armed ready to March.

Now to begin to make ready, which may be done either standing or marching.

Take your Match between the fingers of your right hand.

Put your Rest string about your left Wrist, and carry your Rest in your left
hand.

Return your Match between the fingers of your left hand.

Unshoulder your Musket and Poyse.

Ioyn your Rest to the outside of your Musket.

Open your Pan. Clear Prime Shut

Cast off your loose Corns.

Blow off your loose Corns, and bring about your Musket to the left side.

Treile your Rest, and balance your Musket in your left hand.

Charge with Powder. Bullet.

Draw forth your Scowring stick. Shorten

Put your scowring stick into your Musket.

Ram home your Charge.

Withdraw your scowring stick. Shorten Return

Bring forward your Musket and Rest.

Poyse your Musket and recover your Rest.

Ioyn your Rest to the outside of your Musket.

Draw forth your Match.

Blow your Coal.

Cock your Match. Fit

Guard your Pan.

Blow the Ash from your Coal.

Open your Pan.

Present upon your Rest.

Give fire breast high.

Dismount your Musket, joining your Rest to the outside of your Musket.

Uncock and return your Match.

Clear your Pan Shut

Poise your Musket. Shoulder

Take your Match between the fingers of the right hand.

Take your Rest into your right hand, clearing your string from your wrist.

Return your Rest into the left hand, the string loose.

Return your Match into your left hand.

Unshoulder your Musket and Poyse.

Rest your Musket.

Set the But-end of your Musket on the ground.

Lay down your Musket and Rest. Match.

Take off your Bandeliers. Lay down

March from your Arms.

There is likewise the Sentinel Posture, which is, The Muskettier having his
Musket charged with Bullet, his Match cockt, his Pan guarded, stands with his
Musket rested to perform such duty as shall be commanded or given him in
charge. Some have likewise taught to make ready on, or from the Sentinel
Posture: But note that as none comes to stand Sentinel but comes ready
charged: So if any occasion happen that he must give fire in the time of his
standing Sentinel, it causes a general Alarm. So that he will have no fit
time to make ready upon his Rest: Wherefore, I conceive it superfluous; but
will ever conform to better judgment.

We have also the Funeral Posture, which from the Rest is to be performed at
3. Motions, which cannot so well be expressed in writing, as it will express it
self in Action. Wherefore seeing that it is rather an Ornament to Obsequies,
than truly necessary for Armies I will not spend more time about it, but come
to the Postures of the Pike. Yet before I pass upon them, give me leave to
answer some, which out of a Critical humor will always be carping at others,
condemning these Postures, saying, There are more by half, then are either
good or useful; and that there are no more Postures to be used, but Make
ready, Present, Give fire. The which we will not deny that in Service there
are any other useful: notwithstanding I would have them to know, that Make
ready is no Posture, but a word of Command, including all Postures, from the
first Arming of the Soldier to the present: or if the Muskettier be charged,
shouldered or both, then the word (Make ready) commands the prosecution of the
rest of your Postures which are between the Posture you then immediately are at,
when the word is given, and the other Posture, Present for which reason when
we teach Musketeers at first it is most necessary to instruct them
punctually, from Posture to Posture: Which being once attained, he manageth his
Arms more surely more comely, with more celerity, and with better execution:
and at the first may as easily be taught the best way. But if he have got an
habit of doing ill there will be as much or more pains spent in reclayming his
errors, as at first to teach him the best, safest, and readiest way.

CHAP. II.
Of the Postures of the Pike.
THat which follows next of course is the Posture of the Pike. Wherefore that
we may observe order in our proceeding; we will likewise conceive their Pikes
to lie in like manner before them on the ground* And then, as before, the first
Command will be, To stand to their Arms.

Handle your Pikes. Order

To your open Order. close

Charge with the But-end of your Pike at the inside of your right Foot, your
Pike in the left hand, drawing your Sword over the left Arm. Charge to the
Right, Left, Reere.

Order your Pikes, and put up your Swords.

Note that these Charges at the Foot are to receive a desperate Enemy on Horse,
upon a stand in some strait, or other place of advantage* the Musketeers to
give fire over the Pikemens heads, or elsewhere, at the discretion of the
Commander.

Port your Pikes. Comport Cheek Treile Order

Charge to the Reere is to be understood always to the left about, because it
is 3. times a nearer way then charging to the right about*
Charge to the Front Order as you were. Right Left Reere Shoulder your Pikes

Advance your Pikes. Port Comport Cheek

Treile your Pikes Advance as you were. Charge to the Front Right Left Reere

Shoulder your Pikes. Port Comport Cheek Treile

Shoulder your Pikes Shoulder as you were. Charge to the Front Right Left Reere

From Comport, Cheek, or Treile, the Pikeman may at the discretion of the
Commander charge either to the Front, Reere, or both Flanks, as shall be
necessary or thought expedient. Wherefore we shall not need to do it but once
over, for the Charges will be all alike, whether you Comport from Order, from
Advance, or Shoulder. And so likewise for Cheek and Treile, etc.

From Comport Charge to the Front Comport as you were. Right Left Reere

Cheek your Pikes. From the Cheek Charge to the Front Cheek as you were. Right
Left Reere

Treile your Pikes. From the Treile Charge to the Front Treile as you were.
Right Left Reere

Order your Pikes. Lay down

I shall undergo the censure of some, for that they will find more Postures of
the Pike here then formerly they knew of, and so by their conclusion more then
there is any need of; for now-a-dayes there are such that will limit
discipline, to the verge of their own knowledge, and whatsoever else they
shall see either acted or written by others that is without the lists of their
kenning, they will peremptorily conclude for superfluous and improper,
howsoever I shall always refer my self to the judgment of the more
judicious.

The charges of the Pike are twofold either for defense or offense. Charges
underhand or overhand* but diverse and different they are from their several
ways and Postures from which they are or may be done, although they are not
all always useful, yet at sometimes they may be useful, and therefore very
requisite to be known to all such as either are, or at lest would be accounted
for good Soldiers.

As I have set down the Postures themselves both of Musket and Pike, so it were
not much amiss, if that the Motions of Posture were likewise here expressed. But
because they will take up too much time, and fill too much paper, and the
Subject it self not pleasing unto many; I will spare my labor, and my book
the lines, rather suffering the censure of curtailed brevity, then tedious
prolixity.

CHAP. III.
Of the Drum.
Our Soldiers being sufficiently instructed in the Postures of such Arms as
they carry, or are appointed to use: the next thing they are to learn, is the
knowledge of the several beats of the Drum, which is as requisite to be learnt
of the Soldier, as any thing else in this way. For the Drum is the voice of
the Commander, the spur of the valiant, the heart of the coward, and by it
they must receive their directions when the roaring Canon, the clashing of
arms, the neighing of horses, and other confused noise causes, that neither
Captain nor other Officer can be heard. Wherefore it will be most necessary
for him to learn these six several Beats, viz.

1 A Call. 2 A Troop. 3 A March. 4 A Preparative. 5 A Battle. 6 A Retreit.
1 By a Call, you must understand to prepare to heare-present Proclamation, or
else to repair to your Ensign.

2 By a Troop understand to shoulder your Muskets, to advance your Pikes, to
close your Ranks and Files to their order, and to troop along with (or
follow) your Officer to the place of Randesvous or elsewhere.

3 By a March you are to understand to take your open order in rank, to
shoulder both Muskets and Pikes, and to direct your March either quicker or
slower, according to the beat of the Drum.

4 By a Preparative you are to understand to close to your due distance, for
skirmish both for rank and file, and to make ready, that so you may execute
upon the first command.

5 By the Battle or charge, understand the continuation or pressing forward
in order of battle without lagging behind, rather boldly stepping forward
into the place of him that falls dead, or wounded before thee.

6 By a Retreit understand an orderly retiring backward, either for relief,
for advantage of ground, or for some other political end, as to draw the enemy
into some ambushment, or such like. Much more might be written concerning the
Drum, but this may suffice for the present.

CHAP. IV.
Of Ranks and Files, their places and dignities.
NOw that our Soldiers are somewhat skillful in managing of their arms, and
no less capable of the several beats of the Drum, it is high time for them to
know the difference between a Rank, and a File. Wherefore What is a Rank.
know that a Rank is a row of men, sometimes more, sometimes fewer, standing,
moving, or marching even a breast, or (as some write) pouldron to pouldron, or
shoulder to shoulder. A File What is a File.
is a sequence of men, standing one behind another, back to belly in a
straight line from Front to Reere, consisting sometimes of 6. 8. or 10. men. on
some occasions the Spaniards make them 12. deep. But when any one would show
much variety of exercise, then 8. will be the more pliant and dividual number,
yet for service in the field, where men are not altogether so expert (as I
could wish our Countrymen were) 10. men is the fittest number, not only for
the cause aforesaid, but also because that 10. is the square root of a 100. and
is a better number to draw Companies into grosser bodies.

And now I think it would not be much amiss if I should here insert the
several places of digninity and precedence in Rank, as also in File. Wherefore
because that Files are first to be drawn forth, and that by adding or joining
of Files together, Ranks are made; we will begin first with Files. Wherefore
conceive their honor according to the figures or numbers hereunder placed,
first in File, then of Rank, lastly of both co^joyned.



It will not be of it self sufficient that I have both marked and figured the
places and dignities to each particular man in his File and Rank, but it will
be looked for of some, that I should back my opinions either with sound and
good reasons of mine own, or at the least with the opinions of some others: as
for such as have employed themselves upon this subject, they have been as
diverse in their judgments, as their number, each man having a fancy to his
own way. And if it were much material, I might have here demonstrated unto
you the several opinions of Leo, Robertellus, Count Mansfield, Sir Thomas
Kellie, and many others: whose works being extant, I will spare the labor.
But above all the rest that ever I read, Captain John Bingham has in my
judgment best delivered himself in this particular: which although he have
expressed by way of Tetarchies and Mirrarchies, yet the same may be understood as
well by Ranks and Files. His words are these: In the Tacticks of Ae^an lib. 1.
the Notes of the 10. Chapter.
Every Tetarch is over four Files, in all which the Commander that has the
right, has the first place; he that has the point of the left, the second
place; he that stands on the right hand next to him, the third place. The
last place is his that stands next to the Commander of the right point on the
left hand: He demonstrates it by way of figure thus.



CHAP. V.
Reasons for precedence of dignity in Ranks and Files.
I Shall now endeavor to give some reasons for these several places of
dignity in Rank and File. And first for that Geometrical proportion gives
both life and being to orderly discipline, consider that all parts of the body
ought to be answerable. Wherefore seeing that the joining of Files and Ranks
produces greater Bodies; it is necessary that a true proportion should be kept
from the beginning: and that in drawing forth of Files they observe to make the
Reere half files answerable in skill and worth to the Front half file. And
that the file-leaders, and halfe-rankes of the left flank, should be
equivalent in worth, skill, and valor to the right flank, that the Reere
division hold like proportion with the Front division, and that all parts of
the body depiction of 'ranks and files' be balanced with true proportion, so
near as the knowledge of the Soldiers, and the number of the men will give
you leave; and that there may be correspondency in their worth, place, and
dignity* you may observe by adding the figures of number together, which are in
the Margent, where you shall find that the dignity being added together of the
Front half file, makes the number of 18. And the worth of the Reere division
being in like manner added, makes the like number. So likewise shall you find
the dignity and worth of the File leaders of the left flank, to parallel the
worth of those on the right flank by the same rule. If you will have it yet
more clear, observe that the file leader is the chief in his File, the
bringer up the second, the half File leader the third, the last man of the
front half file the fourth. Now note that as the worth of the first precedes
the second, so the worth of the third exceeds the fourth. Now add the first
worth to the fourth worth, and that makes five. And the second worth to the
third, and it makes the same number; so that there is equality throughout the
Battle both in Front, Reere, and Flanks: for it were unreasonable, that all
the chief men should be on the right Flank, and all the worst on the left.
For the left must be opposed to the enemies right. The File leader ought to be
worthiest, because he has the command of his File, and marches the first
against his enemy. The bringer up ought to be the second, because his place of
march is in the Reere, and is in most danger, should the enemy charge on that
part. The half file leader is the third in honor, because that when the half
file is taken off upon any occasion, he is the leader (unless they be
commanded to face about) the last man of the front half file is the fourth man
in dignity, for when the Reere division is taken off, then he is the Bringer
up. The next man to the file-leader has the fifth place of honor, for that one
doubling brings him into the front. The next man before the Bringer-up has the
sixth place of honor, for that if the body be faced about, one doubling brings
him into the Front accidental, or keeping the proper front by once doubling of
ranks, he becomes Bringer-up to his File-leader. The seventh place of honor
is his that marches next after the halfe-file leader, for that when the half
files double the Front, or marches forth, then one doubling, ranks him even
with the Front. The eight and last place of honor, is his that is the third
from the Front, the File being but 8. deep, which may also be made a
File-leader, though with more trouble than the rest: for by counter-marching
Front and Reere into the midst, and then facing to the former front, and
after doubling of ranks, makes him likewise a file-leader. Now as every man's
dignity is more or less in his File, so is all his rank with him. Wherefore
this that has already been said, may suffice to demonstrate unto those which
as yet are ignorant of the several places of dignity, both in Rank and File.
I might have enforced many other reasons concerning the dignity of number and
place: but I have insisted longer upon this subject, then at first I intended,
which makes me the more willing, though somewhat abruptly to break from it,
and come to show the manner of joining or drawing up of Files into form of
battle. And therefore this may serve for all, the Sergeant that has order to
place them, is to lead them up according to their worth and honor. As first
the right hand file; then the left hand file; and so the other files
successively within them according to their several worths and places. As by
the following figure you may more plainly perceive.



If there be any that shall say these are nicities, and of no repute amongst
Soldiers, I dare say they have been well reputed of by good Soldiers, no
disparagement unto the fault-finders (if there happen to be any such.) As for
the noble, worthy, and well-knowing Soldiers, I am almost confident that out
of their true-speaking judgments, they will either conclude that it is so
used, or at the least that it ought so to be; but if this can work no effect
with the -- I leave every man freely to his own judgment, desiring the
judicious, always to hold a favorable opinion of my well-meaning.

CHAP. VI.
Of the several distances.
NOw that our Soldiers have attained some small knowledge in the use of their
Arms (me thinks like some of our little-knowing soldiers of the trained
Bands) they already begin to be ambitious of File-leaders places; therefore
that their own weaknesses may light them to read their own follies, we will
see how they will behave themselves in exercise amongst the Company. Wherein
the first thing we are to instruct them in, is their distances. But because it
is held by some a matter disputable, whether distance be one of the motions or
no: We will first declare what is distance. To which I answer, that indeed
Distance it self is no motion, but there is motion in producing such distance;
for Distance is the space of ground between man and man, either in File or
Rank, having relation only to the place between each party. All the rest of
the motions having not only relation to the one, but the other. Wherefore not
to spend more time in a matter so apparent, we will say that the discipline of
a foot-companie consists chiefly in distance and motion. And therefore seeing
that distance is the ground of motion, and that no motion can be performed
without distance, we will leave to discourse it, and fall to the matter it
self, and show how many sorts of Distance is ordinarily used in our modern
discipline, which are these four here under named, viz.

Close Order, which is One foot and a half. Order, both in Three foot. Open
Order, Rank and Six foot. Double distance, File Twelve foot.

It has been the opinion of some ancient Commanders, that the distance of
Rank, was always double the distance of File, although they went both under
one and the same denomination. As that order in File was three foot, order in
Rank six foot, open order in file six foot, open order in rank twelve foot,
and so of other distances. But the best received opinions hold them to be alike
both in rank and file.

There is to be considered in distance these three especially, that is,
Distance For March. For Motion. For Skirmish.



You are to observe, thatyour distance for march is to be three foot between
file and file, and six foot between rank and rank; distance for motion six
foot both in rank and file, distance for wheelings and skirmish three foot in
rank and file. Only if you were to receive a charge from the horse, it is
necessary for your files of Pite-men to be at close order. Wherefore we will
rehearse all the ordinary ways for the opening, and closing both of files and
ranks. But in the first place command them to even their Ranks, and
streighten their Files, to be silent and attend to their words of command and
direction, etc.

In motion of Files you are to observe your Leader.
Ranks and files to your close order.

Files open to the right to your order. Ranks open forward

Files open to the right to your open order. Ranks open forward

In motion of Ranks you are to observe your right hand man.
Files open to the right to your double distance. Ranks open forward

Files close to the right to your open order. Ranks close forward

Files close to the right to your order. Ranks close forward

Files close to the right to your close order. Ranks close forward

Files open to the left to your order. Ranks open backward

Files open to the left to your open order. Ranks open backward

Files open to the left to your double distance. Ranks open backwards

Files close to the left to your open order. Ranks close backward

Files close to the left to your order. Ranks close backward

Files close to the left to your close order. Ranks close backward

Files open right and left to your order. Ranks to the front and reere

Files open right and left to your open order. Ranks to the front and reere

Files open right and left to your double distance. Ranks to the front and
reere

Files close right and left inward to your open order. Ranks to the midst --

Note that when Files open to the right, the lefthand file must stand fast,
every file taking his distance from the file next his left hand: And when they
open to the left, then the right hand file stands, every file taking his
distance from the file next his right hand. Observe also that when Ranks open
forwards, then the last rank stands, every Rank taking his distance from the
Rank next behind him: And when they open backwards, then the first Rank is
to stand, every Rank to take his distance from the Rank next before him. You
are likewise to take notice in the action, that you are either to face to the
right, or to the right about.

Note also that in closing of Files, if it be to the Right, then contrary to
the opening, the right hand file stands; the rest closing to the Right, taking
their distance from their next right hand file. If you close to the left, then
the left hand file stands; the rest of the files closing to the left, taking
their distance in like manner. When Files close to the right and left, then
they close inward, taking their distance from the files within them, nearer to
the midst of the body. Also note, that when Files are commanded to open to
the right and left (or by division) it must be outward. If Ranks close to Front
and Reere, then the first and last Rank stand; the others taking their
distances from them. If they close Ranks toward the center or midst, then they
close toward their two middlemost Ranks.

It is not required that every Captain or other Officer that shall exercise a
Company, shall use all these several openings, and closings which are here
expressed, but rather that he shall make use of so many of them, as he shall
think fit for his present occasion or exercise. Although they all may be
useful at some time or other. I may spare examples, for it must needs be
apparent to the meanest capacities.




CHAP. VII.
Of marching the Company in Divisions at length, the order and places of the
Officers, and again drawing them into form of Battle.
NOw that our Soldiers are somewhat expert in their distances, we will next
draw them forth into a long March. Wherefore note, that our files must be at
order, and our Ranks at open order: The Musketeers of the right flank, are to
make the Van, and to march next after the Captain: The Pikes are to make the
battle, and to march after the Ensign, either in one or two divisions,
according to their number. The Musketeers of the left flank (sometimes called
the second division of Muskets) make the Reere Guard, which is led commonly by
the second Sergeant. How beit if there be but one division of Pikes, then the
eldest (or chiefest) Sergeant leads the second division of Musketeers. If the
Company be but small, then it is best to make but two Divisions, one of the
Musketeers, another of the Pikes; For the placing of the rest of the Officers,
you may perceive by the figure in the margent* Wherefore note that M. stands
for Muskets, p. for Pikes, D. for Drums, S. for Sergeants, E. for Ensign, L.
for Lieutenant, and C. for Captain.

Note, if you have but three Drums, then let the Drum in the second
division of Pikes be wanting: If only two, then upon a March, the first
between the third and fourth rank of the front division of Musketeers. The
second between the third and fourth rank of the second division of Pikes.

Note that between each Division in March, there ought to be 12. foot
distance; 6. foot between the Officer, and 6. foot behind him.




CHAP. VIII.
Of drawing the divisions up into a square.
WHen you would bring your body again into Battalia, command your front
division to make Alt or Stand; then give order to your Ensign either by a
Sergeant, or by some sign to lead up the first division of pikes on the left
of the first division of Musketeers, with his colors flying, and the Pikes to
continue shouldered, so long as the Drum beats a March. But if it beat a
Troop, then the Pikes are to advance, and close their Ranks forward to their
order, and so the Ensign to troop them up with his colors fierld. The eldest
Sergeant is to leadeup the second division of Pikes; The second Sergeant in
like manner is to lead up the second or reere Division of Musketeers; each
division still marching up to the left of that division next before it. The
manner you may plainly see in the figure; where the front division is marked in
the Reere with the letter A. The first Division of Pikes with the letter B. The
second Division of pikes with C. The second Division of Musketeers has in the
Reere the letter D. The other figure on the other leaf in form of a square
shows their standing, after the Divisions are led up. All the file-leaders
standing even in front together making one Rank.



The discipline of the Art Military may rightly be divided into these five
general heads, (viz.) Distance, Facings, Doublings, Countermarches, and
Wheelings, which have been not unaptly compared to the five vowels: For as
without one or more of the vowels, no word can be spelled, so without one or
more of these, neither form, nor action can be performed.

CHAP. IX.
What is Facing, and the use of the word, whether to be used or refused.
BEfore we come to show the variety of Facings in the action, I think it will
not be amiss to speak a word or two in the way of definition: and therefore
what is Facing* To which I answer, That Facing is a particular turning of the
Aspect from one part to another, whereby the Front proper becomes a Front
accidental: And a Front accidental, may be reduced to his proper Front. There
are some likewise that by no means will allow of the word Face: Concluding it
altogether unnecessarie; And no other word must be given, but, To the Right, To
the left, etc. Yet I wonder that men will stumble at so small a straw, which
cannot choose but be better used than refused. For the word Face is but one
syllable, and quickly pronounced, and gives so clear an expression of the
intent of the Commander that it concludes it necessary. As for example, Should
you command a Company to double Ranks to the Right, and then command them as
they were, and then say, To the Left, it might puzzle a good Soldier at the
first, to discern whether he should face or double: The like mistake might be
among Countermarches: Wherefore I conceive that none can justly tax it for
superfluous, seeing the easiest expression has always been accounted for the
best. Yet spare me, for my intent is not to oversway any man in his opinion,
but rather to deliver mine; leaving all men freely to their own likings.

If my intent were to make a great book with a little matter, I might then
here insert figures for every particular Facing, and their Reducements to their
first Posture, which would take up diverse sheets of paper, and to little
purpose. For I suppose that every man that knows any thing, may easily conceive
the Idea of any ordinary Facing in his mind. Wherefore I will but show one or
two of the hardest. You are to note that in the Motion of Facings every man
turns on the Center, or Ball of the left foot, moving only the right, the
other being the keeper both of rank and file. In the exercise of the motion of
facings, you are to be at open order in Rank and File.


Face to the Right As you were. Left Right and left Right about Left about
Right and left inward When you face to any hand in the Reducement, you are to
return by the contrary.
Right angle Left Four Angles

The front half files standing, it will be requisite for the half files to
the reere, to do as much by themselves: whereby, they will the more aptly
perceive, how that the subdivision goes under the denomination of the half
files, etc.

Half files face to the Right. As you were. Left. Right and left. Right about.
Left Right and left inward

There is another word which is ordinarily used and proper, for reducements of
Facings, which is, To your Leader.

There is another Facing sometimes used, which is, Face to the center, and is
when the body stands in some circular form, or else in an hollow square.

There is also a Facing, which causes the Body to face to the front, reere,
and flanks, which some call, Facing square.

CHAP. X.
Of Facing square, and how to perform it, the usefulness of facings, and the
several parts thereof.
WHen we instruct our Soldiers how to face square (if the Body be but 8.
deep) command, the two first ranks stand fast, the two last Ranks face about,
the rest of the Body face to the right and left. If the Body be deeper we
command more Ranks to the Front, and so likewise to the Reere. It is very
necessary for young Soldiers to move 10. or 12. paces upon every motion of
facings, whether they are entire, or divisionall. Now I will prick two
several figures of facing, which will be sufficient to demonstrate all the
rest.

Face square and march.

When your Soldiers begin any motion, let them advance their Arms. When they
come to a stand, and have performed their motion, let them order their Arms.
The words of Command, commonly used to produce this figure, are these as
follows.

The two first ranks stand.

The two last ranks face about.

The rest of the body face to the right and left, (then) march all.

To reduce them to their first order*

Face all about to the right, march and close your divisions.

Face all to your Leader (who then stands at his front proper.)

Facing square another way, and marching upon it.



The words of command customarily used to produce this figure are these as
follows,

Musketeers face to the right and left.

Half files of Pikes face about to the right (then) march all.

To reduce them to their former order,

Face all about to the right, march and close your divisions.

Face all to your Leader.

Facings are so useful and necessary, that you may as well dispense with any
one of the grounds of Discipline, as with them; for they are useful almost
upon all occasions, and not only sooner executed than any other of the
motions, but may be needful when Wheelings and Countermarches cannot be used,
as in a strait. There are no more then four facings entire, besides Angular;
as for Divisionall, there be diverse, and indeed very necessary many of them be,
as occasion may offer it self for their several uses; howsoever peremptorily
to say, there be so many and no more, I conceive, has been concluded by none;
but it still rests at the discretion of the Commander, to exercise more or
fewer of them, as he best likes, and the necessity requires either for action
or exercise.

Entire.
Entire facings are so called when the aspect of the whole Company are directed
one way.

Divisionall.
Divisionall facings are so called, when the aspect of the Soldiers is at one
and the same time directed diverse and several ways: as to the front and
reere, the right and left, or to all four at once, etc.

Angular.
Angular Facings are so called, when the aspect of the Company is directed to
the right corner man, which is the right Angle, or to the left corner man,
which is the left Angle; or to the four corner men, which are the four Angles.

Angular facings were of great use among the ancients, for their figures called
the Diamond, the wedge, the Sheeres, the Saw, and such like, when they made use
of such forms of battle. But for the use of them in our modern Discipline, I
conceive there is little or none, only thus, we honor the memory of the
Ancients in their use. And some say they are very fit for exercise; for that by
their use the soldier is made more apt and perfect in the other. Therefore let
this suffice to be spoken concerning facings, and now be pleased to turn your
aspect, and take a view how our young soldiers will behave themselves, in the
performance of the doublings.

CHAP. XI.
Of Doublings, their use and parts.
DOublings are of most excellent and singular good use for the strengthening of
any part of the battle, according to the occasion or discretion of the
Commander, and consists of these two generals, Doublings of length, and
Doublings of depth, all times in quantity of number, sometimes both in number
and place, both sorts having this restriction, to be doublings of ranks or
flanks; every particular doublings pointing at one of these, although there be
sundry and diverse ways for the doing of them, each of them being to very good
purpose, for some consideration or other. Doublings of Ranks, from what form
soever it be done, does make the number double so much as was before, and
sometimes does extend the length of the battle to double the proportion of
ground, as well as well as number.

Doublings of files (or flanks) do also double the number in depth, and
sometimes becomes a doubling both of number and place. Wherefore for the better
understanding of the doublings, observe with me these six usual ways
following.

The several parts or branches of Doublings.
Doublings of 1 Ranks. 2 Halfe-files. 3 Bringers-up. 4 The Reere. 5 Files. 6
Halfe-rankes.

The first is the doubling of ranks, and is when every even rank doubleth
into the odd; the second is, when the halfe-files double their ranks forwards
into the Front: the third, when the Bringers-up double their ranks forwards
into the Front. The fourth when the Front-halfe files doubleth the Reere. These
first four being doublings of ranks, the length of the battle being by them
extended either simply in number, or both in number and place. The next two are
doublings of flanks: the first whereof is the ordinary doublings of files,
every one of the even files being inserted into the odd files, accounting from
the hand named. The next is the doubling of halfe-rankes, which is to be
understood when one flank doubleth the other, either by passing through,
countermarch, doubling entire, or divisionall.

You are to note in this motion of doubling, that as there is one part of the
body stands, so the other part moves: the standing part is to be doubled, The
distance for particular and divisionall doublings, is open order in Rank and
File. Note that the ordinary doublings of Ranks and Files, is or ought to be
performed by three steps, first stepping forth with that foot which is next
unto the place named, and in the reducement, to return by the contrary hand.
the part moving, are those that double, as you may perceive by the figures,
which show the manner of each doubling. That which next follows are the words
of command, and direction for doublings with their several reducements
following next after them.

The words of command for Doublings.
Ranks to the right double. left

Ranks as you were.

Files to the right double. left

Files as you were.

Bringers up double your ranks forward to the right.

Bringers up face about to the left, march forth into your places.

Bringers up double your ranks forward to the left.

Bringers up face about to the right, march forth into your places.

Files to the right and left double outward, Files as you were. Note that in
these doublings of ranks and files, if you double ranks to either hand,
doubling of files to the contrary, reduces them. Or in doubling of files to
any hand, doubling of ranks to the contrary will reduce them.
inward,

Half files double your ranks forward to the right.

Half files face about to the left, march forth into your places.

Half files double your ranks forward to the left.

Half files face about to the right, march forth into your places.

Front half files face about to the left and double the reere to the right,
march forth into your places.

Front half files face about to the right and double the reere to the left,
march forth into your places.

Front halfe-files double the reere to the right by countermarch.

Front halfe-files face about to the left, march forth into your places.

Front halfe-files double the reere to the left by countermarch.

Front halfe-files face about to the right, march forth into your places.

Halfe-rankes to the right by countermarch, double your left flank.

Halfe-rankes that doubled face to the right, march forth into your places.

Halfe-rankes to the left by countermarch, double your right flank.

Halfe*ranks that doubled face to the left, march forth into your places.

Halfe-ranks of the right, double your left flank.

Halfe-ranks that doubled, face to the right, march forth into your places.

Halfe-ranks of the left, double your right flank.

Halfe-ranks that doubled face to the left, march forth into your right places.

Note that upon all motions of doublings, that they that are to double before
they move from their places, are to advance their Arms. When they have
performed their doubling, they are to conform to the Posture of those whom
they double, whether it be Order, Advance, or Shoulder.
Halfe-files double your front to the right entire.

Halfe-files face about to the left, march forth into your places.

Halfe-files double your front to the left entire.

Halfe-files face about to the right, march forth into your places.

Halfe-files double your front inward entire.

Halfe-files face about to the right, march forth into your places.

Halfe-files double your front by division.

Halfe-files face about to the right and left, march forth into your places.

Front halfe-files double your reere by division.

Front halfe-files face about to the right and left inward, march forth into
your places.

Front halfe-files double your reere to the right entire.

Front halfe-files face about to the left, march forth into your places.

Front halfe-files double your rear to the left entire.

Front halfe-files face about to the right, march forth into your places.

Halfe-ranks of the right, double your left flank entire to the right.

Halfe-rankes that doubled, face about to the left, march forth into your
places.

Halfe-ranks of the left, double your right flank entire to the left.

Halfe-ranks that doubled, face about to the right, march into your places.

Halfe-ranks of the right, double your left flank by division.

Halfe-rankes that doubled, face about the right and left inward, march forth
into your places.

Note that all entire doublings, are to be performed at Order both in Rank and
File.
Double your ranks to the right entire.

Ranks that doubled face to the left, march forth into your places.

Double your ranks to the left entire.

Ranks that doubled face to the right, march forth into your places.

Double your ranks by division.

Ranks that doubled, face to the right and left inward, march forth into your
places.

Double your files to the right entire, advancing.

Files that doubled, face about to the left, march forth into your places.

Double your files to the left entire, advancing.

Files that doubled, face about to the right, march forth into your places.

Files double your depth entire to the right files that doubled, as you were.
left

Files double your depth to the right, every man falling behind his bringer-up.

Files that doubled, as you were.

CHAP. XII.
Of inversion and conversion, and of doubling Ranks.
THere is yet another doubling of the depth, which is called Inversion. But
because some out of their ignorance make little or no difference betwixt
Inversion and conversion. Give me leave for the clearing of the doubt, to place
Conversion and Inversion together, that by their contrary effects, the
difference may be the more perspicuous to such as shall be desirous to know it.
Yet before I either enter upon figure, or command for Inversion or Conversion,
I hold it necessary to show some of the figures of those doublings, for which I
have already given the words of command and reducements. And then next after
them, I will place both the words of Command, and the figures belonging to
Inversion and Conversion.

This figure next following, is a doubling of ranks to the right, where you
may perceive how the even ranks are inserted into the odd ranks: the pricks
denotating the places they stood in, before the doubling began, the little line
or stroke drawn from the pricks, showing the manner of the doubling: I think
it would be needless to Note that in the doubling of Ranks, the even Ranks are
to double into the odd, beginning always to reckon from the first Rank.
make another figure, to show the doubling of ranks to the left; for the
meanest judgment may by this figure easily apprehend what the other would be.

Ranks to the right double. Ranks as you were.

CHAP. XIII.
Of doublings of Files.
IN this doubling of Files, you may perceive, that each of the even files
doubleth into the odd files, beginning from the hand named: as in this
doubling of files to the left; the left hand file stands fast, the second file
doubleth into it, the fourth file into the third, and so for the rest. If your
command be to double your files to the right, then contrariwise the right hand
file stands fast, the rest of the even files doubling into the odd, accounting
from the right, as before from the left. Thus much may suffice for the doubling
of files, only take this by way of admonition; that as in doubling of ranks
any way, you are to observe your right hand leader: so in doubling of files,
you are to observe your file-leader; so that as near as possibly may be, you
may either In doubling of Files, note if the doubling be to the left, as in
this Figure, then every man of the even Files, steps behind his left hand
in rank or file, be altogether in one motion. If you please further to
observe with me, that this doubling is a doubling of number, and not of place,
the depth of the battle not being thereby extended, for further satisfaction
observe this figure.

man at three steps, every even File doubling into the odd files beginning
your account with the outmost File to the hand named, as I have formerly said.
Files to the left, double. In this doubling of Ranks by Bringers* up, as
likewise in all other of like nature, they that are to move, are to adxance
their Arms. But if the Commander please, it will be best for the ease of the
Musettiers, to be shouldered. And upon all doubling of Ranks whatsoever, lot
them be sure to observe their right hand men.
Files as you were.

CHAP. XIV.
Of doublings by bringers-up.
THis doubling which next follows, shall be a doubling by Bringers-up, of
which sort, one figure will be sufficient, which I hold most necessary to
demonstrate in manner of motion* The figure follows.

Bringers up double your Ranks forward to the right. Bringers up face about to
the left, march forth into your places.

This doubling of Ranks by Bringers up, differs from the other doubling of
ranks, first done, both in quantity and quality. In quantity it differs, in
regard the other leaves a large distance between Rank and Rank, being double
the distance they formerly stood at: this contrariwise continuing and
preserving the same distance they formerly stood at between each Rank. In
quality it also differs, in regard that it brings the best and second sort of
Soldiers, together into the Front. The manner of this doubling you may
plainly perceive by the figure, where it is performed as follows. The eight
or last rank, which are the bringers up, pass forwards even in rank, through
or between the intervales, to the right of them that stand before them, until
they come even in rank with the Front; The seventh rank following those which
marched from behind them, placing themselves in the second Rank, the sixth in
the third, the fifth rank or half file in the fourth or reere of the front
half file. This doubling makes a very able Front, in bringing all the best
Soldiers together. And although it has diminished the number, in regard of
the depth, yet it has doubled the number in the length. This doubling is in
quantity of number, not of ground. When you march into your places, remember
this, that the Rank which last took his place in the execution of this motion,
must first march into his place in the way of reducement. For as they are led
forth by their Bringers up, contrariwise they are led off by their half file
leaders.

In the doubling of the Front to the left by Bringers up, it is the same, only
differing in this, that whereas before it was to the Right, this is to the
Left. Wherefore let this suffice for doublings, by Bringers up.

CHAP. XV.
Doublings of Files outward and inward.
THe next doubling, is a doubling of Files outward, which works the same
effect; as to double Files to the right and left. For the right flank is to
double to the right, the left flank to the left. As you may plainly perceive
by the following Figure.

Files to the right and left double outward. Files as you were.

This doubling of Files to the right and left outward, strengthens both the
Flanks at once; by doubling their numbers in depth: But it weakneth the Inward
part, where it takes two Files clean away, leaving a large Interuale in the
midst. Some say it is good when a Commander will grace any, to bring them
through the center or midst of the Battalia. But you must note, if you have an
odd File you cannot so punctually perform it, as when the number of your
Files be even. The manner of the doubling, you may perceive by the Figure; The
motion, by the little lines drawn from the Pricks. The performance is as
follows.

The outmost File of each Flank stands; The second Files double into them; The
third File from each Flank stands; The fourth File double into the third; The
sixth into the fifth, and so likewise for the rest.

If you would double Files to the right and left inward, it is to be done the
contrary way: For whereas in this Figure of doubling last performed; the
outmost Files stand, the other doubling outward into them: Contrariwise the two
inmost Files should stand, the rest doubling to them inward. And whereas in
this there is a larger distance in the midst, then is in any other part; The
other part Contra would be closest in that part. Some men do not approove of
either of these doublings. I leave every man to his own choice. The practice
of it makes perfection, and he that can do much may do less when he li^teth.

CHAP. XVI.
Of doubling by Halfe-files.
THe next doubling is a doubling by Halfe-files, whereby the length of the
Battle is extended to double the former proportion of number, the depth being
extenuated both in number and place. This Figure will demonstrate unto you the
manner of the motion, which is as follows.

Halfe-files double your Ranks forward to the right. Halfe-files face about to
the left, March forth into your places.

This doubling our Ranks forward by our Halfe-files, is a Morio^ generally
approved of by all for serviceable, if it be done with conveniencie. It
differs from the other doubling by Bringers up, in quality, not in quantity,
(for therein they keep one proportion:) In quality it differs thus: The
doubling by Bringers up brought the best and second sort of soldiers together
into the Front; The fourth and third sort into the Reere: So that the Reere was
4/7 worse then the Front: This doubling by Halfe-files brings the best and the
third together into the Front, and leaves the second and fourth in the Reere:
So that the Front is made more able, then the Reere, by. It differs likewise
in Motion thus; For whereas in the other doubling, by Bringers up, the Motion
was begun, by the last Rank* every Rank following the Rank which came from
behind him: This contrariwise is directly led forth by the fifth Rank from the
Front, (if they be but eight deep) and so is executed more surely and
suddenly; the fifth Rank passing into the first; the sixth Rank into the
second; the seventh into the third, and so for the rest. For the reducement,
when they are commanded to face about to the left, and march forth into their
places; Then as the Motion was led on by the Halfe-file-leaders, so in the
reducement, they are led off by the Bringers up: Doubling of halfe-files to the
left produces the same effect; only the contrary hand.

CHAP. XVII.
Of doubling the Reere by Front Halfe-files.
THe doubling of the Reere by Front halfe-files, is differing from the doubling
last shown, more in manner then matter; Both concurring in substance, although
differing in circumstance. To say more of it, were more then needed; only
peruse the Figure which presents it self unto you (as it is in motion) as
follows.

Front halfe-files, Face about to the Left; and double your Reere to the Right.
Front Halfe-files, face about to the Left, march forth into your places.

This doubling of the Reere, by the Front halfe-files, is to be performed
after this manner. The command being first given, the Front halfe-files face
about to the left, (the Pikes being all advanced, the Muskets all either poysed
or shouldred) and so being led by the Halfe-file-leaders to the Reere, which
are those that hold the fourth place of honor, they march directly forwards to
the Right of the other part of the Body, which stood faced in opposition;
until the leaders of the doubling have ranked, even in Rank with the Bringers
up, the rest ranking even with the other standing Ranks, according to their
places: If it be for service that this doubling is used, then the whole body is
to face about to the Reere, being the part to be doubled: If only for
exercise, then the Commander may (if he please) keep his place, and the
doubling being performed, and the whole Body faced to the Leader, command for
the reducement; Files to the Right, double entire advancing; every man falling
before his leader; which reduces each man to his first place.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of doubling the Reere by Countermarch.
THere is another manner, of doubling of the Reere, by the Front halfe-files,
contrary to that shown in the precedent Chapter, which is done by the way of
the Lacedemon Countermarch; which some would rank amongst the Countermarches.
Because (say they) the Motion is a Countermarch. But the act intended, or thing
wrought, is a doubling; and if it were, to have the denomination of a
Countermarch, then it ought not to mix with any other part of the Body, only
to Countermarch the Front into the midst, and there to stand, without passing
forwards to the Reere; (which makes it a doubling) and then it might be
accounted A part Countermarch is when one Moity, or part of the Body
countermarcheth, thereby, not altering the number of the length, or depth of
the Figure; but only transferring one part into another.

Note that if the Reere be doubled to the Right, the Countermarch must be to
the Left: if the doubling be to the Left, the Countermarch must be to the Right.

It is at the discretion of the Commander, to face the Company, which way he
pleases, either for Motion, or Reducement of any Motion formerly performed.


for a part-Countermarch. But as it is here commanded, and performed, it is a
doubling. Observe the Figure following.

Front halfe-files, double your Reere to the Right by Countermarch. Front
Halfe-files, face about to the Left, march forth into your places

This Figure of doubling the Reere by Countermarch, produces the same effect
to the Reere, as doubling the Front by Bringers up does unto the Front. The
Countermarch by which it is performed, is a Countermarch of loss of ground, We
will speak more of it amongst the Countermarches. The command to reduce it is
(if the Commander stand, at the head of that part that is doubled.) Front
halfe-files, face about to the Right, march forth into your places: If he keep
his first stand, having faced them to him; Then, Front halfe-files, march forth
into your places. To double the Reere to the Left, by Countermarch, is the
same, differing only in the hand. I will next show a doubling of the left
Flank, by way of Countermarch.

CHAP. XIX.
Of Doubling Flanks by way of Countermarch.
HAlfe-rankes (or flanks) are then said to be doubled, when the depth of your
Battalia, is increased to double, their former proportion; of Number, or Place,
or both: which may be done diverse ways. But this Chapter, and Figure, is only
to demonstrate unto you, the doubling of the left Flank, by way of
Countermarch. The Figure follows: and stands as the doubling is in Motion.

Halfe-rankes to the Right by Countermarch, double your left flank.
Halfe-rankes that doubled, face to the Right. March forth into your places.

This doubling of Halfe-rankes by Countermarch, is a doubling of Number, not of
Place: for the depth still retains, the same proportion; only augmented by
one man, the length of your Battalia, being diminished, both in Number and
Place; The right Flank being wholly inserted, into the left Flank, as you may
perceive by the Figure; The Motion is to be performed on this manner: The
halfe-rankes of the Right, Face to the Right, and then Even in rank together,
Countermarch between the Intervales, until the outmost file to the Right,
which is marked with the figure 1, be come into the outmost File of the left
Flank, which is marked with the number 16: The second into the fifteenth; the
third into the foureteenth; The fourth into the thirteenth: and the rest in
like manner. The use of this doubling is, to strengthen one of the Flanks, by
bringing more hands, to do present execution; the other Flank being in more
surety. The way for the Reducement of this Motion is, after this manner; The
halfe-ranks last doubled, being faced to the Right, then they which were the
last, which took their places in the Motion, now are the first, which take
their places in the Reducement; orderly marching in Rank together, until they
come to their places: Then facing to their Leader, they become Files again.
The left flank may in like manner, double the Right by Countermarch; The
difference is this: The right Flank stands, the left Flank is inserted into
the Right, as before the Right was into the Left. To show another Figure for
it, would be altogether needless.

CHAP. XX.
Doubling half files to the right entire to accomodate the doubling of half
Ranks.
I Should now come to show another manner of doubling of flanks, by inserting
the one flank into the other, a different way from that last shown. But if I
should perform it, as the body stands, in the ordinary square, flanked with
Musketeers: then it would produce a mixture of Arms. To avoid which, before
you enter upon this doubling, of passing in, through or between your half
ranks; Cause your half files to double the Front to the right entire, which
being performed, you may then proceed to the doubling of your flanks, any way
without mixture of Arms. If I should have shown this motion with Pikes or
Musketeers alone, this first doubling of half files entire, might have been
spared: but I desire not to leave any thing obscure or difficult, but to render
it as easy and apparent as I may, to the capacity of the meanest reader: and
if any place in this small Treatise of mine shall seem ambiguous, I shall
entreat the courteous to impute it to my lack of language to express my
self, rather than any will in me to conceal, or obnubilate the sense, whereby
to deprive them of the true meaning of any thing in this Book contained. But
left by doubling of words, I prove tardy in my work; I will forbear further
circumstance, and come to the prosecution of the matter: which in the first
place, will be a doubling of half files to the right entire, whereby the next
doubling may be the more commodiously accomplished. The figure follows.

Half files, double your front to the right entire.

This doubling of half files to the right entire, I have fully expressed in the
figure, as the body stands, the motion being ended: because we are to add
another doubling, before we reduce them. This figure next following, will be
best shown in the motion or action, not fully performed: that thereby the
manner may be the more easily discerned. But by the way observe, that this
doubling of half files, is a doubling both of number and place; for the length
of the Battalia is not only double so many a breast as they were before, but
they also have extended there length to double their proportion of ground, which
formerly they did occupy. I forbear to speak more of this doubling, until
we come to show it in motion: and now proceed to the next doubling upon this.
The command is as follows.

Half ranks of the right, double your left flank. Half ranks that doubled,
face to the right, march forth into your places.

This doubling of half ranks is a more speedy and sure doubling, then the
doubling of half ranks by countermarch, but is most commonly used when the
body consists but of one sort of Arms, being either all Musketeers, or all
Pikes. But because in my figures I have as well Musketeers as Pikes, I have
made use of a Doubling entire, and from that have doubled my left flank, to
prevent the mixture of Arms: However mixture of Arms upon some occasion may
be necessary. The manner to perform the motion, is this. The left flank
stands, the half ranks of the right, face to the left; and then the inmost
file of the right flank, (all the files of the right flank, being by this
facing become ranks) is the leader of this motion, marching forth right to
their left hands, between the intervales of the ranks of the left flank,
until that the sixteenth file which now is become a rank, have placed
themselves orderly in the two and thirtieth file, (which is the outmost file of
the left flank.) The fifteenth in the one and thirtieth, the fourteenth in the
thirtieth: the thirteenth in the nine and twentieth; and so likewise of all the
rest. The places may be perceived by the figure. The doubling is of number, and
not of place. For reducement to both these doublings, first cause the half
ranks which last doubled, to face to the right, and so to march into their
places. They that last took their places in the motion, are the first that
take their places in the reducement. The doubling of half ranks being thus
reduced, next for the reducing of the half files, (which were doubled before,
for the accomodating Order in Rank and File. The distance required for entire
Doubling.
of the doubling of halfe-ranks) command the half files to face about to the
left, and to march forth into their places: Wherewith I will conclude these
sort of doublings, which require open order in Rank and File, and come next to
show entire doublings, which claim a closer distance for their true
performance. And therefore conceive them closed to their order, both in Rank
and File.

CHAP. XXI.
The difference between entire and divisionall doublings, and of doubling
halfe-files entire.
HAving closed our Soldiers to their due distance, I will next proceed, to
show doublings entire. But me thinks, I hear some already inquiring, what is
meant, by entire doublings; and therefore without offense to the curious, give
me leave to be so courteous (to the Ignorant) to tell them, that all Doublings,
are either entire or divisionall. Entire Doublings being these, What entire
Doublingsare.
or such like, as when the files or halfe-files, ranks, or halfe-rankes,
(according as the command may be) do march forth jointly together, without
division or dissipation, to double the part commanded. What is meant by
Particle, and dividuall Doublings.
Particle and divisionall Doublings being such, as I have formerly shown; as
when the files or halfe-files, ranks or halfe-rankes, are disranked and
divided into more parts or places than one. This may serve for way of
distinction: I will now show entire doublings, as they are in action: and first
begin with doubling halfe-files. The Figure follows.

Halfe-files double your front to the left entire. Halfe-files, face about to
the right, march forth into your places.

This doubling of halfe-files entire, has been held a better doubling; then
either the ordinary doubling of Ranks, or the usual way of doubling by
halfe-files or Bringers up: some of the causes are these. First it makes no
disturbance to the other part of the Battalia; but that it may either be
executed in time of motion, exercise, or skirmish. Secondly, it appears
another solid body, to the great disheartening of any enemy. Thirdly, it is
very apt for over-fronting; being a doubling both of number and place. The way
to perform the motion, is this. The halfe-files face to the left, and march
till they are quite clear of that part of the body, which stands; then they
face to their Leader, and so march up, until they are become even in rank
with those which stand upon the right flank: and then the Figure will be
perfect. For the reducement; the word of command is, Half Files face about to
the right, march forth into your places: having faced about, they march
straight forth, until they be clear of the front halfe-files; then they face
to the left, and march straight forth, until every man has his right place,
and then face right after their Leaders. The doubling of halfe-files to the
right entire, is performed after the same manner, only differing in the hand.

CHAP. XXII.
Of doubling the Front inward entire.
DOubling of the Front inward entire, has been a doubling as useful, as
ancient: notwithstanding, most commonly used by greater bodies, as when one
Regiment, Division, or Maniple, moves forward, between two others, thereby
seconding or relieving them: whereby the Front of all the three divisions
become ranged in an even line; but I have only taken upon me, to show the
motion, in a private Company. The Figure whereof follows, as it is in the
execution.

Halfe-Files, double your Front inward entire. Halfe-files, face about, and
march. Front halfe-files, close your division. Face all to your Leader.

It has been the custom amongst ancient Soldiers and great Commanders, that
in the matter of Exercise, they show some things which are most apt for a
private Company; some for a Regiment; other some most useful for complete
arms; so in like manner, it must be the discretion of every Reader, (whether
hereade for apprehension or reprehension) to suit and fit each motion to his
true end and purpose, and with the wise man, rather read twice, than judge
once: and then perhaps, when the intent of the Author is perceived, his
opinions may be received; yet what need I, or any other apologize ought, in the
behalf of this Figure, or any other such like: since they are but the
expressions of the various figures which proceed of the words of command, used
almost by every ordinary Exerciser of a foot Company? Nevertheless if Aesops
long eared beast passing by, should peep into this Druggists shop, and
quarrel with the Compounds, I shall not study for a further answer, then That
the excellent and skillful Physician, can convert that into an Antidote, which
the unlearned fool will make his poison. But lest I be taxt for digression,
the motion of this doubling is thus performed. The half files of the Front,
faceth to the right and left; and march till they have left a distance between
them sufficient to receive the half files of the Reere, and then stand and
face to their Leader. Then the half files march up, and even their Front. For
the reducement of this Figure, there are (as there are for all the rest) diverse
ways. But because that it is necessary to show one, let the half files face
about to the Reere, and march until they are clear of the Front half files,
then stand and face to their Leader; then the other half files of the Front,
close their division, and they are reduced.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of hale-files, doubling the Front by division.
THis doubling has been very well approved of by Count Mansfield, Sir Thomas
Kelly, Captain Bingham, and diverse other soldiers of good esteem, who
prefer these sorts of doublings before any other: because these doublings may
be used in time of fight, without disturbance to the other part of the Battle.
The Figure stands as it is in motion.

Halfe-files, double your Front by Division. Halfe-files, face about inward.
March forth into your places.

The way to perform this motion, is as follows: the halfe-files are to face
to the right and left, and to march, until rhey are clear of the Reere part
of the Front division; then they face to their Leader, and march up, until
they be come even in rank, with the Front, and so stand: which perfects this
doubling. The way to reduce them is, as follows. The halfe-files are to face
about to the Reere, and to march forth-right until they are clear of the
Front halfe-files; and then they are to face to the right and left inward; and
so to march and close their division; Then being faced to their Leader, they
are reduced, as at first.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of doubling the Reere, by Division.
THis next doubling, shall be a doubling of the Reere by the Front halfe-files,
which will work the same effect to the Reere, as the last doubling, by
division, did to the Front. It may be useful in the passing of a River, when
the enemy charge or persueth in the reere. The Front-division either opening,
as you may perceive by the Figure (next following) and suffering the Reere
halfe-files to pass through them, they maintaining the Skirmish, until the
other have attained the further bank of the River; Or else the
Front-halfe-files, being opened to the Right and Left, and Faced upon the
Enemy; March gallantly Up, and receive the Charge, whilst the others provide
for themselves. This Motion may also be useful, when you have gained some
place of advantage, For then by this Doubling of the Reere, your Battle will
be both Lengthened and Strengthened; And so by the sudden bringing of these
Supplies into the Reere you may not only relieve your own, but happily
overfront your Enemy. The Figure follows*

Front-halfe-files double your Reere by Division. Front-halfe-files, Face about
to the Right and Left, inward. March fourth into your places,

For the manner or way of this Motion, it may be thus performed: The Front
halfe-files Face to the Right, and Left, and march until they are clear of
the other halfe-files of the Reere; Then they Face to the Reere, and March on,
until they have attained to be Even in Rank with them, whom they had Command
to Double; which perfects the Doubling. The way to Reduce them, is as
follows: If you keep your place of the first Front, Then let your
Halfe-files* Face about, (according to former directions,) and March until
they are clear of the Reere Halfe-files, which stand; Then Face to the Right
and Left inward, and close their Divisions; And being Eaced all to their
Leader, they are Reduced. Sundry, and diverse ways there are, for Reducement
both of this and most other Figures. Nevertheless I conceive, if I give one
Reducement to each Figure, it may suffice to those that know little; As for
such which know better, they know more ways to the Wood then one: And surely,
should I enlarge my self, but half so much as I might, (and indeed in some
things, no more then were needful) I should then bring my Volume into too
great a Bulk, and by the price, hinder some of the profit: But I am willingly
silent in some things, whereby others may be the better encouraged by my
weaknesses, to take notice of their own worths, which may induce them to put
Pen to paper, and thereby produce some worthy work, which may tend to their
Credits, and their Countries good.

CHAP. XXV.
Of Doubling the Reere entire, by the Front-halfe-files.
THis next doubling, shall be a doubling of the Reere to the Right entire, by
the Eront halfe-files; which I intend not fully to express: But to deliver the
Figure as the Body stands in Motion. For I conceive it better to show some
Figures in the manner of the Motion, then to show them as they would appear.
The Motion being perfected for the way of the working, gives a great deal more
light to the Learner, then to show the thing absolutely wrought. Neither would
I have any think, although I show these varieties of Doublings, and
acknowledge them to be of singular good use for the extension of the Length or
Depth of any Battle; but that the wise conduct and skill of the Commander
must so order them, that the extending of the Length, do not too much weaken
the Depth; nor that the strengthening of the Depth, be not too great a
weakening to the Front or Length of your Battle. I might give examples how
diverse great Co^manders, either by good foresight, or ill oversight, have
gained to themselves and their Countries, Honor and Victory, or loss and
slavery. But others have been very plentiful in examples of this nature,
which makes me the more sparing: For my intent is not to write a History of the
actions of others; but rather to show to such as are not so skillful, The
Bostures, Motions, and some few Forms or Figures of Battle, with their
several Reducements. The Figure of this present Doubling follows.

Front-halfe-files, double your Reere to the right entire. Front-halfefiles,
face about to the Left. March forth into your places.

The manner of this motion (or doubling) is thus to be performed. The
Front-halfe-files, Face to the Left, and March until they are clear of the
Reere-halfe-files: Then Face again to the Left (which is the Reere) and March
outright, until they Rank even with the last rank of the Reere-division;
which gives conclusion to the Doubling.

For the reducement. Let your Front-halfe-files, Face about to the Left, and
March right forth until they (...) clear of the Reere-halfe-files: Then Face
them to the Right, and let them March into their places. Then if the Commander
go to his first Front, and Face them all to him; they are reduced as at first.
To double the Reere to the Left entire, may be done after the same manner:
only differing in the hand.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of doublings by Halfe-rankes entire.
HAving showed the Particle doublings and the Doublings of Front and Reere
entire, and by division* I will next show the doublings of Flanks after the
same manner, and will first begin with a doubling of the left Flank, by
advancing the right Flank, and placing it before the Leaders of the left
Flank* which is a doubling both of Number and Place, and may serve to singular
good use for the strengthening of any flank, where it may be needful: For it
makes the Battle defensible on every part. The Figure, as it is in Motion
follows.

Halfe-rankes of the right, double your left flank entire to the Right.
Halfe-rankes that doubled, face about to the left, March fourth into your
places.

If you would have (...) Musketeers, to double even with the Musketeers of
the contrary Flank. Then it is no more but thus; cause the half Ranks of the
right Flank, to march forth-right (as you may perceive by the Figure) until
the Reere Rank of the right Flank be advanced about three foot before the
Front of the left Flank, and then cause that Flank so advanced, to
Countermarch their Ranks to the right. And then also your Musketeers will be
together, and the Pikes likewise by themselves. The Reducement will be after the
same manner. But for instruction for the Motion, by this figure intended
according to the command formerly given. The left Flank, stands; the right
Flank marches forth right, until the Reere of the right Flank be advanced
before the Front of the left Flank* as a foresaid* Then face them to the left;
and cause them to march, until the Pikes are even in Rank with the
Musketeers, which perfects the doubling.

For the Reducement: let the half Ranks that doubled, face about to the left*
and march, until they are clear of the left Flank (or standing part of the
Battle) then cause them to face to the right; and to march strait down into
their places. Then the Leader being at his first From faceth them all to him,
which reduces them as at first. The right Flank may also double the left
Flank* to the left entire: And then as the right Flank in this doubling, came
cross the Front of the left* contrariwise they will come cross the Reere. The
left Flank may double the right Flank entire; to gether hand in like manner.
But by this that has already been shown* the others may be understood.
Wherefore I spare the Figures.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of doubling of Flanks, by Division.
THis next doubling, is a doubling of flanks by division, and without question,
a serviceable doubling, and very useful, for some occasions: For if you note
the figure; and conceive rightly; what it will produce* (the motion being
ended) it makes a strong form of battle, to give fire three several ways
at once. The figure follows.

Half-ranks of the left, double your Right Flank by Division. Half-ranks that
doubled, face about inward. March forth into your places.

The motion of this doubling, is thus to, be performed. The Reere-half-files of
the left Flank, face about to the right: and then both the front, half-files,
and Reere-half-files, march forth-right; until they are clear of that part of
the body, that stands: Then each division, faceth that way, which they are to
double, (which the Front half-files must do to the right, the Reere
half-files, to the left.) And so march forth-right, until the doubling be
performed. For the Reducement; you are to conceive, it may be diversely
performed: If the Leader, be at the right flank, (which is the part that was
doubled.) Then, the Reducement is, as follows: The half-rankes that doubled,
face about, inward; and march forth-right until they are clear of the right
flank, which stands; Then, the Front half-files, face to the left: the
Reere-half-files to the right, and then close their division. The Leader going
to his first front, and facing the whole body to him, they are reduced as at
first* If that the right flank, would double the left Flank, by division; The
matter is the same: differing only in the hand.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of doubling Ranks entire.
DOubling of ranks to the right entire, is a doubling, both of number, and
place: and in some sort, works the same effect; as the doubling of half-^les
to the right entire. But differs first in regard of the partias; which are
the doublers, and secondly, in the distance, left after the doubling. For the
first, (which is matter of dignity.) The fifth and first in honor, are ranked
together in the front; the second, and sixth in dignity, make the last rank in
the Reere: So that the Front, precedes. the Reere, in worth: whereas, in the
doubling by half-files, the Front exceeded the Reere, by: Secondly, it
differs for the distance; by leaving open order, at the left, between all
the ranks. For further satisfaction, observe this figure following.

Double your Ranks to the right entire. Ranks that doubled, face to the left.
March forth into your places.

The motion of this doubling, ought to be performed, as follows, namely, if
the doubling be to the right, as is above expressed by this figure: Every even
rank, faceth to the right. The right hand man of each rank, becoming the
leader of his rank file-wise: leading them forth, and in their march or moving
forwards, a little bending to the left: that when the left hand man of each
rank, (which are the bringers-up of the motion) are clear of the standing
part of the body, by only facing to the front, they may stand even in rank,
with the rest of the company.

Note, that the left hand men are the Leaders of the motion, in the reducement.
For reducement of this doubling: it may be as follows. Command the ranks
that doubled, to face to the left; and march forth-right into their places. Or
for variety, command halfe-ranks of the right, to face to the left, and double
the left flank. Both which, as the company now stand, work one and the same
effect. The left hand men of each rank, being the leaders of the motion, in
the reducement. To double ranks to the left entire; is to be done after the
same manner; only observing the difference of the hand. This doubling, may
also be done by division. But I spare the figures.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of doubling Files entire, advancing.
DOubling of files to the right entire, advancing, is (also) a doubling both of
number and place: for it increases the depth, to double their former
proportion: of number, as from eight, to sixteen; from ten to twenty, etc.

It also gains so much more ground before the front, as formerly the Battle
did contain: by transferring the even files of the body, into the ground,
before the front of the odd files: but this doubling, diminishes the number
of the length of your battle, although it preserves their place. I spare to
speak further of it, only thus. Let the antiquity of this doubling, plead for
it is excellency, and if that may hold for a rule, then this may be ranked
amongst the best. For further directions, observe the following Figure.

Double your Files to the right entire, advancing. Files that doubled, face
about to the left. March forth forth into your places.

The motion of this doubling, ought to be performed after this manner. The odd
files are to stand, beginning your account from the outmost sile, to the hand
named. The Musketticrs, and Pikes, of the even files, are to advance their
Arms, and follow their file-leaders; every file-leader leading his file forth
right; before his next file to the right, until the bringers up of the even
files are orderly placed, before the leaders of the odd files: as you may
perceive by the Figure. For reducement: let the files that doubled, face about
to the left: the bringers up of each file leading them forth, right down the
Intervales, which are on the left hand; until they are come even, with the
Reere: and then stand, and face to their leader, and they are reduced, as at
first. The doubling of files to the left entire, advancing; is after the same
manner: It only* differs in the hand: wherefore I spare the figure. They
that love to be curious, may likewise double files, by division, advancing.

CHAP. XXX.
Of Files, doubling their depth.
THis next doubling, is a doubling of the depth, to the right entire: and is
likewise, a doubling of files, as the other last, shown in the precedent
Chapter. Being alike, both for number and place: notwithstanding, it differs
from the other, both in manner of executing, and in some sort of the matter
executed. For whereas the other doubling, by advancing of files, did transfer
all the even-files into the ground before the Front. Contrariwise, this
doubling does transfer them into the ground next behind the Rear. And as in
the other doubling, you may perceive half the file-leaders, to remain in the
Front; the other half to be halfe-file leaders. This doubling, has half the
file-leaders in the front: the other half being the last rank, of the Reere.
Those which were the former Bringers up, being become the two innermost, or
middlemost ranks. The figure follows, being demonstrated as the body stands;
the motion being ended.

Files, double your depth to the Right: every man falling behind his bringer
up. depiction of 'files doubling their depth' Files as you were, or Bringers
up, double your Ranks forward, to the left.

The manner of the motion for this doubling; is as follows. The command being
given; files, double your depth to the right entire: every man falling behind
his bringer up: then the even files (accounting from the hand named immediately
face about to the right, and the bringers up of each of the even files, turn
behind the Bringers up of the odd files, that stand. And so every man, as he
comes down to the Reere, turns to the left behind him, that marches down
the next before him; until those that were the leaders of the even files, are
become the bringers up to those which were the odd files. The reducement is as
follows. Bringers up that now are, double your ranks forward to the left.
Which being performed, they are, as at the first. If you would be instructed in
the manner, turn back and see it: where the bringers up double their ranks
forward, into the front. It is the fourteenth Chapter.

I have willingly past over another doubling of the depth, because it is much
after the manner of that, which is done by advancing file upon file; which is
the doubling of the last Chapter. It differs only thus. In the last figure,
the even files marched forth; placing themselves before the odd files. And in
this which I have omitted, the even files are to face about, and march forth
right toward the reere; until the file-leaders of the even files, have placed
themselves, just behind the bringers up of the odd files: and then every man
to face to his leader. Some have a doubling of the depth by countermarch. Which
I conceive scarce worth penning, yet willing to leave every man to his own
liking; and as I do nothing in it, so I Will say nothing of it. There are others
that have written concerning doublings of place, nevertheles because they are
nothing, but the opening of ranks and files, whereby length or depth of your
battle is extended, and so doubled in place, and not in number. I forbear to
write further of them, desiring not to treat of such things, which are more
curious then necessary.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of Conversion and Inversion, with their words of Command, and Reducements.
ACcording to my promise, I will next show the difference, between Inversion
and Conversion: the very names whereof is such a puzzling unto many, that they
are more troubled with the words, then the work. Some are of opinion, that
they are both one; differing in letter not in matter. Others would have a
difference, if they could tell how, or where. But generally, they are so chopped
and changed, one for the other; that the Soldier cannot in truth tell which is
either. But that you may not be deceived, take this for a rule: that Inversion
does always produce, file, or files; and Conversion, rank, or ranks.
Inversion consists of the files filing, or of ranks filing. Conversion of
ranks ranking, to the right or left. Or by increase of files, ranking by even,
or uneven parts: and of ranks wheeling, to the right or left. I shall speak
further of them in their several places. But by the way, you are to observe,
that Inversion and Conversion, require larger distances of Ground, then any
other Motions; which must be, the Officers care, to open the ranks, or files,
to such distance as shall be necessary, to contain the ranks or files, so to
be Inverted or Converted, whether it be double-distance, or twice
double-distance for any other lesser, or larger quantity of ground. The words
of Command, with their several Reducements, are as follows.

Inversion.
Files, file one, to the Right, File-leaders, lead up your files as you were,
Left, Files, file to the right and left by division.

Ranks, file to the Right, Files, rank as you were. Left, Right and left.

Conversion.
Ranks, rank 3, 5, 7, or 9, to the right Ranks, rank as you were. 4, 6, 8, or
10, to the left by increase 2. 4. 6. 8. etc. to the right by increase 1. 3. 5.
7. etc. to the left entire to the right into the front entire into the left
into the front by division into the front Ranks, wheel to the Right Left Right
and Left

Files, rank 3, 5, 7, or 9. to the right Ranks, file as you were. 4, 6, 8, or
10. to the left by increase to the right, 1, 3, 5, 7, etc. by increase to the
left, 2, 4, 6, 8, etc. to the right into the front. to the left

To avoid the words of Inversion, and Conversion, I have delivered the
directions, with once naming either of them. Only I have expressed the six first
words of Command, to be Inversion, and these last sixteen, to be Conversion.
For I conceive it; not to be so necessary, to add to every word of Command,
Inversion, or Conversion. For by so doing, the unlearned, and ignorant Soldier
will be so transported, with the strangeness of the word; that he will scarce,
by any means be made, capable of the matter: For my own part, I have ever held
this opinion: that the easiest expressions, are ever to be preferred in the way
of instruction, to young Soldiers. I might have much enlarged my self, in the
words of direction, concerning this subject: but these being perfectly
attained; others by practice, will be gained. I at the first intended, to have
drawn figure, for every one of these words, of Command: but I have better
considered, that some of them will require, so much room: and again are so
easy to be understood without their figures; that I conceive, I may both spare
the pains, and cost; and only deliver the figures of some few of them, which
will be the most necessary. And for the others I will express in words, what
they will produce, in figure.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of Files, filing in sequence.
The Command is, Files, file on to the right.
Inversion.
TO perform this word of Command, or Direction. The right hand file, marches
away single; The second file from the right, falls into the Reere of the
first. The third, behind the second; The fourth, behind the third. And so
consequently, all the rest of the files; fall into the Reere of their next
right-hand-files, until all the whole Company, become one file. It may be
useful, to pass some narrow bridge, or thicket, or elsewhere; where but one,
at once can pass: the Commander being willing, to preserve his files, entire*
and whole. The way for the Reducement, may be after this manner. The place
being convenient, every file-leader, is to lead up his file, to the left of
him, that marches before him; until all the file-leaders, are even in rank
together: their files orderly following them. The word for the Reducement; is,
File-leaders, Lead up your files as you were: For files, to file on in
sequence, to the left; may be performed, after the same manner: but differs
in the hand. Yet works the same effect; only, the right-hand-file-leader, led
the other: and the elft-hand-file, fell last of all into the Reere. This,
contrariwise', is led forth by the left-hand-file: and the right-hand-file, is
the last, that takes place, in the Reere of the extended file.

Files, file to the Right and Left by Division.
This files filing by division; is wrought after the same manner: but differs
in this; That the right-hand-file of the Company, and the left-hand-file of the
same, begin to lead forth at one, and the same time in their several places.
The files of the right flank falling likewise, behind the Right-hand-file: the
files of the left flank, falling in like manner, behind the left-hand-file.
So, that if the body be flankt with Musketeers; then this filing by division,
brings all the Musketeers into the front-division: and the Pikes in the
Reere of them. If there be an odd file, it most commonly falls to the right.
The word for Reducement is; File-leaders lead up your files as you were. This
sort of Inversion, is called filing in sequence. I will now show another sort
of Inversion, which is by Ranks filing. The which I will demonstrate unto you,
by two figures, which will be sufficient, to instruct the desirous.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of inverting Ranks; or Ranks filing.
THis following figure of Inversion, is of Ranks, filing to the right; where
all the Ranks are to be inverted, into the out-most-file to the right; For the
doing whereof, let all your files, be closed to their order, or close order; as
shall be thought most necessary: the ranks opened, either forward, or
backward, to double-dista^ce, or twice double-distance, (more or less) as the
Commander shall see most convenient, according to his number. Having closed
your files, and opened your ranks, unto their due distance; then, let every
rank, move after his right-hand-man, until every rank stand right in file,
after the right-hand-leader of his rank. In this figure, I have only opened
the four first ranks to their distance, and inverted but two of the four. By
which it may easily be perceived, both the manner of the work, and the matter
which is to be wrought. But if the Commander will perform it upon a March;
then they shall not need to open to any distance, but to take their distance,
in the executions which is the easiest way, and will be thus performed. The
right-hand-man of the first rank, marches forth right; all his rank facing
to the right, and marching file-wise after him. The right-hand-man, of the
Second rank, falling immediately after the left hand-man of the First rank,
all his rank in like manner following of him. The right-hand-man of the Third
rank, after the left-hand-man of the Second; his rank likewise following of
him. And so for all the rest, until they are all become one file.

Ranks, file to the right.



Files, Rank as ye were.

Place this Figure in Chapter 33. between folio 90, and 91.

This Ranks fileing, is sooner performed, and reduced; then Files fileing: and
in the Reducement will presently be ready to make resistance, against any
opposition in the Front. Whereas if Files, file; it will be a great while
before the File-leaders will be able to make good the Front: The manner of the
Reducement of this figure, is as follows. If they were Eight men, before in
rank, then the first Eight men, rank to the Left, into the front. The next
Eight men, rank next after them, which makes the second rank. The third Eight
men, ranking to the left, make the third rank. And so forward for the rest,
until they are reduced, as at the first. But it may be, that some will object;
That in this figure, there is mixture of Arms; which if they will avoid, they
may either March forwards their Musketeers of each division, and close them
before the Pikes; and invert them first. Or they may March forwards their Pikes
first, and leave their Musketeers to come in the Reere. Or if they please,
they may upon a long March, first invert the front-division of Musketeers:
then their Pikes, and last the Reere-division of Musketeers; which way so ever
it be done. The Word for the reducement will be, Files, rank as you were.

Ranks, file to the Left, is performed after the same manner. It differs
from this last done, but only in the hand. And whereas the
Right-hand-file-Leader, was the Leader of the last, this would be led by the
left-hand-file-Leader: The left-hand-Leader of each rank, leading forth his
rank file-wise, as before it was performed; but to the contrary hand. I spare
the figure,

CHAP. XXXIIII.
Of Ranks filing by division: and how useful.
THis next figure of Inversion, is Ranks filing by division is a doubling of
the depth, by unequal proportion. For whereas in most of all other doublings,
the Number of the Length, or Depth is augmented, but to double their former
proportion of Number: this doubling of Inversion, makes their Depth so many
times more in number, as there are files to double. Or half so many times, if
it be done by Division, as in the next following figure. It has been, of
ancient use, amongst the old Grecians: and in these our latter times, it has
been held of special use, to avoid the shot of the great Ordnance, when of
necessity we are to march against any Battery. It has also been held good, to
prevent the eminent danger of some great shower of small shot, likely to be
powered out upon the Front of your Battalia. It may also serve for an Honorable
passage, large interualle, street, or gallery, (as some call it) for any great
Personage, or Commander to pass through. It is also of common use, for the
lodging of the Colors, or Ensign. And many other such like.

Ranks, file to the Right and Left; by division. Files, rank as you were.

Place this Figure in Chapter 34. between folio 92, and 93.

For instruction how to perform this Motion, It is the same with the last
figure; differing only in this; That as in the other figure, all the whole
ranks turned to the right, behind their right-hand-men: In this Motion, the
left-flanke, (or halfe-rankes to the left) fall into the outmost file to the
left: The halfe-rankes to the right, behind their several right-hand-men: as
you may perceive in part by the figure. I have shown the figure, in the manner
of the action, not fully performed: The pricks rankewise, denoting the places,
from whence they came: The Quarter-circles, showing the way of the Motion: The
pricks file-wise, directing, or showing their Places they are going too.

For reducement to the figure: it is no more then this. The Ranks which before
inverted into files, now again convert into ranks, as they were. The word of
Command for it, is, Files, rank to the right and left inward, as you were.

I hope, this that has already been shown, will be sufficient, (at least in
some small measure) to give satisfaction to those, which as yet have not known
what is meant by Inversion. Yet I could wish, that such as exercise the
Companies of the Trained-Bands of this Kingdom; would rather make use of the
plainer word of demonstration; which is, Ranks, file, or Files, file: and
leave out the word Inversion, as a word not suitable with the Capacity of diverse
of our Soldiers of the Trained-Bands. Especially of this City, where Porters,
Colliars, Water-bearers, and Broomemen, are thrust into the rooms of men, of
better quality, as though they themselves were too good, to do the King and
Country service.

CHAP. XXXV.
Of the several parts of Conversion: and how they-are to be understood.
THe next branch of Discipline which I offer to your view, shall be of
Conversion: and of its several parts: wherein if there be any that think me
tedious; let them turn it over, and settle on some other part, which may be to
them more delectable: whilst I, in the mean time, shall endeavor to give
content to all, neither stuffing out my book with needless discourses; nor
yet too much abbreviating the matter, whereby to render it too obscure unto the
commonest capacity. Wherefore take their parts as they hereafter follow.

Conversion consists of these parts, viz. Of Ranks ranking in equal parts 1 in
unequal parts 2 entire into the Front 3 by division into the Front 4 by
wheeling to the Flanks 5 Files ranking by equal parts 6 by unequal parts 7
entire into the Front. 8

First of ranks ranking, in even or equal parts. Which is to be understood,
when there are twelve, or twenty, (more or less) marching abreast, and the
Commander (either for the narrownesle of a passage, or for some other intent)
causes his ranks to rank three or six abreast, or five, ten, or any other
number, either according to the place, or occasion; every rank holding
equality of number.

Secondly, ranks then rank by unequal parts: when they rank by increase or
decrease. As when the first rank shall be three, the next five, then seven,
nine, etc. which is commonly used, for the making of Diamond, and Triangular
figures.

Thirdly, ranks then rank entire, into the front: when the first rank stands:
the second rank places it self on the right or left of the first: the third
by the second, the fourth by the third, and so forward for all the rest, until
all the ranks, (either to the right or left) according to direction are become
one rank in the front.

Fourthly, ranks then rank by division into the front, when the second rank,
and all the rest of the ranks behind, open to the right and left: the one
part going to the right, the other to the left; ranking even with the first, as
before, and all together making one rank.

Fifthly, Ranks, then rank to the flank or flanks; when either the right hand
man of each rank, or the left hand man (or both together) are as it were the
Hindge of the motion, the rest of each rank wheeling about them, to the right
or left, or each hand by division* until that every rank be brought into the
distance which was before the rank; between the right hand-man, of the rank
next before, and the right hand-man of the same rank you stand in. If it be to
the left, then they wheel into the distance between the left-hand-leaders of
each rank. If it be by division, then half the rank wheeleth to the right:
the other half to the left, and produces two ranks.

Sixthly, Files, then ranks by equal parts: when they rank three, four, or
five, abrest (more or less) still keeping the number of men in rank, of due
proportion. If you rank three abrest (either to the right or left) and your
files be but eight deep; then the first six men make two ranks, the third
rank must be made up by the leader of the second file. And so for all the
rest. If you rank four, and the files be eight deep, then every file makes
two ranks. If you rank five, the files being 8 deep, then the first five men
make a rank: and the first two men of the second file from the hand named,
make up the second rank. Five of the other six, make up the third rank. And
so forward for the rest. If the depth of the file were ten men, then it would
make two even ranks.

Seventhly, Files then rank by unequal parts: when they either rank by
progressionall increase, or by decrease. As when every rank exceeds the rank
before it, by two* three, or four, be it more or less. Or else that each
rank decreaseth, after the same manner.

Eighthly, Files then rank entire into the front; when there is so much
distance between file and file, as will contain each file, ranke-wise: every
man in the file marching forwards to the right or left, as shall be commanded,
until he stand even in rank, with the leader of his file, which brings the
body into one rank.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of Ranks wheeling by Conversion.
IF I would strive to be curious, I should need no other subject to lengthen
my discourse, but only this, of Inversion and Conversion, which of it self
would yield matter sufficient to make a Book of. But I have taken a large
task. And therefore like the Artists in Geography, who sometimes by a spot,
present a Town, and by a wrinckled line, a large River: so must I crave of the
favorable Reader, that in this small Treatise of Discipline, he will not
expect that I should enlarge my self so amply, as I might, upon every part.
For then my book would grow beyond his bounds, and I beyond my promise; but
lest I be taxed for digression, this that has already been shown, may
suffice for Conversion. But because it may be expected, that I should show
Conversion in Figure, as well as the other Motions, therefore to gratify such,
I shall demonstrate two Figures unto them: which may serve for all the rest.
The one shall be of ranks wheeling, by Conversion: the other of files ranking,
four to the left. The word of command for the first, stands placed right over
the figure.

Ranks, wheel to the right and left by division Place this Figure in Chapter
36. between folio 98. and 99.

This foregoing figure of Conversion, is of Ranks, wheeling to the right and
left, or ranks ranking to each flank by wheeling. It differs from ranks
filing, both in manner and matter. In the manner thus, Whereas in ranks filing
to the right and left; the right and left hand file-leaders, preserve and
continue their places; and with that, their honors. In this wheeling by
Conversion to the right and left, contrariwise: the innermost file-leaders,
become the outmost men in that pure where the front stood; the other
file-leaders ranking even within them. Some men have called this, Ranks,
filing by Conversion, to the right and left, but corruptly. For conversion
always produces ranks, as I formerly said: and inversion, files. But their
mistake grows from this, that when ranks wheel to the right, or right and
left, then (say they) they by wheeling, become file, or files, which is a
palpable mistake. For when we have any command for wheeling, it is a maxim for
us, to wheel our aspects unto the hand or part named. By which doing, we
either become rank, or ranks: and not files, as some have sought formerly to
maintain. One use, among many, for this motion is. It is the speediest way for
a great body (if they have their due distance) to give fire to one, or both
flanks, that as yet I know of. The way to perform this motion, is as
follows. The right and left-hand-men, of every rank, became the Hindges of
the motion: the rest of each rank, wheeling by equal division, to the right
and left about, and above their right and left hand Leaders, until they become
ranks to the flanks. As you may perceive by the Figure, where the pricks denote
unto you, the places they stood in before the motion: the quarter circles,
showing the way of their motion: themselves being converted into two ranks,
shows the motion executed. I have only converted three of the ranks; for it
would have taken too much room, to have wheeled all the ranks. And it is easy
by this that is shown, to conceive the rest. If you would avoid mixture of
Arms, then place all your Musketeers, either in Front, or Reere: or else
wheel only your Musketeers, and leave your Pikes, standing. Or else it may
be done; the body marching at length: the Musketeers being in the front, and
reere Divisions. The word for the reducement is; ranks, rank as you were.

The easiest way for the reducement, will be first for to face to the reere,
and then to wheel back into their places. Then, face to their leader; and
they will be reduced as at first. Now we will come to show the next figure of
Conversion, which is of files converted into ranks by equal proportion.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Of Files ranking in equal parts.
IN this Chapter, I intend to show the manner, of files ranking by Conversion,
in equal parts; which Motion, I have seen used by some Commanders, at such
times as their Companies have been but small, having not had above two or three
files of Musketeers, upon a flank; and being willing, to march forth their
Companies in divisions: And this, because, that two a breast would be somewhat
improper (unless it were upon necessity, in some narrow passage) and that
three a breast, is also somewhat with the thinnest. Therefore to augment the
front of their march, they have shartned somewhat of their depths, in each
division: by causing their files, to rank four, or five, according as their
depth may be, when the Command shall be given. This Motion of Conversion, may
also be useful for larger bodies. For if upon a March, you are to pass
thorough some straight, where not above four or five, can march a breast; and
that being past thorough, you are to direct your course, to the right, or left:
If your way be to the right, then cause your files to rank to the left: If to
the left, then let the files rank to the contrary hand. For by so doing;
having past the straight, and faced your body that way, which you intend your
March, by commanding the File-leaders to march; and the half-files to stand,
and take their places: your body will be led again by their proper
file-leaders, all a breast; the Musketeers becoming again the Flankers, which
in the passage of the straight, were in the Front and Reere. For the better
understanding the manner of the Motion, observe the following figure.

Files, rank four to the left.

The way to perform this Motion, is as follows. The Command being first
given (as abovesaid) the right-hand-file-leader, leads forth his file: and
the three next men behind him, move forwards to the left of each other; until
they rank even a breast with their file-leader. The next four, in like manner
ranking to the left, make the second rank. The file-leader of the second file,
places himself, next after him, that was the half-file-leader of the first,
which now is become the right-hand-man of the second rank; the three next men
behind him, making up of his rank, in like manner. And so forward for all the
rest, until the Motion be fully perfected. This converts each file, into two
ranks; and brings all the proper file-leaders, and half-file-leaders, to make
the outmost file to the right: the Bringers-up, both of the Front, and
Reere-half-files; make the outermost file to the left. The figures of Number,
which are on the left flank of the figure, in which, the word file added to
each of them, demonstrate places of the first, second, third, and fourth file,
and so consequently for all the rest; according to their former standing, and
the places they now occupy, being converted into ranks. The letters f, and h,
which are placed on the right flank; shows the places of those, which were
the file-leaders, and half-file-leaders: each of the propex file-leaders,
having now his half-file-leader, next after him* I have shown this figure
partly performed partly performing, and partly standing, as before the Motion
began.

For reducement, of this Motion of files ranking, four to the left: One way
is, to cause your ranks to file, (or invert) to the right, which being done,
Command every File-leader, to lead up his file to the left: and so every man
will have his place: For another way, Face the whole body to the right, and
command the File-leaders to march, and half-files to stand, and take their
places: and then they are all reduced, only the file-leaders of the
right-flanke, are on the left; and the file-leaders of the left-flanke, are on
the right: which is reduced, by any entire Countermarch, of rank, or file.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
The conclusion of doublings.
THere are yet another sort of Doublings, both of length and depth, which are
performed by divisionall wheelings. Which because they have ever been accounted
for wheelings, I will not displace them; but still rank them in their former
places: although in truth they are doublings. The working part indeed is
wheeling; but the intent, or thing wrought, is Doubling. I will speak further
of them, when I come to show them, in their several places. And here I mean to
set a Period to our Doublings. Concluding, that those Soldiers, who can put
every one of these to his right use; as also give to each his right reducement,
must needs be skillful, and expert, in this part, of the Art Military. And
contrariwise, they that are ignorant in these Doublings; can never truly
attain, to the right managing of a Foot-company, either for exercise, or
service. For doublings, indeed, are the only Motions, for varicty and
alteration of figures, or forms of battle: No other Motions doing the like.
And therefore Doublings, must needs be accounted the most excellent amongst all
the Motions.

You that have eyes to read, and skill to judge;
And have perused these doublings I have done:
Though I have tedious been, yet do not grudge:
For you know well, I have skipt over some.
But marvel not: the cause I do not show them,
It is not much material for to know them.
Those that are Skillful in the Art of War,
And take delight to exercise their men:
Shall find more pleasure in these doublings far,
If that they intermixe them now and then.
And so contrive their doublings in these cases,
That lastly one word brings them to their places.
Why in our Country do we Captains choose,
That have no skill nor artfull inclination?
They do themselves and Country much abuse:
Thus to deceive them in their expectation.
I think the Cause of this fault in our Nation
Is, that our Gentry holds it not in fashion.
But some, perhaps, will say, I am too bold;
There Is no such need for Captains to have skill.
The Muster-masters have enough (some hold)
The Captains and the Counties for to fill.
So whilst the Muster-master does the labor.
The Officers may play upon a Tabour.
But stay! me thinks, one pulls me by the sleeve:
And tells me that I have my self forgot.
Wherefore of doublings, here I take my leave:
Entreating those that read, mistake me not.
Let Muster-masters take their money, then;
But let the Captains exercise their men.
CHAP. XXXIX.
Of Countermarches. Their Antiquity, and words of direction.
THe next branch of Discipline which offers it self to your perusal, are
Countermarches: which are of three kinds. To wit, Chorean, Lacedamonian,
Macedonian: which is, Maintaining, Loosing, and Gaining. Each of them are to be
performed two manner of ways. One by File: the other by Rank.

There are also Counter-marches, Entire and Divisionall. But diverse men, are
diverse for their opinions concerning the Macedonian and Lacedamonian
Counter-marches. Some will have the Macedonian, A Countermarch of gaining of
ground; because that it transfers the Battalia, into the ground before the
Front. Others will have it, A Countermarch of loss of ground; because (say
they) the Enemy being in the Reere, it makes a semblance of flying. Some will
have the Lacedamonian, A Countermarch of gaining of ground: because the Enemy
appearing in the Reere, it makes a semblance of Charging or falling on. Others
call it, A Countermarch of loss of ground: because it loses all that ground
the Battalia stood upon; taking in stead thereof, the ground behind the Reere.
There are others of opinion, That there are Counter-marches of loss and gain,
in either of them. All these are furnished with reasons, to back their
opinions. But if I should stand to show their many and several reasons, I
might well be thought to be without reason my self. My opinion is; That taking
the ground before the Front, is gaining ground: and that to leave the ground we
stood on, to take the ground next behind the Reere, is loss of ground: And yet
to take either, whereby there is advantage gotten, must needs be gaining. But
where the matter it self is so indifferent, it were fondness to spend longer
time about it. Wherefore note, That Countermarches were of ancient use amongst
the Greeks many hundred of years since, and from them learned and practiced,
by many other Nations; and so still continued unto this day. But as the
Snow-ball by much rolling, becomes the greater: So, in like manner, these
Counter-marches have received addition in all ages. So that the three original
ones are now become more then thirty accounting those divisionall. And yet are
all of them fathered upon one or other, of the three kinds. Though some of them
will scarcely be owned or acknowledged; as you shall perceive, when I come to
show them in their several places. But amongst all the Motions, this might be
the best spared: as being least beneficial, to this our modern Discipline.
But because that knowledge is no burden; and that at some times they may be
useful: Therefore first take the words of command or direction, which are as
follows.

Entire Countermarches, by file.
Chorean.
Files to the right left hand countermarch.

Lacedemon.
Files to the light left countermarch, every man turning on the ground he
stands.

Macedon.
File-leaders, face about to the right left the rest pass through to the
right, left,


and place your selves behind your Leaders. Bastard Countermarch.
File-leaders stand; the rest pass through to the your Leaders. right left
placing your selves before

Bast.Count.
File-leaders stand, the rest pass through to the right left placing your
selves before your Leaders; following your Bringers up.

Lacedemon.
Bringers up, face about to the right: left: the rest pass through

to the right left and place your selves before your bringers up.

Lacedemon.
Bringers up, stand: the rest of the Body pass through to the right left
placing your selves behind your bringers up.


Entire Countermarches by Ranks.
Cretan or Chorean Lacedemonian
Ranks to the right left Countermarch.

Ranks to the right left countermarch, every man turning on the ground he
stands.

This right hand file, face to the left: the rest pass Macedonian. through to
the right: placing your selves behind your right hand men. This left hand file
may face to the right, and do as much. This light left hand file stand; the
rest pass through to the right, B. A Countermarch.
left,


placing your selves on the our side of your right left hand men.

This right left hand file face to the right, left, the rest pass Lacedemonia
through to



the right, left, placing your selves before your right left hand men.




Divisionall Countermarches, by Files.
Cretan or Chorean Bast. Countermarch.
Countermarch front and ^e cre into the midst. File-leaders, and
halfe-file-leaders, stand; the rest pass through to the right, and place your
selves before your Leaders. Lacedemonia,
File-leaders, and Bringers up, stand; the rest pass through to the right: and
place your selves before your Leaders and Bringers up. Macedonian.
File-leaders, face about; Bringers up, stand; the rest pass through to the
Right; and place your selves behind your Leaders and Bringers up. Bast. Count.
Front-halfe-files, interchange ground with the Reere.
Divisionall Countermarches by ranks.
Chorean or Cretan.
Countermarch your (wings or) Flanks into the midst (or Center). Lacedemonia^.
The out-most-file of each Flank, face outward* the rest pass through to the
right and left; placing your selves behind your outside men. Macedonian.
The out-most file of each Flank, face inward: the rest pass through to the
right and left; placing your selves behind your outside men. Bast. Counter.
The out-most file of each flank, stand: the rest pass through to the right
and left, and place your selves on the outside of your outside men. Interchange
your Flanks.
Note, what is done by the out most files, may be reduced by converting the
command to the innermost files; but must be done before they have closed their
divisions, etc.

CHAP. XL.
Of the Chorean Countermarch: and the way to perform it.
I Could willingly have pricked a Figure, for each of these several
countermarches, The distance for Counter march is, six foot, or open order in
rank and file.
but that they will take up too much room. And therefore I will only prick
some few of the hardest of them; and for the rest, I will endeavor by words to
make them as facile as I may: that so they may be apprehended by the meanest
capacity. And first I will begin with the (Persian, Cretan, or) Chorean
Countermarch. The word of Command or Direction is, Files to the Right hand,
Countermarch.


Note, that when there is a Countermarch commanded without any other addition;
then it is always intended, a Chorean countermarch.
This Chorean Countermarch, is by some called the Modern Countermarch. I
conceive their reason to be, because that it is more in use than any of the
other: Or else, for antiquity, it might claim many ages. It is a Countermarch
for maintaining of ground: for it works its effect, on the same ground it
stands; neither loosing nor gaining. But it transferres the file-leaders, into
the place of the bringers up: and the bringers up, into the place of the
file-leaders: withal turning the aspect of the body or battalia, to the Reere.
The way to perform this motion, is as follows. As Soon as the word of
command is given, if it be to the right, then all the file-leaders step
forwards with their right legs, and face about to the right: every
file-leader with his file following him, passing down toward the Reere,
through the intervall on his right hand, still observing, to keep even in
rank with his right hand man. But by the way, note that no man must turn,
until he come to the ground where at first his file-leader began the
Countermarch. This motion is then performed, when the bringers up, have
attained unto the place where before their file-leaders stood: being faced
right after them; Files, countermarch to the left.

To countermarch to the left, works the same effect; and is done after the
same manner: only differing in the hand.

For reducement, if you countermarch to the right; do as much to the left: and
they will be as they were. For any entire countermarch of files, will be
reduced (of what kind soever) by making another entire countermarch, to what
hand soever.

CHAP. XLI.
Of Countermarching to loose Ground.
The Command is.
Files to the Right, Countermarch: every man turning after his Leader, on the
Ground he stands.
Lacedemonia^.
THis Lacedemonian countermarch, is a Countermarch of loss of ground; for that
it leaves all the ground the Battalia formerly did contain, and in lieu or
place thereof takes the ground behind the Reere. This Countermarch is to be
performed, when the Body is upon a stand. And as the Chorean, turns the
Aspect toward the Reere. The Greeks were wont with this Countermarch, to
bring their file-leaders to oppose any enemy, appearing in the Reere: thereby
gallantly bearding their enemies in the teeth: neither politickly making show
of flight, whereby to bring the enemy into disarray; nor over providently
careful, of the advantage of ground. The motion of this Countermarch, is to be
performed as follows. The file-leaders of each file, are to step side ways
to the right, and therewithal to face about to the reere; and so march even in
rank together down between the An Intervall is the space of ground between
fills and file, or rank and rank; but in this place, is intended the space of
ground between the files.
Intervalls, no man advancing a foot forwards, but turning in like manner after
their leaders, when they are past by them; still observing to keep their due
distance. And so a whole rank together, still turning off to the right, each
Rank successively doing the like, until the Countermarch be fully performed.
Any entire countermarch of files, will reduce this. But for order sake, take
one of the same sort to the contrary hand, which is.

Files to the left, Countermarch: every man turning after his Leader, on the
ground he stands.
I shall not need to speak further, concerning this Countermarch of loss of
ground to the left; seeing that it differs from the other only in the
alteration of the hand. The substance and effect of both, being one and the
same: only I will now speak to a second fort of Countermarch, which is of the
same kind. The Command is.

Bringers up, face about to the Right, the rest pass through to the Reere, and
place your selves before your Bringers up.
Lacedemonia^.
This Lacedemonian Countermarch does also loose the ground, whereon it formerly
stood, and takes the ground behind the Reere, the manner of the motion is as
follows: The last rank or Bringers up face to the Reere, and stand: the rest
of the Body facing about in like manner, and passing through or between their
bringers up, and placing themselves even in rank before them. The motion is
begun, by the rank, next the bringers up, and so continued; successively by
the rest, until the Countermarch be ended. It may be reduced, by doing the
same to the contrary hand. Nevertheless for brevity sake, I will make use of a
sprigge, from the same bough, and reduce this Lacedemon countermarch, by
another of the same kind. The Command is, Bringers up, stand, the rest pass
through to the Right, and place your selves behind your Bringers up.


Lacedemonian.
This Lacedemonian countermarch, is thus to be performed; the last rank (or
bringers up) are to stand; and the rest of the body, to face to the Reere, and
pass through to the Right, and place themselves behind their bringers up,
contrary to the countermarch last shown, where they placed themselves before.
The motion is also begun, by the second rank from the reere, the rest
following successively, until the file-leaders are become the Bringers up:
Then face them about after their proper file-leaders, and they are reduced.

CHAP. XLII.
Of Countermarches to gain ground, or the Macedonian Countermarch.
The Command is, File-leader face about to the right, the rest pass through to
the right, and place your selves behind your Leaders.
Macedonian.
THis Macedonian Countermarch, is for gaining ground, for that it leaves the
ground, the Battalia formerly stood upon, taking in lieu thereof, the ground
next before the front. It also turns the aspect toward the reere. The motion
of this Countermarch is from the reere to the front, contrary to the
Lacedemon, whose motion is from the front to the reere: This Macedonian
Countermarch, makes semblance in the reere of flight, but presently produces
an orderly settled front, when perhaps the enemy, with a too early pursuit,
has broken the order of their array.

The way to perform this Countermarch* according to the directions formerly
given, is as follows: The file-leaders or first rank, face about to the
right: the rest of the body pass through, between the Intervalles, (or
distance of files) to the left: and place themselves behind their leaders;
every rank (beginning with that next the file leaders) passing through
successively, and taking their places, until the Countermarch be fully
executed. It may be reduced as the rest, by doing the same to the contrary
hand, or as I have formerly said, by any entire countermarch of file; and
therefore I will reduce it by another Macedonian countermarch. The command is,
as follows.

File-leaders face to the Reere, the rest of the body pass through to the
left, following your bringers up, placing your selves behind your leaders.
Macedonian.
This Macedonian countermarch is rather remembered for its antiquity, then
excellency, (as some more of them be) nevertheless if any will be curious to
observe the motion, it may be performed as follows: The first rank (or
file-leaders) face to the reere, then the last rank begin the countermarch,
passing forward between the Intervalls, the seventh rank following the
eighth, the sixth following the seventh, and so likewise the rest, until the
whole body be transferred, into the ground before the front, and then jointly
together, facing to the right about, after their leaders, the counter march is
ended. For reducement, observe this for all; that any entire countermarch of
file, may be reduced, by another entire countermarch by file, of what kind,
or to what hand soever.

These three last Chapters of counter-marches, are the original grounds of all
the rest, yet I shall show one in the ensuing Chapter, which time has begotten
out of the latter two, which takes part with either, being absolute in neither.

CHAP. XLIII.
Of the Bastard countermarch.
The Command is, File-leaders stand, the rest pass through to the right, and
place your selves before your Leader.
Bastard Countermarch.
THis passing through, (or bastard countermarch) is partly Macedonian, and
partly Lacedemonian; for first with the Macedon, it takes the ground before the
front, the motion being from the reere forward: it is partly Lacedemonian, for
that they pass through, and place themselves before their Leaders, and for
that it makes semblance of falling on, or charging the enemy: nevertheless the
Macedonian disclaimes it, for that it alters not his aspect: The Lacedemonian
refuses it, for that it takes the ground before the front, and not that
behind the reere: or with the Chorean, it holds affinity. And many there be
that will not allow it for a countermarch, for indeed the word it self will
not bear it; notwithstanding seeing that it has been long ranged amongst
them, I will not be he that shall displace it, but will pass forwards, to show
the manner of the motion, which is to be performed as follows. The
file-leaders stand, according to the former direction, the rest of the body,
advance their arms; the second rank first passing through to the right, and
placing themselves before the first rank, the third rank before the second;
the fourth before the third, and so forwards for the rest, until the last
rank (or bringers up) are become the foremost, which perfects the motion. It
may be severally useful, as to skirmish against an enemy, advancing by way of
introduction, or upon occasion, to bring the reere, men to march in front, and
such like. For the reducement, you may do, as much to the contrary hand, only
for order sake, I will reduce it, by another like it self. The Command is,

File-leaders stand, the rest pass through to the right, placing your selves
before your Leaders, following your bringers up.
Bastard Countermarch.
This motion may be done either to the right or left, and is nothing differing
from that last shown; but that, whereas the other, began with the second
rank, this contrariwise begins with the last rank, (or bringers up) every
rank successively, following the rank, which came from behind them, until
they which were the leaders, are become the last in the reere. If this
countermarch be first done, it may be reduced by any of those formerly shown,
etc.

CHAP. XLIV.
Of countermarching ranks, to maintain ground.
The Command is.
Ranks to the right hand countermarch.
Chorean
THis Chorean countermarch of ranks, is an altering or changing of one flank
for the other, the Battalia still keeping the same ground, only the right
flank becomes the left, and the left, becomes the right: The way to perform
this motion, is as follows: the command being given, then the whole body
faceth to the hand named, and every man in the outmost file, to the right:
(files by this facing, being become ranks) turns down through the Intervalle,
(or distance between rank and rank) marching forth right unto the part,
which was the left flank, with their ranks, file-wise following them, being
come unto their ground, they face as before, and the countermarch is
performed: for the reducement, let ranks countermarch to the left, after the
same manner, differing only in the hand, and they are as at first.

CHAP. XLV.
Of Countermarching Ranks to lose Ground.
The Command is.
Ranks to the right hand Countermarch, every man turning after his
right-hand-man, on the ground he stands.
Lacedemonian.
THis Lacedemonian-Countermarch of Ranks, is a falling on upon the left
Flank: the Motion being begun by the right; It leaves all the ground, the
Battalia stood on, and takes in place thereof the ground beside the left Flank,
turning the Aspect to the left: The manner or way, to perform this Motion, is
as follows: The whole Body faceth to the right; and then the right-hand-file
being faced, (becomes a Rank) begins the Countermarch, turning down the
Intervals of the Ranks, (which by this facing, is made the distance between the
Files) and so marches forth-right, beyond the left Flank, every man following
him that was his right-hand-man (but not stepping forwards one foot of ground)
until the Countermarch be performed. For the reducement of this Countermarch,
do as much to the left, and they will he as at first: Or (if you please) take
another of the same kind; The word of Command, or direction is.

Right-hand-file, face to the right, the rest pass through to the right, and
place your selves before your right-hand-men.
Lacedemonian.
THis Lacedemonian Countermarch of ranks, makes a falling on upon the right
Flank, the Motion being from the left Flank, to the right, leaving all the
ground whereon the Battalia stood, and taking in lieu thereof the ground beside
the right Flank. In those days; when Countermarches were more useful for
their Discipline, then now they are for ours; the Lacedemonian Countermarches
were of chief repute, as well amongst the Macedonians, as the Spartans and
others: the way to perform this Motion is as follows. The right-hand-file
faceth to the right; and passes through the Intervals or spaces, to the right:
placing themselves, before their right-hand-men, until the left-hand-file,
become the foremost rank; If you do this Countermarch by it self, then for
reducement, first face them to their Front proper, then let the
left-hand-files, face to the left, and do as much to the left; and then they
will be as at first.

CHAP. XLVI.
Of the Macedonian Countermarch by Rank.
The Command is: Right-hand-file face to the left, the rest pass through to
the right, placing your selves behind your right-hand-men.
Macedon.
THis Macedonian Countermarch of ranks, contrary to the Spartan, dismarcheth
from the enemy upon that Flank where he appears, and presents the contrary
Flank, to receive the Charge. It is performed after this manner. The
out-most-file to the right, faceth to the left. The rest of the body, or
Battalia, faceth to the right; every man passing thorough to the right and
placing themselves, behind their right-hand-men: For the reducement of this
Countermarch, as all the rest, there are diverse, and several ways; but
perform as much to the left, as you have done to the right, and they will be
at first: Or if you please, this following Bastard Countermand, will do the
same. The word of Command or direction is,

Right-hand-file stand, the rest pass through to the right, placing your
selves, on the outside of your Right-hand-men.
Bast. Count.
THis passing thorough, or Bastard Countermarch of Ranks, does alter both
ground, and flank; (still reserving the Aspect, without alteration.) It is to
be performed as follows. The out-most or right-hand-file, stands; the rest of
the body, facing to the right, pass thorough to the right, every man placing
himself, on the right side of his right-hand-man, and so standing even in
Rank, the Motion still continuing, until the left-hand-file, is become the
right; the right, the contrary. If this Countermarch be done alone, for the
reducement; let the left-hand-file stand, and do as much to the left, as before
to the right; and they will be as at first.

CHAP. XLVII.
Of Countermarching Front and Reere to the midst.
Of divisionall Countermarches.
FOr the Entire Countermarches, I have endeavored to express them, as well as
I could in words, but for the divisionall Countermarches, I intend to express,
both in word and figure, whereby they may be the more easily apprehended by
such as shall be desirous to know them: notwithstanding before I enter upon the
divisionall Countermarches* I would willingly clear one thing which by some
will be carped at; which is, the using of the word Midst, instead of the word
Center: The word Center (I confess) has been the more usual word amongst us;
and yet it is not altogether so proper to our use as the other; wherefore give
me leave, without offense, to use those words, which are not only more proper,
but more significant. The Midst of the Battle, is to be understood, either
from the Front, and Reere; or from both Flanks (or wings:) If between Front and
Reere, the Midst must be between the half-file-leaders, and the Reere rank of
the Front half-files, extending it self from Flank to Flank: The Midst
between the Flanks, is between the two innermost files; continuing the whole
depth: from Front to Reere: Our first Countermarch shall be Chorean; the word
of command or direction is.

Countermarch Front and Reere, into the midst.

This divisionall, chorean countermarch, brings our File-leaders, and Bringers
up together in the midst, and the ranks that were in the midst in the Front and
Reere. It is a countermarch mayntayning ground; for every man marches up, into
his leaders ground; before he faceth about to countermarch: The way to perform
the Motion, is as follows. The command Note, that for Countermarching Front
and Reere into the midst, the Front-halfe-files ever turn off to the Right,
the Reere half files to the Left, which being truly observed, they will
always meet even in the middle of the Battle, where to the contrary, if they
turn both off to the Right, they can never do the Countermarch but wrong.
being given to countermarch, either let the commander, or some other of the
Officers, command the half-files, to face about: then the file-leaders stepping
forwards, with the right leg, and face about to the right, passing down the
Intervals on the right hand, the rest of the Front-halfe-files, following their
Leaders, and not turning, until they come to the ground, where their Leaders*
turned down before them: The bringers up with the Reere-half-files, at the same
instant turning down their Intervales, on the left hand, the rest of their
division following them, until the file-leaders and bringers up, meet together
in the midst of the Battle, and then having faced all to their Leader, the
Motion is performed. For the reducement, of this figure, doing the same thing
over again, will reduce it. Or any other divisionall countermarch of File.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Of bringing Front and Reere together, into the midst, by the Bastard
Countermarch.
The Command is: File-leaders, and half-fileaders stand, the rest pass
thorough to the right, and place your selves before your Leaders.
Bast. Counter.
THis Bastard Countermarch, does bring the Leaders, and bringers up, together,
into the midst, and saves two facings, and is quicklier performed, then the
other last done: or any other in the precedent Chapters: The way to perform
the Motion, is as follows: The first rank stands; and the half-file-leaders
stand, then those of the Front-half-files, pass thorough their Intervals to
the right, placing themselves before their File-leaders: The second rank
before the first, the third before the second, the fourth before the third; The
Reere-half-files at the same instant, doing the like, and placing themselves,
before their Note that as the front half-files empiieth the space of ground
between the leaders and halfe-file-leaders placing themselves in the ground
before the front, so in the mean time their places are replenished by the
soldiers of the Reere-halfe-files which march up and supply their rooms.
half-file-leaders, as the other did, before their File-leaders: This Motion
may be either reduced by doing the same over again to the contrary hand, or
else by countermarching front and Reere into the midst, or by any other of the
divisionall countermarches of files. The next shall be a Lacedemonian
countermarch, the word of command, or direction, is as shall be expressed in the
ensuing Chapter.

CHAP. XLIX.
Of Countermarching to make a large Intervale between the first, and last Ranks.
The Command is, File-leaders, and Bringers up stand, the rest pass thorough
to the right, and place your selves, before your Leaders, and Bringers up.
Lacedemonian.

THis divisionall Lacedemonian Countermarch, makes semblance of falling on, or
charging, both to the Front and Reere, and leaves all the ground, which was
occupied by the Soldiers, which stood between the front and reere,
transferring them into the ground, before the front, and behind the reere; the
ground (or place) of their former standing, being vacant, only demonstrated in
this figure by the pricks. The Motion may be thus performed. The
Reere-halfe-files are commanded to face to the Reere, and then the
front-halfe-files, pass through to the right: placing themselves before their
Leaders; The second Rank, before the first; the third, before the second; the
fourth, before the third; the Reere-halfe-files at the same instant, passing
through to the Reere, after the same manner; and placing themselves before
their Bringers-up. You may perceive by the figures of Number, placed on the
Flanks of the figure of battle, both how the men stood, before the Motion
began, as also how and in what place they stand, the Motion being ended: For
the reducement, if you have not closed their distance, you may face them about,
and so let them pass again into their places: Or else, by doing the same If
you reduce them by another Countermarch, first close their divisions.
Countermarch over again, or to the contrary hand, or any such like way, will
reduce them. This next following Countermarch will also reduce them, or this
will reduce that. The word for the Command, or direction is, as you shall find
it placed, over the front of the figure.

CHAP. L.
Of making a large Intervalle, between the first and last ranks, by the
Macedonian Countermarch.
Macedonian.
THis divisionall Macedonian Countermarch, is little different from that, next
before it, only the other, turned the Aspect outward, to the front, and Reere;
this Countermarch turns the Aspect inwards, toward the midst. It may be
useful, if the Commander would show, or publish ought, before his best
Soldiers, for that it not only leaves a large distance, but that it brings
the best Soldiers into the midst, with their Aspects directed inwards: It may
also serve, to conduct any great personage, cross the length of your battle,
whereby to show them, the braverie of your Soldiers, etc. The figure follows.

The Command is, File-leaders face about, Bringers up stand, the rest pass
through to the Right, and place your selves behind your file-leaders and
Bringers up.


This motion may be thus performed: The first rank (or file-leaders) face
about, the last rank stands, the Reere-halfe-files, face about, and so the
front-division; pass forwards, and place themselves behind Note that when the
Reere half files face about, the last rank which are the bringers up (...)^ill
to keep their (...).
the file-leaders, the reere-halfe-files, behind their Bringers up. The
manner, you may perceive the plainer, if you note the figures, of number, which
are placed, on the flanks of the figure, their number showing the places, they
had, from the front, before the motion began. This figure may be reduced,
either by the same word of command, which produced it, or else by any of the
foregoing divisionall countermarches. Our next, shall be a countermarch of
exchange of ground. The words for command, or direction, are as follows.

CHAP. LI.
Of Interchanging Ground.
The Command is, Front-halfe-files, interchange ground with the Reere, passing
through to the Right.
Bast. Countermarch. In Motion.

This Bastard Countermarch, may not rightly be said, to be derived from any one
of the particular grounds of Countermarch; but rather, participating of them
all: And yet considering it, as it is to be, it is different from them all: for
whereas the other countermarches, of files in division, although they bring the
Front and Reere into the midst, yet the front-halfe-files continue still, on
the same part, and the Reere-halfe-files do not alter into the places of the
other. But this, contrary to any other, of the divisionall countermarches,
transferres the front-halfe-files into the ground, or place of the
Reere-halfe-files; and them, into the contrary part, bringing the file-leaders,
and bringers up, together into the midst. The way to perform this Motion, is
as follows. The front-halfe-files face about, passing forwards to the right
(being led by the bringers up, of the front-halfe-files) between the
Intervalles toward the reere: The Reere-halfe-files at the same instant in
like manner marching forwards, between the Intervalles on their right hands
into the Front, until the Front-division, have attained the places of the
Reere, and they contrariwise, the places of the Front. For the reducement of
this countermarch, do as much back again; Or if you would reduce it some
other way, you may first make an intirc countermarch of files, and then
countermarch front, and reere, into the midst; for under two countermarches, it
will not be reduced. Now I will pass, to show divisionall countermarches of
Ranks, or Flanks; The first shall be Chorean, as in the Chapter following.

CHAP. LII.
Of counter-marching the flanks (or wings) into the midst of the Battle.
The Command is, Countermarch your flanks into the midst.
Chorean


THis Chorean countermarch of the flanks into the midst, is of ordinary use,
when the Commander would have the outermost files, to become the innermost: the
motion to be performed on the same ground, and is as follows. The command
being given, the whole body faceth to the right and left, by Note that upon the
Countermarching of flanks into the midst, the right flank must always obser^e
to turn to the right, the left flank to the left. For if they should both
turn off to the right, they will never meet right i^ they turn off both to the
left, it will be as bad.
division; the outermost files, by this facing, becoming ranks, every man in
the right hand file, being a leader in his half rank file-wise, and so
likewise in the left hand file the same* then they countermarch the right
flank to the right, the left flank to the left, which you must always observe
to do, and your flanquers will meet just in the midst of your Battalia.
Lastly, having faced them to their first front, the countermarch is ended.

To reduce them, they may either use the same Countermarch again, or any of
these following divisionall countermarches of flanks, (unless it be that of
interchanging of ground.) The next shall be Lacedemonian, the Command, or words
of direction, are, as in the Chapter following.

CHAP. LIII.
Of Countermarching, to take the ground before the flanks.
The Command is, The outermost file of each flank, face outward, the rest
pass through to the right and left, placing your selves before your outside
men.
Lacedemonian.


THis Lacedemonian Countermarch of half ranks or flanks, makes (...) of
charging on, upon both flanks, but leaves a wast distance of ground, unoccupied
between the two outmost-files, or midst of the battle. The way to perform
this Motion is as follows. The right-hand-file faceth to the right, the
left-hand-file to the left; the rest of the body faceth to the right and left,
the right-flanke passing through to the right, and placing themselves, before
their right-hand-men. The second file from the right, begins the Motion on the
right-flanke; the left-flanke in like manner, passing through to the left, and
placing themselves before their left-hand-men; the second file accounting, from
the left, begins the Motion on the left-flanke: But you must note, that the
files become ranks with the facing.

For the reducement of this figure, if you will first face them, to their
proper front, you may then command the two inmost-files stand, the rest pass
through to the right, and left inward, and take their places: Or if you please,
make use, either of a Chorean, or a Macedonian Countermarch of Ranks by
division, and with a facing, and closing their divisions, they will be
perfectly reduced.

CHAP. LIVE.
Of Countermarching to take the ground on the outside of the Flanks, and to
direct their Aspects inwards.
Macedonian.
The Command is, The outmost file of each Flank face inward, the rest pass
through to the Right, and Left, placing your selves behind your outside men.


THis Macedonian Countermarch, differs nothing from that last showed, but
only in the turning of the aspect inwards: whereas the other, directed their
aspect outward: The Motion is thus performed: The outermost-files, of each
Flank, face inward: the rest of the body, face to the right, and left,
outward; those of the right flank, passing through to the right, and placing
them selves behind their right-hand-men. Those of the left flank passing
through to the left, and placing themselves behind their left-hand-men: The
Motion is begun, by the second file, from each flank. I might here show these
Countermarches, beginning their Motion from their middlemost-files; But I am
willingly silent, hoping that these, may suffice to the courteous, not much
forcing my self to give satisfaction to the curious. For the reducement of
this Countermarch, having faced them to their first front, you may if you
please, command the two innermost files to face outward, the rest pass through
to the right, and left inward: placing themselves behind their right, and
left-hand-men; which being done, the whole body will stand faced to the right,
and left outward; Then being faced to their Leader, they are reduced. If you
would reduce it, by some other way, you may make use, either of the
Countermarch, which is next before, or of that, which next follows: Or of any
other divisionall Countermarch of Ranks; (which does not interchange ground).
Our next two which follow, will be Bastard Countermarches, with the which, we
will conclude this our fourth branch of Discipline.

CHAP. LV.
Of taking the ground on the outside of the flanks; not altering the Aspects.
The Command is, The outmost-file of each Flank stand, the rest pass through
to the right, and left, and place your selves on the outside, of your right and
left-hand-men.


THis Divisionall bastard countermarch, produces the same effect, which the
other two next before it wrought; only differing in the Aspect: for the
Lacedemonian, turned the Aspect outward: The Macedonian, turned the Aspect
inward; And this, keeps the Aspect still directed the same way. He that knows
every way, may when time serves, make use of those ways, which are most
necessary and suitable to his present occasion: The Proverb says, Knowledge
is no burden* The way to perform this Countermarch is as follows (according
to the Command) the outmost-file of each flank stands; the rest of the Body
faceth to the right and left outward, the right flank passing through to the
right, the left flank to the left; those of the right-flanke, placing
themselves, on the outside of their right-hand-men: in like manner, those on
the left flank, placing themselves, on the outside of their left-hand-men.

If may be reduced, either by any, of the foregoing divisionall Countermarches
of Ranks, or else being faced, to any of the flanks, then the ranks become
files. And by divisionall Countermarches of files, you may reduce, divisionall
Countermarches of Ranks, or by ranks, files; only you must observe some
facings: Yet for this figure, if you please, Command the two innermost-files,
stand; the rest, face to the right, and left inward, and so march into their
places. The next shall be a Countermarch, of interchanging of Flanks.

CHAP. LVI.
Of Interchanging Ground by the Flanks, and bringing the innermost-files of
Pikes, to become the outmost-ranks.
The Command is, Interchange Flanks.


THis exchanging of Flanks, or Bastard Countermarch, is differing from all the
other divisionall Countermarches of Ranks; for this transferres the
right-flanke into the place of the left, and the left-flanke, into the place of
the right. It is very apt, for to receive a sudden charge, from the horse, for
as soon as they shall be commanded to interchange their flanks, they face to
the right, and left inward, and then the innermost-files of the pikes begin the
Motion; the rest of each flank following orderly file-wise, the pikes porting
so soon as they begin to move, and charge as they see occasion: If Note that
if y^u please, y^u may paste the Pikes alone through, and let the Muskettier,
stand. But then there will lbe a la ge distance between the Musketti ^s in the
midst
need be, the pikes may charge at the foot, the Musketeers giving fire, over
their shoulders: If any object, that the Pikes have too large a distance, they
may close at their own pleasures, as soon as they have past through.

For the reducement, you may, if you please, interchange ground again:
nevertheless if you would reduce it, by some other way, Countermarch your
Flanks into the midst, and then an entire Countermarch, either of rank, or
file, will reduce them.

I might have further enlarged my self, upon this subject, both in Command,
and Figure; but it may be, that some will find fault with these, which I have
already penned, concluding them for nicities, and for no service; because they
cannot presently apprehend, for what use, or service they may be fit.
Notwithstanding I would entreat such (if any such happen to be my overlookers)
that they would suspend their censures, until they have fully informed their
judgments. Yet thus much I will conclude with them, that Countermarches might
the best be spared, of all the Motions, as being least beneficial, to this our
Modern discipline. And yet to very good use, many of them might serve, if our
Soldiers were well practiced in them. Nevertheless such is the wilful
stupidity of the times, that many good, and useful things are disreputed, and
accounted of no use, because the Soldier wanting skill, cannot perform them,
as they ought: which would the Officers take more pains, by often instructing
their Soldiers, the hardest Motions would become facile and easy. And to say
truth, the greatest fault is, want of skill in those, which should give
instruction to others; and yet they will not stick, to carpe at such, as shall
show more, than they, concluding such things for superfluous, and improper,
which they themselves do not rightly understand: But lest I be taxed for
digression, I will conclude this branch of Discipline with these few lines
following.

SOme burdened are with more command than skill,
Which had they power suting to their mind,
You then should see Reason inthral'd to will,
Nor any 'bove their knowledge should you find:
For rather than they will study to learn better,
They wish all wanting; none to know a letter.
So be there many Officers in Bands
That neither know themselves, nor care for those
That skillful are in Postures, and Commands,
Nor are they careful which end foremost goes.
They think, to dice, to drabbe, to swear, and swill,
Is skill enough for them: Learn more that will.
And if that any man more forward be
For to instruct the Soldier (as is fit)
With such a fellow they cannot agree;
He is vainglorious, strives to show his wit.
They will be sure to quarrel and deprave him,
And in their cups perhaps they will --
Such honest hearts as spend both means and time
To practice others for their Countries good,
Why should this good be counted for a crime,
To those that for their Prince would spend their blood*
That Country sure will best be kept from harms
Whose Subjects pleasure take to practice Arms.
But on this Subject I Will no longer bide,
Of Countermarches. Here I Will take my leave,
To show the Wheelings, next I shall provide,
Which follows next of course, as I conceive.
And though with verse my Countermarches close,
Beginning Wheelings, I return to Prose.
CHAP. LVII.
Of wheelings, their kinds, and uses with their several words of Command.
THe next Branch springing from this root of Discipline, are wheelings; which
are of two kinds, viz. wheelings Angular, and wheelings on the Center, as also
they are to be conceived, in manner of action, either entire or divisionall:
the use of entire wheelings, is to turn the aspect of the front proper, to the
right, to the left, or reere; either for the gaining of the Wind* Sun, or
some such like advantage; or to confront the enemy with their best soldiers.
Most of the divisionall wheelings being indeed more properly doublings, either
extending the length, or depth of the Battle: notwithstanding, because I would
not be taxed with innovation, or alteration, I have, according unto the usual
received way, placed them amongst the wheelings; and now I will show their
words of command, or direction. But before I enter upon Note that the distance
for wheelings ought to be three foot between Rank and File.
them, give me leave to lay down an observation or two, for the better
instruction of the Soldiers in their wheelings. The first is, That before you
enter upon your wheelings, you close both Ranks and Files to their order,
which is three foot, both in rank and file: The other, that upon all
wheelings, you must be sure, to Note that upon the exercise of the motions
whether it be distance, facings, doublings, Countermarches, or wheelings, the
Musketeers ought to be all upon one and the same posture either po^^ed or
shouldered: the pikes in like manner either shouldered or advanced.
observe your leader, and follow him, keeping your due distance; your
Musketeers being all, either poyzed, or shouldered: your Pikes ought to be
advanced. The words of Commands, are as follows.

Wheel your Battle to the Right, Left, Right about, Left Right, on the same
ground; Left, Right about Left

Wheel off your Front by division. your Front inward to the Reere. Front and
Reere into the Right flank. Left your flanks into the Front, Reere, both
flanks into the front and reere. your front and reere into both flanks.

Observe that the first four wheelings are angular, the next four are
wheelings on the center, or more properly, on the midst of the front. But all
the first eight be entire, the latter eight, are all divisionall. You may also
observe, that every following wheeling is a reducement unto that, which is
placed next before it, and the wheeling next before, may reduce that next
following: as to wheel your flanks into the front, if you wheel your flanks
into the reere, it is reduced; or to wheel front and reere into both flanks;
if you wheel both flanks into the front and reere, they are likewise reduced,
as before.

For the last eight wheelings, which are divisionall, I will prick for each of
them, his figure. As for the first eight, which are entire, I conceive them so
easy to be understood, that I may spare the labor; yet I will endeavor to
express them as well as I can in words: and first I will begin with the
wheelings anguler, and then with the rest, according to their places: and
therefore note, that when you are Commanded, to wheel to the right or left,
etc. and no other command added, it is to be understood, an anguler wheeling,
and so to be performed.

CHAP. LVIII.
Of wheelings Anguler*
The Command is, Wheel your battle to the right.
angular wheeling, which transferres the aspect or countenance of the front
proper, into that part which was the right flank: It also removes the Battalia
from the ground whereon formerly it stood, and places it on that part, before
the front, the hindge or Axell tree of the motion, is the right corner man, or
right hand file-leader, who with a small motion, moves to the right* every
man, the more his place is remote from the right Angle, the more swift must be
his motion; because his arch-quadrant, or semicircle, is larger in proportion:
wherefore it must be the discretion of the Officers, so to instruct their
Soldiers, that when they wheel to any hand, they may so moderate their
motion, that they on the contrary flank, be not forced to run, but so
orderly to contain themselves, that they may still preserve an orderly and
even front. For the reducement, wheel your Note the direction for angular
wheelings.
Battle to the left, in the like manner, as it was wheeled to the right;
nevertheless you must then note, that it will not bring you back into the
same ground you formerly stood on; for it has advanced you, the length of your
Battalia, before the place of your first front. But if you would be reduced
right, and being so faced, wheel your Battle to the left, which being
performed, face to the left, and then they are completely reduced, both for
aspect and place. The next Command is, Wheel your Battle to the right about.


This is also an anguler wheeling, and transferres aspect of the front, proper,
toward the reere: It is to be performed in the same manner, as the wheeling to
the right was; only the motion is twice so much: Wherefore there ought to be
the more care had, that so the motion may be orderly performed: Note that
wheeling to the rightabout will not be reduced by wheeling back again to the
left about just into the same ground, if the wheeling be Anguler; but will be
^wise the length of the battle removed to the right of your former standing.
by so much as every man is nearer, or further off, from the right corner man,
by so much the more swifier or slower must he continue his motion, that so he
may be sure, to keep still, even in rank with his right hand man. This motion
being thus performed, your Battle will be removed from its former station,
taking in lieu thereof, the ground Diagonally opposite in the right Angle.

To reduce these to their former aspect; wheel your Battle to the left about,
notwithstanding the ground you formerly did possess, will be twice the length
of your Battle to the left, of your left flank, if you would reduce them, as
well to their first ground, as their first aspect; face them to the right, and
then wheel them to the left about, which being done, face them to the left,
and they are perfectly reduced, as at first.

CHAP. LIX.
Of wheeling on the Center.
The Command is, Wheel your Battle to the right, on the same ground.
wheeling, is by some called a wheeling on the Center: by others, a wheeling on
the same ground. I cannot absolutely maintain it to be either, for that it
only wheels about the midst of the first rank. Neither may it rightly be
termed a wheeling on the same ground, because it loses. of the ground it
formerly stood upon. This wheeling is quicker performed, then the anguler
wheelings: and may be done in far less ground. For the left flank advances
forward, still wheeling to the right, the right flank contrariwise, facing to
the left; and so falling backward. If you have an odd file, then the middle
file-leader must be the center or axelltree of the motion, if you have an even
number of files, then the middlemost file-leader from the left. But if your
wheeling be to the left, then the contrary. This by some is called the Prince
of Oranges wheeling. For the reducement, wheel your Battle to the left, on
the same ground: and they are reduced as at first. Our next Command is, to
Wheel your Battle to the right about, on the same ground.


This wheeling is also a wheeling on the center, or midst of the front: and
transfers the aspect of the front proper, toward the reere, removing the
Battle from the ground whereon it formerly stood, and placing it on the
ground before the front. It is performed after the same manner, as the last:
only the motion is double so much as the other. In this motion, on the left
flank, every man is to observe his right hand man; and the right flank must
keep even and straight after their left hand man, which become their leaders
file-wise, until they have attained their ground: after which, they face as
before: making an even front. For the reducement, wheel your Battle to the
left about, upon the same ground; and they will be reduced as at first. I will
next show the divisionall wheelings, and intend to give to each of them his
figure: whereby they may appear the more easy to such as do not yet rightly
understand them. The first shall be a wheeling off by division: as in the next
Chapter.

CHAP. LX.
Of wheeling off, by division.
The Command is, Wheel off your front by division.


THis wheeling off by division in greater bodies, may be useful to meet
several enemies at one and the same time, with the front of your Battalia: and
so consequently with your best Soldiers. But if you will wheel off your
Battle by division, and join them again when they be in the reere; then it
brings all your Musketeers from the flanks to the midst of your Battalia: and
your Pikes on the out side or flanks. If any question the depth of the number
of this figure, I have doubled files to make the figure more perfect. The way
to perform this motion, is easy; for all the file-leaders of the right flank,
wheel about to the right: the rest of each file following their leaders: the
file-leaders also of the left flank, wheeling about to the left, in the same
manner; and then join or close their divisions. This being done, if you would
then reduce them, wheel them off again by division, after the same manner;
and they will be as before. But if you would do it some other way, make use of
this wheeling next following: which will also bring them as they were. The word
of Command or direction follows, as in the next Chapter.

CHAP. LXI.
Of wheeling the Front inward, toward the Reere.
The Command is, Wheel your Front inward to the Reere.


THis divisionall wheeling of your front inwards to the reere, is here placed
as a reducement unto the other foregoing wheelings: and so it brings the
Musketeers to the flanks again. But if you will do it, the Company being
first reduced; then it brings the Pikes to the flanks. Some say it may be
good, if you be annoyd with horse in the Reere, upon a march; and that you have
gained some side of a hill or other place of advantage: then to wheel your
front inward to the Reere, to the enemy will make show of disbandoning or
flight. But contrariwise, you march toward him with a settled and orderly body:
your Musketeers being all in the midst, and so firing upon their enemy: the
Pikes being their flankers, thereby defending the shot from the fury of the
horse. This motion will hardly be well done, if your body hold too large an
extension of length. But at what depth soever, it is easy. The motion is to be
performed as follows. The right hand file-leader, with all the leaders of the
right flank, advance forwards, and so wheel about to the left: every file
still keeping close to their right hand file. The left hand file-leader,
likewise, with all the leaders of the left flank, advance forwards, and wheel
about to the right: every file of the left flank, closing close to the left.
Thus the outmost files of each flank, will meet and become the innermost: the
front falling perpendicularly to the reere. For the reducement of this figure,
you may if you please, either wheel them off to the right and left, by
division: or else wheel your front inward again to the reere. These two last
wheelings, have been demonstrated with their files doubled: whereby the
figures might be the ^ore perfect, but with men, it would have been needless:
wherefore double ranks to the contrary hand, and they will be as at the first.

CHAP. LXII.
Of bringing the Flanks into the Front of the Battle.
The Command is, Wheel your Flanks into the Front.


Wheel your Flanks into the Front, Wings Front* Front Battle, Front Midst,
Front Center, Reere Flanks.

THis divisionall wheeling of the Flanks into the Front, is, properly, a
doubling performed by wheeling. It brings all your Musketeers, from the
flanks into the front. So that whereas this body, before, could do execution,
but with 8. Musketeers at once; by this Motion they may power on 16. shot
together. If they were deeper before the Motion began, then it would bring the
more hands to employment. If upon some pass, you should be chased in the Reere
by horse; by this motion of wheeling your flanks into the front, you not only
secure your Musketeers, but also barricado up the pass with your pikes; if it
be not above fifty foot over Some call this, a wheeling on the center: because
they wheel about the middle-men of the front. But I rather conceive it an
angular; because upon the first Motion of dividing, every division wheeleth
about his own angle, until the outmost-file-leaders of each flank, meet
together in the midst. You may perceive how, by the figures of number, where
the figure 1. meets the number 16: 2 with 15, 3 with 14. and so for all the
rest. Then being faced to their leader, every two files that met being now
joined, make one rank. There must be the like order and decorum kept, in the
motion of wheeling each flank: as I showed in the instruction of entire
angular wheelings. For reducement of this Motion, wheel your flanks into the
Reere. Or else four times the same, as I have seen some do: although somewhat
the further way about. Diverse men are diversely opinionated; concerning the best
word of Command or direction, for this Motion. These I have known used which I
have placed in the Margent, by the figure* And if any man like one better then
the other, be it at his own choice, either to use or refuse, while I pass to
show the next wheeling.

CHAP. LXIII.
Of wheeling the Reere into the midst of the Battle.
The Command is, Wheel your Flanks into the Reere. The Direction is, Face all
about to the Right.
Wheel y^^r Fl^^k^ into the Reere, Wing* Reere, Reere Battle, Reere Midst,
Reere Center, Front ^lanks*



Upon al wheeling^, you must observe to follow your leader^, which must be
understood, as well of those which b^come leaders accide^^ally (by reason of
facings) as of those which be the ^^^st and pro^^^ leaders. As in th s wheeling
(^or example) where the Bringers up ^te become the leaders of the M^^^on.
THis divisionall wheeling of the Flanks into the Reere, is also a doubling,
and performed as the other. And whatsoever might be said, in the behalf of the
wheeling of the front into the midst; the same may be also spoken, concerning
the wheeling of the Reere into the midst. For this wheeling, brings your two
outmost-files to be the first rank; the Bringers up of the right and
left-hand-files, meeting together: the bringers up of the left flank, meeting
face to face with the Bringers up of the left-flanke. And so being faced to
their leader, they which before were complete files, are now become
halfe-ranks: either to the right or left. But you must note, that before you
begin to wheel, you must face your body about to the Reere: and then the
action will be all one, as if you wheeled your flanks into the front. Wherefore
I shall not need further to explain it: having spoken fully to it in the
precedent Chapter.

Note that the two m ddlemost ^ringer^ up ^re the Hinge^ of this wh^^ling.
For the reducement of this wheeling, the Commander being at his Front
accidental, may command them to wheel their wings into the Reere, and so
pass through to that part, where his proper file-leaders are: and then face
them to him, and they are reduced. Or else, when he has past through to the
reere, and faced his Company to him; then his pikes being foremost, let him
wheel his flanks into the front, who being faced to their leader, they are
reduced. For this motion, there are also diverse and several words of Command.
And because it may be, that some will better approve of some of the other words
of Command, then of this that I have made use of: therefore I have placed
others in in the margent, That so any that will, may take their choice: while I
pass to show the next wheeling. Whose word of Command and direction, you shall
find over the figure of the next Chapter.

CHAP. LXIIII.
Of wheeling the right flank, into the midst of the Battle.
The Command is, Wheel Front and Reere, into the right Flank. The Direction
is, Face all to the right.
This Figure stands as the Body is in Motion.
Wheel Front and Reere into the the left Flank right Flank. the right Flank
Front and Reere. the right Flank Midst. Center.



THis divisionall wheeling of the Front and Reere, into the right-flanke; does
Not^, that if the length of your Bat^e^^, be double the num^ r of your depth;
as in this figure then this wheeling of front and reere into the right or
left-flanke, does qu^d^uple their forme^ depth. If the number were equal, in
lengto and depth; then by this wheeling, they would be but doubled. If the
number of your length, exceed more then double your depth, by so much the more,
will the extension of the dep^h be, beyond quadruple, etc.
quadruple the depth: as may appear by this figure, which before the Motion
began, contained but eight in depth: But this wheeling being perfected, makes
them 32. namely, if you direct the Aspect of the Body, either to the right or
left; after the Motion is ended. If you observe this wheeling, it does divide
the Musketeers on the left-flanke: the one half of them, wheeling to the
Front; the other half, to the Reere: all the Musketeers of the right-flanke,
wheeling together into the midst. The pikes are likewise divided; those that
were the Front-halfe-files, are in the midst of the Front-division of
Musketeers; and those which were the Reere-division of pikes, are in the
midst of the reere-division of Musketeers. This wheeling may be to singular
good use, for the making of some forms of Battle. But I forbear now to treat
concerning figures and forms of Battle, reserving them to be spoken of in
their due places: and come now to show the way how to perform the Motion. The
Command therefore being given, to wheel Front and Reere into the right-flanke,
then the first thing the Soldiers are to do, is to face to the right. That
done, they wheel together about the fourth and fifth men in the
right-hand-file: which is the halfe-file-leader to the front, and
halfe-file-leader to the reere. You may easily perceive how, by the figure:
where the Reere-division wheeleth to the left; and the front-division, to the
right: until the bringer-up of the right-hand-file, meets in the midst with
his file-leader: the second, with the seventh; the third, with the sixth; the
fourth, with the fifth. etc.

For the reducement of this figure of Wheeling, there are many ways: according
as the Body may be faced. But first conceive, as if they stand faced the same
way as they were before this Motion began. And then the wheeling of front and
reere into the left-flanke will reduce them; when they are faced to their
leader. Or if you will, face them that way which they wheeled in the Motion;
which was to the right: then wheel your flank into the reere; when being
faced to their proper front, they are reduced. And so, in like manner, should
you face them to some other part; they might be otherwise reduced. The next
wheeling will be the same to the left, as this is, to the right: where
notwithstanding that the Motion be all one, yet it shall differ in the placing
of the men. For before I begin the wheeling, I will pass through all the
Musketeers, from the left flank to the right: by which means the Body will
stand, as appears by the square figure following. From whence I will begin
the next wheeling.

CHAP. LXV.
Of wheeling the left Flank, into the midst of the Battle.
The Command is, Wheel Front and Reere, into the left Flank. The Direction
is, Face all to the Left.
depiction of 'left Flank wheeling'

THis divisionall wheeling, of the Front and Reere into the left-flanke, is, in
like manner, a doubling of the depth. For the nature of the Motion, it is
altogether like unto the wheeling next before: differing only in the flank;
and after that the body is faced to the left, the wheeling is to be performed,
as wheeling the flanks into the front. But by reason that before the Motion
began, all the Musketeers were on the right-flanke: by this wheeling, they are
brought to the front and reere. For the Aspect being directed the same way, it
was before the Command was given, the depth willbe 32, as in the other figure.

For reducement, the ordinary way is to wheel the front and reere into the
right-flanke. O^ if upon any occasion, you have faced your Body to the same way
they have wheeled (which was to the left-flanke) and would give your Command
from thence; Then let them wheel their flanks into the Reere. This done, the
Commander passing to his first front, and facing them to him: they are as when
this last wheeling began. Then cause the four files of Maskettiers, to face to
the left; and to pass through to their places. Lastly, do but close them to
their due distance, in rank, and file: and they are perfectly reduced.

CHAP. LXVI.
Of wheeling Front and Reere, into the midst of the Battle.
The Command is, Wheel both Flanks into the Front and Reere. The Direction is,
Halfe-files, face about to the Reere.


THis divisionall wheeling of both flanks into the front and reere; does double
the depth: making them from 8 deep, 16. It does likewise transfer the
Musketeers, from the flanks into the front and reere: making a division
between the front half files, and reere half files. So that of one body,
flankt with Musketeers, it makes two, each having their Musketeers in front.

This figure, (as most others, as well facings, doublings, counter-marches and
wheelings) is here set forth as the motion of each presents it self in the
execution; few of them being shown, as they be when they are executed. And I
conceive it the better way, as well for expression, as apprehension: to show
the work as it is in doing, rather then absolutely performed.

For the way how to perform this wheeling, take these directions following.
The Command being first given, (as aforesaid) the first thing the Soldiers
have to do, is for the halfe-files to face about, and then the front half
files, and reere half files wheel at one and the same time: The front
division, wheeling about their two innermost file-leaders, which are figured
with the numbers of 8 and 9. until the file-leaders of the right flank meet
together in the midst, with the file-leaders of the left flank: as you may
easily perceive by the figure showing the motion; the rest of their divisions,
orderly following them. The halfe-files, also being faced about; the bringers
up, in like manner, wheel together: being now the leaders of the motion, in
the reere, as you may perceive. This being done, if you please you may face
them all to their leader, (whom suppose to be at the place of his first front)
and then command them to close their divisions: which being performed, all your
file-leaders are in the two innermost files of the front division, file-wise,
and all the Bringers up, in the reere division of the same files.

For the reducement of this figure, if you will, face them to either of the
flanks, and command them to wheel both flanks into the front and reere, when
facing them again to their proper front, and closing their division, they will
be as at first. But if you would make use of some other wheeling, to reduce it,
then take this in the following Chapter.

CHAP. LXVII.
Of wheeling the flanks into the midst of the Battle.
The Command is, Wheel front and reere into both Flanks. The direction is,
Face to the right and left.


THis divisionall wheeling of the front and reere into both flanks, may also
be termed a doubling of the depth: by reason that from 8 deep, it makes them
double numbers. By this motion, the Musketeers which before were flankers, are
now transferred into the midst, between the front and reere of the Pikes. And
whereas in the other figure, the wheeling was about the two middlemost
file-leaders, and Bringers up; this wheeling contrariwise, is about the two
half file-leaders of the outmost files of each flank. In the other wheeling,
the file-leaders and bringers up, made the innermost file: in this, the
innermost file of each flank, as you may easily perceive by the figure. This
motion being performed, it leaves a large Intervalle (or division) from front
to reere, between the flanks: which if the Commander pass into the midst,
between each division, and face them all to him; causing them to close their
divisions, and to march forth into his first place, (directing their aspects
the same way) then will the Pikes be in the front and reere.

For the reducement of this Figure (of wheeling) to its former posture; you may
face the body to one of the flanks. Which being done, command them again to
wheel front and reere into both flanks; when being faced to their former
front, and having closed their division, they are reduced. But if you would
make use of some other wheeling, for reducement; then wheel both flanks into
the front and reere; and they are as at first: having faced to their leader,
and closed their division. And thus as briefly and as plainly as I could; have
I run through the several motions and grounds; for the disciplining of a
foot-company. And although I neither can, nor hope to give satisfaction to all;
yet I shall entreat the better qualified, that where I am wanting, there they
will supply my defects with their goodness. Or if it so happen, that I
undergo the censure of needless superfluity: I would have such to make use
of so much of it, as they shall think fit for their own turns: and to leave
the residue unto such as may have opportunity for to use it.

THus Courteous Reader have I past the grounds
And various motions of the Infantry,
Where thou may gain the skill, cost others wounds,
Though from a young one of the Artillery.
Read and consider, if thou nothing gain,
I ask as little from thee for my pain.
If thou the distances do well peruse,
The several facings and the doublings too,
The Counter-marches which of course ensues,
And then our wheelings which we lastly do.
These being practiced, learned, and understood,
The benefit turns to thy Countries good.
These, like the vowels, are in number five,
With which me spell all words that can be named*
So with these motions we all forms contrive,
And from these grounds are all our figures framed.
Then frame thou no excuse, but learn to know them,
And with as free an heart as I do show them.
Now next of all I should some firings show,
But lest perhaps I hold you over long,
I think it fit some respite to be stow,
Lest that our Soldiers think I do them wrong.
So please the Reader but to pause the whiles,
And see our Leaders exercise their files.
For now each Leader is so courteous grown,
He strives to bring another to his place.
But they as modestly would keep their own,
And each prefers his follower to the grace.
So please you then but wink at the digression,
And you shall see each Leader by succession.
CHAP. LXVIII.
Of making men file-leaders successively, the files being eight deep.
IN the making every man in file, successively leader according to their first
standing: may as well and easily be done in great bodies, as by single files.
Yea and with the same words of Command and direction, as you may perceive by
the Table, where the figures of number show the succession of each man's
leading. The words of Command which produce each leader, being placed in the
Columes beneath. In the first Colume of the Table, the file stands as at first;
with his proper file-leader in front: each man having his right place. The rest
of the files, demonstrating the places of the men, according to their standing;
upon the making of every several file-leader. The Commands are figures, which
produce the like leaders.

The front of each file, as they come to be File-leaders; successively.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 2 1 4 3 6 5 8 7 3 4 1 2 7 8 5 6 4 3 2 1 8 7 6 5 5 6 7 8 1 2 3
4 6 5 8 7 2 1 4 3 7 8 5 6 3 4 1 2 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

The several words of Command, which produce each File-leader.
2 Ranks to the right double. Files 3 File-leaders and half-file-leaders stand,
the rest pass thorough to the right, and place your selves before your
Leaders. 4 Ranks to the left double. Files 5 The first Rank stand, the rest
pass thorough to the right, and place your selves before your Leaders. 6 Ranks
to the left double. Files 7 Countermarch Front and Reere into the midst, then
face to your Leader. 8 Ranks to the left double. Files 0 Then face about or
Countermarch your Files, and they are as at first.

The first, are the proper leaders of the files. For to make the second lead,
if there be but one file, then file rank two to the right: if there be more
files, than ranks to the right, double, and files to the right, double. By
which means, the second man is become leader of his file: every man being
disposed, as you may perceive by that file, whose leader is the figure of 2. To
make him that was the third man, leader, let file-leaders, and halfe-file
leaders stand: and the rest pass through to the right, and place themselves
before their leaders. Thus will the file stand like that, led by the figure of
3. For to make him that was the fourth man leader; Ranks to the left, double;
and files to the left, double: whereby the file will stand like that, led by
the figure of 4. For to make him that was the fifth man, leader, let the first
rank stand; the rest pass through to the right, and place themselves before
their leaders: by which means the file will stand like that, led by the figure
5. For to make him that was the sixth man, leader; double your ranks to the
left, and files to the left, double: and then the file will stand, like the
file led by the figure of 6. For to make him that was the seventh man, leader
of the file; Countermarch front and reere into the midst, and face them to the
former front: whereby the file will stand like that led by the figure of 7. For
to make him that was the eighth man, lead the file-ranks to the left, double;
and files to the left, double; and the file will stand like that, led by the
figure of 8. For to reduce them, cause the first rank to stand; the rest to
advance forwards to the right, placing themselves before their leaders.

CHAP. LXIX.
Of making men file-leaders, successively: the files being but six deep.
SOme will be inquisitive to know for what use the making of leaders by
succession, serves? or whether it be not a mere Curiosity? to which I thus
answer. That it is not only pleasant, but profitable. Pleasant to the leader of
a file: who having sufficiently exercised his file in Postures, to give some
time of respite, or delectation, for the recreating of their almost tired
spirits, brings each man, successively, to lead the file by proper words of
Command. And lastly, reduces each man to his former standing. It must needs be
profitable and much availeable in discipline, when the skillful Commander can
thereby (with much ease) change and interchange: bring what ranks he pleases
to lead in front; and exchange them afterward for others; yea, and lastly, at
his own pleasure, bring the proper file-leaders again into their places. This
following table, shows each man's several place as they stand; still being
altered, according to their various Leaders. By the figures of number (which
are placed over the heads of those Columes, wherein are writ the words of
Command) understand that those words under the figure of 2. are to make the
second man, file-leader. Those words, under the figure of 3. make the third
man, leader. And so forward for the rest.

The front of each file, as they come to be Leaders.
1 2 3 4 5 6 2 1 2 5 6 5 3 4 6 1 3 4 4 3 1 6 4 3 5 6 5 2 1 2 6 5 4 3 2 1

The words of Command, which produce each several Leader.
Files 2 Ranks to the left double. 3 Half-files double your Front to the right,
Files to the right double. 4 Facc to the Reere, or let the first rank stand,
the rest pass thorough, etc. 5 Ranks to the right double, Files double your
depth to the right. Files 6 Ranks to the left double. 7 Face to the Reere, and
they are reduced.

The first man, is the leader of the file. For to make the second man, leader;
Command, file rank, two to the left. If there be more files then one; ranks to
the left, double; and files to the left, double; which makes the second man,
leader; every man in the file being disposed, as you may perceive by that file,
led by the figure of 2. For to make him that was the third man, leader; command
half files, double the front to the right, and files to the right, double; by
which means, the file will stand like that, led by the figure of 3. For to
make him that was the fourth man, leader: Face to the reere, and then he
leads. But if you will keep the same front; command the first rank to stand,
the rest to pass through to the left: placing your selves before your leaders.
Thus will the file stand like that, led by the figure of 4. For to make the
fifth man, leader: command, ranks to the right, double; and files to double
their depth to the right entire: by which means the file will stand like that,
led by the figure of 5. For to make the sixth man, file-leader: cause ranks to
the left, double; and files to the left, double; and then the file will stand
like that, led by the figure of 6. For to reduce them, there needs no more but
face to the reere: notwithstanding if you would have the front the same way,
the Command is, the first rank, stand; the rest pass forwards to the right:
placing your selves before your leaders.

For to make six men, successively leaders, by six words of Command, besides
Facings.
The first is leader: for the second file, Rank 2* to the left, and files to
the left, double. For the third, Countermarch front and reere into the midst:
and face to that part which was the reere. For the fourth, face about to the
right. For the fifth, countermarch front and reere into the midst, and face to
that which was the reere. For the sixth, rank two to the right; and files to
the right, double; face them about, and they are reduced.

CHAP. LXX.
Of drawing the Files again into a Body: and preparing them for a skirmish.
BY this time (me thinks) I hear the Drums beat a Call: which summons each
file-leader to his place: every man observing his order, both in rank and
file. The Officers having taken their due places; the Captain and Ensign in
the front of Pikes, the Lieutenant in the reere; the Sergeant on the flanks,
the Drums on the front and reere Angle s of the Pikes: as you may perceive by
the square figure next following. Now the Drums beat a march, the Ensign
flying at the head of the Pikes; the Pikes and Muskets shouldered, marching at
their distance of order in file, at open order in rank: presently by a sign
from the Captain, the Drums beat a preparative: the Ensign furl-up, retiring
into the midst between the Pikes; the Pikes advance, the ranks close forwards
to their order; the Musketeers makes ready, and every man prepares himself
for Battle or Skirmish. And here the Eyes of the Drum must be very vigilant,
to observe his Captain or Commander; that by the least sign, either of his
hand, leading-staf^e, or whatsoever else he carries, he may either continue
his charge, retreat, or else charge home: and every Soldier ought to be so
well trained and practiced, that in the time of Battle, he may receive ample
instructions from the sound of the Drum.

The Body drawn into a square: with the Officers in their places.


Thus many Officers may serve for a larger Company, if the soldiers be expert
and skillful: and to the contrary, they are all too few, if they be raw and
unexperienced. I have seen some Companies, which have been so absolutely
ignorant, that each man would have needed an Officer, to have kept him orderly
in his place. Nevertheless I make no doubt, but that by the careful oversight
of the Lord Lieutenants, the good assistance of their Deputies, and the
diligence of the Captains, and their Officers, this fault will quickly be
amended. And this might easily enough be done, if that those which are owners
of Arms, would but meet one hour or two in a fortnight (at their best
leisures) and practice the postures of the Pike and Musket first, and the
motions, and firings, when they are more expert. If any shall object, That how
ever this may be done in Towns and Cities, yet it cannot be in the Country
Villages. I answer, That if they meet not above four, six, or eight in a
place, although they have no Officer to instruct them, yet by conferring, and
trying, and often practicing, they will begin to carry their Arms with more
ease; and to use them with more delight. Neither need they to be altogether
ignorant, seeing there are diverse printed portraitures of the postures of each
Arms: as also books, whereby they may have very ample instruction. By which
having attained some little skill; they will not be contented, until they have
better improved it by the instruction of their Officers: after which they will
prove better proficients in one hour, then as they were before, in a year.

CHAP. LXXI.
Of firing by forlorn files. The manner, and use.
BEfore I enter upon forms and figures of Battle, be pleased to observe with
me, that all firings, are either direct or oblique: notwithstanding that the
forms are full enough of variety, occasioned (most times) by the situation
of the place; the order of the enemy, and the number of men: with other
Political observations, for the gaining of wind and Sun. For the manner of
firings, they are sometimes advancing against an enemy: sometimes receiving the
enemies charge upon a stand; or else retreiting. Otherwhiles, we give fire in
the Reere, marching from the Enemy: or in Flank, marching by an enemy: and it
may so fall out, that the enemy may charge in several places at once; as in
Front, and Reere; or in Front, Reere, and Flank. Of which particulars, I will
severally treat, desiring to give content to all, not making the least question
but that benefit may accrue unto some. And therefore hoping that the courteous
and best qualified, will accept of my good meaning; and not refuse my cates,
although presented unto them in earthen vessels: whereby I shall be induced
with more willingness, to proceed in my intended discourses, so you be pleased
to favor me with your better opinions; neither rashly condemning me of
prodigality, for enterprising a work of such consequence as this; nor too
suddenly accusing my simplicity, for preferring my rush-light before the
Sun; when others suffer their Torches to burn out in dark lanternes: whom I
confess to be far more able (were they but half so willing) to have
imparted of their Talents, to the benefit of their Country. But seeing that
they will not vouchsafe it, and that I, like bold bayard, have adventured thus
far; I shall (with your good favor) proceed. And first I will begin with
firings in front; advancing, and standing: and so to the rest. And for the more
clear expression of each firing, I will deliver them both in words and
figures. The first whereof, shall be a firing by forlorn files: which commonly
is used in our exercise, two manner of ways: One way is, for the two
outermost-files of each flank of Musketeers, to march forth, being led on by
the two junior Sergeants, so far as by the superior Commander shall be
thought fit; who being there to stand, the foremost ranks are to give fire;
wheeling off, both to the right, or to the right and left (if it be so
commanded) and to place themselves in the Reere of their own files, the rest
of the ranks firing, and doing of the like, until they have fired once or
twice over, according to their directions. This done, the next two
outmost-files of each flank, are to march forwards unto the place assigned*
and to do the like: those files which formerly faced, in the mean time
trooping back, and placing themselves next the pikes, on the inside of the
divisions of Musketeers: the rest of the Musketeers (in like manner) marching
up, and firing: still placing themselves next the pikes, as aforesaid. When
they have fired all over, and placed themselves according to these directions:
they are reduced, as at first. A second way of firing by forlorn files, may be
after this manner. The outermost files of each flank, are led forth by the
Sergeants; according to the charge until they have brought them unto a fit
place for execution: and then they command their files to rank inward, and to
present, and fire all together: as you may plainly perceive by the figure
following.



The first two files, having ranked i^^ard, presented and fired, are to wheel
off to the right and left: following their leaders in single file, and placing
themselves on the inside of their divisions of Musketeers next the Pikes; the
next outmost files, which followed the first in the reere in the mean time
ranking inward, firing and wheeling off, as before, and placing themselves next
the Pikes. And so forwards for all the rest of the files: still marching up,
and doing the like, so long as the Captain or Commander shall fee fitting.
These kind of firings (and all such like) are either for the beginning of
skirmishes, before the Bodies come within shot one of another, or to provoke
the enemy to battle, to draw them from their Trenches, into some ambushment,
and other such political ends, the number of men which march forth upon such
designs, nor the manner are not always certain, but consists sometimes of
more, sometimes of fewer, according to the number, time, and place.

CHAP. LXXII.
Of firings by two Ranks, ten paces advanced before the front: Next, even with
the front; and lastly, even with the half files.
Advancing of two ranks to fire, ten paces before the front, is most commonly
used, when one or both Battles march against each other: the Musketeers
being led forth by two ranks together, ten or twenty paces, before the front
of the body; that so they may come near enough to doe*certaine execution. A
Sergeant from each flank leading up the two foremost ranks, (according as
they shall have order) the first rank of each flank is to present and give
fire, wheeling either all off to the right, or to the right and left, as you
may perceive by the following Figure.



The first ranks having presented, fired, and wheeled off, (as aforesaid) are
to march close down in single file, within three foot of their own flanks,
until they come to the Reere of their own divisions: where every man is to
place himself in the reere of his own file. The second rank being at the
distance of three foot, behind the first rank, when they first took their
ground: they likewise are to rest their Muskets, mounting their muzzles clear
of their Leaders, and so to stand with their matches cock^, and pans guarded,
that so they may level and fire as soon as their Leaders are clear of them,
and wheel off, in like manner placing themselves as they were before. The next
two ranks are to begin to advance forwards, when they see the last of the
two former ranks, presented ready to fire. And they also having fired, wheel
off as the others did before them. And so, successively the rest of the ranks
advancing, fire and wheeling off again, placing themselves according to former
directions. This way, they may give fire, once or oftener over, as the enemy
does advance; or the Commander shall see fitting. All this while that the
Musketeers advance so far before the front, (if the body be upon march) the
Pikes may be shouldered: but when the bodies come within twelve score, or
less, then it is fit that the Musketeers give fire even with the front of the
Pikes, and that the Pikemen, advance their Pikes, and close forwards to their
distance of three foot, that so they may be even in rank with their
Musketeers, as you may perceive by the following Figure.



Now the Pikes being advanced, and the ranks closed forwards to their due
distance of order, the Musketeers are to present, even with the front, every
rank successively moving forward, until they come to be even in rank with
the first rank of Pikes, there to give fire, and to wheel off to the right
and left, trooping, file-wise, down close to their own divisions: and taking
their places in the reere, as in the former figures. The first rank of
Musketeers having fired, and wheeled away, the next ranks are to move forwards
at three The three motions are, Blow your Coal^, Open your Pan, Present Breast
high. You are to blow your Coal^, stepping forwards with your left foot. Open
your Panel stepping forwards with your right foot* Present, stepping forwards
with your left foot. The (...) a^e to bepetfor^^d, hand and foot together, by
every one that advances (...) to ^iv^ fire, without expecting anydirecti^^^ in
time of Skirm s^.
motions, into their places; and there to give fire after the same manner:
wheeling away again, and placing themselves according to former directions,
every rank still making good their Leaders ground. In this sort the battle
may be continued, until they have fired once, twice, or oftener over; and that
the Bodies become so close together, that the Pikes begin to port, and so at
length come to push of Pike. Which done, the Musketeers are to give fire,
either retreiting, or else not to advance further, then the half files of
Pikes. For in that place (the bodies being come so near together) they will
do as much execution, as if they were even with the front. The manner of the
standing, you may perceive by the following Figure.



The Pikes being now come to push, the Musketeers are to advance no further
than the half files of Pikes: that (so they may do execution with their shot,
and be out of danger of the Pikes. This having attained, they are there to
present, and give fire; every rank still moving forwards, and maintaining his
leaders ground. After they have performed their firing, they are to wheel off
by division, as in the former Figures: still placing themselves in the reere of
their own files, always taking their directions from the Drum, either for
charging or retreiting, etc.

The battle or charge being ended, the reducement is easy. The leader of each
file, being in his place at the head of his file; command the Musketeers to
march up, even with the front of pikes; and then they will be as at first.

Observe withal that when the firing is to be performed, even with the front;
then the Musketeers are still to make good their leaders ground. The want to be
in the place of most security (which is the Reere) as you may perceive by the
pricks, which I have designed, for noting out the empty rooms of such, who
have closed forwards to make good the ground in the front: the others that last
fired are wheeled off, and trooping down into their places. When the firing is
even with the halfe-files, they are to do the like: unless the Drum beat a
retreat; for then, the Musketeers neither advance, nor retreat: but every rank
giving fire on the same ground, they stand: and then wheel off again, that
their fellows may do as much. Nevertheless when the forlorn files march
forth, or that two ranks march forth, ten paces (or more) before the front:
then they are to give fire, as upon a retreit: unless the enemy fly. I will
now show some other ways of firing in front; before I show the firings in the
reere. The first whereof, shall be the horn Battle: as in the Chapter
following.

CHAP. LXXIII.
Of the Horne-battell; how to make it: and to reduce it by firing.
THe Horn-battell may be for the same occasion and use, as the firing by two
ranks ten paces advancing before the front: and is by some held more
serviceable, because that the musketeers do their execution more roundly,
without any intermission of time: and keep themselves without straggling from
their bodies. Besides, the wings of Musketeers being so advanced, are more apt
for over-fronting, and more easily to be wheeled; whereby to charge the enemy
in flank; each of these wings, or divisions, are to be led up by a Sergeant
(or some other superior Officer) unto the place appointed by the Chief. But
because that it may be performed in time of exercise, by the intelligible
Soldier, observe the Command which produces this following figure.

Pikes, stand; Musketeers, march; until the Bringers up, rank with the front
of Pikes.
The Horne-battell.


The figure being perfect, the firstranke of Musketeers, present and give fire
wheeling off, either all to the right; or to the right and left (according as
they shall have direction) and placing themselves, orderly, in the Reere of
their own files. The next rank (after the same manner) firing and wheeling
off, and placing themselves behind those, which were their leaders. Thus is
every rank, successively* to do the like: until they have all given fire. If
the Commander would still preserve, and continue the same figure; then let the
Musketeers still move forwards, into the ground (or place) of them that fired
before them: and the form will be still the same. And if by the Chiefetain it
be found necessary, that after once or twice firing over, the shot should
flank their pikes; then the Musketeers, must not advance into their leaders
ground; but, to the contrary, every rank is to present and fire on the same
ground they stand: and that so soon as they are clear of their leaders. Or if
need be, the pikes may advance and march up, to make their front i^tire: which
being done, the file-leaders of Musketeers being in front, they are reduced.

CHAP. LXXIIII.
Of the Demie-hearse Battle: The use of the figure; how to make it, and to
reduce it by firing.
THe next firing in Front which I present unto you, is the Demie Hearse: which
is a figure most firm, most sollid, and most stable, yea, and does as much
execution, as any of the former: and that with half the danger. For the pikes
in the former figure, they either rank even with the front of Muskets: or
else, the division of Musketeers being open, they become liable to the danger
of the enemies shot: themselves not being able to do any thing, either
offensive or defensive. But, to the contrary, in this figure, they are securely
covered by their own Musketeers: until they approach nearer to the enemy.
Whereby they may be able to do some service; either by sending their showers of
arrows amongst them, for bringing their array out of order, or else, by closing
nearer, come to the shocke, and so try the fortune of the day. But not to hold
you longer in circumstance, take the words of command: which produce the
figure, as follows.

Pikes, stand, Musketeers, advance before your Front of Pikes: and close your
Divisions.
The Demic-hearse.


For the firings on this figure, they may be diverse; yet I shall content my
self only to show two of them: The first is, that the Musketeers may at the
discretion of the Commander, give fire in front: and so wheel off by division
(or all to the right, as shall best please him that commands in Chief) placing
themselves in the Reere of their own divisions and files of shot, which is
just before the front of pikes. The next ranks then moving forwards into their
leaders ground, are to present, fire, wheel off, and place themselves after
the same manner: the rest of the ranks of Musketeers, doing the like, until
they have all given fire: which firing, does nothing alter the form or figure
of battle. Having fired once or twice over this way, the second firing shall
serve for reducement: which is indeed the firing intended to be expressed by this
figure. And that I may by words, the more clearly explain the work, take
these directions following.

The first rank having given fire, are to wheel equally off by division: each
part falling file-wise down, close by their flanks of Musketeers: until the
leaders of the ranks of Muskets come down as low as the first rank of pikes;
which being performed, they are to face outward, and to move so far forth in
a strait line, until they have ranked even with the first rank of pikes. But
herewithall are they to observe, that they must leave an Intervall between the
innermost-musket of each flank; and the outermost-file-leader of the pikes. So
soon as the first rank has given fire and wheeled away, the second rank is
to give fire, wheeling off, as before, and passing down between the Intervals
on the flanks: placing themselves after their leaders. The same is every rank
successively to do, until all the Musketeers are drawn from before the
front, and placed on the flank of their pikes. But when there are not above
two ranks of Musketeers to give fire, then the pikes may port; and when the
Musketeers have fired, and are wheeled away, they may charge. And lastly, the
pikes being re-advanced, the body stands reduced, as at first.

CHAP. LXXV.
Of giving Fire, advancing, by way of Introduction: with the beneficial use of
the Bow and Pike.
I Shall next offer to your perusal, a figure of Introduction: which is a
passing through or between: Being a firing by way of advancing against the
enemy, and of gaining ground. I will not dispute how useful it is; but sure I
am, it is over-ballanced with danger. As for such whom I have seen to practice
it, they have rather used it for variety, in a well experienced Company, then
for any known excellency it has in it self. But if these lines happen to be
over-lookt by any, that preserues a better opinion of this firing by
introduction, then I do: I shall be willing to leave them to their own liking,
while I in the mean time proceed to show the manner of the execution, which is
usually one of these two ways. The first, when the Motion is begun by the
second rank from the front. The other, when it is begun by the Bringers up.
Nevertheless you must note* that your files of Musketeers must be opened to
their open order; before the firing begin: that so, the Musketeers may pass
between the Intervals of each file, to give fire in the front. And therefore
take the words of Command and Direction; which will produce this Figure
following.

Musketeers, make ready to give fire by introduction to the right.
Files of Musketeers, open by Division to your open order.


This firing by introduction may be thus performed. The Pikes being flankt with
their Musketeers, the first rank of each flank, present and give fire:
having fired, they stand and make ready again in the same place. The second
rank passing forwards before the first, do there fire and stand: the third
rank then passing forwards after the second, and standing even in rank with
them that first fired; that so soon as the second rank has fired, they may
quickly step before them, and fire in like manner. In this firing, still the
rank which is next to fire, stands even in rank with them which last fired;
until those which stand presented, have likewise given fire: after which they
then pass before them; the Rank which was their next followers, passing
forwards and ranking with those which last fired: every man following his
Leader successively, until the Bringers up give fire, and stand, and then the
Figure will become a Horn battle. All the while that this firing by
Introduction, is continued, the Pikes may be shouldered (if there be no fear
of horse) or otherwise at discretion. If you continue this firing twice over;
the Musketeers will have their right places: which being done, march up your
Pikes, to rank even with your Musketeers in front, and they are reduced. For
the other way of firing by introduction, the first rank (or file-leaders) are
to give fire as before, and to stand, the last rank (or bringers up) in the
interim of their firing; marching up, and ranking even with the second rank:
the rest following their Bringers up; as they do when Bringers up double their
front. The first rank having fired, the Bringers up step immediately before
them; present, and give fire; the rest still, successively, doing the like,
until every rank have given fire once over. Observe withal that the
file-leaders are to give fire twice over: being the first and the last and then
to stand, the Pikes marching up, even with their front of Musketeers. And thus
they are reduccd, as at first. The Pikemen, all the time of this firing, do no
service: Notwithstanding, if one half of them had bows fastened unto their
Pikes (being able and well practiced men) they might, whilst the Musketeers
are in firing, be dealing of their doles about: and although their arrows did
not happen to wound mortally, yet the whisteling noise, the terror of the
sight, and the several hurts (which could not choose but be many) would be a
great abatement to the stoutest courages. And great pity it is to see, the
lusty Pike-man poorly to drop down by the Musket Shot; himself not being
able to hurt his enemy at that distance, nor defend himself.

CHAP. LXXVI.
The way to make the Diamond Battle: several ways to fire upon it: with
diverse other figures and firings, which are thereby produced.
THe Diamond Battle is also a firing in front; though more for show, then
modern service; yet because that some hold it in venerable respect, I thought
fit to place it amongst the rest; leaving every man to his liking, either to
use it or refuse it. It may be that some will look, that I should make the
Sheere Battle; the Wedge, the Saw, and many such like: which might be made
either hollow or sollid. But I shall entreat such to spare me; for I would not
willingly spend time to so small purpose; choosing rather to insist on Figures;
more profitable for them, and commendable for me. Yet if any man have a mind
to practice any of them, by observation of this Diamond Battle, he may easily
make them. But not to hold you longer with circumstance, the words of Command,
and direction, which are for the making of this Diamond Battle, are as follow.

First cause your Musketeers of the right flank, to open to the right, to a
sufficient distance: for receiving the Muskets of the left flank.

Then command the Musketeers of the left flank, to pass through into the
space of ground on the right.

This being done, for to make the Figure, Command.
Files of Musketeers, rank 1. 3. 5. 7. etc. by increase, to the left.
Files of Pikes, rank by decrease after your Musketeers.


The Musketeers may fire on this figure, diverse ways: though I only intend
to speak unto two of them. The first, is the most usual way: and that is, the
giving fire in rank; the first man (or point of the Diamond) first giving
fire: then wheeling off to the right, and placing himself just behind the
single Pikeman, in the reere. Then, the next rank being three men, give fire;
wheeling off by division: and placing themselves in rank, behind the single
Musketeers, as they were before the firing began. This done, the rank of five
Musketeers, gives fire; wheeling off, in like manner, by division* ever
observing, that where the number is odd, and they command to wheel off by
division; there the greatest number, always goes to the right. And so, in like
manner, the ranks give fire, successively; and place themselves after their
leaders, as before. When all the Musketeers have given fire, and are wheeled
off; then charge Pikes, which will be fifteen in the first rank; the rest
decreasing, Having advanced your Pikes, your figure will stand like two wedges,
with their points joined, as you may perceive by this Figure next following.



If you would reduce your men from this Figure, without firing, (your men being
sufficiently expert) let the Musketeers stand, and Pikes face to the reere:
and so the wedges will stand faced in opposition. Next, command them to
interchange ground: the Musketeers advancing forwards, into the ground of the
Pikes, and the Pikes, moving into the ground of the Musketeers; and then by
facing the Pikes to the former front, the body will stand in form of a Diamond
again.

If you would give fire from this Figure (all the Musketeers being in the
reere) the body must face about: and so the firing will be contrary to the
former. But if you wheel them about, they may give fire the same way.
Howsoever, they having given fire, are to wheel off by division, and to place
themselves in the reere of the Pikes, even in rank again, as they were when
they gave fire. Thus having all fired over, and wheeled away; the Pikes may
charge: and being again advanced, the body will stand in form of a Diamond*
and this I pray you to conceive, for I intend not to remake the Figure.

The second way of firing on the Diamond figure, is by way of Countermarch* and
is an oblique firing. For whereas in the other firing by ranks (in the Diamond
Battle) each rank fired by increase of two (beginning with one, and ending
with fifteen in a rank) this firing, contrariwise, begins with 15. and ends
with 1. still decreasing 2. For this firing, your files must be at open order,
because the Musketeers must countermarch down between the Intervals of their
own files to the right: every Muskettier that finds himself without a
leader, being to present and give fire: and then to countermarch to the right,
and to place himself in the Reere of his own file, behind the pikes. When the
first 15. have fired, then the next 13. present, fire, and countermarch, still
placing themselves in the reere of their own files. Next there fireth (...)
th^^ 9. etc. for still there fires ^o many, as are (...) of any leaders. And in
this manner of firing, they that fire together, stand neither in rank not
file, bu^ o^liquely. When all the Musketeers have fired* and ^^e (...) into
the Reere of their own files; let the pikes charge: and so the form of your
battle, will be like a long wedge: as you may perceive by the following
figure, where now your Ranks are become 2. and 2* of a number.



Your men standing in form afore-shewed, if you please yet to be more curious,
face them all to the Reere: and command your Musketeers to march ten or twelve
paces. Your pikes to stand, and your Musketeers will present you with an
hollow wedge* and your pikes with a sollid wedge. Lastly, to reduce all these
several forms into the first proper square battle: first, let the sollid
wedge, close forward, into the hollow of the other: then, let the Musketeers
make ready, present, and fire, as before. That is to say, every Muskettier that
finds himself without a leader, is to give fire, and to countermarch to the
reere of his own file, the rest doing the like, successively. When they have
all fired, and are countermarcht clear, let the pikes charge: and then your
body will have the form of a Diamond again. Next, face them all to the Reere;
and command, Ranks, file 8. to the right. Which being done, pass through the
Musketeers which belong to the left-flanke, into their places; and close the
Musketeers of the right-flanke to their due distance: and so they will stand,
all properly reduced.

CHAP. LXXVII.
Of the Unequal Half Moon; The use of the Figure: and of several ways of
firing upon it.
THe Unequal halfe-moone, or semicircular Battle, is a form both good and
useful; which the time, the number, and place (with other circumstances) may
make either beneficial or prejudicial. Wise Captains and Commanders ever
foreseeing with providence, what forms or figures may be most profitable and
available, for the present service. This Unequal figure may be useful, either
at the landing of soldiers in an enemies Country, or for necessity (the enemy
being more able in horse) making use either of hedge, ditch, wood, creek or
River; to secure the Reere. For the figure it self, it may be made many ways;
either with the Musketeers outermost, or innermost, or lined, etc. as please
he Commander. It may also be made in a Regimentall way, or after the way of a
small and private Company: But because I have only in this my small Treatise,
taken upon me to show the postures, motions, and figures, which are most
usually done in a small Company (although many of them, yea the more part, may
be very fit for larger Bodies) I shall content my self to sail in so small a
bottom, not desiring to put on more sail then will suffice for the bearing of
so small a burden. Wherefore my request shall be, that every courteous and
skilful Pilot that shall come aboard this small Bark; will be pleased neither
to launch it into the maine, lest it be swallowed in the Surges* nor to expose
it to the danger of shelues, rocks, and sands; lest it suffer shipwreck for
want of good guidance, but so to steer it, that it may safely arrive at its
^^sir^d Harbor: wherein they will both honor (...) expressing their virtues,
and g^^tifie (...) by applying each motion, figure, and form, to his right
use, and true intention. I will now show, how the figure is to be made, which
is as follow^th* If yo^^ Battle be in form of an Hearse* then (...) them to
the right or left about; until they have atteined this figure. But if in a
square, then observe these following words; which will produce the figure.

Wheel your Flanks into the Front: then face the Body to one of the Flanks:
and wheel your Battle into a Unequal Half Moon.
The Unequal Half Moon.


Having brought your Soldiers into this Unequal form, you may face them all
inward, for speech; or outward for fight. Then let the Officers make Intervals
for the Musketeers; and let the outermost Arc, or first rank of each
division, present, and give fire: those of the right flank, wheeling off to
the right; the left-flanke, to the left; placing themselves in the Reere of
their own divisions of Musketeers; still making good their leaders ground.
The rest of the ranks are to do the same: until they have all given fire.
Nevertheless, if your enemy be too potent for you by reason of his horse, your
Bow-pike-men need not stand idle; although they stand behind their
Musketeers: for that they may plie them faster with their shafts, then the
others can with their shot. But if the horse be so violent, that the
Musketeers may not abide them; then let them give fire, and wheel off by
division, as before: passing quite through their Intervals, and placing
themselves in the Reere of their pikes: every rank making good their leaders
ground. Thus also are the rest of the Musketeers to give fire, placing
themselves in the concave part of the Body, as aforesaid: following the pikes
which now make good the Musketeers ground. If need be, the pikes may charge
over-hand: or if occasion serves, at the foot, drawing forth their swords, over
their left arms; and couching down their heads: by which means the
Musketeers may give fire, over their shoulders. For the first rank having
fired, may kneel down on the ground, and charge again: and so the second
rank may give fire, and kneel in like manner: making ready again. And so in
like manner for all the rest: all giving fire, and kneeling on the ground; that
so the next rank behind may give fire over them. Thus continning the firing,
until all the Musketeers have given fire. Nevertheless if need be, the first
rank may rise with the rest, and give fire over again, as before. And so the
Battle may be continued; the Pikes still keeping off the horse.

For the reducement of this figure, and to bring every man to his place: let
your Musketeers (either firing, or passing through) be brought into the places
they were in, before they first gave fire. Then face the whole Body to one of
the flanks; and march them until they have evened their ranks, and straightened
their files. This done, then if all your Pikes be on the right flank; wheel
your right flank into the midst; if on the left flank, wheel front and reere
into the left flank. This being done, let the Commander pass to his proper
file-leaders; and face the whole Body to him, and they are reduced as at first.

CHAP. LXXVIII.
Of Extraduction: the several uses, firings, and Reducements.
THe next Firing which I shall take upon me to demonstrate, shall be by way of
Extraduction: which is also a firing in Front. It may be to singular good use,
in a strait or passage sage where your Wings and Reere may be secured: your
enemy being supposed to be too powerful for you, either in Horse or Foot, or
both. Having gotten into some strait, there fill the mouth of the passage with
your Pikes: and if the length of your Company be not sufficient to do it, then
double your ranks (as in this following figure) and let your pikes either
order, advance, port, or charge: according to the occasion; your Musketeers
being in the Reere, may march up into the Front, and fire. But before I show
the firing, observe these following directions, which produce the Figure.

Pikes stand, Musketeers face to the Reere, and March u^till you are clear of
your body of Pikes;
Then face inward, and close your division: that being done face to your
Leader, and double your Ranks.
This being performed, the Pikes are all in front, the Musketeers in Reere.
A firing by Extraduction.


Having ordered your ba^tell in this manner, let the first rank^ ^f Musketeers
(which are those that follow next after the Pikes) face to the right, and march
forth (file-wise) to close by the right flank of Pikes, until he that is the
leader of them, be come into the front of Pikes, then he is to lead them
quite cross the front of Pikes; until he have attained the further part of
the front to the left; which being done, they are all to stand, present, and
give fire. You must note withal, in this firing, that he which was the right
hand man of the Rank, and was the leader of the ^^tion, now becomes the left
hand man, when he gives fire; and that having fired, they are to wheel off to
the left, close to the left flank of Pikes, and so to fall in the reere of the
Musketeers. In the interim, whilst that the rank which first fired, is
wheeling away, the second rank is marching into their places to give fire. And
in this manner they may maintain their Battle, so long as they please: the
Pikes either porting or charging all the whiles. The Musketeers in the time of
their crossing the front, are to couch, or stoop under their Pikes; that so
they may be no impediment to the Pikes in their charge. There is another way of
firing ^y Extraduction, which is, that the right hand leader of Musketeers,
places himself before the right file^eader of Pikes: the rest all falling
beyond him: nevertheless because I conceive it not to be so good a way as that
already shown, I will not trouble you with it: but come immediately to the
^educement of this, which is as follows. Com^and your Pikes to stand, and
your Muskets to double their front by division: but if you want room to do it,
then first double your files (...) the contrary hand of that, which you doubled
your ranks; and so having doubled by division, as aforesaid, they will be
reduced, as at first.

CHAP. LXXIX.
Of the Broad-fronted Battle: with the ways of firing upon it.
THe broad-fronted battle, must needs be of special use; for many occasions,
either offensive or defensive. Which because it is so apparent to all, I shall
not need to stand to reason with any; rather desiring to show the manner of
making and reducing it: which is ^s follows. Cause your Pikes to stand, and
your Musketeers to march: until the reere rank of Musketeers be advanced a
little before the first rank of Pikes; then let the Musketeers face inward,
(or in opposition) and close their divisions; and then face to their leader.
And if you would bring more hands to fight, double ranks to any hand, and the
body (for form and number) will stand like the figure here next following. But
the speediest way, and (I think the best) I am sure with expert Soldiers, is
to wheel both ^lanks into the front, which is the way intended by this Figure.
For the manner of the firing it self, you may partly perceive that there are
intervalles made for each division, to wheel off to the right, that so they
may either fall in the rear of the Musketeers, and there continue the firing;
or else fall in the rear of the pikes, and be thereby secured from the horse. It
may be done, one or both ways: according to the occasion or discretion of the
Commander. Nevertheless, before I show the firing, observe these words of
Command, which produce the Figure.

Wheel your flanks into the front,
Face to your leader.
The broad ^^onted Battle.


The first rank having presented, and given fire, let them wheel off to the
right: all passing down the Interual^es to the right, and placing themselves in
the reere of their own divisions of Musketeers. The Musketeers making good
their leaders ground; and the next ran^es firing, wheeling off, and placing
themselves as before. Having fired once or twice over this way, a second way
may be, to place themselves in the reere of their Pikes; either standing, or
advancing: the Pikemen in the mean time, clouding the clear sky, with their
ayrie Armorie. The Musketeers having all given fire, and placed themselves in
the reere: if need be, the Pikes may close their divisions, and charge over
hand: and if the enemy shall still press forwards, the Pikes may charge at the
foot: the Musketeers giving fire over them, etc.

For reducement, there are diverse ways by firings; but because I would make
every thing so plain and easy, that those that read for instruction, may
receive benefit, it has caused me to reduce each figure by it self: and not
to multiply one upon another, whereby to make them too ambiguous. And
therefore, if you make this Figure by wheeling your flanks into the front; and
then fire, as aforesaid: the reducement may be, either Note that the second
firing will cause the body to f^ee to the rear, which then becomes a front
accidental, and is the cause that the same command reduces the figure which
first made it.
to fire them over again, and so to fall into their former places: and then to
wheel your flanks into the front again, and lastly, face about to the right:
and they will be as before. Or else, if you would reduce them without giving
fire over again, then command your Musketeers to double your front by
division: that done, wheel both flanks into the reere: then face to your
leader, and command your Musketeers to double your front by division again:
and they are as at first. If I should proceed to show the many and sundry ways
of firings, which may be done in front: my Book had need to have as many
leaves, as lines: and yet all too little. But that I may keep my self to my
promise, and my Book to its compass: I will next come to show some firings in
the reere: and amongst my divisionall firings, I shall insert some other sorts
of front firings, which here I have omitted.

CHAP. LXXX.
Of dismarching, or firing in the Reere: the several ways, and how they ought
to be performed.
HAving so long maintained Battle in the front, I will now face them about,
and see how they will behave themselves upon their firings in the reere. Which
kind of firings, may be very beneficial and serviceable, many ways. For by
keeping an orderly march, and firing in the reere, the eager enemy, (by a too
hasty pursuit) may be disordered. Or if it so happen (as many timesit does)
that you have a disadvantagious place to imbattell on; by this firing you may
march away: still preserving your order and array, until you have brought your
adversary into some ambushment, or such like inconvenience. For the manner of
coming of the firing, it must either be by facing about, wheeling about, or
countermarching: the Pikes are to be shouldered. The figure follows.

A firing in the Reere.


The Body being upon a march, if the enemy appear in the Reere; let the last
rank of Musketeers, face about, and give fire, wheeling off, by division,
file-wise marching up toward the Front, and there placing themselves before the
foremost rank of Musketeers: (the outmost man of each rank, being Note upon
all firings in the Reere, Blow your colt; stepping forwards with your right
foot. Open your p^n, stepping forwards with your left foot present to the R
ere, stepping forwards with your right foot
the leader up of those which have fired) where first taking their places on
the outside, the rest wheeling about them, and ranking even with them on the
inside; ever observing, that they rank even with the second rank of pikes.
The rest of the Musketeers also doing the like: and in this manner to continue
the firing, as occasion shall require. Nevertheless, of all the figures and
firings, that ever I have seen, this has been the worst performed in all
places; which might easily be amended, if the Soldiers would observe this
following order in their execution: namely, when the last rank of Musketeers
have presented to the Reere, and are giving of fire; the rank which marched
next before them, do then blow, open, and present, at three motions* still
keeping along even with the Body, until that, (lastly) they present to the
Reere; by which time, the rank that last fired, will be wheeled away. The next
rank, so soon as the other has presented, is likewise at 3. motions, to do
the same: and so, successively, for all the rest; every rank observing, upon
each ranks firing, to loose one; and to march one rank nearer, to the reere of
the Battle: that so that part, may still be kept absolute.

This giving of fire toward the reere for service, is to be continued;
according to the quality of the place, the occasion for fight; and the
discretion of the Commander. In exercise, we commonly do it but once over; and
then (if you please you may make Alte) and face your Body about, giving fire
over again: and charging your pikes upon it: if need so requires.
Notwithstanding, if the horse shall still continue to pursue you in the reere,
you having gained some strait or place of advantage, may wheel your flanks
into the Front, then face to the reere, and with your charged pikes, defend
your Musketeers: which (the body being so wheeled) will be in the reere. The
body standing in this form, the Musketeers may sleeve up by way of
Extraduction. The manner, you may perceive in the Chapter which treats of that
figure. If the horse still press forwards, cause the pikes to charge at the
foot; the Musketeers giving fire ^ver them, as in the Unequal half Moon.
Lastly, to reduce them, having thus fired, command them to wheel their flanks
into the fron, and to face about after their proper file-leaders, and they are
reduced.

Sometimes, we give fire in the reere: having all our Musketeers marching in
the reere of the pikes. For the manner of the motion, it is as before: but for
placing of the men, after they have fired; it may be different. As, to wheel
off by division, placing themselves in the front of the Musketeers, next
behind the reere of pikes. Or if the body be large, to wheel all off to the
right, through Intervals* and so to march into the front of pikes. Or else,
they may wheel off by division, flank their pikes, and so fire over again,
as before. If you have brought your Musketeers (by firing) to the Reere,
before the front of pikes; then to reduce them, you may either wheel the body
about, and give fire in front, causing your Musketeers to fall off by
division, and to flank their pikes, as you may perceive by the figure of the
Demie-hearse. Or else, if you will reduce them without a firing, cause your
Musketeers to open to the right and left: and the pikes to march up in the
miast: after which, facing all to your Leader, they are as at first.

I might have shown a Figure for each of these several firings in the reere:
which would have delivered them with more variety: but I conceive that this
here already expressed, may suffice: especially this being the ground of what may
be spoken. Concerning firings in this nature, many men are of many minds,
about this firing in the reere. Some will have it, that the last rank, shall
at one motion, face to the reere: and there present, and give fire. Others will
have it at two motions; but either of them have their inconveniences. For
however they pretend a more sudden execution, they are decerved: for would they
make trial, by causing the Musketeers of one of the flanks, to give fire at
one motion; and the Musketeers of the other flank, at three motions, (as I
have here set down) they should soon find, that the firing upon three
motions were the best: and that the other would be cast so far behind their
body, that they would be in some danger to be cut off. Besides this, they are
longer in clearing themselves from their own men, which all the whilst must
stay, until they are marched off: or else kill them, in stead of the enemy,
whereas in this other firing upon three motions, they still keep along with
their Body, doing their execution more suddenly and more safely. Nevertheless,
there be many so much wedded to their own wilful opinion, that they will more
willingly persist in known error, then be seen to alter what they have
seemed to maintain. But leaving such to steer by their own compass, I will
here conclude my firing in the reere. And the next I show, shall be firings in
flanks: to which purpose, I pass all my Musketeers to the right flank. The
words of direction for it, are these.

Musketeers of the right flank, open to the right, or face to the right, and
march. When they have opened to a sufficient distance, then stand.

Musketeers of the left flank, pass through between your ranks of Pikes,
to the intervalle on the right flank: then stand, and face all to your leader.

CHAP. LXXXI.
Of firings in flank, in general; and more particularly, of the gathering
firing.
THe Musketeers being all on the right flank, (as in the last Chapter is
directed) it would be needless to make a Figure, whereby to demonstrate the
standing of the body* seeing that none can be so ignorant, but must needs know
that all the Musketeers being upon the right, the Pikes must be upon the left.
Nevertheless, I shall endeavor to show what is meant by firing in flanks.
Which (for the general) are of these two kinds. The first is, when the enemy
skirm^sh with us in flank as we march: the other, when as by some sudden
attempt or ambushment, the whole body is engaged, and so forced to stand, and
to face to the right, or left; or both. By which facings, the flanks become
fronts accidental, and their firings will be after the same manner of the
firings in front. Wherefore seeing I have already spoken sufficiently of them,
I will now show firings in flank, marching: the particulars whereof, are as
follows. The first is for the outmost file to give fire, and stand until the
next file have fired, which by some is called the gathering firing. Secondly,
firings in flank, and leading them up, between the Musketeers and Pikes
firing; in flank, being led off by the bringers up: firings in flank,
sleeving up on the contrary flank of Pikes: firing in flank, and drawing them
up between the innermost files of Pikes. All these firings in flank, are to
be performed upon a march, the Pikes are to be shouldered. Our first firing in
flank, follows.

The Command is, Musketeers, give fire to the right: and gather up your files.


This kind of firing on the flank, I have seen and known used, by many good
and able soldiers. Nevertheless, in my opinion, the men stand in a great
deal of danger, when having given fire, they can do no good; but stand like
so many marks for their enemies shot. Notwithstanding, it may be that such
whom I have frequently seen to use it in their practice, may be able to render
good reasons for the service; though as yet I cannot conceive it. I will
therefore surcease any further prosecution my opinions, and show the manner of
execution: which is to be performed as follows. The Command being, to give
fire to the right, presently the outermost file to the right, faceth outward,
and presents: the rest of the body, still marching forwards. Then the presented
file, gives fire, and stands facing again to their first front. By thattime,
the body will be marched clear of the standing file, then the next outermost
file, presents and fires; in like manner: the body marching as before. Having
fired, they in like manner face to their first front, and stand; a Sergeant
leading up the file, that first fired on the out side of the file that last
fired. Then they both stand together, until the third file has given fire
after the same manner. And then the Sergeant leads up the two files, even with
the third, which last fired. And after this manner, the ^^^es of Musketeers
face to the flank: and give fire, s^c^essively: and stand, until the Sergeant
leads up the rest of the files which fired, even with the front of the file,
which last fired. Thus having all fired over, they are to march up again, even
with the front of Pikes, and this reduces them, as at first.

CHAP. LXXXII.
The second manner of giving fire to the flank.
IF you would fire in flank, a more secure way, then that last shown: take
this way of firing. And this shall be full as serviceable, for matter of
execution, and shall far precede it, in way of preservation: both in securing
the Musketeers (after they have fired) from the danger of their enemies shot:
as also in continuing the body entire, without separation. It is especially
useful, when two enemies are divided by a River, or by some such like means
secured from the incursions of the horse. For then, by this way of drawing the
Musketeers up between the innermost file of Musketeers, and the outermost
file of Pikes to the right: your Battle may be continued, according to the
occasion or the Commanders discretion. The Figure follows. The Command is,

Musketeers, give fire in flank: marching up between the Pikes and Muskets.


The way to perform this motion of firing, is as follows. The outermost file
being commanded to face to the right, and present: the rest of the body
marches away (as in the other Figure) and the standing file, gives fire. This
done, and that the body is marched clear of the standing file; the next file
presents to the right: and the file that first gave fire, faceth to the first
front, and is led by a Serieant, cross the reere of Musketeers, and up
between the Muskets and Pikes; the Musketeers are still to open to the right;
as they march, that so there may be room for one file to march up between
them, and the pikes. And so (successively) each file having fired marches up
next unto the right flank of pikes. When all your Musketeers have given fire
once over, they are reduced as at the first. The battle may be continued, at
discretion. The next firing in flank (for the matter of firing it self) will
be all one with this: but for the manner of the wheeling off, and placing them,
it will differ.

CHAP. LXXXIII.
A firing in Flank, led off by the Bringers up.
THe next firing in flank, which I propound to your perusal, will be nothing
differing for manner of execution, from the firings in Flank; formerly showed.
The only difference arising between them, is, that the other files of
Musketeers, after that they had given fire, were led off by their proper
file-leaders; and this, to the contrary, must be led off by their Bringers-up.
And this, indeed, if the body be upon a slow march, is the readiest and
quickest way: and does more speedily secure the Musketeers, after that they
have given fire. The words of Command and direction, which produce the firing,
are as follows.

Musketeers, give fire to the Right: wheeling off, after your Bringers up; and
placing your selves between your Divisions.


For the manner of execution, or way to perform this firing, it is as
follows. The body must be conceived to be marching; upon all these firings in
flank: and that with their pikes shouldered. This being presupposed, the
Command being given, the outmost-file presents to the right, and gives fire:
then faceth to the right, after their bringers up; who leads them off, cross
the reere of Musketeers, marching them up between the divisions, the bringers
up supplying the file-leaders place; and marching even in rank in the front,
with the file-leaders; the file-leader of the same file, becoming the bringer
up in the Reere. The files of Musketeers, or Pikes (according as the command
shall be given) are as they march, to open; thereby giving way to the
Musketeers, after they have fired; to come up between the divisions, and so
soon as the first file that fired, is clear from the right flank; the second
file, presents and fires: in like manner wheeling off, as before, and marching
up between the Pikes and Musketeers; every file, successively, giving fire,
and wheeling off as aforesaid. This firing may be performed, once, twice, or
oftener over: according to the discretion, of the Commander. Nevertheless, if
it be twice performed, the men are reduced as at first; every man having his
right place. If you fire them but once, or thrice (or any odd number of times)
over, then you must countermarch your files of Musketeers to reduce them.
There is another way for the bringers up to wheel off: and each of them to
lead off his file; until he comes to the Reere of the division which is
between the Muskets and the Pikes; and there he is to stand, and rank with
the bringers up, the rest that follow, passing on forwards, by way of
Introduction, and every man ranking before him, that was his leader in the
wheeling off; until the proper file-leader be come into his place again. And
after this way, they may give fire; each firing being his own reducement.

CHAP. LXXXIIII.
The difference between Firings in Flank, marching: and of bringing the
Musketeers on the outside of the Pikes.
ALL, or the most part of the firings in flank, which are performed marching;
in point of execution, are the same: the especial difference between them,
being ^ither in the manner of the wheeling off, after they have fired, or in
the material placing them, whereby to make them more offensive or defensive.
And all this appears by this next following firing: which is to be used at
such time and place, when as there may be doubt of the enemies horse: And,
therefore, for the more security of the Musketeers having fired; they are to
be drawn up on the outerside of the left flank: if happily there may be some
hedge, ditch, river, hill, marish, wood, or such like convenient safeguard;
whereby to shroud them from the fury and violence of the horse; that so the
pikes making Alt, and facing to the enemy, may charge, and with their armed
points (strongly and closely coucht) receive and abate the fury of the first
shocke. And if need be, the pikes may all charge at the foot, closely serried
together, with their swords drawn, and the Musketeers may give fire over
them. The manner, you may perceive in the figure of the Unequal halfe-moone. But
lest I anticipate my self, in showing the use: I will return to shewth e
manner of the firing, intended by this following Figure. Only first take the
words of command and direction, which are as follows.

Musketeers, give fire to the Right: placing your selves on the outside of the
left Flank of Pikes.


The ovtermost files having presented to the right; the rest of the body
continues the march, whilst they in the mean time, are giving fire. Which
being done, and the body clear, the next outermost file, presents, the file
that last fired, in the interim, facing to the left after their proper
file-leader; who leads them cross the reere (both of Muskets and Pikes) a
pretty round pace; sleeving up on the out side of the left flank of Pikes. The
next file having, in like manner, fired; does also troop up on the out side of
the file, led off before every file; giving fire, and doing the like. When all
have given fire, and are cleared away, then the Pikes may charge. Which is very
necessary; if but to accustom the Soldiers unto in times of exercise, both
for charging on, and for retreiting, as also to push with their Pikes, that so
by practice they may be able to do it, orderly, either way: still keeping
their order and array. Having given fire upon the right flank, and drawn all
your Musketeers in this manner to the left flank, if you will cause them to
give fire on the left flank, and bring them back again to the right flank:
they will be reduced. Or if you would reduce them without a firing, then either
pass your Musketeers through between your ranks of Pikes, or else, let your
whole division of Musketeers, be drawn cross either the front or reere of
Pikes, into their places: or by division (if you please) your Musketeers*
also, may give fire in flank: the first fire, sleeving on the left flank: the
rest of the files, still falling between the Pikes: and the Musketeers which
wheeled off the last before them. And this is also a very good firing, and may
be reduced with doing the like back again: and many other ways, they may
also fall off after the manner of the figure last shown: being led by their
bringers up, either into the front, or else after the manner as is discoursed
in the latter end of the last Chapter. But I endeavor, all I may, to contract
my matter; left my volume should exceed my intent. And therefore I will show
but one firing more in flank, upon a march: wherewith I will conclude these
sorts of firings.

CHAP. LXXXV.
Of Firing in Flank: and placing the Musketeers in the midst of the Battle
of Pikes: with other firings from thence proceeding.
FIring in Flank, and bringing them off between the midst of pikes; is to be
used at such time, when as you would secure your Musketeers: the place
(otherwise) affoording no natural convenience of succor, such as I have
formerly spoken of: and therefore by this manner of falling off, where we want
natural assistance in the situation; there, art ought to supply us, namely,
by contriving to bring up the Musketeers between the pikes; and so to defend
them from the fury of the horse. And, if need be, you may draw 3. or 4. files
of pikes (more or less, according to your number or the danger) cross the
Muskets, both in front and reere, which are in the midst between the pikes,
which will as well preserve the Musketeers in front and reere, as in flanks.
But leaving further to discourse, what may be done; I will now show how this is
to be done. Only first take the words of Command and direction for the firing,
as follows.

Musketeers, give fire to the Right: Marching up between the midst of Pikes.


The Command being given, for the outermost-file to present to the right (as
formerly in the other firings in flank) the rest of the body still marches
on* until that the outermost-file has fired, and is faced to the left again:
following their leader. He now leading them off to the left, marches up
between the middlemost-files of pikes: who are then to open to the right and
left: so to give them room, to march up between them. In the mean time, the
next file having given fire, wheeleth off: in like manner marching up on the
left of the files, which fired last before them. And so, successively, for all
the rest of the files of Musketeers, all which are to give fire, and to wheel
off, as before: placing themselves still on the left of the files which last
fired. Wherein is still to be noted, that the files are still to open to the
right and left: and that for the receiving of the Musketeers, after that they
have given fire. This firing (as all other the firings in flank) may as well
be led off by their Bringers up, as by the file-leaders: and then the
reducements will be answerable. The Musketeers having all fired; the pikes may
charge, at discretion. The Bow-pike-men, which are in the reere of the
Musketeers, in the mean time not sparing to send their showers of arrows,
amongst the thickest of their enemies, and if need require, the front of pikes
charging at the foot, with their swords drawn; the Musketeers may give fire
over them, rank after rank; for the foremost ranks having fired, may kneel
upon the ground; and there make ready again: until the other ranks behind
them, have likewise given fire. After this manner, the Battle may be
continued: according as occasion shall require. For reducement, and to bring
the Musketeers into both flanks again, as they were before I began these
firings in flank, command your pikes to face inward; and your Musketeers to
the right and left outward, and so to pass through and interchange ground;
then facing them to their leader, they will be reduced, as at the first. I
would have the ingenious Reader to conceive, that all these firings in flank,
may as easily be performed to the left: and with the same words. Only the
words of right, must be changed for left: and left for right. I might have
further enlarged my self upon Firings in flank: but these already expressed,
may suffice for to instruct the ignorant. As for the skillful and experter sort
of Soldiers, I shall rather request their approbation, then presume to write
ought, which may seem to pass me with the least conceit, tending to their
instructions. Wherefore, for the further prosecution of my intended discouse, I
will next show some divisionall firings. And (for methods sake) I will first
begin with Firings in ^ront and Reere: which may be performed either upon a
march, or stand. And to that end, suppose your Musketeers to march all in
front, and reere. Nevertheless, because it will not be amiss, to show with
what words of command, or direction the Musketeers may be brought thither:
therefore take notice from what part of the body they are brought. And if they
be in the midst (as in this last figure of Firing in flank) then command the
halfe-files of the Musketeers, to face about: which done, let the pikes stand,
and the Musketeers march; until they are clear both of front and reere of
pikes; then let them stand; and face to their leader: which being done, your
battle will stand in form of an hollow square. In which hollow, may be
conveyed any carriage, or such like. But if you will not have your battle
hollow, then command your pikes to close their divisions; and the Musketeers
will be all in front and reere. If your Musketeers be on the flank, and you
would bring them into the front and reere; then after the same manner let the
halfe-files of Musketeers face to the reere: and then both halfe-files of the
front and reere, march until they are clear of the Angular pikemen. This
done, let them face in opposition, and close their divisions: after which,
having faced all to their (...) they will be rightly placed: namely, the (...)
of Musketeers before the front o^ ^ikes; and the reere-halfe-files of
Musketeers behind the reer^ of pikes. Thus will the figure of battle be in
f^^me of ^n Hearse; and the Musketeers, be ready to give fire to the front and
reere: either marching, or standing. But before I begin my divisionall firings,
I would entreat you not to expect, that I should reduce every particular
firing, so soon as it is performed; as I have done by these hitherto showed,
but rather let it be suitable to your likings, that I reduce firings by firings:
sometimes giving fire upon a march: sometimes upon a stand: sometimes, to the
front and reere; sometimes, to both flanks. I do the rather desire to go on in
this way, because thereby I may express far more matter, in fewer lines and
shorter time.

CHAP. LXXXVI.
Of firing to the front and reere, upon a march.
THe Musketeers being all placed in the front and reere, (according to the
directions in the last Chapter) I will now show the manner of firing to the
front and reere, upon a march. Which however that it may be rare, and seldom
useful in service: yet it must needs be excellent for practice. For by the
often using it, the Soldier may be made capable of any firing: The Pikes, (you
are to understand) are to be shouldered. The Command for the firing is.

Musketeers, give fire to the front and reere: and flank your Pikes.


The Command being given (as above said) to give fire to the front and reere;
the first rank presents; the last rank, faceth about to the reere, and does
the like: and so both giving fire together, wheel off by division. The one
half of the rank, following after the right hand man of the same rank; the
other half, after the left hand man, who leads them close down by the side or
flank of the Musketeers, until they come to the Pikes. The first rank of
Musketeers, now ranking even with the first rank of Pikes, the last rank of
Muskets, with the last rank of Pikes, leaving a sufficient intervalle betwixt
them and their Pikes, for the other Musketeers to march between. And here you
must note, that he that was outermost when they gave fire, must likewise be
outermost, when they have taken their places on the flank. The first and last
ranks having fired, and wheeled off, the next ranks, (the body marching on,
three or four steps) are in like manner to present, and give fire: wheeling
off by division; and passing between the divisions: there placing themselves;
they of the front division, behind those which fired last before them; and
they of the reere division, before them which fired last, behind them. And so
they may continue to give fire after the same manner; until they have all
given fire, once over. Then may the body make a stand, and the Pikes charge to
the front and reere, if need be. Or if the Commander would continue his firing
to the front and reere, still upon the same figure: Then let the Musketeers of
the front, place themselves (after they have given fire) behind the
Musketeers of their own division* those of the reere division placing
themselves betwixt the reere of Pikes, and the Muskets of their own division:
and so the body moving but flowly forwards, they may continue the firing.
Having given fire to the front and reere, and flanked their Pikes: if the
occasion offer, or the Commander please: they may give fire to the front and
reere, upon that Figure which indeed I hold the better, as you may perceive in
the ensuing Chapter.

CHAP. LXXXVII.
A second way of firing to the front and reere.
THis second way of firing to the front and reere upon a march, may easily be
performed; if the Soldiers be well and often instructed. Without which, all
matters in the Art military will seem difficult: and by which, all things
will be made facile and easy. I could instance in diverse motions and figures,
by some reputed superfiuous niceties, which were the true uses known to the
Commander, and the way to execute, to the Soldier, would be found to be of
singular good service. Nevertheless, because to the ignorant nothing beyond
their capacities may seem excellent; many good and serviceable motions are
slighted, and not accounted fit for service. But I could well wish, that some
good course might be taken, that the Soldiers of our trained Bands might have
a little oftener practice; that so they might be able (at least in some
reasonable way) to understand and exercise, what shall be commanded them. But
I have strayed from the matter. And therefore take these words of Command and
direction: which being orderly executed, produce this following firing.

Musketeers, give fire to the front and reere; placing your selves between
your Divisions.


The way to perform this firing, is as follows; the Command being given, the
first rank presents to the front, the last rank of Musketeers, facing about,
and doing the like, toward the reere: This done, they both give fire; wheeling
off by division; and place themselves between the Musketeers of their
divisions. Those, namely, which were of the front half files, falling into the
reere of their own division; those of the reere half files (contrariwise)
falling before their half file leaders, and ranking even with the half file
leaders of Pikes; the next ranks, successively, firing, and wheeling off,
after the same manner. Having fired, once over, they are reduced, every man to
his place. These two last firings to be performed upon a march, would seem
very difficult to unexperienced Soldiers: but by often exercising, they may be
made capable of these, or of any other.

CHAP. LXXXVIII.
A firing to the Reere and right flank, marching.
HAving showed firings in front, reere, and flank, (some marching, some
standing) I will show one firing to the reere and right flank, upon a march,
which (without question) must needs be very serviceable at such times, as the
enemy shall skirmish with the body, to annoy them in their passage* in flank
and reere at one time. I shall not need with arguments to enforce the
usefulness of the firing, for none that knows any thing in the Art military,
but will ingeniously confess that for some services, it must needs be
necessary. You may (if you please) give fire to the flank and reere: your
Musketeers being in their ordinary places, on the flanks of their Pikes.
Nevertheless, a securer way for the Pikes, will be to draw the Musketeers
from that flank, which is in least danger; cross the reere of Pike-men. And
this shall be the way I will observe in this firing. The words of Command and
direction for this firing, are as follows.

Musketeers, give fire to the right and reere: placing your selves between
the Pikes, and your own divisions.


The Command being given, to fire to the reere and right flank; the outermost
file of Musketeers, presents to the right: and the last rank of Musketeers
presents to the reere, and so both give fire. The rest of the Body, in the
mean time, marching a reasonable pace. The right hand file, and last rank
having fired; the file faceth to the left, after their file-leader; and so
marches up between the Musketeers of the same division, and the Pikes; the
rank wheeling off to the right, and placing it self next after the reere of
Pikes, and before the first rank of Musketeers of the same division. If you
please, you may make an Intervalle between the Musketeers: that so part may
wheel off to the right, on the out side, and the other part wheel off to the
right, and march up between the Intervalle into their places. The first file
and rank that presented, having given fire, and wheeled clear off the body,
the next file and rank, present and give fire: after the same manner, wheeling
off, and taking their places, as aforesaid; and so successively, the rest (both
files and ranks) give fire, observing the same order. And having given fire,
once, twice, or oftener over, they are still reduced to the same they were
before the firing began. Then draw your Musketeers from the reere, to the left
flank again; and they will have their places as at first.

CHAP. LXXXIX.
Of firing to both flanks, marching.
TO give fire to both flanks, upon a march; must needs be a serviceable
firing, without exception: the time, number, place, and strength of the enemy,
being always to be considered. which may sometimes cause the Musketeers
(having fired) to march up between their own divisions, and the Pikes, as in
this Figure. Or (sometimes) between the midst of the Pikes, the better to
secure them. Diverse other such like ways there likewise be, at the discretion
of the Commander: and as the present occasion shall require them. But because I
insisted (somewhat largely) upon the firings on the right flank; I shall not
need to show them again, by division on both flanks; but will conclude them
all in this one. The words of Command which produce the Figure, are as follow.

Musketeers, give fire to both flanks; marching up between the Pikes and
your own divisions.


The Command being given, the outermost file* (on each flank) presents
outward: the ^est of the body still continuing the march. The presented files
(in the interim) giving fire; then facing after their proper file-leaders, who
led them up between the Muskets of their own divisions, and the Pikes,) in
the time of their wheeling away) the next two outermost files present, firing
after the same manner, and leading up as before. The rest (successively) doing
the like, until they have fired all over: which brings them to their former
places. The firing may be continued at discretion, each firing being its own
reducement. Nevertheless it may so fall out, that either through the fury of
the enemy, advantage, or disadvantage of ground (or some such like accident)
the body may be forced to make Alt, and to face to both flanks; and so with
fronts accident all, to maintain the fight, standing. To which end, the firing
in the succeeding Chapter, shall be of that sort. Therefore suppose the body
faced to the right and left, preparing to give fire.

CHAP. XC.
A firing to both Flanks, standing.
FIring to both flanks, upon a stand, is a good and serviceable firing. And
although it show but thin, in the figure* yet it may be substantial and
useful for the field: especially if there be a larger proportion of number,
then I have made use of in my forms and figures of Battle. The words of
command and direction, which produce the figure, are as follows.

Advance your pikes, and stand. Face to the Right and Left. Musketeers give
fire; and flank your Pikes.


The body being faced to the right and left, the foremost ranks of Musketeers
(which were the outermost-files) present and give fire; and then wheel off by
division; ranking even with the foremost ranks of pikes, and leaving sufficient
Intervals for the rest of the Musketeers to march between them and the Pikes.
The next rank presenting and firing, after the same manner, but not advancing
forwards: only firing upon the same ground; and wheeling off by division:
afterward passing down between the Intervals, and so rank after their
leaders. It is herewithall to be noted, that they that were outermost, when
they gave fire; are likewise to be so, when they have taken their places. If
these instructions be not sufficient, utrne back to the figure of the
Demie-hearse: where the manner of the execution is all one with this. All the
ranks of Musketeers having fired, and wheeled off, as before; the pikes (if
need be) may charge, and the Musketeers give fire, over again: wheeling off
outward, and placing themselves in the reere of their own divisions. Having
advanced your pikes, and faced your body to the first front, all your
Musketeers will be in front and reere. And then if you face your halfe-files
about, and give fire after the same manner to the front and reere; having faced
them again to their first front, they will be reduced (as at first) into their
ordinary square. Nevertheless, I will reduce it by another firing, which was
first invented and showed us, by that worthy Citizen, and excellent Soldier,
Captain Henry Waller, now deceassed: It is a firing in front, the Musketeers
of the reere division, opening to the right and left; and sleeving up on the
flanks of pikes, until the leaders of the reere division (who as then are the
halfe-file-leaders) rank even with the front of pikes. The words of direction
that produce the figure, follow in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XCI.
Captain Wallers Triple firing to the Front.
THis Triple firing to the Front, has had the approbation of good and well
experienced Soldiers: who have all acknowledged it to be both sollid and
serviceable. Bringing many hands to fight, in very good order: the pikes being
securely covered by their Musketeers, in front. Neither need they be idle in
time of battle, if they have any Bowpike-men amongst them: for that they may
send their whistling Archery over their Musketeers heads, without offense to
their friends: though not without damage to their enemies. If any carpe at the
depth of the Musketeers (either in this figure, or in any other in this book)
I shall request them to suspend their censures, and wisely to conceive by a
little, what a great deal means. My intent not being, to make my book
monstrous, by having little leaves, and targe figures. Only I desire with this
small number, to show the nature of several forms and figures of battle; the
manner of their firings and wheelings off; their orderly placings, and several
ways of reducement: not having the least conceit, to induce any to believe,
that men are able long to continue battle, at four deep; although at
(sometimes, and for stratagems) they may be reduced into a lesser number. But
lest by digression, I too far trespass upon your patience; I will return to
show the manner of the firing. Only first observe, the words of command and
direction; which produce the following figure.

Musketeers of the Reere, double your front of Pikes, by Division.


The Command being given, the first rank of Musketeers (both of front and
flanks) present to the front and give fire: wheeling off to the right and left
by division. The Musketeers of the front-division being wheeled off (as
aforesaid) close by the flanks of their own Musketeers, pass directly down
between the Intervals: and place themselves even in rank behind the
Musketeers of the reere division, which are upon the flanks. This you may
perceive by the pricks, that come down between the Intervals: the
Musketeers, also, that fired at the same time on the flanks; wheel also off;
(the right flank, to the right; the left flank, to the left) marching
directly down, even with the reere rank of pikes; and there place themselves
again even in rank with the last rank of pikes. This done, the rest of the
ranks (successively) give fire, and do the like: every Rank taking his place,
after the rank which fired last before them; the other ranks moving one rank
forwarder. The Musketeers having given fire once over; and falling off
according to this direction, they will be reduced to the flanks again, as they
were at the first. The firing may be continued, or the pikes may charge, at
discretion of the Commander.

CHAP. XCII.
A firing tripartite, doing execution to the front, reere, and right flank.
FIgures and forms of Battle, may be infinite: according to the judgments
of the Commanders, and the various workings of the diverse motions: no art nor
science yielding more content, unto the studious practitioners; none more
honorable and beneficial, for the good of our Country: none more neglected
and less countenanced, then the Practisers of the Art military, nor none more
screwed up in the places of their abiding, then those men this way affected.
The rich cubb'd gown men, holding it as a maxim, that Soldiers (though never
so poor) yet they must be taxed in the parish books like Gentlemen. Thus much
encouragement we have, for spending our money and our time for our Countries
good, and this (in good time) I hope will be amended: but of this no more. The
next firing being a firing Tripartite: does execution to the front, reere, and
right flank, at one and the same time. For the use, I shall refer it to the
judgment of the Judicious: for the instruction, how it is to be made, the
words of Command and direction show it, which are as follows.

Half ranks of the left, double your right flank by division.


For the direction, look back to the 27. Chapter: which treats of this
doubling. Only remember to face the divisions that way which you intend they
shall give fire.

For the manner of the firing, it is ordinary: the foremost Rank of
Musketeers (on each part) having fired, they wheel off to the right, or to
the right and left: (according as directions shall be given) placing themselves
in the reere of their own divisions; the next ranks, in the mean time, moving
forwards into their leaders ground; there, in like manner, firing, wheeling
off, and placing themselves as before: the rest of the ranks, successively,
doing the like. This firing may be continued, a^ pleasure of the Commander. The
Pikemen (as advantage may be given) in the interim either porting, charging, or
sending their fatal showers amongst the thickest of their enemies. Lastly, for
reducement, face them all to their front proper, then Command, half ranks
that doubled, to face to the left, and so to march into their places. For
further directions, turn back to the 27. Chapter, which shows the reducement
of the aforegoing Figure, etc.

CHAP. XCIII.
Of the Sconce Battle.
THe Sconce Battle is a Figure most properly fit for a whole Regiment; at
least for a larger pro portion of number, then is here expressed* it neither
being good nor safe to divide a small Company, into so many divisions and
Maniples. And yet to give satisfaction unto some, I have placed it here amongst
my Figures; yea and shown the way, how to make it with a private Company. For
the manner or way how to fire upon it, may be diverse. The Musketeers being so
placed, that they may give fire to the front and reere, to the right and left,
or to all four together, at the discretion of the Commander. If your
Musketeers give fire to the front and rear, (every rank making good his
leaders ground) then the Figure will still continue the same. If they give fire
without advancing into their leaders ground, then the Musketeers will rank
even again with their Pikes: and the Figure will become an hollow cross, the
Musketeers making the Angles. The words of Command and direction, which
produce the Figure, are as follows.

Half files of Musketeers, face to the Reere.
That being done, Command all the Musketeers to march to the Angles of their
Pikes.
Next cause The two first and two last ranks of Pikes to stand.
The rest to face to the right and left; and march, until they are clear of
the other pikes, then stand.
Lastly Command The two first and last ranks of Pikes, which did not move, to
double their Files to the right.


These words of Command and direction being executed, perfect the Figure, as
follows.
The Sconce Battle.

Many and several are the firings, which (with some little alteration) may be
drawn from this Figure. Nevertheless not to spin out time with discourse, the
firing now intended to be shown, is to be performed to the front and reere. To
which purpose, the one half (both of Musketeers and Pikes) are to face about
to the right; there presenting and giving fire: those of the right flank,
wheeling off to the right; the left flank to the left; and placing themselves
in the reere of their own divisions. The next rank still moving forwards into
their leaders ground; the other ranks (successively) doing the like. After
this manner, the firing may be continued, and the Figure still preserved.

For reducement. First, face them all after their proper file-leaders.
Secondly, cause the front and reere divisions of Pikes, to double their ranks
to the left. Thirdly, command the Pikes of the flanks, to face, in opposition;
close their divisions, and then to face after their leaders. Next, command the
Musketeers of the front division, to face to the reere. Lastly, command the
Musketeers (both of front and reere) to close their divisions. And then being
faced to their leader, they are perfectly reduced, as at first.

CHAP. XCIIII.
Of firing by three files at once; two of them standing oblique, the other
direct.
WHen I began the forms and figures of Battle, I noted all f^rings to be
either oblique or direct; and now for satisfaction to the curious, I shall
insert two or three oblique forms amongst the rest. The first whereof, shall
be a Firing to the Front by drawing forth the outermost file on each flank,
obliquely (or the innermost, as shall seem best to the Commander) until the
bringers up of the files, stand even with the right and left angle-men, over
the front of pikes. They may also bead^ a file of Musketeers, cross the front
of pikes; when having placed and faced them (as they ought) for execution, they
will stand in manner of this following figure.



The two files of Musketeers which were led forth, having obliquely presented
inwards, and the file drawn cross the front of pikes, being presented direct
Rankwise: upon the first Command, they are all to give fire together, and then
to face after their bringers up; who lead their files directly into their
places. This done, they face to their proper front again; the other files (in
the mean time) leading forth after the same manner. These having done their
execution, are to return into their places: being led off by their bringers up
(as is aforesaid). The rest of the files, after the same manner, firing and
returning: until they have all given fire; and then they will be all reduced,
as at first.

CHAP. XCV.
A firing oblique, by four files together, in form of a W.
ALL the commendations, that may be given of these oblique Figures, is that
they power out a great deal of shot at once; and may quickly be reduced to
their places. Notwithstanding, they are a great weakening to the body, if any
sudden accident should happen before they are settled in their former stations.
Nevertheless I shall leave them to themselves; and if they be found to hold
out weight, I shall not grudge that I have given them room amongst the rest.
But if they prove too light, let them be as lightly respected, yet bear
somewhat with them, for their antiquity. The way to make the figure, is as
follows. The two innermost files of Musketeers on each flank, march forth
(each of them being led by an Officer) until they have taken their places.
Then the Officers that led forth the two middlemost files, are to return to
their places again; the Sergeants that led forth the outermost files, standing
to see them do their execution. Yet before the Musketeers have order to give
fire, observe the manner of their standing, by the following Figure.

The W. oblique.

The Musketeers having presented, according to their directions; they give
fire all together; and then suddenly facing after their bringers up; march
down into their places; the next two files of each flank, in the interim of
their marching away, are to move forwards to their ground: where they are, in
like manner to give fire: and then to take their places, as aforesaid. The rest
of the files of Musketeers (if you have more) must then move forwards, and do
the like. And in this sort, may the Musketeers give fire, once, twice, or
oftener over: each firing, being a reducement to it self.

CHAP. XCVI.
Of the Fort Battle; the way to make, and to reduce it.
THe figure of the Fort-battell, is an oblique firing: and takes its
denomination rather from the (...) the strength of a Fort. Its chief use, is
for the entertainment of some great personage or Commander in the field: who
being received into the midst of the divisions of Pikes; the Musketeers may
present and give fire, altogether in one vollie. Or if they would have the
Musketeers give fire, one after another; then the vollies by succession (which
some call the Peale) will be the best. If there be more Musketeers, then will
serve to make up the figure single; they may also give fire with the rest:
presenting obliquely between the distance of their leaders. The way to make
this figure, is as follows. First, draw forth the outmost files (of
Musketeers) on each flank, in form of an hollow wedge, before the front of
pikes. Then, cause the next two outmost files, to face about; and to follow
their bringers up, in the same form to the Reere. Then, let the last two files
of Musketeers (on each flank) be drawn after their file-leaders, in the same
manner and form, to the flanks. The Musketeers being thus ordered, and all
presented obliquely outward, command the two first, and two last ranks of
Pikes, to stand; the rest of the Pikes, to face to the right and left: and so
to march, until they are clear off the other pikes which stand. Then, command
the Pikes which moved, to double their files to the right. Lastly, command all
the Pike-men to face outward; each division of Pikes, after their hollow (...)
of Musketeers. Or else, let them face all inward to the Center* and then the
Body will stand in form of the following figure.

The E^rt-battell.

Having fired upon this figure, there is no manner of wheeling off: because the
form is still to be continued. But when you come to reducement, first face all
the Pikes to their proper front, (that is, unto the place, where you find the
proper file-leaders. Secondly, let the Pikes which are flankers, double their
ranks to the left: and so close their divisions. Then the Pikes will be
reduced. For the Musketeers, first command those on the flank, to lead up
their files in their due places, close to the Pikes. Next, command the
Musketeers of the reere, to sleeve up on each flank by division. Lastly,
command the Musketeers before the front of Pikes, to face after their bringers
up, and to march down into their places. Lastly facing to their leader, they
are all reduced, as at first.

CHAP. XCVII.
Of the cross Battle; the way to make it with a private Company. How to fire
upon it: and to reduce it.
THe Cross Battle, though it must needs show thin, (in regard that the
number is not sufficient, to express the worth of the Figure) yet may the
form be very useful, with a larger body, and the Musketeers may give fire,
two, three, or four ways at once upon it: Yea, if the number were as opulent,
as the Figure is excellent, then they might fire twelve several ways
together. This notwithstanding, I spare to speak further to what may be done;
and come to show what I intend in it. Concerning this Figure, the ways to fire
upon it, are ordinarily two. The first, when the Musketeers give fire, and
then place themselves in the reere of their own divisions of Muskets. The
second way is, after that they have fired, to place them in the reere of their
Pikes: the Pikes maintaining the Musketeers ground. The words of Command which
produce the Figure, are as follows.

The two first ranks, wheel your front into the midst.
The two last ranks, wheel your reere into the midst.
The rest of the body, face to the right and left: and so march, until the
reere-Angles meet.
Then let the Commander go into the midst, (or Center) and face the whole
Company to him: giving tm such direction, as is meet.
Lastly, being all faced about to the right, the body will stand like the
following Figure.
Note, that as men stand in rank when they give fire, so they are to place
themselves again, when they have fired. The ^utermost men, taking the outside
places: the rest, in like manner, orderly placing themselves within them.
The Cross Battle.

This cross Battle being faced to the front, reere, and flanks, and the
Musketeers commanded to give fire: one way of placing them, is, in the reere
of their own divisions of Musketeers; for that hereby, the Musketeers will
still continue their places. For the second way, after that the first ranks
have given fire, let them wheel all off to the right (or to the right and
left, if the number be large) and place themselves in the reere of their Pikes,
each rank moving forwards, and maintaining their leaders ground. The second
rank, in like manner, is to fire, and to take their places after the
Musketeers, which fired and wheeled off last before them. The rest,
successively, are to do the like, until all the shot have fired, and are
wheeled away again. Then let the Pikes charge, etc. If any object, that it is
dangerous to have so large distance between the fronts of each firing: then,
if you have files enough, yo u may draw two or three files of each Arm; cross
the divisions from the Angle of one front to the other: and so facing of them
outward, they will make reasonable good defense on those parts, etc.

Having given fire upon the cross battle, and brought your Muskets to the
reere of the Pikes: if you would reduce them, pass into the midst of Center of
the Figure, and face all (both Musketeers and Pikemen) to you; and cause those
which were the flankers, to close their divisions. Next, wheel the fronts into
the midst of the two other divisions: then move to the front proper, and face
the whole body to you, and so you shall have all your Musketeers in the midst;
flanked with Pikes. If you would reduce them into their right places, command
the Musketeers to face to the right and left outward, the Pikes to face to the
right and left inward: and so to pass through, and interchange ground: thus
being rightly faced, they are reduced.

CHAP. XCVIII.
Of the hollow-fronted Cross Battle, how to make it with a private Company:
and the way to fire upon it, etc.
THis next Figure, shall be of the hollow-fronted Cross; which is a stronger
form, than that last shown, and yet thus much let me warn you of, that there
can be but little expectation of strength to be perceived, in Battles formed
with so small a number. This notwithstanding, the ingenious Martialists can
easily discern those things, which in war may prove most useful for his
own, and his Countries benefit; although they are here expressed to the
public view, in so mean array, and in such thin numbers. Wherefore,
setting aside all Apologies and excuses, I will briefly show the words of
Command and direction, which will produce the following Figure.

The two first ranks, wheel your front into the midst.
The two last ranks, wheel your reere into the midst.
The rest, face to the right and left: and march until they have made the
perfect Cross.
Lastly, cause the Musketeers to flank their Pikes: according to this
following Figure.
The hollow fronted Cross.

The several directions for firing upon this Figure, may be diverse. But to
avoid distraction, I will show only one way; and that directed to the front,
reere, and flanks. Nevertheless (for varieties sake) you may cause them to
give fire, once over, wheeling off by division, and placing themselves in the
reere of their own divisions; still moving forwards into their leaders ground
thereby to preserve the Figure in the same order.

At the second time of firing, cause the Pikes to move softly up, even with the
front of Musketeers: porting as they advance forwards. The Musketeers having
fired, and wheeled off, are to place themselves in the reere of their divisions
of Pikes, (whom before they flanked) every rank of Musketeers firing,
wheeling off, and placing themselves, as aforesaid. Lastly, the Pikes having
charged, and again readvanced, the body will stand in the Figure of a perfect
Cross.

For the reducement, it is the same with the Crosse-Battell, delivered in the
97 Chapter. Wherefore I shall need to add no further directions in this place,
for the said reducement, then, that the flank divisions are to be closed, and
the front and reere divisions to be wheeled: that the body may be again
returned into a square, with the Musketeers in the middle. All this being here
taught, I now proceed to show one firing with the Musketeers, in that order.

CHAP. XCIX.
Of firing upon the square Battle, flanked with Pikes.
THe square battle flanked with Pikes, must needs be very safe for the
Musketeers as being a very able defense for the flanks, against the
incursions of the enemies horse. The Figure follows, just ^s the Musketeers
are in motion.

The Square Battle flanked with Pikes. depiction of 'a Square Battell'

The ways or manners of giving fire upon this figure, are ordinarily three.
The first firing is, with the Aspect being directed to the front; the
Musketeers wheeling, either all off to the right; or to the right and left, as
you perceive by this figure. The second is, for the Musketeers to give fire to
the reere, upon a march; which they may easily do, from this figure. The third
is, to give fire to the front and reere, upon a stand; the halfe-files being
faced about.

If the firing be performed to the front, then every rank is to march up into
their leaders ground.

If the firing be to the Reere, upon a march, then the ranks (contrariwise)
close backwards toward the Reere: to make good the Battle, on that part.

If it be to the front and reere, upon a stand; then the Musketeers march up
into their leaders ground; and those which have fired, and are wheeled off,
place themselves in the Reere of their own divisions.

To write further of this firing, were more then necessary, no one of these
firings, any ways altering the figure, but the Aspect only. Nevertheless, if
the Commander please, he may after the firing in front, wheel both flanks into
the front, and so charge pikes; and from thence, proceed to other firings.

If the firing were in the reere, he may wheel the flanks into the Reere; and
cause his pikes to charge that way.

If the firing were to the front and reere, he may wheel both flanks into the
front and reere; and so charge with his pikes, both ways. Which by Captain
Bingham is called Amphistomus.

Before I come to reducement, I shall proceed to the next firing in the ensuing
Chapter.

CHAP. C.
Of the Plinthium, or foure-fronted-battell; by us called the Cross of
Muskets, flanked with Pikes.
THe Foure-fronted Battle, is a figure both steady and serviceable: being
useful as well for a march (thereby securing the carriage, and all other such
like necessaries) as for fight. For if it should so happen (as it often does)
that you should be charged in front, reere, and flanks, all at one and the same
time: then are there both Muskets and Pikes so placed, that each Arms is
assisting to the other. For seeing that neither Musketeers nor Pikemen alone,
can be singly sufficient of themselves, to withstand the able and resolute
horseman (without great advantage of ground) on the contrary, the Musketeers
and Pikes being conjoined into one body, and being well ordered, they are not
only able to defen'd themselves against their fury; but also to put them to
the worser. Yet this must not be understood, of raw and unskitfull Soldiers,
whose ignorance is cause of diffidence; but of hardy, experienced, and well
exercised men, such as know well how to demean themselves courageously, in
time of fight.

The words of Command and direction, which produce the figure, are as follows.

Note that all the Muskettier^ must be in the midst, and the pikes on flanke^,
when you begin to make this figure. If your Musketeers be on the flank when
you make it, then the cross will be Pi^^s, and the Angles Musketeers, etc.
Halfe-files of Pikes, face to the Reere, and march until they are clear of
the last rank of Musketeers.

Secondly, command,

Halfe-files of Musketeers, face to the right and left, (then) march between
the divisions of Pikes.

Thirdly, command,

Left halfe-ranks of the first division of Muskets, face to the Reere, and
march between the Reere divisions of Pikes.

Lastly,

Having evened their ranks, straitened their files, and closed their divisions
to an equal distance, and being rightly faced; the body will stand like the
following figure.

The Plinthium, or foure-fronted Battle.

The Plinthium is a hollow Square Battle; fronted four ways; the number
equal, in length and depth. Another kind of Plinthium, is to have the depth
exceed the length; the light Arms to be placed in the miost of the hollow
patt. See the Ta^^ic^ of Aelian, the second Books, the notes of the forty two
Chapter.
The manner of the firing, may easily be apprehended by the figure; the
Musketeers giving fire in rank, and wheeling all off to the right: do then
pass down their Intervals, under the favor of their pikes; and placing
themselves in the reere of their own divisions of Musketeers; the pikes
charging at discretion. Having fired, once, twice, or oftener over, and still
maintaining the same ground, the figure will continue to be the same.

If the reere part of the battle, were by any means secured; so that you need
give fire but three ways, then the front-halfe-files of Musketeers, might
have been preserved entire.

This Plinthium, or foure-fronted Battle, may as well be made with the
Musketeers in the Angles: the pikes making the cross; this kind of Command,
always making the cross of the Arms, in the midst of the Battle.

After that you have given fire at discretion, upon this figure, and charged
your pikes, if you would reduce them to the first square, command the whole
body to face to the front proper.

Secondly, command the Musketeers in the reere, to march up on the left of the
Musketeers in front: the pikes being first opened, to give them place.

Thirdly, cause the Musketeers in flank, to face inward: and to close their
divisions.

Lastly, cause the pikes to march up; placing themselves right after their
leaders.

This being done, the body will be brought again into a sollid square, flanked
with pikes. I forbear further to reduce them, until I show the next figure.
Yet, for further satisfaction to any that shall require it: command your
Musketeers to face to the right and left outward; the pikes, to face inward,
and so to interchange ground; and then being rightly faced, they are reduced.

CHAP. CI.
Of the Hollow Square for March.
Sundry forms there be which go under the denomination of the hollow Square;
and very diversely they may be framed. Some are hollow, impalled with pikes; the
pikes, again, girdled with shot: Other Squares, are made with shot, and they
impalled with pikes. Some, again, with divisions of Musketeers and pikes:
orderly mixed with an hollow in the midst. A fourth sort is, when each Arms are
divided by themselves: as when the pikes make the front and reere, and the
Musketeers the wings. A fifth way is, when the Musketeers lead in front and
reere; and the pikes make both the flanks. All these ways are very necessary
and useful; as the time, occasion, or place shall give cause; or the judgment
of the Commander shall see fitting. Nevertheless, the hollow battle which I
now intend to demonstrate unto you, is especially useful for a march: whereby
to secure the carriage, as likewise to preserve the sick and wounded; it may
also serve, for the Commander to consult with his Officers or to make any
speech or Oration, to the Soldiers. Or the Ensign may in sign of triumph,
display his Co^^urs in the midst: upon a march after Skirmish.

The way to make this figure (the Musketeers being in the midst) is as
follows. First command the Halfe-files of Musketeers, to face to the reere:

Then command all the Musketeers to march, and the Pikes to stand.


When they are clear of the front and reere of the Pikes, let them stand* and
face all to the front proper: and it produces this following figure.

The hollow Square for March.

If you would give fire upon this figure, to the front and reere, it may be
done marching. But, more properly, standing; by facing the halfe-files (both
Musketeers and Pikes) to the reere. Then the command being given, to present,
and give fire; they wheel off. by division: placing themselves in the reere of
their own divisions of Musketeers; each rank moving forwards into their
leaders ground, and doing the like. If you should give fire, and not move
forwards into your leaders ground; then the Musketeers would fill the hollow
in the midst; between the Pikes. Nevertheless, suppose the figure still to
continue to be the same. Because I will now come to the reducement: and the
rather, for that I have not done it, since I began with the Hollow-fronted
Cross. But now (so please you) I will reduce all, by a firing. And to that
end, first close your divisions of Pikes; and then the Musketeers will be all
in the front and reere.

Secondly, cause the halfe-files (both Musketeers and pikes) to face to the
Reere. Then, cause the Musketeers (both of front and reere) to give fire;
wheeling off by division, and flanking their pikes. When they have fired all
over, the Pikes may charge: who being again advanced, and all faced to the
front proper, they are all reduced (as at first) into the ordinary Square,
flanked with Muskets.

CHAP. CII.
Of the hollow Hearse, and the Cross.
THe Hearse-Battell, by the Greeks called Orthophalanx, (as in Aelian) is,
when the depth does manifold exceed the length, thrice at the least. It may be
made, either sollid or hollow, at the discretion of the Commander. And
notwithstanding that this Figure (simply of it self) has ever been accounted
weak (as bringing but few hands to fight) nevertheless being conjoined with
the Cross, it may prove serviceable. True it is, that being expressed by so
small a number, the strength of it cannot so evidently be discerned: which,
were the number more, each division would appear to be the stronger, both for
offense and defense. But I have only taken upon me, to show the several
forms and figures of battle, which may be formed, and practiced by a private
Company: as having limited my self, not to exceed the number of 128 men.
Wherefore my request must be, that the Courteous Reader, when he shall find
that any Figure for want of number, shall look thin, (or poor) he will
there be pleased to clothe it in a larger number: for that thereby the Battle
will appear the more sollid, and the beholder become the better satisfied.

This Figure may be useful upon a march, for a Convoy: the hollow parts
thereof, being very commodious, to secure the carriage: the men also are very
well disposed to help and assist each other, in whatsoever part it should
happen them to be assailed.

The words of Command and direction which produce the Figure, are as follow.

Wheel front and reere into the left flank.
That done, face them as before, and the Musketeers will be in front, midst,
and reere.

Next, open the Musketeers in the midst, to the right and left, and cause them
to double their ranks to the left.

Then cause the front-halfe-files of the front division of Pikes, to open to
the right and left: and the reere halfe-files of the reere division of Pikes to
do the like.

Then, having evened their ranks, and straightened their files, and being
faced to their leader, the body will stand in form, like this Figure.

The hollow Hearse and Cross.

If so be, you will give fire upon this Figure, you may do it any way, or
every way. If you give fire to the front, reere, and flanks; then let your
Musketeers wheel all off to the right, and place themselves in the reere of
their own divisions. If you would still preserve the Figure, then let every
rank (before they give fire) march up into their leaders ground.

Having either marched, or skirmished upon this Figure, (or both) and then
would come to reducement, First, face all the whole body to the proper front,
and cause the Pikes that are flankers, to face inwards, and to close their
divisions. This being done, cause the Musketeers which are in the middle part
of the Battle, to double their files to the right. Secondly, let them face
inward, and close their division. Next, let them face all to their leader, and
wheel front and reere into the right flank* which being done, and they faced
again to the front proper; they will be reduced into the ordinary square; the
Pikes being flanked with the Musketeers, as at first.

CHAP. CIII.
Of the Hollow Square, girdled with shot.
THe Hollow Square Girdled with shot, is a Figure to be used at such times of
necessity, as the Commander shall see occasion: who well knowing, that he
shall be enforced to fight, having found some commodious advantage or ground,
draws forth his battle into this form and array. The use whereof is, that
within the hollow parts of it, he may convey such of his carriage, or
whatsoever else may not prove useful for the strengthening of some part of the
battle. Having drawn his men speedily into this form, lest that the enemy
should take the advantage, to break their order by entering at any of the
Angles, they are speedily to cast up a Rampart of earth, in each of those parts
of the Angles. Or if they have not time, (or that the ground be not fit) they
may supply that defect by placing some of their Wagons, Carts, or other of
their Carriage, so orderly, that it may be sufficient to fortify those parts,
which are the weakest. This Figure, may be as well made with the Pikes
foremost: but because that the Musketeers may more commodiously fight before
their Pikes, and with less danger to their own body: therefore I conceive it
fittest, at first to place them in front of their Pikes. And if the enemy shall
too hotly press them with his horse; then, at the discretion of the Commander,
they may safely retreat behind their Pikes; the Pikemen making good the
ground of the Musketeers. For better satisfaction, observe the direction to
make the following Figure. First, command a Sergeant to draw forth all the
Note, that the odd files on the right flank, are the outermost files to the
right; the third file, the fifth file, the seventh, and so forward for the rest,
if the (...) be larger; beginning your account from the outermost file, to the
right. Note, that the odd files on the le^t-flanke, are the left hand file ^
the third, the fi^th, the seventh, etc. so still accounting the odd files,
beginning with the outermost file to the (...)*
odd files of the right flank, (both Musketeers and Pikes) and wheel them to
the left, cross the front. That being done, command the odd files of the left
flank, (as well Musketeers as Pikes) to face to the reere, and let them in
like manner be wheeled to the left, cross the reere, following their Bringers
up.

For the rest of the body, that remains undrawne forth: let them close to the
right and left outward; until the Reere-Angles of each division, stand
diagonally opposite to each other. Then, let them be all commanded to face to
the Center or midst of the hollow square; where the Commander is to give them
such encouragement and directio^s, as shall be meet.

Lastly, let all face about to the right, and present.

The hollow square Girdled with Musketeers.

For the manner of firing upon this Figure, it is as follows. The first rank
of Musketeers (to each front) having presented and given fire, they are to
wheel all off to the right. And because that eight or ten men, are too many
to wheel down one Intervalle, (for that they will be so long, before they
can clear the front) therefore you may cause Intervalles to be made, between
the midst of each division, as you may perceive in the Figure. The first rank
having fired, and wheeled off, the next ranks are to move forwards into their
ground: they which wheeled off, in the mean time placing themselves in the
reere of their own divisions of Musketeers. The next rank of Musketeers
having fired in like manner, are to wheel off, and to place themselves, as
aforesaid: the rest of the ranks of Musketeers, (successively) are to do the
like, until they have all given fire, (once or oftener over) that way,
according to the occasion. And in this interim may the Bow-pikemen be
bountiful in bestowing their showers of arrows, amongst the thickest of their
enemies.

If the horse prevail so much, that the Musketeers may not endure to bear
the brunt of them: then let the Musketeers (after they have fired) wheel off,
and place themselves in the reere of their following divisions of pikes: they
moving forwards, and maintaining the Musketeers ground; charging with their
pikes (as they see occasion) for securing the Musketeers, in the midst. This
notwithstanding, if the enemies horse shall still press forwards; and with
their shot shall continue to annoy the body (the pikes on this figure being
especially defensive) then cause the Pikemen to charge at the foot; and your
Musketeers, to give fire over them: according to former directions, on the
Unequal halfe-moone. After this manner, the battle may be continued to the last
rank. When you have given fire in this order, your Musketeers being all in
the reere of your pikes; and that you be minded to reduce them, into the first
orderly square, this is one way for it. Pass through your Musketeers, before
your front of pikes, as they were before the firing: that being done, let the
Commander face the whole body to the left Angle, of the front-division, by
which means he shall there find the half of his file-leaders. This being
performed, let them march: and so even their ranks, and straiten their files;
the reere division of Musketeers and Pikes, orderly following after the front
division of the like Arms. After this, let the halfe-files which then are
(which indeed are the residue of the file-leaders) double their ranks forwards
to the left: which being performed, the men are reduced as at first.

If you would reduce them some other way, without passing through your
Musketeers (as I have formerly said) then first let the whole body face to the
left Angle, of the front-division; and march, evening their ranks and files, as
aforesaid. Which being done, cause the halfe-files (which then are) to double
their front to the left, which being in like manner performed, all your
Musketeers are still in the midst. Your next work, is, to cause your
Musketeers to face to the right and left outward: and your pikes,
contrariwise, to face inward; and so to pass through, and interchange ground.
Thus being faced to their front proper, they will be reduced, as at first.

If any will be practicing of this form of battle, with a smaller number of
men (as with 64. or fewer) whereby they will be constrained to double their
halfe-files: then they will be reduced the same way* only they shall not need
to double their halfe-files again, in their reducement: as they must needs do,
were the number larger.

CHAP. CIIII.
Of the Sollid Square, with Musketeers in Center and Angles. The way to make
the figure with a private Company: how to fire upon it, and to reduce it.
INfinite are the forms and figures of Battle, which may be made; yet all
differing, either in circumstances or in matter. Some of them are Sollid,
others Hollow: some of them, again, being Trines, Squares, Hearses, Cirtes,
Crosses, Diamonds, Plinthiums, Plesiums, Paramekes, and infinite others. Some
of them taking their denomination from the nature of their numbers. Others,
according to the placing of each Arms. A third sort, taking their names from
things they most resemble, all of them being necessary to be known, to such
which would be accounted skillful Serjeant-Majors: that with all numbers, upon
all occasions, they may readily bring their Soldiers into any form or figure
of battle (according as the time, the number, and place will give them leave)
for opposition of horse, foot, or both together.

But to return back to our single Company, the work of this Chapter, being
to show the Plesium, or long square. In which the Musketeers are half in the
midst of the Pikes; and the other half equally divided, and placed on the 4.
Angles of the battle: the pikes making 4. divisions; as being placed upon the
front, reere, and flank. Yet not to hold you with longer circumstance, take
these words of command and direction; which produce the following figure.

Halfe-files, double your front to the left entire:
Only do not close them, to make one Body.
That being done, your Body will be but 4. deep.
Next, command the 2. outmost flanks of each Body; to double inward, by
division.
For better satisfaction, observe these directions.

First, see the halfe-ranks of the outmost flanks, faced to the front and
reere: and that they march, until they are clear of the standing part of the
battle.

Secondly, cause the halfe-ranks of the right-flank, and the halfe-ranks, of
the left-flanke, to face in opposition, and to close their divisions: the two
first ranks of each flank, moving cross the front of the standing part of the
body; and the two last ranks of each flank moving cross the reere. Then, the
whole body facing to the front, they will stand as in this figure.

The Polium. depiction of 'the Polium'

If you would give fire upon this figure, it may be performed either to the
front and reere, to the right and left, or to all four together. But which way
soever the firing be, let the Aspect of the Musketeers in the midst, be turned
the same way, and cause the pikes which stand before them, to charge at the
foot, and the Musketeers in the Center, to g^ve fire over them. The first
rank having fired, let them kneel (or crouch low) upon the ground; making
ready again: whilst the next ranks behind them, give fire, and do the like:
and so forwards, for the rest. Having all fired once over, this way, let them
rise up: and (if need be) give fire over again, after the same manner. The
Musketeers on the Angles (in the interim) giving fire after the ordinary way,
wheeling off, and falling in the reere of the Musketeers of their own
divisions; the others in the mean time moving forwards, and making good their
leaders ground. This being done, and the pikes having charged; the figure will
still continue to be the same, without alteration. And that as well in men as
matter: if so be the firing be performed, according to the former direction.

For reducement, command the two first ranks, and two last ranks, to face to
the right and left: all marching forth, until they are clear of the standing
part of the body.

Next, command them to stand: then, face them to the right and left; and close
their divisions. This being done, let them face all to their leader. Lastly, by
commanding the halfe-files to face about to the right; and to march forth into
their places: you shall see them fully to be reduced.

I might have further enlarged my self, upon this subject of firings, and
figures of Battle: yea and showed varieties enough of Trine Battles, round
battles, the cross and round, in one; the sollid-square impaled, besides
infinite other kinds. But I have already advanced further, then I at first
intended: though (well I hope) no further then will be freely and lovingly
accepted. Which if it be, I shall conceive my self to have received a
grateful and most ample satisfaction. The hope whereof, does somewhat
encourage me to proceed a little further. And as I have already showed diverse
and several Motions, with their forms and figures of Battle: yea and in all
(or the most part of them) as I have not only given the words of command and
direction, to produce them from the ordinary square, but also together with the
demonstration of the figure, and direction for the firing: I have, in like
manner, given direction for the reducements again into the ordinary square: So
now, for the satisfaction of some of the quainter sort of Soldiers, give me
leave to multiply one figure upon another, until that by firings, I reduce
firings. For the performance whereof, that I may observe some method, I will
digest them into the way of Exercise, etc.

CHAP. CV.
The first days Exercise.
HAving brought your Company into a place convenient, where you intend to
exercise them; if you have time enough, you may cause the file leaders,
Corporals o^ Serieants, to instruct them in the I is very necessary, still, so
often as time will permit; to instruct the Soldiers, in the postures and the
well handling of their Arms.
Postures and true using of their Arms. Wherein having spent some time, to the
benefit of the Company; upon the Each file-leader to lead up his file upon the
first Summons of the Drum.
first summons of the Drum, each file-leader with his file, is to march into
his place. The Captain (or other Commander) being at the head of his Company,
commands them to Ever to observe to be even in Rank, and strait in file, and
stand at the true distance.
even their ranks, and to straiten their Pikes, and stand in their order both
in rank and file. Fetching the Ensign to the head of the Company.
If your Ensign be not already in the field, but in some place near at hand;
then cause your two innermost files of pikes to advance: commanding a Sergeant
with a Drum, to troop them along to the place of Re^dezvouz, there to fetch
their Colors. If the place be not nigh at hand, take as many files of
Musketeers. Having brought the Ensign to the head of the Pikes, each file
returns into his place; the Officers likewise, withdrawing their several
stations. Soldiers ought to be very silent. First, the soldiers ought to have
their due distance given them, with directions how most properly to perform.
Silence being commanded, the Captain (or other Commander) begins Facings,
Doublings, Countermarches and Wheelings wherein the Soldier ought treatably to
be instructed^ the Commander always observing, what his Soldiers are he has
to deal withal, and to give h s directions accordingly. Never striving to put
more into the battle then it can conveniently hold
first to instruct the Soldiers in the several distances, betwixt rank and
file, with the ways to open and close to them. And if he think fit, to
instruct them in the several uses of each distance.

Next after distance, they are to be instructed in the facings, then in the
doublings; next, in the Countermarches; and lastly, in the wheeling. In each of
which they are to be instructed, according to the opportunity of the time and
place: but, especially is the capacity of the Soldier to be observed. Wherein,
the Captain may do very well, in each of the motions to lay down some
special rules and observations; by which the Soldier may the better
understand what he is to do, and how (the best way) to perform it.

Observe to march between each firing, and upon each figure, that may be
convenient.
After the motions ended, let them prepare for skirmish. And first you may
cause them to give fire with forlorn files, marching forth twenty paces (or
thereabouts) before the front. Having all fired over that way, they may give
fire once over, by advancing two ranks together, ten paces before the front.
Then let them give fire, even with the front, and then with the halfe-files:
the Pikes porting or charging, according to discretion. The Pikes being
advanced, and the Musketeers marched up, even with their front; you may either
Face about, or wh ele about, for to Countermarch if any en my be n^^r, i^ very
dangerous.
face about, wheel about, or Countermarch, and so give fire in the reere. Your
Pikes then being shouldered, and your Musketeers having fired over in the
reere, you may (if you please) Wheel your Flanks into the Front if your
Soldiers have time enough, otherwi^e face to the Reere, and charge Pikes.
wheel your flanks into the front, and so charge Pikes to the reere. Which
done, wheel your front into the midst; pass into your place, and face them to
you. Then (if you will) you may pass your Musketeers of the left flank,
through between the ranks of Pikes, and place them next to the right flank
of Pikes, opening the right flank of Musketeers, to give them way. Then let
the When the Pikes shoulder the Musketeers must observe to rank even with them.
Pikes shoulder, and Musketeers give fire to the right, upon a march* their
leaders leading them up between the Pikes and their own divisions of
Musketeers. Having fired once over, in this way, let them continue their
firing to the right, each leader leading up his file on the outside of the left
flank of Pikes. Then Upon this firing, advance Pikes when there is but one
file: and close forwards to the distance of order.
let the Pikes advance, even whilst the last file is giving of fire: and so
soon as the Pikes are clear of the Musketeers, let them face all to the
right, and charge. Having advanced your Pikes, and faced your body again to
the left, you may then wheel your Battle about to the right, and then facing
the whole body to the left, the Musketeers will be all in front. Then let your
Musketeers give fire, and either wheel all off to the right, thereby making
These kind of Intervals ought to contain six foot in distance upon some other
occasions, 12 foot is necessary.
an Intervalle for the left flank, or else let them wheel off by division,
placing themselves in the reere of their own divisions of Musketeers. Having
given fire once (or oftener) over that way, let them give fire again, and
wheel off by division: ranking even with their Pikes. That being done, cause
the Pikes to charge: the Musketeers giving fire once over, on that Figure. The
Pikes being advanced, face the whole body to the right: and cause the
Musketeers to stand, and the Pikes to open to The hollow Square.
the right and left, and so to make the hollow square. Then you may (if you
please) command the Ensign to display his Colors in the midst of the hollow;
in sign of triumph: the body, either standing or marching. After which,
command the Pikes to close their divisions: Which being performed, command the
reere division of Musketeers, to double their front of Pikes, by division: and
then they will Captain Wallers firing.
stand in form of Captain Wallers Triple firing: Let them give fire upon that
Figure, and fall off again, according to the directions upon that Figure.
Which being performed, and the Pikes charged, and readvanced: the body will be
absolutely reduced, as at the first it was before you began your firings. These
firings, may (with the motions) be sufficient for the first days Exercise.
Wherefore, for this time, we will lodge our Colors: until by the summons of
the Drum, we are called forth to the second days practice.

CHAP. CVI.
The second days Exercise.
HAving brought your Soldiers the second time, into the field, the body being
drawn up into the ordinary square, and every Officer vigilant in his place:
the Captain commands silence, with some other general terms of
observation, both for the leaders and right hand Silence.
men. Having thus commanded them (as before) to even their ranks, and to
straiten their files: he proceeds Upon all motions be ^ure that the Soldiers
stand even in rank and file.
to show (as formerly) the distances, the facings, the doublings, the
Countermarches, and the wheelings: therewithal instructing them either in all,
or so many of them, as the time will permit, and he thinks convenient. Ever
(by the way) observing that in the Proverb, A thing once well done, is twice
done. That Commander, that exercises his Good words more available then
blows* or ill language.
Soldiers with good language, and with sollid reasons; shall make them better
proficients then he that shall use rigid terms, and rough hands. After the
postures, distances, and several motions; that which next follows for this
days exercise, are firings and figures of battle. So soon, therefore, as the
Drum begins to beat a preparative, the Musketeers are to The Muskettie s make
ready to give fi^e.
begin to make ready.

And first, you may cause them to give fire on the Horn Battle, still
marching up into their leaders ground: by that means preserving their Figure.

Secondly, let the Musketeers close their divisions before their Pikes, and
then give fire upon the ^etween each firing cause your body to march either in
form of Ba^talia, extended in length: or upon any other figure, where it may
conveniently be done without disorder.
demie-Hearse-Battell: falling off presently, either all to the right, (the one
half passing down an Intervalle) or to the right and left by division; and
placing themselves in the reere of their own divisions of Musketeers.

The third time of their firing, let them wheel off by division, and flank
their Pikes: and when they have fired over that way, let the Pikes charge.

For the fourth firing, let them give fire even with the front of Pikes,
wheeling off to the right and left, and placing themselves in the reere of
their own divisions.

Then let them fire even with the halfe-files, wheeling off by division, and
placing themselves in the reere of the Pikes. The Pikes (you are to understand)
ought to charge all the time of the last firing: who being advanced, you are to
wheel your Battle about to the right or left.

Then, your Musketeers being in the reere of your Pikes, let your sixth firing
be to the reere: the Musketeers wheeling off by division, and placing
themselves before the front of their own divisions of Musketeers; and next
behind the reere of Pikes. Having fired once over, that way, let them give
fire over again, and flank their Pikes: which being in like manner performed,
Command them to wheel their flanks into the front, and then face to the
reere, and charge pikes, at the inside of the right foot, with their swords
drawn in their right hands.

Let the seventh firing be discharged over their pikemen, wheeling, either all
off, to the right through Intervals, or else by division, and placing
themselves in the reere of their own files. Otherwise, (for want of room) the
first rank of Musketeers, having given fire, let them kneel, or crouch low
upon the ground: and make ready again; the second rank, in like manner,
firing and kneeling: and so for the rest. Having all fired once over, in that
manner, let the Pikes advance, and put up their swords: the Musketeers, in
like manner, are to rise, then to even their ranks, and streighten their files.

For the eighth firing, you may face the body to the reere (or if you will
continue your firing the same way) then wheel your battle about, and having
opened your Intervals, your form will be the broad fronted Phalange, or broad
fronted Battle. Let these give fire, the first time, falling (or wheeling) all
off to the right: and placing themselves in the reere of their own divisions
of Musketeers. The second time of firing, let them wheel all off to the
right, (as before) and place themselves in the reere of the pikes, which follow
next after their own divisions. In the interim of the last two ranks firing,
cause your Pikes to port: but when the Musketeers are cleared away, the Pikes
may charge.

When the pikes are advanced, for the ninth firing, face them to one of the
flanks, and wheel them into a Semicircle or Unequal half-moone; where the
Musketeers being outermost, give fire upon that figure: the first time,
falling behind the Musketeers of their own divisions: The second time of
firing, cause them to place themselves behind their pikes. For further
directions, look back upon the 77. Chapter, which discourses of the Unequal
halfe-moone. The pikes may also charge, and the Musketeers give fire over
again: according to discretion. The Pikes being readvanced, face the whole
body to one of the flanks, and march them out horsewise. Then command them to
double their ranks to the right: which being done, command that flank which are
Musketeers, to double the contrary flank by division: which being performed,
all the Musketeers will be in front and reere. Then cause the reere-division
of Musketeers to double the front of Pikes, by division.

Then let them give fire on that figure, as they may see further directions in
the Chapter. The pikes having charged, and advanced again.

For the eleventh firing, first face the whole body to the right: then cause
the halfe-files that then are, to face to the reere; and so let the Musketeers
give fire to the front and reere: wheeling off by division, and flanking their
pikes. The pikes may also charge to the front and reere, which being performed,
face them all again, to their leader.

For the twelfth firing, make the Plinthium or foure-fronted battle: the
Angles whereof being filled with Musketeers. For further satisfaction, look
upon Chapter 100. which gives direction, both for the motion and reducing
thereof. Next face the whole body to that part which was the front, before the
last firing began. Then, if you would have your Ensign to display, in an
hollow Square, cause your Musketeers to stand, and halfe-files of pikes, to
face to the Reere: and so both divisions of pikes to march, until their last
ranks are even with the front and Reere of Musketeers. Then face all to their
leader. If you please, the Musketeers may give fire upon this hollow square,
as they march, to both flanks: still leading up their files, on the inside of
their own divisions, and this will make the 13. firing.

But by this time, our powder being spent, our men weary, and night
approaching: We will come to reducement. Wherefore, first cause the Pikes to
close their divisions, and the Musketeers to march up, even with their front
of pikes. Then let the whole body, wheel their flanks into the reere, which
being done, all the Musketeers will be in the Reere. Then (if you will) face
to the Reere, and give fire; causing your Musketeers to wheel off by
division, and to flank their pikes. Or else, cause your Musketeers to open to
the right and left; and double your front of pikes, by division. Which being
done, double files to the left; and they will be all reduced as at first.
Wherefore, we will now lodge our Colors, and conclude our second days
Exercise, etc.

CHAP. CVII.
The Third days Exercise.
Whosoever it be that teaches the postures of the Musket: ought to be very
diligent, in his instruction, concerning the well managing of their a^mes: that
they may not only fire to the Front reere and flank: But that they observe
order in their motion, which will better their execution. The file-leader if he
have time may instruct his file in the distances and the several motions.
HAving the third time (as formerly) brought your Soldiers into the Field; it
is very necessary, in the first place, that they be taught the Postures of
each Arms: either by the file*leaders, or some other of the Officers. Wherein
they must be careful, to instruct them in the firings, both to front, reere,
and flanks. As to give fire to the front, advancing; to give fire to the front,
upon a stand: to give fire to the Reere, upon a march: to fire to either
flank, marching or standing. As also to instruct them in distance, facings,
doublings, countermarches, and wheelings: that so, they may be the more apt and
capable, when they shall be brought into a body. Having spent some time, in the
exercising of files, let the Drum summon each file-leader, to his place: the
Ensign be fetched to the head of the Company; the Captain command silence; and
the Soldiers tender obedience. The ranks being evened, and the files
streitened, the Captain (according to his accustomed manner) begins to
instruct them in the Distances and Motions. And after the performance of so
many of them, as he shall think fit for the present exercise, he commands the
Drums to beat, and Musketeers to make ready: and so causes them to give
fire, By drawing fo^th ^ff loose files or otherwise.
three or four several ways, after the ordinary manner of firing in the
front.

Then cause your Musketeers of the left flank, to give fire to the reere; and
the Musketeers of the right flank, to give fire to the right. This firing is
to be performed upon a march, the Pikes shouldered.

For the second firing, let them give fire to both flanks. The gathering
firing.

For the third, let them fire to both flanks, drawing them up between the
divisions of Musketeers and Pikes.

For the fourth firing, let them give fire again, to both flanks, leading
them up after they have fired, between the midst of Pikes. When the last files
are firing, advance your Pikes, and close your ranks forwards to their order.
Then, face to the right and left, and charge Pikes. Your Pikes being advanced,
and faced again to the front proper: all your Musketeers will be in the midst.

Then, open them some Intervalles; and let the fifth firing be to the front,
wheeling all off to the right, and placing themselves in the reere of their
own divisions. Then cause the Pikes to charge, and when your Pikes are
advanced again, let your halfe-files face about to the right.

And so the fixth firing, may be to the front and reere; the Musketeers of the
front division, wheeling off to the right: those of the reere division,
wheeling off to the left: either of them placing themselves in the reere of
their own divisions. The Musketeers having fired once or twice over, wheel
your flanks into the front, and cause your Pikes to charge to the front and
reere. The Pikes being again advanced, and all faced to their former front,
wheel front and reere into both flanks.

For the seventh firing, make the Plinthium, or four fronted battle, the
Angles being filled with Pikes: and let them give fire, and charge their Pikes,
according to directions for that Figure. As likewise the firing being ended,
reduce the men back into their places, as they were before this firing. Then,
wheel off your front by division, which brings your Musketeers upon the
flanks; but does not reduce your men justly into their places, if your number
be any thing great.

From thence, make them a perfect cross battle, and let your Musketeers give
fire, wheeling all off to the right, placing themselves in the reere of their
own divisions of Musketeers.

For the ninth firing, let them give fire as before; but place themselves in
the reere of their Pikes; the Pikes moving forwards into their ground, and
charging. Having advanced your Pikes, command your flank divisions to face
about to the right, and to close their divisions. Then command the front and
reere divisions to wheel their flanks into the reere: which being done, face
them to the front proper, (that is) after the right file-leader.

For the tenth firing, (your Musketeers being still in the midst) let your
Musketeers give fire by Introduction* (beginning with the second rank) the
Pikes moving softly forward.

For the eleventh firing, let them give fire by Introduction, (beginning with
the Bringers up) The Pikes may charge at discretion: then let the Musketeers
stand, and the Pikes march forwards: closing their divisions before the
Musketeers.

And so let the twelfth firing be by way of Extraduction. Let the Pikes charge;
which being performed, command the first and last four ranks to stand; and
the rest of the body to face to the right and left: and so to march, until
they are clear of the standing ranks. Then let the whole body face about to
the right* and let the Ensign display his Colors in the midst.

For the next, let the Musketeers give fire being foremost, both in front and
flank, which will make the thirteeenth firing. Let them wheel off by
division; placing themselves in the reere of their own divisions of
Musketeers. Which being done, next cause those which opened to the right and
left, to face in opposition: and to close their division. Then wheel off your
front by division, or else, wheel your front inward to the reere. Then let the
Commander march at the head of his Pikes, all the Musketeers being in the
reere.

Then for the fourteenth firing, let the Musketeers give fire in the reere;
wheeling off by division, and flanking their Pikes, which does reduce every man
to his place he had, when the Exercise first began. And herewith we will
conclude our third days Exercise, and lodge our Colors, until that the
bellowing Drum call us the fourth time into the field, to give an account of
our proficiency. Till when, we will leave our Soldiers in their several Hutts
or Cabines, there to rest their limbs, refresh their spirits, and replenish
their Band liers.

CHAP. CVIII.
The fourth days Exercise.
HAving, the fourth time, brought your Soldiers into the field, and (as
formerly) caused them to be instructed in the Postures, (both of Musket and
Pike) that so they may be capable to use them both with agility, and with
safety. As likewise taught them their diverse ways of distance, with the
several and various motions: not forgetting, particularly to instruct them
with rules and pertinent reasons to every one of them: that so they may, not
only learn to do, but like rational men, understand what they do. Which
being deliberately performed, and each Officer disposed to his several place,
the ranks being evened, and the files straitened: the Captain commands, the
Drum beats, and the Musketeers make ready for skirmish, etc.

You may ei^ t^^r draw forth the innermost or outermost at discretion.
The first firing, being by drawing forth the innermost files of each flank of
Musketeers, to the right and left, obliquely before the front, and so to stand
and give fire. Having given fire, let the Bringers up lead them back into
their places. And, in the mean time, let the next innermost files, lead forth
and fire, after the same manner; and so likewise the rest; until all the
Musketeers have fired once over that way.

For the second firing, let them give fire obliquely, and cross the front,
both at once.

For the third, let them give fire obliquely: the Musketeers standing before
the Pikes, in form of an hollow wedge. Upon this firing, the Musketeers fire
outward: whereas in the other, they fire inward.

For the fourth firing, let them fire upon the oblique W. For the manner of
these firings, with the ways both how to make them and reduce them: I refer
you to their several places, where I have shown them plainly.

For the fifth firing, let them fire to each flank obliquely; the Musketeers
making on each flank, the forms of hollow wedges: and so they may perform as
much to each flank, (or both flanks) as has been to the front.

For the sixth firing, let them fire over the first oblique firing, to front and
reere.

For the seventh firing, let them fire obliquely, and cross the front and
reere.

For the eighth firing, let them fire to the front and reere, obliquely: in the
forms of the hollow wedges.

For the ninth firing, let them fire to the front and reere, obliquely, in the
form of the W.

And for the tenth firing, let them give fire obliquely, on the Fort figure,
which is to front, reere, and flanks.

In all these firings, the pikes never come to charge, but stand in a square
battle, in danger of the enemies shot: themselves neither being able to offend
the enemy, nor to defend themselves. And yet if by frequent practice, they were
inured to the use of the long how fastened to their pikes: I make no question,
but that, when they should become expert in the use of the B^w and Pike; they
would not only be a terror to their enemies, by the continual showers of
Arrows which they would send amongst them; but also that they would be a great
means to rout their enemies, and u^^erly to break their order. On the
contrary, if men should be put to use the Bow and Pike, and have not first well
learned the use of the Pike alone; they would be so cu^^ersome to themselves,
and so troublesome to others; that instead of spoiling their enemies, they
would ^out them selves. But pardon this (...) whilst I proceed to the rest of
this days exercise.

The eleventh firing, being in ^^rme of a Roman T; is to be made as follows.
Let the pikes, stand, and the (...) of (...) wheel into the front: then let
them give fire, making an Intervall upon each flank; the (...) of the
right-flanke wheeling off to the right* the Mus^ettiers of the left flank, to
the left; and placing themselves in the reer^ of their (...) When the
Musketeers have fired, once or twi^^ over, (...) the pikes p^sse through, and
wheel their fro^^ into the midst, and then faci^^ to the front, let them
charge their pikes: and from thence having advanced their pikes, let the
Commander pass to the right flank; and face the whole body to the right.
Then, wheel the battle about to the left, until the body be brought into a
round battle: from whence we will begin the twelfth firing.

The figure being made, face the whole body to the Center, and give them their
directions, what they have to do. When they have received their instructions,
let them all face about to the right; present, and give fire. The first time of
their firing, placing themselves in the rear of their Musketeers; The second
firing, countermarch to the right, and placing themselves in the reere of their
pikes: The pikes, at the same time, are to move forwards into the Musketeers
ground: where they may charge over head; and (if need be) at the foot: the
Musketeers giving fire over them, as in the Convex-halfe-moone. The firing
being ended, and the pikes advanced, let the Commander march forth of the round
Battle: at that point; where he shall find all his proper file-leaders. Then
let the whole body, be faced to that part, a^^ the file-leaders caused to march
forth, even a breast: the Musketeers and pikemen following their leaders, and
marching, until the body have atteined their orderly square again. But note,
that all your Musketeers are in the midst of the battle.

For the thirteenth firing, make the impaled sound square: the way to perform
it is as follows. Your (...) being now the flankers, draw forth the (...) of
the ^^^es of pikemen, from the right flank, cross the front of the body
(taking the outmost-files) let half the files of pikemen of the left flank,
be drawn cross the reere, following their bringers up. Then, face all your
Musketeers to the front, reere, and flanks. The pikes may charge, all
overhand: and (if need be) at the foot, with their swords drawn: the
Musketeers firing over them. Having fired, charged, and advanced their Pikes,
draw off the Pikes, again, from the front and reere, into their places.

For the fourteenth firing, (the Musketeers being still in the middle) make
the hollow fronted-crossebattell; the Pikemen making the hollow, upon the
flanks of the Musketeers. For the making whereof, wheel the front off the 2.
first ranks, into the midst. That being done, wheel the rear of the 2 last
ranks, after the same manner: and then face the rest of the body to the right
and left; and cause them to march until there be a square hollow, in the
midst of the battle. Then command them to face to the front, reere, and
flanks: which being in like manner performed, cause the Pikes (who are now in
the front of the Musketticrs) to open to the right and left; the last rank of
Pikes, ranking even with the first rank of Musketeers. The Musketeers may
give fire upon this figure, wheeling all off to the right: and placing
themselves in the reere of their own divisions of Musketeers. If need be, the
Pikes may close their divisions before their Musketeers; and charge their
Pikes. Which being done, and the Pikes again advanced: we will come to the
reducement. For which purpose, face the whole body about to the Center: and
cause the flanke-divisions to close to their order. This being executed, let
the front-division wheel together their front, into the midst (as they now
stand faced) the reere-division doing the like. That being in like manner
performed, face the whole body to the front proper: then wheel off the battle
to the right and left: after which having closed their divisions, they are
perfectly reduced as at first. And herewith we will conclude this days
exercise, and leave our Soldiers to rest: until that the morrows Sun, and
the thundering Drum, shall call us forth again into the Field.

CHAP. CIX.
The fifth days Exercise.
HAving the fifth time brought your Soldiers into the Field, if you have
leisure, it will not be amiss for to cause them to be instructed (in the first
place) in the Postures of the Pike and Musket. For those Soldiers which by
often practice of their Postures are grown perfect, will manage their Arms
with case, surety, and celerity: when, on the contrary, the unpractised
Soldier, will be a trouble to himself, a danger to his fellows, and a
Dormant to his Enemies.

After the Pastures, each file being drawn into his place; and the Ensign
(according to former directions) brought to the head of the P^kes; the Ranks
evened, and the files streitned; the Captain (having commanded silence, and
delivered himself in such ^earmes, as the present occasion does require, ever
preferring the industrious and painful; and, on the contrary, blaming the
careless and the slothful) he next proceeds to instruct them in their
sev^^a^^ (...): and these, indeed, are the grounds of all motion: seeing that
without distance, the motion cannot be excected. Next to the distances, they
are to be instructed in the motions: ever observing to each motion, its due
(...).

Next after (...), distance, and motions; let the rest of the days Exercise be
spent in firings and figures of Battle. Each Officer, having now received his
several Charge: The Captain commands; the Drums, beat, and the Musketeers,
make ready.

The first firing being performed by leading forth the outmost file of each
Flank twenty paces (or thereabout) before the Front; and no^ (...) the place
of firing^; let the second men, (...) the right and le^^ inward, even with
their (...) so give fire, together, wheeling off by (...) the right Flank to
the right, the left flank (...) the left; placing themselves on the inside of
their own d^viss^ns of Muske^^i^^s next the Pikes file-wise, as they were when
they marchedforth. So soon as the first two men of their files, have after this
manner ranked, fired, and wheeled off; the next second m^n, rank even with
their Leaders, as before: giving fire, and wheeling away to place themselves,
filewise, aftertheir ^^^ders. The residue of their first files are to do the
like; and so still the outermost files leading forth, doing in like manner^;
and still placing themselves, file-wise, next to the Pikes.

For the second firing, cause the outermost files to march forth to the former
distance before the front: And whereas in the last firing, they ranked but two
and two^; and so gave fire: now, let them rank four. That is to say, the
three men next behind the right-hand-file-leader, shall rank inward to the
left, even with their File-leaders: the three next men, after the
left-hand-file-leader, ranking inwards to the right; even ^^rest with the
leader of their file: the residue of each file, keeping themselves in file; and
closing formard^ to the distance of order, just after their File-leaders. The
first four of each file, having presented, fired, and wheeled away; the last
four men (being the ^e^r^-half-files) in the interim of their wheeling off,
rank to the ^ight and left inward: presenting^; ^^^ing, and wheeling off (as
aforesaid) and placing themselves in the (...) of the former part of their
files, which wheeledaway before them. The second Files are then to lead forth,
and to do the like; and so successively, the rest, until they have all fired
over, this way.

For the third firing, let the outermost files lead forth to the same distance
before the Front^; whither being come, as tothe place wherein (...) do their
execution^; let the files (...) to the right and left inward^; and so fire all
together: (...), and placing themselves as in the (...) f^^^ngs. The residue of
the other Files of Musketeers, at the sametime, marching forth; giving fire,
and still placing themselves file-wise, on the innermost part of their own
divisions of Musketeers; and next to the outside of Pikes.

For the fourth firing, cause your Musketeers to rank to the right and left,
into the front; and so the whole body of Musketeers give fire at once: which
being performed, let them face to the right and left inward, and so march into
their places.

They may (if you please) open the files of Musketeers, to double distance,
and so cause the files to rank to the right into the front, by Conversion:
giving fire after that manner, which (if it be done) will make the fifth firing.

After this, let them fall back into their places, and having made ready
again, before you close their distance, cause the halfe-files to face about,
and then let the files rank into the front and reere, and so give fire: which
will make the si^t firing. Having thus fired, and being fallen back into their
places, let the half files, face again to their leader; and the files of
Musketeers close again to their order.

For the seventh firing, let the ranks of Musketeers open back to their
double distance; and the Musketeers, wheel to the right and left by
Conversion: and so give fire to both flanks.

The men being returned to their places, and having again closed their ranks
to their order: after some little pause, by marching, (or otherwise) the
Musketeers being all again ready; command your files of Pikes to open to the
right and left, to their double distance. Then command, ranks both of Muskets
and Pikes, to open backward to their double distance. Which being done, command
the Muskets to invert to the right and left outward; and then to face outward,
and present; and let the halfe-files of Pikes face about. Then cause your files
of Pikes, to rank to the front and reere by conversion: and let the
Musketeers give fire, and the Pikes charge.

This figure will take up a great quantity of ground, because that all the
Musketeers are now become two ranks: that is to say, to each flank one, all
the Pikes being likewise brought into two ranks, one to the front, and the
other to the reere. This being performed, the body will stand in form of a
great hollow square.

The Musketeers having fired, the Pikes being advaneed, and each Soldier
returned to his place, and all faced to their leader: let them close their
ranks and files to their order. Then cause the ninth firing, to be performed
to both flanks, upon a stand: facing the whole body to the right and left,
there firing and wheeling off by division, and flanking their Pikes. Whilst
the two last ranks are giving fire, let the Pikes port, and when the
Musketeers have fired, and wheeled off, let them charge.

Having advanced their Pikes, face the whole body to that part where you shall
find your file-leaders of Musketeers: then will all your Musketeers, be in
front and reere. Next, command your halfe-files that then are, to double your
front to the left entire: which being done, let them face to the right and
left, the Musketeers giving fire, and wheeling off to the left, and placing
themselves in the reere of their own divisions. The Pikes may also port, and
charge, at discretion. The Pikes being advanced, and the whole Company, faced
to their former front, command the halfe-rankes of the right, (both Musketeers
and Pikes) to march, and the halfe-rankes of the left flank to follow in the
reere.

Having given them some time of breathing; then for the eleventh firing, cause
the halfe-files that then are, (Musketeers and Pikes) to face to the reere.
Which being done, let the Musketeers give fire to the front and reere, upon a
stand, wheeling off by division, and placing themselves in the reere of their
Pikes; they moving forwards, and maintaining the Musketeers ground. The Pikes
are then to charge, when they are cleared of their Musketeers. Which being
done, and they again advanced, face them all to their former front.

For the twelfth firing, command halfe-files to double the front inward entire.
To which purpose, open the front halfe-files (both Musketeers and Pikes) to
the right and left; for receiving the halfe-files of both Arms, within them:
which being executed, each Arms will stand in three divisions. Then command
the front halfe-files, to face about to the reere, and to present: The Reere
halfe-files keeping still faced to the front; and there in like manner
presenting, and both giving fire together. The first time of their firing over,
they may fall in the Reere of their own divisions of Musketeers; wheeling off
to the right and left. The second time of giving fire upon this figure, let
them wheel off, as before; and place themselves in the Reere of their
following divisions of Pikes. Which being in like manner performed, let the
Pikes, charge. Being again advanced; face the body to the former front; and
command, halfe-files that doubled, to face to the Reere, and march into their
places. The halfe-files being faced about, and marched clear off, then are the
front halfe-files to close their divisions. Thus being all rightly faced, the
Musketeers will be in the front and reere.

For the thirteenth firing, make the horned battle to the front and reere. For
the which, cause the halfe-files of Musketeers and Pikes, to face to the
reere. Then cause the Musketeers to open to the right and left, (both in front
and reere) and so to give fire: wheeling off by division, and flanking their
Pikes. The Pikes may also charge: Having advanced, let them all face to their
leader at the proper front.

Lastly, for the fourteenth firing, make the Sconce Battle. For further
directions wherein, turn back to the 93. Chapter; where you may find
instructions, as well for the making, giving of fire, and reducing thereof. And
if you please, your Ensign may display his Colors, in the hollow part of the
midst of the Pikes.

Supposing now, that by this time, the night has almost overtaken us; we will
prepare to lodge our Colors, with our accustomed Bene-vale: and herewith we
will conclude this our fifth days Exercise; suffering our Soldiers to depart
to their several habitations. There leaving them to cleanse their arms, and to
refresh their bodies, until the morrows clamouring Drum, does invite us forth
to our sixth days Exercise.

CHAP. CX.
The sixth days Exercise.
HAving the sixth time brought your Soldiers into the Field, according to the
accustomed manner: let each File-leader, exercise his File, in the Postures of
such Arms, as they carry. Which being performed, and the Files again rejoyned
into one body: the Ensign being at the head of the Pikes, and the rest of the
Officers in their several places: The Captain having commanded silence,
attention, and obeaience (three especial virtues, most necessarily requisite
to every common Soldier) he proceeds to the several distances; instructing
them in the uses of each of them. Next after the distances, he teaches them the
Facings, the Doublings, the Countermarches, and the Wheelings, with several
Observations upon each of the Motions. After which (having so commanded) The
Drums, bcat; and the Musketeers, make ready for Skirmish: Then (if you please)
you may cause three or four of the first firings, to be performed by light
Skirmishing before the Front: and that with loose Ranks, or Files, or both:
either some of those, (or such like) as I have formerly spoken off in the
preceding Exercises. After which, for your next firing; cause your Half-files
to open to the right and left, by equal division: until the Reere Divisions
of Pikes, stands right after the Musketeers of the Front-division. Now the
Musketeers standing in four Divisions, let them all present, and give fire to
the Front: wheeling all off to the right, and placing themselves in the Reere
of their own divisions of like Arms: each Rank, still making good the Leaders
ground. Having given fire, once or twice over on this Figure: For the second
firing cause the Front-division to give fire to the Front; and the two Reere
divisions, to each Flank in a March. The Front-division with fires in Rank,
wheel all off to the right; placing themselves in the Reere of their ownc
Divisions of Musketeers: the other Divisions with fire in flank, leading up
their files between their own divisions of Musketeers and the Pikes.

Having given fire once or oftener over, according to discretion this way; let
the third firing be performed upon a stand. For the which, cause your
reere-divisions to facc to the right and left outward: the front-division,
still to continue the same aspect. Then, let the Musketeers give fire, those
of the right flank, wheeling off to the right: and the contrary flank, to the
contrary hand; the Musketeers of the front division, placing themselves in the
reere of their own divisions of Muskets; the Musketeers of the reere
divisions, placing themselves in the reere of the reere divisions of Pikes:
each rank of Musketeers, still making good his leaders ground. When they have
fired all over, let the Pikes charge, to front and both flanks.

Having advanced your Pikes again, and faced your body to the front proper,
each Arms still stands in three divisions. Then let the fourth firing, be to
the reere, and both flanks upon a march. And to that end, open your
front-divisions of Musketeers to the right and left, until they are clear of
the reere-divisions of Pikes: that so they be not troublesome unto them, in
their march. Then let your pikes shoulder; and the Musketeers, give fire: the
front divisions of Musketeers, firing in flank, and leading up on the inside
of their own divisions. The Musketeers of the reere division, giving fire in
the reere in rank wheeling off by division, and placing themselves in the
front of their own divisions of Musketeers. Having fired once over, and the
Pikes charged; let your fifth firing be to the Reere, and both flanks upon a
stand. In the which, let the half-files (both Musketeers and Pikes) face to
the Reere; the Front-division to the right and left, and so give fire one each
part; those that fire to the flanks wheeling off, and placing themselves in
the Reere of their divisions of Pikes, and the Muskets of the Reere divisions,
wheeling off to the right and left, and placing themselves in the Reere of
their own divisions of Musketties: each Rank moving forward into their
Leaders ground. Having fired over, let the Pikes charge. The Pikes being again
advanced; face the whole body to the proper front: and then all the Musketeers
will be in the midst, and the Pikemen on the flanks.

For the sixth firing, cause your half-rankes of the left, double your right
flank by division. For further directions, look back to the tripartite
firing: which you shall find, Chap. 92. Having fired over that way; charged,
and re-advanced your pikes: face the whole body to their former front.

For your seventh firing, cause the front and reere divisions of Musketeers
and Pikes, to face to the right: the rest of the body (both Muskets and Pikes)
to the left. Let the Musketeers give fire, and wheel all off, either to the
right or left, and place themselves in the reere of their following divisions
of Pikes; each rank still moving up into their leaders ground. When there rest
but two ranks of each division, to fire, let the Pikes port. Having all fircd,
and wheeled away; let the Pikes charge. Then, face the whole body to their
first front; and command the first and last four ranks to face to the left:
and to march, until they are clear of the standing part of the Body. Then,
cause the front halfe-files, to face to the left, the reere halfe-files, to the
right: and so to close their divisions: and after that to face toward their
leader.

For the eight firing, make the sollid Square girdled with Musketeers. For the
which, draw half the files of the right flank of Musketeers, cross the
front, and half the files of Musketeers of the left flank, cross the reere.
Then face the whole body (both Muskets and Pikes (to the front, reere, and
flanks. This done, let the Musketeers give fire, and wheel off by division:
placing themselves in the reere of their own divisions of Musketeers* All the
time of this firing, the Pikemen, being in the middle of the Musketeers, have
good opportunity (if the enemy be near) to gall them with their thick showers
of feathered shot. The Musketeers, in the mean time, having fired once,
twice, or oftener over, on this Figure, draw your files of Musketeers back
again into their places.

Then having faced the whole body to the proper front, let your ninth firing,
be Captain Wallers double firing to the front and reere, after this manner.
First, wheel front and reere into the right flank: then face them all the
same way they were before: which done, cause the halfe-files to face to the
reere, and command the Musketeers which are in the reere of each division of
Pikes, to double their front of Pikes by division. Then, let them face about
and close their divisions: and so having refaced them as they were; let them
give fire, wheel off, and charge, according to directions on Captain Wallers
Figure.

For the tenth firing, let them face to the right and left, and give fire to
both flanks upon a stand: wheeling off by division, and flanking their Pikes.
When the Pikes have charged, and are again advanced, let the Captain pass to
the front accidental of the left flank, and face the rest of the body to him,
and in the next place wheel their flanks into the front, and so all the
Musketeers will be in the front: and by facing the whole body to the left; all
the Musketeers will be on the right flank.

Let the eleventh figure be the Diamond Battle. Having given fire two or three
several ways, according to the directions upon that figure; charged Pikes,
and reduced them again into the Square: face the body about to the right; and
pass the Musketeers which belong to the right flank, between the ranks of
pikes into their places. Then, the Musketeers of the left flank, being closed
to their Pikes, the Body will stand at their first order.

For the twelfth firing, make the hollow Square girdled with shot: let them
give fire upon that figure (both without and within) according to the
directions for that firing. Let the Pikes, charge; and reduce them in the same
manner as I have discoursed upon that figure.

For the thirteenth firing, Make the Plesium as you shall find directions in
the 104. Chapter.

Having made it, given fire upon it, and reduced it as at first.

Let the fourteenth and last firing for this exercise, be the Hollow Hearse and
Cross. Turn back to the 103. Chapter, where you may find ample instructions
for the making, firing, and reducing of it. And lastly, that you may conclude
with triumph, cause your Ensign to be displayed in the middle of the Hollow
Cross: and then having fired, charged pikes, and reduced your men, according
to the directions on that figure, your men will be as at first. And therefore
seeing that by this time night is come; and our powder gone; we will here give
conclusion to our sixth days Exercise.

Wherefore, that you may observe some form in the lodging of our Colors;
cause your Musketeers to march in the front of your pikes. Then, as as they
march, let them invert to the right and left: which is, when the Ranks file to
the right and left, by division. Then, cause all your Musketeers to face in
opposition; to cock their Matches, guard their Pans, and rest their Muskets.
In the mean time, let the pikes advance, and close their ranks and files, to
their order. Which being done, the Captain, Lieutenant, Ensign, and Drums
beating a Troop, at the head of the pikes: pass through this Guard into the
appointed place for the alledgement of the Ensign. Then, the Sergeants cause
the Musketeers to face all about to the right, and present: and upon the first
beat of the Drum, they all give fire in one Volley. And now having performed
our sixth days Exercise, the Drum beats a Call: and makes proclamation, that
every man may depart unto his several home, until his next Summons into the
Field.

FINIS.
The Contents of every Chapter contained in this Book.
Chap. 1. COncerning Postures and handling of Arms. page 1. The Postures of
the Musket. page 3 2 Of the Postures of the Pike, page 7 3 Of the Drum, page 11
4 Of Ranks and Files, their places and dignities, p. 13 5 Reasons for
precedence of dignity in Ranks and Files. page 15 6 Of several Distances,
page 20 7 Of marching a Company in divisions at length, the order and places of
the Officers, and again drawing them into form of battle, p. 24 8 Of drawing
the Divisions up into a square, p. 26 9 What is facing, and the use of the
word, whether to be used or refused, p. 28 10 Of facing square, and how to
perform it, the usefulness of Facings, and the several parts thereof, page
30 11 Of Doublings, the use and parts, p. 34 12 Of Inversion and Conversion,
and of doubling Ranks. p. 40 Chap. 13 Of doublings of Ftles, page p. 42 14 Of
doublings by Bringers up, p. 43 15 Of doublings of Files outward and inward,
page 46 16 Of doubling by half Files, p. 48 17 Of doublings the Reere by Front
half Files, page 50 18 Of doubling the Reere by Countermarch, p. 53 19 Of
doubling Flanks by ways of Countermarch, page 54 20 Of doubling half Files
to the right entire, to accommodate the doubling of half Ranks, p. 57 21 The
difference between entire and divisionall doublings, and of doubling half
Files entire, p. 61 22 Of doubling the Front inward entire, p. 63 23 Of half
Files, doubling the Front by division, page 66 24 Of doubling the Reere by
division, p. 67 25 Of doubling the Reere entire, by the front half Files, p.
70 26 Of doubling by half rank entire, p. 72 27 Of doubling of Flanks by
division, p. 75 28 Of doubling Ranks entire, p. 77 29 Of doubling Files
entire, advancing, p. 79 30 Of Files doubling their depth, p. 82 31 Of
Conversion and Inversion, with their words of Command, and reducements, p. 85
32 Of Files siling in sequence, p. 88 33 Of inverting Ranks, or Ranks filing,
p. 90 34 Of Ranks filing by division, and how useful, page 92 Chap. 35 Of the
several parts of Conversion, and how they are to be understood, page p. 94 36
Of Ranks wheeling by conversion, p. 97 37 Of Files ranking in equal part, p.
101 38 The conclusion of Doublings, p. 105 39 Of Countermarches. The antiquity,
and words of direction, p. 108 40 Of the Chorean Countermarch: and the way to
perform it, p. 112 41 Of Countermarching to loose ground, p. 114 42 Of
Countermarches to gain ground, or the Macedonian Countermarch, p. 117 43 Of
the Bastard Countermarch, p. 119 44 Of Countermarching Ranks, to maintain
ground, p. 121 45 Of Countermarching Ranks to loose ground, p. 122 46 Of the
Macedonian Countermarch by Rank, p. 124 47 Of Countermaching Front and Reere to
the midst, p. 125 48 Of bringing Front and Reere, together into the midst
by the Bastard Countermarch, p. 128 49 Of Countermarching, to make a large
intervall, between the first and last Rank, p. 130 50 Of making a large
Intervall, between the first and last Ranks, by the Macedonian Countermarch,
p. 132 51 Of interchanging ground. p. 134 52 Of countermarching the flanks (or
wings) into the midst of the Battle* p. 136 Chap. 53 Of countermarching, to
take the ground before the flanks, page p. 138 54 Of Countermarching to take
the ground on the out side of the Flanks, and to direct their Aspects inwards.
p. 140 55 Of taking the ground on the outside of the flanks; not altering the
Aspects. p. 142 56 Of Interchanging Ground by the Flanks, and bringing the
innermost files of Pikes, to become the outmost ranks. p. 144 57 Of wheeling,
their kinds, and uses with their several words of Command. p. 148 58 Of
wheelings Anguler, p. 150 59 Of wheeling on the Center. p. 152 60 Of wheeling
off, by division. p. 154 61 Of wheeling the Front inward, toward the Reere. p.
156 62 Of bringing the Flanks into the Front of the Battle, p. 158 63 Of
wheeling the Reere into the midst of the Battle, p. 161 64 Of wheeling the
right flank, into the midst of the Battle, p. 164 65 Of wheeling the left
Flank into the midst of the Battle, p. 167 66 Of wheeling Front and Reere,
into the midst of the Battle, p. 169 67 Of wheeling the flanks into the midst
of the Battle, p. 172 68 Of making men file-leaders successively, the files
being eight deep, p. 176 Chap. 69 Of making men file-leaders succes^ively: the
files being but six deep, page p. 179 70 Of drawing the Files again into a
Body: and preparing them for a skirmist, p. 183 71 Of firing by forlorn files.
The manner, and use, page 186 72 Of firings by two Ranks, ten paces advanced
before the front: Next, even with the front; and lastly, even with the half
files, p. 190 73 Of the Horne-battell; how to make it: and to reduce it by
firing, p. 195 74 Of the Demie-hearse Battle: The use of the figure; how to
make it, and to reduce it by firing* p. 198 75 Of giving fire, advancing, by
way of Introduction: with the beneficial use of the Bow and Pike, page 201 76
The way to make the Diamond Battle: several ways to fire upon it: with
diverse other figures and firings, which are thereby produced, p. 204 77 Of the
Unequal Half Moon; The use of the Figure: and of several ways of firing upon
it. p. 211 78 Of Extraduction: the several uses, firings, and Reducements. p.
215 79 Of the Broad fronted Battle: with the ways of firing upon it. p. 218
80 Of dismarching, or firing in the Reere: the several ways, and how they
ought to be performed. p. 221 81 Of firings in flank, in general; and more
particularly, of the gathering firing. p. 226 82 The second manner of giving
fire to the flank. p. 229 Chap. 83 A firing in flank, led off by the Bringers
up. page p. 131 84 The difference between Firings in Flank, marching: and of
bringing the Musketeers on the outside of the Pikes. p. 234 85 Of Firing in
Flank: and placing the Musketeers in the midst of the Battle of Pikes: with
other firings from thence proceeding. p. 237 86 Of firing to the front and
reere, upon a march. p. 242 87 A second way of firing to the front and reere.
p. 245 88 A firing to the reere and right flank, marching. p. 247 89 Of firing
to both flanks, marching. p. 249 90 A firing to both Flanks, standing. p. 251
91 Captain Wallers Triple firing to the Front. p. 254 92 A firing tripartite,
doing execution to the front, reere, and right flank. p. 257 93 Of the Sconce
Battle. p. 259 94 Of firing by three files at once; two of them standing
oblique, the other direct. p. 262 95 A firing oblique, by four files together,
in form of a W. p. 264 96 Of the Fort Battle; the way to make, and to reduce
it. p. 266 97 Of the cross Battle; the way to make it with a private Company.
How to fire upon it: and to reduce it. p. 268 98 Of the hollow-fronted Cross
Battle, how to make it with a private Company: and the way to fire upon it,
etc. p. 272 99 Of firing upon the square Battle, flanked with Pikes. p. 274
100 Of the Plinthium, or foure-fronted-battell; by us called the Cross of
Muskets, flanked with Pikes. p. 276 101 Of the Hollow Square for march. p. 280
102 Of the hollow Hearse, and the Cross. p. 283 103 Of the Hollow Square (...)
dled with shot. p. 286 104 Of the Sollid Square, with Musketeers in Center and
Angles. The way to make the figure with a private Compani^* how to fire upon
it, and to reduce it. p. 291 105 The first days Exercise. p. 297 106 The
second days Exercise. p. 299 107 The third Days Exercise. p. 304 108 The
fourth days Exercise. p. 308 109 The fifth days Exercise. p. 313 110 The
sixth days Exercise. p. 320
FINIS.
Faults escaped in the Printing.
PAge 17. line 5. for and, read ad, p. 25. l. 32. r. before, p. 34. first line
of the 11. Chap. (...) p. 36. in the margent, r. particle, p. 64 l. 13. r.
armies, p, 74. l. 9. 4. all, (...) ^8 l. 8. r. least, p. 86* l. 6. r. or, p.
86. l. 19* r. to* p. 87. l. 8. r. without, p. 87. l 2^ (...) drawn a figure* p
89. l* 6. r. left, p. 89. l. 17. r. file-wise, p. 97. l. the last, r. (...) p.
106. l. 3. r. one, p. 108. l. 9. r. in, p. 112. l. 5. r. before, p. 117. l. 4.
r. (...) leaders, p. 119. l. 19. and 20. r. and with the Chorean it holds no
affinity, p. ^24* the last line, r. be as at first. p. 127. the 2 m m which
stand for the ou^^ost file-leaders to the right, stand quite contrary. p. 137.
l. 5. r. to. p. 140. ^he figure se^ wrong. p 152 l. 8. r. ^oo p. 1^6. l. 11. r.
flanks. p. 173. l. 13. r. o^^rmost. p. 176. l. 32. r. figured. p. ^07. l. 14.
r. commanded. p. 217. l 4. r. u^* p. 250. l. 8. r. firing. p. 269. l: 18. r.
them. p. 271. l. 11. r. arms. p 292. l. 13. r. flanks* p. 293. the title of
the figure, r. Plesium. p. 296. l. 6. r. to her several, etc. p. 297. the
marginall note opposite to the a^* line* r. instead of one file and close. One
file of Musketeers to give fire, and close, p. 302 l. the 9. for h^^swise, r*
herswise, p. 306. l. 27. for Leader, r. Leaders, p 311. l. 17 for overhead, r.
overhand.


