THE Birth, Purpose, and mortal VVound of the Romish holy League.

Describing in a Map the envy of Satan's Shauelings, and the folly of their
wisdom, through the Almighties providence.

By I. L.

Psalm. 2. Verse. 2. and 4. The Kings of the earth band themselves, and the
Princes came together against the Lord, and and against his Anointed. But he
that dwells in Heaven shall laugh: the Lord shall have them in derision.
Imprinted at London for Thomas Cadman. 1589.

The Birth, Purpose, and mortal VVound of the Romish Holy League.
THe Antichristian intrusion into the Empire, having manifested the Pope to be
that man of sin whereof S. Paul speaks to the Thessalonians; and the
innumerable deceiving fantasies, traditions and vain inventions, wherewith the
erroneous Church of Rome has made drunk the Nations of the earth, discovering
her to be that purple Whore sitting on the Beast with seven heads, or rather
(as the Angel interprets in the Revelation) on the City with seven hills:
has (through the mighty working of Gods spirit by his zealous Ministers) so
laid open the skirts of their filthiness, that the most part of Christian
Princes with their people have embraced the free liberty of the Gospel, and
freed themselves from her Antichristian yoke. Whereupon Satan (chief Patron
of that Regiment) seeing the decaie of his Empire, the discredit of his
Vicegerent, and the open defamation of his infamous Spouse (the Romish
Church); thought it high time to set too his helping hand, the rather for that
his kingdom draws so near an end. Therefore in the silentst time of night
(a fit hour for the Prince of darkness to take in hand a hellish enterprise)
he posted to his terrestrial Palace at Rome; where seating himself in the
secret chamber of his Papal Vicar, heethus began: The care (right trusty and
well-beloved) of infinite thy predecessors, together with thy approved diligence
for the suppressing of Christian verity, (the only obstacle and hindrance of
my happiness) is to me no less known, than graciously accepted: but thou
see that notwithstanding all your trauells (being my device) as giving
indulgences and promising heaven to traitrous subjects for the dispatching of
their natural but our adverse Princes, or the daily excommunications thundered
against the said Princes, we canneither by the cursing of the one, or the
blessing of the other so prevail, but that the disciples of Luther, Calvin,
Beza, and such like back-sliders from our Church of Belial, do openly and
hourelie preach and publish his Almightinesse, whose name I tremble to
rehearse; attributing to him, and none but him, all power to forgive sin:
whereby my kingdom (founded upon me the chief corner stone, and laid
together by diverse Popes, Cardinals, Abbots, and other Cloisterers is so
sorelie shaken, our pardons, pilgrimages, and purgatory so little feared, that
as the walls of Jericho, so fall our principals at this Evangelical sound.
This therefore is my will, (which may in no wise be delaied) that seeing there
is yet some hope, by reason every Christian Prince is not fully dissuaded
from our faction, there be foorth-with a uniform League of fatal confederacy
by such as favor us, against our foes; especially our Arch-enemies, Elizabeth
Queen of England, and Henry King of Navarre: This League proceeding from my
spirit of malignitie, (as a Daughter worthy no other father) I would have
thee beautefie with some hypocritical style of outward holiness, and if thou
list call it the Holy League. Touching the Princes thou shall confeder, I need
give small instructions: only this I charge that thou be sudden and
circumspect to assemble thy Synod, among whom I will as a chief Compeere sit.
The Devil had no sooner said these words, but a Senate of sacriligious
Shauelings were assembled, and Satan himself by the Popes high Chair
proudly seated? ( as appears in the Map at the letter A.) Here was it
concluded, how this League now named Holy, should also prove mighty in
operation against the Princes professing the Gospel. First it was ordained,
that the Duke of Guise (being by nature ambitious and bloody, yet through
riotous excess utterly unable) should have his necessity supplied with
Spanish and Romish superfluity: provided that he fill France with inhumane
massacres, ( explaned in the letter B.) thereby to weaken the King of Navarre:
to which he was animated by the Popes Messenger, who to whet him on powrde
treasure at his feet ( letter C.) persuading him also to stir up such ill
affected English as he might against the person of their Royal Sovereign. But
Navarre fortefied from heaven, armed at all points like a Christian Cheualier
defended the Gospel ( letter D.) and England happy through her Elizabeth, sat
crowned with a wreath of peace (making Christ her hope) as a Rock immovable
( letter E). This fretted the Pope; and Philip King of Spain made drunk and
deceived with the superstitious cup of Romish abomination, was whetted on
according to his promise in the Holy League, cha^pion-like to prepare his
people, and discharge his abundance of Indian earth: in satisfaction of which I
warrant ye, he had no small rewards, for his very Horse was trapt with Bulls
and pardons ( letter F.) Allen also that caitiffe Cardinal, and English
Arch-traitor, from his Cannon of corrupt conceit discharges two seditious
Libels against his Souereign: to which the English Friars and Seminary Priests
give fire ( letter G). Now to make this League an able Body, to bear down
the adversaries of Antichrist both by land and sea, her head was beautified
with a horned Moon ( letter H) of huge and mighty ships, ready to join
with the bloody Guise, and also to unite them to the Prince of Parma, that in
a moment they might swallow up little England, as the ravenous Crocodile does
the smallest fish in the seven mouthd River Nilus. But God the only Patron
of England and our Elizabeth dismayed first the appointed Army of the Prince,
so that like the Syrians that besieged Samaria in the days of Eliseus the
Prophet, they fled away unsought with from joining with their fellows at Sea,
and would not by the gentle entreaties nor severe threatenings of the Prince
their General ( letter I) be any way persuaded to set foot aboard the small
Skiffes, appointed to transport them to their holy or rather unhallowed mates:
their fear arising (as it evidently appeared) from that Fleet whereof the
Lord Seymor was General ( letter K) which with the Hollanders was ready to
give them their deserved welcome. This Fleet and all the rest of their worthy
warre-fellowes ouershaddowed with the wings of the Almighty, honorably vowed
to sell their worthy lives in the defense of this Island, (his little Israel,
and their native Nourse) animated courageously every man his mate, with
resolution to attempt the ruin of this unhallowed League: whose Mooned Cronet
was decked with sundry pendants, of painted Saints, (sufficient guides for
superstitious sotts full gaudelie adornde with the finest gold, rakte out of
wretched Indiaes Womb, whose senseless bowels the Spaniards (slaue-like)
ceaselesllie tear out ( letter L), only to satisfy the ravenous appetites
of their Wooluish Inquisitours, who submit forthwith at the feet of their
Papal God, the travails both of Prince and people, making them vassals to an
unworthy Priest: and applying their labors gained with venture of their lives,
and hazard of their souls to the strengthening of the forenamed League. But all
is vain: for the breath of the Lords mouth has dimmed the brightness of her
Moon, and scattered those proud ships, whose masts seemed like Cedars to
dare the Sun, the treacherous Libels of traitorous Allen, are with himself
held infamous to the world: The Guise also (one of greatest helps) is dead
deserved lie. She being with these sorrows surcharged, and mangled with many
maimes, she languisheth in a consumption on her bed ( letter M.) The Pope (on
earth her chief Patron) promises his help in what he may, and feeling her
pulses, assures her there is yet good hope. But the Devil belike being the
better Doctor, and not loving to dissemble where his daughter was Patient,
protests after he had cast her water, there was evident sign of death. Thus is
this devilish League devised by the Devil, and confirmed by the Pope, weakened
and wasted through the Spirit of Truth, and power of our Lord Jesus Christ: To
whom let England sing so all her victories; Not unto us o Lord, not unto us,
but unto thy Name be praise.

The Birth, purpose, and mortal wound of the Romish Holy League.
IN silent night, when each thing takes it rest,
Yet wakes the Devil, who never shuts his eyes:
In darksome night he leaves his loathsome nest
All in a rage, and toward Rome he flies.
Where when to Palace of the Pope he came,
He enters in, and thus his tale does frame.
Draw near my son, and listen to thy Sire,
The world waxes old and may not long endure,
The time draws on apace, it must consume with fire:
Then ends thy kingdom too, which stands nothing sure;
Because the Gospel spreads it self apace;
While thou and thine, run headlong to disgrace.
A Council call of all thy Prelates great:
Cardnalls, Friars, and Shauelings of each sort:
And I with thee will sit upon thy stately Seat,
And for thy ruined state, erect a mighty fort,
And build the same with Princes of this land,
With other Kings fast bound in follies band.
Which band, though it be bound, by thee and me my son,
Yet must it be adorned, with title of devotion;
And call it Holy League, or else we are undone,
And thou will tumble down from all thy high promotion;
And he the Spanish King which Phillip has to name,
Must be the chiefest of this League, and master of the game.
He has great store of gold, and will not spare for cost:
He can supply the Guizes want, which now is far in debt,
By riot and excess, his coin is spent and lost:
And what will he not do, if that it be to get?
I tell thee here my son, thou have not such a boy,
From East to West, or any where within thy princely sway.
A fair religious Cloak, do spread upon his back,
To cover his ambition, his cruel bloody mind:
But Pistolets of Spain, and Coin he must not lack
To execute thy tyranny, whereto he is assignd,
Against both Christ and Christians that do profess his word:
Yet say he sheddeth blood, with noble Gedeons sword.
And I will rule his heart, for there I have my seat;
Thy Butcher he shall be, and human flesh shall sell:
No age his hand shall spare from smallest to the great,
His mind I will so vex with furies out of Hell:
But chiefly he shall aim at the good Navarre King,
He is the mark, shoot right at him, for that's the only thing.
Give him no leave, nor leisure, for to muse
Upon the sacred word of his eternal God:
But still do him pursue, as other Popes did use,
Being yet in mothers womb, with their afflicting rod:
And ever since his birth he has been chased still:
And yet unto our woe, we cannot have our will.
He must be made away, because he is the heir,
And next unto the Crown of France, by orderly descent:
It Is he, it is he, that puts us all in fear,
And he must down, or else you will be shent.
He cares not for thy Curse, our Guyze must do the deed,
Thy Bulls nor yet thy Charms, can never make him bleed.
And yet there is a greater foe, and she of greater might;
Against whom our dearest Guize, nor scarsely Spain I ween
May well prevail, to put her from her right;
She rules brave Britain Isle, I mean the English Queen;
Against her my son, this League must join in one,
For all too weak our Spain will be alone.
Her Father first did wound thee to the heart,
Her brother next thy wound did still renew:
But sister yet did salve again thy smart,
And heald thy wound as all the world did view:
Till she came in that ouerthrewe thy Crown,
And in her Land by force does keep thee down.
Yea many other Foes, both Kings and Dukes of fame.
I know we have, but first these two must down.
Bend all thy force against that stately Dame;
And then the rest will shrink, if thou but frown.
This Satan said, wherewith away he vades,
He leaves the earth, and flies to darksome shades.
This guest thus gone, they all allow his tale,
And straight proceed to practice his pretense:
Wherein they had such luck, there blewe so brave a gale,
They got their whole desire, and that with small expense:
The King, the Peers, and many Princes seals,
Against Heaven, against Christ, and Christian Commonweals.
And Phillip now bestirres his aged limbs,
He beats his brains, he tyres his weary wit,
He sends for Gold, and homeward fast it swimmes,
And says, herewith the mark I mean to hit
Whereat so long I aimed have in vain,
To join that famous Land unto the Crown of Spain.
And Antichrist does whippe his posting have with speed:
And Cardnall Allen he must play the gunner stout,
And shoot abroad great bragges, without respect or heed,
As Champion chief amongst this ruffling rout;
So blazing forth his shame, as one deuoyd of grace,
Against his and our good Prince, her Crown and royal place.
Then hugie Ships, as erst were never seen,
Proud Spain prepares for to invade our Land:
And all against the most renowmedst Queen,
That ever yet bare Scepter in her hand.
Oh Lord what has thy Handmayd done to these,
That thus assault her Kingdom and her Seas:
But worthily in thy great judgments just,
Of thy good will thou did confound their pride,
And made them feel the smart of their ambicious lust,
Not daring long our royal Ships abide,
But fled away like sheep before the hound,
Still here and there, some going to the ground.
They felt the force of British brave young bloodes,
Which queld the Spanish hearts, and made them hide their heads:
Some crept below the Deck and prayed to their Roodes,
And other some to other Saints, while Friars took their beads.
Then at the length, when we forsook the chase,
Both wind and wave defied them to the face.
But all this while proud Parma with his barges,
Could naught prevail to drive his men aboorde,
But lost his toil, with all his costs and charges:
Sometime he spoke them fair, straight threatening with his sword;
But all in vain, his Sailers ran away,
And left his Boats to set him home his hay.
They wift full well, that in the narrow Seas
Was nothing got but stripes and English blows;
Which they forsook, as glad to live at ease,
And left the Prince quite bored through the nose.
But God (my friends) he took away their barts,
To make them know his power and fury of his darts.
Yet that which most does show the arm of God,
In all these bloody broils we lost not threescore men;
To them a certain sign of Heavens heavy rod,
To us a show of love: let us be thankful then,
And praise that Lord, which is the Lord of host,
That does defend and shield our English Coast.
And makes our Land abound with flesh and bread,
And cloth most fine, from cold to guard our back:
With Timber store, good Iron, Tin and Lead,
And many other things, which other Nations lack:
But yet a greater grace, we have his word in peace,
God grant it may continue, and bring forth more increase.
Let Spanyard then go delue and dig for hidden gold;
Let him go rend rich Indies bowels out;
Let him go try his friends, and let his Bulls be sold;
Let him raise taxes more, and let him cast about;
Let him, let Pope, let Devil and all the rest,
Do what they can, yea let them do their best.
Let them not cease to boast and brag to come again;
Let them with speed prepare like Forces trebble told:
Let us repent, amend; pray for our Princes reign;
Let us be true in one, let us together hold:
Come Devil then, come Pope and all the crewe,
And as you sped of late, so shall you speed a new.
For England yet both is, and shall be English still:
And English Brutes do bravely keep the same:
Though bastard Britains boast and brag their fill,
And leave their Land and skorne the English name:
They skorne not us, but bring themselves in skorne;
By leaving us, they leese themselves and seed unborn.
Our Papists play the Batte, that left the flying foul;
Because he thought that Beasts more stronger were than they:
Who dares not now appear, but with the skriching Owl
Flies always in the night, not daring view the day:
So do our Papists proud, who skorne our little I Will,
In flying to the mighty Beasts, which now have got ye foil.
They would be Birds again, but shame does beat them back:
They wish themselves unborn, or else untimely birth:
Their hope is overthrown, their Beasts be gone to wrack:
So they bewail their loss, while we sing praise with mirth.
We praise our God which does us safely keep,
While they may howl like hounds, and wring their hands and weep.
And long may you so houle, till you repent and change,
And turn unto the Lord, from whom you go astray;
And yield unto your Realm, from which you run and raunge:
Good subjects to your Prince, become while yet you may;
Orels be sure, more plagues will still ensue
Upon your loathsome League, and also upon you.
Which League now lies sick, your Doctors do despair:
Your Pope does scratch his head, your Spanish ships are lost:
Your Cardinals cry out, your Friars tear their hair:
Your combs now are cut, your Clergy cease to boast:
The French king now espies whereto your league was hatche
And like a King he cutteth short those that him ouer-matcht.
Because he suffered long, you thought that he would bear:
Because that he forbore, you thought ye might him lade:
Because once you made him fly, ye thought him still to fear:
Because he would not be of Romish League and trade,
You thought to cut him off, you thought him to betray;
Which beede your Guize must do, and make the King away.
But Guize has his reward, and in his guise is slain
The bloody Guize has bloody end, most justly to his hire,
The bloodiest man that France ere bred, yt made of blood a gain,
Lies now in dust, who was your hope and top of your desire.
Loathe then ye League that leaves you, and is in falling down,
Against Christ it first was made, and Heavens thereat frown.
Forsake the Church of Rome, and fly that man of sin,
Return to Christ his fold, that you with us may joy;
And pray with us in heart, yea let us never lin,
That God protect his Church, and keep from all annoy
Our thrice renowned Queen, our royal Realm and Land,
From secret foes at home, and from the Romish band.
FINIS.

