THE SOVLES Lamentations, and love to God.

Preces and Lachrymae. Dumps and tears of REPENTANCE.

Aut ora, aut abi. Aut Poenitendum, aut pereundum. LONDON, Printed by Tho:
Purfoot. An: 1614.

To the Christian READER.
Think not (good Christian READER) that these Prayers may only be appropriated
unto my self. They are not only the Anatomy of my Soul, and the discovery
of my life; but whatsoever poenitent and true hearted Christian shall light
upon them, I doubt not but he will think they were deuized and ordained of God
for him. By them thou may find the Scripture verified, which says; To the
weak I become as weak, that I may win the weak, 1. Cor. 9 22. Or rather
that, Whether we be afflicted, it is for your consolation and salvation; or
whether we be comforted, it is for your consolation and salvation, 2. Cor.
1.6. If God bring some to the gates of death for the comfort of others; what
account we all ought to make jointly of our selves, and what possible comfort
to minister one unto another severally, in temptations, in afflictions, in
pouerties, in necessities, in all the worlds jniuries wherewith we are vexed
every day, thou see. Seeing also we esteem nor to discover our nakedness,
and to set our jnfirmities unto the view of men for his servants sakes, that
their joy may be full; knowing that if they be weak, so are we, if they be
strong, so are we: if they be sinful, so are we: if they be poenitent, so are
we. Let God be glorified, and let every sorrowful soul triumph in Christ upon
the view of our weakness. For he that refused not us, refuses none of his that
come unto him, call upon him faithfully, turn from jniquity, and worship him
in spirit and in truth. This one thing I entreat of thee, Ask not my name: it
will not profit thee; I am thy fellow servant, let that suffice thee: In thy
prayers remember me for a while, if thou know me, and know me by thy self,
and it shall satisfy me to the full: I do and will pray for thee. Our Lord
Jesus Christ be with thy Spirit. Amen.

To the Sinner.
CHristian Sinner: be not offended at the passions of these Prayers. Thou will
not: thou can not: if ever thou have felt either thy sins, or thy savior;
the one to afflict and affright thee, the other to ease and refresh thee. There
is no greater burden then the burden of sin: There is no greater joy then the
joy of the holy Ghost, given and inspired of God through Jesus Christ our Lord,
The one is hell, and the other is Heaven here on Earth. The spirit of a man
will sustain his infirmity: but a wounded spirit who can bear? And so
contrary: The heart that is possessed with The peace of God that passes all
understanding; no doubt, rejoices with joy unspeakable and glorious. Add
hereunto: Jf the dear Saints of God, (especially the holy Prophet David,)
forced not, as it were, to shun themselus in the eye of the world, that they
might satisfy their Consciences, and glorify God* It ought not to seem
strange to any sanctified soul, that the Author hereof has made himself (in
a manner) a gazing stock to the world, to Angels, and to men: To become weak
unto the weak that he might win the weak; all to all, that at the least he
might gain some. It is no matter what shame be poured on the face of a
sinful, miserable, and mortal man: so that one soul thereby may be gained to
Christ. And J like exceedingly of that excellent resolution of supereminent
Saint Augustine. Confitebor infirmitates meas oraturis pro me fratribus. Be thy
discretion what it will, this is mine in God. And so I wish thee the comfort of
heart in the Sau^o^r of the world; of whom I am sure thou have great need, as
well as I.

Thine in truth and charity. B: L.

DEVOVT PRAYERS.
A Confession, lamentation, and submission to God.
O Lord, my God: I have sinned, and done wickedly, I have grieuouslie sinned,
and done exceeding wickedly: my sins are in number infinite, and most
abominable in nature. Oh good Lord: I have provoked thine excellent Majesty,
and thy strong power, and thine upright Justice, to condemn me body and soul
suddenly. Surely it is of thy mercy that I am not already consumed: I have
deserved presently, even now (Lord) before the next nioment, to be delivered
up into the hands of hell, and of the Prince of darkness, the Tyrant of the
soul of man, Satan the Devil. For I have served him and neglected thee: I have
from my youth obeyed him and despised thy Majesty (oh most glorious, mighty,
and terrible God) thy power, and thy Justice I have despised and set at naught:
And yet if this were all: I had committed but small offense in respect of that
which I have done. For thy mercy, thy mercy (oh Lord) thy compassions (oh good
God) thy compassions infinite, and unspeakable, and inconceivable, evermore
alluring me, calling me back, and eue^ beseeching me (my Conscience bearing
witness) to refrain from iniquity, I have cast behind me, and most vile
wretch, then whom there is none lives more wretched that shall be saved, I
have trodden and trampled under my feet. True it is (my God and my merciful
Redeemer) it is most true: that when thou have offered me grace, I have
refused it, and when thine Angel has stood on my right hand, and Satan on the
left, I have rejected thine Angel, and turned aside unto Satan, I have leaned
unto the left hand, and not unto the right. So I have traitorously misused thy
Majesty, and have showed my self a notorious, wilful, and unrepentant
rebel: yea as a swift Roe of the Forest, or as a Dromedarie of Midian, or as
a wild Ass of the Wilderness, that snuffeth up wind at pleasure: I have run
hastily and headlong from the right and high way of life, into bypath of
death and destruction: I have entered league with sins, and have travailed
quietly hand in hand with the Princes of everlasting darkness: I have suffered
my self to be led by them unto the bottomless pit: and therein I had almost
plunged my self unawares: I was even clean gone from thy presence, and
remembered thee no more: Then, even then (oh sweet God) when I was held in
chains of darkness, thou did send thine Angel and deliver me. What shall I
give unto thee? How shall I be thankful? I will praise thee with joyful lips:
I will sing to thee from ye ground of my heart. Accept the sacrifice of praise,
I will take the cup of salvation, and pray unto thee. Behold I come unto thee
right humbly, oh Lord hear me, oh Lord hear me: O Lord despise me not. If
thou make as though thou hear not, I die, and what profit is there in my
blood? Spare me (good Lord) spare me Hear and forgive, I present unto thee
Christ Jesus, he came into the world to save sinners: of whom not S. Paul, but
I, even I the slave of sin that now am before thee, I am the chief: which I
speak not (Lord) for fashion, but from the depth of an oppressed and wearied
Conscience thou know: It is time for thee now to lay to thy hand: for they
have destroyed thy law within my soul. They, even mine enemies, and thine
enemies, my sins and villainies have destroyed thy law. I am brought even hard
to deaths door, and Satan, yea truly many Satan's, and many fiends, and
furies, and concupiscences, and Legions of Devils in me have almost made an end
of me. My soul is a pray unto them. O Lord deliver me, and be merciful
unto me. Deliver my soul from the jaws of the Lions. Deliver me for Jesus
Christ's sake, sprinckle his blood over my scorched Conscience: yet if thou
suffer me to lie a while in these flames, Lord grant me patience, and I
willingly suffer. Thy will be done. I know thou will deliver me, for thou have
promised and can not lie, and thou art able readily: For thine is the
kingdom, the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

A wrestling with hardness of heart, and a betaking of the Soul unto Gods
dispose.
OH merciful Lord God, I am utterly ashamed and confounded: I am grieved at
the very heart: my Soul is heavy and full of sorrow; my bones are dried, and
my sight fails me, because of my sins. I lie in the midst of my cruel
enemies, and the snares of Hell do hold my heart in heaviness: it grieueth me
to confess, it grieueth me very sore, the remembrance of mine iniquities is a
vexation unto my soul, the shame of the^ which yet I have not shamed to commit
in thy sight carelessly, commonly, presumptuously, and peeuishly, does even
astonish and amaze my wounded and languishing conscience: Yet I must confess
and will not deny unto thee (Oh my God) I have sinned exceedingly. Ah Lord God
show me thy countenance, and turn thy loving and favorable face toward me,
give ear unto my prayers, and consider my meditations; my mournful
meditations, how I mourn in my self, and am vexed. Here (Oh Lord) yet
vouchsafe to hear my request, vouchsafe to hear the confession of my sinful
and ungodly life, of my wanton, and wicked behavior; of my vile and
abominable sins and transgressio^s whereby I have dismayed my heart, daunted
my courage of faith and godliness, and even (without thee) dammed my self
body and soul. Hear I most humbly beseech thee (most loving Father of heaven)
who never disdainest nor scornest them that come unto thee. Hear my sins, my
sins, my sins. Alas: how can I repeat them? how can I remember them? they
are more in number then the hairs of my head, and my heart has failed me. I
am even already in the hell, and I lie covered with them and blinded (O God) I
cannot see thy face. If not now, even when thou will. If thou never wilt, I
know it not, for who has known thy mind (O Lord) or who has been thy
Counceller? Yet seeing I know not whether thou will shine unto me in the face
of Jesus Christ, or no: I will therefore trust in thee, and rest upon thee, and
bequeath my soul unto thee, though thou kill me. And now according to my duty
I will confess, if hateful heart filled with sin do say not for my duties
sake, yet for the ease of my stomach: and if I so hate my self, and envy mine
own ease, yet even for spite to my corrupted conscience; I will confess my
wickedness, and I will lay open my abominations, that I may delight in their
remembrance, not that I delight in them, but that I abhor them, and my self
for them, and therein I take delight. Wherefore I confess unto thine eternal
Majesty freely without constraint, willingly without compulsion, gladly, and
joyfully, joyfully that so much grace is left unto me to confess, but
sorrowfully to my soul, (and woe worth my soul that ever I have so abused,
defaced, wounded it) but I confess, I confess, and where shall I begin: I
confess I have sinned against Heaven, and against thee, against Earth, and
against thee, against my self, and against thee, against all men, and against
thee, against the whole course and order of nature, and against thee, against
my creation, and against thee, against my redemption, and against thee, against
my Justification, and against thee, against my Sanctification, Preservation,
Faith, Hope, Charity, godliness, virtue, all grace that ever was given me
(and it has been given in great measure) and against thee; against thee (Oh
heavenly Father) and thy Majesty, mercy, and glory, and power, and Justice,
and goodness, I have offended and trespassed most haynously and villanously.
Oh Lord pardon me, Oh Lord forgive me, forgive my pride, and arrogance, forgive
my negligence, contempt, and security; forgive my idleness, and vanity; forgive
my prophanes, and impiety; forgive my uncleanness, and unchastity; forgive
my oppression, and injury; forgive my gross, and godless, and shameful, and
unnatural, and unmeasurable, and insatiable wickedness. Accept my confession,
accept my contrition, accept my acknowledgement, accept my judgment, and
condemnation of my self; for mine own conscience has condemned me, and my
ouer-many, and out-crying sins have witnessed against me, if thou (Oh
merciful Judge) pronounce the sentence of damnation against me, it is thy
mercy that thou have stayed thy fierce wrath, and ten thousand times deserved
vengeance thus long: yea verily, that thou did not forthwith pass thine
irreuocable sentence, it is thy great mercy. If now thou will do it and show
me mercy no more, thou may do it in very equity of Justice, thou have my
confession, it does me good that I have been vexed therewith, would it might
please thee I might be more vexed until my hatred be perfect against
ungodliness; thy will be done. I commit my self into thy hands. Do with me as
seems good in thine own eyes, thou art a gracious God. Death is my desert, I
am even glad and it rejoices me, that yet in one thing I can be obedient unto
thee, even in yielding my soul to thy holy will though it be to throw down
to hell. Hell is my right and my portion, the enheritance that I have deserved.
If I be cast thereinto I must be content: But yet there is hope. I deal with
a merciful Judge; well: let there be no hope, Take my confession O God of my
soul, do thy pleasure, if I dye I die worthy of a thousand deaths, none more
worthy. Alas my soul, alas my soul, Come sweet Jesus, come quickly, the pit
is deep, it is bottomless, despair has taken hold upon me, and it draws
me, Lord shall I be damned indeed? oh take the sacrifice of a contrite spirit:
oh remember the blood of Jesus Christ: oh wash me, and cleanse me, and thou
shall find no wickedness in me. Lord shall I be damned, that sometime have
trusted in thee, and have hoped in thy holy name? I commit my soul into thine
hands; oh remember thy son Christ; and so I commit it into thy merciful hands
again: For thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory, for ever and ever.
Amen.

A comfortable conceit upon review of the soul under Gods protection: And an
earnest entreatie for godly perseverance.
I Committed my soul into thy hands (oh Lord thou GOD of mercy) render it,
restore it now; nay thine it is and keep it I beseech thee, and let me have a
sight of it. Oh thanks be unto thy divine Majesty and unspeakable mercy, that
yet once again thou have washed, and cleansed it, that thou have sprinkled
the blood of Jesus Christ over it, that thou have adorned and beautified it
with glorious grace, and have not taken thine holy Spirit from me. Lord pardon
my unthankfulness. Go my soul unto thy God at all times, for he loves thee,
he has once loved thee, and he loves thee for ever. Go unto him, and tie thy
self, be not separated oh my soul. He is thy God, he is thy Creator, he is
thy redeemer, he is thy Savior. O worship thou him in the beauty of
holiness. Oh merciful Lord God have pity yet again on my distressed,
forlorn, and forsaken soul. It is wonderfully wounded unto the death. Oh save
me, save me oh Lord, why am I thus? why art thou angry with me for ever? I will
hope in thy holy name, oh let me not go away ashamed because I have put my
trust in thee. Who ever trusted in thee, and was confounded? And shall I?
Surely thou will hear me, thou will help me, thou will comfort me; My heart
tells me: thy spirit bears witness unto me, that I shall be relieved,
and comforted, and made glad, and exceeding joyful, with the light of thy
countenance. Behold, even as the eyes of a servant do look unto the hand of
his master, and the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her Mistres, even so
mine eyes wayt upon thee my God, until thou have mercy upon me. Make speed O
Lord and be not slack, it is time, it is high time I beseech thee Lord let me
beg my soul out of the hands of Satan, for Jesus sake, and draw my soul (oh
loving Father) unto Jesus Christ: let him command Satan to yield it up again.
Seeing he has no title, no interest, why should he have any possession, oh
that it were wholly employed in thy service. Hear then Lord, and forgive all my
sins past, my Rose-coloured and bloud-red sins: remember thy mercies in
Jesus Christ my only Savior and most loving Redeemer; to whom with thee and
the holy Ghost, one God Almighty, eternal, and most merciful, be praise,
and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

An excellent wrestling with Jesus Christ.
OH sweet Jesus Christ son of God, son of the Father, lord of life, son of
David, redeemer of the world have mercy upon me miserable sinner. I have
defaced the glorious Image after which I was created: I have perverted my
ways, and delivered my soul into the power of Satan. I was held captive, and
bound in the chains of everlasting darkness, yet thou (Oh Lord) did redeem
me with thy most precious blood: thou did deliver me, and set me at
liberty: thou did offer up thine own body upon the cross, and submit thy
self unto the death for my sake, and this my redemption thou did seal in my
heart by the most comfortable gift of Faith, and other Christian virtues
attending thereupon: so that I gave my self to love thee, and cheerfully to
serve thee; and call upon thee: then did thou answer me again, and filledst
my heart with gladness; yea (sweet Jesus) thou know that my heart within me
has leaped, and daunced for joy of thy loving countenance, and unspeakable
mercies. May it please thee, I know it does please thee (Oh merciful Redeemer)
to continue thy loving kindness toward me. I know, and I confess (for if I
deny I am a liar) that I have notwithstanding thy tender love toward me, in
redeeming my sinful and wretched soul, greatly, and notoriously abused, and
contemned thy goodness; wantonly, and wickedly kicked, and spurned against thy
holy grace, the seal of mine eternal election, and redemption, wonderfully,
and strangely, (oh good Christ) thou know most villanously, presumptuously,
and almost despightfully defacing and rasing out the print thereof by most
heinous transgressions heaped up together, and increasing in great measure in
most vile and abominable sort; so that I had almost lost faith, and fallen
from grace: But continual and everlasting praise be given to thee: thou have
lifted me up from the gates of death, from the pit of hell, and power of the
Devil. The slye and subtle snares of damnation were spread under me, and I
stumbled, and fell; and now was hell and death, and damnation, preparing a
triumph over my soul, now was the Devil stepping with his greedy teeth to
tear; and lo, thou son of God, thou savior of men, thou strong and mighty
by thy mighty power, whereby thou art able to subdue all things unto thy self,
did pluck me out of his teeth, and deliver me. What shall I render unto thy
Majesty? thy power, thy goodness, thy mercy, thy most undeserved (true Lord,
and most true) compassion, and pity? What shall I render unto thee for all
the good that thou have done unto me? Surely I will confess unto thee my
wickedness, and be sorry for my sin. I will magnify and praise thy name for
ever. I will speak of thy loving kindness, and make mention of thy salvation;
Oh Lord, who is like unto thee, that deliuerest me from him that is to strong
for me, and spoileth me? My soul shall make her boast of thee, and shall not
be ashamed, because thou Lord have helped me, and comforted me. Moreover (oh my
Jesus) I will not cease to pray unto thee, dispose me thereunto I most humbly
beseech thee, for without thee I can do nothing. Oh let my prayer come before
thee, and enter into thy presence, Let me never be so mightily overcome, and so
shamefully overthrown as I have been. Give me thy constant spirit: breed in
my heart and Conscience a deadly hatred, and desperate enmity of sin and
wickedness: let me never be reconciled unto them again: Oh let my soul love
thy most precious blood, by which it is washed and cleansed from most vile
corruptions. Let me die (oh Lord) and depart this life before I so
contemptuously, as indeed I have done, tread, and trample it, as it were under
my profane feet. Oh let me die first I unfeignedly desire thee (my sweet
Savior:) For why should I live to dishonor thee in such sort? Why should I
live still to provoke thy wrath, and mine own unquietness? I have profaned
thy sanctified and sanctifying blood, I have buffeted thee on the face; I have
whipped and scourged thee most cruelly: I have by most odious impiety crucified
thee afresh unto my self. Ah sinful wretch laden with iniquity; heavy
laden; Oh laden, oh when will thou refresh me? quicken me in thy
righteousness, and cleanse me from all my filthiness, oh cleanse me and I shall
be clean, whiter the^ snow, clearer then glass, acceptable to the righteous
Judge God our Father, loving, and merciful, who never refuses thee (oh
Christ) his well-beloved Son. I beseech thee, I beseech thee restore me; make
glad my heart again, render now thy grace, which I have lost by my trespass;
and from presumptuous sins (oh Lord) keep me: set Angels about me to draw
me by violence from such ungodliness. If thou will thou can make me clean,
and thou art mercy it self, and yet hitherto none has trusted in thee, and
been sent away empty, and thou art able, For all power is given to thee in
heaven and in earth; and at the name of Jesus every knee must bow, both of
things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth: now I commit
my cause unto thy divine wisdom, and unspeakable mercy: now I crave pardon,
now I crave grace, and continuance therein, and in thy good time thou will not
fail to give, (oh Lord) strengthen my patience, and increase my faith, for
thine is the Kingdom, the power, and the glory, for ever and ever Amen.

A comfortable confession and Supplication.
O Lord God, great and fearful, most mighty, and full of strength: Behold how
I mourn in my prayer, and am vexed, my sorrows are gone over my head, my
sins are bound up in a bundle to be laid upon me, nay to be repeated, my
soul is payned and pined away through my daily complainyng, and yet thou (oh
righteous Judge) continuest holy, and just in thy judgments. Thy punishments
are inflicted upon me; thine arrows stick fast in me, thou have wounded me
sore; but in mercy thou have chastened me, my rebellious have deserved much
more, nay infinite; and yet it pleases thy Majesty to be merciful unto me,
even so Father because it is thy good pleasure to save sinners, of whom I am
the chief. O God of mercies and compassions; of Father, and Spirit of all
comfort, and consolation, hear thy servant that puts his trust in thee;
hear, and give ear: thy mercies have drawn me unto thee, and thine
innumerable compassions have constrained me to acknowledge unto thee Holy,
holy, holy, true in promise; faithful in mercy; full of kindness, long
suffering and of great goodness, wonderful in pity, and most wonderful, thou
sparest when we deserve punishment, and in thy punishment thou art not cruel,
but severe; nay rather gentle, and merciful: even gentleness, and mercy, and
meekenes, and patience, and tender love, and kindness it self. I see it, I find
it, I confess it, I give thanks for it. What shall I render to thee? I will
thank thee, for thou have wounded, and thou have cured, and thou have healed
me, thou have suffered me to slip into the gates of hell, and thou have
delivered me. Oh ye that fear the Lord, magnify ye the lord with me, oh let
us come before him in the beauty of holiness; for he has regarded the
contemned estate of a sinner, and he only forgave my sin: my soul does
testify and make her boast of the Lord, I sought him early and late, in the
day time and in the night season (this was my duty, this was my necessity:)
for a while he hid his face from me, and I was troubled; for a while he was
angry, and I consumed; for a while he held my sins before me, and I was
amazed, ashamed, and confounded: but he turned his mercy toward me, and I
received comfort, I conceived hope, I perceived that of very faithfulness he
caused me to suffer grief; O magnify the Lord with me. He wounds, and
makes whole again; he afflicts, and he delivers out of affliction; he
has showed me sorrows, and yet in the multitude of the sorrows that I had in
my heart, his comforts have refreshed my soul. What comforts? Christ my
Redeemer: my Savior, my King, and my God. Verily a King. He has taken my
sins, my presumptuous sins, and defaced them. He has entered into my soul,
and dispossessed Satan, Legions of Devils he has chased, and gotten himself
the victory. Rejoice in the Lord thy King (oh my soul) he rules in the midst
among thine enemies. They are brought to nothing that sought to destroy thee.
Jesus is in the midst of thee, even in thy heart, and in thy soul to save, he
sits there, even there also in thy conscience. Oh my redeemed soul between
the Cherubins; Behold thy king, behold, and be glad, his train is with him,
his Angels minister unto him, and about thee they stand to drive away the
fiends of hell, and to defend thee. Why then art thou so sad oh my soul? what
aileth thee? Can thou not rest upon thy savior, thy horn, and thy buckler,
and the strong God of thy salvation? O put thy trust in God; be strong, and of
a good courage, and he shall establish thy heart, even Jesus that delivers
thee from the wrath to come, he shall so establish thine heart, and save thee.
O bless his holy name. Oh praise him, and magnify him for ever, he only is
the Lord, he only is the King, and there is none but he; Oh Jesus I adore and
worship thee. Oh Christ I praise, and give thanks unto thee, Oh Redeemer I
confess unto thee, mine is ye shame, thine is ye glory, mine is the weakness,
thine is ye power, the kingdom, the dominion, and rule over sin and Satan,
death, and hell. Sit still while thou art there; behold I scorn at sin and
Satan, they cannot enter. Auant Satan. Jesus is the Lord, thou had miserably
spoiled me; but lo my Redeemer is come; Auant Satan. Sweet Jesus; mighty Lord;
my king; thy mercy is sweet, thy might is invincible, the scepter of thy
kingdom is a scepter of holiness; holiness the life of the soul, the seal
of life, the earnest of inheritance in the kingdom of Heaven. O King in my
heart sit still, rule still, live still. And of a truth will God dwell with
man? I thank thee, I honor thee, I adore thee. Oh King live for ever. Amen,
Amen.

A very devout and zealous complaint against Inconstancy and Hyppocrisie.
I Said I would forsake my wickedness, and eschew mine iniquity in thy sight,
I resolved from a perfect and upright heart (oh my GOD thou know) to give an
everlasting farewell to my sin, I promised thy most sacred and excellent
Majesty from the ground of my grieved Conscience, that I would never return
as a Dog to my vomit, or a Sow that is washed to the wallowing in the mire. But
alas how weak? how faithless? how inconstant? how forgetful am I? how soon
am I carried aside, and turned out of the way? how is my soul become a snare to
take my self? how is my body a very bondslaue to the silthy desires of my
soul? how am I altogether corrupt and abominable as before? I hate my sin,
and I commit my sin, I abhor my rebellion, and yet yield to my rebellion.
How is my soul pained, and my body pined by reason of my sin? I have
fasted, and watched, and prayed, and wept, and confessed, and craved pardon
many times, carefully, zealouslie, vehemently: and have received comfort,
conceived hope of thy constant spirit, and yet my sin remains. O vile
wretch! O slave of sin! O drudge of transgression! O vassal of Satan that I
am! what shall I do? whither shall I fly? to whom shall I resort for
deliverance? If I say unto my body do not yield, it resists; If I say to my
soul be not overcome, it denies. I am wholly evil, and there is no good
thing in me. And yet my soul is more abominable then this: for it flattereth
me as though it would be obedient to thy spirit (oh God) but it disse^bleth
with me. It is a very hypocrite, in nothing constant, in nothing steadfast but
in hypocrisy, and in deceit, it promises, and it performs not. Why art
thou so wicked oh my soul? why art thou so false unto me? why do thou suffer
Satan thine enemy and murderer to poison thee, and so to kill thee? Oh
miserable soul? why will thou dye? oh Jesus my life why am I departed from
thee? Oh Jesus come unto me whom my soul loves. One depth calls another:
the depth of misery, the depth of mercy. My misery is deep, but thy mercy is
bottomless, and I know no end thereof. What then? be of good cheer my soul,
go, seek thy savior, follow after him. Thy sins are many, and thou can
not number them, they are heinous, and odious, and thou can not esteem the
abomination of them: but he has numbered them, and he knows their quality,
and his mercies are without number and measure. Infinite and not definite to
any persons; thou art not excepted; to any times this day thou shall be
accepted, as it is written. At what time soever, etc. oh put thy trust in God,
and in the mercy of the most high, thou shall not miscarry, he is the help of
thy countenance, and thy God. Trust to him, rest in him, depend upon him;
follow after him, wrestle with him, pray unto him, and leave him not till he
bestow a blessing: till he change thy heart, and make it new, be not faint,
neither forgetful; without him thou shall have no rest, and in him thou shall
find rest, and ease, and comfort, and joy, and eternal life, and everlasting
felicity, thou know my Soul when thou art with him thou art quiet, and
glad because of the light of his countenance, when thou art from him, thou art
sad because thou art from thy joy. Oh seek thy Redeemer; forget not thy
Savior, his mercy is thy life, oh life grant mercy. Oh Christ save. I am a
Leaper, if thou will thou can make me clean. I am the Publican, oh Lord be
merciful unto me a sinner, a great sinner, a grievous sinner, the chief of
sinners. Truth, oh truth, oh faithful and true, oh sweet Jesus, who has need
of thy mercy as I have? Thou can not bestow it on a more needy beggar? One
drop of thy mercy sweet Jesus, sweet Jesus. Amen, Amen.

The dumpe or dampe of despair: whereout the sinner laboring, pitifully
complains and cries unto Christ Jesus to be refreshed and comforted.
DAy by day have I cried unto the Lord, and in the night when I was waking I
thought upon his mercies, and called for them. For I saw the ugly shape and
innumerable multitude of my sins crying vengeance day and night. I perceived
I was afflicted, my soul was heavy, and my body pined away, I cherished my
flesh, and it would not remain, it rotted, and decayed. For the anger of the
Lord, and the indignation of the most high, I brought my life down unto the
ground, and my sorrows were increased in my heart. For I was pained within me,
and straightned in my own bowels, then spoke I to the Almighty, and said as
the Prophet taught me. When thou with rebukes do chasten man for sin, thou
make his beauty to consume away as it were a moath fretting a garment, and I
said, My wounds stincke, and are corrupt through my foolishnes, and I said,
Thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presses me sore. For I prayed
daily, and yet my sin remained, and the punishment of my sin was hard upon
me. The Almighty had covered his face with glory, and I was troubled, I found
no rest in my self, no refuge in any creature. Then I stood amazed in the
presence of my God. For I could not speak, my sins were unfolded, and laid
open in his sight, and he remembered them. So I drew nearer and nearer unto the
pit, and accounted my self among the wicked. I was silent before the high
Majesty and most excellent glory, for I could not speak, yea, my heart
wandered too and fro, and I sought to hide me from his presence: But it would
not be. The eye of iealouzie sees all things, and the ear of iealouzie
hears all things, and my sins were bound up in a bundle before him, and the
punishment for them lay sore upon me. Then I said again. Lord do thou so
correct thine own children? Where shall the wicked appear? Surely they shall
vanish away like smoke when thou appearest to them in glory. But I said of my
self I am cast out of thy presence, and I am numbered with the reprobate
generation. Nevertheless, when I saw I could not lie hid, neither could avoid
the righteousness of the righteous Judge, neither yet was able to pacify my
vexed conscience, because I found no means in my self to forsake mine own
iniquity, wherewith I am clothed as with a cloak. When I perceived indeed,
and knew thoroughly the most poor, wretched, and miserable estate of my soul,
inclinable to no goodness, but most vehemently with might and maine striving
against it: I came trembling unto the Lord Jesus, I made my complaint and
powered out my supplication before him, in this manner. Oh Jesus Christ the only
Savior, anointed of the high God: Lord of life, of consolation, and
eternity, Redeemer of the world, reconciler of man unto God: priest, and
mediator for ever, clothed with the flesh of man to deliver man from hell
beneath. Oh mercy, and goodness, and compassion it self, thou make
friendship between life and death, mortality, and immortality, corruption,
and incorruption; Hear me (O Lord) and cast me not away: wherefore did thou
die, but for sinners? why did thou come into ye world but to save sinners? To
what purpose did thou deliver thy self into the hands of sinners? Was not
this the cause of thy obedient life, and cruel death, the wretchedness of
sinners? Why then (oh Jesus) I am a sinner. Why art thou absent from me? Thou
camst not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance; call me then unto
thee, and draw me: For I cannot come of my self, I cannot come when I am
called, except I be drawn; without thee I can do nothing: I cannot come unto
thee, Call me, draw me, come for me. I lie in the pit, I am spoiled of robbers:
I am robbed of thy robes, mortification, and sanctification. The spoilers are
my sins, my concupiscences, my corruptions within me. They (oh Jesus) even
they have spoiled me, dis-robed me of thy graces, disfurnished me of thy
riches, and virtues; Oh good Samaritan while I am weltring in my blood, Oh
while I am in my blood, despise me not, pass not by me, have pity, and
compassion upon me. Bring thy blood, thy most precious blood, precious, because
not to be valued at any price, better then the balm of Gilead, power it into
my wounds, it is wine, it is oil, it has a saving virtue, O save me my
Savior, Jesus the son of David have mercy upon me, I thirst for thee, I long
for thee, I faint for thee. Jesus thou son of David have mercy upon me, I
have hoped in thy holy name. For why art thou the son of David? Is it not
because of thy sure mercies to David? and to his seed for ever? And who is the
seed of David? are not they that call upon thee, that rest in thee, that have
no other salvation but thee, the seed of David? O then I have no helper, no
savior, no redeemer, but thee, (oh Lord of life. O Prince of peace, oh GOD my
righteousness.) I have none but thee. I am then the seed of David, perform to
me ye holy things of David, the promises of eternal life. O son of David
have mercy upon me. If thou will, thou can make me clean, purge me oh
Physician of the soul: purge me, and make me clean, let thy blood wash me
thoroughly, and I shall be clean; I have deserved thy just conceived fury: no
reason thou should hear and save, but thine own mercy, and thine own love:
I appeal unto them: wherefore have thou called me, and taught me thy truth? In
vain? O let it not be in vain. Wherefore do I believe thee to be savior of
sinners? in vain? O let it not be in vain But if I be not saved I believe in
vain. Lord hear my prayer, and let my sorrowful sighing come before thee. So
I trust. I will not distrust, Help my unbelief: I will lay my salvation on
thy shoulders, oh Christ Jesus. For thine is the kingdom, the power, and the
glory, for ever, and ever. Amen.

An humble suite for a lively faith.
OH Almighty God, and most merciful Father, thou know my sorrows, and my
rolling repentances within me; how I am grieved, and vexed that I have
transgressed against thee, oh Lord thou know. The terrors, and troubles of
my heart are all open before thy Majesty, whom that I have provoked to take
swift vengeance upon me I confess, yea (oh mighty Monarche of heaven and
earth) I confess freely and willingly, that damnation of body and soul is my
due, and the rather for that by mine iniquities best known unto thy sacred
Majesty, I have refused Faith in the blood of thy Son Jesus Christ. I have
hardened my heart, and increased my contempt against him. Now Lord, seeing it
has pleased thee to call to my remembrance, and consideration my
transgressions, to give me grace to confess and acknowledge them in a
detestation of them: to seek and sue for thy Son Jesus Christ in whom thou
art well pleased, I beseech thee (oh Father) good Father as thou have loved
mankind freely; so give me the most excellent and comfortable gift of Faith, in
the death and passion of Jesus Christ, that I may believe steadfastly to my
comfort in him, that he is the Savior, and Redeemer; not only of others but
of me also, even of me (oh Father) thy Creature, though miserably deformed by
sin. Oh send thy holy spirit of grace into my heart, that I being dead and
stinking in the grave of my wickedness; yet may arise, and live to thee, and
thy glory for ever, through the powerful might of Jesus Christ, by an unfeigned
and settled faith in my heart. Oh heavenly Father, I am almost swallowed up of
despair, thy punishment does so amaze me; Oh deliver my soul from that
fearful monster. I am ashamed and confounded before thee, my sins are so many
since my youth up, and now thou call the^ to thy remembrance, and I cannot
answer one for a Thousand. I will therefore lay mine hand upon my mouth, and
keep silence before thee, waiting for thy deliverance, and for faith in Jesus
Christ; oh send me faith, lively and working, and comforting, that I may go
forward courageously in the path of sanctification all my life long. Grant this
oh Father, that I may glorify thy name, and rejoice in thee and in thy saving
health Jesus Christ my only Lord, Redeemer and Savior. To whom with thee, and
that desired and longed for holy Ghost, three persons, and one Coequall, and
Coeternall God, be all glory and praise, and Dominion and Majesty, and
thanksgiving from henceforth, and for evermore, Amen.

A gladsome thanksgiving for the taste of Gods mercy.
Eternal GOD, whose habitation is in heaven, and whose wonderful and gracious
providence in all the world: thanks be given to thy most sacred Majesty, that
being so high, thou have respect unto the lowly: that being so powerful and
mighty, thou have regard to my misery. Oh gracious and most loving Father in
Jesus Christ my Savior, has it pleased thee indeed to take the prey from the
mighty (my soul from Satan) and to let the just captivity go free? my
sinful soul and body indeed, and truth, snared and captiued of the Prince
of darkness, to be loosed from the chains of hell, infirmity, enormity,
presu^ptio^, custom of iniquity? it is true, it has pleased thee? even so
Father, because it was thy good pleasure. I acknowledge, and confess that this
has proceeded of thine everlasting and never dying mercies. I will therefore
take up the cup of salvation, that thou have reached unto me, and drink it up,
health unto my bones, to my bowels, to my nauill, to my soul. I have sucked
the dregs of the cup of trembling; but the cup of trembling is taken from me,
now thou have refreshed me with cheerful wine, the blood of Jesus Christ. I
will make mention of thy righteousness always, I will sing praise and honor
unto thee with my whole heart: I was dead, but I am alive, I was withered like
hay; but now I shall flourish as a green herb, beyond all hope. Lo: this
this is the portion of the^ that turn from iniquity in Jacob, and fear the
Lord serving him in vprightnes and truth. Thus is the Lord merciful unto his
servants whom he has chosen: He keeps them that they do not fall for ever.
Thus is he merciful unto them for his own sake. O King of Kings, thou
dweller in eternity, seeing so far it has pleased thee to visit the
distressed estate of a sinner, and to lead me in the path of righteousness,
thou art unchangeable, one and the same, and have never used to repent thee of
thy compassions, hear me, and give ear, and look upon me through thy son
Jesus Christ, and please thy self with me. Grant that I being continually
covered with his obedience (as with a cloak) may be ever acceptable in thy
sight, accompany me the whole race of my mortal life, with his, and thy most
sacred and wise grace, that so it may appear to the joy of my sorrowful
heart, and peace of my conscience; as also to the sight and perfect knowledge
of men, that thou art merciful unto me of a truth, that thou have lifted me
up; that in thy wrath thou did punish me: but in thy mercy have compassion on
me; because I have hoped in thy holy name, and have waited for thy salvation.
And as for me (my God) perform the work of comfort, which thou have begun
in me, and increase the joy of my spirit from day to day, and bring me forth
into the light, a mirror of thy mercies, and a spectacle of thine unspeakable
and rich compassions, through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior. Amen.

The Sinners denial of himself, and lowly petition to be accepted of God,
and received into his conduct.
O Almighty God, Father of mercies, and God of all consolations: I have now
seen, and had experience in deed and truth, that in me, that is in my flesh,
there dwells no good thing. For the very fountain is corrupted, even my
heart within me, the fountain of all my actions. I find it indeed full of
filthiness in it self: full of rebellion against thee; hating thy most
excellent Majesty, and even wishing that thou werest no God at all, that it
might the more frankly, and freely set on fire the whole course of nature in
me, and so draw me body and soul into the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone, Fire that never goes out. I do here therefore freely acknowledge
and confess, that my destruction is sought mightily and maynly by my self:
but my Salvation is of thee. I do unfeignedly repent me of my wicked heart, and
as heretofore I have in vprightnes and truth dedicated and devoted the same
unto thy heavenly protection: (as thou know): so now in like manner I wholly
resign my self into thy hands, beseeching thee to take this ungodly heart,
and frame it anew, to make it pliable, and fit for thy self. I know thou have
no need of my service, for thou can command the stones, and they will arise
and praise thee. But yet seeing I wholly deny my self, and betake my life to
the good government of thy Son Jesus Christ my blessed Savior: I beseech
thee, oh Lord I beseech thee accept the soul of thy servant. Let me now see
and experience ye power of Christ against Satan. I have experienced mine own
power which is weakness, not able to encounter with the strong man. The life
that hereafter I shall live, let me live it wholly, (oh merciful Father) by
the faith in the death of Jesus Christ, and let Christ live in me by his
gracious and sanctifying spirit, that from henceforth I may unfeignedly detest,
and abhor my former wickedness and may be renewed as a garment, and receive
the Kingdom of Christ in my conscience as a Child, even so (Father of heaven):
so be it. For thou have magnified thy mercies in me, and so magnify them for
ever. Thou have disappointed Satan of my soul, and so disappoint him still; of
a truth I perceive that thou art faithful, and true in thy promises, and
love thy Children with an everlasting love. Glory, and honor, and great
worship, and all power, might, and Majesty, be ascribed unto thee. For thou
art worthy oh GOD most high. Amen.

In the instant and urgent assault of Temptation, a very earnest prayer.
LOrd, why abhorrest thou thy servant? why hidest thou thy face from me? Hear
thou in heaven, thy dwelling place, thou possessor of heaven and earth, thou
maker of all things, thou lover of men, thou sauer of souls hear and give
ear, and let my prayer enter into thy presence. The tempter is ready, my heart
is weak, my soul is wicked. I shall conspire against thee with Satan, I shall
enter a league with death and hell: I am fettered in the chains of eternal
damnation: Oh Lord God Almighty, strong, and merciful, hear thou in heaven
thy dwelling place: Behold mine own desires are confederate against me, and
mine inward affections conspire together to overthrow me. Now even now, am I
ready to be taken away: now my sinful body vexes my simple soul, now my
simple soul enthralleth her self to my sinful body: Now hear, and help, oh
God of heaven: my Savior said it; I surely find it: The spirit is willing, but
the flesh is weak. Satan is strong, he is very strong, he has strengthened
me against my self. Oh strength of Israel, strength of thy Chosen, strength
of thy Children, strengthen me for my self, as Satan has strengthened me
against my self. If thou my God, my rock, my refuge will save, who can
destroy? If thou will deliver, who shall imprison? If thou will but say the
word: let the just captivity go free: give me the soul (oh Satan) that I
have loved for ever, that I have elected before the world; that my son has
redeemed with his precious blood: what Satan? What sin? What death? What
hell? What hatred? what curse? what law? what guilty conscience? what despair?
what damnation can hold it back? Thou art Almighty, thou art All-sufficient,
mighty against all that resist thy might, and therefore all these: sufficient
for all that band themselves against thy sufficiency, and therefore for these.
For these (O Lord God most merciful and loving Father) whether they be in me,
or about me, thou art Almighty, thou art all-sufficient. Wicked sin, a
guilty conscience, a despairing soul, these are within me; O God dispossess
them. Law, and curse, hatred, and hell, death, and devil, and damnation it
self; these are about me: Oh Lord disperse them. Arise (Lord) and let thine
enemies be scattered: let these that hate thee flee before thee. Oh deliverer
of the captives, helper of the afflicted, relieuer of the oppressed, comforter
of the grieved, my temptation is at hand, my temptation is at hand. I fall, I
fall, Lord lift me up. Lord lift up the light of thy countenance upon me. Where
art thou my God? Oh my soul what do thou? where art thou my God? My soul
whither will thou? what have I done unto thee? why do thou betray me? But
where art thou my God? Oh hear me now I call. O help me now I cry unto thee.
The assault is grievous, the violence is villainous, the danger is desperate, oh
wretched creature that I am: Who shall deliver me from this body of death? Oh I
am weak hearted. I am soul sick. I am faint spirited. I find no means of
resistance. Now I fall, now I yield, now I am tempted, now I am taken, now I
consent, now I run headlong upon mine own damnation. Oh my breast is
pinched, my heart is pained, my soul afflicted, my infirmity surprised, my
conscience vexed, mine affection enflamed, my presumption increased, I yield, I
fall, I sin, I dye. Oh God, oh good God, oh gracious God hear me: oh spirit,
oh holy spirit, oh comfortable spirit (thy name is the comforter) oh come and
assist me. O Jesus, sweet Jesus, Jesus that deliuerest us from the wrath to come.
Come hear me, come help me, come save me, come stand by me. Rebuke Satan,
rebuke sin, I beseech thee (my Savior, my gentle Savior) rebuke my sinful
soul that rests upon thee, reform my soul that longs for thee: Suffer
me not to be tempted above my strength, of my self I have no strength; Be
thou my strength, my castle and deliverer, at this time, and at all times, in
my perplexities, assaults, and temptations: So be it, even so be it, so I
trust, and so I rest. Jesus that deliuerest us from the wrath to come. Amen.

A prayer for grace and diligence to pray.
OH most merciful God, and loving Father: I confess, and acknowledge my
negligent and careless behavior toward thee, as in all the course of
godliness, so chiefly in devotion and godly prayer. Have mercy upon me, and
forgive my security. I have hindered many good things from my self that I have
not prayed for. I have thereby vilified thy heavenly blessings, and riches of
thy mercy: I have brought leauenesse unto my soul: Oh gracious God, stir up
my dull and dead spirit, and quicken me in thy holiness, that my breast being
set on fire, and enflamed with thy manifold mercies and graces, I may
diligently direct my petitions unto thee, and so obtain according to my
necessitty. Open mine eyes O Lord, that I may see my wants clearly, touch my
heart that I may pray unto thee faithfully, fervently, and continually. Hear
me (oh good God) and quicken me according to thy mercy. Oh disperse mine
iniquities as a cloud after a great rain. Now after the time that thou have
visited my sin upon me, return, return I beseech thee in great compassion.
My soul is afraid of thy judgments, I am beaten back with fear of thy
wrath; when I think to pray, my heart is cold within me, I am astonished, and
suddenly cast down. LORD, lift me up to thy throne in prayer, thou that have
lift me up from the gates of death. Where is thy lively spirit? Sweet God,
Jesus my Savior promised me the comfortable spirit. In his name I beseech thee
send it into my heart. It will teach me and warn me to pray: so shall I be sure
to obtain my prayers. Hear me (O Lord) for my Savior Jesus sake, to whom
with thee, and the holy Ghost be all honor, glory, and praise. Amen.

A thankful acknowledgement of divine mercies in Judgments.
OH most mighty Lord God, Creator, Governor, and possessour of Heaven and
earth: Wisdom is about thy throne, and thy kingdom is established in
judgment. Whatsoever pleases thee, that do thou in heaven and in earth, and
in all deep places. Thou beholdest, and considerest the ways of men: and thou
rewardest every man according to his works. Thou call for punishment, and
it runs like the swift lightning upon the transgressors. Thou command
vengeance, and vengeance enters into all places, the stately palaces of
Princes, and the beggarly cottages of the poor. There is nothing hid from the
brightness of thy presence. Thine eyes in every place (a thousand times
brighter then the Sun) behold the evil and the good. There is nothing can be
delivered from the fircenes of thy wrath. It burns like fire even to the
bottom of hell. Thou do correct the wicked with the vengeance of eternal
fire. Thou do chasten thine own children (when they go astray and wander in
the paths of the ungodly) with the corrections of men, Infamy, poverty,
sickness of body, weakness of mind, imprisonment, banishment, persecution, and
temporal death. Oh Lord our governor how excellent is thy name? how
wonderful are thy judgments in all the world? And yet for all this how few
there are, even a very few, that consider thy work that is done under the
Sun; that ponder thy judgments though they be upon themselves? Oh palpable
blindness, oh dull forgetfulness, oh great security, oh gross impiety, thou
smitest, and no man regards, thou punishest, and no man considers, thou
layest thy judgments to the view of all men, and no man lays them unto his
heart. Blessed is he whom thou instructest by punishment, and guidest in the
way of judgment. Surely this is a great mercy, and it passes all thy works,
O teach me thy judgments, thy loving corrections have made me glad: To me thou
have revealed mercy in judgment, thou have assured consolation by correction.
Why so? For I prayed unto thee in the sorrows of my soul. Correct me O Lord
yet in thy judgment, not in thy fury, etc. So I prayed, for I was content to
bear thy punishment, because I had sinned against thee. This my prayer thou
have graciously granted unto me, thou had respect unto the humble suite of a
sinner. Therefore in thy fury thou did not correct me with violent fire which
does devour the Adversary, with everlasting pains thou did not reward me
as I deserved: but in judgment thou have punished me, with the corrections of
men: Infamy, poverty, sickness, weakness; and such like, and so thou have
granted my petition, thou Lord have received my prayer, thou have chastned me
with thy Children, least I should be condemned with the reprobate. And thus to
me thou have revealed mercy in judgment. Thus thou have assured consolation by
correction. Here is thy mercy (oh merciful God) to grant me my request this
was thy mercy to give ear in this thing unto a sinner, this was thy great
mercy, I grant it, I confess it, I profess it, I praise thy name for it: Oh
Iehoua. This is the garment of gladness for the spirit of heaviness, oh God
my heart is ready, my heart is ready, I will sing and give praise. Awake my
glory, awake my grace, awake my soul, all the secrets of my Soul awake. I my
self will awake right early. Rejoice (my dear Soul) in the Lord thy God, and
again I say rejoice. Oh righteous Father: thou have executed thy justice, and
extended thy mercy upon me both together. Who can declare thy noble Acts, and
show forth all thy praise? who can do as thou do? can a Man? can a Saint?
can an Angel? can any power, and Principality, any throne, or dominion bring
good out of evil, sweet out of sour, honor out of shame, life out of death,
out of vengeance mercy, as thou do? To thee therefore (oh Iehoua) and to thee
alone shall all flesh come, shall all creatures in heaven, and in earth, and
under the earth be subject, to thee shall my soul and all the secrets of the
same be dutiful, and obedient from henceforth and for evermore. I will sing
unto thee among much people, and will not be ashamed. I will speak of thy
praises in the congregations, my Soul shall make her boast of thee, and I will
ever remember this, that in wrath thou think upon mercy. I will remember
and not forget: even so be it (oh Father of heaven) through Jesus Christ thy
only Son, in whom thou art well pleased, my only Savior in whom I am fully
comforted. So be it.

A Meditation sealing Eternal Election by the consideration of good Education.
O Most gracious God, and loving Father, who in thy son Jesus Christ before
the world was made did predestinate, and foreappoint some men to life, and
some to death, some to glory, and some to contempt, some to salvation, and some
to condemnation, even of thy good pleasure. I give thee most humble, and hearty
thanks that thou have chosen me to life, glory, and salvation, freely, and of
thine own accord, when it might have pleased thee to reprobate me for ever.
Eue^ so (Father) because it was thy good pleasure: a taste of this love and
favor thou have given me by the revelation of Jesus Christ. Hereby I am
assured yt I am predestinate unto eternal life, that I have faith in the death
and bloodshed of Jesus Christ. O Lord increase my Faith. Moreover this thine
ancient love, eternal, and without beginning is manifested to me more
perfectly, for that it pleased thee yt I should not only be borne of godly
parents embracing thy truth, but also by them be brought up and trained from
my child-hoode in a course of godliness and virtue, that so coming unto riper
years I might be grounded and established in thy holy ways. Oh merciful
father, my conscience and sins do testify against me that I have not
deserved the least of thy mercies that thou have enriched me withal from my
youth up, much less this so great and inestimable a grace to be followed with
thy loving kindness, and attended upon by thy grace through good education
all my life long to this present hour. For (to confess a truth) I have not
ceased to provoke thee continually, I have not ceased to transgress against
thy holy Majesty, in thought, word, and deed every day, yea Lord in great and
grievous sort, early and late, in childhood, in youth, in middle age,
ignorantly, and wittingly, weakly and presumptuously, in such sort (O Father)
that it is marvel I am not already consumed, already condemned. Yet for all
this, thy loving favor has accompanied me evermore; and now I perceive the
good fruit of godly education. Oh my God what shall I render unto thee? how
shall I be thankful? what recompense do thou look for? behold I will
thank thee in Christ Jesus thy beloved Son, and my blessed Savior: I will
trust in thy mercy for ever through him. I will live in thy fear by his
power, I will serve thee with an unfeigned heart, and glorify thee in my body,
and in my soul, by the working of his grace and spirit all the days of my
life. Oh continue forth thy loving kindness toward me from henceforth, and for
ever, that being conducted and guided through this vale of misery; after I have
a little recovered my strength in body and spirit, performed my duty,
patiently suffered, and endured the appointed cross for me: I may in the end
receive the end of my faith and hope: even the salvation of my soul, and at
that great day the glorification of both body and soul through the same, my
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to whom with thee, and the holy Ghost, be
eternal and equal praise for ever. Amen.

In weeping, mourning, and bitter anguish, a confession and prayer.
OH Lord God, what shall I say unto thee? O father of Heaven how shall I entreat
thee? I am horribly afraid of thy judgments, I am wonderfully abashed at thy
glorious presence, I am utterly ashamed of mine own baseness, vileness,
wretchedness, dust, and ashes: flesh and blood, filth and froth, swill, and
sin that I am, who shall give me access and entrance before thy Majesty?
who shall help me to entreat for thy mercy? The blood of thy Son I have
polluted and profaned, the holy spirit of grace I have refused and despighted.
I confess my wickedness, and I am sorry for my sin. The remembrance thereof
is grievous unto me, the burden thereof is intolerable. Albeit my due desert
is hell, death, and damnation: Yea, and perpetual vexation and terror of
heart, until the sentence of destruction and eternal confusion be executed
upon me, a spirit of unquietness to trouble me (like the spirit of Saul) from
henceforth even for ever: Yet I will hope in the multitude of thine unspeakable
mercies vouchsafed to all sinners in their deepest distress and misery. In
most humble wise as it becomes an inferior vassal to his puissant and
Almighty prince and liege Lord; as it becomes a Malefactor to an upright and
most wise Judge, as it becomes a very disobedient and stubborn servant to
his careful Master, and finally a prodigal and wilful Child to his most
kind and loving Father: I submit my self wholly distasted of mine own
deserts, and utterly detesting mine own abominable conceits, words, and
works against thy holy will, and commandment, in the wound of conscience, and
from the depth of a mind thoroughly grieved with my rebellions I most submissely
and earnestly call and cry unto thy most gracious Majesty and mercy, for pardon
and forgiveness of my heinous crimes and innumerable transgressions, in all
humility and tribulation of spirit, beseeching thy fatherly goodness to lay them
upon the back of thy dear son Jesus Christ, that All-sufficient Redeemer,
Reconciler, and Savior of all those that put their trust in his most absolute
merits, and perfect obedience. O my God: my sure trust is in him, that he will
be pleased to accept me for one of those whom he calls in the Gospel,
laboring and heavy laden with their sins to be relieved, and eased; Not for
any other reason, but because he is the right hand of thy mercy, reached out
unto fainting and languishing sinners, whereof I am one. Wherefore (oh dear
Father of Heaven) despize me not approaching to the throne of grace in his only
name, but let me be possessed with the spirit of assurance of faith sprinkled in
my heart, from an evil conscience, that I may find grace to help me now in
this time of need. I do feel certainly, I do find the gnawing Worm eating up
my heart, the venom of thine arrows drinking up my spirit, the rigor of thy
judgments perplexing my thoughts, the severity of thy punishment astonishing
and amazing my weak and feeble wits, so that I know not, either what course to
take to ease my self, either what words to use to entreat thy mercy. O Lord
God, great and fearful, be not as a Lion unto me, do not set me as a mark
to shoot at, for thou never failest to hit where thou aymest, thou hittest full
and home, thy shot is of an Archer of perfect strength, thy strokes are deadly
strokes, thine arrows are venomed with the fire of wrath that burns for
ever. Who is able to abide? will thou still hold my sins before my face? will thou still increase the sorrows of my heart? Alas what is my strength? What is
my faith that thou tryest me? Surely thou can find nothing in me; but
exceeding weakness, a daunted Spirit, a dispairing soul. The thought of all
my sins since my youth up being now set in order before me, does quench the
light of the assured faith which I hoped was within me. O good Father prove
me but this once, and withdraw thy punishment from me. Let not this fit of thy
lasting indignation make an end of me. I know assuredly thou have, and daily
do forgive sin, greater and more heinous sin then mine. For in the very
depth of my disobedience I have always restrained the unbridled affection, and
surely thou have never suffered me to this hour to give my full and whole
consent to any sin whereinto I have fallen since I was borne. In
consideration whereof (sithence I have the sure testimony of a good conscience,
that I am one of thy chosen) I humbly entreat thy Majesty to incline thine ear
to my supplication, and to deal with me, as with a son remembering himself,
and returning unto thee in weeping, and great mourning. Let the grief of my
heart, and the tears of mine eyes be accepted for all that I can do, and lay
all the burden of my transgressions: late, and long since past, upon the back
of my blessed Savior Jesus Christ, who for such as I am dyed, and suffered the
bitter cup of thy wrath. O be thou pacified, and well pleased in him, who
suffered the Just for the unjust, and endured causeles, and undeservedly all
extremities, to the end thou (O righteous father) should be pacified and well
pleased, with all penitent and believing sinners, notwithstanding the
multitude, magnitude, and turpitude of their transgressions. Were mine
abominations now to be committed, though I might conceal the^ from the world,
I would not perform them in the presence of thy Majesty, because thou art a
God of pure eyes, and can not behold iniquity. I fear thee. I love thee. I
do reverence before thee. I adore thy purity, integrity, thy perfection. I am
desirous to be like unto thee, O thou that dwell in the heavens. My soul
has desire and a longing to please thee, and persevere in thy ways, and to be
renewed in righteousness, and true holiness, after thy blessed Image. When my
sins are forgiven, and my transgressions wiped out of the score of thy
judgments; then shall mercy embrace me, and loving kindness compass me,
every morning, then shall my faith work by thy love, shed abroad in my heart
through the holy Ghost, then shall my wonted strength, and much more also
possess, and enarme my soul against all my deadly foes, then shall I be
cleansed and made fit for every good work. So shall the Comfort of my heart be
restored unto me again, and I will serve thee in Spirit and truth all the
days of my life. And do render unto thee in the mean time, nothing doubting
of thy free pardon, all honor, glory, praise, power, dominion, and thanks, now
and for evermore. Amen.

A De-profundis full of hope, and godly resolution.
OH Lord my God the comforter of all the chosen, from whose only throne
proceeds joy and gladness, peace and comfort, and everlasting felicity, in
whose presence is the fullness of joy, at whose right hand there are pleasures
for evermore, without whose cheerful countenance, and pleasant aspect nothing
is amiable, no Soul is joyful; vouchsafe to shine into my woeful heart, even
pined and confumed with grief, through my daily complaining: miserably rent,
and torn in pieces through continual mourning day and night, perplexed and
distracted unto the very death through perpetual tribulation, and anguish
without ceasing. I know that one favorable aspect of thy grace upon me can
restore me to unspeakable gladness. Oh that it were thy pleasure to afford it
me, to bring me back from the grave, which I behold as it were already opened
for my transgressions. In truth my grief is not conceived of me; yet it does
astonish me. I find my self in far worse case then ever in my life, never
was I pierced so much at the heart root. I have not heretofore received so
deep, and desperate, and deadly wound in my conscience. If thou (Lord)
vouchsafe to rid me out of this thraldom, and even hellish captivity, being
fast bound in the chains of damnable thoughts, O my Lord, my good God, my
heart and tongue shall sing for ever unto thy praise. I will publish thy
mercies, I will teach thy judgments unto thy people. I will praise thee in the
great congregation. I will wholly consecrate and deuote my self unto thee all
the days of my life. Oh Father of heaven give and bestow freely upon me the
most excellent gift of an unfeigned Faith, that my sins are forgiven me for
thy dear son Jesus Christ's sake: let me fully be assured thereof by the
Spirit the comforter. Indeed it does not belong unto me I confess, I
confess, I will not deny. For I have behaved my self more like a reprobate,
and damned creature then one of thy children. Surely such Carrion curs as I am,
that trample the blood of Jesus Christ, and despise the spirit of grace so
sinfully, so shamefully, so often, so odiously, so presumptuously, so
intollerably, as I have done, are not worthy ye least crum of thy merciful
comfort: yet Lord, since I am but dust and ashes, and through the frailty of the
old Adam, I have thus abused thy goodness, refusing and vexing thy holy spirit,
for which damnable insolency, I am now most woefully distracted, and almost
bereft of my small wits; the deep thoughts whereof do so dangerously assault
me; O my Father, and my God: contend not with me any longer; I shall surely
despair, and be damned, if thou send me not aid and peace of Conscience
speedily; How can I lie in these scorching flames? Oh consider mine exceeding
weakness, Oh good Samaritane: power wine and oil into my bleeding wounds. Oh
sweet Jesus let me not be cast away, because I have put my trust in thee. I will
not let thee go until thou bless me. (Now blessed Savior) many of my prayers
have been refused let this be accepted; since thou have given me a time to
repent, with most humble thanks give me leave to accept it. Cast me not out of
thy presence. I desire to be at rest in my spirit, yt I may go cheerfully
forward in the holy service. What shall I say? how shall I entreat? good Lord
have mercy upon me. Oh let thy tender mercies comfort my distressed, and heal
my wounded heart, one drop of thy mercy sweet Jesus, sweet Jesus, mercy or no
mercy, all honor, and glory, and praise, and power, might, and Majesty be
ascribed unto thee for ever and ever Amen.

A true penitents confession, and petition for grace.
O MOST mighty Prince and Potentate of Heaven and Earth, Lord God of hosts,
invincible and incomprehensible Spirit, whose wisdom is infinite, whose power
irresistable, whose mercy unspeakable, have mercy upon me most woeful
Captive and Caitife, enthralled to sin, to Satan, to the powers of darkness,
to the sorrows of soul, to the tribulations and anguish of a guilty
Conscience, by my most heinous offenses, and criminous enormities, most
ridiculous, and absurd vanities, wherein once I found some fond delight; but
now I find no sound comfort, only discontentme^t, indignation, woe, and shame.
I am abashed, and confounded, and in a wonderful perplexed agony, that I
should so deeply, so deadly, so often, offend thy most excellent Majesty, who
art a God of pure eyes, and can not behold iniquity. For albeit such is the
drouzie dulnes of our cursed corruption, that we cannot, and ye saucy
presumption of our wilful inclination, that we will not set thee before our
eyes, when we are tempted to sin, and moved to transgression: yet certain is
it, that thine ear of jealousy hears all things, and thine eye of ielouzie
sees all things and nothing is hid from the brightness of them, ten Thousand
times brighter then the Sun, but whatsoever work is in our hands, whatsoever
word in our mouths, whatsoever thought or imagination in our hearts, thou O
Lord know it altogether. And as all our ways and works, are all naked and
open before thy sight; you love righteousness, and hate iniquity, therefore
when we are sinful, yet thou continuest holy, excellent in glory, upright in
justice, Almighty in power; as thou many times sparest when we deserve
punishment; so thou many times woundest with thy just revenge when we feel it
not till afterward, we flatter our selves in our own sight, till our
abominable sins be found out, till thou reprove us sharply, and severely
set before us the things that we have done, till thou make a Catalogue and
roll of our offenses, and set our secret sins in order before us, and
presentest thy self withal a just revenger, our manifold breaches, of thy
holy Commandments, and manifest contempt of thy bl^ed word, of thy just
judgments and of thy loving mercies, consider not in our hearts, our most
accursed, and damnable estate wherein we daily plunge our selves most
odiously, and abominable, yea though our sins be not of the smallest; but
great and grievous, and heinous and enormous abhominatio^s; yet either such is
the gross darkness, and palpable blindness of our minds, and understandings,
or such is the deadnes of our infected consciences, that we run on still
from one iniquity to another, till we suddenly fall into thy heavy
displeasure, till thine indignation and fiery wrath break forth like fire upon
us, and we be not able to quench it. Hence is it that we are plunged into many
fearful gulfes of desperation. We are affrighted with many ugly sights of
our sins, hence we are wounded at the very heart with many distrustful
thoughts of thy mercies, and as many desperate imaginations of thy vengeance
The pains of hell get hold upon us, and the fear of thee does undo us,
before either we stand in awe of thy Majesty, or seek after thy mercy; Oh my
God and Savior I confess unfeignedly this my case: so I have transgressed, so
little I have regarded, so I am oppressed; Wherefore O Father of mercies, and
God of all consolation, who have appointed repentance for sinners, who dwell
in eternity, and yet in the humble and contrite spirit: In the name of thy
holy, and blessed, and only beloved son our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
who has promised ease to all that laboring and heavy laden, come unto him:
who cannot break the bruized Reed, and will not quench the smoking flax, I
most humbly and earnestly beseech and entreat thy fatherly goodness to forgive
me all my sins, to lay them upon his back, the true scapegoat, and send them
into the wilderness, the land of oblivion, that my Conscience through faith in
his most precious blood and meritorious sacrifice may be fully discharged of
them all. O Prince of peace, send peace into my heart: the peace that passes
understanding, that peace which thou gave for a Legacy to thy Disciples, when
before thy death thou did make promise of that spirit the Comforter. O
holy spirit of Comfort, the only joy of thine elect, let thy blessed
presence so cheer and glad my soul, that being assured of thy saving health,
I may delight to serve thee, and to sanctify my self more and more with all
allacrity and pleasure of my spirit attending on thy will, and walking in thy
ways all the residue of this my pilgrimage, and mortality. Grant this O
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, holy, blessed, and eternal Trinity, the Author
of Life, the giver of grace, the God of power, whose wisdom is peerless,
whose dominion is endless, whose mercy is bottomless: To whom be all praise,
honor, and glory, for ever, and ever, world without end, Amen.

A special form of submission, and supplication to the Almighty.
IT cannot be denied (oh Lord GOD almighty) it is too well known to thee, and
too too lamentably experienced in our selves, that we are nothing else but a
sink, and swill, and puddle of sin, a mass and lump of rebellion. That
there is no light in our understanding, no good inclination in our good will,
no grace in our life: we have erred, and straied from thy ways ever since we
were borne, through the original Concupiscence and Corruption wherein we are
conceived, we have never ceased to break thy holy Commandments, and to run
headlong into all manner of disobedience. When the tempter is ready we are fit
to be tempted, as he is never unready; so we always are tempted, and taken
in most dangerous and deadly gins. Woe and alas to our most weak and feeble
souls, wherein there is neither power, nor will, nor wisdom to withstand the
fierce and violent assaults of the spiritual wickednesses that fight against
us, that entrench, and encampe themselves round about us; when we think that
all is safe, then rush they upon us, as the Philistims did upon Sampson, and
we through dalliance with this wanton Delilah of our own flesh, and filthy
vanity of this wicked world are lulled a sleep in carnal security, and have
lost our spiritual strength of Faith, hope, and godliness, and so are taken,
and bound, and blinded, and lead away Captives, and held in thraldom, and
scorned of those wicked and hellish fiends, who greatly delight in the
destruction and confusion of thy children, which thirst and long after our
eternal damnation. In tender and bitter consideration whereof most lamentably
complaining unto thy most excellent and incomprehensible Majesty, (oh Lord God
of hoasts) thy most distressed and forlorn servant, and adopted son shows,
and opens his grieuances: and being tired, wearied, and ouerburdened with
most cunning crafts and subtle sleights, as also most outrageous tyrannies,
and impetuous violences of his implacable, infernal foes: in all humility and
lowliness of mind with no less grief and sorrow of a perplexed heart, most
submisly, devoutly, and fervently beseeches thy supereminent, and far most
exceeding excellent Highness, to send out thy most mighty and powerful spirit
to aid and assist me in these assaults. Oh let thine Angels pitch their tents
round about me to discomfite all those that have evil will at my soul. Of thy
goodness beat them back that annoy me. I am sore troubled and hindered in
that course of godliness wherein I would walk. Oh let me run the way of thy
Commandments, and set my heart at liberty. My soul has a desire and a
longing to be pertaker of thy strength: I know none so weak, yet none so
desirous to be strong in thee. Oh my God set me not against thee as a mark,
my building is of the clay, my foundation is in the dust. How can I choose if
thou deliver me into the hand of tempters, but fall away presently? Arise (O
God of my Salvation) and let mine enemies be put to flight, let me not be
overthrown, because I have hoped in thy holy name. Let no temptation
ouercharge me, because my trust is only in thy mighty hand, and outstretched
arm. Were it that I rested in my self at all, or that I did not wholly
renounce mine own strength, which is very feebleness it self; I should not
dare to call upon thee: but since I am wholly discouraged and cast down in my
self, and indeed I labor with temptations, and am heavy laden with many
sins, I presume in all possible objection, and prostration of my soul and
body, from a broken and a contrite spirit, which thou never use to despise,
to entreat thy favor and fatherly protection, that (according to his most
gracious promise) I may be refreshed and eased by thy blessed Son my only hope
and Savior. I do very well know, and in all dutiful thankfulness upon mine
own experience I acknowledge, that the holy spirit the comforter proceeding
from you both, is of All-sufficient and invincible force and wisdom to
withstand, and confound all those that come against my soul. Be they never so
many Legions of unclean and wicked spirits: yet one only comfortable
Influence, and Inspiration of that your mighty and victorious spirit of Grace
is fully able to mortify, and kill all the venomous contagions and infections
wherewith they have empoysoned my seely soul. Wherefore (O Father of eternal
mercies) who look upon the abject and forlorn offenders, with a loving and
compassionate aspect, who art wont to be entreated of broken hearted wretches,
I beseech thee, I beseech thee, with distilling tears I humbly, heartily, and
earnestly beseech thee hide not thy face, withdraw not thy helping hand from
me; but in tender consideration of my exceeding grief, and distraction of mind
for my sins past, mine apparent frailnes, and admirarable weakness, to
resist assaults and temptations to come; be present with me thou guide and
governor of my life, to smite the enemy at his approach. Enter into me O
spirit of power, and rule within me mightily; Keep the Sconse, the Fortress,
the Bulwark, the Castle of my heart: unite, and knit my will and thoughts unto
thee, and enable me with a garrison of heavenly graces, that I may not only
defend my self; but plague them that hate and hurt my soul. For I am thy
servant, and so will be for ever. All other freedom is but bondage and slavery,
thy only service is perfect freedom, and therefore unto that do I betake my
self. Receive me (O Lord) and cast me not away. I will fight in thy field, and
dwell in thy house all ye days of my life, because to fear thee, and love
thee, and live after thy will is my whole delight, and perfect joy. And glory
be unto thee, O God most high; even all glory, honor, and praise, now and for
evermore. Amen.

A petition for a feeling Conscience.
I Am now determined and fully resolved, Lord God eternal, most gracious and
merciful Father, to give an everlasting farewell to all mine impious and
presumptuous designs. Have mercy upon me, have mercy upon me: aid and assist
me with thy constant Spirit. There is no beginning, there is no ending, there
is no proceeding in a godly course without thy special help. Satan by the
world and original corruption is able to overthrow the strongest soul. But
the strength of one of thine Angels is far beyond all power of Satan. How
much more the powerful inspiration of the spirit of grace? Now Lord, I am
persuaded by the same that I am fully reconciled unto thee: that my many and
mighty sins are utterly defaced, and rased out of the Book of the memorial
of thy most just judgments. Wherefore in assured confidence of thy manifold
mercies, and full assuranre of thy loving favor; in all humility and lowlines
of heart I submit my self to thy most mighty Majesty, beseeching the same to
look upon my misery, whereinto I have plunged my self by my folly; and put
the most holy spirit of Comfort, Christian courage, and Constancy upon me: And
let it rule within me to the overthrowing of the kingdom of Sin and Satan in
my Heart and Conscience, in my Life and Conversation continually. It is well
known unto thee, and I do acknowledge, that such, and so great are, and have
been, mine enormities from time to time, that they are able to break the
stoutest heart; the remembrance


