AN ADMONITION or warning that the faithful Christians in London, Newcastel
and othere, may avoid Gods vegeau^ce, both in this life and in the life to
come. (...) by the Servant of God John Kno^es.



The Persecuted speaks.
I fear not for death, nor pass nor for bands:
Only in God put I my whole trust,
For God will require my blod at your hands,
And this I know, that once dye I must,
Only for Christ, my life if I give:
Death is no death, but a mean for to live.
(...) To the faithful in London, Newcastel, and Warwick, and to all others
within the Realm of England, that love the coming of our Lord Jesus, (...).
(...). wishes co^^aunce in godlynes to the end.
V^hen I remember the fearful threatninges of God, pronounced against ^ealmes
and ^ous, to who^ the light of Gods word has been offered, and contemptuously
(...). (...). Math. r.
by them refused, as my heart ^fainedli mourns for your present state
(dearly beloved in our Savior Jesus Christ) so do the whole powers of my body
tremble and shake for the plages y^ are to come. But that Gods true word has
been offered to the Realm of England: can none deny, eccept such, as by the
Devil holden in bondage (god justly so punishyng their ^. (...). ii.
proud inobedience) have neither eyes to see, nor understanding to discerue
good from bad, nor darkness from light. ^inst who^ none other wise will I co^
tend at this preset, the^ did the prophet against y^ stifnecked and stubburn
people of Judah, saying: The wrath of the Iere. (...)
Lord shall not be turned away, till he has fulfilled y^ thoughts of his heart.
And thus leave I them, as of whose repentance there is small hope, to the
hands of him that shall not forgot their horrible blasphemies, spoken in (...)
of Christ's truth, and of his true minysters. And with you that unfeignedly
mourn, for the great (...) of Gods true religion, purpose I to communicate
such counsel and admonition, now (...) mine own pen, ^somtimes it pleased god
I should proclaim in your cares. The end of which my admonition is, that even
as that you purpose and intend to avoid Gods vengeance both in this life* and
in the life to come, that so ye avoid and fly as well in body as in spirit, al
fellowship and society with idolatours in their idolatry.

You shrincke I know even at the first: but if an Orator had the matter in
handling, he would prove it honest, profitable, easy and necessary to be done,
and in every one point were store enough for a long ^ration. But as I never
labored to (...) any man in matters of ^ligion (God I take to record in my
conscience) (...) by the very (...) and plain infallible truth of Gods word,
no more mind I to do in this behalf: but this I affirm that to (...) from
idolatry is so profitable and so necessary unto a Christian, that unless he
so do: all worldly profit tourneth to his perpetual disprofit and condempnation.

Profit apert^th either to the bodies or cl^ to the souls of our selves and of
our (...). Corporal commodites consist in such things as man chiefly (...)
for the body, as rytches, estimation, long life, health and (...) in earth.
The only comfort and joy of the soul is God, by his word ^lling ignorance,
(...) and beath: and in the place of these, placyng true knowledge of him
self, and with the same, justice and life by Christ his Son. (...) of these
aforesaid (...), the^ of (...) it is that we avoid (...), for plain it is that
the soul^ has neither life nor comfort, but by God alone, with whom idolatours
have no other participatio^; the^ have ye ^. Cori. (...)
Devils. And albeit that abominable idolatours for a moment triumph: yet
approaches the hour when Gods vengeance shall strike, not only their souls,
but even their vile (...) shall be plaged, as God before has (...). (...).
threatened. Their Cities shall be (...), their land shall be laid waste, their
enemies shall dwell in their strong holds, there wives and daughters shall be
de^led, their children shall fall in the ^dge of the sweard. Mercy shall the^
find none, because they have refused the God of all mercy, when louin^ and
long he called upon them.

You (...) the (...), and (...) I have hereof, to God (...) I appoint no time,
but that these and (...) plages shall fall upon the (...) of England, and that
or it be long. I am so sure, as that I am that (...) god lives.

This my affirmation shall displease many, and shall content few. God (wh^
knows the secrets of hearts) knows that also it displeases my self, and
yet like as before I have been compelled to speak in your presence, and in the
presence of others, such things as were not pleasable to the ears of m^,
whereof (alas) a great part this day are come to pas: So that I am compelled now
to write with the tears of mine eyes (I know to your dyspleasure.) But dear
brethren, be subject unto God, and give place to his wrath, that we may
escape his everlasting vengeance.

My pen I trust shall now be no more vehement, then my tongue has been
oftener then once, not only before you, but also before the chyese of the ^alme.
What was said in Newcastel and ^arwicke before the sweat, I trust yet some in
those places bears in mind. What upon the day of Alsayntes, that year that
the Duke of Somerset was last apprehended, let ^castel wytnes. What before him
that then was Duke of Northumberland, in the town of Newecastel, and in other
places mo: What before the Kings Majesty at Wyndsor, ^ton Court, and
Westminster: And finally what was spoken in London, in mo places then, one,
when Fyers of soye and ^otous bancketinges were made at the proclamation of
Marye your Queen. If men will not speak, the stones and timber of those places
shall cry in fire, and bear record that the truth was spoken, and shall
absolve me in that behalf in the day of the lord.

Suspect not brethren, that I delight ^n your calamytyes, or in the plages that
shall fall upon that unthankful nation. No, God I take to record that my heart
mourns within me, and that I am cruciate for remembrance of your troubles.
But if that I should ^ase, then did I as well against my conscience, as also
against my knowledge: and so should I be gylty of the blood of those that
pearished for lack of admonition, and yet should the plage (...). xxxiii
not a moment the longer be delayed, for the Lord has appointed the dai of his
^geaunce, before the which he fendeth trumpets and Messengers, that his elect
watching with prayers and so^, (...). xiiii
may by his mercy escape the vengeance that shall come.

But you would ^now the grounds of my certitude, God grannt that hearing them,
ye may understand, and stedfastlye believe the same. My assurau^ces are not the
(...) of Merline, neither yet the darcke sentences of profane prophets, but
the plain De. ^viii
to al inobedient. (...) immutable ^rem. v.
ius^ must require the ^aine. (...). iii
The (...) punishments and plages, show (...): what (...) then having
understanding, can cease to propheci.

The word of God playnelye speaks: that if a man shall hear the curses (...).
(...).
of Gods law, and yet in his hearts shall promise to him self (...) and* good
luck, thin^nge that he shall have peace, al be it he (...) after the
imagynations of (...) own barte, to ^ch a man the Lord will not be merciful,
but hie wrath shall be (...) against him, and (...) shall destroy his name from
under the heaven. (...) the Lord threatens plage after plage, and ever the
last to be the for^st, while finalli he will consume (...) and Nations, if they
repent not, read ye, ^vi. ^eu. (...).
chap. of ^euiticus, which chapter often I have wylled you to marcke, as yet I
do unfainedly. And think not that (...) appertains to the (...) only: No
brethren, the Prophets ar the inter preters of the law, and they make the
plages of God common to al offenders, the punishment ever beginning at the
household of God.

And here must I touch a point of The duke of North^ (...),
that diuelysh confession, made (alas) by that miserable man, whose name for
sorrow I can not recite. This argument he uses to prove the doct^ of ^ite
years taught amongst you to be wicked. Troubles and plages (says he) have
followed the same, not o^li here in England, but also in Ger^, as he wylled you
to mark. This fragile and vain argument at this time none otherwise will I
labor to confute, the^ by plain scryptures: declaryng that plages appertain
to al (...), begu^i^g first where Gods mercies has been offered, and
obstinately refused, and that may answer the blind rage of ignorance.

The Prophets Esaias, Ieremi, and ^say. xiii (...). xvii. xviii, xix. xx. xxiii.
^chiell, after they had proclaimed plages to fall upon the people of Israel*
and upon the house of Judah, prophesied particulerly against certain Nations and
Iere. l. li. Eze. xxv. xxvi. xxvii
Cities, not only adjacent in circute about Jerusalem, but also against such as
were far distau^t, as against Moab* (...), Palestina, Egypt, ^irus, Damascus and
Babylon. And in conclusion general prophecies are spoken against al inobedient
and sinful nations, as in the four and twenty chap. of Esai plainli appears.
As also the Lord commands (...). xxv.
Ieremye, to g^ue the cup of his wrath to al nations one after another who
should drynike of the same, (...) though they refused it of his hand: that
is: (...) they would not believe the voi^ of the prophet, yet should they not
escape the plages that he spoke, for Ierem. ^.
every nation like unto this, shall I punish (says the Lord of hosts.) With
the same agrees (...) saying: The eyes of the Lord are upon every sinful not
on, to root it out of the earth. (...). (...).


These and many mo places evidently prove, that plages spoken in the law of
God, appertain to eueri rebellious people, he they Jew, or be the Gentil:
Christians in title, or Turckes in professyon. And the ground of the Prophets
was the same, which before I have rehearsed for one of my assurau^ces, that
England shall be plaged, which is Gods immutable and inviolable justice, which
cannot spare in one realm and Nation, those offenses, that most severely he
has punished in another, for else were he unequal, and made different as
touching ^cusion of his just judgments be^wirt person and person, which is
most contrarious to the integriti of his justice, t^us he (...) by ^remi his
prophet: Behold, (...). (...).
I have begone to punysh in the house where my n^me is incalled, and shall (...)
the (...) lord would say: How can my justice permit those crimes (...) in
proud contemp^, that neither regard me, nor yet my law, seeing I have not ^ared
mine own people that (...) bears some (...) to my name.

That God has punyshed other (...) and (...), men of (...) understanding will
easlye confess. But whether that like (...) have been and yet are committed
(...) the ^alme of England, (...) the last pl^es of ^od (...) those Nations,
that (...) to be (...). In this (...) ca^ nothing better (...) us, the^ Gods
plain word, (...) the vices which reigned in those days. and omitting al such
as (...), it shall (...) ^or this (...) to rehearse some places of (...): the
time of whose prophecye well considered, shall make the matter more sensible. He
be (...) in y^ thirten year of king (...) raygue, and continues till after the
destruction of Jerusalem, which came in the leuenth year of Zederchi^. Long
preached this godly man, to wit thyrty and nine years and two months, before
the uttermost of the plages apprehended this stubbourne nation. And that he did
with mutche trouble and (...) sustained, as in his prophecy is to be seen. By
all lykelyhode then there was some (...) that were not pleased ^th the Prophet,
neither yet with his preaching. And yet plain it is that no ^yng so truly
turned unto God, with all his heart, with all his soul, and with all his
strength, according to all the ^awe of Moses, as did Josias, and yet (as said
(...)) the prophet of God was troubled, and that not by a mean number, for I
find him complain universally and generally upon the peoples iniquity. For
thus induces he God, speaking: My people has committed dubble ^quitye, they
have forsaken me the fountain of living water, and have dygged to them selves
^storns that (...). ii.
can conteyne no water. Why will thou justify thy self? Under thy wings is
found the blood of the soul^ of the poor innocents, whom thou^ ^oundest not
in corners. And yet tho^ say: I am innocent. Thou have gotten a wh^res
forehead. Thou can not think shame: My people is folyshe, they know me not.
They are folish ^erem. iii
Children, and have no wisdom, wise they are to commyt myschyefe, (...). iiii.
but to do good, they are all together ignorant: Every man may beware (...).
(...)
of his neighbor, and no man assuredly may trust his brother, for every man
is become diceytfull, they have practesid their tongues to lies and gyle, they
have left my law (says the Lord) and have followed the wicked imagynations of
their own hearts, they have followed after Baal^, whom their Fathers taught
them. The ^ces of (...) before (...).


Of these and many mo places like, appears the general offenses of that
people to have been, defeccion from God, sheddynge of innocent blood,
justification of them selves: and defense of their iniquity, while yet they
about ded in theft, murder, ^sion, lies, craft, practice, (...), and manifest
idolatry, following the trade of their Fathers: who under (...) and ^mon (of
whom the one in the beginning, the other all his life, mayntained idolatry) had
been the ring leaders to all abomination.

The Prophet of God (wondering at so manifest iniquitye) judged that such
ignorance and disobedience (...) only among the rascal sort of me^, and
theefore he says: These be but poor ones, they are foolish, they know not the
wai of the Lord, nor the judgment of their God. I will go to the (...), and I
will talk with them, for (...) (...). (...)
know the wai of the Lord, and the (...) mentes of their God. But what fyndeth
he amongst them? (...) in these words. They have al broken the yoke: they
have heaped (...), and one mischief upon another. From the least unto the
most, all (...) (...). (...)
(...) upon avarice, and gape for (...): (...) the priest to the prophet, ever
man (...)* leth dis^ytfully. Behold their ^ares be (...), they cannot aduert,
the word of god is a rebuke unto the^, they delight not in it, they have
committed abominable myschiefe.

What this abhominatio^ was, god shows to ^echiell: all had forsaken ^zech.
viii.
God in their hearts, in so much that a great number openly had turned their
backs unto God, and made sacrifice to the Sun, every man in his (...) secret
closet. (...), women mourned for that they were not permytted to commit open
abomination. Is it not to be wondered that al estates (...) so corrupt under so
godly a prince? But our prophet (...) procede^ (...). v.
in his complaint, saying: they cannot repent, neither yet think shame: they
have demed the Lord, and said: it is not he, we shall neither (...) nor (...).

^ou hear the obedyence that the Prophet found among the princes of (...).
And yet (I say) (...) it not to be wondered, that the (...) which was so well
manured, brought forth no better grapes* They had a ^ynge (...) England.
most godly minded, they had prophets (for (...) was not alone) most ^aythful
and fervent, they were (...) nished by ^uers plages, and always the prophets
cried out for repentance; and yet followed nothing but open contempt of (...),
and of his Messe^gers. (...). vi.
Their (...) was (...) the morning (...), it (...) not, although they could
(...) their mouths: The Lord lives, yet were (...). v.
their oaths nothing but lies. Find me one man that does (...) and justice.
etc. And to him will I be merciful (says the Lord.) Here (...) narrow and
(...) inquisicion, (...) so great a multitude. (...) like there have not (...)
very many, when he that knows the secret thoughts, searches so (...).

But before we proceed (...) (...) and (...) before the (...)
this matter (...) shall be (...) to see, how these (...) do agree ^yth our
estate and time. (...), y^ we (...) not Gods word offered (...), (...) none
(eccept an (...) papist) (...). (...) had a (...) of so godli (...) toward
virtue, and chiefly toward Gods truth, yt none from the beginning passed him,
and (to my knoweledge) none of his years did ever match him in that behalf,
if he might have been lord of his own will. In this mean time if (...) did
abound, let every man accuse his own conscience, for here I am not minded to
spetyfye all that I know, neither yet is it necessary, (...) some crimes were
so manifest and so heinous, that the earth could not hyde the innocent blood,
nor yet could the heavens without shame behold the craft, the disceit, the
violence and wrong that openly was wrought and in the mean ceason the hand of
God was busy over us, and his true Messengers (...) not silence. You ^nowe that
the ^ealme of England (...) visited with strange plages, and whether it were
ever prophesied that (...) plages were to ^olow, (...) apeale to the (...) of
your own conscience.

But what insued here upon? (...), (...).
I shame to rehearse it. vniuersalll contempt of al godly admonitio^s: hatred
of those that rebu^ed their (...): (...) tho^ig of such as could invent most
vilany, against the preachers of God. In this matter I may be admitted for a
sufficient wytnes: for I heard and saw, I understood and knew with the sorrow
of my heart, the manifest contempt and the crafty devices of the devil,
as well against those most godly Preachers, that this last ^ent, (...). M. D.
^iii. were appointed to preach before the Kings Majesty, as also against al
others, whose touges were not tempered by the holy water of the court, to speak
it plainly, who flattering against their own consciences could not say al was
well, and nothing needed reformation.

What reverence and audience was given unto Preachers this last ^ent, by such
as then were in authori^: their own countenau^ces declared, assuredly even such
as was given to (...). They hated such as (...) their (...), and stubbornely
they said: We will not amend. (...) yec how boldli their (...) were (...), such
as were present can witness with me. Almost there was none, who did not prophecy
and plainly speak the plages that are begone, and assuredly shall end.

Master Grindal plainly spoke the rindal.
death of the (...) Majesty, complaining upon his household seruau^ts, who
neither shamed, neither feared to rail against the word of God, and against
the true preachers of the same.

That godly and ^ruent man Master (...).
lever plainly (...) the desolation of this common wealth.

And Master Bradford (who^ God Bradford.
for Christ his son sake, comfort to the end) spared not the proud est, but
boldlye declared that Gods vengeance shortly should stryke those that then
were in authority, because they lothed and abhorred the true word of the
everlasting God, and willed them to take ensample by the late Duke of Somerset,
who became so cold in hearing Gods word, that the year before his last
aprehencion, he would go to viset his Masons, and would not danger him self
from his Galery to (...) to his Hall, for hearing of a Sermon. God punished him
(said that godly preacher) and that suddenly: and shall he spare you, that be
doubble more mycked? No, he shall not, will ye, or will ye not, ye shall drink
the cup of the Lords wrath. Iudicium Domini, Iudicium Domini, the judgment of
the Lord, the judgment of the Lord cried he with a lamentable voice and
weepynge tears.

M^ster haddon mostlearnedly opened Haddon.
the causes of the by passed plages, and assured them that the worsse (...)
after to come, if repentance shortly were not found.

Much more I heard of these four and of others, which now I may not rehearse
And that which is to be noted, after that the whole counsel had said, they
would here no mo of their Sermons, they were vndyscryte fellows, yea and
prating Knaves, but I will not speak al, for if God continue me in this
trouble, I purpose to prepare a dysh for such, as then led the (...), pea, and
who but there? But (...) they have been at the school of Placebo, and there
they have learned among ladies to dance, as the Dyuel list to (...), against
those who^ God has stricken. Seeing now reasteth to them no place of
repentance, nothing mind I to speak: but such as live to this day would be
admonished, that he that has punyshed one, will not spare the reast.

But to our matter. These preside^ts I judge sufficient to prove this our age
to have been, and yet to remain like wicked (if it be not worsse) with the
time of Ieremi. Now let us search what followed in Judah: Mischief upon
mischief, notwythsta^dyng the continual and long cryinge of the Prophets,
while finally God in his anger took away good king Josias, because ^iii. (...).
^iii.
he was determined to destroi Iu da, as before he had destroyed Israel.

After the death of this godly King, great was y^ trouble, diverse and sundry
were the alterations in that common wealth. Their Kings taken prisoners (...)
after another in short space, what other were the miseryes of that stubborn
nation. O God for thy great mercyes sake, let never thy small and troubled
flock within the Realm of England, learn in experience: But in all these
troubles, no repe^tau^ce apeared, as by the Prophet you may learn, for thus he
cries: Thou have stricken the^ Ierem. (...).
(O Lord) but they have not mourned: Thou have destroyed the^, but they have
Esaias. i.
not received discipline, they have hardened their faces harder then stones,
they will not convert. The whole la^d is wasted, but no man will wey, ponder, nor
consider the cause. This people will not hear my words, they talk in the
wick^ inuencion of their own hearts, they go after other gods, to worship and
serve them. And of the Prophets natural friends of the me^ of ^nathot, some
plainly said: Speak no more to us in the name of the lord, least thou dye in
our hands. Selyke these men had small fantasy to Gods Prophet: But yet shall a
Sermon (and that which ensued the same) made in the beginning of the reign of
^him son to Josias, make evident and better known, how much the people were
bent to idolatrye, and to hear ^alse Prophets, after the death of their good
^iynge.

The Prophet is commanded by God, ^o stand in the court or entresse of the
^ordes house, and to speak to all the Cities of Judah, that then came to
worship in the house of the Lord, and is commanded to keep no word back. (...)
paraduenture (says the Lord) they
will harken and turn every man from his wicked way. The te^or of his sermon
(...). xxvi.
is this: Thus says the lord: if ye will not obei me, to walk in mi laws
which I have given you, and to hear the words of my servants the Prophets,
whom I sent unto you, ^ng up ^times, and still sending: If (...) will not hear
them (I say) then will I do to this house, as I did unto Silo, and will (...)
this City to be abhorred of all the people in the earthe^care Jer. xxvii.
not the words of the Prophets that sai unto you: ye shall not serve the ^nge of
^bylon. I have not sent them, says the Lord: how (...) then are bold to
prophecye lies in my name. Nota.
^ If you ^ue care unto the^, both you and your false Prophets shall perish.

Here is syrste to be noted, that the people was already entered into iniquity,
and specially straight after the death of their King into idolatry: from which
the Lord by his Prophet labored to call them back, threatnyng unto them
desolation, if they proceeded to rebel.

Secondarelye it is to be observed that amongst the^ were false Prophets, not
that they were so known and holden of the people, no they were holden and
esteemed (for so they bosted them selves to be) the true Church of God that
could not err, for
how should the law perish from the IERE. (...).
mouth of the priest? These false Prophets were maintainers of idolatry, and
boldly they promised to the people prosperity and good luck, wherewith the
people were so abused and ^ynded, that the words of Ieremye did rather harden
their hearts, then p^ouoke any to repentance, as the consequentes declared.
For his Sermon ended, the Priests and Prophets and the whole people
aprehe^ded Jeremy, (...). xxvi.
and with one voice cried: he is worthy of y^ death. Great was y^ uproar
against the poor Prophet, in which apparatli he could not have escaped the
death, if the princes of Judah had not hastily come from the Kings house into
the tempel, and had taken upon them the hearing of the cause, in which after
much debate (while some defended and some accused, the Prophet most vehemently)
the text says: the hand of (...) the son of Saphan, was with Jeremy, that
he should not be given in to the hands of the people to be killed.

Here of you may easly consider (beloved brethren) what were the manners of that
wicked generation, immediately after (...) death of their good king, and how
they were encouraged to idolatry by false prophets. But in all this time the
Prophet ceasseth not most faithfully to execute his office. For all be it
(...) this he might not enter into the temple (for he was forbydde^ to prrach)
yet at Gods commandment he writes his Sermons, and causes them to be openly
read in the temple: (Alas I fear we lack Saruch) and after they came to the
ears of the ^saile, and last to the king. And all be it in dispite they were
once brent, yet is Jeremy commanded to write again, and boldlye to say:
Iehoiakim shall have no seed, that ever shall sit upon the seat of David.
Their Carrion shall (...). xxxvi.
be cast to the heat of the day, and to ye frost in the night. And I shall
viset (says the Lord) the iniquity of him, of his seed, and of his
servants, and I shall bring upon them, upon the dwell lers in Jerusalem, and
upon all Judah, all the calamities that I have spoken against them. (...) when
these words were spoken and written, so they were contemned and despised that
they durst cry: let the counsel of the holy (...). ^iii.
one of the Israel come, we will follow the (...) of our own hearts. Yet no
words of his threatninges were spoken in vain: for after mani plage^ (...) by
the mischeuous father, the wicked and miserable son in the third month of
his raygne, was led prisouer to Babylon. But now when the time of their
desolario^ approaches. God sierreth above them such a king. (...) Prophets and
Prestes as their own hearts wyshed, eue^ such as should wychout repugnauce lead
the^ to their (...) again: that they (who never (...) in the truth) might fyl
their bellyes with horrible lies. Zedechias was ^yng, and such as long had
resisted (...). (...)
poor Jeremy, had now gotten in their hand the fearful (...) of correction.
Pha^ and his companio^s led the King as they list. (...) goes (...) (a place
of (...).) The hill au^ers (...) with incense. (...) and his bell* Gods, (...)
yt vengeance of God was poured upon them, and upon them who^ they disceiued,
get the day they long looked for. In conclusion, so (...). ri.
horrible were the abominations that newly were (...), that the lord cries to
his sore troubled flock: what has my well beloved to do in my house?
(meaning in the tempell of Jerusalem) seeing the multitude commits such
abhominatio^? They have pro uoked me to anger, burning incense unto Baal. Which
great abhominacion, when God had showed, not only to ^eremy (who then was in
Jerusalem) but also to Ezechiel being prisoner Ezec. viii.
in Babylon, their bodies being separate, in prophecy they did both agree,
that whole Israel and Judah should be (...). Thus (...) Ezechiell: (...) upon all the abnominations of the house of Israel, they shall fall by the s^rd, by
^ieluce and hunger, he that in far of, shall dye of the plage: (...) that (...),
shall fall by the swe^d. (...) that is left and is beseged, shall dye by hunger,
and I shall complete my ^rathe upon them. And Jeremy says: Behold I will give
this city in the hand of the (...), in the hand of (...) ^ere. rrrii.
King of Babylon, who shall take it. The (...) verily shall euter into it. and
they shall burn it with fire: they shall burn it, and the houses in which they
brent (...) to Baall. etc. The children of Israel, and the children of Judah
have don nothing from their youth but wickedness, and that before mine eyes, to
provoke me to anger. They have turned unto me their (...). viii.
backs, and not their faces: they, their Kings, their princes, their
prophets, their priests, whole Judah, and all the city of Jerusale^. They would
not hear nor be reformed. They have set up their dong (so terms he their
idols) in the place that is co^secrat to my name. And when the King of Babylon
was lying about the city, he says to the messengers of Zedechias (who are
sent to demand of the Prophet what should become of this City.) The Caldees
Jer. rrrvii
shall take this City, and shall burn it with fire: yea if you had killed all
the Who would not have called y^ Prophet a traitor.
host of the Caldes, that besegeth you, and if the killed man were left, every
man should rise in his tent, and should burn this City with fire. He that
abides in this City, shall dye either by sweard, by hunger or by pestilence.
But he that shall go forth to the Caldes, shall live, and shall wyn his soul,
for a pray. And to the liyng in (...) askyng his counsel, he boldly says: If
suddenly thou shall go forth to the princes of the Babilonians, thy soul shall
lyuc, and this City shall not be brent with fire: But if thou go not forth to
the captains of the Babylonians, this city shall be given over in the hands of
the Caldees, who shall burn it with fire, neither yet shalt thou escape their
hands.

Thus did these. ii. Proplietes (as al so did others before them) playnelye
speak the desolation of that place, for such offenses as before has been
rehearsed, But how pleases such message the City of Jerusalem? the Priests,
Princes and people of Judah? and what reward received Jeremy for his long travel
and painful preaching. Derelye even such as Pha^hur and his counsel The ^mes
laid against (...).
judged meet. He spa^e against the temple (said they) He prophesied mysthiefe
against the City, he faynted the hearts of the souldiars and of the people:
but principally he was unfriendly to the faith that Phas^hur taught the people:
to wit, the faith of their (...) Ierem. (...)..
fathers, who always rebelled against God. And therefore he was reputed an
(...). xx. Ieremies commendations.
(...), accused of sedition, and dampened of treason. Plam preachings were made
against at that he had spoken, and such (...) was promised, that within. ii.
years should the yoke Jer. xxviii
of (...) be broken from the necks of all the people, and the vessels of the
Lords house together myth all pleasures should be brought again to Jerusalem.

Now did they abound in wine and ^da^ce came before the distructio^ Iere. xiii.
Ie. xxxviii
with oil. (...) pleasing and blessed amongst the people were such Prophets.
Ieremye had troubled them, and therefore he must dye: to prison shall he go, for
the king can deny nothing to his princes, of whom Phas^ur appears to have
been chief chauncelour: by who^ was not only the king, but al y^ whole
multitude so blinded: that boldly they ^iexxvii.
durst cry: no mischaunce shall come to us. We shall neither se pestilence not
hunger, the king of Babylon shall never come against this land.

In the midst of these stormye troubels, no other comfort had the Prophet,
then to complame to his God, at whose commandment he had spoken. And in this
his complaint he is so kyndled Iere. (...).
against their idolatry and great un tha^kfulnes, that he cries as in a (...):
O thou Lord of hosts, the (...) the just, thou that see the raynes of the
heart: let me se thy vengengeaunce taken upon them, for unto the have I
referred my cause. As thi^ prayer was most searfull to his enemies, if they
had seen the efficacy thereof. So by the same was the Prophet assured, that Gods
wrath was ki^dled against that sinful nation: and that it should not turn
back; til he had performed the cogitations of his own heart.

I appeal to the conscience of every indifferent in (...): what one point
differs the Regiment, manners and state of England this day from the ^boue
rehearsed estate of Judah in (...) days: except that they had a king a man, as
apeareah of nature (...) a^ then cruel: who sometimes was in ^reated in the
Prophets favor, (...) also required him of counsel in some dangers: And
yeu have a Queen, a moma^ of a stout stomach, more ^iffe in opinion, then
flexible to the truth: who in nowise may abide the presence of gods Prophets.
In this one thing you disagre, in all other things so like as one ^ut is to
another.

Their King was led by pestilent Judge (...) indiffere^cie wherein you agree.
preistes. Who guides your Queen it is not unknown. Under such came idolatry
to the height again. ^ would to God that the worsse were not among you. In
Jeru^ale^ was Jeremy persecuted for speaking the truth, and for rebuking their
idolatri. What prison with in London tormenteth not some true Prophet of God,
for y^ same causes: And O thou (...) of darkness, where that idol of late days
(...) The Tower.
first erected, thou ^mer of London. In the do mo (...) then one suffer (...)
and trouble, whom God s^al comfort according to his promis, and reward their
(...), even as they have deserved. And in that dai shall thou tremble: and
such as shall purpose to defend the, shall perish with the, because thou wast
first defiled in that most abominable idol.

Consider dear brethren: if al things as pertaining to iniquity be a like
between England and Judah before the destruction thereof. (...), if England be
worsse then Judah was in those days: Seeing God spared not them, shall we think
that the Lords vengeance shall sleep, man's iniquitye being so (...)* No dear
brethren, he that has under standing must know the contrary: and he to whom
the Lords mouth has (...). (...)
spoken, must show the causes why the Land shall be waste. It may offend you that
I call England worsse then was unthankful Judah: but if good and evident reasons
adduced, may take place, then I fear not judgment.

From Jerusalem many passed away Where in (...) better, the^ England is now.
at the admonicion of the Prophet, leuing al they had, rather then they would
abide the dangers of Gods plages that were threatened. Gods Prophets have
cried, but I hear not of many that prepare to flytte, God grant they repent
not.

In Jerusalem were princes and Nobels, who defended Jeremy and also that did
absolve him, when wrongfully he was accused by the priests* But how many now
of the Nobilyty with in England, boldly speak in defense of Gods Messengers,
is easy to be (...).

Among them had Gods Prophet

In Jerusalem was ^demeleche,

In Jerusalem, Jeremy being damned ned to prison, was fed of the Kings
charges, and that when great honger and scarcity of bread was in the whole
(...) In London where al plenty abounds are Gods messengers permitted to
hounger, yea to horrible to be heard, and a^cient Fathers are so cruelly
entreated, that like extremity has seldom been used upon thieves and
murderers.

In this behalf I do not blame you (beloved brethren) for assuredlye I know
your hearts to mourn for that troubles of your brethren and faithful prechers,
and that you seek (...) means possible, home they may be comforted or
relyued: But these things I rehearse, to the end that you may see, that more
abhominatio^ and less (...) of God, more unjust dealinge and less shame, more
cruel persecutions against Gods messe^gers and less merey and gentilnes, is
now among your chief Rulers with in England, then in those days was in Judah.
And yet did not Jerusalem escape the vengeance of God. Shall we then believe,
that (...) gland may avoid the vengeance that (...).
is thr^ned? no dear brethren*if Idolatrye continewe as it is begun, no more
can England escape Gods vengeance, then God him self may lose his justice.

And therefore dearly beloved in our savior Jesus Christ, is profit to your
self or to your posterity, can move you any thing, than must ye avoid and
fly Idolatry. For if the Lords messe^gers that shall be sent to e^ute his
wrath, find you amongst filthy Idolaters, your bodies committinge like
abhominatio^ with them, ye have no warrant that ye shall escape the pla ges
prepared for the wicked: But rather it is to be feared, yt ye shall be plaged
with them. The whole Tribe of (...). rr. (...). (...). (...).
Benjamin perished with the adulterers and yet were they not all adulterers in
fact. Whole (...) was commanded to be destroyed, and yet was not one of those
living, that trobled the Israelites in their passage from Egypt. Pharao was not
drowned a (...), as in another letter I have more plainly written, ^ther yet
found Io^athas mercy, as touching life corporal, in the (...) when Gods
vengeance ^oma. (...)*
punished Saul the reprobate. And why? The Apostle answers: Because me^
knowing the justice of God (says he) and doing the contrary, are worthi of
death, not only those that do wickedly, but also such as consent to the same.
And no man can be accused, but that he consents who daily frequentinge in the
company of wicked men, geuech nether sign in word nor in work, that iniquity
displeases them, and therefore yet I say, if profit may move us, most
profitable shall it be, even for the body in this present life, to avoid
Idolatry: for so doing as we shall escape the plages which y^ ungodly shall
suffer, so is God by his Esai. (...). (...).
promise obligate and bound unto us, to be our fathe, our portion, our
inheritance Zach. iii.
and defense, he promises, and Psalm. (...).
will not deseiue, to carye us upon (...) lvii. crl. crlui.
own wings from al danger, to plant us and our posteriti in everlasting
memorial, to feed us in the time of hon^, and finally to fight for us, and to
sau^ us from al miseries and mischaunces, but no^e to the subsequent.

(...) it is most profitable for bod^e and What me do when me (...) our seiues
with I do (...).
soul to avoid id^latro, so is it necessary, that unless we so do, me refuse
to be in leage (...) God: we declare our* selves to have no faith, and we deny
to be gods witnesses. And so must he of his justice (...) in his word, Note
well (...) lesson.
(...) us to appertame to him or to his kingdom, and then (alas) what ^easteth
for us, but perpetual death, ordained for those that will not cont^nue in
leage with God?

The leage between God and us contains these (...): that God shall be our God,
and we shall be his people? (...) shall communicate with us, of (...) graces and
goodness, we shall serve him in body and soul: he shall be our safegarde from
death and (...), we shall stick to him, and fly from all strange Gods, Thus is
the leage in (...)
(...) where of we (...), never to have fellowship with (...), (...) that which
God has authorized by his manifest word* ^f by Gods scriptures these
preside^ts be so plain, that reasonablye no man can deny any point thereof,
then have I good hope that ye will admyt it to be necessary, that you avoid
idolatri, if the leage between God and you shall be kept sure. And ^yrst is to be
obserserued, that Gods justice being infynite, in matters of (...), requires
like obedience of al those that be with in his leage at al times, that he
requires of any one nation or particular man in (...) one age. For all that
be Deuteronomy. (...)
within his leage, ar one bodi, as Mosee does wytnes, reconyng men, we* men,
children, servants, princes, priests, officers and strangers with in the
(...) of the Lord. Then what God requires of one as touching this leage, he
requires of all, for his justice is immutable: and what he damneth in any one,
that he must damno in others, for he is ryghteous with out (...). Then let us
consider what God has required of such as have been in leage with him, and
what he pronounces damnable.

Moses (the mouth of God to his (...). xiii.
people of Israel) speaks as follows: ^f thy brother, the son of thy
mother, or y^ wife of thine own boso^eor thy neighbor, who^ thou love as
thine own life, shall privily solicit the, saying: ^et us go and serve other
Gods, who^ thou have not known. etc. (...) him not, hear him not, neither yet
let thine eye spare him. Be not merciful unto him, nor hyde him not, but kill
him, let thy hand be the first upon him, (...)
that such a one may be killed, and the^ the hand of the whole people. Stone
Mark what god commanded should be don to al Idola^ours.
him with stones till he dye. And likewise commands he to be done with a
whole City, if the indwellers thereof turn back to idolatry, addyng also that
the city and the whole spoil there of shall be brent, that no porcia^ shall be
saved, nor yet that the city shall be builded for ever again, because it is
accursed of God.

^ere is a plain declaration, what God requires of them, that will continue in
leage with him, and what he has damned by his (...) word. And do we (...)
(beloved brethren) that the immutable God will (...) at our idolatry, as that he
saw it not, semg he commands judgment to be eccecuted so severely against
idolatours, and against such as only provoked or solicited others to idolatri,
that neither should blood nor affinity, neither multitud^ nor riches, save
such as offend: neither yet that we should (...) their offenses, but y^ we
should be the first that should accuse brother, son, daughter or wife: And
why: because he intends (says Moises) to bring the from the Lord thy God,
who led the forth from the land of Egipte* and therefore let him dye, that al
Israel hearing, may fear, and presume not after to commit the like
abhominatio^. Let nothing pertaining to such a man or city cleave unto thy
hand, that the Lord may turn from the furour of his wrath, and be moved over
the (...) most tender mercy and affection, and that he may multiply the, as he
has sworen unto thy fathers.

In these words most ^uidently is e^spressed unto us, why God will that we
avoid a^ fellowship with idolatry and with the maintainers of the same. In which
are three thyngeo (...) to be noted. First that the holy Ghost instr^cteth us,
that maintamers of idolatry, and prouokers to the same, intend to dr^w us from
God, and therefore he commands us that we shall not conceal their impiety,
but that we shall make it known, and that we shall punish it, if we will have the
leage between us and God to^ stand sure. And here is the firmament of my first
cause, why it is necessary to avoid idolatrye, because that otherwise we
declare our selves little to regard, yea to have broken and (...) demed that
holy league which is betwirt us and God through Jesus Christ.

Secondly. It is to be noted, that Idolatry so kindles the wrath of God that
it is never quenched, (...) the oftenders and all that they possess be
destroyed from the earth, and that by fire. It may appear, that this is a
scuere and rigorous judgment: but let y^ cause be con^idered, and then shall we
understand that in the same, God she^eth unto us his most singular love,
declaring himself enemy to our enemies. For all those Drawers of me^ from God
are of the (...) uels nature.
that would dram us from God (be they Kings or Queen's being of the (...) nature)
are enemies unto God, and therefore will God, y^ in such cases we declare our
selves enemies unto the^.

And last, it is to be noted, that obedience given unto God, in taking (...)
^eaunce upon Idolators, by such means as GOD has appointed, is a cause, why
God shows his mercy. Why he multiplieth us and embraces us with fatherly
love: where contrary wise by consenting with Idolatry, are the mercies of God
shut up from us, and me cut of from the body of Christ, to wither and rotte as
trees without moister.

But now shall some deman^d: what Question*
then? Shall we go to and kill al Idolators

That were the office and duty of every ^nswere*
civil maiestrate within his (...) and jurisdiction: But of you is required
only to avoid perticipation and company of that abomination* as well in body as
in soul, as David and Paul plainly teaches. David in his Psalm. rvi.
e^ile in the mids of Idolators, says I will not offer their drink offerings
of blou^, neither yet will I take their name in my mouth. And Paul says: You
may not be pertakers of the lords Table* and of the table of devils? ^. Cori.
r.
you may not drink the Lords cup and the cup of devils.

As these two places of Scripture plainlye resolve the former question, so do
they confirm that which is before said: that the league between us and God,
(...) of all Idolatrye. First, plain it is that in ^. (...). rrvii
^ath and in Corrinthus, was no small noumbre of Idolators, when David was there
in ecsile, and when s. Paul Idolatry (...) be so abhorred, y^ no part of us
be defiled a^l.
wrote his Episile: yet nether says Da uid that he will kill any in that
place, (because he was not their maiestrate) nether gives Paul any such
commandment: But in one thing they both agree, that such as has society
and leage with God, must so (...) Idolatry, that no part of the body be ^efiled
therewith, for David says: I will not take their names in my mouth: As though he
would say: so odious are the names of false and ^aine gods, that the mention
of them is righteously compared to stinckynge dounge and vile carrion, which
nether can be eaten, nether yet smelled without disyleasor of such as have not
lost the judgments of their senses. And therefore says David: I will not
defile Note well*
my mouth with them: That is, I will never speak one favorable word of them. I
think much less would he have crouched and kneeled before them for any man's
pleasure.

Aduert brethren that David inspyred with the holy ghost, knew no such shifts,
as worldly wise men imagy^ now a days, that they may keep their hearts pure
and clean to God, though their bodies dance with the Dyuel. Not so bear
brethren, not so, the temple of God has nothing to do myth (...). The cause
ecspresseth David in these words, for the lord him self (...) my portion and
in my inheritance. Great is the cause if it be depely ^sidered. David
illuminated by the holy Ghost, says eue^ the self same thing which before we
have alleged of the Apostles words: that God myll not part spoil with the
(...), permitting him to have the sctuice of the body, and he to stand content
with the soul, heart or mind. No brethren, David (...) this the foundament and
reason, whi he (...) offer sacrifice to idols, neither yet defile his mouth w*
their names: because (says he) y^ lord is my portion. As he would say: Such is
the What the league between us and god, requi^.
condition of the leage between (...) and my god, that as he is my (...) of
defense against my enemies preseruyng and norishing both the body and soul. So
must (...) whole his in body and soul: For my God is of that Nature that he
will suffer no portion of his glory to be given to another.

In confirmation of this, says (...) after he had rebuked their idols and
(...). These are thy portion. (...), lvii.
And Jeremy likewise in (...) of the^, says: (...) thy bedfellowes deliver
the: call upon them, and let the^ hear the. Thou have committed for Iere. (...)
nicatio^ and whoredom with stock and stone. The Prophets meaning thereby
that Idolatours can have no leage nor covenant with God: in so (...) as their
hearts be alienated from him, which the service of their bodies does testify.
And therefore renounceth God such leage and bond, as was before offered: for
Esaias would say: Even such as thou haste chosen, such shall be thy portion. And
Jeremy would say: Thou have put thy trust in them (which he means by the
liyng with the^ in bed) and therefore let them (...) their power in thy
deliverance: and thus he sends them, as it were to such water from hate
burning coals.

It shall nothing (...) us to say: we trust not in Idols, for so will every
Idolator allege: But if either you or they, in Gods honor, do any thing
contrary to Gods word, you show your self to put your trust in somewhat
elce besides God, ant so are (...) Idolators. Mark brethren, that many
Trusting in ma^s wis dome, is idolatrye.
make an Idol of their own wisdom or fantasaye: more trustinge to that whith
they think good, then unto God, who plainlye says: not that thig, which
seems good in thine eyes, do unto thy God: But what thy lord God has
commanded the: But of this some other time God willing more shall be spoken.

Hereof I suppose it be plain, that like as GOD is immutable, who by his law
has not only forbidden al fellowship with Idolators in their Idolatrye, but
also has commanded that (...) and punishment be taken upon them: And as the
saints Mark.
of God were inspired with the holy ghost, who would not so much as once
favorably speak of Idols. And last as the scriptures be infallible, which
pronounces, that God may not abide, that our bodies serve the devil in
joining our bodies with Idolatri: So is it of mere necessity, that both in
hodye and soul we (...) from the same, if we will have the leage between God
and (...) to stand sure.

I will not trouble this time with an swering to any such obicctions as me^
sekinge to live as they list, do now a days invent: seeing that partly in
another letter I have answered the same. And if God shall grant any rest in
this wiked life, I purpose by the grace of God (as occasion shall be offered)
fully to answer what can be said for their defense: which in very dedewha^ al
is said that they can, they have said nothing that God will admit.

Now rests to show, that inhau^ting Idolatrye, we declare our selves to be
without faith, and do deny to bear witness unto God. But that faith perseth
the heart, I trust none of you will deny. But whether that inward faith
reqvireth an ecsternal confession, and if a man mane not have faith, and yet do
in Ceremon: (...) of the church as the world does. Herein per^ ye doubt. As to
the first the (...).
(...) answers in these words, In the heart it is (...) unto (...) but by
the mouth, is confession to salvation. And David says, I have believed, and
therefore have I spoken, but Psalm. crvi.
I was sore trobled. As David would say, I could not (...) the confession of my
faith, (...) be it trouble did ensue the same. Thus the holy ghost joy neth
faith and confession, as things that be inseparable the one from the other.
And therefore dare I not take
upon me to disseuer the^, but must say that where true faith is, there is also
co^ fession of the same, when time and necessity requires, and that where con
fession is not found, there faith is a sl^pe, if he be not from home.

Now is it to be considered, if this Wheither this time requires ^o^fessio^ of
^ur (...).
time requires the confession of our faith. Christ and his gospel ar oppugned
his holy sacraments are profaned. Christ's Messengers are some eccded, some
cruelly tormented in prison: Our aduersarics have gotten the vpperha^d, and an
ecsecrable idol ^ted up in confirmation of al iniquity. What now shall I do,
that am assured that all this is abomination? Here Christ is in battle. Shall
I do as the multitude, or as Christeo enemies do? What (...) give I then?
Assuredlt even such as the reast does, for neither does foot, hand, eye nor
mouth, wytnes the contrary. The feet carye the body to serve an idol, the eye
beholds Note.
it with a certain reverence, the mouth dare not whysper what y^ (...)
thincketh, yea, the hands are ecstended, and give signification of humble
obedience. Have I not now justified Esa. (...)*
the Devil, and dampened Christ, it can not be denied.

But let me have no credit, unless the same be yet proved by most plain
demonstrations of Gods sacred scryptures. The lord by his Prophet Esaias, says
to his people of Israel (and this is answer also to the second question: If I
may not do as the world does, and yet have faith) you are my (...) whither
there be any God but I alone. Is there any Creator that I should not know him?
These words were spoken, as it were: (...) an en^ (...) to rebuke al idolatry,
and the ^ayne (...) of the same. As the lord would say: Thou house of Jacob, and
you natural children, discendyng from Abraham. You are my people, whom
peculyerly I have chosen, to show in you the greatness of my name: and for that
end have I spoken unto you hid things from the beginning, that you may
understand and know that there is no knowledge but in me a ^one: That you
persuaded of my infinite wisdom, power, and goodness, may testifye and bear
wytnes of the same to such as has not the like understanding with you. Hereof
it is plain, y^ of such as to who^ god gives knowledge, he requires a
confession, to provoke the ignorant to embrace God and his word, or at the
least that by the understanding man, the vauitie of the foolish should be
rebuked.
So zealous is GOD over his gifts, that if we labor not to employ them to the
glory of God, and to profit others his creatures, he will according to the
threatninge of Christ, take (...) talent from us, and will give it tosuch as will
labor thereupon. Some perchance would gladly labor, but they se not what
fruit shall succeed, and there fore judge they better to cease: eue^ as though
God could bring forth no fruit, eccept he made us first of counsel. God is
to be obeyed in his commandments, A good les son to be followed.
and the success is to be committed unto him, whose wisdom is unsearchable,
He commands us to refrain from idolatrye, to Why we should ref^ayne from
idolatrye.
let other men see that they do wrong. This ought we to obei, albeit the
present death should follow, for we are ^alled as witnesses between God and
the blind world as is before said: Israel Note.
thou art my witness.

The world asks: is the Mass Gods service, or is it idolatrye? God has
opened to us, that it is abhowinable idolatry, but when that we, for fear of
our vile (...), do as the blind world does, what witness bear ^e? Assuredly
false wytuesse against God, and against our neighbor. (...) God, for that we
iustifye and maintain that with our presence, which God condemns. Against
(...) neighbor, for that we confirm him in error to both our co^dempnacio^s.
But when we abstain from al fellow ship of idolatry, what ever ensue there
upon, we do our deuties to gods glory. (...) no man think that I am more
severe, then necessitye requires. Na brerhren, I (...) coutain my affirmacions
within the bonds of Gods. (...), and that shall (...) the Prophet witness, who
writing to the Jews, being prisoners in (...), after he had sorbidden them to
follow the vain religion of y^ people amongst, whom they were then (...), by
many reasons proving that their, idols were no Gods. (...) last he says:
^eremi. x.
(...) shall say to them: the Gods that made neither heaven nor earth, shall
perysh from the earth, and from under the heaven.

Here is to be observed (as Tho^ (...), (...), that singular instrument of God,
The Prophet constrayneth y^ (...) to declare their co^fes sio^ (...) idols, and
that chau^ging their natural (...).
most diligently notes) that the reaft of the Prophets work was written in
the Hebrew (...), which then was peculiar to the Jews: but these (...) ses and
mordes above rehearsed, were written in the Caldees tongue, in the tongue of that
people where the Jews were then in thraldom, as that the Prophet would
constrain them to change their natural tongue, and in plain words declare
the hatred and alienation which they had from all worshipping of Idols. I
beseech you brethren, mark the words of the pro phet. He says not: You may
think in your heart that they are (...), and that they shall perish. But you
shall say it, and that not priuilye, but to them who put their trust in such
vanity. (...) that the three children openly spoke, deniyng to give the
ceuere^ce of their bodies before an Idol. And Daniel that would not keep secret
the confession Dani. (...). (...). and. (...).
of his faith (...) three days, as in my former (...) more plainly is
expressed. Hereof it is plain, that requi ryng that (...) profane not your
bodies with Idolatri. I require no more then Gods Scriptures by plain precepts
and ensamples teach. Neither ver require I of eueri man and at al times so
much: for I co^strain no man to go to (...). (...). v.
idolatours in the time of their idola try, and to sai y^ al which they do is
abominable and naught: but only yt we keep our own bodies (called of the
(...) the temple of the holy ghost) clean from al such diabolical conue^^:
which that we do, is most pro^ and also necessary to the preseruacio^ of our
selves, and of our posterity, of whom now at the end, ^what must we speak.
Every man that is not degenerated to the nature of (...) beast, will appear to
bear such lone to his children, that to leave the^ riches, in reast, and in
good estate, he patiently will suffer troubles: and wyth^ grudge will do many
things, that otherwise are contrary to his own pleasure: and with my heart I
wish to God, that the perfection of this were deeply grounded in man's heart,
I mean very love, and not fond folishnes, which under the name of love,
(...). Cor. (...).
procures destruction of body: Where contrariwise true love most carefully
laboreth for salvation of both. (...) this love I say, toward our (...)
(which every man pretends to have) (...) in us: the^ of necessity it is,
that for their causes we shall avoid al society of those filthy abominations.
This my assertion may appear (...), but if it be with in difference perceived
it shall be very easy to be understand.

The only way to leave out children blessed and happy, is to leave the^
righteously instructed in Gods true Religion: For what anaileth all that is in
Note.
earth, if condempnatio^ follow death, yea and Gods vengeance go before the
same? as of necessitye they (...) where the true knowledge of God is The true
knowledge of God, (...) not berne with man.
absent. Plain it is that y^ true knowledge of God is not borne with man,
neither yet comes it vuto him by ^tural power, but he must have schole
Masters to train him up in yt which he lacks. The chief schole Master (the
holy Ghost eccepted) of the age following, is the worckes, practices, and the
life of the forefathers: Where unto (...) we se the children so addicte and
bound, and specially if it be in idolatri, y^ god crying by y^ mouths of his
mes sengers, has much to do to reaue or pluck any man back from their
forefathers fotesteps. Now, if y^ you altogether Note and despise not
refusing god; stoop under idolatry, what sc^lemasters are your to your
posteritye? What image show you to your children? yea, in what estate leave
you the^, both touchig body and soul? assuredly you ar eue^ such scholemasters
as ^er those fathers, who co^se^tyng to Iero^oa^ to his idolatri, left unto
their (...). (...)* rii
children a pattern of pardicio^. To speak it plamly, you leave the^ blinded in
ido latri, and bond slaves to the Devil, (...) hope of rede^pcion or light to
be received. (...) (will some say) y^ lord knows ^uasion (...).
his own. True it is, but his ordinary means to come by his knowledge, a^ not
to be conte^ned. He commands you to teach your children his laws, statutes
and ceremonies, yt they likewise may teach y^ same to the generation sollowi^g.
But yet will some object: what taught our fathers to us? O dear brethren be not
so ingrate and unthankful to yet I would y^ you should flatter (...) selves,
thinking y^ such a trumpet shall be blown to your posterity, as has been blown
unto you, if al come to so closig s^lence as yt Lords messe^gers found the
beginning of this our age, when this whole ^ealme of England was drowned in so
dead a sleep, y^ the sound of the (...) trumpet was not understand, while first
the most part of yt blowers gave their blood in testimony y^ their doctrine,
was y^ same which began (...) blud was planted and kept in mind by yt fame,
and by blud increased, and did fructifi. Will the Lord have his (...) to fight a
lone: Will he bestow such abou^da^ce of Note.
blud upon your children, to encourage the^, as yt he did upon you, for your
insiruction and incourageme^t? Y^ that you also traitorously fly from him in yt
dai of this his battle, the contrary is greatli to be feared. Often (...) how god
has ^sed my tongue (my tongue I say being most wretched of others) plainelye to
speak the troubles yt ar present, there o^ ^ureth to mind a certain admonition*
yt god ^old I co^me^ly should use in all (...) The admonicio^ was this: that the
last Trumpet was in blowing with in the Realm of England, and therefore ought
every man to prepare him for battle. For if the trompet should cease and be
put to silence, then should it never blow again with like force in England,
til the coming of the lord Jesus. O dear brethren, how sore these threat
ninges perce my heart this day, only God knows, and in what anguysh of heart
I write the same, God shall declare when the secrets of al hearts shall be
disciosed. I wyshe my self to (...) accurssed of God, as touching all
earthly pleasures or comfort, for on^ year of that time, which (alas) neither
you nor I dye righteous^ye esteem, when al abounded with us.

I sobbe and groan, I call and I pray, that in that point I may be disceiued.
But I am commanded to stand content, for it is God himself that performs
the words of his true messe^gers: his justice and order cannot be perverted.
The Sun keeps his ordiuary course, and ^eapeth not back from the West to
the South: but (...) goes down, we lack the light of it, till it rise the
next day toward the East again. And so it is with the light of the Gospel,
which has his day appointed by God, as witnesses Ihon. (...).
Christ saying: while ye have the light, (...) the light, that darkness
apprchend Romans xiii.
you not. And Paul: the night is passed, and the day is come (meaning of the
Gospel.) And also? this day if Hebr. iii*
you hear his voice, harden not your hearts. And albeit that this day be all
Note.
time from Christ's incarnacion til his last gainco^ming: yet evident it is
that al nations have not had at one time y^ light of Gods word, but some were in
darkness, when other some had light. But by the contrary most evident it is,
that where the light of the Gospel for ma^s unthankfulness, has been taken
away: there is it not to this day restored again. Witness whole Israel, and all the congregacions of the Ge^tyis, where Christ was first preached by the
Apostels. What is in Asia? ignorance of God. What in Africa? abnegacio^ of
Christ. What in those most notab^e churches of the (...), where Christ was
planted by Paul, and long after matred of others? Mahomet and his false sect.
Yea, what is in Rome? yt most idol of all others, that aduersarye to Christ,
that man of sin, extolled above all that is called God. Has God punished those
Nations before us, not only the first offenders, but even their posterity unto
this day: And shall he spare us, if we be like unthankful as they were* yea
if we be worsse the^ they were? For of them no small number susfered
persecucio^, banishment, slander, poverty, and finally death, for the
professing of Christ: Who having only this knowledge, that idol^ were odyous
before god, could neither for loss of temporal goods* for honors offered if
they would obey, nor yet for most cruel torments suffered in resisting, once be
persuaded to bow before Idols. And (alas) shall we after so many graces that
God has off^red unto us, sor pleasure or vain threatenings of those whom your
hearts know, and your (...) have confessed to be odious idolatours; (...)
bac^e to idolatrye, to the pardicion of our selves; and of our posterity to
come? Shall Gods holy Prophets work no great obedience in you? Shall nature
no otherwise mo^ your hearts? Shall not fatherlye (...) overcome that (...)? O
behold your children, and consider the end of their creacion. Great crueltye it
were to save your selves, and to damn them. But O more then crueltye and
madness, that cannot be ecspressed, if for yt pleasure of a moment, ye deprive
your selves, and your posteriti of that ^ternal joy, that is ordaiued for those
that continue in confession of Christ's name and truth to the end, (...)
assuredly ye do* if without resistau^ce al together, ye return to idolatri
again.

Alas than the trompet has lost his Note*
sound, the Sun is gone down, and the light vanished away. But if that God
shall strengt hen you boldlye to gain stand al such impiety, then is there
but ad arc mistie cloud over spread the Sun for a moment, which shortly
shall vanishe: so that the beams God (...) you may understand.
of the Sun after shall be seven fold more bryghte and amyable, then they were
before. Your pa^ience and constancy shall be the louder trom pet to your
posterity, then were all the voices of the Prophets that cried un to you. And
therefore for the tender mercies of God, arm your selves to stand with Christ.
Fly from that abominable Idol, yt maintainers where of, shall not escape the
vengeance of God. Let it be known to your posterity, that ye were
Christians, and not Idolators: and so is not the trompet seaced* so long as any
bouldly resists Idolatry. The precepts are sharp The obsection of the flesh.
and hard to be observed (will some object) and yet again I affirm, that
compared with the plages, which assured ly shall fall upon the coutemnours, they
shall be found easy and light. For avoiding of Idolatry, it may chance that
you be contemned in the world, and compelled to leave the Realm: but obeiers
of Idolatri as before god they are abominable, so shall they becompelled body
and soul to burn in hell. For avoiding of Idolatry, your worldly substance
shall be lost and spoiled: but for obeiyng of Idolatry, heavenly riches shall be
lost. By avoiding Idolatry, you may fall into the hands of earthly tyrauntes:
But o^, consenters and mayntainers of Idolatry shall not escape the hands of
the living God. For avoiding of Idolatry, your children shall be deprived of
father, of frindes, riches, and earthly rest: but by obeiynge to Idolatrye,
they shall be left without God, without the knowledge of his word and without
hope of his kingdom.

Consider dear br^thren, that how much more dolorous, it is to be tormented
in hell, then to suffer trouble in earth: to be deprived of heavenly (...),
than to be robbed of transitory riches, to fall in the hands of the living God,
than to abide man's vain and uncertain displeasure: So much more fearful and
dangerous it is to obey Idolatry, or (dissemblyng to consent (...) that
abomination, then avoiding the same) to (...) that in^o^uenie^ces ^ay follow
thereupon by ma^s (...). O be not like to Esaw, y^ sold and lost his birthright
for a mes potag^: I am not prejudicial to Gods mercyes, as that such as after
shall repent, shall not find (...). xviii. (...).
grace, God forbydde, for herein am I most assuredlye persuaded, yt in (...)
soever hour a sinne^ shall repent: God (...). i.
^hal not (...) one of his iniquities But albeit his offenses were as red as
Scarlet, they shall be made as why^e as Snow: and albeit in multitude they passed
number, yet so shall they be (...) out, y^ none of them shall appear to da^natio^
of the very re pentaunt. For his promises be infallible, y^ such as truly
believe in Christ, shall never e^ter in judgment. For the blood of Jesus Christ
purgoth the^ from al sin. So y^ how far y^ ^. John. i.
heaven to distau^t from the earth, so (...) does he remove y^ sins from the
(...). Psalm. ciii.
But consider dearly beloved brethren, yt these and like promises ar made to
pem^, and do nothing appartain to profane persons, idolators nor to fear full
sh ri^kers sro^ the truth, for fear o^ (...) trouble^. And if any allege, god
may call the^ to repe^ta^ce, how wic^ yt ever me^ be. I answer, that I
acknowledge and do (...), Gods omnipote^cy to be so (...), yt he may do what
pleases his wisdo^e: But yet is he not Note*
bound to do al yt our fantasy requires. And likewise, I know yt God is so
loving and so kind to such as fear him: that he will perfourm their wills and
pleasures, although Kings and prin^ had sworn the contrary.

But herein stands the doubt, whether Let this be noted.
that such as for pleasure of men or for auoidyng temporal punishment defile
them selves with Idolatry, fear god. And whether they which al their life deny
Christ, by cousentinge to Idolatry, shall at the last hour be called to
repentance. No such promises have we within the Scryptures of God* but rather
the express contrary. And therefore God is not to be tempted, but is to be
hard, feared, and obeyed, wh^ thus earnestlye he calls and threteneth not
without cause, pass from the Apo. xviii*
mids of ^er O my people (says the (...)) that you be not partakers of her
plages. And that is meant of that abominable whore and of her abomination.
(...). (...). xviii
How long will ye halte on ^. Cor. x.
both parts* You may not both be par takers of the cup of the lord and of the
cup of the devil: (...) that denies me before men, I will deni him before
Math. x.
my father: ^e that r^fuseth not himself, and takes up his cross and
follows me, is not worthy of me. No man putting his hand to the ploughe,
(...). ix.
and lokyng backwarde, is worthy of the kingdom of God. And Paul to ^eb. vi.
x.
the Hebrews only means of this (...) where he says: Who willynly sins
after the knowledge of the truth, cannot be renewed again by repentance

O dear brethren, remember the dignity of our vocation, you have follow ed
Christ, you hau^ (...) war against Idolatry. You have laid hand upon the
truth, and have communicate with the lords table, will ye now suddenly slide
back? Will ye refuse Christ and his truth, and make pacti^ with the devil and
with his discei^able doctrine? Will ye tread the pr^cious blood of his
Testament under your feet, and set up an Idol before the people* which
things assuredly you do, as often as ever you present your bodies among
Idolators before yt (...) Idol. God the father of al mercies for Christ his
sons sake, preserve you from that sore tentation whose dolours and dangers
very so row will not suffer me to express. Alas brethren, it is to be feared,
that if ^e fall once a sleep, you lie to long before you be weakened. Yet some
shall object Peter the denier optained mercy. To whom I answer, particular
ensamples make no common law. Neither yet is there any resemblaunce or
likelihode between the fall of Peter and our daily Idolatry. Peter upon a sudden
without any former purpose, thrice denied Christ within the space of an hour or
two. We upon determinate purpose and advised mind daily deny Christ Peter had
Christ's assurau^ce and pro mis, that after his de^ial he should be converted:
We have Christ's threteninges, that if we deny, we shall be de^. Peter in the
(...) and a^ wicked men of war (...) his offense for fear of life, (...) in
(...) city and (...) for loss of wicked (...) do no less. Peter at the (...)
of the Cock and at (...) look, left the company that (...) his sin, We after
Christ's (...), yea after gentle erhortations and fearful threatninges, will
continue in the mids of (...) and for their (...), will crouch and (...) as
the devil (...).

What likelihode (...) here, let every man judge. But much I wonder, that
(...) that can epsy so narrow shifts (...) to hyde (...) selves from the
presence of God, behind a bushe with (...) their father, cannot also epsy
that (...) was (...) in presence of (...), of no less authority then Peter
was: That (...) was the first born. in the world: That Saul was the first
anointed (...) by Gods ^dement (...). (...). (...).
and by his prophet. And that (...). (...). (...)
(...) was a man of most singu^ wisdom, and (...) none of these found place
of repentance. Have we any other assuraunces and particular warrantes within
the scriptures of God, then they had, that al our life we may be in leage with
the (...), and then at our pleasure that we may lay hand upon Christ, and
clothe (...) with his justice: (...) not disceined dear brethren: Joel. ii.
for (...) most true it is that whosoeincalleth (...). (...).
the name of the lord, shall be saved, yet like true it is, that who that ii.
Tim. ii.
(...) incalleth the name of the (...), shall avoid and eschem all iniquitye,
and that whosoever continues in open iniquity, the same man incalleth not the
John. (...).
name of the (...), neither has God any respect to his prayer. (...) greater
Job. (...)
iniquity was never from the beginning of the world, then is (...) in that
abominable idol, for it is the The (...) the devils sacrament and (...).
scale of that leage which y^ (...) has made with the pestilent sons of
^tichrist, and is the very chief cause, why the blood of the saints of God
has been shed nigh the space of a thousand years, for so long almost has it
been (...), and in decking with yt whoorish garment, wherein it now tryumpheth
against Christ. The only one sacrifice of his death, and merits of his
passion. Which whole abhominacion (...) confirm and show your selves (...) to
the murder of those that have suffered for (...) against it, (...) often as ever
you garnishe that Idol with your preface, and therefore avoid it, as that (...)
will be part (...) with Christ, with whom ye have sworen to die and to live in
baptism and in his holy Supper, Shame it were to break promis unto man, but is
it not more shame to (...) it unto God? Foolishues it were to leave that (...),
whose victory you (...) present, and to take part with (...) who^ you
understood and perceived to be so vanquished and overthrown, that he might
neither gainstand, nether yet (...) the coming of his adversary. O (...), is
not the Devil Then* (...). (...).
the prince of this world, vanquished and cast out? (...) not Christ made con*
quest of (...) he not carried our flesh up to glory, in despite of Satha^s
(...)? Shall not our Champion (...) turn? You (...) that he shall, and that
with ecspedicion, when Satan and his adherentes I dolatours, worshippers of
that blasphemous beast, (...) persons and (...) from (...). (...)
the truth of God, shaibe cast in y^ (...) or lake burning with fire and (...)
which never shall be quenched. But in the mean time you fear corporal death.
(...) Nature admitted any man to live ever, then had your fea^ some ap
pearaunce of reason. But if corporal death be common to al: why will ye ieopard
to lose the life everlasting, to decline and escape that which neither rich
nor poor, neither wise nor foolyshe. proud of stomach, nor feable of courage,
and finally no earthlye creature by no craft or ingyne of man did ever escape.
(...) any have escaped the horrible fear of death, it was such as boldly did
gainstand men's iniquity in the earth. But yet grudgeth the flesh (say The
flesh can do no thing but grudge.
you) for fear of the torment, let it do the own nature and office, for so
must it do till it be burdened with Christen cross, and then no dout shall God
send such comfort, as now we look not for. Others before us (...) passed the
(...) ^y torments.
Let us not turn back from Christ* albeit the fiesh complain and fear the
torment. Wonder it is that the wai to life is fearful unto us, considering
that so great a number of our brethren has passed before us, in at the same
gate* that we so much abhor. Has not y^ most part of the Saints of God
entered into their reast by torment and troubles, of whom witnesses Paul: Some
were racked, some hawen a so^der, Hebr. ri.
some slain with sweardes; some (...) up and down in shepes skins, in need, in
tribulation and (...), in mountains, dens, and in caves of the earth. and in all these (...); what co^plaintes hear we of their mouths, eccept it be that
they lament the blindness of the world; and the per dition of their persecutors?
Did God comfort them, and shall he despise (...) if in obedience to him, we
follow their footesteppes? He shall not do it: for he has promised to the
contrary. And therefore dearly beloved in the Lord, as ye purpose to avoid the
(...) of God, that suddenly shall s^rike al ob^ I dolators, as ye (...) have the
leage between God mid you to stand sure, and as you will declare your selves to
have true faith, without which no man ever shall enter into life. And final ly
as ye will leave the true knowledge of God in possession to your children,
avoid (...) and at partici^acio^ thereof, for it is so (...) before Gods
presence, that nor only does he punish the inuenters and first offenders, but
De. (...)
often times their posterity are stricken with blindness and dasednes of mind,
the vattail shall appear strong, which ye are to suffer, but the Lord him self
Zacha. (...).
shall be your comfort. He shall come in and our defense with his mighty (...).
He shall give you victory, when none Psalm. (...).
is hoped for. He shall turn your tears lrrvi. lri.
into everlasting joy. He shall confound (...). vii. rrii.
^our enemies with the breath of his month. He shall let you se their ^cion,
Psalm. to*
that now are most proud. The God of al comfort and co^solacion, for Christ
Jesus his sons salt, grant that this my simple Admonicion ((...) rather the
marnyng of the holy Go^) may be re^eiued and accepted of you, with no less
fear and obedience, then I have written it unto you, with unfeigned love and
sorrowful heart, and the^ I dout not (...) we shall be comforted, when al such as
now molest us, shall trem ble and shake, by the coming and our Lord Jesus,
whose om^ spirit preserve and ^eepe you undefiled body and soul to the end.

Amen.
Lord increase our Faith* From Wittonburge by Nicholas (...) Anno. M. D. (...).
the. (...). of May.
Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


