Here begins a little treatise of the turks law called Alcaron. And also
it speaks of Machamet the Nygromancer.
a clergyman preaches to nuns from a pulpit

two wealthy men, one accompanied by the devil, and one by an angel, talk to
each other from balconies while a woman begs on the ground below

FOr to know and to here some new tidings for to refresshe ye me^nes wits
and understanding. So will I somewhat write of ye turks laws / which law in
many points accords with our law and is ye law of Machomet / ye which in
his law used a word (oteidite. That is to say kylle. So all them yt will not
believe in their law they flee them. And yt is against ye law of our lord
Ihesu christ / for he byddeth yt we shall love them yt love not us and pray for
our enemies. And ye turks ben charged to their believe. But the christian people
be not so / but amyably learned and teched. And when yt the predycante or
prechour shall go to preche their falls believe he has a naked sword in his
hand as long as his sermon shall endure and last. Or else he puts ye said
sword in a high place where as every body may behold it yt is there for to
fere and threten them therwithall. And we christian people puts a crucyfyxe in
the mids of ye church on high for humylyte and not for fere or thretenynge
like as the turks do the foresaid sword. And so forth I will proceed and
write of their laws and book the which is named comenly Alcaron. And some men
does call it the book of Mesaap and some of them be of diverse langages and in
like wise of diverse countries ye which book Machamet made and gave it unto
them. In the which book this false nygromancer Machamet wrote among other
things as many one has read and seen here before that they the which ben
good shall go unto paradyse and they the which ben evil to hell / and that
byleueth all the sarasyns / And if a man asks them what paradyse meneth they
say it is a place of delight and Joy / where a man shall find all manner of
delytes and fruytes / and all manner of fruytes at all times / and the river
renneth milk / wine / honey / and fresshe water. And they shall have fair
houses / after yt they have deserved them here and those same houses ben made
of precious stones / of gold and silver / and each man shall have ten wives /
and all maidens / and also they speak and troweth upon the vyrgyn Mary and in
like wise upon the Incarnacyo^ of our lord Ihesu christ. And how that Marye was
learned of the angel and that gabryell said unto her that she was cho^en
before all other women from ye beginning of the world / and that witnesses
their book that told of her and of the Incarnacyon of our lord Ihesu christ.
And that she conceived and bare a child and yet she was a maiden. And they
say that our lord Ihesu christ spoke as soon as he was borne / and yt he was
very god and prophet in word and deed and that he was meke / and ryghtwys
unto every body withoute^ any vice. And they say also that when the angel
told her of the Incarnacyon she had greet dread / for she was but young and
there was one in that country the which had the craft of sorcery and
nygroma^cye and men called him Takney the which with enchau^tement could make
himself like unto an angel And he went often and laid by maidens and
therefore was our lady aferde of him for she wend that the angel had been
Takney that went to the maidens And she co^iured him and badde him tell if
that he were Takney. And the angel badde her not dread for he was very
angel and messager of our lord Ihesu christ. And also thyr book says that
she had child under palm and than she shamed and wept and say that she
would have been deed / and the child comforted her and said. Ne time as maria.
That is for to say dread the not Marye. And in many other places the book
says that he spoke as soon as he was borne. And they say also that he was
sent from our lord almythy for to give example unto all them that were in
the world at ye time and that should come after and that god shall deem all
good unto heaven and all evil unto hell there for to abide in pain
everlasting. And that our lord Ihesu christ is the best prophet next unto
god / and yt he was a very prophet / and gave the syghte unto the blind men /
and he let the lepres / and raised the deed and styed a quycke up in to heaven.
And if that they may find a book of the gospelles and manely of the gospel of
Missus est angelus gabriel. They do great worship thereto. And also they fast
seven months in the year / and they ete not but upon the nyghtes / and then
they keep them from their wives / and when they be syke they be not constreyned
unto that fast. And the book speaks of the Iwes and says that they ben
wicked people for they believe not that Ihesucryst is one with god and they say
that the Jews lies upon our lady and on her sone Ihesucryst for they say yt
they did him not upon the cross. And the sarasyns byleueth so ^^oche in our
faith that they ben lyghtely converted when men does preche unto them the
faith of our lord Ihesu christ. And they say that they know well yt their
law of Machamet shall fail as does the law of the Iwes and that the christian
law shall last unto ye worlds end. And if a man ask them wherein they
believe they say in god almighty maker of heaven and earth and all other things
that been therein and without him is nothing done nor bego^ne and at the day of
dome all thing shall be rewarded after their deseruynge and all thing is true
that christ said by ye mouths of the prophets. And also Machamet bade in his
Alcaro^ that every man should have two or three wives and now they take ten or
twelve or as many lemma^s as they may get. And yfony of their wives does a
mysse to their husbands they may drive them away and take another but he
must give her a part of his goods. Also when men speaks of the fader and
sone and holy ghost they say that they are three persons and not one god but
they scorn it and speak not thereof but of the trynyte. But they say that god
spoke or else he was domme and god is a ghost or he were on live and say that
gods have great strength and so say they in scorn. And the say also that
Abraham and Machamet were well in ye grace of god for they spoke with him diverse
times. And they say in like wise ye Machamet was the very messanger of god and
they have many good artycles of our faith and they all understand ye
scryptures and the prophecyes for they have them written in the gospelles and
in the bible in their la^gage and so they know much of the holy scripture but
they understand it not but after the lettre of ye gospel and therefore saint
poule says thus.

Littera occidit. spiritus viuificat. That is to say the lettre sleeth and the
ghost quyckeneth. And the sarasyns say that ye Iwes keep not the law that
Moses took unto them. And also cryste^ men do not well because that they kept
not ye ten commandments of the gospel the which Ihesu christ gave unto
them* And therefore I shall tell you what ye soudan said unto a christian man
upon a day in his chamber. He made for to avoid out of his chamber lords and
ladies and all that was therein for he would speak with him in counsayll. And
when all was avoided he demanded him how ye christian men governed them and he
said right well blessed be god. And the soudan said sykerly nay for he said
that our prestes said not their service as they should do nor give not good
example of good living unto the people as they ought for to do. And when ye
people should go for to serve god they go unto the tavern and lies there i^
glotonye all the day and all the night and eteth and drynketh as beestes and
wot not when they have enough and he said that christian men enforced them for
to fight together and echone to begyle other / and they be so proud that they
wot not how for to clothe them nor how long nor how short now streyte now
wide in all manner of guyses / and said that they should be meke and simple and
soth fast and do alms as christ did in whom they believe. And they be so
covetous that for a little silver they sell their trouhte and their children
and their systers and their wives that one takes another man's wife and few
holds their truth. And therefore he said for these sins christian men have
lost all the lands that we hold. For though sin has god put this land
in to our hands and not through strength but thorughe your sins and
wretchedenes.

But we know right well for a certay^te that when ye serve well your god that
he will help and socoure you In such wise yt no man can withstand against
you. And that also we know well by our prophecyes that the christian men shall
wyune these lands again wha^ they serve their god well. But whiles that they
live so synfully and so wretchedly as they do we have no dread of them. And
then he asked the soudan how that he knew so a^ the estate of crystendome.
And the soudan said that he know it both of lords and commons / and by his
messangets the which he sent thorughte all countrees as they were merchants
with perles and precious stones and diverse other marchaundyses for to know the
manner of all countrees. And then the soudan called in the lords again. And
then he showed unto me the gretest lords of that contree / the which did
speak you ^^^^^^yght well ever ch^^e and the soudan also and than I had great
mer^ayll of the dysclau^dre of our faith. And so the ^^^kes and sarasyns ye
which should be ^orned to Ihesu christ by good example / they ben drawn away
thorughe our sin and wretched lyuy^ge for they say sot he / wherefore it is
great pity for to behold and here ye sins that reygneth now thorughe all
crystendome. But the sarasyns ben true For they keep well the law or writing
of Alcaron yt they say that god sent then by his messa^ger Machamet unto
whom they say that Saint gabryell spoke often with him / and told to him ye
will of our lord / And this Machamet was borne in Arabye / and he was first
a knave and kept the horses in the stable and he went after marchantes So he
came ones in to Egypt with a merchant, And egypt was ye time christian and
there was a chapel beside Arabye / wherein did dwell an hermyte and when he
entered in to the chapel the which was but a little house and a low anon it
ganne for to wax as great as a palace gate. And ye sarasyns said that it was
ye first miracle that Machamet did in his yongthe. And afterward Machamet
began for to be right wife. And he was afterward a great astronomyer and
sith he was keeper of all the gold of the princes of Corydan and he governed
and kept it full wisely. And when that the prince of Corydan was deed he
wedded his wife the lady that men called Quadryge. And this false Machamet fell
often into ye falling evil / wherefore the lady was wroth because that she
had taken him to her husband. But this Machamet made her to believe that at
every time yt he fell so that the angel gabryell spoke unto him / and that
for the great bryghtnesse of ye angel he fell down. This machamet reigned in
Arabye the year of our lord Ihesu christ. vi. ho^dreth and twenty. And was of
the kynred of Ismael that was Abraham's sone and he begat him on Arage his
chambere^. And therefore ye sarasyns ben called Ismahelytes and some Agaren / and
some of Agar. And some there be that been called Moabytes / and some Amonytys
after the two sons of Loathe. And this false Machamet loved well an holy man ye
which dwelled in a wilderness yt was a mile from the mount of Synay in the
vale as men does go fro Arabye unto Caldas / and it is but a days Iourneye
fro the sea when merchants come from Venis. Machamet went often i^to that
hermytage wherefore his men wexed all angry and wroth and forsothe he would
gladly here the hermyte preche and made his men for to wake all night wherefore
they would gladly have had ye hermyte deed. And so it be fell upon a night yt
Machamet had well dronken wine and fell a sleep / and his men took his sword
out of his shethe whiles that he lay and slepte so fast and slew therewith
this hermyte. And then they put up his sword again in his shethe all blody
and upon the morrow when he found ye hermyte deed he was wroth out of mefure
and would have stayne his men. But they with one accord said yt he himself
had slain him when he was dronken. And then they badde him look upon his
sword ye which was all blody. And when he beheld it he wend yt they had
said sothe and this is the second miracle ye Marchmet did / and he cursed
the wine and all them that dronkke any wine. And therefore the sarasyns dare not
drink no wine but some drink it pryuely for and they drink good beuerage and
nourys^hynge the which is made of Camamyle and thereof is the sugre made. Also
it be falls sometime that christian men be come sarasyns either thrughe pouerte
or through wyckednes and when yt they have renou^ced the christian faith they
learn him their falls bylyue and makes him for to say thus when they receive
him.

La oles ella Machamet roses alla.

That is to say / there is no god but one and Machamet is his messenger. etc.

Also the turks believe is strongly kept in their cyrcu^cysyon. And they ben
cyrcumcysed when they be of the aege of.xii. year for Ismael Abraham's first
sone was circu^cysed at thyrten year old of whom they be^ all proceeded and
comen. And that law they keep still after the old manner / and their believe is
that they may dry^ke no wine. And their law is that they should pray and
fast much but they keep it but little. But Machamet knew not ye our lord
Ihesu christ was god and man And he says also in his Alcaro^ that ye Jews put
not our lord Ihesu christ upon ye cross nor put him not unto death. For the
turks say that when they would have taken out lord they took Judas his
traytoure in his stead. For thy say that our lord Ihesu christ had altered
himself in his likeness and incontinent as he had done this he went into
heaven and Judas was put upon the cr^sse in his stead thi^ is th^yr ^als
byle^^e. And shall come again in the end ^o the world and Judge and shall
dystroye ^^^tecryst. And they say that such a great prophet would not deye
such a shame full death. For he did aray^e the deed and in this false opinion
they accord with ^^^secte of Manacheen and they say that the cross is a
token of the devil and that no man should worship it. And they believe not that
he is arysen from death unto life and they forsake. Also ye seven sacraments
of holy c^^rche the which ben run out of his holy five wou^^es ye which
keep us from all mysbyleue and bring us in to everlasting Joy there as his
holy sy^e w^^des ben bryghter and ^ayrer than the son. Amen.

Thus ends the Alcaron of the Turks law / made by the false Nygromancer
Machamet. Enprynted at London in Fletestrete in the sign of the Son by me
Wynkyn de word.

wynkyn.de. word.
printer's device of Wynkyn de Word


