LECTVRES of John Knewstub, upon the twentieth Chapter of Exodus, and certain
other places of Scripture.

Seen and allowed according to the Queens majesty's Injunctions.

IMPRINTED BY Lucas Harrison.

ANNO. 1577.

To the right Honorable and virtuous Lady, the Lady Anne, Countess of
Warwick I. K. wishes increase of that grace, that has promises, both of this
life, and of the life to come.
WHen once I had yielded (right honorable) to the often and earneste request of
sundry men, for the publishing of certain Lectures which (as they said) not
without some fruit they had heard me read, I was soon resolved within my
self of one, to whom I might present the first fruits of this my labor. For
the well accepting of that which first I did speak before your honor, put me
in assured hope to find an indifferent ear for this, which with more
deliberation I should commit to writing and the manifold benefits which I
have received, constreined me to lay hold of any opportunity offered, whereby
I might le^^e some remembrance of my thankfulness and duty toward any of
that honorable house of Warwick, to the which I am (in the Lord) so many ways
indebted. Whereof I have in few words to say thus much, that I think there is
great occasion offered of thankfulness unto the Lord, who would that so many
benefits and so much comfort should come to me from thence, that he has
offered me also this opportunity, to leave behind me a thankful memory
thereof, that there might be some remembrance continued of that thing, that
has in it great deserving why it should not be soon forgotten. And to the
Christian reader whosoever I say, that I am not ignorant into what danger I
have offered my self, attempting to write of that matter wherein so many and
godly men with so great fruit and commendation have trauayled before me for
to add any thing unto them, or to differ any whit from them, will be charged
of some with novelty, or secret reprehension of their trauayles, and to tread
in the same steps with others that have gone before, shall not be able to avoid
the blame of needless labor, and travel to no purpose. I am therefore to
require of all men that judgment may not proceed against me, before I shall be
admitted to speak for my self, and that with indifferency it may be heard
what can be said, why no such sentence ought by any right to pass against me
or any other in the like attempt. And for the former charge (of adding any
thing to the labors of so godly men) if those who have gone before us having
so little help from their predecessors, have notwithstanding left great light
unto us, so that being be trusted, but (as it were) with one talent, by their
diligent travel and occupying they have made it five, I do not see, but that it
may well stand with the modesty of a Christian of our time, being so richly
left, and entering upon so great a stock, to travel at the reckoning to be
found at the lest to have gained something: nay, I do not see how we shall
avoid the just reproach of unfaithful stewardes, if so many talents increase
nothing under our hands: so far am I from imagining that the blame of
novelty or any such thing, has in it just cause to stay our travel, or
hinder our labor in that behalf.

And for the other charge (of treading in the same steps with them that have
gone before us) if that course should be taken, there is much that might be
said for it. For the same meat which being prepared by one, does please the
taste and stomach: being dressed by another, we have no such savor in it:
and surely the affections of men stand no less diversely affected toward the
variety of Gods gifts in delivering one and the same matter, then does the
stomache toward the diversity of dressing of one and the same kind of meat,
so that in so great diversity a man may with modesty hope to be directed unto
some, who shall find themselves helped by his handeling of the matter, albeit
no other thing be brought beside that which has been heard of before: For as
the Lord will always have this advantage against the wicked for the cleareing
of his justice, that it may truly be said unto them, in respect of the
variety of Gods gifts granted them: We have piped unto you, but ye have not
daunsed: Luke* 7.31.
we have mourned unto you, and ye have not wept: so will he magnify his mercy
toward those that be his, in granting them such variety of gifts, as no
man shall be so affected, but that he shall find a help prepared, whereby he
may be benefited. We see then, that either of these courses has not only
sufficient defense to clear it, but also much to be said in the commendation
of the same. The Christian Reader shall perceive in perusing this treatise of
the law, that my travel has been to let him see, that Christ is a Savior in
deed unto him, that he might perceive the length, breadth, and depth of his
mercies, and so be brought to embrace them accordingly. And because the
greatness of our corruption discovers the riches of his grace, which is by
so much the richer, as the poverty is greater which it does relieve: I have
labored therefore to lay out our poverty and want in every particular
commandment, and how our affection stands naturally not indifferent, but an
utter enemy to the obedience required in the same: that in the sight of so
much rebellion and sin, bleeding (as it were) in every part of us of some
deadly wound, we might slack no time in seeking unto Christ Jesus the only
Physician of our soul: and considering the number and danger of those wounds
that he does cure and cover in us, we might never forget or smally account of,
but always worthily magnify the greatness of his grace and mercy toward us.

Which manner of proceeding (if it be indifferently examined) shall be found to
have great fruit and profit in it: For to make us careful in seeking after
Physic, this is not sufficient, that we know our selves to be diseased and
sick, but to know a number of diseases to be growing upon us, and those of
that quantity that every of them threatens present death, haueing infected
the principal parts of our life: that is it which makes a man with all
speed to take him to the remedy appointed for the same. Many there are, who
will not deny themselves to be sinners and sick of sin: but because they
neither know how many parts are infected, nor yet how dangerous their
infection is, their care to be relieved is the smaller, and their labor the
less to be ridd of it. Whereupon also it follows, that he is so much the
less regarded who is to work that cure upon them: so that we see this
general lapping up of sin, when it is not vnfolden to our consciences and
laid out in the several branches thereof, is not only hurtful unto us, but
also injurious unto the due estimation of the death of Christ. I cannot more
fitly compare those men (who will most willingly confess them selves in
general words to be sinners, and yet are very loath to be troubled with any
particular knowledge thereof) then unto some notorious offenders against the
laws and peace of their prince, who can willingly hear these general words,
that they be offenders, and have not kept the several statutes and laws of
their prince, so that they will proceed no further with them: but to be
brought forth and charged with their several fellonies, murders, or treasons
that they have committed, and to have their wickedness particularly laid out
in number of deeds, and manner of doing, that may best set out the heynousnesse
thereof, that, in no ease, may be abidden: and yet notwithstanding before that
time, neither is their own estate greatly feared, nor yet the law so much as
thought upon how to be satisfied. It is this particular sight of sin that
sends us forthwith unto Christ, and makes him appear both glorious in the
multitude of his so great mercies, and most necessary in the consideration
of our so many dangerous infirmities.

If it please the Reader in the examining of him self in any commandment,
forthwith to join to the same that which is written here of the properties of
love, and that other next Lecture of the use of the law: he shall find (I
hope) some help in them, the sooner to depart from him self, and the more
carefully to embrace Christ. And that he may be acquainted the better with my
meaning, and purpose in this matter, I will give him in few words the reason
of the same.

I see in the law of God that we are not only forbidden the works of our own
devotion and intent, and bound to that choice of works that God has appointed
in his word: but also that we are strictly charged to do the same, all and
every one of them in love, which is an affection that carries a man so in
delight after the things which he loves, that he oftentimes forgets
himself in respect thereof, according as it is reported by the holy Ghost (as
a property to know it by) that love seeks not her own things. This is the
cause why after the commandementes I have set down the notes and properties to
discern love by, that when we have seen what works they be that we are bound
to do, we may also see with what affection we are charged to do the^: that we
may be as careful to bring the right manner of doing unto the Lord, as the
very deed that he approves. For we are as well to perform duty in the
manner of doing, as in the deed it self: It is one and the same God who has
enjoined both unto us, and therefore may not be denied in either of them. The
use of the law which is in the Lecture following, will declare with what
conditions we have wages promised for our work, and whether the covenant be so
favorable as that we need not to doubt, but that we shall be able to
perform it, and therefore to live in it: or otherwise so hard, (as the
truth is in very deed) that he remains under the curse of God, who
continues not in all things that are written in the book of the law to do
them. Let us then set these together. First, the number of deeds: then, the
manner of doing, which must have in it those properties that be in love: and
last of al, the hard condition, which is, not to have our good doeings to
blotte out and put off our evil, but to remain under the curse, if we shall
not continue in every thing that is written in the book of the law to do
it: and then we shall be forced to give over this strong hold, even this
confidence in our selves, and betake us wholly to the mercy of our God, and
magnify the same accordingly. And least we should imagine the matter of
letting go the opinion of our selves and our worthiness to be nothing so hard
as is supposed, and therefore no such need to have so often before us in
meditation and earnest consideration thereof the multitude of deeds to be
done, the loving manner of doing, and the hard condition if they shall not be
done: Let us advisedly consider, how that singular instrument of God S. Paul
confesses, that he himself was so subject unto this over great opinion of him
self, that the messenger of satan was sent unto him to buffet him, 2. Cor. 12.7
least he should be puffed up with the measure of graces, which were given
unto him. The danger is greater therefore then we are aware of, when so rare
an instrument and chosen servant of GOD as was Paul, so hardely and with so
much a do, is brought to have an humble opinion of him self and his
worthiness.

The Romish religion likewise (fighting so stoutely for the deserte of man) may
teach us, that this doctrine of true humbling and submitting of our selves unto
our God, will not so easily enter into fleash and blood, as at the first we
would imagine: but that we have need often to set before us this lookeing
glass of the law, in manner as has been declared, to humble us withal: and
all shall be found little inoughe to bring us truly from our selves, and to
send us, not in part, but wholly, unto the mercies of our GOD, which are
declared unto us at large in the next Lecture after the use of the law.

When we shall have profited in drawing nere unto Christ, and making much of
his mercy, by an often and true sight of our selves in the law, there is yet
remaining an other use and fruit to be taken by it, of no less profit then
the former: which is, that when we shall have taken comfort in the mercies
of Christ, and decreed to walk in the obedience of his will, to declare our
thankfulness thereby: the law will stand us in good stead to quicken us
thereunto, while we learn by it, both the number of things that are to be
done, and also the backwardness of our natural disposition and inclination
thereunto: which we could not once (without this admonition from the law) have
suspected to have been so great, and therefore our care to suppress it,
would have been so much the less. But having determined once to walk in the
ways of his commandments, and then having warning from the law, that there
is both in our wit and will enimitie thereunto, altogether bent to resist it:
it can not but increase our care, and add unto our pains and travail, for the
atteining unto that end of obedience which we have propounded unto us. For the
man who has a desire unto any thing, understanding once of any let in the
way, is thereby more provoked and stirred up to bestow cares and pains upon
the same: knowing very well, that the thing which he desires can not otherwise
be compassed.

And where is that man then, that seeing what duties are to be performed both
to the Lord, and to his brethren, and in what manner of affection and love,
(for it is the end of Christ his death, and the purchase of his passion to
have a number not only given, but zelously given unto good works) remembering
withal, what an enemy he has at home of his own nature, if there be any
fear of God in him, that shall not be occasioned hereby more plentifully to
practice the means of his salvation: especially knowing, that those who are
ingrafted into the body of Christ, must dye unto sin and rise up in to these
fruits of righteousness? Moreover the knowledge and meditation of the law and
commandments, do help us forward unto true and sincere Christianity. For a
great number deceive them selves in a general good meaning which they have to
serve the Lord, taking that to be the true service of him: and in the mean
time are nothing careful to keep a good conscience in the several duties of
the law, nor any thing traueyling to train up their affections to delight
therein: as if in Christianity we were to roue vncerteinely about good motions
and good meanings, and had no certain marks of several duties set before us
to shoot at, that we might so judge of our selves, as we see us come short or
wide of them: whereas the true Christian, in very deed profits in drawing
nearer and nearer unto the Lord, in making his life and conversation more
conformable unto the several duties set down in the commandments, being
likewise careful to approve his doings by the laws and statutes made for the
same, as in civil dealings and traffic, a man will fear to offend against
the laws and statutes provided in that behalf. And as a wise man that has
much dealing in the world, will have some abstract of the statutes, that (as
occasion requires) he may turn to them, and so deal without danger of law:
so it stands well with the policy of a Christian, to be skillful in the
statutes of his God, that when he has to deal with the name of his brother,
lookeing in this abstract, he may see the cautions to be observed in the same,
that he offend not against the laws and statutes of the Highest: and when
soever he has to deal with his goods, he may turn in like manner to that
statute that has provided for well dealing therein, and so avoid the dangers
that otherwise he should fall into. The like is to be done, when there are
dealings immediately between us and the Lord, that we should often look into
this brief abstract of the statutes of our God, to see always what is the
prouiso that is made for his glory, and the suppressing of our own
corruption. Our corrupt nature does ask all this of us, and the man that
fears God gives no less unto it. For the blessed man is said to meditate
in the law of his God day and night. Nay, we see that the only wise God (who
knows better then we our selves what need we have) has appointed us yet more
means, and therefore we must think that there is more untowardness in us, then
we could of our selves suspect. For he has left it a perpetual order for the
education of his children, that there should be men of special gifts, both for
learning and aptness to teach, and also for good life: who by teaching,
exhorting, and reproving, should (as it were) whet the word to make it enter.
It must of necessity be an hard matter, that requires such instruments, and
such workmen, for both the instrument and the workmen are from above: The
wisdom of the world could not perform this, and therefore the Gospel
(which is the arm and power of God unto salvation) was sent from the bosom of
the father: and for the workmen, we are not at our choice to take where it
seems good unto us, but they are appointed to our hand by the holy Ghost, who
has set down such notes of good learning and good life to discern them by,
who are of his sending, and fit for so weighty a work, as that they give
forth a plain testimony unto us, that they come from Heaven, framed and
prepared of the Lord him self unto this work.

As the goodness of our God could not deny us any thing necessary, so his
wisdom would not that we should be laden with any thing superfluous and
unnecessary, which must force us to conclude against our selves, that we are
not known unto our selves, unless we see matter within us, necessarily
requiring to be pricked forward with the lively preaching and sounding
ministry of the word: and that we tempt the Lord, if we content our selves
with our private readings and meditations, and despise the preaching of the
word: which the Lord has seen to be so necessary, that he has appointed
it not for one sort of men, but unto all, of what condition soever: neither
unto age alone, but perpetual for all ages and times. The labors therefore of
them that do write, are not taken in hand, that men standing upon them, should
contemn or less frequent the public ministry of the Church: but to bring
them into greater love and liking with the same, that receiving some fruit
that way, they might look for a great deal more by that which is appointed
by the Lord, Col. 1.21
to present us perfect in Christ Jesus.

Concerning these Lectures, I am to crave generally of all men to whose hands
they shall come, that in what point so ever they shall think their admonition
may do me good, they would not deny me that Christian and Brotherly help:
and likewise if they shall in any thing find themselves helped by my travel,
that as they are to return the whole praise unto GOD (to whom only it is
due) so they would not deny the comfort of their prayers unto him, whom the
Lord in mercy has vouchsafed to make an instrument (though most unworthy) of
some goodness unto them. And of your honor (my very good Lady) I am most
humbly to require, that this duty (how slenderly soever performed) may
according to your accustomed clemency be well accepted of: that what want
soever be in the work, either of that you desire, or that I were in duty to
perform, may find a supply herein, for that it proceeds from a mind
most willing to answer your desire, and most unwilling (if ability did
serve) to be behind with the least part of that, that duty may in any
respect demand.

And as al good Christians should rather be desirous to learn how to go
forward, then to hear what good beginnings they have made, so I doubt not
(Madame) but a few words uttered to that end (especially from me that have
great cause to be thankeful unto God, for that he has already wrought in you)
shall find better interteinement with your honor, then much speech directed
to an other purpose, how good and just soever the cause be that might provoke
me thereunto. It was a saying sometime of Asia, that it was no praise never to
have seen it, but to have lived temperately in Asia, was praise worthy: so
many were the allurements, and so great was the intemperancie thereof. I think
we may now (altering the words) retain the truth of the matter, if we should
say: it were no great matter, never to have seen the Courts of Princes, but
to have lived Christianly in those Courts, were a special work of Christ in
his. And therefore (Madame) as sometimes I spoke in the hearing of your honor,
so now I say again, that where the assault of the adversary lies sorest
against any, there wisdom would, that the instruments to bear off and to
beat back the same, should be more in number, and stronger in effect. And for
this cause we do read, that in the Court of Israel the Prince himself, who
for the number and weight of affairs was (as may be thought) by some just
title to be priuileged above the rest, might not be exempted from keeping this
diligent watch and ward in his own person, (by reading all the days of his
life in the laws of his God) against the dangers that by reason of that place
he was in great danger of: diverse whereof, after they are recited in
Deuteronomie, immediately the holy Ghost gives the medicine for them, which
is, to be occupied in the laws of his God, all the days of his life. If any
by daily meditation in the law of God, Pro. 4.8.
shall thus exalt wisdom (that is the word of God) by making it the chief
delighte of their heart, beside the avoiding of these dangers and such like,
there is a promise passed from the Lord, that wisdom shall exalt them. If
they shall set her in place and estimation above all other things, she will
requite it again, by aduauncing their honor and estate above the condition of
others: but if they shall make no more of her, but as a common thing, she will
answer them in like measure again, to leave the^ in place and estimation with
the common and worst sort of men.

The honor therefore of advancement (which all men are given to have so great
lyking of) comes neither from the East nor from the West, but from the Lord
him self: and this true honor wayteth upon all of them, whom employ them
selves, their countenance and their credit, to honor and advance this
wisdom, which is the word of God. Which thing that it may abound in you
(Madame) daily more and more, and in his honor to whom the Lord has joined
you, and that by the means thereof, you may so continue your life, as that you
shall not fear to dye, as in duty I am for many benefits received most
bounden: so I do most humbly crave it of our merciful GOD, to whose fatherly
providence (ceassing to add any thing further, and remaining to perform all
duties, from time to time that I shall be enabled unto) I do most humbly
committee your Honor. (?)

Your honors most humble to command in the Lord. John Knewstub.

THE LECTVRES of John Knewstub upon the twentieth chapter of Exodus, and
certain other places of Scripture. The first Lecture upon the first and
second verse of the same Chapter.
THEN God spoke al these words, saying: I am the Lord thy God,

2 Which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of
bondage.


IT has always been and now is a fruitful travail of men, to draw arts
and sciences plentifully laid out into brief heads, and some few general
rules and principles, not only for memory, (which in many, and long
discourses, becomes so entangled as it can hardly with any fruit get out:)
but also for practice, which of necessity must be so much the later, as it
shall be longer before we learn the matters to be practiced: and the slower we
are in perusing matters to be done, the slacker must we be in the performance
thereof. But yet all this notwithstanding, as well reason, as the practice of the
learned, might easily be avoided, because all is but the reason and practice of
man: if the only wise God had not leafte unto us, the whole doctrine of
Christianity comprehended in very few words, Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5. Matt. 22.37.
Heb. 6.1.
examples whereof we have diverse, both in the old, and new Testamente,
which may be a sufficient warrant for enterprising thus briefly to comprehend
Christianity.

If any shall take exception against the preaching and opening of the law in
this clear light of the gospel, calling it (as it is called in the second
Epistle to the Corinthes) the ministry of death, 2. Cor. 3.
and the killing letter: let him understand that the holy ghost in the same
place speaks of the law without Christ, what it works in our infirmity:
whereas otherwise of the law (being considered in the covenant, that is, in
Christ) it is truly said by the Prophet in the Psalm, The law of the Lord
is perfect, Psalm 19.7
converting the soul, the statues of the Lord rejoice the heart, etc.

At the publishing of this law of God, there was great terror and fear on
every side. For (as appears in this former chapter) the mount Synai was all
on smoke, and the Lord came down upon it in fire, and the smoke thereof
ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and all the mount trembled excedingly. The
people hearing the thunders and lightnings, and the sound of the trumpet,
seeing the mounteine smoking, and feeling such terrible trembling and shaking
of the earth, fled, and stood a far off: making earnest suite unto Moses
that he would speak unto them, and that they might not hear the Lord least
they died, so great was their fear, and so woonderfully were they amassed at
the matter. It was very requisite and necessary, that this majesty of the
lord should come in with the entrance of his word. For we are given to make
small reckoning of it, and lightly to reject the authority thereof. For, do
not thousands imagine that they sufficiently reverence the majesty of the
Lord, when notwithstanding, they live without all awe, fear, and reverence of
his word? Nedeful therefore was it, nay most necessary, that the majesty of
the Lord should visibly come forth after a glorious manner at the delivery of
the word: that men might understand that the neglect of the word, is the
contempt of the majesty and honor of the Lord. For the Lord has coupled his
honor, and glory to his word, so that they can not neglect the one, but that
they must in so doing contemn and despise the other. Heb. 1.
Those plentiful testimonies, that are recited to the Hebrews to advance the
dignity of Christ, proving his divinity, and giving him superiority above
the Angels: are in the second chapter applied by way of exhortation, to the
reuerencing of his word: telling them, that if the word spoken by angels was
ratified, and that every disobedience received a just recompense of reward,
how could they think once to escape, neglecting so great salvation, which at
the first, begoon to be preached by the Lord, and afterward was confirmed by
them that heard him God bringing testimony and authority thereunto, both with
signs and woonders, and diverse miracles, and gifts of the holy Ghost. Well
did the Lord understand, that words are but wind with men, and therefore it
was the good pleasure of his will, that neither his law, nor Gospel should come
naked and bare into the world, but with the credit of his own glory, and
countenance of his own majesty. For, the gospel as now we have heard, was
not only preached by the Lord Jesus, but also confirmed by the ministry of
those that heard him, with signs, woonders, and miracles: so that to neglect
the government of the word, is, to tread under feet the majesty of the
Lord. Having made this entrance I do proceed unto the text, where I am
enforced to speak a little of the nature of the words, because they bring
great light to the true understanding, and meaning of the commandment.

The word JEHOVAH which is here englished Lord, is a name of God, giving unto
him his true nature and essence, which is, so to have his beginning, and being,
of him self, as in him, and by him, all things that are, have their being:
and therefore it is usually set before the promises and covenants of the Lord
in the scripture, that we should not doubt of the perfourmance thereof, seeing
it is the covenant and promise of that God that has his beginning and being
of him self, and procures the being and perfourmance of all things unto them:
in so much that the Lord denies in Exodus that he was known to Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, by his name Jehovah, Exo. 3.9.
because he had not performed in their time the promises made for their
deliverance out of Egypt, and for their possession of the land of Canaan. The
verb is not usually expressed of the Hebrews in the like phrases, where the
sense is apparent, and therefore of some is set down before the word, Lord,
and read thus. I am the Lord thy GOD: of other some next after the word,
Lord, and then it is read thus: I the Lord am thy GOD, wherein, although in
sense there be no difference, but that both affirm one and the self same
thing, yet because there is more clear understanding of that one and the same
thing, by placing the verb next after the word, Lord, I see no cause why
the practice of some should be prejudicial in this matter, but that it may be
said. I the Lord am thy GOD.

In affirming that he is their God, he assures them of all mercy and
happiness, from him self alone, both in this life and in the life to come,
making a league with the^, to make himself known to be their God, by the
mercies he had to bestow upon them, and that he would have the care and charge
of their welfare, reserved to himself alone. It remains to be proved by the
scripture, that this manner of speaking (to be their God) conteyneth promises
in it, for this life and for the life to come. In the psalm, Psalm. 144.15
the Prophet having made mention of sundry outward blessings in children, in
increase of corn and cattle, peace and freedom from enemies, concludes thus,
Blessed are the people that be so, blessed are the people whose GOD is the
Lord, making these outward blessings, to be contained under the benefit of
having the Lord to be their god. Exodus 6.7.
In Exodus, promising their deliverance from Egypt, he says that he will be
their God, containing that outward deliverance, within this mercy of being
their God. And as for the spiritual and inward blessings, as writing his law
in our hearts, pardoning our sins, and not remembering them any more, that
they are contained within this covenant of being our God, may appear in the
Epistle to the Hebrews. He. 8.10.12.
After those days (says the Lord) I will put my laws in their minds, and in
their hearts I will write them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my
people. For I will be merciful unto their unrighteousness, and their sins
and their iniquities I will remember no more. And in Ezechiel we may clearly
see, Ezech. 38.28
that the renewing of our stony hearts, the receiving us to mercy after we
have transgressed, the causing us to walk in his statutes and laws, are
streams that flow from this free founteine of grace that the Lord is become
our GOD. A new heart (says the Lord by his Prophet) will I give you, and a
new spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the stony heart out
of your body, and will give you a heart of flesh: and I will put my spirit
within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my
judgments, and do them, and ye shall dwell in the land that I gave to your
Fathers, and you shall be my people, and I will be your GOD: Where, these
benefits received, are made the fruits that follow of having him to be their
God, which is all done freely, and undeservedly, as the Lord plainly
professes in the same chapter in these words: Verse. 32.
Be it known unto you, that I do not these things for your sake (says the
Lord) therefore O ye house of Israel, he ashamed and confounded for your own
ways. Neither does this mercy of having the Lord to be our God, conteyne it
self within the compass of this life, but reaches unto the blessings of the
life to come, as appears in the Gospel after Saint Luke, Luke. 20.37.38.
where our Savior Christ proves that it must needs be well with Abraham,
and that he must rise again, because it is written, The Lord is the God of
Abraham, for he is not the GOD of the dead, (says our Savior Christ) but of
them that live.

In the Epistle to the Hebrews, Abraham, Heb. 11.10.
and others the children of God, are reported to have been strangers in the
land of promise, and not to have seen the promises fulfilled in their time:
which might seem to make against this that I have said, concerning the
blessing of them to whom the Lord is become God: but it is answered there, that
he was not ashamed to be called their God, for he had prepared for them a
city: as if that which seemed to be wanting in this life, were so
sufficiently recompe^ced in that joy that did abide for them, as yt the Lord
neded not to be ashamed to be called their God, so rich was his mercy toward
them. By this we learn, that the first commandment conteyneth in it the
promises of the Gospel (as it is well noted by M. Peter martyr upon Romans 7.
Peeter Martyr) contrary to this damnable opinion of certain, who hold, that
the fathers of the old Testament, had no promises, saving of the land of
Canaan, and temporal things. We see that the Lord made promise to be their
God, which (as we have heard) has promises both of this life, and of the life
to come. And (as it appears in Genesis) all the mercies that Abraham
received, Gene. 17.7.
were contained under these words (which are the words of the covenant) I
will be God to thee and to thy seed after thee.

The benifite (that here is set down) of bringing the^ out of the land of
Egypt, and from the house of bondage, is an experience which they had of this
goodness of God, wherein he did apparauntly declare him self to be their God,
and so likewise it is in other places brought in as a confirmation of the
covenant: Deuteronomy. 7.8.9.
Because the Lord loved you (says the holy ghost) and because he would keep
the oath which he had sworn to your fathers, the Lord has brought you out by a
mighty hand, and delivered you out of the house of bondage, from the hand of
Pharao king of Egypt, that thou may know, that the Lord thy God he is
GOD, the faithful God, which keeps covenant and mercy unto them that love
him, and keep his commandments. This experience of God his goodness
toward them, and the trial that he is become their GOD, makes much to
bring an obedience, and therefore is placed with the covenant. For when we
have trial in deed, that ye Lord has special good will toward us, it has
great force in it, to bring us willingly under his obedience. Therefore we are
taught by this, always to have in memory those benefits of God, that have in
them the note and mark of special good will and lyking, such as he bears
unto his Children. For the remembrance of those, will draw duties from us,
that shall proceed from a frank and free heart. Let us therefore have a register
of his greatest benefits done unto us: Let us call to mind what a special
benefit this is, if we had none other, that when we were (as is the
disposition of all Adams children) following the lusts and affections of our
own heart, in that broad way that leads unto death, which so many follow, it
has pleased him to pick us out of so many, to give us mysliking of that course
of life, which by nature we are so addict and inclyned unto, and the earnest
hungring and thirsting after that righteousness that is approved by his word:
His benefits may not be over passed without consideration, they carry with them
strong persuasion unto obedience, the faithful do use this help to further
obedience unto God. In the last chapter of Joshua, Joshua. 24.
there is mention made of the several benefits of God bestowed upon his
people, and all for this end, to reclayme them from sin, and to stir them
to free and willing service of the Lord. And the people (in the same Chapter)
allege his benefits received, as a reason, why they neither may nor will
refuse obedience unto him. God forbid (say the people) that we should forsake
the Lord to serve other Gods. For the Lord brought us and our fathers out of
the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage, and he did those great miracles
in our sight, and preserved us in all the way that we went, and among all the
people, through whom we came, and the Lord did cast out all the people, even
the Amorites which dwelt in the land, therefore will we serve the Lord, for he
is our GOD. They gather by these benefits that he is their God, and conclude
therefore that they will serve the Lord because he is their God, and has been
so singulerly good and beneficial unto them.

And in very deed this persuasion that he is our God, and so tenderly
affected toward us, is the mother of all true obedience, the founteine from
whence flows all true worship and service of God, the note that discerns
between the works of a true Christian, and the deeds of an Infidel or
heathen man. The Christian works his obedience, having this persuasion, that
God is already his GOD: The Infidel and unbeliever has no such persuasion,
and therefore his doings come not franckly and freely from him to honor the
Lord, but slauishly and seruilely to serve himself, and after that manner, as
it were, to get within the Lord, and to earne his salvation of him self, It
is this faith which made the difference between the sacryfice of Abell, and
the sacrifice of Cayne, as the Scripture does declare. It is this faith, that
makes the difference between the continency that we have read to have been
in Infidelles and Paganes, and that which is in Christians: between the
mercy and alms that proceeds oftentimes from civil men, and that merciful
relief that comes from Christians: It is this persuasion of his goodness
that justifies the one, whereas ye other wanting this is odious and hateful in
his sight. It is this persuasion, yt God is so rich in goodness as to accept
of us, which sends us to the true service of him. The Lord is not only
contented to say, that he is their GOD, but also to bring good evidence for the
same, in putting the^ in mind of that singular benefit of their deliverance
from Egypt, which he had bestowed upon them.

We learn then in this Commandment (which charge us that we take the
Lord for our God) that he has taken upon him self the provision, to stoare
us with graces and blessings, both for this life, and for the life to come:
and will have the honor and glory of it him self alone, because he will
declare the riches of his graces toward his faithful people, and by his
dealing with them, be known to be their God. Therefore, he binds us to
seek for all good things at his hands alone: and in like manner, when we have
received any thing by humble thanksgiving to return ye whole praise thereof
unto him again. Now that we know ye meaning of this commandment, it behooves
us to apply it to our profit: wherein we must first understand, that by ye
means of sin (which is in every man by nature) man his wit and understanding
has received such a blindness, as it cannot conceive the truth of this
commandment, and also his will and affection is so poisoned, as it cannot take
any joy or lyking in it: the trial whereof, may be had in this manner: when the
man that is not borne again and received into mercy (whom the scripture
calls the natural man because all are such by nature) when he (I say) is in
any straight or necessity, either because he wants necessary food for this
life, or for that he is in danger to loose wealth, credit, or life, and sees
not the ordinary means, by which it is likely he should escape ye danger:
Let it the^ be told him, that God is his God, and has a love toward him, and
a care over him, and will in his time by lawful means provide for him: yet
notwithstanding his wit neither co^ceueth this persuation, nor his will and
affection is any thing made joyful or comforted thereby, as one that desirously
enclyneth after the hope thereof: which is declared by this, that some fall to
stealinge, or seeking unto witches, wisemen, or wisewomen (as they call them)
to have their griefs remedied, and their wantes supplied: others not using the
same, yet by one unlawful means or other, wind them selves out of danger,
not waiting by faith upon the Lord, until by lawful means he procure their
deliverance.

This corruption also of the natural man, is no less evident, when he is out
of danger and has ordinary means to maintain him by. For when a natural man
has credit, wealth, or friends to compass matters by, either not at all
does he seek to God by prayer to prosper those means which he uses: either
else if he pray unto him, it is so coldely, as that every man may perceive,
but especially his own conscience may tell him, that his hope arises, rather
from the means he has, then from the goodness of God, without whose blessing
all helps are nothing: and yet for all that, he finds no fault with him self
for want of faith, but will protest, that he takes God to be his God, and
looks for all things from him, believing as assuredly in him, as the best of
them all. It is not greatly to be merueyled at, if the natural man give so
much unto the means, for it comes often times to pass, that the Lord is
constrained in dealinge with his Children, to withdraw something from the
number or stength, even of his lawful and ordinary means, that the glory may
be wholly his. A notable example whereof we have in the book of the Judges,
Judge. 7.1.
where the Lord caused Gedeon to send away the greatest part of his men when
he should go to battle, giving the reason of his doing in these words. The
people that are with thee, are to many for me to give the Madianites into their
hands, lest Israel make their vaunt against me, and say, My hands have saved
me. Thus corrupt is the estate that all men are borne in, and in this estate
do all men continue, finding no fault, nor mislyking of the same, save that
little flock of Christ's, that by the benefit of his death are exempted from
it, whom when it pleases God to call unto the hope of everlasting life, by
the means of his word, he clears their wit and understanding to conceive the
goodness of this God to them ward, he purges their will and affection to take
comfort in it: And therefore when means want, they are not (as the wicked)
altogether without hope, running after unlawful means, but wait better upon
their God: and when they have the ordinary means whereby God usually brings
matters to pass, they are careful in craving ye success of it, yea with
inward persuasion of heart, to find no fruit but by his blessing.

The man that will truly examine himself in this commandment, must well
consider with himself, what evil and unlawful shifts he has made throughout
this life, in his distress and necessity, or what doubts and fears of not
being well, and in due time provided for, have arisen at any such in time his
heart, and how tickle his nature is thereunto. Likewise when he has had the
usual means of Gods mercies, he must consider well, how sparing and how
cold he has been in prayer to God for ye success of them, which declares,
that his trust was rather in them, then in God the giver of them. Thus may he
easily perceive in what a miserable condition he should have been, had not the
mediator and redeemer Christ Jesus answered the matter for him. It is
therefore required, that after this manner he thoroughly examine his infirmity
and disobedience, until he be truly humbled and brought to Christ, to see
the benefit of his death and passion, how great it is, and how needful for
him, when by due examining of himself he does well understand, that he is
wholly beholden unto God for the benefit of his salvation, because by the law
they are accurssed that continue not in all things which are written in the
book of the law to do them: 2. Cor. 5.
then is he forced to acknowledge that it is good right and reason that his
life should be ordered after the pleasure and will of him, that by his death
has brought deliverance unto him from everlasting death and destruction, and
the hope also of a blessed estate to continue for ever. Whereupon, he proceeds
not only to ye misliking of this corrupt nature of his, but also to the
suppressing of it, that it deal not as it was accustomed, neither when it
wants means, nor yet when it enjoys the^, calling earnestly unto God by
prayer that he may so increase in faith, yt he may glorify him in the
obedience of this commandment. His profiting in this obedience (how great
soever) is always joined with true humility, because he well understands
(by the sight that he has of him self) yt he stands by the mercies of God in
Christ alone, because also he plainly perceives that his obedience is not
without frailty and manifold infirmities cleaving unto it: as his obedience
is not with out humility, so his falls and infirmities are not without grief
and vexatio^ of heart, whilst he sees in them the dishonor and obedience of
that God, of whose free goodness he holds al yt he has or hops for. A great
number persuade the^ selves that their faith is perfect enough, and no want in
it at all, when notwithstanding in their necessities and distresses they are
all ready to doubt and distrust of comfort, as if they had never heard of the
Gospel, nor learned any thing of the promises made unto ye faithful: Nay,
which more is, they shall no sooner be in any distress, but they are as far
from hope in God, and as ready to help them selves by one evil shift or other,
as those civil men which have no religion in them at all: And all this
notwithsta^ing, they cannot see, nor be brought to acknowledge any want in
their faith. Let a man be brought something behind hand (as we say) either
by loss that he has had in his sheep or cattle, or by means of evil
creditors with whom he has hadd dealinges, and by and by he will be ready to
imagine, that he shall not be able to live, unless he utter his commodyties at
a greater price then before he has done, when notwithstanding, he has gone
as far before, as conscience could in any respect give him leave. He
thinks that his former decay, does privilege and make lawful this kind of
dealing: and understand by the way, that in all this purpose and practice, he
receives not any suspicion, that there should be any want of faith or
weakness in that behalf, when as in very deed: then is there true trial of
our faith, if in our necessity, we shall thereby stay us from evil means,
in hope to have us provided for according to his promise, albeit we see not any
likelihood thereof, so far as our reason can reach. For in faith there is hope
beyond hope.

Romans 4.
The Children of God by the eyes of faith, see a secret blessing promised, which
they apprehend by hope, when as the common sort wanting this eye, cast away
all hope, unless by a sensible manner they perceive and presently may groape
the goodness and help of God. The man that will take no knowledge that there is
want of faith in him, but does profess (as the most will do) that he trusts
in God with all his heart, and that there is no mistrust of God in any part or
corner thereof, is to be sent back to his doeings and thoughts that are and
have been in him in the time of his troubles, dangers, poverty or decay: to
consider if there have been the^ in his heart, no more doubting, fearing or
suspecting to be provided for, from the Lord, then has been in other times:
by this means (if there be any sense or judgment in him) he shall be
constrained to confess the weakness of his faith, and so seek his comfort in
Christ, being convict within him self, of such mistrust and unbelief, as
the law does accurse and condemn. For if a man will not willingly be wise in
the beguyling of him self, he may soon see and perceive a great diversity
in him self at those times: that where so long as he had helps and and
holds to go by, he was comfortable, bold and confident, those being taken
away, he is become without all courage, comfort or hope. If there were no
want of faith, how could there be any lack of comfort or hope? If his
confidence were not in the means, how could he be as a man with out all heart
or hope, so soon as the means are either utterly taken away or else
diminished: especially seeing the goodness of the Lord, which is the ground
of faith indureth for ever?

And that the man, which will take no knowledge of the want of his faith, may
be brought to the sight of himself, let him well consider with himself,
what should be the cause, that when he has abundance, and wants no
necessary help, he is so exceeding sparing and careless, in his manner of
serving and seeking of the Lord: in respect of the fear, and care that he is
in, so soon as he shall be any way distressed, and the pains also that then
he takes in his manner of serving the Lord, if his faith be at both times
one, why should his care; which does bewray his fear, be almost none at one
time, and so plentiful at another: but only that there was want of faith
before, albeit he could not epsy it, the means standing as a mist or a
cloud between him, and the light that would teach him truly to discern. The
man therefore yt boasts of the perfection of his faith, not feeling any want
therein: denying that he trusts in his riches, friendship, authority, or
wealth, must be willed to set them a while aside in his thoughts and
considerations, imagining seriously and in good earnest, that he had them not:
then let him ask his conscience, and truly search out his spirits, whither he
could be as confident, comfortable, and hopeful in his heart, in the wanting,
as in the having thereof, his heart will then tell him the contrary, if he
search truly and thoroughly, and his deeds will declare no less. For we shall
se such as courageous, and as confident as may be in their wealth, credit, and
health: and when they are taken away, as faint and feeble, as men that neither
have heart nor hope. Thus must a man be sifted both in abundance and want, that
in ye true sight of his poverty, he may be forced carefully and thankfully to
lay hold upon the mercies brought by Jesus Christ. As for us that profess we
know Christ, and are led to magnify his mercies, by the experience of sin
that we have within our selves: Let us remember that it is our part, to
declare that we are his, and in him, by dying unto sin, and living unto
righteousness. Let us therefore be ashamed to bear the name of Christ, and
to carry ye countenance of them that love his gospel, and yet in our
nccessities to be as mistrustfull, and as ready to help it by one unlawful
shift or other, as ever we were: or as they are, that neither profess nor
know the gospel. Let us be ashamed to profess the gospel, and in the mean
time to be at no more mislyking, nor war with our mistrustfull thoughts,
then we have been, when we had no knowledge of the same. Has not the Lord
therefore died, Romans 6.
that by his power we might die unto sin? has he not appeared to weaken the
power and strength of sin in those that be his, that although they cannot
drive sin from being at all in the flesh, yet they might drive it from
reigning and rulinge in them, abeating the power and force thereof? How can men
think then, that there is any truth of Christianity begun in them, being
in the same manner affected toward their mistrustfull thoughts and evil
shifts, that proceed thereof, as they were from the beginning ere ever they
knew the word and Gospel of their GOD: having no more hatred of them, nor
greater war and strife with them? It is true, that the Lord in mercy for
Christ covers the sins of his, but it is as true, that the Lord cures the
sins of his. It cannot be denied, but that for Christ, he does pardon the
sins of his servants, neither may we deny, but that in Christ he does also
purge the sins of his servants. Let us therefore (brethren) resort unto God
by faithful prayer, that as he has taken away the condemnation of sin, so he
would more and more abolish the rule and kingdom thereof. Our hope is great,
for our promises are many: our captain is strong, our enemy has often been
foiled, even in frail flesh as feeble as we be: but the conquerors have ever
been careful, much given to use the means of the word and prayer, often in
the field with their own affections, having upon them the complete harness
of a Christian.

Now let us pray unto our heavenly father, that we may so see our want of
faith, that we may truly magnify the grace and mercy of GOD in Christ,
which covers the imperfection thereof: and also that we may have such
strength from the power of his death, that by the means thereof we may more
and more prevail both over our mistrustful nature in want, and also over our
careless and secure estate in plenty and abundance.

The second Lecture upon the third, fourth, fifte and sixte verses.
3 Thou shall have none other Gods before me.

4 Thou shall make thee no graven image, neither any similitude of things that
are in heaven above, neither that are in the Earth beneath, nor that are in the
waters under the earth.

5 Thou shall not bow down to them, neither serve them, for I am the Lord thy
GOD, a ielous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers, upon the children
upon the third generation, and upon the fourth of them that hate me.

6 And showing mercy unto thousands, to them that love me and keep my
commandments.


ALbeit the time would nor permit me to speak the last day of the third
verse, but forced me to reserve it unto this day, and to join it with this
matter that now you have heard (of not making to our selves any graven image)
yet that which time has now knitte together, is by the judgment of diverse
godly and learned men, not to be sundered at all. For they take that (of
having the Lord our God) which has already been declared, to be the first
commandment, and this Scripture that now I have read, contained in these
four verses, to be the second. Of this judgment was that learned Father
Peter Martyr, Romans 7.
whose words are these in his Commentary upon the Romans. I suppose the
first commandment to be that which is set before the rest in stead of a
proheme, I am the Lord thy GOD which have brought thee out of the land of
Egypt. For in these words are we commanded to account him for the true God,
and that we should not think that he is to be worshipped together with other
Gods, straight way is added the second precepte, wherein we are prohibited to
worship strange Gods, and graven things and images, and if a man will more
narrowly consider the thing, he shall see that together with this first
comaundemente is offered unto us the Gospel, for in it GOD promises that he
will be our God. These are the words of Peter Martyr.

Of this judgment in like manner was that learned and godly man M. Bucer, as
appears in his exposition upon 24. Psalm, where he has these words. The
first thing of all in the matter of our salvation, is to believe in one Lord
our GOD, from whom as the fathers had their deliverance from Egypt and all
other blessings beside, so we all receive the good things that we have,
which is taught in the first of the ten commandments, that is to say, in
this, I the Lord am thy GOD which brought thee out of the land of Egypt. The
second commandment is to join no feigned God with the true GOD, which man's
madness is always accustomed to do: neither were these men alone of this
judgment, but followed in it the opinion of some of the best learned among the
interpreters of the Hebrew, who do thus divide these two commandments,
taking yt of making graven images to be a branch of ye second commandment,
which forbids us either to join any false God to the only true Lord, or to
worship ye true God with any false worship devised of our selves, and not
commanded from him. For as it follows in that place which now I cited out of
M. Bucer, the blindenes of man is accustomed to give so much to his own
devises, in joining some in worship with God, or to that which he has devised
for the worship of god, that he will not depend upon the mere goodness of God
alone. And for the most part (says he) they seek by such ceremonies to
pacify the lord, whom they do perceive to be offended with their wicked life,
which thing has greater blasphemy in it then we can conceive of. It is most
sure that when once man dare adventure, to put others in the honor of worship
with the Lord (which thing he has forbide^) he will not be afraid to bring
upon him an other worship then he has commanded: these both come from one
corrupt beginning, as shall (God willing) hereafter more plentifully appear.

We are in this commandment forbidden to worship any together with him, or to
admit any worship of him, besides his own which he has left us in his
word, the Lord therefore would have us to seek al good things at his hands
alone, and cannot abide that we should have other Gods before his face, or
upon his face, for this interpretation will both the words and the meaning
bear very well: as if he should say, In as much as I have taken upon me to
care for you, and to honor my self by showing forth the treasures of my
grace upon you, it shall not be lawful for to darken the light of my
goodness, by seking to obtain that at the hands of any other, the gift whereof
I have reserved to my self alone, for the glory and praise of the riches of
my grace. For I do you to understand, that when soever you seek to any other
then me, for any part of your welfare, you do as it were draw a corteine
over my face, that I cannot be seen in the full show of my mercy, how I am
affected toward you, while they by stepping between, convey some praise of
the gift and mercy to them selves. Here we see all passages to the virgin
Marie, Angels or Saints whatsoever, to be stopped up, and the way to GOD
opened unto all, in their necessities to run thither, with an assured hope of
comfort, by reason of the promise.

When Satan would have obtained of our savior Christ, a part in the honor
of worship, he tells him it was written: Matt. 4.10.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God and him alone shall thou serve, the
answer of our savior Christ being according to ye question and demand,
tells us that Satan would not have refused to have had the Lord worshipped,
so that he might have obtained to have been partaker with him in it. It
declares also that not only the Lord refuses to have Satan, but also any
other whosoever, to be worshipped with him. for it is written, Him alone shall
thou serve.

Invocation therefore and prayer, being a worship that the Lord prefers
above sacryfice, may not be given to any Saint or Virgin, but must be
reserved unto the Lord alone, who will not have his grace darckened, or his
glory parted with any. Neither can he suffer that the virgin Marie, or any
saint or angel should come into any opinion of mercy, either above him, or
equal with him: which must be granted, if this be confessed, that it is
lawful to call upon the^. For why should we come in prayer unto them, if he who
is of greater power to perform our request, be also of more mercy to incline
favorably to our demands? This resorting therefore unto them by prayer, has
in it a plain profession, that they are more redily inclined unto compassion,
then the Lord: which in deed denies him to be God. For he is not the true God,
if any do exceed him in mercy and compassion. It cannot be that the Lord
should be God, if any be found his superior or match in mercy, wherein
consists his chief glory. But of this (God willing) more shall be spoken
when I come to speak of prayer: Romans 5.
And yet it may not be forgotten that in dying for us when we were enimyes unto
him, he left that pattern of mercy behind him, the like whereof has not
been heard or seen in any: which cannot but lead us in belief to hope for
more mercy from him, then from any other. If any think that prayer is not
such worship of God wherewith he is so delighted, but that he can be content
that others, as Saints or Angels, should also have that honor: let them
peruse the 50. Psalm, and they shall find that the Lord prefers this
service of his (to be called upon in necessity) above all sacrifice and
outward worship. The Church of Rome will not give out license to offer
sacrifice unto Saints that be departed from this life, and yet the Lord
sets prayer in dignity above sacrifice, making it a service that does more
honor him, then does that other.

For what greater honor can he have, then to be magnified in this greatness
of his mercy, that he should be the only sanctuary for the distressed in
their calamity. The Angels themselves have refused to be worshipped of men,
knowing that the Lord will not have his glory parted unto others. Reave. 22.8.
In the Revelation, John professes that he fell down to worshipp before the
feet of the Angel, and that the Angel said unto him, Se thou do it not, for I
am thy fellow servant, and the fellow servant of thy brethren the prophets,
and of them which keep the words of this book: Worship God. The Angel refuses
worship, places himself as a servant among them that serve the Lord after
his word, and charge him to worship God. Let us learn to bridle this
affection, that seeks to be approved under the title of a good intent: for it
is a strong persuasion to the fleashe, that the Lord cannot refuse, but well
like of whatsoever worshipp we offer, so it be to no other, the^ those that
are beloved of him, of whom he has declared his likeing by graces and gifts
granted unto them in greater measure, then unto the common sort of his
servants. We may well suspect our infirmity, when the Evangelist John was
almost carried away with his weakness in this part. For the infirmity of the
flesh reasons thus. Can it be any offense to honor and advance them whom
God himself has honored? Has not God himself declared by his graces given
unto them, what reckoning he makes of them? Can we make too much of them,
whom God so tenderly loves? These are the paths of good intents wandering
without the word: Nay, they proceed further. If we shall be approved of the
Lord, we must creep into favor with those that are dear unto him: and the
next way to have favor with him, is to grow into the favor of those that are
near about him, according as the practice is to get the good lykings of men,
that are of great calling here in earth, by growing into the lyking of those
their servants, that can do most of all with them. But we are taught of the
Lord himself, that his ways differ from ours as far as Heaven differs
from the earth, and that the Heavens are not so far in height above the
Earth, as are his thoughts above ours. So that we offer exceeding wrong unto
his majesty, while we think to bring him under the condition of man's
infirmity, whose good countenance cannot be obtained, unless in the persons
of those whom he especially lyketh of (by brybing or flattering of them) he
him self may seem to be honored, and the hold of his favor craftily
undermined.

The word of the Lord shakes off all such follies, telling us, that it is the
hearing of his word and keeping of the same yt gets credit with him that
makes us allied unto him: even to become truly the mother, sister, or brother
of him: as we read in the gospel after S. Luke, Luke. 8.21.
in the which place he does so commend this kindred (as I may call it) of his
word, that he makes no reckoning of any other, but in respect of that.
Wherein he does notably reprove the foolish fancy of fleashe and blood
which imagine that they can offer nothing unto the virgin Marie, wherein they
shall not bind him unto them: the Lord therefore is constrained to signify,
that those natural respects prevail not with him, as with weak men, but that
the hearing of his word and doing of the same, is all in all with him, and
the only worship that pleases him, which when it is wanting, he accepts of
no service, have it never so great show of man's reason for it.

As we may not take upon us to worship any besides the Lord, no more is it
lawful for us to give any worship to the Lord, but only that which is
allowed in his word: and therefore has he forbidden us to make any graven
image, imagining that way to please him, and to do a work that is acceptable
unto him. For those that bow unto graven Images, think and say that the Lord
is served therein, and that they do it not unto the Image, but unto the Lord
represented unto them in the Image: but the Lord in this commandment
forbids as well the false worship of the true GOD, as the giuinge of any
part of his true worship unto a false God, I mean unto any besides the only
true God. It comes all from one founteine, to dare be bold to give unto him
any worship beside that which he has commanded, and to worship any other
besides himself: which thing he has in many places plainly forbidden, and
therefore in this commandment he represseth this intolerable boldness of
man, that in his own devotion will presume to please the Lord, either in the
worshipping of others, or in any other manner of worshipping him, than he
himself has opened in his word. In this second part (concerning graven
Images) there are certain words, which being laid open, will make the
better entrance to the true sense and meaning of the whole: in consideration
whereof, it shall not be unprofitable, briefly and in a word to touch them.
It is said here that he is A ielous God: which signifies, that he can not
suffer us to join any with him, in the cause and care of our welfare. A kind
of speech borrowed from husbands: who can not abide to see the minds and
affections of their wives entangled with any other men, but require to have
them kept pure and chaste to them selves alone. The pursuing of his
displeasure (which is here recited) toward the third and fourth generation
of them that hate him, seeming to maintain unrighteousness in the Lord, is to
be understood of such children, as tread in the same stepps of iniquity with
their fathers. For otherwise that of the Prophet Ezechiel is true, Eze. 18.20.
The godly son shall not bear the iniquity of his ungodly father.

These things being now made plain unto us, let us go forward with the
matter that we have in hand. The Lord God in forbidding the worshipping of
images, and so under that, all other kind of worship invented by man, adds
this reason to disuade us from it, because he is become our God, who is
jealous over us, and cannot abide that we go after any other: this reason to
disuade us from idolatry, maintaining such tender affection of God toward
his as cannot suffer them to look aside after any other, because he would
have them, as they are in deed, so to take them selves wholly beholden to him,
argues that Idolaters and false worshippers of God, are so carried away with
the love and affection that they bear unto those whom they worship with the
LORD, and with the opinion of that their devised worship of him, that they
depend not wholly upon his goodness, taking him alone to be their whole
happiness, the only author and worker thereof, but are parted and divided in
their affection, imagining and persuading them selves that they are beholden,
and that not a little, (for the benefits they have what soever) unto those
whom they worship, and unto this their devised service of the Lord.

This thing is notably declared by the Prophet Hosea: Hosea. 2.5
where the Idolatry of the Israelites is resembled in the adulteress and
whorish woman, that says plainly she will go after her lovers which gave
her bread, wool and flax. Their mother (says the Lord by his Prophet) has
played the harlot, she that conceived them has done shamefully, for she
said I will go after my lovers that gave me my bread and my water, my wool
and my flax, mine oil and my drink.

It is the persuasion of the Idolaters, that the blessings which they have
are the gifts and rewards of those whom they worship, and of that their
devised worship. It is yet a common thing in the mouths of many, that the
world was good when men worshipped Saints and Images: there was plenty of
all things, so that even now we may descry the whore by her wonted speech, I
will go after my lovers that gave me my wool and my flax, mine oil and my
drink.

In the 8. verse of this Chapter the Lord says plainly by his Prophet, That
this whore did not know that it was he that gave her corn, and wine, and
oil, and multiplied her silver and goulde, which was bestowed upon Baal. It
does plainly appear by this, that the Idolaters are drawn in their heart and
affection unto those whom they worship, nourishing a secret persuasion that
they have their benefits from thence: whereby it comes to pass, that their
hearts depart by little and little from the Lord. We have a plain proof of
this in Popery, not only by their speech that say, while they worshipped
Saints they had store and plenty of all things, but also by their practice,
who had assigned unto several Saints the honor of help and aid in several
causes of distress. To some they assigned the charge for agues, to others for
the fruits of the earth, and to several kingdoms and countries they assign
several Saints for patrones. To these they did resort in distresses, these
they called upon, when any help came, they received it as the benefit of that
Saint to whom they had allotted that charge. Thus having distributed Gods
office unto others, and having put over the distribution of several benefits
unto several Saints, and (as men that tendered the trouble of the Lord) set
almost over all dealings unto other under him, being any way relieved, the
honor thereof if it were not altogether given away from the Lord, at least it
must be parted: so that it cannot be but ye talk of the whore, That she will
go after her lovers, that have given her her oil and drink, her woll and
flax. For to what end should she so resort unto them, if having help that
way, she meant not to return the honor upon them. The truth is so, that
worshipping any besides the Lord, as also in giving him any worship of their
own devising not confirmed in his word, they are carried so away with the
opinion and worthiness thereof, that they do not wholly depend upon the goodness
of the Lord, therefore we shall find it often in the scriptures where the Lord
laboreth to overthrow Idolatry and worshipping of Images: in the same place
he magnifieth his own goodness and his alone goodness toward them, a notable
confirmation whereof we have in the prophet Esaias speaking of them that set up
the woods of their Idol: Esai. 45.21.
Immediately upon it he has these words, There is none other God besides me, A
just God, and a Savior: there is none beside me. Look unto me, and ye
shall be saved: all the ends of the earth shall be saved, for I am God, and
there is none other. I have sworn by my self: the word is gone out of my
mouth in righteousness, and shall not return, that every knee shall bow unto
me, and every tongue shall swear by me. Surely he shall say, In the Lord have
I righteousness and strength, he shall come unto him, and all that provoke him,
shall be ashamed. The whole seed of Israel shall be justified and glory in
the Lord. It is worthy the diligent consideration, that in depressing of
idolatry and false worshipp, he arises to maintain our justification,
strength and glory to be in the Lord alone, and us so to profess it, that
we glory for that we have righteousness and strength in the Lord: which
proves plainly, that Idolaters are not so persuaded, but that in the opinion
of these their doings, Esai. 44.21.
their affection abateth toward the goodness of the Lord. The like
confirmation we have in an other place of the same prophet, where disuading
the^ from idolatry, he sets forth the greatness of his goodness toward
them. Remember these (Oh Jacob and Israel) for thou art my servant: I have
fourmed thee, Thou art my servant: O Israel forget me not: I have put away thy
transgressions like a cloud, and thy sins as a myste: turn unto me for I
have redeemed thee. Whereas before the great and undeserved goodness of the
Lord is brought in as the best medicine to cure idolatry. True it is
therefore, whatsoever they do say, yt they so trust unto these untoward devised
things which they do unto God, that they depend not wholly upon his mere
and alone goodness, as they who take their happiness only to arise from
thence: and that is the cause, why in dealing with them, he vpholdeth the
greatness of his goodness, and of his alone goodness toward them, which
carries in it a secret sentence against them, that they stand not persuaded
and resolved thereof. Idolatry is most fitly compared in the scripture unto
adultery, and the Idolaters called whoores, because as whoores admit unto
their love others than their own husbands, so Idolaters, and the false
worshippers of God, reserve not their faith and confidence unto the Lord alone,
but permit others to be fellows with him at the same. Wherefore to declare the
great hatred that he has of such dealing he takes unto him the quarrel of
jealousy threatening that he will prosequute this injury of prostituting and
laying open that faith unto others which is due unto him, even unto the third
and fourth generation of them that shall be found transgressors herein calling
them haters of him, who are not by faith (the very knot of this spiritual
wedlock) surely knit unto him alone. He can no more abide to hear of any that
should be fellows with him at our faith, than the honest man can abide to
hear, that another besides himself, should have the enterteinment of an
husband with his wife. It is diligently to be observed that he calls the^
haters of him who shall thus divide their affection from him. The most that they
can say, for this their worship is, that it comes from a good meaning and
intent, and this persuadeth the most of them well of it: For God (say they)
cannot of his mercy refuse that which is well meant and intended toward him:
The Lord therefore utterly overthrows this defense, saying in express words,
that they be haters of him, and so ledd with the liking of their worship, from
the Lord and his true service, yt when occasion serves, they bewray extreme
hatred thereunto, prosequuting it with fire and faggot in the true professors
thereof. This sin of idolatry and false worship of God, is diligently to be
considered of, that we may see the danger of it, and keep us from
transgressing therein. The danger of this sin, and the greatness thereof, we
can not better discern, than by the punishment executed against it from the
just Lord: who because he is just and Justice it self, cannot appointe
punishment, but according to the nature and quality of the offense, he
threateneth that the fire of his jealousy shall burn upon the posterity of
those that offend therein, unto the third and fourth generation. Great must
that sin be, the flame of whose punishment casts out smoke so long. The
greatness of the punishment may lead us to se the heynousnesse of that offense
of Idolatry and serving of God by good intentes. The fire of Gods wrath being
kindled by this sin, as we see, cannot be quenched many generations after
the death of them that have been the first transgressors in ye same. The
lord declares ye reason by his prophet Hosea why he will thus punish the
posterity of the idolaters, Hosea. 2.4.
I will have no pity upon her children (says the Lord by the prophet) because
they be the children of fornication, declaring yt he may lawfully disinherit
them, because they are none of his, but children begotten in fornication. The
state of the children of Israel in the captivity of Babylon even until the
coming of Christ may fitly shadow out unto us the truth of this punishment
threatened here for idolatry. For albeit there was a return from Babylon, yet
we know that the number was small that returned, and subject unto great
misery even until the coming of Christ, beside their punishment, in the want
of temporal benefits. The lord thretned by his prophet Hosea according as he
did perform in deed, Hosea. 2.11.
that he would no more suffer them to inioye the use of his worship, I will
cause (says the Lord) al her mirth to cease, her feast days, her new Moons
and her Sabbaoths, and al her solemn feasts. And in the third chapter, the
Lord in like manner declares, Hosea. 3.4.
that the children of Israel shall remain many days without a king, and also
without an offering

Long before their captivity, they had nothing beside the outward show and
ceremonies of the worship of God, which also utterly ceased when they were led
into banishment: yet the comfort came which was promised in the latter time
unto their posterity, according as it was foretold them by the Prophet: but
great was that sin that procured so long lasting punishmente upon their
posterity, and so great a punishment, that they should be divorced from the
Lord. For he affirms this by his Prophet, that he will marry them unto him
for ever, declaring thereby that they had been divorced before. But we need not
take examples of God his punishment of Idolatry from the people of Israel,
(wanting, beside other benefits, the true worship of God so long time:)
Popery in these last times may be a true spectacle thereof, where ye declining
from true religion has brought so miserable blindness, continuing so many
generations. The Papists now in the latter days of the Gospel, after this as
it were solemnizing of the marriage again between the Lord and his Church,
require to know where the Church was before this time of the Gospel: as if
some of the Israelites, after that the Lord had returned unto them in mercy
and betrothed them a new unto himself again, should have required where the
Church had been in their captivity, when they wanted the sacrifice and
offeringes, ye Sabbaothes, new moons, and all ye true outward worship of God:
calling into question the truth of that true worship and service of God,
because they had been so long without it before. Those times of Popery were
the times of idolatry and punishment of the Lord for idolatry: they were (as
I may call it) the widowhoode or rather the divorced estate of the church,
when (notwithstanding the Lord did bear love and secret liking unto those
that were his) yet was their outward estate the condition of a widow, or
rather of a divorced woman, having in it the badge of displeasure and
punishment from ye Lord. To require therefore yt this our time should be
confourmed in worship unto that, is to like of diuorcement better then
marriage, and to crave yt the unlawful liberty of the one may be a pattern and
warrant to dissolve the godly and lawful bond of the other. The Lord affirms
likewise that he Will show mercy unto thousands of them which love him, and
keep his commandementes: wherein he notes unto us two properties in ye true
worship of God, the first is the love of him, the second the keeping of his
commandementes: whereof the first, (that is the love of him) opens unto us
what beginning true worship has: and the second (which is the doing of
things pleasant in his sight) tells us by what rule that worship does
proceed, even by his word, which truly discovers what things are pleasing
or displeasing unto him. That love toward him begins all true service and
worship of God, hereby it is manifest, because the Apostle declares yt the
children of God are sealed up with the spirit of adoption, whereby they cry
Abba Father, which bears witness unto their spirit, that they are the
children of God. Romans 8.1^.16.
Which inward testimony of adoption cannot be without the love of him that
has adopted them. And in the Epistle to the Galathians, the Apostle has these
words, In Jesus Christ neither circumcision nor uncircumcision avails any
thing, but faith that works by love. Gal. 5.6.
And in the same Epistle he affirms, The life which he now lives, to be in
this faith, that the Son of God has loved him, and given him self for
him. This love therefore that arises of the goodness of his God, Gal. 2.20.
whom he perceives so entirely to embrace him, and to reckon of him as
righteous, is that which sends a true christian to good works, and is here
noted as the founteine from whence good works do flow, and the first mark
of a true worshipper of God.

For before this persuasion of his favor toward us, the works that are done
by us (notwithstanding such they are as be commanded of God) are done rather
to make our selves righteous thereby, then for any love and liking of him, and
therefore defiled with self love, and our own profit, not directed as they
ought, by the alone love of God. This love proceeds to the doing of those
things that are acceptable in the sight of God: for it is the second note of
the true worshippers of God to keep his commandments, and to go to the service
of God, not at adventure directed by the line of our own devotion, but by the
level of his word and commandment, wherein also false worshippers are
greatly deceived: for as their beginning is evil, because it flows not from
love to God, so their proceeding is as dangerous, in that they follow not the
rule of his word. For notwithstanding, the LORD might justly reiecte what
soever deeds of ours though commanded of him, if they should not proceed
from love toward him, yet herein more appears the great blindness of
Idolaters and false worshippers, who in their devising to serve God happen
always on those works that least like him. And therefore the serving of God by
Images, as it has often in the Scripture, the goodness of God set against it,
for the redress thereof, (in that the not restinge therein has begotten it) so
has it also the word of God often times in the Scripture to correct it as not
proceeding by the right rule. Therefore in Deuterono. Deu. 4.12.
when the Lord was about to prescribe the manner of his worship, it is said
thus: You heard a voice, but saw no similitude: Take therefore good heed unto
your selves, for you saw no Image in the day that the Lord spoke unto you in
Horeb, where the holy Ghost makes the practice and example of Almighty God,
in opening himself by his word, and not by any similitude, a sufficient
declaration that his will was we should be directed by his word, and not by
Images in the service of him.

Exo. 20.22.23.
In Exodus in like manner, the holy Ghost makes the teaching by the word of
God a reason why they should have no images: You have seen (says he) that I
have talked with you from Heaven, you shall not therefore make with me Gods of
silver, nor Gods of goulde, you shall make you none. Esai 30.21.22.
And in Esaias it is declared, that when the word of GOD shall take place with
his, they shall abhor Images as a menstruous cloth. Thine ears (says the
prophet) shall hear a word behind thee saying: This is the way, walk in it,
when thou turnest to the right hand, and when thou turnest to the left, and ye
shall pollute the covering of the Images of silver, and the rich ornaments of
the Images of goulde, and cast them away as a menstruous cloth, and thou
shall say unto it, get thee hence. Neither is the word of GOD set down here
to keep us from Images alone, but also to restrain us from serving of GOD by
any devotion of our own or good intent whatsoever, whereof we have no warrant
from the word. For in his word we receive his own testimony for good and
evil, and he has plainly told us, yt if we follow our own heart and our
eyes, in discerning good and bad, we shall depart and go a whoreing from
him: as it is written in the book of Numbers, where they are commanded to
have the law continually before their eyes, that they should not seek after
their heart, and after their own eyes, Nume. 15.39.
after the which (faith the holy Ghost unto them in the same place) you go a
whooring.

In the Gospel after S. John, Ioh. 14.23.
our Savior Christ says, If any man love me he will keep my word. The
experience is plain, that if any man do love another, he will observe what
things he is delighted withal, that in doing thereof he may satisfy his
affection, and will not be so negligent as when with a little pains he may
learn his disposition, rashly to adventure ye doing of that which (for any
thing he knows to ye contrary) may possibly procure his heavy displeasure.
This is not humility, but pride and dangerous security, restrayning the Lord
to our lyking, and not conforming our selves to the good pleasure of his will.
Out of this co^man dement we may learn a notable difference between the church
of God, and the synagogue of satan. The church of God loves God, and keeps
his commandments, she is that chaste wife, that admits none beside the Lord
into the fellowship of her faith: she brings up her young ones unto the lyking
of him, feeding them with the sound milk of the word. The church of
Antichriste keeps not her self to her husband alone, but admits others to
the use of her faith, and therefore in the scripture is she fitly resembled
unto an harlot: neither does she nurce up her young ones after the lyking of
her husband, with the wholesome doctrine of the old and new Testament, (which
Augustine does call very fitly, the two pappes of the Church:) but with the
pestilente poison of good intentes, teaching them from their infancy to
follow her foote-steppes in going a whooreing after their own eyes, and after
their own heart, which are the very steps of an harlot, as was even now
proved unto us out of the Book of Numbers. Our nature is corrupt in this
commandment, as in all the rest, and greatly pleases it self in things
that it does of a good meaning and intent unto the Lord, not regarding
whether they stand approved by his word or no, holding this as a true
principle, that the thing can never be evil taken of the Lord, which is well
meant of man. The man that will truly examine him self in this commandment,
must thoroughly consider of the former time of his life, when he has occupied
him self in outward things, not warranted by the word, and yet reputed of
him as the special pleasing of God: nay under the defense and shadow of those
things, has been the more careless to seek out and practice the duties of
the word: remembering that such service of GOD, deserves to have a curse
continuing upon his posterity unto many generations. Thus shall he easily
perceive what is ye benefit that he has by the mediator Christ Jesus: for
the law drives him thereunto by opening his corruption in this manner, and
letting him see yt there is no help but in the alone redeemer Christ Jesus:
when in him self he does truly understand that he is only beholden unto the
Lord for his salvation, he must begin to war with his affections that would
shake of obedience under ye shadow of good intent and devotion, occupying it
self in trifling outward things, and never drawing near unto the Lord in ye
duties laid upon him by the word, he must labor diligently to find out the
will of God in his word, for no other end but that he may be a doer and
follower of the same, his profiting, how great so ever it be, is not without
infirmity, and therefore he is not without humility in his best doings: his
offending at any time cannot be without grief, for he sees in it the
dishonor of his merciful father, whose free mercy is his stay. Let us learn
(brethren) to take heed in serving the Lord in a devotion that agrees not with
his word. What will it avail to say, We do it of love and good meaning toward
him, when the Lord has said, yt all such are haters of him? Shall our mening,
condemn the truth of his saying? Or shall that be good meaning when we come
to true reckoning which the Lord has pronounced to be hateing? Let man be
afraid to bear hatred against ye Lord, and therefore let him fear to serve
him with good intents besides his word. If man should be so obstinate in
evil, that he fears no punishment in respect of himself, imagining his life
to make an end of all his affliction: yet let him fear the punishmente of this
sin, that will not leave him in the grave, but set the mark of his iniquity
upon his children and posterity unto many generations.

I need not greatly to speak unto the most that be here, that they should
leave those foolish works of devotion and good meaning, as going on Pilgrimage,
setting up of shrynes, and such like things received amongst the Papists. His
name be praised, that madness is descryed, and a great number of them selves
begin now to blush at it: but the outward ceremonies of Religion, as resorting
to common prayer, hearing of Sermons, or such other, these have obtained now
the title of the true service of GOD, and shut out the obedience unto the
duties commanded by the word. These hold men now from care of duties
appointed by the word, as devised devotion kept them in Popery, from true
religion. These are the good intentes of Gospellers at this day, and as the
Lord spoke of his sacrifices commanded in his word, when me^ were holden in
those without any care of good life. He that kills a Bullock, is as if he
slew a man, Esa. 66.34.
they have chosen out their own ways, therefore will I choose out their
delusions, and bring their fear upon them. So may it truly be said of a
great number, that the Lord hates their resorting to prayer and sermons,
they are now become their own ways which they have chosen, because they are
sundred from Christian conversation and amendment of life, for the which they
were ordained. The means to avoid the dangers of our devises in the service of
GOD, and to have disclosed unto us the subtilties and snares thereof, Pro. 2.10.
is to delight in the wisdom of the word, to be much exercised therein,
according as it is declared in the book of Proverbs, That when wisdom
enters into the heart, and knowledge delights the soul, then shall it
deliver us from the evil way, and from the strange woman, which forsakes
the guide of her youth.

Now let us pray unto our heavenly father, that we may so see our untowardness
unto his true worship, that we may magnify his mercies that has pardoned
our transgressions, and that we may receive strength from the power of his
death to shake off all those shadows of serving the Lord, John. 4.
being truly humbled to serve him in spirit and truethe, according to the
direction of his word.

The third Lecture upon the seuenthe verse
7 Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.
IT is manifest in the Scriptures, that by the name of GOD, is meant the law
and commandment of God. For the Lord will be honored and get a name among
his people, by transforming their affections and deeds, into the obedience of
his law. In Leuiticus it is thus written: Leuit. 22.31.
Ye shall keep my commandments, and do them: for I am the Lord. Neither
shall ye pollute my holy name: declaring that his name is profaned, taken in
vain, and polluted, when his commandments are not regarded.

1. Tim. 6.1.
It is also to be seen in the Epistle to Timothy, that the name of GOD is
taken for the doctrine and word of God. Let Servants (says the Apostle)
account their masters worthy of all honor, that the name of God and his
doctrine be not evil spoken of: joining the name and doctrine of God together,
as words that importe all one matter. For the name of GOD cannot but be
dishonored and evil spoken of through us, when such laws (as all men know
he has appointed for us to walk in) are without regard neglected and
contemned of us.

If it be required, why the Lord speaking of his law gives it the title of
his name, we must understand the reason of his so doing, to be very good and
forceable to procure obedience. For what can be more dear unto us, than the
name and glory of our GOD? Or what can bind our obedience unto more
dutifulness, than when we understand he has committed his own name and
honor into our hands: being content to abide without all name and glory
here in earth, if he may not have it of his, by their obedience to his law?
And therefore as the love of GOD must cause us to begin all duties, so the
end we look at in all of them, must be by the doing thereof to get honor
and glory to our God.

For it is written to the Corinthes: 1. Cor. 10.31
Whether ye eat or drink, or what soever ye do, do all to the glory of
GOD. Heerevppon it comes, that works commanded are rejected of the Lord,
when they are done to be seen of men for the praise of our selves, and not
with a careful heart to glorify the Lord, and procure his praise thereby.
Take heed (says our Savior Christ) that ye give not your alms before men to
be seen of them, or else ye shall have no reward of your father which is in
heaven. The Lord him self often uses the credit and glory of his name not
only in commanding, but also in forbidding things to be done: Leuit. 19.
as in Leuiticus 19. almost through the whole chapter, when he forbids any
thing, he adds these words immediately, I am the Lord thy God: because the
contempt and breach of his commandment, does reach to the stayning and
polluting of his name. For he has entered covenant with us to be our God, in
causing us to walk in his ways, that he thereby may be magnified and
advanced: as it is written in Deuteronomie, Deuteronomy. 26.17.
Thou haste set up the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk in his ways,
and to keep his ordinances, his commandments, and his laws, and to harken
unto his voice: as if the observing of ye law were the placing of him in his
seat of glory. Now that we have learned what is meant by this word Name, it
remains to understand, what it is to take his name in vain.

This name is said to be taken in vain, when there is not diligent care,
watchful observing, and great regard had to the commandments of GOD to
do them. It is written in Deuteronomie, Deuteronomy. 28.58
If thou shall not observe to do (for so is the truth of the Hebrew text) all
the words of the law, that is, If thou will not diligently mark this law for
to do it, and fear this glorious and fearful name, the Lord thy GOD, then
the Lord will make thy plagues wonderful, etc. Careless security, when men
have no careful mind of the word of God to live thereafter, is that which is
forbidden by this taking of his name in vain or vainly. For in this place the
holy ghost expounds the observing and taking heed to do all the
commandementes of the law, to be the fearing of this glorious name, The Lord
thy God: which fear of his name is contrary to the taking of it in vain,
and esteeming of it as a vain thing.

In saying He will not hold them guiltless: he does assure them of punishment,
that are careless in keeping of his commandments: whereupon his name and
honor hangs: as it is written in Leuiticus, If ye shall despise mine
ordinances, Leuit. 26.15.
either if your soul abhor my laws, so that ye will not do all my
commandments, but break my couenaunte, then will I appoint over you
fearfulness, a Consumption, etc, threatening (as appears in that Chapter)
to proceed in punishment, until their uncircumcised heart be humbled to the
careful keeping of his commandments. For those who mind his commandments
to do them, are they to whom only his mercies are promised in the 103,
Psalm, Psalm. 103.17.18.
The loving kindness of the Lord indureth for ever, upon them that fear
him, and think upon his commandments to do them.

The punishmente of these that have no careful regard of the word to do it,
is threatened in the 28. of Deuteronomie, beginning at the 15. verse, Deuteronomy.
28.15.
in the which verse it is to be noted that there is the same phrase of speech
in the Hebrew which I spoke of before (that is, not observing to do all the
commandments) which imports this want of care in doing, pointing out by
that speech, secure men that take no great care of the word for to do it.

The same words (Observe to do) are used in the first verse of the same
Chapter, and therefore not lightly to be regarded of us, being so often noted
by the holy ghost. If we peruse the judgments of God throughout the whole
Bible, we shall easily perceive, that when the people ceased to be careful
how to please God, then was some one punishmente or other let in upon them, to
awake them out of that dangerous sleep of security.

Send away this care, by good life to honor God, and then assure thy self,
punishment will not be long absent, if thou be not a bastard, over whom he
has no fatherly regard. And no marvel: for in very deed God has no service
in truth, where this godly care is wanting: it is no prayer that is not a
careful prayer: he never obteyneth, that has no desire to obtain. When works
(of them selves good) are done without any great care to have them done, the
same may have praise for doing, but the heart can claim nothing for any
careful purposing.

The scripture therefore is plentiful in teaching us that a Christians life
must be a careful life, comparing Christianity to a trade or occupation
that must be applied thoroughly, 2. Tim. 2. verse. 5.6.
or else there is no good to be done in it. If any man strive for a
maisterie, (says the holy Ghost) he is not crowned except he strive as he
ought to do. The husbandman must labor, before he receives the fruit:
sending us to learn at husbandry, the care and trauail of Christianity.

Every man that proves maisteries (says Saint Paul) absteyneth from all
things: 1. Cor. 9.25.
and they do it to obtain a corruptible crown: but we for an incorruptible.
This commandment therefore, excludes all feigned, careless, and
hypocritical walking in the ways of the Lord: and tells us that the Lord
looks unto them (as he says by the Prophet) that do tremble at his word.
Esai. 66.2.


It is not lightly to be passed over, that requiring this care to be had of
Gods glory, he joins to the name of the Lord those two words, Thy GOD:
which signifies, that love to him, because he is our God, must bring forth
the care of his glory, and this observing of his commandments to do them.

For herein is the care and fear of a servant distinguished and discerned
from the care and fear of a Son, that the sons care and fear he has of
his Father is joined with love, and aryseth thereof, and proceeds thereby to
please him: The Servants care and fear aryseth in respect of punishment if
he displease his master, or else from the hope of wages if happily he may
please him in his service. So that even the true fear and care of GOD is
mingled with the love of him, because he is our God. And is not that which
wrestleth with the conscience and proceeds to doing only for this cause, to
get ease thereof, not having any respect to glorify his good God: not, but
that the Lord has such beginning even of his best children, but that it is
not right, before it be seasoned with the love of his mercy. For the fear of
GOD is never true in us, till we be drawn unto him by his goodness, where
through he allureth us: as it is written in the Psalm, Psalm. 130.4
Mercy is with thee that thou may be feared.

In the Book of Kings, Solomon prays that the stranger (who is not one of
the people of Israel, 1. Reg. 8. c. 41.42.43
but comes to the house of GOD) hearing of his wonderful works, may have
his prayers granted, that al people may fear GOD, as does the people of
Israel: acknowledging his true fear to spring of his goodness. The fear of
GOD because it arises of his goodness, draws us always unto God: and in
the Scripture therefore arguments and reasons are drawn from his fear to
bring us toward him, in some one or other duty: as in the Psalm, Ye that
fear the Lord, Psalm. 22. verse. 23.
praise him: and the reason is taken from his goodness, in the next verse
following: For he has not despised the affliction of the poor, but when he
called unto him he heard. Also in the 115. Psalm, Ye that fear the Lord,
Psalm. 115.11.
trust in the Lord, for he is their helper and their sheelde, etc, prosecuting
his goodness as before. In the next verse following it is said, The Lord has
been mindeful of us, he will bless us, he will bless the house of Israel. etc.
We do plainly se then by these testimonies, that they do not truly fear
him, that are not drawn by his goodness to the careful loving and honoring
of him.

This commandment then touches al those that pass over their time
carelessly without a law and fear of the Lord, as if there were nothing less
belonging unto them then by observing his will to get honor to their God: or as
if their ungodly and secure life, should never a whit impeache the glory of
his name. By this commandment we learn, that not only Atheists and godles
persons have to fear the judgments of God, but also all those that are not
touched with care and great desire by their good life to glorify God. For he
will not hold the^ guiltless that take his name in vain, not regarding his
honor by careful attending upon his pleasure.

Hereby also we are taught to cease to marvel at the afflictions of those
men, in whose lives we have espied no great outward offense. For here we see
the want of care to his glory, though it be coupled with no outward evil,
has matter in it sufficient to provoke the judgments of God against us. Does
not that master who at his coming home finds the work he had enjoined his
servant carelesslie looked unto, think there is occasion sufficient offered him
to proceed to the correction of his servant, notwithstanding he has no other
matter to charge him withal?

In this commandment also is forbidden all swearing vainly or falsely: all
swearing by those things that are not God, as particular things against his
word, and therefore against the glory of his name. For if the commandment
forbid the neglect of his law generally, it must needs forbid severally and
particularly that which is against some several and particular commandment.
We have learned that careless contemning of his word is reproved in this
commandment: and the reason is, because the Lord does communicate his name
and his honor thereunto, which we may not take in vain or without reverence.
Heb. 6.
The same thing is to be said for the use of his name, which he has granted
unto us to decide controversies and doubts of great importance withal: that
because there is in it the mark and print of his glory, we must have the use
of it in those matters with reverence accordingly. We deal not with the Lord
in any communicating with his essence and everlasting being, that a man should
imagine yt he can offer him no wrong unless he rush against the heavens, and
violently run upon his person: he deals with us by his word, and by his
name: if there be any villainy, wickedness, nay want of reverence yt way it
touches his glory and pearceth the honor of the highest. Blasphemous mouths
therefore that cannot be stirred in their affections, but they will by and by be
revenged of the Lord, and cast up their choler in oaths and blasphemy against
his majesty, have here well to look about them, and to remember that in such
outrage, they fight against ye honor of the living Lord, yt will advance ye
same in the dishonor and utter confusion of them. Is it not horrible
blasphemy, that a miserable man should seek to redeem himself from contempt
by bringing ye Lord under his foot, and treading his honor in the dust? I
do not mean that perjured persons, who have put upon the Lord the person of
Satan, in making him a protector of lies, be only these blasphemous mouths,
that have enterprised the defacing and dishonouring of the Almighty, but those
common swearers also, in whose mouth the name of the Lord runs so usually
and so irreverently in common speech. The Lord has lent us the use of his
name to determine our doutes, and decide our controversies that be of great
importance, and cannot otherwise come to light: and that with such reverence as
unto his honor apperteyneth. He has not left it to wait upon our vain words
and talk of no importance, to serve where our humor will place it: so that men
are always guilty of high treson against his glory in ye use of his name,
unless both ye weightines of the matter they have in hand and their reverence in
ye manner of dealing therein, shall excuse them. A man can no way be vnreuere^t
toward his name, but he shall in so doing be guilty of his dishonor: for those
things wherein he has left ye marks of his glory, as his name, his word, and
sacraments, by the use or abuse of them, do truly witness of the heart, how it
stands affected toward the honoring of him.

There was never man found truly honoring God in his heart, whose tongue was
defiled with usual swearing, and often vnreuerent using of his name. Neither
was there ever found man truly fearing the Lord, that walked without all awe
and reverence of his word. The excuse therefore is vain and utterly untrue,
that swearing is but a custom of the tongue, and that their heart stands
reverently affected toward his name and glory. For it is the want of
reverence in the heart to God, that fometh out such filthynesse at the mouth:
and the long continuance of that impudency in the heart, has brought the
fruit thereof into ye mouth: which witnesses sufficiently the corruption that
is settled inwardly in the heart. Let the common swearer then cease to seek
excuse, by saying, It is but a folish custom: For that long custom of
dishonouring the Lord in his mouth, will prove that he has had a custom to
dishonor him in his heart of no less continuance. Our communication must be
yea, yea, nay, nay: that which is more comes of evil. But it is commonly
said, Something must be added or else men shall not be believed. It is a pitiful
thing that the credit of a Christian should be so little, that to borrow
belief for his common talk, he must leave no less pawn and pleadge behind
him, then is his faith and truth, the greatest treasures and jewels that he
has received from the Lord. If men would seek credit by their well dealing,
they need not to bring forth so great assurance for it in their speaking.

It is likewise unlawful to swear by creatures: in as much as an oath gives
superiority unto that whereby they swear: and acknowledges it as a Judge and
discerner of secret and hid things, a bringer also of them unto judgment,
condemning the wicked in bringing his way upon his head, and justifying the
righteous in giving him according to his righteousness. The giving of this
unto creatures enters upon the right of the Almighty, and intituleth
creatures unto the honor of the creator who has declared plainly, Esa. 42.8.
that he will not give his glory to another. And therefore it is in ye
highest degree of reproching, or rather blaspheming the Lord, in laying his
chief honor open to the spoil of a creature, bringing a contemptible
creature, as it were to pray upon the almighty creator. And if there be
acknowledgement of superiority over us to the thing that we shall swear by (as
is witnessed by the holy Ghost,) then, Heb. 2.16.
as we may not swear by Heaven, Earth, or any other creature, much less may
we, by Mass, Mattens, Roode, or such like, we will put the honor of the
Almighty upon them, and take them as our God, who only has superiority
over us, 1. Re. 8.31.32
to justify righteousness, and to bring the wickedness of the wicked upon
his head: which thing in our oath we do acknowledge to belong unto him by
who^e we swear. Hos. 2.17.
When Almighty God promises by his Prophet Hosea, to receive the Israelites
to favor again after their affliction, he says that he will take away the
names of their Idols out of their mouth, and they should be no more remembered by
their names. These things may suffice to teach us, yt the Lord cannot bear the
dishonor of his name, but will have that vpholden in honor and reverence,
without suffering it either to lie open unto the contempt of godless persons,
or unto the spoil of Idolaters, who breaking it upon his glory, do beautify
and set out his creatures with the ornaments thereof. This commandment
likewise reaches particularly to all of them, which neglecte any of those
means, that God has commanded us to use, either for the welfare of our
soul, or body. For the words and works of his wisdom may not be refused
as vain and needelesse, but must with all humility be embraced, that in our
so doing his wisdom may be honored, who has appointed those to be the
means, whereby he will conueye his mercy toward us: the neglect whereof,
charge the Lord with want of wisdom in ordeyning them. Here falls to the
ground the wicked and blasphemous opinions of the Anabaptists, Libertines,
and the feigned Family of love, who are grown to such a magnifying of grace,
brought as they say by the revelation of the spirit, as the wisdom of God in
his word is of small or no account with them in deed: but as if it were a
needeles matter or had no certeintie in it, it is wholly transformed into their
spirit, and made to speak accordingly. The nature of man is in this
commandment corrupted, as in the rest: doing the things which he does to God
without all awe and fear of his word. It behooves the man therefore that will
truly try him self, to search into his life, and well to consider what
manifest contempt there has been in him of the name and honor of God, in
stubbernely standing against the authority of his word, while he has
willingly neglected to be admonished and advised thereby: what contempt of his
honor he has given forth in common swearing and usual oaths, that either
directly or indirectly reach to the glory of God, even to ye wounding of him
in ye same. Moreover it behooves him to consider what carelessness there has
been and what little regard in his best doings, to have them so soundly and
thoroughly done, as unto the honor of God does apperteine: where the diligent
pains, careful and through dealing in matters that touch his own name,
shall be a sufficient light to disclose his halting with the Lord. For the
corruption of man's heart is so great and so hidden, yt all means almost are to
few to utter it: therefore it is requisite, that we use all the means we may in
that behalf. Let a man in this examination well consider, whether there has
been any such fear or care to avoid things forbidden, and to do things
commanded him by the word, (wherein consists the glory of God) as there has been while his own honor is in hand, and his own name called to question at any
time: whether he has dealt in duties appointed him by God with fear and care,
lest the Lord through his infirmity should be foiled, and his name
dishonored, which could not have been wanting, if his own estimation had
been in hazard, that he may be brought to the sight of his Son. For when it
pleases God to call any to the hope of his kingdom, he lets them see their
corruption to be so great in these and such other kinds of dishonor that they
have done unto him, as that their heart is forced to appeal unto the mercy of
God, fastening themselves to it, and utterly giving over their own obedience.
Which mercy of God they so stay upon, and are so comfortable in, that it
provoke them no longer to neglect the name and glory of their God, but with
all reverence to submit themselves to the government of his word, always
endeavoring to better their obedience toward his law, because it tends to
the glory of his name, wherein how great so ever their profiting be, yet
this corruption which cleaves so fast unto them, cannot but continue in them
still an humbled and lowly heart, even in all their blessings, while they
clearly perceive them (by the sight of their corruption) to be the undeserved
graces and gifts of their God. Their offending also whatsoever, cannot be
without the great grief of their heart, because they see it to be with the
dishonor of him, who has abased himself to the death of the Cross, to
work the honor and advancement of them. We are therefore (brethren)
diligently to learn to wax weary of those ways that would depart from the
reverence and honoring of the Lord, in not fearing to offend against his
word: P^o. 3. verse. 13.
because it is written, He that despises the word, he shall be destroyed, but
he that fears the commandment, shall be rewarded. Let us learn to become
careful in the duties which are appointed us by the word, for the Lord will
not hold them guiltless that are secure therein. We can not bear good heart
unto the Lord, if we let his honor fall to the ground among us: it is his
mercy that does vouchsafe us this favor, to be trusted with his honor. Can
it want then just reproach, if we shall be tried to be senseless in this point?
It drew tears from David, that the wicked kept not his law: and can we see
our own lives, and the lives of those committed unto us, wandering from the
ways of life, and hungerly (in the contempt of the word) pursuing after
death, and yet for all that never to be touched with it, especially seeing the
dishonor of our God depends upon it? It should vex us, that the gospel
has been so long time with so little fruit among us: that the instruments of
his grace, that have gained so many in former times unto God, should not only
not preuail in many, but even receive discredit and dishonor among men: and
that the little fruit appearing in our lives, should call into question the
verity of Gods gospel, being in fruit and effect so unlike in many, unto that
it has been in former times. A Christian should go to the duties laid upon
him by the word with the like mind, that a good soldier goes to the defense
of that hold which being taken by the enemies, he is assured to receive
continual shame and dishonor.

The Lord will be honored, by having his word obeyed: if we do not conspire to
maintain his honor that way, we are guilty of treason against his glory:
when we suffer satan to batter down obedience in us to God and man, we are as
well accessarie to the betraying of his glory, as those soldiers, that are
quiet within the castle, while their enemies sack the same without. Let us
therefore go carefully about these matters of his honor, let our care and
sound dealing be a record unto our hearts, that we are not conspired with his
enemies. There can be no better argument, that men do willingly consent with
satan, then to see them careless of his assaults: then never to see them
stand upon their watch, especially dealing with the enemy, who has
professed that he will never be at truce with them. And because the Lord
gives so glorious a title to christianity, as to call it his glory, making
so near a bond between our salvation and his honor: let us not sleep in so
earnest matters, neither bring a slender and bare affection, where there is the
assured hope of a double commodity. Now let us pray unto our heavenly Father,
that we may more be humbled, that we have so long lived to so little honor of
his name, not only that we may thereby truly acknowledge the mercy of Jesus
Christ, that has put up so great dishonor at our hands, washing it away
no otherwise than with his blood, but also that in the remembrance of so long
time, wherein we have dishonored him, we may be whetted to bestirre us this
time, that we have to live, both to pull down our affections, that would
dishonor him in the plain contempt, or careless regard of obedience, and
also to bring forth that fruit of new life, that may open the mouths of many
to speak of his praise for it, whose workmanship it is.

The fourth Lecture upon the eighth verse.
8 Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy.

9 Six days shall thou labor, and do all thy work.

10 But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it thou shall
not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy man servant, nor
thy maid, nor thy beast, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates.

11 For in six days the Lord made the heaven and the earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: therefore the Lord blessed the
Sabbath day, and hallowed it.


THe rest from bodily labors that was commanded upon the Sabbath day, had
in it this signification: that Christianity did consist in ceassing from
sin. So do the Prophets (who are the true expositors of ye law) interpret
it: Isai. 56.^.
For thus we do read in the Prophet Esaias, Blessed is the man that does this,
and the Son of man that takes hold on it, he that keeps the Sabbath and
polluteth it not, and keeps his hand from dooeing any evil. The Prophet
does declare, what it is to keep the Sabbath, by these words following, And
keeps his hand from doing any evil. The evil that by this sabbath we are
commanded to rest and cease from, is not a matter strange and disagreeing
from our disposition, but rooted in our nature: as now we have it from Adam.
And therefore the same Prophet that here affirms the keeping of the Sabbath
to consist in ceassing and resting from evil, Esai. 58.13.
in an other place affirms it to be the ceassing from our own ways and
works: declaring thereby this evil and iniquity (that we are commanded to
cease from) to be no forrener or stranger, but to keep his house and home in
our own nature. In that the Scripture terms evil to be our own ways and
works, according as it is written by the Prophet Isaie, If thou consecrate the
Sabbath as glorious unto the Lord, and shall honor him, Esai. 58.13.
not doing thine own ways, nor seeking thine own will, etc. expounding the
Not doing our own ways, nor seeking our own will, to be the consecrating of a
glorious Sabbath unto the Lord. The Sabbath then consists in keeping us
from doing evil, so that necessarily we must conclude this evil to be in our
own wills and ways. This inward corruption, wherewith both our wit and will
is poisoned, was very fitly resembled in the outward observing of the Sabbath.
For upon the Sabbath day, the people were called from all their accustomed
works, that they had been occupied in the six days before. So that a man
comparing their doings that day, with those they were exercised in the other
six days, must of necessity say they were clean altered and changed in
their doings, from that, that usually before they had been, and so diverse,
as if they had not been the same, but other men. A resemblance very fit and
sitting to our spiritual Sabbath, which consists in becoming new men
concerning our dooinges, from that we have been, before we knew the
Gospel. The outward rest from bodily labors, which did shadow out our true
rest from sin, (which is our accustomed way and work) was so strictely
observed among the Jews, that the neglect thereof in the least things, (as
gathering sticks upon the Sabbath day) was punished with death: as we do read
in the 15. of Numbers, to declare some signification of greater things in it,
Number. 15.^^
according as the Prophets have interpreted it. The Sabbath then does very
well point out the corruption that we have received of Adam, which rules and
reigns in the ways and wills of al them, that are not borne again and
changed both in will and deed, by the power of that his grace, which only he
bestows upon his elect. Ephe. ^.3.
For thus it is written to the Ephesians: Among whom (speaking of the children
of disobedience) We also had our conversation in time past, in the lusts of
our flesh, in fulfilling the will of the flesh, and of the mind, and were by
nature the children of wrath as well as others. We have to mark here that
speaking of his sin, he describes it to have been done by following the will
of the mind, (which is the reasonable part:) as well as in following the will
of the flesh, (which is the affection and unreasonable part.) And lest we should
ascribe this only to his custom in sin, (as if he had not been borne with
this disease, nor by nature inclined thereunto,) he puts himself and others
under the wrath of God by nature, saying: We are by nature the children of
wrath as well as others: making it the common case of all men, as naturally to
be inclined to evil, as they are to eat and drink in their hunger or thirst.
It is worth the noting yt he puts himself in the number, for he says of
him self to the Philippians, Philip. 3.6.
yt his life was not outwardly to be reproved, no not before his calling. And
therefore we may learn, that this is the estate, even of those civil men, that
are not to be touched with any notorious offense or outward evil.

This Sabbath, teaching us our inward corruption, stays not there, neither
is that the end of it, but leads us to understand, that our justification,
sanctification, and true holiness of life, are the free works of God within
us: which we are compelled to grant, in yt we confess our own ways to be
corrupted, and yt the ceassing from sin, is the ceassing from our own ways and
works. For if (as the truth is) our own ways be al corrupted and defiled with
sin, if any good be in us, it must have a beginning and spring other where
then from our selves. That the Sabdaoth did signify our new birth in Christ
to be the workmanship of God within us, may appear in Exodus. Keep ye my
Sabbath, Exodus 31.13.
for it is a sign between me and you in your generations, that you may know
that I the Lord do sanctify you. For the denial of their own ways, must
needs witness their works of sanctification to proceed from the Lord,
and not of them selves. The same is witnessed in Ezechiel, and in the Acts of
the Apostles. Ezech 20.12 Acts. 3.26.
The covenant made with Abraham for blessing all nations in his seed, is
said to be performed in Christ, in turning every one of his from their
iniquity. Unto you (says the holy ghost in that place) has God raised up his
son Jesus. And him has he sent to bless you, in turning every one of you
from your iniquities.

There is mention made in this commandment, of the Lords creation of the
world in six days: as if the Sabbath should only direct us to the
consideration of that work of our creation, not requiring any thing beside:
especially, seeing there follows that note of inferring: Therefore the Lord
blessed the seventh day and hallowed it: Deuter. 5.15
as ifelse there were no other consideration to be had. In the fifte of Deute.
where the law is repeated, this commandment has annexed to it, the memory
of their deliverance out of Egypt: Remember (says the holy Ghost in that
place) thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt, and that the Lord thy God
brought thee out thence by a mighty hand and stretched-out arm: Therefore
the Lord thy GOD commanded thee to observe the Sabbath day. In this
diversity of benefits to be considered in the Sabbath, we may learn, the
Lord meant rather to induce us to the freeness of his goodness in Christ in
every benefit: then to bind us to any one particular fruit and effect
thereof, the clearest testimony of this free goodness we have in our new
birthe: And yet the scripture affirms the excellency of our creation to be
in Christ, as may appear by conferring the eighth Psalm with the 2. chapter
to the Hebrews verse 7.8. and 9: Psalm. 8.5. Heb. 2.7.8. and. 9.
where the excellency of man above other creatures, is put over to be
considered in Christ being crowned with glory and honor. The Prophet notes
the founteine of all our goodness to be in Christ, and the greatest fruit
thereof to be our new birth: notwithstanding all other benefits are received of
his children, as fruits and effects thereof. And they bound therefore, as in
sanctification, so in creation and deliverance from Egypt, to acknowledge the
alone and free work of Gods goodness: and this is the cause why ye holy Ghost
does not strictly bind them unto one benefit in the observing of the Sabbath.

This commandment teaches us mortification: for to that end are we taught,
that our nature is corrupt, yt we may learn to subdue the same, and to
renounce it. The Jews had this special ceremony of rest, to exercise them in
the doctrine and practice of mortification: the truth of which ceremony is
fulfilled in Christ. Romans ^.
For by the power of his death it is brought to pass, that sin dies in his.
It was necessary they should be acquainted with this doctrine, for the Lord
has no service of us that he will accept of, if we learn not to renounce and
deny our affections: neither can we go truly to the obedience of him, but in
the denial of our selves. Our affections are as untamed coltes that refuse to
draw in the yoke of the Lord: and therefore must be tamed if we mean to
interreine obedience. For we can not draw nere unto the Lord, except we shall
remove far, from our selves: keeping under our wisdom and affections, that
they make no insurrection against the Lord in the government of his word. If
a man might retain his own affections and desires together with the worship
of the Lord, it would be received of many: but because they can not stand
together, but he who is ruled by the one must depart from the other, the number
of them is small, that truly serve the Lord. For notwithstanding there be many
that observe outward things that apperteine to the profession of religion and
outward deeds which they may do, and yet not greatly strain their affections,
yet because such men, whenever the matter of religion and duty directly
warreth with their affections, then do usually take part with themselves in
their affections against the Lord, their kind of service of the Lord, is but
in deed a serving of them selves. For they have not learned this special
point, without the which all the rest is nothing. It is a small matter for a
man to busy him self about sundry things, so that he be surely determined
of this, that his affections shall no sooner be pressed, but he will forthwith
set them at liberty, and let them go free. If we shall have taken part with
the wisdom of God, to the suppressing and abandoning of our own wit, if
with his pleasure, we have stood against our own, then may we say in truth,
that there has been some religion and service of God used and practiced of
us, when it has prevailed to the displacing of our own lusts and desires.

Free will.
By this commandment falls to the ground all free will of man to do good:
all works of preparing us to receive Gods grace. For what frank and free will
unto God can there be in that nature that is dead in sin? Or how can he boast
of the freedom or good inclination of his nature, whose glory and
sanctification consists in resting and ceassing from the affections and
motions of his nature, in such a victory over them as he be no longer led nor
ruled by them?

This commandment teaches us to give all glory unto God, in the true
abasing of our own corrupt nature: for the Lord is not truly honored and
glorified of us, unless he be found true, and we liars, he just and we unjust.
He will not have us stand together with him. No justice, but his, must be
vpholden in the fall of ours, he advanced in our humility. Many may be
brought with the Phariseie, Lu. 18. verse. 10.11.12.1^. and. 14.
to confess Gods goodness in the benefits they have received of him, but
few with the Publicane to humble themselves truly and from the sense of their
heart in the nature that they have rebelling against him. It is neither great
aduauncing of God, nor any great abasing of our selves, to profess him to have
done us good, when there is no deserving of ours to ye contrary confessed or
acknowleged. For even civil men have this goodness in them, to do well to them yt
have deserved nothing to ye contrary. But then is he truly honored in his
goodness, when it is given to unworthy and undeserving persons: when the love
is so great toward his enemies. Then are we truly humbled, when in heart we
acknowledge it not only to be undeserved, but also even contrary to our
deserving. What then? Shall we sin that God may be glorified in our humility?
God forbid. For when we have taken as good care over our ways as flesh and
blood possibly can perform, there will be matter enoughe of throwing down
our selves in all humility, before the throne of his mercy.

By this commandment are Papists, Anabaptists, and that wicked and damnable
sect of the family of love, upholding free will, and their fulfilling of ye law
found all traitors to Gods glory, which stands not whole and sound, unless
every mouth be stopped, and all the world found culpable and faulty before GOD:
as it is written to the Romans. Romans 3.19.
This commandment as far forth as it is ceremonial, now is ceased because
Christ is now come, by whose death we die to sin, and rest from our own
ways. And therefore in that it did admonish us of him to come, now, in that
he is come, it serves no longer to that end: In as much also as the
dispensation of those times were (as the Apostle says to the Galathians) The
minority and wardshippe of the Church, Gala. 4.1.2.
during which time, the heir (though Lord of all) differs not from a
servant, but is under governors. These times that now follow Christ, must
needs be more free from the bondage of these outward things, and from that
strict observing of the outward rest, that in those times they were in bondage
unto. Yet all this notwithstanding, in as much as this seventh day is appointed
by ye Church for the assembling of ye faithful, and for their joining together
in prayer, Sacraments, and hearing of the word, thereby to get power to
cease from sin, (that is our own ways and works,) it cannot without great
wickedness and sin against God, be neglected. Wherein the wickedness of
this exceeds, in that men commonly no day in the week, follow so much
their own ways, and the delights of their own heart, as on that day, which
is appointed to learn them how to cease from their own ways, works, and
delights. For a great number, (and those not ye worst of all,) take that day
to be ordained only for the ease of their body, and to be a day of recreation
after their travels and labors that have been the six days before, and use
it accordingly: whereas the Lord has appointed it to the exercise of the
word and prayer, that being unburdened of their worldly affairs, they might
with free hearts and minds attend upon the word, prayer, and meditation of the
mercies and benefits of God, and so profit therein, that the other days of
labor might feel the benefit and commodity thereof, they being better armed
to stand against the occasions of evil, which men who have daily dealings in
the world, and so tickle a disposition unto sin, without great grace shall never
be able to avoid but must altogether be overwhelmed therewith.

And likewise it was ordained that men by consideration of his mercies, should
so be ledd to love him, and by faith to wait for the mercies and happynes
laid up for his, that they might become the more willing to cease from their
own ways and wills, and to moderate their inordinate desire after worldly
things.

But is this regarded of the most, I cannot say so: for common experience
would confute me. One sort (as was declared before) making the case of the
body to be the end thereof: An other, (a great deal worse then they) using it
only to make good cheer, play and sport themselves on that day. Thus the
right use and end of the Sabbaothe is clean altered, and not that only, but
changed into a practice most contrary to the institution thereof. For being
appointed to be (as I may call it) the market day of the soul, to make
provision for the days following: they are not only no better holped that
way, but as if Satan might boldly open his shop windows then, which could
not be permitted him before, they do so fasten upon his wares and stoare
them of that provision, that not only that week, but many weeks are served
of the abundance thereof.

In a third sort we shall see it, that if a man have any matter to deal in,
that is of smaller importance then yt his ordinary business may give place
thereunto, those are cast upon the Lords day, and then must he and also
oftentimes some of his, be sent upon those messages or other matters whatsoever
to dispatch them. These kind of men use the Sabbath day commonly to make an
end of reckonings, or other kind of like matters not finished the former week,
and to set matters and business in a redynes for ye week following: so that
their heads are as full fraught with the world that day as upon any other, and
therefore far from the right use thereof, which is to be emptied of all such
things, that better may have the place.

These four commandments, instruct us perfectly concerning the glory of God
wherein it does consist. First, from the heart, the corruption of our own
heart, ways and works, and earnestly traveling to subdue the same; thereby
advancing the free mercy and undeserved goodness of our God, both in justifying
and also sanctifying of us.

In the examination of our selves concerning this commandment, we have to
learn that we are by nature corrupted in this commandment as in ye rest, and
that there is nothing so hard, as with true humility of heart to be humbled in
acknowledging and mortifying the corruptions, wickedness and rebellio^s of our
nature against Gods co^mandeme^ts: in so much that oftentimes he suffers his
children to fall into gross infirmities, that all ye world may see it, before
they can truly be humbled in the sight of their infirmity, and so cast down
as they give the whole glory to his mercy, earnestly seting upon their
affections for the subduing of them. But when it pleases God to pull any out
of their corruption, and to begin Christianity in them, he does let them see
with assurance of his mercy toward them: but so, as notwithstanding he
brings them not only to the sight and bewailing of that rebellion which they
feel in their affections against his will, but also to the mortifying and
subduing thereof.

The man therefore, that will truly examine him self, has to consider what
resisting of his affections has been in his life, so shall he soon
perceive, what need he has to betake him self unto the mediator CHRIST
JESUS, while his conscience shall witness either of no profiting at all
herein, or at the least so little, as shall sufficiently convict him, and force
him to lay hold upon the righteousness of Christ, as his only refuge: yet
so, as his care to suppress his affections be no less, because he
understands what mercy is in Christ, but so much the more increased, as he
perceives that travail to please the Lord, even as the best thankfulness
that we can perform, for the great benefit of our redemption.

Now let us pray that we may bear such an enemies heart against our own
corrupt affections, as may not spare to tread upon them, when soever they
shall rise up against the Lord.

The fifte Lecture upon the twelfth vearse.
12 Honor thy Father and thy mother, that thy days may be prolonged upon the
land which the Lord thy GOD gives thee.
THe former commandments, do perfectly instruct us in all the duties that
apperteine directly to God. These following, do give us rules and precepts
for the duties that we do owe unto men. The Lord our God being perfect in
all happiness by him self alone, has no need of our service: yet will he
have trial of the love that we bear unto him, not only by deeds done
immediately unto him self, but also by deeds done for his cause unto men. He
therefore (meaning to make a trial of our love toward him) has commanded
us that we should not be altogether our own men, closed up within our own
profits and pleasures, only regarding and procuring them, and wholly taken up
of them, but that we should go out of our selves at his commandment, to the
good of our brethren: witnessing our thankfulness unto God, in giving for his
sake this service unto men.

The duties unto GOD (going in order before these unto men:) do admonish us of
this doctrine, that all our doeings toward men are nothing, where Gods glory
does not go before, as it is written in the Epistle of Saint John: 1. John.
5.2.
In this we know that we love the children of GOD, when we love God and
keep his commandments. And like as our dealing with men is nothing, when
the true service of God is either not known or not regarded, so that service
that is given unto GOD is not accepted, when our brethren are neglected of us.
Matthew. 5.23. and. 24
Therefore does our Savior Christ in Matthew charge us that when our
neighbor has any thing against us, we should not presume to offer any gift
unto God, before we be reconciled, so greatly does the Lord esteem of this
loving conversation with men, that the holy Ghost makes it the proof of our
blessed estate, as it is written in John, 1. Ioh. 3.14.
We know that we are translated from death to life, because we love the
brethren.

Concerning that which we do owe unto men: the honourtng of father and mother,
has the first place. By Father and mother are all those understood, who are
the instruments of GOD in any of his special goodness toward us: whom
because he has vouchsafed to be his means in the conueying of that grace
that we do enjoy by them, he cannot abide that they should be without honor
at our hands. By honor (which is required to be given unto them) we are
taught so to behave our selves toward them in all our dealinge, as may
witness that in heart we do honor them, and therefore this honor does
not so much exact any one several thing, as it puts a quality and
condition upon all our behavior toward them, that it should be such, as it
may be a witness of our heart how highly it does reverence and regard
them.

If it be demanded, why the Lord by Father and mother, should understand all
the instruments of his goodness toward us, whereas he makes mention but of
one sort, it may be required of them again, why the Lord forbidding all
kind of violence, should make mention only of murder: For as by murder
being the chief, he comprehends all of that kind, so by one instrument of
his special goodness, he leads us to the consideration of all the like.

Moreover, we must reverence the wisdom of the only wise GOD herein, who by
the most gross evils, labors to work the loath-thing of all the like, and
by benefits and good things in them selves most amiable, to further the
cause of all the rest, setting the ouglyest shape he possibly can upon evils
to terrify us withal, and giving to good things the countenance that may
best commend them. Our travail therefore must be to search into these good
things which we receive by others: that when we shall have found them, we
may (as by duty apperteyneth) honor the owners of them. Nature may prevail
with them that be of any consideration, for the conceiving of those benefits
which they inioye by means of their Parents: so that the travail need not
to be much herein. Reason may persuade, even the most simple, that if we
have any good thing in this life, or any blessing following it, they who have
brought us into life, may justly claim a part therein.

The matter of Magistrates is not so plain, what good we receive by them,
therefore it craves more time to be given unto it. The Magistrate is the
instrument of GOD to preserve that life which the Lord in mercy has given
unto us. For by the administration of justice and execution of good laws, the
outrage of the wicked (with whom the world is always pestered) is restrained
from laying violent hands upon the good, which otherwise would at all times
burst forth, because the occasion (which is the good works of the one, and
the evil of the other) can never be separate from their lives. And that this
is the occasion, 1. Ioh. 3.12.
may be proved out of the Epistle of S. John, where, after inquiry had what it
was that moved Caine to slay Abel, he answeareth, Because his own works were
evil and his brothers good. And least we should note some extraordinary
thing in Caine, he puts all the wicked in the rank with him, making it the
common disposition of them all: and therefore saying, We may not be as Caine
which was of the wicked and slew his brother.

It is therefore no small blessinge and benefit of God, that keeps the sword
of the ungodly from our throat, which is every hour drawn out and shaken at
us, with whom we can never be at league, unless we will be at one with evil.
Moreover, the blood which is spilt in any land, and the wickedness that is
committed therein, cries to the Lord for vengeance against that land and
people wherein it is committed, and is sure to draw out the sword of the Lord
against that people, if the Magistrate (who is the Lords Lieutenaunt) shall not
before draw upon it, by executing deserved punishment against it.

Which thing to be so, the very Infidels have perceived: and therefore in
their great afflictions have proceeded by casting of lottes, to know the
malefactor, that by his punishmente, the evil might be removed from them: as
we read the mariners dealte wih Jonas when the tempeste was most vehement
against them. Jonas. 1.7.


Therefore often times in the Scriptures after charge given to execute
punishment against sin, Deuteronomy. 13.5.
these or such like words are added: So shall thou take evil away, forth of
the midst of thee. And these also: Deuteronomy. 13.17.
That the Lord may turn from the fierceness of his wrath, and show thee
mercy and have compassion on thee. Solomon charging Benaia (as it appears in
the book of kings) to slay Ioab, adds these words: 1. Reg. 2.31.
That thou may take away the blood which Ioab shed causeless, from me and
from the house of my Father.

The Magistrate therefore as he keeps the bloody hand of the ungodly from
us: so is he our sanctuary from their sin that pursues us and our land to
destroy us, while he executes justice upon it. Miserable therefore are the
Anabapistes and such kind of men, who in denying Magistracy, deny thereby
those great comfortes and blesinges, which GOD by them has granted unto his
people. The Magistrate also binds the benefit and help of all degrees of
men and trades of life unto us, so that in denying us their lawful aid, we
have remedy of law against them, whereby they stand bound to employ them
selves without deceit or fraud to our good: whether it be in place of
Justice under the Prince and chief Magistrate, or in any trade or occupation
for the maintenance of them selves: while we have so many laws to correct the
abuses in them, that thereby they may be used without guile or deceit to our
most profit. But the chiefest benefit of all other is, when they are ye
instruments of Gods glory, in bringing the Gospel to us, and maynteining it
amongst us, when they open the eyes of the seers and Prophets, that they be no
more shut, cause the heart of the foolish to understand knowledge, and make the
tongue of the stutter ready to speak distinctlie: Isay. 3^.3.4.5. and. ^.
as it is spoken of all godly magistrates under the person of Ezechias.

By which means of the Gospel, evil is disclosed, yt it can no more lurk
under the name of that it is not, but appearing in his most filthy face, may
the better be avoided, and good things are brought to their beauty and
increase, that they may be stronger to allure unto them the hearts of all
those that have any love of good things within them: which are in the place
above named recited as fruits that follow the receiving of the Gospel. By
this we have some taste of those blessings of God, which we do receive by
means of magistrates, how many they be in number, and how worthy in
deserving.

From this sight, must arise the true honoring of them: for so does the
Apostle teach us to the Romans: who* when first he has taught that the
magistrate is appointed for the terror of the evil and praise of the good,
Romans 13.3.
he concludes, that therefore we must be subject unto magistrates: not only
for fear of their punishment, but also for conscience of the good that they
do unto us, least (as says Chrysostom upon those words) thou should
be unthankful toward a benefactour.

It were too long to stand upon the benefits that other inferiors receive
from those whom the Lord has set above them: only this do I require of
all inferiors, to enter into some diligent consideration thereof: in so
doing, I am sure that they shall find them far to exceed the opinion that
before they had of them.

It is therefore very meet and requisite that our duty toward them in all
things should be such, as may well be called a true honoring of them, and a
right regard of so great benefits as we do receive by them. The opinion of
those men who restrain honor only to some civil outward gesture of the body
is so frivolous and vain, as it does scarce deserve the honor of an answer.
That honor is not only seen in civil gestures of the body, but also in
outward deeds to be done: 1. Tim. 5.17.
as may appear in the first Epistle to Timothy, where the holy Ghost
(speaking of the mainteynaunce of them that labor in the word) calls it
Honor: affirming that such do deserve double honor. And in the same Chapter
he admonishes Timothy to honor widows that have no kindred to provide for
them, meaning that he should se so good provision to be made for such, as they
might take them selves honored therein.

Matthew. 15.
And our Savior Christ reproved the Phariseies as contemners of the
commandment of God, (commanding parents to be honored) when they gave
counsel to their children to offer up those things in the Temple, which
ought to have been bestowed toward the relief of their poor parents. By
these testimonies we may clearly see, that such things as do witness our
great regard, and loving affections toward others, are justly called by the
name of honor, and they truly honored therein*

There is a promise annexed to this commandment, that it shall go well with
such as honor their superiors, and that their days shall be prolonged here
upon earth. The promise, in equity is very well aunswearing to the thing it
self: that those who are thankful to the instruments of GOD, whereby he has
either begun, continued, or any way blessed their life, should have the
blessing of many good days: and that they who are unthankful to those his
instruments of life, should in justice be deprived of the benefit of living,
being so unthankful and vnduetiful to the instruments thereof.

The transgression against this commandment, threateneth the shortening of
life unto the rebellious and disobedient: which punishment (if it be not
executed against his person) will not fail to find out his seed and
posterity, in whom he is said after a manner to live.

Contrariwise, obedience to our Parents, continues us and our posterity,
according as it is written in Jeremy: Because ye have obeyed the commandment
of Ionadab your father, Iere. 35.18. and. 19.
therefore thus says the Lord of hosts the GOD of Israel. Ionadab the son
of Rechab, shall not want a man to stand before me for ever. A great blessing
of God to have a heir male of our own seed wherein our name may be continued
unto many generations. The Verb that here is translated of a Verb Passive,
has usually in the Scripture the signification of a Verb Transitiue: and
therefore thus it may very well be translated: That they (meaning thy Parents)
may prolong thy days, making the continuance of our life, as it were the
gift of Parents, approving the honor that their Children give unto them: and
so it is here attributed unto Ionadab as his blessing and benefit, that he
shall not want a man to stand before GOD for ever, notwithstanding the
obedience were in his Children. Whereby we are taught so to walk duetifully
and thankfully toward our superiors, as they may be compelled to approve it,
and so to bless it with many good days. For the Lord to get this honor of
inferiors to their superiors, has (as it were) put this benefit of long
days into their hands, and makes it to follow their approving of that
thankfulness, which they receive from their inferiors.

This threatening of the Lord, may not only bring a terror unto rebellious
subjects, and disobedient children, which live in the displeasure of their
superiors, justly conceived against them: but also unto those (who
notwithstanding they have committed nothing that justly may displease them) yet
have not done any thing that may justly challenge approbation and lyking from
them. This curse (of cutting off the length of their lives, either in their
own person, or in their posterity) most justly falls upon such, as greatly
regard not the consent of their parents in that weighty matter of marriage.
Parents have here to learn the bringing up of their children in all
obedience and reverence toward them selves, lest by their too much lenity,
they bring such an infection into their children, as will not depart from
them, before it has brought them all unto the grave, that there be not one
man of their seed left to continue their name.

This blessing (of many good days promised to obedient inferiors) is so far
forth performed, as it may be a blessing unto them. For sometime God in
mercy takes away obedient children in their young years, that they should
not taste of the afflictions that he means to bring upon the land: or lest
the iniquities of those days should pervert them. Deuteronomy. 5.16.
In Deuteronomie unto the promise of long life are added these words, That it
may be well with thee, promising them benefit of long life no longer, then it
shall be for their weal to enjoy it.

So likewise it may come to pass, that a disobedient child may live long, to
taste of the grief of disobedience in his own Children, to suffer exile and
banishment, or some one great punishment or other: or else that his
wickedness may grow yet riper to reuengement, so that it be no longer a
blessing to enjoy such days. We must remember that all this which has been
spoken of obedience, and the blessing thereof, must be limited so, as in
obeying them we do not disobey God, and go contrary unto his word.

This commandment also binds superiors unto their inferiors. For those
gifes of God that come with special direction to be employed unto certain
persons, (as do the gifts of inferiors) cannot in equity, but have some
special consideration from them again, upon whom they are thus especially
employed. Heerevpon aryseth the particular callings that be, when by reason of
particular benefits and blessings which we receive of particular persons,
we become indebted unto them again for several duties, more and above those
general duties which we owe unto all men.

This commandment comprehends all particular callings of what condition
soever they shall be. For the law being a perfect rule of righteousness,
cannot content it self with general duties alone. When this duty from
superiors is not given to them that be under them, it comes often to pass
by the just judgment of God (and yet with the inferiors their great sin and
heinous offense,) that they become unthankful, undutiful and rebellious
against those that be set over them, armed by the just judgment of God to
deny duty unto them, from whom they have received none. Masters complain
of the unfaithfulness of servants, and yet was there never any time when
servant had iuster cause to complain of undutiful masters. For where are
those masters to be found that have any just regard of the swette of their
servants, (which is their blood) bestowed in their service? How slenderly are
they recompensed, when they have spent their young years, (the flower of their
life) upon them? yet even reason would, that seeing the Lord has laid the
maintenance of their life upon their labor and travel which their masters
have eaten up, they should not be so cruelly unkind, as after their long
service to send them away with an empty hand. I omit to speak how little ye
care is of bringing them up in the fear of God. The number of those parents
which carefully perform this duty toward their children, to make them
learned in the law of their God is as small. And where shall we find any
number of such Magistrates, as employ them selves to terrify wickedness and
wicked men, and to encourage the good in their goodness? These things are as
well due from them, as the other duties before recited belong unto them.

There is also generally required of all superiors, yt loving dealing and
behavior toward their inferiors which may witness yt they are not
unthankful for those special benefits which they do receive from them. For if
love (which has in it special good will and liking) be commanded toward
all men in general, there must of necessity be a greater measure of it
between those, that are more particularly employed the one upon the other. This
loving regard of them outwardly declared in deed and behavior, must come in as
a supply to help to bear and sustain the weight of labor and subjection,
which the nature of man otherwise can hardly digest, as in a man's body more
labor or cost is bestowed about those parts that have the lest beauty and
form in themselves, in so much that those parts, which (as they are of
themselves) dare least abide the eye, are set forth with more beauty to the
eye, thereby (after a manner) having recompense of their want in the body, so
in the body of the common wealth, and in the society of man, tender regard
of superiors and amiable affection toward those that be under them, should
bear up a part of that heavy burden of subjection and service.

The gifts and graces of God in others crave also honor from us. For being
fellowe-members of one body, we have our benefit, and fare the better for the
several gifts of others. For the Lord has made such a division of his
gifts, as that he has laid a necessary part of the welfare of every man
out of himself in some other: the lack whereof, makes him maimed in him self,
and therefore forces him to seek unto others, for his perfect form and just
proportion. These gyfts of God we are not only bound to see and behold, but
also to subject our selves in modesty unto them, even he that has more unto
him that has less, as it is written to the Philippians: In meekness of
mind let every man esteem another better then himself. Philip 2.3.
And to the Romans, In giving of honor, let one go before another. Romans 10.12
There is as great a cause why the aged should be honored in his knowledge long
time experienced in good things, as the young man for the ripeness of his
wit: and therefore men must mutually reverence the gyfts of their fellow
brethren, if love and liking shall be any long time mutuallie vpholden. That
is the cause, why in the same verse when the Apostle had persuaded us to
brotherly love, immediately has these words: In giving of honor, go one
before another: as if the one would not long continue, where there were not the
other. There is no one thing that our nature can less like of, then to be
under contempt, and that nothing should be espied in us for the which men
would regard us: wherefore it stands all upon, to travel so in finding out
the goodness of the gifts and graces of GOD in other, as their hearts may in
vnfeignednesse yield reverence thereunto: and also thereby to make a defense
against infirmities which will be in flesh and blood, that there may be bearing
and forbearing one of another, by love and reverent regard had to the gifts
of Gods grace in them.

Our nature is no better inclined in duties toward men, then it is (as
before we have learned) in duties toward God. For we are given to seek to
have our selves honored in our calling or gift whatsoever, but little to
regard, nay even to envy the honor of others: which we shall then discern,
when any shall be compared with us, and made either superiors, or else equals
unto us. And therefore when it pleases God to call any of his unto the hope of
his kingdom, he lets them see their corruption even in this commandment,
so as they are forced by the sense and feeling thereof to give over the claim
of salvation in the title of their works, which have no promise if they do
not perform the whole law and every work thereof throughout the whole
course of their life. For it is written in Deuteronomie, Deuteronomy. 27.16.
Cursed is he that confirms not all the words of this law to do them. And
I would willingly learn what man there is yt can truly say, that he has
neither done nor yet left undone any thing, either to his superior or
inferior to men of greater gyfts or less the^ him self, which did bewray
want of honoring of them from his heart. The lord also causes those whom he
calls, both carefully to stand in watch against their infirmity, lest it
should burste forth to the dishonor of God, and likewise more heartily to
require a ready and willing affection to procure the honor of his name, by
walking duetifully in this commandment.

And if the outward work of this commandment should be attended upon of any
never so diligently, and yet Gods glory not sought therein, it would profit
us nothing. For if we give men their due, and in the mean time deny the Lord
his, what avails it us? Therefore those former four points (wherein his
glory consists) contained in the former commandments, must of necessity
be joined with all duties unto men, which are: First yt we acknowledging all
our welfare to come from the Lord alone, do depend wholly and only upon him.
Secondly, that in love of him for his mercyes we begin to obey him after his
word. Thirdly that his glory being the mark we shoot at, make us careful in
all our works, so to do them as he may have honor by them. Fourthly, and last
of all, that in true acknowledging and travail in subduing of our own
corruptions (which will not altogether be sundred from our ways and works)
we humble our selves in our best obedience, that the Lord may always retain
the praise of the free and undeserved working of his grace.

Now let us pray unto our heavenly father, that we may truly see and bewail
the little reverence and regard that we have had both to superiors and
inferiors, becoming thereby not only unthankful unto them, but also unto
the Lord, who has placed such graces for our benefit in them: and let us
crave of him, that we may not only obtain more power to suppress the same,
but also may be enabled from him to send abroad such fruits of true
reverence and honor, as may come to the sight and hearing of many, to the
great praise of his name.

The sixte Lecture upon the thirteenth verse.
13 Thou shall not kill.
THe former commandment has given forth instruction for particular callinges,
from which (by reason of more particular employing of benefits mutualy one
upon another) there arises more particular duty of the one unto the other,
then that which every common man may claim unto himself. Now we are to be
instructed in those duties that generally we do owe unto all men: amongst
which, this commandment of not killing has the first place, wherein we are
forbidden to do any violence, injury or wrong to the body and life of our
neighbor: and commanded to defend, maintain, and cherish the same. It is to
be observed, that the Lord bidding us show forth love unto our neighbors,
has not left it unto us to devise wherein to pleasure them, but has set down
what things are most dear unto them: that by our help given for the
preservation of those things safe unto them, and in benefiting them therein
they may have true trial of the love and affection that we bear unto them.
Our neighbor therefore in this consideration is not shut up in the alone
flesh and blood of the man, but the duties of neighbourhode reach unto the
life and body, wife, goods, and good name of the man. Neither is love the not
hating or not hurting of a man, but the helping and furthering of him to
receive more comfort in those things above recited: over the which every man
is so tender, that being in any of those annoyed, he can no longer account him
self as a man loved or regarded of the authors thereof: For he himself is
vpholden in life and liking by the comfort of them. The Lord (in forbidding
murder) forbiddith also all violence, cruelty, and wrath toward our
neighbor: laboring in the detestation of this greatest evil, to work in us
a hatred toward all that be of any affinity with it: and therefore not
letting us see them, but in that form which may most fear us from them,
putting upon them all that fearful form of murder. The punishment of the
offenses against this commandment, will help us to judge ye greatness of the
same. Touching the murderer, it is said in Leuiticus, Leui. 24.17.
He that kills any man he shall be put to death. Violence bursting forth into
extremities of dealing, in the old law was punished with the like of that
that was done what kind soever it was, according as it is written in
Leuiticus, If a man cause any blemish in his neighbor, Leui. 24.19.
as he has done so shall it be done to him, breach for breach, eye for eye,
toothe for toothe, such a blemishe as he has made in any, such shall be repaid
to him, whereby the offender was drawn to the better consideration of that
grief which he had brought upon another, in feeling the displeasure thereof
within him self, and also feared the more from offending, being well assured
before, that he could offer no great wrong unto his neighbor, which self
same in so doing he should not bring upon his own head. This punishment does
not only declare the unlawfulness of violence which here is forbiden, but
also by that punishment which the just Lord did appoint for it, we see how
great the offense is which has had such a punishment appointed for it from
the justice of God, that more account may be made of such injuries, then
commonly there is in any place. In this commandment is forbidden all cruelty:
and therefore in the punishment of certain offenses, there was a number of
stripes appointed, which in punishing they might not pass: as we read in
Deuteronomy. Deuteronomy. 25.2.3
So does the Lord abhor cruelty, that he would not have it covered, no not
under the cloak of justice and zeal against sin, which under that pretense
might be shadowed, if in any respect at al it were to be mainteyned. This law
was so religiously observed amongst the Jews, that they would always give
one stripe less unto the offendour whosoever. And therefore forty being the
number of strypes which they might not pass, the usual punishment was to
give forty save one, which number they did not exceed, no not in punishing
of Paul toward whom they bear so deadly hatred: 1. Cor. 11.24
as he testifies of himself to the Corinthes, Of the Jews (says he in that
place) five times received I forty stripes save one. Thus would the Jews
give out some signification how they did abhor cruelty, being very
unwilling to be publicly noted of that crime, how bloody soever their hearts
were, no not at that time, when as they might have had some shadow, in
pretending the zeal of justice for their fact. But Christians must abhor
that in deed, which these in show would be thought to be far from. Leui.
19.14.
Cruelty was restrained, in that which we read of in the nineteenth of
Leuiticus, (of not putting a stumbling block before the blind, nor reuiling
the deaf:) for such wantes get compassion amongst all those in whom there
is any humanity or pitiful inclination. Those therefore must of necessity be
cruel and savage, that are so far from any touch therewith, as that they can
abide to increase it, by insulting upon them and adding more torment unto
them. To repress cruel dealing, it was forbidden them to withholde the hyre of
the poor and needy hired servant, Deuteronomy. 24.15.
as it is written in Deuteronomie, Thou shall give him his hyre for his day,
neither shall the sun go down upon it: for he is poor and therewith
susteineth his life, least he cry against thee unto the Lord, and it be
sin unto thee. Exodus 22.21
To the same end was the commandment given in Exodus (for not vexing nor
oppressing the strangers, widows, and fatherless children) with this threat,
If thou vex or trouble such and so he call and cry unto me, I will surely
hear his cry. Then shall my wrath be kindled, and I will kill you with the
swoorde, and your wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless. Exodus
22.26
For the same cause, in the same chapter they are commanded to restore the
garment taken to pledge before the sun go down, This is his garment for his
skin (says the Lord:) Wherein shall he sleep? therefore when he cries unto
me I will hear him: for I am merciful. Leui. 25.35.
The commandment that was given in Leuiticus (concerning those that were
impouerished and fallen into decay) to relieve them, but in no case to take
usury or advantage of them, had in it ye same purpose and end to meet with
cruelty and unmercifulness. For every such condition has in it matter to
move us to pity and compassion: which occasion is taken of the good, as
offered them from the Lord to declare whose children they are by being
merciful even as their heavenly father is merciful. Matthew. 7^
But when men are so far from compassion and mercy, as being provoked by
present and visible occasion offered, they do not only shut up the bowels
of compassion against them, but even make a pray and spoil of them, most
cruelly increasing their misery, it is a plain proof that there is no drop
of humanity, and much less of Christianity within them. To conclude this
speech of cruelty, that which is written in Deuteronomie Deuteronomy. 25.
(of the mouseling the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn) and is
applied by Saint Paul to the Corinthes, 1. Cor. 9.9.10.
to prove that the labourer may not be denied his hyre and wages for his
pains, makes plainly against cruelty, and battereth down all the walls of
unmercifulness, that are so strongly vpholden by the general practice of so
many now a-dayes. For what man almost is there of any worship or wealth, who
thinks not that he may lawfully use his tenant, or poor neighbor without
any wages? yet the prophet Jeremy pronounces woe against this kind of
cruelty in these words: Iere. 22.13.
Woe unto him that builds his house by unrighteousness, and his chambers
without equity: he uses his neighbor without wages, and gives him not for
his work. It is nothing so cruel a fact to rob a stranger, whom thou
know not, as to suck out (by his labor) the blood of thy friend and
neighbor, and after to send him away without wages. If such buildinges
stand upon unrighteousness, (as says the prophet,) it is to be feared that
many a fair house in this land has such a ruinous foundation, as
threateneth the destruction of the owner. This kind of cruelty how heinous
it was in the sight of God, and what plague it might bring in justice upon the
things that were in such unrighteousness accomplished, did Job very well
understand, and therefore says.

Job. 31.39.
If I have eaten the fruits of my land without silver, or have grieved the
souls of the masters thereof, let thistles grow in steed of wheat, and
cockle in steed of barley. Prou. 12.10.
A righteous man (says the holy Ghost) regards the life of his beast, but
the mercies of the wicked are cruel. If he neglecte not his beasts but
gives them food in due time, much less will he neglecte his family or
servants, in defrauding them of that, either in meat, or wages, that is
convenient. These examples that now I have alleged, as they spring from an
unmerciful heart, and tend to the unjust grief and molestation of the body
and life of our brother, so are they directly against this commandment.
Notwithstanding, as they bring damage unto him by deteyning that which is his
due, they are against this commandment also, Thou shall not steal: so that it
is not impossible for one kind of action, to be guilty both of murder and
theft.

The negligence of man, whereby his neighbor receives either loss of life,
or hurt of body, is forbidden in this commandment. The reason is very good.
For if the Lord has lawfully and in equity laid upon us the care of our
neighbor his life, by good right may he require at our hands the wilful
neglecte thereof. The punishment of such wilful negligence toward the life
or body of their brethren, was most sharp and severe in the old law, as we
may see in Exodus, Exodus 21.28
where the man's own life must answer for the life of his brother who perished
by his negligence: according as the example is set down there, of a man not
keeping up his ox which he knew was woonte to pushe. If the ox were wont
to pushe in times past (says the holy Ghost) and it has been told his
Master and he has not kept him, and after, he kills a man or woman, the
Ox shall be stoned, and the owner shall die also.

In this offense of negligence are all those transgressors against this
commandment, who by. delaying to take up matters in controversy or suites
of law with all possible speed that may be, do by their negligence give
occasion to the frail nature of man to commit murder or some other
mischief, against him with whom he is in controversy. And if careless
negligence be thus dangerous, how hard a matter will it be to reckon with
the Lord for deliberate purpose to keep men at variance and debate, that their
gain may grow thereby? It will be a hard matter to answer before the
Almighty, if we have given occasion whereby our neighbor has received
loss of life. David's carfulness herein is woorthily commended to all
posterity, who when his men (breaking through the host of the Philistines with
the danger of their lives) had brought him water to drink which he so
greatly thirsted after and wished for, immediately powered it out for an
oblation unto the Lord, and said, Let not my God suffer me to do this: 1.
Chron. 11.17.18.19.
should I drink the blood of these men's lives, for they have brought it with
the ieopardie of their lives: therefore he would not drink it. A notable
example to fear us for being occasion to any (though servant or inferior)
rashly to hazard his life either for our profit or pleasure.

In this commandment the Lord is not only careful to have obedience from our
hands, but also from our hearts and tongues: so that both thoughts and
words must come under subjection unto him, that neither of them be infected
with malice which the Lord so hates and abhors. For we must interpret the
Law, according to the nature of the Lord who is the lawe-giuer. Man, by reason
that he only sees the deed and cannot discern of the heart, makes laws
for the outward doeings, and punishes them alone, Ierem. 1^^
without proceeding further: but the Lord, who searches the heart and reins,
makes laws for it, and punishes even the consent of the heart goeing against
his law: in as much as the Lord hates the evil it self, he cannot but abhor
it wheresoever he shall find it, whether in heart, hand, or tongue. It is
written in the Epistle of S. John, 1. John. 3.15
That whosoever hates his brother is a manslear. We see then that not only
gross evils come into reckoning before the Lord, but even hatred settled in
the heart, although the hand has never been stretched forth to execute the
same, neither comes it before him as some trifling thing which does not
greatly displease him, but appears monstrous, having none other shape upon
it, nor other accounte made of it then of murder. Thus must we think of hatred
consented unto in the heart, that it has a bloody face in the sight of the
Lord, and therefore is to be abhorred and loathed as the cruelty of murder.
This was ye cause why ye Lord forbidding hateful and malicious thoughts in
this commandment would give it none other name the^ murder, teaching us yt
howsoever we nurish such thoughts and make small account of them, yet his
judgment is plain yt they be no better then murder, when ye heart is settled in
them. Matthew. 5.22.
In the Gospel after S. Matthew. we see how the Lord hates words proceeding
from malice and anger. Whosoever shall say Fool unto his brother (says our
savior Christ) shall be worthy to be punished in hell fire. Hatred toward our
brethren is so grievous in his sight, that it staineth and defiles whatsoever
it touches, be it word, or thought: and makes it so heavy that the Lord can
no longer bear it. And because words bewray yt which lurketh in the heart,
and brings it to light that otherwise would not so easily be espied, we must
keep some good watch over them, that from thence we may be led to the
privy chamber of the heart, to see how al things go there: for of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, so that there is no outward thing,
that can bring us sooner to the sight and speech of the heart, then can the
tongue it self: which if it be infected with hatred or disdain, sure it is
that all things are not well at home in the heart: and therefore all men must
observe the inclination of the heart by the usage of the tongue, that when it
comes abroad casting forth hatred, wrath, and debate, we may with speed
return to the founteine, that is the heart, to purge and cleanse the same:
because we are sure, that from thence the tongue receives all poison. If we
shall prevail much in suppressing hatred both in our heart, tongue, and hand,
yet is not that all which is here commanded. For the Lord in forbidding
murder, meant not to stay there, but in removing hatred, his purpose was to
make way and passage for merciful dealing toward the life of others. And
necessary it was yt he should give us warning of that stumbling block which
lies in the way, lest we suspecting no such matter, should have imagined that
there would have been true care for ye life of our brother, where there was no
victory before over our own disposition which is altogether otherwise given
and inclined. The true proof whereof we shall then have, when our affections
shall be stired up by any dealing which shall mislike us. For then we shall well
perceive wrath to be mightily working in us, which before (because it had
peradventure no great matter to work upon) we thought that we had been
altogether void of, or at ye lest not greatly infected therewith. But now in
this manner of speaking used by the holy Ghost (who battereth down hatred,
when his purpose is to build up love) we see yt there will be no passage to
any loving dealing in truth, but by treading down of our contrary affections,
which are noted to be in us by the form of speaking. For to what end should
the holy Ghost will us to do no murder, if there were no disposition in us
thereunto? This is the cause why ye holy Ghost deals so plainly with us, in
telling us what we are, that our care may be great to reform it. And when we
shall have profited any thing herein, it may be acknowledged from whence we had
that, which we are assured was not to be found in our nature. The holy Ghost
therefore in this place detecteth our nature of want of love, nay, of hatred
and cruelty, which otherwise we should not have marked no nor suspected our
selves of it, if we had not had warning from the almighty that our nature is
poisoned therewithal. For if a man (not fearing God, yet otherwise of good
understanding to conceive the truth of things) be demanded what his opinion
is of himself, whether he be prone and bent to hatred, and whether he finds
his nature greatly inclining thereto or no, he will with great protestation
constantly affirm, that in him (he thanketh God) there is no such matter:
abiuring it, with admiration and woondring how any man should be brought to
think so of him: and thus in ye not understanding his own corruption, he sees
not what need he has of a savior and redeemer, and therefore whatsoever he
says, is in deed and truth unthankful for that benefit, while in finding
no great thing amiss in himself, he cannot see what way he should so greatly
be beholding to a savior that would answer for his transgressions, which in
his own opinion is no great matter to do, they being either few, and so
borne out in the number of those good things which he has done, or else none
at all. Moreover, if we shall have done something, or diverse things that may
be thought loving and friendly, yet if the inclination to wrath (which is by
nature in us) be either not known, or being known, the strength thereof shall
not be subdued, and the sting pulled out that it reign no more within us, we
shall never be provoked by any evil dealing of others, but that forthwith
(letting the reyne go to our heart) we shall dishonor his name in following
the rage of our mind contrary to the law of our God. So might it come to
pass that a man (having some good opinion of him self, for some outward
things, but never tried with injurious dealing of another) might take it to go
well with him, when notwithstanding this corrupt nature of his stands whole
in her full force and strength, being never a whit subdued unto the spirit,
as he well perceives when that any great occasion shall be offered to try him
with all. We see then how just cause there is, that the Lord should admonish us
of this corruption of hatred which is within us: not only that we should see
the benefit of our Savior and mediator, but also that subduing it and
treading down the strength of it, we might find free passage, to do and not
to be removed from doing the works of mercy and love which are here
commanded, even the contrary of those that (as we have heard) were forbidden
us. We are commanded to have care of the body and life of our brother, to
maintain it as his necessity shall require, and our ability can perform,
remembering that the Lord has committed that care unto us.

The Jews were commanded to make places of refuge and defense, Deuteronomy. 4.
where the guiltless persons might have protection against the rage of them
who pursued them unto death: that (as it is written in Deuter. Deuteronomy. 19.10
) innocent blood be not shedd within their land, and least blood should be upon
them: (for these are the very words of the text in that place) signifying
that the not regarding and providing for the safety of their life were matter
sufficient enough to make them and their land guilty of their blood, that
thereby they might well understand that the care of their brethrens life was
commended unto them, not without great danger, if there were to be found any
negligence therein.

Merciful dealing is here commanded toward all, but especially toward
inferiors, widows, fatherless children, and those that be in any great
extremity. A notable practice we have of this in the person of Job suffering
his servants to plead their right, Job. 31.13.
and to maynteine their good cause before him: not using his authority to
oppress them, and cruelty to execute his rage, without regarding the equity
of their cause, only standing upon his own authority over them: If I did
contemn the judgment of my servant, and of my maid, (says Job) when they
did contend with me, what then shall I do when GOD stands up? and when he
shall visit me, what shall I answer? he that has made me in the womb has
he not made him? Here is ye true trial of a merciful man: for it is no
commendation, not to offer wrong unto those who are our equals and able to
match us, but then have we true trial of our affections that there is some
mercy in truth within us, when we shall show pity and compassion toward,
those whom (for our authority or place that we be in) we might easily
oppress: when we shall be kept from fleshing our affections upon those that lay
open unto us, having no fence of power or credit, that is sufficiently able to
hold us. His example of compassion is no less commendable toward all of
them that were in any great want or extremity, as the holy Ghost (under his
person) witnesses in these words: Job. 29.12.
I delivered the poor that cried, and the fatherless: and him that had none
to help him. The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me, and I
caused the widows heart to rejoice. The Jews were bound to declare their
compassion toward their brethren, by that law which commanded them to lend
their brother that was needy amongst them, sufficient for his need: taking
for assurance, a pledge which he might forbear, as appears in
Deuteronomie: Deuteronomy. 15.8.
where they have a straight charge, that when the year of Jubilee should
approach (at what time all men were charged to relese their debts) they should
not at that time shut up their compassion from him that would borrowe for his
need, but frankly give unto him notwithstanding ye year when all debts must be
released be even at hand. There is a promise added to encourage them, that for
so doing the Lord would bless them in all that they should put their hand
unto.

They were charged also to relieve their brother or the stranger that dwelte
with them, who was fallen into decay, forbidding them in express words to
take any usury or increase of such, either of money or meat, Leuit. 25.35.36.
as appears in Leuiticus: using their goods to such comfort of their
brethren, as might well witness the love that they had unto them. The law and
commandment that was given to this people at the time when they had made an
end of the tything of their increase, does declare that they had in charge from
the Lord, to relieve with their goods, the Leuite, stranger, fatherless and
widow. Deu. 26.13.
For in Deuter. before the people should crave of God that he would bless
their land, they must protest in set words that they had given unto the
Levites, stranger, fatherless, and widow, accordingly as he had commanded
them, and so proceed after declaration of this their obedience to his will, to
crave his blessing for the people and the land: thus using their goods to the
commodity of their brethren, in lending and giving according to Gods
appointment, they did give apparaunt tokens of love toward their neighbors.
The Apostle Paul will not acquit him that has stolen if he shall steal no
more, but charge him that he shall labor that he may have some thing to give
to him that needs, that way to practice love and the works thereof upon his
needy brethren. It is not only therefore the duty of rich-men to give
something toward the relief of the needy, but even the poor must spare
somewhat of their poverty to the comfort of Christ in his needy members:
which be it never so little that they offered of their poverty (if there go a
willing and a faithful mind withal) is much more acceptable to God, then
great sums given from some wealthy men of their superfluity only, without
like faith or love unto the Lord: as we are taught in the parable of the
widow casting in her two mites into the treasury, which are justified by our
savior Christ to be more then all that the rich had cast in, because theirs
was of their superfluity, Mat. 12.43.
but hers of her poverty. If any ought to be dispensed withal from declaring
their love in this part, it is very reasonable that he (who by reason of his
long loitering in acquaintance with stealing and idleness was become through
custom which is an other nature, unapt for labor) should be discharged upon
the maintenance of him self by some honest trade: yet notwithstanding, even
he stands charged from the Lord, to reserve some thing for the provision of
his needy members.

To encourage us to duty in this part of merciful dealing and giving to the
needy, the Lord does promise that it shall be paid us again in our
greatest need. For thus says the Prophet Isay, If thou refresh the hungry and
troubled soul, Isay. 58.10.
then shall thy light spring out in darkness. The Lord shall satisfy thy
soul in drought, and make fat thy bones, and thou shall be like a spring of
water whose waters fail not. A great blessing of God to be provided for in
drought, a godly forcaste to lay up in prosperity that which we may be
assured will not only come again, but also will be sure to watch that time,
when for our need it shall be most welcome unto us.

Who would not be content to give, if he might be sure to have it again at his
most need? And behold we have letters patents from the Lord, under the
broad seal of his blood, for the findeing of that we have laid out for
him, even in our greatest need. How can we then be slack in ye liberal laying
out of some thing for an evil day? according to the counsel of the holy
Ghost in Ecclesiastes: Eccle. 11.2.
Give a portion (says he) to seven and to eight, for thou know not what
evil shall be upon the earth.

Moreover, the sentence of that great day proceeds against the damned persons
in this form. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire which is
prepared for the devil and his angels: for I was an hungered, and ye gave me no
meat: Matt. 25.41
I thirsted, and ye gave me no drink: I was a stranger and ye lodged me not: I
was naked, and ye clothed me not: sick and in prison, and ye visited me not.
Verily, I say unto you, in as much as ye did it not to one of the least of
these, ye did it not to me. And if ye promise cannot draw us, the form of
sentence must necessarily provoke us to obedience herein. We learned before,
that negligent delaying, whereby our neighbor is indaungered in his body or
life, was forbidden in this commandment: and then is speedy help and
diligent using of the present occasion that is offered to do our neighbor
good given us here in commandment. We have a singular example of this in
the fourth of Hester, Heste. 4.14.
where Mardocai tells the Queen, that if she should let slip that present
occasion then offered her to do good unto the Jews, she and her fathers
house should perish, and yet deliverance would appear unto the Jews from
some other place. In like manner Job professes that he had not caused the
eyes of the widow to fail in long looking and waiting before their request
were granted, Job. 31.1^
but had with all speed satisfied her desire: acknowledging it for a great
offense, if he had been but slack therein, even such as if he should have been
guilty thereof, might justly have brought a curse upon him.

Our natural inclination goes wholly amiss in this commandment as in the
rest: which notwithstanding it lie hid in some more cloasely then in other, for
all ye it is not so cunningly covered in a ny, but that it is disclosed and
discerned when occasion is offered. The man that is borne again unto ye hope of
everlasting life, does so clearly perceive his infectio^ heerin, that both in
heart and word he acknowledges the great necessity and benefit of a savior
and redemer: being privy unto himself not only of many evil fruts ye have
appeared in his life contrary to this commandment, but also of a disposition
within, that is naturally prone and inclined to offend herein. The hope that
he has in his mediator and savior Christ Jesus, does not make him secure and
careless in his sin, following the inclination of his own heart, but
leads him to a continual strife and debate with it, because it is against ye
honor of his God and savior, to whom he well perceives yt he is only
beholding for his salvation, and quickens him to all loving dealing which is
so often commended and commanded of his good and merciful father.

The natural man sees not any such inclination in him self to wrath, or
dullness unto loving dealing with his neighbors, as through the grief therewith
drives him to make much of the alone Savior and redeemer Christ, but when he
is charged with his offenses that burst forth contrary to this commandment,
he makes light of them, and puts them up in a common bag, saying, all
men have infirmities: never so touched with it, as he can be compelled to
magnify the grace brought by the alone mediator Christ, and much less is he
driven to any earnest war with it, or great care to profit in the works of
love, that are contrary to it.

To conclude, this commandment if we shall do some outward things
commanded here which shall obtain great commendation of many men, and for
all that the Lord want his glory, which consists in the four points which
were spoken of in the former commandment, it shall avail us nothing. Those
things that apperteine unto God, must of necessity go with those duties unto
men that shall be accepted. Neither in deed can we hold out in these, except
we have life and encouragement from the other. For the love that GOD is our
God, tenderly favoring and plentifully rewarding us that be his, must make
us to persevere in those duties which otherwise would not abide the reproaches
and injuries of men, but would burst forth to requite them: and much less
would we labor to overcome them and their evil, with our good done unto
them. But this persuasion of his good favor toward his, and plentiful
mercy which is to be showed upon them, makes men willingly to forbear the
ensuing and satisfying of their own corrupt affections, not envying the wicked
their transitory delights, but prosecuting their course in his obedience,
through all their reproaches, while they do well perceive what a plentiful
recompense of reward abides for them by the free gift of their GOD.

The man that cannot be persuaded but that he loves his neighbor as
himself, perfourming all that is required of him in that behalf, must be sent
to examine him self, if there have at no time appeared in him any cruel
dealing, toward his inferiors, any neglect or delay in helping and releeuing
the distressed, if compassion has always, as occasion served, drawn him to
speedy releeuing, by lending or giving, so shall he easily see into the error
of his opinion.

Now let us pray unto our heavenly Father, that we may so see into our cruel
and careless disposition, that we may magnify the free mercies of our GOD in
the forgiveness thereof: and also have power more and more to subdue it, that
we abounding in all merciful dealing, may glorify him in this life, and be
glorified of him in the life to come.

H.I.

The seventh Lecture upon the 14. verse.
14 Thou shall not commit adultery.
WE have learned already, that the love which we owe to our neighbor
stays not in his own person alone, but proceeds unto other things that be
precious and dear unto him: in the which if he shall by us be annoyed, forth
with in so doing we shall be convict to be void of love and charity toward
him. For the excuse is vain and childish to say we love the man, when we stick
not there to vex him, where we know it cannot be but that some great grief
of heart will come unto him.

He that loves a man in deed, deals tenderly with all those things that
are especially liked of that man: fearing most of all there to offend, where
he understands that he may the soonest displease. And because next to a man
him self, his wife ought to be most dear unto him, the wrong that is done to
any therein, cannot but have the next place unto the sin of murder.

The greatness of this sin of whordome shall then better be discerned, when
we shall bring our mind from that account which is made of it with man, unto
that judgment which the most just GOD has set down of it in his word.

It has been observed in all times, and is to be seen at large in the old
Testament, that the sin of adultery and uncleanness has then abounded
most, when for their idolatry the people has been under the greatest
displeasure of the Lord. Romans 1.24.26.27.
And if to be given up to this and such like kinds of uncleanness has been
the punishment of that most grievous sin of idolatry, we may soon
conjecture in what account it stands before the Lord. For it cannot be
holden for a small offense before him, which he in justice takes to be a due
punishment for the greatest sin.

The holy Ghost makes the crime of theft, a small matter in respect of the
offense of adultery: affirming theft to be subject neither to the like infamy
and reproach with men, neither yet to the like greeuousnesse of punishment from
the Lord. And therefore when he has spoken of the punishment that is due for
theft, amplifying the other crime above it, he uses these words: But he
that commits adultery with a woman, Pro. 6.32.
he is destitute of understanding: he that does it, destroys his own
soul, he shall find a wound and dishonor, and his reproach shall never be
put away.

Thus the adulterer in his wickedness does both undermine his own life, and
also brings such a blot of infamy and reproach unto his name, as never
shall be wiped out.

It is not to be meruailed at, if the holy Ghost make adultery a more
heinous fact then theft: For therein men rob not others of their goods and
substance alone, but of their honesty and honor. Neither rob they only those
yt are borne, but also those that are yet unfashioned in their mothers womb:
from whom as they take all honor and estimation, so they procure unto them a
perpetual blot of infamy, more and besides that that by their birth they
become illegitimate, and cut off from the title and claim of many temporal
benefits, which they are most cruelly deprived off, before that ever it was
granted them to see into the benefit and commodity thereof: much less to
take any comfort by the use and inioying of them.

What the stayne was of infamy and dishonor that bastards were under in the
old law, may appear in Deuteronomie, Deu. 23.2.
where it is plainly forbidden them, even to their tenth generation, to bear
any office among the people of God. A cruel and heinous offense to rob so many
generatio^s of all estimation, all place of office and honor among the people
of God: yet so much more heinous is the crime, because it is done by falsifying
of the covenant of marriage, and cancelling of ye bond that was made by the
Lord himself, for the perfourmance of certain duties between party and
party, being sealed and delivered in the presence of God, his Angels, and
many other witnesses assembled for that purpose.

Moreover, the adulterer as much as lies in him makes a stews in his own
house, becomes a bawd to his own wife, directs the eyes and hearts of
adulterers toward her, in as much as it is a punishment justly befalling
him from ye justice of the Lord, if he shall have his own wife aba^doned to ye
wickedness, that he has brought upon another. Which punishment, David him
self (though otherwise dear unto the Lord, 2. Sam. 16.22. and Sam. 12.11.
and.12.
and leading his life in uprightness, saving in that fault with the wife of
Vrias) was not free from, according as we read in Samuel. Job. 31.9.10.
Job also (acknowledgeing the justice of that punishment) offers him self to
suffer the shame thereof, if ever he sought to abuse any man's wife.

But if it shall so fall out, that a wicked man in this kind of sin shall
have a godly wife, whom the Lord shall preserve from this evil to yield unto
the wickedness of others, yet is his fault never a deal the less herein,
then if he should have fallen into that extremity of sin, because his
deserving has called for that punishment from the Lord, which the Lord in
mercy toward her has withholden. And in as much as the adulterer depriueth a
man of the true comfort of his true and natural seed and posterity, can we
imagine otherwise of the Lord, but that he will draw one swoorde or other
upon some of his children, that shall never cease to pursue them, before it
has driven them in at the doors of death? Job (speaking of this sin of
adultery) says, that it is a fire that deuoureth all to destruction. Job.
31.12.
So that by this testimony, the house of the whooremonger must be consumed,
and there is a secret fire flaming there, that threateneth to devour before it
has done and made a final end: which men might easily se by sundry
experiences in ye world, if there were no word of God to lead us thereunto.
The hope to hide this sin (which bewitcheth the ungodly, and leads them
into this fire of God his wrath) must of necessity be vain, because the Lord
him self has taken upon him to be revenged of those that shall dare to break
that bond of wedlock which he has made. In ye old testament the Lord did (by
a special law made for ye purpose) take upon him, Heb. 13.
not only the knowledge, revealing and punishing of this sin, even when it
should be most secretly done without witness of any other man, yea or certain
knowledge from the husband him self, but also ye defense and clearing of the
guiltless woman, oppressed and vexed with the unjust jealousy of her husband:
who might present his wife (whether she were guilty in deed, or only in his
ielous mind was thought to be so, before the priest, unto that trial which
God had appointed and established for ye end. After which matter solemnized
with all the circumstances thereof, as it was appointed in the book of Number. if
the woman were defiled in deed, then should her belly swel and her thighe rot:
Number. 5.12.
if she were not defiled, then should she not only be free from this
punishment, but also be blessed with fruitfulness, as appears in ye same
place. We see how greatly the lord does abhor adultery, taking upon him to
bewray the closest dealing in ye wickedness that can be, and also what a care
he has of the uniting of their minds, who are become one by marriage, in
ordeyning a law to cure jealousy, and so taking upon him also the defense of
the innocent party. That law is now ceased, but that same God does yet
remain, bearing the same hatred to that sin that he did before, and has the
like love to innocence that before he has had. So that there is small hope to
be had when God is become ye searcher him self: when he who knows it, is an
utter enemy unto it, and has professed the revealing of it, yea and that more
is, the just and deserved punishing thereof. It would greatly fear the thief,
if it were noysed that that man would search him, whom he does well remember
to have passed by and beheld him, while he was hiding of that which before
he had stolen. We do not read through the whole testament, the like
solemnity in ye searching out of any sin, neither yet that in any other
sin the party suspected was compelled to subscribe unto certain words of
execration and calling for evil against himself, if he had offended, save
only in this trial of adultery: which may both teach us in what place of
sin to set this crime of adultery, and what measure of punishment to look
for, after trespass and transgression made in this part. The punishment,
which in the old Testament was appointed to be executed against it by the
civil Magistrate, was death: according as it is written in Leuiticus, Leu.
20.10.
The man that commits adultery with another man's wife, because hoe has
committed adultery with his neighbors wife, the adulterer and adulteress
shall dye the death.

In this commandment is not only adultery forbidden, which is, when one of
the offenders is joined or betrouthed to another in marriage, but also
fornication when both the offenders are single persons. We have learned
before, that it is usual in the commandments, under one kind of evil to
forbid all that be of affinity with it, and like in wickedness unto the
same. Fornication is forbidden in express words in Deutero. Deu. 23.17.
There shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel, neither shall there be
any whoorekeeper of the sons of Israel. The punishment of this sin of
fornication which was so fearful among the people of Israel, is brought in
of the Apostle Paul, to bring all men to such fear of God as may restrain
them from it: 1. Cor. 10.8.
Neither let us commit fornication (says the Apostle) as some of them
committed fornication, and sell in one day twenty three thousand. The life of
man being so precious unto our merciful father, as it is, it can be no small
sin that provoke the Lord to proceed in judgment even to the death of
twenty three thousand. And therefore is this notable punishment (notwithout
great reason) joined to fornication, which was the cause thereof. For commonly,
this sin is made as nothing, having natural infirmity set beside it, in the
usual speech of men to hide it withal.

But the holy Ghost does not so match it in his speech, he does not set it
before our eyes in a cloak of natural infirmity, whereby we should the less
fear it, but puts upon it the garment that in deed belongs unto it,
even a cloak bathed with the blood of xxiii. thousand men. There is great
diversity between these two cloakes: the one is far unlike the other: in
the eyes of the holy Ghost, this sin is fearfully stained with much blood:
in the sight of fornicatours, there is nothing in it which is not natural and
kindly: so diverse are their judgments, and so great is their disagreement of
their opinions. 1. Cor. 6.16.
The Apostle Paul reasons against fornicatours by the worthiness of our
bodies, which are the members of Christ: how great is that abasing and how
miserable, to be divorced from Christ, and coupled to an harlot? Dee ye not
know, (says the Apostle) that he which coupleth himself with an harlot is
one body, for two (says he) shall be one flesh. Most certain it is, that the
body of an harlot can be no member of Jesus Christ. And the fornicatour, by
the testimony of the apostle, is become one body with her, having the same
conjunction with her in wickedness, that the husband has with his lawful wife
in holiness, and by the appointment of the Lord. There is great cause
therefore why the holy Ghost should so earnestly persuade us to fly
fornication, making ye sin above all other to offend against his own body
which does commit it.

Neither are these two especial branches of filthiness forbidden alone in
this commandment, but also all other uncleanness and losenesse of life in
this kind and degree.

The means also which bring them on, and do begett them, or being begotten
do cherrish and maintain them, are here forbidden in this commandment: as,
the want of temperaunce and sobriety in apparel, meat, and drink,
idleness, evil company, evil speech, and filthy communication: in the which,
whiles we do cherrishe our selves, not bridling our affections, we do tempt
the Lord, and running upon the rocks that he has forbidden, do hazard our
chaste behavior. For we have no warrant of his safe conducting of us under
those sails of uncleanness, but threatening, that in so doing we shall make
shipwreck of all honest and chaste behavior. For to walk in such ways, has
no promise of protection from him: they are not ye ways which he has promised
to prosper. It does become a christian which looks for mercy from Christ, to
humble himself unto all such conversation as he is well assured that the
Lord imbraceth: that he may stand under certain hope of favor and mercy
from his hands. For these things before recited and such like, are we
forewarned of in the Scriptures to beware of, as those things that lie in
wait to deceive us, and lay siege unto our good conversation to give it an
overthrow. Neither is the assault so weak (as we suppose commonly) that it
need not to be feared, but so strong as being continued, it prevails and
corrupts our good conversation, according as it is written to the Corinthes:
Be not deceived, 1. Cor. 15.33.
(says the Apostle) evil speech corrupts good manners. By this one example
of evil speech, we may learn how to judge of all the rest. It is not lightly
to be passed over, that he wills us not to be deceived herein. For this
watche-woorde signifies that our nature conceiueth not so hardly of the
matter, and therefore is the sooner to be deceived by it.

This forespeeche (I say) points out the ticklenesse of our corrupt nature,
and is used of the Apostle elsewhere, after he has given admonition to the
faithful, for avoiding of the like matters, as filthiness, foolish talking
and jesting, concluding with these words: Ephesians. 5.6.
Let no man deceive you with vain words, for, for such things comes the
wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. We suspect no danger in these
things: but the only wise God bids us take heed that we be not deceived.
Can we now continue without fear of these enemies, when the holy Ghost has
descried the danger of them, with so many blastes of his own trumpet? or dare
we say there will follow no harm, when the holy Ghost says in plain words,
that it does corrupt good manners, and that for such things, the wrath of
God comes upon the children of disobedience? And even in this commandment
we see, that the holy Ghost does vouchesafe them none other name, then the
name of adultery.

For sure it is, that under this word they are forbidden by the testimony of
all the learned: therefore it is well to be considered how the holy Ghost
does term it, and his reason why he will have it known by that name. Sure it
is, that he is well acquainted with our nature, which is accustomed to make
small account of great evils, and therefore to give them names accordingly, he
is constrained to name the child himself, and call it adultery: willing us so
to take it, and to think no better of it, whenever we shall let the reyne
go to our affections, not restraining them in these and such like things.
The Prophet Ezechiel says in express words, Eze. 16.49.
that pride, fullness of bread, and abundance of idleness were the sins of
Sodom, that brought down fire and brimstone from heaven upon them. Thus the
holy Ghost writes the means of uncleanness and filthiness, and blames them
for all that punishment, that followed their abominable uncleanness, and
filthiness, not to be named: teaching us thereby, that we may not maintain
this excessive eating and drinking, proud and wanton attyreing of our selves,
and surfeiting, under the name of good fellowshippe, civil behavior, and such
like titles, but that we know them by the names which the holy Ghost has
given unto them, who knows better then we what they are, and therefore has
given them their names accordingly.

Our nature (if we knew it as the truth is) needs not to be made tame unto
satan by any such means. We are of our selves inclined too much to embrace
him, and nothing so wild that way as were to be wished. Being therefore so
ouertractable of our selves, what madness is it to offer him those blocks of
advantage, whereby his temptations with more speed and ease may mount upon us,
and thus willingly to hold the stirrup to our own destruction? The heart of
man (being the founteine from whence comes good or badde) may not be
suffered to go at liberty after unchaste thoughts, but must be kept in, with
the fear of God. For out of the heart of man (as says our savior Christ,)
proceed evil thoughts, Mark. 7.21
adulteries, fornication, uncleanness, a wicked eye. All these evils come from
within, and defile a man. They are not therefore to be cherrished and followed
after, but to be repressed and beaten back, of so many as fear ye Lord.

The danger is not only of the soul in time to come, but as experience
tells us, in cherrishing of unclean thoughts, there is peril toward the
reason and wit of man. For how often falls it out, that men by giving
themselves over unto these thoughts, become mad, void of wit, and reason,
not able to govern them selves like other men? And therefore has that virtue
which represseth these affections, a name with the Graecians which carries
with it ye signification of that fruit and effect which does follow it:
which is, the preservation and safety of the mind. For moderation and
temperance in this part, is the health and soundenesse of the mind and wit
of man: which (while it is wanting) is either utterly overthrown, or else so
feeble and weak, as every one may descrie it, for the dullness and
feebleness that is in it.

Adultery being forbidden, the godly and chaste life of married folks must
needs be commanded: which that it may be performed, Almighty God requires
of his children, yt they do match the^ selves with such as fear him and serve
him after his word: such has he promised to bless. As for those that
marry for riches, beauty, and such outward things, when there is not the
fear and true worship of God joined withal, they have always tasted of most
grievous plagues from the hand of the Lord. This unequal matching of the
godly and godless (for so I call all of them that are not humbled to serve God
after his word) was the cause of that universal floude which did ouerflowe the
world in the days of Noe, according as it is written in Genesis: Gene. 6.2.3.
Then the sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair, and
they took them wives of all that they liked. Therefore the Lord said, My
spirit shall not always strive with man, because he is but flesh, etc. Here
upon we see the evil beginning, and the just punishment of such as pollute
marriage, which should be kept in all obedience and holiness. For marriage
is the nourcerie of Christianity.

Now if the nource be a dry nource, not having any true fear and service of
God, shall she not be guilty of those that sterue under her hand? Or shall their
cruel carelessness be unpunished that dare commit heirs of so great an
inheritance unto such nources destitute altogether of any nourishment fit and
convenient for them.

The learned give this reason (why in the books of kings there is so
continual mention made of their mothers who were Kings) that the children are
by nature given to follow much the inclination of their mothers, and that
education which they receive from them: and therefore that diligent care
should be had to make such choice, as were likely to bring the benefit of
Christian education to their children and posterity. This is the first thing
which is required to make a godly and chaste life in marriage, Even to marry
in the Lord. 1. Cor. 7.
As this choice is the beginning of a godly and chaste life, so love and
hearty good affection is the thing that does continue it. For the increasing
whereof it was provided in the old Testament, Deuteronomy. 24.5.
that the new married man should not go on warfare, neither be charged with
any public business, but be free at home one year and rejoice with the wife
which he had taken, to the end there might be such uniting of minds, as
afterward were not easily to be fundered. This also had the Lord respect
unto in that law, Number. 5.12.
which (as we have heard before) was made to cure the jealous affection of the
man.

This love shall then be surely continued when either party shall perform
that which the Lord has laid upon them, humbling themselves under ye burden
of obedience which he has charged the^ withal: Peter. 3.7.
which is: for ye man, (as we are taught by ye Apostle Peter) that he give
honor unto the woman as the weaker vessel, making a supply of her weakness,
and that want which by nature she has of many gifts granted unto man, by
his love and hearty good affection declared unto her, even as in the body of
man, the stronger members give diligent care and support unto the weaker:
always taking heed that he suffer no contempt to abide in his heart (much
less in his deed) toward her, who is fellow heir with him of the grace of
life (as the Apostle witnesses in the same place) and therefore may not have
her life made (by contempt or outrageous dealing) so bitter and grievous as it
may rather be called a curse, then a grace and merciful gift of God.

But the chief cause which should move a christian most, is, left their
prayers and service of God be rejected: which cannot be acceptable unto him
while there abides wrath and displeasure in the heart toward any, but
especially if there be iarring and dissension with those with whom we should
be most at one. For prayer is the lifting up of pure hands without wrath
(as the Apostle testifies to Timothy. 1. Tim. 2.8.
) The man behauing himself thus according to the commandment of God, shall do
the duty which to him belongs, 1. Pet. 3.4.
to continue a chaste and godly life. For ye wife, it is required by the apostle
in the same place, that she be of a meek, gentle, and quiet spirit, which the
holy ghost requires her to be apparelled withal, setting it in the place of
all outward vain attyring of them selves, as that which is precious before
God, and most able to allure the hearts of good men: affirming this to have
been the attire of holy women in times past which trusted in god: who for that
they trusted in him, committed them felues to the ornaments prescribed by him:
not fearing contempt, but assuredly believing that in that his way, he both
could and would give favor unto them in the eyes of their husbands. It is
worthy the noting, that he makes it the attire of them that trusted in God:
for therein he plainly gives forth, that the outward vain setting out of
them selves, sauoureth of mistrust and fear of contempt, whatsoever be
pretended: and that (if they trust in God) they shall not need to fear that
their meekness and quietness can bring any contempt with it, but that it
shall be rewarded with liking from the Lord. It is also required that they be
reverently subject unto their husbands in all things as was Sarai, who used
such speech of reverence, (calling him sir,) as did witness of the heart that
it did honor him: which if it be refused, neither is that benefit granted
unto their weakness (of a head and guide) acknowledged, (which is great
unthankfulness both unto God and to their husband) neither yet that
government obeyed, which the Lord has put them under, which is intolerable
disobedience. The place therefore that they are in, must be acknowledged with
all humility: and the duties laid upon them by the Lord performed, that
there may be continuance of their godly and chaste love. Thus no occasion must
be given unto satan by either of them (thorough alienation of mind and breach
of love in not perfourming their several duties) to make any way or passage
to the ungodly and unchaste liking or using of any other. Young men shall then
give them selves to the duties of this commandment, when they shall have
learned sobriety and temperaunce, a gift that brideleth their affections in
pleasures (as eating, drinking, and vain setting forth of them selves in
apparel,) not suffering them to have all that they require herein, but cutting
the^ short of that they would, yea, of some part and of yt also which honestly
they might have: always being short, rather than in any respect beyond that ye
is convenient for men of their degree, so that they need not to fear the
judgment of any indifferent men, being always a good deal within the
compass of their state and calling, but never without: giving forth
testimony by that means to al men, of their modest, temperate, and sober
mind, which the holy Ghost calls the ornament of young men. And the Apostle
Paul warns Titus to exhort them unto this gift and grace of young years,
Tit. 2.6.
a very profitable mean to drive away unchaste conversation. Women also are
exhorted unto this temperance, and sobriety, and unto modesty, and
shamefastness which is the root and beginning of it, by the Apostle Paul to
Timothy: who wills in that place, 1. Tim. 2.9
that their apparel may speak and declare the shamefastness of their mind,
which dare not put forth it self unto all that dignity and degree of
countenance in their apparel, that most lawfully they might otherwise claim.
For therefore it is called temperaunce, because it restrains a man of his
liberty. But in this our age, when almost all go as far as they may, and
the most part both of men and women a great deal beyond their compass, where
is this temperance and sobriety, which is so highly commended in the
Scriptures, the very walls of pure life, and bars of chaste conversation?
This may be bewailed of all men, but the disease is so universal, as it is
impossible to be cured, if the lord shall not put to his mighty hand from
heaven. It will be said that it is hard to measure these indifferent things:
but the truth is otherwise, for the holy Ghost has sent us a measure and
meteyard, even sham efastnesse and temperance: so that when there is no
moderation or temperance, but that by every indifferent judgment, they be as
far as their estate can give them leave, when there is no shamefastness, but
that they dare be bold to go without blushing as far as their place or
ability can lead them, may we not boldly say, that they have left the
Lord his measure? and therefore their attire and behavior must of necessity
be deformed in his eyes, how well soever it be pleasing unto them selves.

This temperaunce is to be taught the younger sort not only from the mouth of
the elder, but from their life and conversation: that they may be kept in those
means which do uphold chaste behavior: and therefore the Apostle Paul charge
Titus that he stir up the elder both men and women, Titus. 2.2
to season young years therewith. Although this be the duty generally of all
elder people, yet is it the special duty of parents to their children, by
their teaching and example of life, thus to instruct the^. And therefore in
Deuteronomie it appears, that the woman that had offended in her fathers
house, Deu. 22.21
(the matter not being known before marriage) must be stoned to death at the
door of her fathers house. But and if her husband should wrongfully charge
her, that he found her not a maid, after trial made to the contrary, he must
pay an hundred sickles of silver to the father of the maid. The reward of her
innocence, as well as the punishment of her wickedness, reaching unto the
father, (for she must be stoned at his door) tells us what duty belongs
unto the parents, in as much as they had their parr, as well in the dishonor
as honor that followed the good education of their children.

The Lord in forbidding us adultery, tells us that our nature is inclined
thereunto. For what need we to be forewarned of that, which we are in no
danger of.

It is required that we peruse diligently the course of our life, with due
consideration how our intemperancie has uttered it self in any of those
things which we have now learned to be forbidden us, and also in diligent
consideration, how prone and tickle our affections be thereunto, that we may
in truth come from the opinion of our selves, to betake us wholly to that
perfect obedience of Jesus Christ, to rest in it as that only, which can abide
the justice of the righteous God: and then in thankful regard of those his
mercies, manfully to set upon our in temperat desires for the mortifying
thereof, that the Lord may have the honor of our moderate and chaste
conversation. Which that it may so come to pass, let us call upon our
heavenly father, saying.

The eighth Lecture upon the fifteenth verse.
Thou shall not steal.
IT has been showed before that our neighbor is not to be considered in his
person alone, but in what so ever thing is dear unto him: as goods, good name,
and such like: and therefore that the love which we must bear toward him,
may not be toward his body alone, but also toward his goods: that our
dealing with them may be so upright, as may declare in deed that we do love
the man. For if any thing of his, passing through out hands, shall not find
fidelity and faithful dealing, but deceitful conueyaunce of it or some part
thereof to our selves, can it be truly said, we love the man? there is no
man that can so judge of it: that can I say persuade him self that he is
beloved of those men, when nothing of his goods comes to their hands, but
it is sure to be fleeced, and to pay toll before it shall depart. The Lord
therefore (commanding safe passage and loving dealing toward our neighbors
goods, when so ever (according to the manifold necessities of every man, to
deal and communicate with an other in buying and selling, or otherwise) they
have occasion to pass through our hands) has forbidden stealing, and all
unfaithfulness in their goods: condemning it of want of charity and love
toward them selves, whose goods are diminished by us, when so ever we shall
have dealing with the^. And because we go so closely to work, and are so
cunning to deceive our selves, imagining that we love our neighbors, when in
deed there is no such affection in us, the holy Ghost is compelled as it were
to trace us, and by such unfaithful footesteps as these be, to descrie us. For
when we are so often taken with untrusty dealing, and unfaithfulness, in our
neighbors goods, good name, and such like: is there not just cause to arest us
for not discharging this duty of love, which is so due unto them?

This unfaithful dealing with the goods of our neighbor, how greatly it did
displease the Lord, and with what laws he did restrain his people of Israel
from the same, the statutes and orders of that government can best declare:
from whence it shall not be amiss to take some help in the interpretation of
this commandment. In Exodus we do read, Exo. 22. verse. 1.4.
that if any man should steal a sheep, and kill it, or sell it, he should
restore for that one sheep, four: but if any man should steal an ox, and
after kill it, or sell it, he should restore five oxen for that ox. The
reason why he must pay more for the ox then for the sheep, was, for that his
neighbors loss was greater in the want of the one then of the other, as
bringing more profit to the owner thereof. But if they were found with the
thief alive, not sold nor killed, then must he restore but the double of the
ox, ass, or sheep, for that his obstinacy in this evil did not appear so
great, as when he should make sale of them, and turn them into gain.

For it might be, while they were alive, that he being touched with
repentance, would restore them again: but when they were sold or killed,
the thief gave greater token of his impudency, and confirmed obstinacy, and
the owner also was one degree further from any likelyhoode to come by them
again. If the thief be nothing worth, and so not able to make restitution,
then as it is there declared, he must be sold.

Thus did the just God in the old Testament, by laws made for that purpose,
and punishments appointed accordingly, declare his hatred of the evil, and in
what reckoning it comes before his judgment seat: that we might take light
at his judgment, how to discern of theft, and how to judge of this kind of
hatred toward our neighbor, that bewrays it self in so unjust dealing
with his goods.

The love that we must show forth toward our neighbor by dealing well
with his goods, may not only be seen in this law (so sharply punishing the
thief for his want of love evidently appearing in his theft and injury
committed) but also in the law made for him, that should borrow any of his
neighbors goods. Which law did very well provide for faithful dealing with
it, in punishing the contrary so sharply, as his unfaithfulness (how great
so ever) should gain him nothing at all. For thus it is written in Exodus: If
a man borrowe ought of his neighbor, Exo. 22.14
and it be hurt, or else dye, (the owner thereof not being by) he shall surely
make it good. If it be an hired thing, he shall not make it good, it came for
his hyre. It appears here plainly, that the owner must have his loss made
good of the borrower, unless his own eyes could testify, that the hurt or
loss thereof came not through any default of the borrower. But he that shall
lend for hyre, must stand to the adventure of the principal if it decay. The
reason is rendered, because it came for hyre, and not of love alone, as did the
thing borrowed. And therefore the reason is good, why he should not be charged
in this case, as the borrower, to make good that which he has hired being hurt
or dead. Mark well I pray you this law of God for lending and hyring: that
the borrower must make good things borrowed, if they decay, but not the hyrer.
Mark it well I say, for this is the ground of many things that are to be
spoken of hereafter.

The equity of this law, brings great light to discern of the vsuries that
are so common at these days. In things borrowed (it appears by this law)
that only the hurt or death of the goods was provided for. Here is then no
help for money that is borrowed or lent, which perishes not with use, but is
still of the same value and worth that it was at the first delivery of the
same. Besides that, if it were worsse for the use, there is no more required
but to make the decay of it good. How then can those who lend their money to
usury (which decays not with use) claim any thing above that which was
delivered? By this law of lending, their recompense was commanded only in
this title, that the thing by lending was certainly known to be impaired. How
dare then the usurers claim a right of recompense, under none other title, but
that it was likely with ye use thereof, yt they might in that time, thus and so
greatly have gained? It is ye equity of God, to require no recompense for the
use of things that are the worsse with using, so long as there appears no
casual hurt (as we call it) of the whole. What equity then must it be, that
for things not worsse with use, contenteth not it self, no, not with the
whole? Here, in this law of God good will is no better recompensed, but that it
be no looser: Shall a covetous desire then so richly be requited, as that it
shall be sure always to come home a gayner? By this equity of God, when it
is certainly known, that by the use of the thing borrowed, the borrower has
good gain, yet does the almighty allow no return of commodity to the
lender for that gain. By what equity then can the usurer claim gain for the
use, yea oftentimes when it is certain there is no gain gotten at all? By
this law of GOD, the lender could never gain: for there is no other prouiso
made but for his principal: by over practice, he is ever assured of gain. By
that law, the borrower was assured of the gain that was to return to him: by
this practice, the lender is oftentimes the whole gayner. If it be granted,
that this law of God in borrowing and lending have in it any equity, this
practice in borrowing and lending of money, must be condemned of plain wrong
and injury, as directly standing against the same.

If this dealing, shall fear the strict justice of borrowing and lending, and
seek covert under the liberty of things let out to hyre, it is also shut out
there, and finds worsse interteynment. For hired things, because they go
for hyre, have not the ordinary allowaunce of the principal, if they shall
decay, which borrowed things justly claim, because they come freely and
without hire: therefore the law yt we had of hired things, handles the usurer
more hardly, tha^ that law of borrowing and lending. For here, because of his
hyre, he has no hold of the principal if it decay.

Thus if it should be granted that money may be hired, which I think never
can be proved: yet must it be with hazard of the principal, according to the
equity of this law. That by the equity of this law, (which is the equity
of God) it can have no better allowance (if it shall be proved lawful to let
it out for hyre,) then to stand to the danger and decay of the principal,
these reasons will plainly prove: The goods which naturally yeald commodities
in the use of them to him that possesses them, as sheep, and such other,
must stand to the adventure of decay, if they be hired: therefore much more
must they do so, which naturally and of them selves yeald no commodities.

The goods that in yealding their commodities do spend and we are away them
selves, are contented with their hyre, and lay no claim to have the whole
repaired. By what justice then may goods that are never a whit the worsse for
wearing, besides their hyre, bind a man to uphold the whole? If it be
equity, that those goods which naturally of them selves yeald by use a
certain gain, should not be charged with the danger of decay, it is against
all equity, yt those things which neither of them selves, nor yet with like
certentie yeald the commodity, should beside their hire, have the whole
vpholden. To conclude, if those goods which (by all men's judgment) may most
lawfully have consideration for their use, be not better considered, it seems
to me good reason, why those goods (which the most think are not at all to
have hyre for their use, and all men think, they may not so justly require it
as the other) should hold them selves well contented, when their allowance is
as good as theirs is, which best do deserve it.

If any man shall reply, and say that some of great deserving in the Church of
God, men of singular learning and judgment, have thought and taught otherwise:
Let them understand, that there is no usury that is now in use with us that
can be vpholden by their doctrine. For proof whereof, I refer my self unto
that, which is written by that worthy instrument of God Master Calvin upon
this matter in his Commentaries upon Ezechiel Chapter eighteen: Eze. 18.
a man that has said the most for the allowance of usury in some special
cases, his words are these: Nunc videndum est, quando, and a quibus, accipere
foenus liceat. Hic autem valere debet sententia illa, neque passim, neque
omnia, neque ab omnibus. Hoc quidem dictum fuit de muneribus: and lex illa
imposita fuit praesidibus prouinciarum: sed optime quadrat huic causae. Non
omnia igitur accipere conuenit: quia si modum excedat quaestus, (quia id pugnat
cu^ charitate) etia^ repudiandus est. Diximus quoque more^ and vsum co^tinuu^,
vitio no^ carere. Ia^ neque passim, quia foenerator (vt dixi) locum habere non
debet neque ferri in Ecclesia Dei. Deinde no^ ab omnibus, quia a paupere semper
foenus accipere nefas erit. Now we must consider when, and of whom, we may
take usury. And here that common saying takes place, not every where, not
always, not al things, not of all men. This was spoken of gifts: and this
law was made for the rulers of provinces: but it agrees very fitly unto this
cause. A man may not therefore take all gain, for if it exceed measure
(because that is against charity) it is to be refused: and we have said
already, that often to use it, and to make a common and usual practice of it,
can not be without fault. Neither is it to be allowed every where: because the
usurer (as I have said) ought to have no place, nor once to be suffered in the
Church of God.

Moreover, it is not to be taken of all men, because it shall always be
extreme wickedness to take usury of a poor man. This is the opinion of that
man, who of all other gives most liberty, and is thought to be most
favorable in this cause. As for him that lives upon usury, as the husbandman
does upon his husbandry, his judgment is that he ought to be thrust out of
the society of men. Thus much for his judgment, whom some usurers in this
matter pretend to build upon. We see in this commandment, what hedges and
fences the Lord has made for the safety of our goods, to reserve the
propriety and benefit thereof unto our selves: and to keep us also from
witnessing any want of love, by breaking in upon any other men's goods,
unlawfully. This want of love, witnessed by evil dealing with our neighbors
goods, was likewise provided for by laws made for their faithful dealing,
that had any thing given them to keep. We read in Exodus, Exo. 22.7.
that if a man deliver his neighbor money or stuff to keep, and it be
stolen out of his house, if the thief be found, he shall pay the debt: if the
thief be not found, then the master of the house must be brought unto the
Judges to swear, whether he have put his hand unto his neighbors goods to
defraud him of it or no: not being acquitted of that suspicion, before he had
purged him self by an oath. But if a man shall deliver unto his neighbor to
keep, ass, ox, or sheep, or any beast, and it die, or be hurt, or taken
away by enemies, and no man see it, the owner (hearing him testify by an oath
that there was no deceit of his part in the matter) must hold him self
contented therewith. If it were stolen from him to whom it was given to keep,
he must make restitution to the owner thereof, because therein appeared his
negligence. If it were torn in pieces (which might be, notwithstanding his
diligence were never so good) he must bring some part of it, and show that it
was devoured, and in so doing, he is not bound to make it good, Exo. 22.11
12.13.
as appears in Exodus. These testimonies are here brought in, to testify how
careful the Lord is of faithful and loving dealing with our neighbors in
their goods, and to let us see and understand, that we are not so free from
duties in that behalf, as commonly we are wont to esteem our selves to be:
but that we stand bound before the Lord, to leave records behind us of our
loving affection toward them, when so ever by any occasion we shall have to
deal with their goods.

What natural man can be persuaded, that there is any conscience binding to
restore goods that were put in trust unto him, if they should be stolen? What
natural man would not fret and fume at this, that when his neighbor makes
request unto him to keep it, he should notwithstanding be bound to answer
it if it were stolen, or be troubled for his goodwill, to purge him self
before a magistrate by an oath, that there was no unfaithful dealing on his
part with those goods? Would not flesh and blood storm at this, as an
unlawful and unjust thing? But the just Lord, by these laws lets us see
that we stand more bound unto loving dealing with our neighbors in their
goods, than our corrupt nature would willingly yealde unto. And those laws
are good glasses for us thus far to look into them, that we may learn that
we are bound to show more fidelity and love toward our neighbors in
their goods, then our corrupt nature can be brought with any goodwill to
acknowledge.

The negligence, whereby an other man suffered loss or damage in his goods,
was accounted as a kind of deceit and injury before the Lord: and he was
bound to make it good, through whose negligence it did perish, according as it
is written in Exodus: Exo. 21.33.
When a man shall open a well, or dig a pit, and cover it not, and an ox or an
ass fall therein, the owner of the pit shall make it good, and give money to the
owners thereof, but ye dead beast shall be his. What shall we then think of the^
that of deliberate purpose, wittingly and willingly shall bring damage or loss
to their neighbors? when careless negligence (not being joined with any
purpose to hurt or impouerish) is bound to make good the hurt and damage of
his negligence, and yet nothing is so common now a days (even among
christians and gospellers) as upon the least grefe or displeasure conceived, to
force a man to spend his money and goods in suite of law. These men are far
from fearing the punishment of negligence, while their deliberate purpose
without any lawful cause to impair his wealth, is accounted as no fault with
them, no not half the price of their displeasure, be it never so unjustly or
without cause conceived.

We have heard how careful the Lord is to make safe passage for our goods,
whether they come within the coast of the borrower, receyuer, or careless
passinger. The same care has he also of them, when they must pass by the
buyer or seller. For even the buyers and sellers have charge to deal well with
them, that there appear not lack of love toward the owners, by the their
doings and dealings with their goods. And therefore our own greedy affections
must not make the market, nor set the price upon the things that are to be
sold, but the worthiness of the thing it self that is to be bought or sold,
and the benefit that it is likely to yield to him that shall enjoy it, must
strike the stroke.

A law was given unto the people of Israel for fidelity and faithful dealing
in buying and selling, as appears in Leuiticus: Leuit. 25.14.15.16.17.
When thou sellest any thing to thy neighbor, or buyest at thy neighbors
hand, ye shall not deceive one another, but according to the number of years
after the Jubilee, thou shall buy of thy neighbor: also according to the
number of the years of the revenues he shall sell unto thee: according to
the multitude of years thou shall increase the price thereof, and according to
the fewness of years thou shall abate the price of it: for the number of
fruits does he sell unto thee. Oppress not ye therefore any man his
neighbor, but thou shall fear thy GOD, for I am the Lord your GOD. These
are the very words of the text. At the year of Jubilee every manne
returned again to his lands and possessions that he had sold and made away:
therefore as that year was further off or nearer, so they bought and sold
things dear or better cheap. And the reason and equity of this law is
added: for (says the holy Ghost) the number of fruits does he sell unto
thee, and those can thou not have after the year of Jubilee, and therefore
if he should sell otherwise then after that rate, he should take in some
money of thee, not giving any thing out for it: for the number of fruits does
he sell unto thee. As if he should say, he has not right to take, but in
regard of that fruit and commodity that does come unto thee, by that which
he does sell thee. For he makes this the reason (why he must abate according
to the near approaching of Jubilee,) because the other after that time, could
receive no benefit of that which he bought: as if it were an undoubted
truth, that there must be some equality of mutual benefit between the buyer
and the seller, that a man may not take money for nothing of his neighbor, but
must give him a penie worth for his penie. The year of Jubilee is gone, with
other the like laws made for the government of that people: but the reason
and equity of this law stands, and binds us to have conscience in our
buying and selling, and not to let our covetous affection set the price upon
that we have to sell.

Out of the equity of this law, which yet remains, (being the equity of
that GOD which cannot be contrary to himself,) it appears, that the seller
must in selling look what commodity and benefit it is likely that the buyer
shall enjoy by that which he sells unto him, making conjecture thereof
according unto the usual rate of those wares as they go at that time, and to
increase or abate the price of his wares, or that he has to sell whatsoever
accordingly. For they must buy and sell according as the year of Jubilee
(which being once come they might no longer enjoy it) was sooner or later,
increasing the price, if it were longer to that year, because the buyers
commodity should increase: and abating the price, if the time were shorter,
because the buyers commodity must be so much the less.

By the equity and reason of this law, we may learn two rules, which will
teach us to discern well of true buying and selling, and learn us to buy and
sell in the fear of God and with a good conscience. The first is, that our
covetous affection must not set the price of that we utter. For here we see
he must have an eye to that time, when the others commodity must cease, and
take his rule from thence: so that he is sent from him self in making of the
price, and must look at an other. This is the first rule given us to buy and
sell by, and is drawn from the equity of this law, which is the equity of
our GOD.

A meruaylous good rule, sauouring of love to our neighbor, and brideling
self-love, which without regard of others, looks to it self alone. If this
rule were observed, then should these speeches cease in Christian mouths, and
not be heard, I may and will sell thus, because I have had losses
heretofore: or I will sell as I can get for my wares how soever, because I may
have losses hereafter, and this must help to bear when that comes: As if
we had commission from the Lord, to take up upon ye buyer, our shipwracks, or
the recompense of our losses what so ever: or as if we had authority, to lay
those strokes upon his shoulders, that should first deal with us, which we
have justly borne from the hand of the Lord.

It were very requisite, if any do so, that his commission were seen why he
should so do: for sure it is, the Lord gives not out any such large
commission, as by virtue whereof any may challenge a recompense in another man's
goods, when soever the Lord for just causes has thought it good to diminish
his. The second rule is, that in buying and selling, we drive the commodities
given and received as near equality as possibly we can: that so far forth
as we can gather (by the present value, rate, and account that is made of
those things exchaunged) there be equal commodities coming to both the
parties by that exchange, and that neither party be a deceiuer, or oppressor
of his brother: for such has the Lord threatened that he will be revenged
of. Therefore this reason is given (why he must take less if the time be
nearer, when the buyer shall forgo his commodity:) for (says the text) thou
sellest him the fruits, and the fruits he can no longer enjoy: and if he
should say, he can no more have commodity of that which he bought of thee,
and therefore must thy price be abated accordingly, that there may be mutual
benefit, and neither part be found oppressing an other. For thou art not
licensed to take any penie from thy brother for nothing.

Thou must (as nigh as thou can discern) give him as good as thou take:
thou art bound to give him a penie worth for his penie, and a penie for his
penie worth. Thou may not do that to him, which thou would be loath that he
should do to thee. Thou would not that he should take any commodity from
thee, unless he gave thee the worth of it again.

I perceive the time passes, and I have much yet to speak of this matter: I
will therefore here make an end, reserving the rest until the next day.
Now let us call upon our heavenly father in the name of his son, that we
may witness the love which we bear unto our brethren, by all faithful and
loving dealing with their goods. etc.

The ix. Lecture continued upon the 15. verse.
WE learned the last day, that a man might not take any commodity from
another, unless he gave the worth of it again. This rule says sore to the
usual buyings, and sellings of these days when commonly all men regard them
selves alone, to make the most they can of their commodities, without any
regard had what his commodity is like to be that deals with them, by that
which he receives from them. Yet it is no other rule, but that common one
which we have received by the light of nature, that we may not do that unto
another, we would not have done unto our selves. And who (I pray you) would
have the worse at an other man's hand? Who would have willingly less given him
then he had delivered unto an other? Or who could bear, that another man
should have no regard how well or ill he had dealte with him? Then may we not
do so unto others.

We must therefore thinck, that when we come to buying and selling, we come
to witness our love toward our neighbor by our good dealing with him in
his goods, and to leave some testimony of the fear of God, and a good
conscience behind us: we come to make trial of our faith to God, while we
depend upon his blessing for our provision to live well and happily, in
following the rule of love and upright dealing, which he has left us, and not
the desire of our own rauinous affection. But in very deed, if a man should
look to the dealinges that now are common in the world in all buyinges,
sellinges, and exchau^ges, he must be forced to confess that men come to
buying and selling as it were to the razing and spoiling of some enemies city
or hold, where every man catches, snatcheth, and carries away, whatsoever he
can come by: and he is thought ye best that carries away the most: his botie
is taken to be the warmest, that has made the most naked in the streets: he
comes home the merriest, that has caused the most weeping and wayling,
sighing and sobbing, to utter the heaviness of the heart. Yet in all this
oppression, every such offender persuadeth him self that he is not out of
charity with his neighbor, but that he loves him entirely and shows it
well enough: for he gives him good words in buying and selling, and he
intends no hurt unto his person. But the holy Ghost will bring us to
another trial of our love, he will not be bound to that alone: and therefore
does send us to see how loving we are, by our dealing with him in his goods.

Therefore does the Apostle say very well to the Romans, that this
commandment, Romans 13.9.
Thou shall not steal, is as the rest fulfilled no otherwise then by love.
These oppressions therefore, these frauds and deceiptes to pull another man's
goods into our hands that are so rife every where, do no less declare our
want of love (by the testimony of the Apostle) then do murders, slaughters,
and bloodshed.

Now to come to the matter more particularly, by this rule is condemned all
uttering of naughty and conterfaite coin or ware. For how can there be
equality of commodities, where the one is not commodious or profitable at all?

Secondly, here is condemned all that uttering of money or wares (though good
in the^ selves) which have some things closely joined with them, to utter
them with all and to increase the price above that which they are worth, and
without those additions, do usually go for: which things are no commodities
nor merchandise at all of them selves, neither will they always abide with the
use of the things, and departing, they cannot but bring loss unto him that
must have the use of them, and leave him (as we say) in the lashe.

In this number are all those, that sell their commodities what soever, dearer
then otherwise they are sold for in those times, because they give day with
them, and longer time before they be paid, taking money for time, and making
it to increase, and add to the value of their commodities.

First understand, that time is no merchaundize: for who dare be so bold as
to say that he has brought time into the market to sell? or who has given
thee leave to sell days and months? There must also be equality of
commodities: the man has given out for time, but when he comes to the using
or wearing of that thing, he finds no benefit by reason of that time,
which he has paid for. In deed if a coat or cloake-cloathe sold dearer for
time, would be longer time in wearing then another coat of the same or like
piece sold for present money, there were some reason in it, because the buyer
should have the same commodity of time in the using of it, that the other had
in the sale of it.

Or if the corn sold dearer for time, would feed a man's family longer then
so much bought for ready money, there were something to be said for it. And
if it be answered, that he who receives it of us makes a commodity of time
as we do, for he sells it thereafter, the matter is not yet answered,
unless it be first proved that thou may lawfully take money for yt, which
though peradventure one do not lose by, (through his as unjust dealing as thine
own) yet thou art sure another cannot but smart of it: for it comes so much
the dearer to him that must use it, who reapeth no commodity for time, but
rather loss and hinderance, notwithstanding it has increased thy gain. And
who has given thee leave to take some thing the more for thy commodity, in
consideration of that, which will be gone, when thy commodities shall come to be
taken commodity of, and to be put to the use, for the which they were bought
and sold, that is, to occupy, spend or use them as their nature does
require? There is no equality in that exchange, when a man must give out
something for that, which he is never a whit the more, but rather so much the
less, benefited by, whenever it shall be put unto that use for the which it
was made, and in respect whereof we do take money for it, but in respect of
that commodity which it will yield, when it shall be put to that use and end,
which the nature of the thing requires. Moreover, if there be any thing of
good report, Phil 4.8.
we Christians must seek after it: and surely it can purchase no commendation
of brotherly dealing and good speech that way, when our dealinges shall be
harder, then the usual dealing of those times are, even among those men that
have no other thing to get their living by, beside the commodity and profit
that comes unto them by that their trade. Hereunto may be added, that it is
often prejudicial to the reasonable sale of that man, who must sell his wares
for present money, his necessity so constrayning him. The like is to be said
of other things, which (notwithstanding they be good and sufficient for the
most part thereof, yet) have something mingled among to increase the
quantity, and so the price of the other: which in the use thereof, brings
no benefit, but hurt, hinderance, and deceipte unto him that occupies the
same. One example may be this: When clothes are stretched five, six, or seven
yardes in a cloathe above that which the cloth does of necessity require, it
is well known unto the seller who takes money for the same, that all of them
will shrink in again, so soon as ever they shall be wet, and that the wearer
shall have no good by the^. And how then can these men take money for nothing?
They can not be priuileged to take in some part of money for that, which has
no piece of commodity in it, when it shall come to the trial and use that
should be of it.

There is no equality, to take a commodity for that, which in his hands or
house if it lie by him, will vanishe into nothing. It is no otherwise, then if
some iuggler had closed in our fist, (as we thought) some piece of coin, but
when we open our hand, there is no such thing to be found there. As for their
desire to have it so which do buy it of us, that cannot mainteyne any thing
in us, not lawful of it self. For no man's appetite can warrant our wrong
dealing in deceiptfull wares. If the commodity which we do utter be neither
altogether, nor yet in part deceiptfull, but wholly good and sufficient, yet if
we shall ouer-sell it, we trespass against this rule of equity and reason,
which forbids the commodity of one, to arise of the loss of another, and
labors for equal commodity in exchange, as nighe as may be. Neither can
we be truly entitled unto any other their commodity, but by departing from
some other thing of ours unto them again, as commodious as that is, and the
same, either in weight, measure, or value. Those men therefore that in buying
and selling do always lay in wait for them, who for some one necessity or
other, must necessarily utter their commodity, thinking to make a pray of
their necessity, and to make ye price after their own lust and desire, are
not simple thieves: (for it skilleth not to make it theft, whether it be much
or little yt we take from another which we have no right unto, nether yet
whether it be done under some color, or without any show of right,) but also
this kind of dealing has in it a spice and smacke of cruelty and murder:
because it is toward those most commonly whose necessity (if there were any
Christian bowels in us) were rather to be pitied as it already is, then
further to be increased by us: as if their affliction were not yet enoughe to
be under our feet, unless we trampled upon them, and did our good will that
they might never arise again.

It is no more lawful, to leave testimony that there is want of love
toward our neighbor by our dealing with his goods in buying and selling,
then it is in our borrowing, keeping, or lending, as was before declared.

For the Lord has forbidden us to show any lack of love toward our
neighbor: and for trial of our obedience herein, he follows our footing to
the gate of his goods, as well as to the door of his person: to epsy,
whether we return from thence both merciful and helpefull, or cruel and
hurtefull. For thus does he trace us and try out our heart toward our
brethren, leading us to see the secrets of it, by the out-goinges that it
has to the things that be especially necessary and commodious for them, and
also best beloved and most dear unto them.

As the Lord has bound the borrower, lender, keeper, buyer, or seller, to
good abearing toward our goods, so has he granted the peace for him, that
shall find any thing of ours. (No exception admitted to the contrary, no not
in the finding of the goods of his enemy.) For the man that shall find his
enemies ox or ass going astray, is charged to bring to him again. And if he
shall see his enemies ox or ass lying under his burden, he must help him
up with it, according as it is written in Exodus. Exo. 23.4.5.
He is also charged with all the lost things of his brothers that he shall
find, to restore them again in Deuteronomie: Deuteronomy. 22.3
and if he know not whose ox, or sheep they be that he finds going astray,
they must remain with him at his house, until his brother seek after them,
Deuteronomie. Deuteronomy. 22.2.
If any man should deal deceiptfully (and therefore uncharitably) with his
neighbors goods, then were they bound to restore yt whatsoever it were,
which their conscience did charge them with all, adding the fifte part more
thereunto, and giving it unto him yt was so wronged, iniuried, or deceived by
the^, the same day which they should offer for yt their trespass to ye Lord:
so that the Lord would not be appeased, until their brethren were satisfied.
Thus must they do, when their conscience should prick them in any thing,
according as it is written in Leuit. Leuit. 6.^.
The wrongs that are there set down to be restored again, are, to deny his
neighbor that which was taken him to keep, or that which was put to him of
trust: oppression, either by fraud or violence: finding that which was lost,
and denying it: and whatsoever one has hindered his neighbor in, by a false
oath. These things are expressly set down in that place, to be restored in
the whole and the fifte part thereof added thereunto, at the summon of their
conscience whenever. It appears in the book of Numbers, Number. 5.8.
that the offenders in this part, must pay this damage unto his next kinseman,
if he were dead whom thus they had wronged: neither was he so acquitted, if he
had no kinsman, but must give it to the Lord, for the priests use. If so be it
shall please the Lord to call any man, and let him see an universal oppression
and hard dealing in all his doing, not grieuing him with the alone
remembrance of one, or some few, then the counsel of Daniel is to be
followed: Dan. 4.24.
to break off their sins by righteousness, and their iniquities by mercy
toward the poor, that plenty of merciful dealing may follow there, where
there has gone before great store and plenty of the contrary. Isaie. 58.6.7
Is not this the fasting, (says the Prophet Isaie) that I have chosen, to
loose the bands of wickedness, to take off the heavy burdens, and to let the
oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke? Is it not to deal thy
bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that wander unto thine
house? When thou see the naked, that thou cover him? etc. Thus must he not
only leave oppressing, but also take up merciful dealing with the needy. We
see how by this which hitherto has been said, the Lord has fenced our
neighbor his goods, and how contrary it is to the love of our neighbor, to
hurt or hinder him any way in them, and how agreeable to the will of the Lord,
that we should be means that he might inioye the commodities thereof.
Therefore was there a law among the children of Israel made to show their
love toward their neighbor, who had planted a vineyard, but not tasted of
the fruit thereof: wherein it was provided, that the officer should make
proclamation at their going to warfare against their enemies, that if there
were any who had not eaten, of ye fruit of their labors, they should return
home and take comfort and use of their own. This law of love, might not be
dispensed withal, no not in the heat and urgent necessity of wars. A
notable testimony to show how well it likes the Lord, that men should take
comfort of their own. As does that Law also, Deuteronomy. 19.14
which was given in Deuteronomie of not removing the lande-marke, which they of
old time have set. And therefore we are commanded to show them this
kindness and love, to reserve unto them the comfort of their commodities,
without impayring of them whenever we shall either borrowe, keep, or find
any thing of theirs: or in buying and selling exchange with them. For we please
God and show love unto them, whenever we shall deal truly with their
goods: according as we heard before, that God makes trial of our heart toward
our neighbor, by our hands, as they are wont to deal with them in their
commodities. It is an undoubted truth therefore, that God is greatly pleased,
when for obedience unto him, we deal thus faithfully and lovingly with the^ in
that which is theirs: it is a true fruit of love, and a faithful obedience
unto this commandment. And because of that, whensoever it is done for
obedience sake unto God, who does comaund it, and of good will unto them who
receive ye fruit of it, even this fidelity in his goods that we borrowe,
find, or be trusted withal, either else receive by way of exchange, in buying
and selling, is a good work in deed, and an humble obedience to the charge of
God given us in this commandment.

There are two things, without the which we shall never be able to perform
any acceptable obedience to God in this commandment.

The first is an assured faith in Gods promises, that he will provide for us,
in the things necessary as well for the body as the soul: and that he has
charged himself, as well with the care and provision for the one, as for the
other. This faith (if it were true) would consume many fears, and cares of
our mind for worldly matters and works that follow the same. So might we
employ our selves upon the care of better things. This did the holy Ghost
know very well, and therefore meaning to cure covetousness, he makes the
plaster of faith, saying: Let your conversation be without covetousness, Heb.
13.5.
for he has said, I will not leave thee, nor forsake thee. When our hearts
shall be fully persuaded, that the Lord will not leave us, nor forsake us, we
cannot be so greatly tormented with the care to live and obtain necessary
things for us, having so strong assurance for it as his promise, who has
made all things of nothing with his word. And therefore in the former place,
exhorting them to conscience in buying and selling: he sends them to the
covenant, saying: I am thy God: which words (as we have learned in the first
commandment) contain promises for all things needful for this present life.
If this be steadfastly believed, that the Lord will not leave us, nor forsake us,
there will be no doubt of our evil dealinges with the goods of our neighbor:
whether we buy or sell, borrowe, or keep the things that be his.

The second thing is, to find a contented mind, with that which we have
already, and therefore to stay in it, as in a rich portion, with great
thankfulness of heart to our God for it, bearing our port and countenance in
all our doings accordingly, without any exceeding whatsoever. For if once our
affections shall ouerflowe ye banks of our own condition, so that in mind we
burn with the desire of a better, our dooinges can never be persuaded, that
they must so nerely be looked at, but that they may borrowe a little of
conscience and equity, to make the provision according as the desire
directs. This does the Apostle confirm in plain speech to Timothe: Timo.
6.9.
where after persuasion to be content with that we have, (because the gain of
godliness is great,) he tells us plainly, that they who will be rich, fall
into many tentations, snares, and many noisome lusts: this is the danger of
them, that are fallen so far into friendship and love with a better estate,
that they will be rich. This being once set down and determined, not only
conscience is constrained to depart, but also thankfulness to God for our
present estate does in like manner forsake us.

Let us learn by this commandment to know our corrupt inclination toward
the goods of our neighbors, and so to view our deceiptes that have been in
us at any time, either in buying or selling, borrowing or keeping any thing of
his, together with our corrupt inclination thereunto, that the remedy, of
redemption (brought us by Jesus Christ) may truly be taken hold of: and
that we being made comfortable in his mercy, may with courage go about the
obedience of his will in this commandment so that still we may be more and
more freed of all manner of deceipte, and more and more enabled to glorify
him, in all loving and faithful dealing with the goods of others.

Which that it may be performed, let us call upon our heavenly Father in the
name of his Son, that it would please him in the multitude of his mercy, to
hold us up by the hope of his promises, that we standing assured of his help,
may not be drawn by any necessity, to do contrary to his blessed will; and
also that we having a contentted mind, may not be tormented with the hungry
desire of a better estate, which being once entered, unjust dearling cannot long
be kept out.

The tenth Lecture upon the 16. verse.
Thoy shall not bear false Witnesese, etc.
THis commandment takes care for the good pame credit, honor, and
estimation of our brethren, that we should not bring any blotte or blemishe
unto that, but by love maintain and uphold it. For herein the Lord will have
trial of our love toward them, as well as in their body and goods: and
therefore charge us no less herein with duty, then before he has done in
other things that are dear and precious unto them. Neither is there any late
cause why we should stand charged toward his crate and good name, then
toward his goods. For as the holy Ghost witnesses in the Proverbs: Prou.
22.1.
good name is better then great richesse and the loving favor of men which
does follow it, is above silver and above gold. This must cause us to become
careful, lest we should annoy him, in so great a benefit and treasure of his,
as credits and good name is, by good right accounted of by the holy Ghost. The
togue therefore is here enjoined not to cast forth, by want of love, any such
speech as might leave behind it the stayne and soil of infamy and reproach
upon his neighbor. That the hurt and annoyance of the tongue may rightly be
considered upon, it shall be good to proceed to the danger and damage of it
particularly. The first is, when in open place of justice and judgment, any
man shall of malice and will will, testify or depose yt which is untrue
against his neighbor. Which how heinous a thing it is before God, may appear
by the punishment, that the Lord did appoint for the transgressors herein:
which was to have the same punishment, that he should have had who^ they did
falsely accuse, if the accusation had been proved true. As it is written in
Deuteronomie: And the Judges shall make diligent inquisition: Deu. 19.18.19.
and if the witness be found false, etc, then shall ye do unto him as he had
thought to do unto his brother: so thou shall take evil away froth of the
middlest of thee: and the rest shall hear this and fear, and shall from
henceforth commit no more an such wickedness among you. Therefore thine eye
shall have no compassion, but life for life, eye for eye, toothe for toothe,
hand for hand, foot for foot. The false witness therefore in the judgment
of God is as great an offender, as if he had done that in deed himself, which
untruly he does charge another withal: and therefore must he reckon with the
Lord, for committing that sin himself (how heinous soever it shall be) that
by his testimony and speech, an other is wrongfully blamed for. As for
example: if he shall wrongfully accuse a man of murder, he is in the same fault
before God, as if he should have cut any man's throat: for false witness
makes them doers of that, which untruly by words they put upon others. And
because of the danger that might grow herein, ye Judges were charged not to
receive testimony of one alone against his neghbour: but at ye lest two should
testify in every matter, before any judgment should go against ye man.

For when the testimony of two or three is thoroughly examined, the falsehode
(if there be any) may soon be found out, which might ham better, covert under
one man's testimony alone. This may teach us, how careful the Lord is to
preserve the credit Of man, from the malice, hatred, and venom of a false
witness.

The Lord also has charged the judge most strictly, that he hurt not the
right and cause of any man with his tongue and sentence: so careful is the
Lord to keep us harmless from this member, that is so tickle unto evil.
Therefore Judges, and those that be in place of justice, are charged in Exodus
not to overthrow the right of the poor in his suite: Exo. 23.6.7.
but to keep them far from a false matter, either to pronounce it, or to
admit of it, because (as it is there said) the Lord will not fie a wicked
man. They are forbid there to receive gifts, because those will blind the eyes
of ye wise. These are the charges that be given unto them that sit in place
of justice. For the Lord meaning to make an harborowe against all the wind
weather of an evil tongue, would never leave ye part uncovered, where the
weather were likes to bring the greatest danger. And if the Lord so mislike
false witness, that he would have no place to be a sanctuary for it, he can
never abide that wrong to be offered unto him, that his own sacred seat of
justice should become the throne thereof. It is no small matter before the
Lord, to dare defile his seat with a false sentence. And notwithstanding it
seem no one matter to pronounce a false sentence, and to bear out an evil
man or evil matter, yet is it amongst the evils of the tongue the greatest to
overthrow the right of the righteous, and to justify the wicked: and so much
the more, because that throne of the Lord and place of justice and execution
for the wicked, is by that means made a den of thieves and wickedness. Can
there be a more monstrous sin then this of the tongue, to adiudge him the
garland and crown of a clear and just man, who has deserved the hyre and
punishment of reproach even from the seat of the Lord? And which more is, to
make the Lord to put the crown upon the head of the wicked, and the halter
about the neck of a just man, while sitting in his place and seat, as it were
in his name, and for him they do it, justifying by their sentence, a wicked
man or wicked matter, whom the Lord abhors: and condemning the just, whom
he approves? The Lord does threaten them, that sitting in place of justice
and judgment, do bolster evil men and evil matters, with those punishments
(and that in this life,) that of all others they do most mislike: even to be
in contempt, reproach, and inward misliking of the people, according as we are
taught by the holy Ghost in the Proverbs: Prou. 24.23
It is not good to have respect of any person in judgment. He that says to
the wicked, thou art righteous, him shall the people curse, and the multitude
shall abhor him, but to them that rebuke him shall be favor: and upon them
shall come the blessing of goodness. It is feared lest if men should set them
selves in yt place against evil men and causes, it were the way to make them
subject to displeasure and loss of favor with many, without any gain of
good report: but the holy ghost says in that place, yt the blessing of good
liking shall be upon such, where as the other laboring (by upholding evil
matters) either to keep friendship, or otherwise to make all stand in awe of
their displeasure, and so to speak of their great authority with admiration
of it, shall find the contrary: even the secret misliking of al, howsoever
for a time fear may keep it in, yt outwardly there be no exclamation and
outcrie against it. In the word of God, not only those are charged with this
sin of false witness, that first set on foot and erecte a false tale to
the discredit of their neighbor, but those also, that by their approving of
it, and ears willingly opened unto it, do uphold the same. For notwithstanding
it were set up, yet must it of necessity fall down again, if it should find
none that would by the receiving and approving there of, underprop it, and as
it were lend their shoulders unto it. Therefore it is said by the holy Ghost
in Exodus, Exodus 23.1.
Thou shall not receive a false tale, neither put thy hand with the wicked, to
be a false witness. It shall not excuse us that we were not the first authors
of it, neither yet yt many as well as we did believe it, but we are taught to
take heed how we give credit to report, eue^ strengthened with ye approbatio^
of many, (whereof notwithstanding we our selves have no certain knowledge,) yt
we be not so hasty to give sentence in our heart, and much less in place of
justice use our testimony against any, upon no sufficient ground, moved only
by the speech and reports that run abroad. We are taught neither to join
nor go with the mighty to witness a false matter for favor or fear:
neither yet upon a kind of foolish pity to honor the poor, and to join
with them in their unjust cause: so precious would the Lord that the regard
of his truth should be. It is not lawful for us to agree with any against
God. And as for that easy ear that so soon receives the slaunderers report,
the holy Ghost gives the medicine for it, in the Proverbs: As the North
wind drives away the rain, Prou. 25.23.
so does an angry countenance the slaundering tongue. It is the over good
enterteinement, that the slanderous tongue finds, that cherrisheth it: for
the heavy countenance drives such guests clean away. The scripture
speaks of those people, that they be as pedlers that go from house to house
to utter their wares, even slau^derous speech: the receiver therefore must be
as evil, as the first brocher: for if we had no receivers we should have no
thieves. Those men therefore that with friendely looks and ears do enterteine
them that are ever bringing news and reports of others, are partakers with
them of that evil, and of all the fruits and effects thereof.

We are to consider that which oftentimes has been spoken before: yt under
one sin (as this bearing of false witness) it is usual with the holy
scripture to contain all that be of any affinity with it: so that all the
fruits and venom of an hateful and unloving tongue are here forbidden. Those
men that blaze abroad the infirmities and offenses of their brethren, through
want of love, offend against this commandment: which provides for all loving
dealing with our brethren in their name and estimation. It is no excuse to say,
the matter is true we utter of them, when the truth shall convict us, that we
have not proceeded therein by the rules of love, which charge us to cover
them, and by loving covering of them to cure them in deed, and to take out the
blott and blemish of them both before God and man. For the word of God
charge us with a duty of loving dealing even toward such as shall slip
into sins and offenses: as is said, that love covers all trespasses: and
that it is hatred that stirs up contention. And likewise we read, Pro. 10,
12.
that he who covers a transgression, seeks love: Pro. 17.9.
but he that shall publish such a matter, separateth his chief friend. For
it comes so heavily unto our heart, when that we shall hear men that they
have no regard of us in our infirmities, not spareing by the inlargeing of ye
report to increase our misery and infamy, yt notwithstanding we have been
most tenderly loving to such men aforehand, yet shall we now no longer keep yt
lyking and good opinion of them, while we do not see them, as it were bearing
a part of our grief and sorrow with us, but rather increasing the same by
their unloving dealing, in the publishing of it. We have good admonition to
this purpose in the Proverbs, where it is said: That the discretion of a man
differreth his anger: and his glory is to pass by an offense. Pro. 19.11.
This passing by, is an usual speech, when we stand not upon a thing to the
uttermost, as those that mean to bear with nothing, nor use any friendship in
the matter, but with extremity to stand upon all things.

This covering of offenses may seem a very pleasant doctrine unto the flesh:
for we are naturally bent one to sooth up an other in sin, and no man to
epsy any fault, specially in his friend and acquayntance: at the least if we
shall see it, yet we will not see it. But the holy Ghost is far from the
upholding of any such kind of passing by sins and offenses: for he means,
that covering of them by loving admonition and private exhortation, which in
causing a man to be ashamed of them, and to leave them, blotteth out the
memory of them both before God and man. So does the Apostle James expound
this covering of sins: Brethren if any of you have erred from the truth,
Iam. 5.19. and. 20.
and some man has converted him, let him know that he which has converted
the sinner from going astray out of his way, shall save a soul from death, and
shall hide a multitude of sins.

To this does our Savior Christ exhort us in Matthew, Matt 18.15.
affirming that if he which has offended shall hear our admonition, and be
ordered by it, we have won our brother: that place is worth the diligent
noting. For after that he has spoken of his care, for the lost sheep that
leaves ninety and nine, to seek that one which was lost, declaring also the
joy that he conceiueth after the finding of this one, forthwith he makes
mention of seeking up those of our brethren who have fallen into sin or
iniquity, and therefore offended us: chargeing us with the seeking up of them
by brotherly admonition, according as it is there plainly set forth, as also
in Leuiticus. Leui. 19.17.
By these testimonies is apparent, that loving and freendly admonition is the
way to hide sin, and that dissembling it, and not admonishing our brethren,
is the hatred of them and the procuring of the blazing abroad of it, because
we know that the Lord will not suffer him unpunished, but by punishing it, will
utter and declare it. We therefore in dissembling it, while that we shall not
admonish them to leave it, and so to have it hid in the mercies of God, may
truly be said to hate them, and also to be in the same offense and fault of
publishers and blazers abroad of their sin, in as much as through our
negligence, the Lord is forced to bring it to light, that so it may be cured.
So that we must be far from this hatred toward them, nay, we must so love
their credit, lest they should be put to some open punishment and shame for
their sins, Matthew. 1.
as that the very good affection that we bear unto them, and grief to have
them made a public example of reproach, move us by way of exhortation to
prevent the publishing of it by some blaste of sore punishment from the Lord.

Wherein as we are to deal plainly, so must we also deal in the spirit of
meekness and mildness, according as we are willed in the Epistle to the
Galathians. Gal. 6.1.
Brethren, if any man be fallen by occasion into any fault, ye which are
spiritual, restore such one with the spirit of meekness, considering thy
self least thou also be tempted,

As the faintness and want of love which leaves a man in his sin, is justly
reproved: so that blustering heat that of a medicine in like manner makes a
poison, is no less to be reproved of want of love toward the good name and
estimation of our brother. For there is no man yt can easily grow into any
good lykinge of those men, in whom he perceives there is no affection toward
him: neither yet can well digest sharp medicines, though otherwise never so
wholeso^e, if there shall be no sugar to make it sweet withal. We must
therefore take heed lest the medicine become unprofitable by our unskillful
handling it, and so we become no couerers of sin, but rather by dealing so
rudely make him cast off all care of goodness, letting the raynes go to all
liberty of life with the ungodly, while he sees him self so hardly dealt
with, and the godly to have cast off all hope and care of him. This is the
cause why the Apostle in the Epistle to the Thessalo. 2 Thessalonians. 3.15
wills them to admonish those as brethren, who for their evil conversation
did justly stand excommunicate: Have no familiar company with him (says the
Apostle) that he may be ashamed, yet account him not as an enemy, but
admonish him as a brother. The nature of man is easily carried to offend in
this part, even to seem to come into some opinion of holiness, by counting
all others as profane, and reproving them in such a blustering manner, as
carries with it no signification at all of loving affection toward them. We
are therefore diligently to observe, that our hearts witness unto our
selves, the care we have by our admonition, to have them reclaimed from those
sins: and then that we consider, what manner of dealing they are most like
to profit by, that notwithstanding we may deal with some more roundly then
with others, yet eue^ those may see them selves not despised of us, nor yet
altogether despaired of, that they should be in a manner caused to fall into
the acquaintance and fellowship of the ungodly: and lest that they should only
see our affections eased upon the^, without further care of their good. If
there be good affection toward the^ in deed, we shall easily avoid both ye
extremes, that neither we cease to admonish them at al, neither yet in
admonishing be over bitter toward them. It is sure yt love will moderate both:
having no other end in reproving and opening the evil, but to keep him from
persisting in it. In the handling also of the matter, this loving affection will
direct him, to consult what manner of dealing is likely to do most good, (for all men are not able to bear alike) that after consultation had, he may proceed
accordingly: always remembering, that what sharpness soever, either the thing
it self or the disposition of the man shall require, yet it may appear, that
we seek not to have the man defamed, but the sin cured. If in this behalf
the matter shall be clear, both in our conscience and the judgment of those
who are accustomed to weigh things by the wisdom of ye word, it skilleth not
though those men hold them not contented, who would have sin touched, in
whose opinion the mildest proceeding against sin that can be, is too
boisterous.

To conclude this part, let us be well advised that we speak not of the
infirmities of our brethren, but with this affection and meaning, that either
they may be reclaymed, or others feared from offending in the like, while they
shall learn the great danger thereof: and that there be no want of love in us
toward our brethren, that shall set our tongues a work that way, without
meaning of any good either toward him or them that hear us.

There is an other vice and mischief of the tongue reproved in this
commandment: when the words or deeds of our neighbors are by the want of
this love wrou^g either into a sense plain diverse from their meaning, or else
not so well interpreted as they might be taken, if they had found any
indifferent judge. It is an evil practice and mischiefous, (notwithstanding it
be common at this day) to bring a man's own words against him, changed into
an other sense, purpose and meaning, then ever the man had in uttering of them:
which is not only usual in words taken from the mouth of the speaker, but
also in speeches penned as plainly as may be. For what is more usual with many,
then to stand so upon some one or few bare words of a statute, bond, or
obligation, that the meaning of the same shall be clean altered, and the true
intent and purpose of the lawe-maker, no longer sought for? But as it did not
acquire the Jews of false wittnesse-bearing against the Lord Jesus,
notwithstanding they used some of his words, because they had altered his
meaning, (wringing his words to the building up of the temple at Jerusalem
within three days, Matt. 26.6 62.
which he meant of the Temple of his body) no more shall it be able before GOD
to discharge any man that he has stood upon some words of a statute, or
obligation, when his conscience shall accuse him that he has swarued from the
meaning and purpose thereof. As for the dealings of those men who are
accustomed to expound those things into ye worst part, which might have a
good meaning if they were indifferently weighed, or for some infirmity joined
with a good action do disgrace and discredit the whole, this commandment
must necessarily reprove them, when it condemns (as we have heard before) the
careless blazing abroad of things altogether evil in them selves, charging
us with the covering of them by friendly and private admonition.

If things altogether evil, must be cured with a godly and friendly covert of
private admonition had for that purpose, those the^ which if they were well
weighed might be well taken, must find more friendship at our hand, then to
have open outcryes made against them. Neither can it be lawful for a
Christian, where some infirmity or want has been found with a good deed
under pretense of hatred had thereunto, to work the discredit of the whole,
and in so doing to undermine the workmanship of God, plainly appearing
therein. It is wonderful to see our corrupt nature, what poison it utters in
such matters as these be. We shall see some men that are little moved or touched
with infirmities and faults of their own (which are not in part, but wholly
evil,) and yet for all that so boiling at these little, and as I may term
them half evils of others, (for so they are in respect of their own,) that a
man would judge them to be great zealous men, when as in deed they nourish
monsters at home, and can well enough away with them: yea which more is, play
and dally with them.

It were good in such causes to practice first upon a man him self, before he
take liberty to go abroad: first to use some sharp dealing with his own
affections, to see how that will work, before he shall minister so bitter
medicines unto others. For it is an intolerable thing, that great evils
should live quietly at home, when little ones are so sharply revenged abroad.
It is strange that any manne should play with some that is grown to be a
monster, and not to be able to look upon it in the childhoode thereof, when
it is nothing so deformed nor evil favored. Such quarelling with evils not
half formed in others, especially when there is quietness with many that be
already perfectly shapen at home, can not proceed of any sound meaning or
hatred against sin. We must remember the end why the Lord has given us a
tongue: which is, that we should maintain love and friendlinesse, in
communicating the good things that lie hid in our hearts and affections, by our
speech and talk one with an other. Wherefore we must carefully consider, that
we utter no poison nor venom that lurketh in our corrupt nature* and is
deeply rooted therein, by our tongue and talk one with an other. The holy
ghost being privy to our great infirmity this way, has in many words
forewarned us of the slipperinesse of the tongue, that we should have it under
sure and safe custody, telling us in plain words, that he, who shall let
his lips go at liberty without restraint, shall surely come to destruction,
according as we are taught in the Proverbs: He that keeps his mouth, keeps
his life: Pro. 13.3.
but he that lets loose his lips, destruction shall be unto him. And
further: the good man is described to be musing and meditating what to speak,
and the folish and evil man without any moderation of that member, to be
babbling out whatsoever first comes into his head. Pro. 15.28.
The heart of the righteous studieth to answer: but the wicked man's mouth
babbleth evil things. In this place we see that the holy Ghost ascribes only
a mouth unto the foolish man, and not a heart to ponder and consider his words
before, which heart he gives unto the wise man, occupying it self in musing and
considering how to speak. Pro. 15.2
In the same chapter there is yet a clearer and playner difference between the
wicked and the godly, drawn from their usage in speech, yt the good man having
wisdom, and therefore good matter to utter, does notwithstanding beautify and
adorn it in entering the consideration how to make it good, and get grace and
favor unto it, by observing the circumstances of fit time, place, and manner
of uttering, which most may commend it: whereas the wicked and foolish man
has neither care of the matter which he is to utter, neither yet of the manner
how to utter it. This use and end of the tongue, to communicate the good things
of our heart one with an other, to the increase of love and friendship among
men, does reprove those who are wont to press upon others with words of wrath
and contempt. It shall not excuse him that has laid reproach or contempt upon
his neighbor in his speech, to say that his words were no words of malice,
but of pleasure and mirth: for even that pleasant speech that nippeth and
taunteth our neighbor, and brings reproach, contempt, or grief of heart
unto him, can never be so cloaked with the outward show of jesting speech,
but that the Lord shall clearly see the bitter grief of contempt or disdain
that lies close within it, and how far that tongue is from the maintenance
of that love and amity, which increases the estimation and credit of his
neighbor.

Moreover, if the use of the tongue be to communicate the good things of the
heart, not only these infamous speeches shall be brought to judgment, but
also fruitless and unsavory words, yt have not the fruit and profit of
wholesome instruction in them. As we are taught by the apostle. Ephe. 4.29
Ephesians: that we should let no unsavory communication proceed out of our
mouth, but that which may bring grace unto the hearers. For (as we have heard)
the tongue serves to communicate together the good things of our heart, not the
wickedness or vanity that lurketh therein: and whereof there is so great
danger, that we are counseled in the scripture to separate our selves from
foolish men, Pro. 14.7
when we perceive not in them the lips of knowledge.

It is apparent by this that has been spoken, what are the duties and good
works of this commandment, even the contrary of these aforenamed. It shall
be therefore sufficient in a word to touch them here, because they are
clearly perceived in their contraries, which now we have heard reproved and
forbidden in this commandment. The general charge of this commandment is, by
love to maintain and uphold the credit, estimation, and good name of our
brother. For our love must be declared as well by loving and entire deling with
his credit, honor, and good report, as by loving behavior toward his goods
and person. It behooves therefore that the love which we bear toward our
brethren should be fruitful in the good works of this commandment, because
this way the inward affection of the heart has her outgoing, and is convict
either of love or hatred, no less than in his person and goods.

As false witness, standing against the life and blood of our neighbor, was
the thing which in the first place (as we have heard) was forbidden, so the
good work contrary to this, is to use the credit of our testimony for the
defense of him. The goodness of such a work is declared in the Proverbs in
these words: A faithful witness delivers souls. Pro. 14.25
What work can be of greater account then to come justly into this
commendation, to have delivered the lives of men? The good works of them that
by their sentence execute justice, is (according as it is declared in the
person of Job) to deliver the poor that cries, Job. 29.12
the fatherless and him that has none to help, diligently to seek out the
truth and goodness of their cause, to pluck the pray out of the unrighteous
man's teeth. This brings the blessing of him that was ready to perish upon
them.

It was forbidden as a sin against this commandment, to blaze abroad the
infirmities of our brethren. The good work that answers it, is to admonish
one an other, and so to hide sin and iniquity, as it is written. 1.
Thessalonians. We desire you, These. 5.14
Brethren, admonish them that are unruly: comfort the feeble minded: bear
with the weak: be patient toward all men. It was forbidden us to expound
things that might be well taken, into the worse part: and for some little
blemishe to deface the whole. Mat. 7.3.4
It is commanded us to show forth our zeal against sins that be already
ripe in our selves, and to turn it that way to be revenged upon them, when it
would be so gladly occupied in suspecting and surmising evil in others, which
either is not so at all, or at the least not so clear as in our selves. So
that always this be our rule, from the sight of our own sins, to proceed
to the reproving of others. In consideration of the end and use of the tongue,
which is to give forth the good things of the heart, we are sent from speech,
either bitter or nipping, or vainly or without profit delighting, unto the
wholesome words of edifying and instructing one an other unto good, as it is
written in the Proverbs: The heart of the wise, Pro. 16.23 and 24.
makes his mouth wise, and adds doctrine unto his lips. His sweet words,
are as an honey comb, sweetness to the soul, and health to the bones. The
lips of the just man are reported to feed many: Pro. 10.21.
and that they know what is acceptable to God and man, and labor to get grace
and favor to that which they do speak. Pro. 11.30.
It is said that the fruit of a righteous man is as a tree of life, and that
he, because he wins souls, is wise: and that he shall be filled with good
things, for the fruit of his mouth: Pro. 12.14.
that it is yt good understanding and wisdom, that gets grace and favor
with men, Pro. 13.15.
with other infinite testimonies out of that book, directing us to the right
use of the tongue. We have to learn so to examine our dealings with our
neighbors credit and good name, according to these duties here prescribed
us, that we learn truly to humble us under the free mercies of Jesus
Christ, and truly to honor him, by showing forth our love toward our
neighbor in all good dealing with his name, and subduing those affections,
that rise up against it: that we may give forth testimony unto others, that we
are in Christ, by cause we are dying unto sin, and living unto
righteousness. Now let us pray unto our heavenly father, that we may
witness our love unto men, by all faithful and loving dealing with their name.

The xj. Lecture upon the seventeenth verse.
Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, neither shall thou covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his man servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass,
neither any thing that is thy neighbors.
THis last commandment pearceth deeper then the former. Before, the deed was
condemned that was hurtful to our neighbors, and the settled will also and
resolved determination: these were forbidden in the other commandments: but
now, the holy Ghost reproves the desire and lust toward any thing of our
neighbors, notwithstanding there be no full resolution nor settled consent
given thereunto. I call it a settled consent, when in our mind we are fully
resolved, and have set it down, that we will embrace and follow that (as
occasion shall be given) whereunto our desire, lust, and appetite does lead
us. Desire and longing after the things of our neighbors, as house, wife,
goods, or land, (which yet are cut off before we sit down with the deliberate
persuasion to take our pleasure of them) are here brought unto judgment, and
restrained by this commandment. In deed the Lord does pardon and forgive
unto his children the desires and longings of their mind, that are repulsed
and beaten back before they obtain full consent. But it is one thing to
dispute, what desire unto evil is in the desert of it self, and an other how
it is pardoned in the merits of Christ. For in the merits of Christ, not
only the desires, but also the evil doings of his servants lie hidden and
covered. We are then to consider, what reckoning is to be made of the lusting
and coveting desires, yt solace themselves some good time with their neighbors
benefit, when yet they shall be scared from that feast, before their affection
shall be filled and wholly satisfied. In ye gospel after S. Luke, Luke 10.2^
we are charged to love the Lord with all our heart, with all our strength, and
with all our thoghts. While the^ our thoughts are carried hither and thither,
now after his goods, to desire this house, or this parcel of land of his: or
ye estate and condition yt now is his, although we would not wish it before
his death: being a long time holden in these thoughts, and vanishing in these
desires, although nothing be fully concluded to say deliberately in our
hearts, These pleasures will we follow, are we not justly blamed for not
loving him with all our thoughts? Were it not a plain mockery of GOD, if a
man should give liberty to his thoughts to pursue pleasures whole days and
weeks, so that they take heed of setting it down, and concluding fully to
wallowe in any? Our thoughts should be wholly taken up to the Lords use, and
therefore may they not be let loose after goods or benefits of our brethren,
with the alone charge to take heed how they fully settle them selves in them,
but so they be sure of that, otherwise to take no great care, this is not by
love to take up our thoughts and direct them to his service, but by carnal
liberty to give them the head. And surely we may discern a fault in this,
even by the light almost of reason: that our thoughts should rather delight to
spend themselves upon evil or vain things, then upon those that have the
greatest pleasure and chiefest goodness in them. Behold then it is a faulty
thing that our thoughts run rouing after vain things, that they follow the
delights of their neighbors pleasure or profits, though not greatly settled in
them, but wantonly wandering by them. Why should they not be fastened with
delight and whole consent unto good things? Has not the Lord paid the price
for body and soul and all that is in us? Why then should not all be kept under
his obedience, without rouing after our own desire? Either else why should we
excuse any thought straying and wandering from him with this answer, that it
had returned before it was gone so far as possible it might? This is no
reasonable excuse nor plain dealing before our God: this is not to love him
with all the thought. It were a very ungodly thing and would be cried out
against even amongst me^, if any should permit his son not to spare daliance
and delight with young women, so that he made this always sure, that they
should get no hold of him by giving full consent to join in marriage with
them. This were an intolerable thing among men. And can we think when we
shall have delighted our selves a long time in the pleasure of unlawful
thoughts, that this will wipe out all, because we are not fully purposed to
dwell in them? Our thoughts are married already unto the Lord: they are not at
liberty to match them selves where it shall best like them, neither yet to
acquaint them with any strange love. She is no longer holden as a chaste wife,
that spares not to sport and pleasure her self with others besides her
husband. 1. Cor. 13.^
It is written to the Corinthians that love thinks not evil against him
whom it loves, nor rejoices not in iniquity done against him whom it
tendreth. If then we shall love our neighbors, our thoughts must be kept up
from thinking any evil, or by thought intending any wrong against them. For
the thoughts of a man that truly loves an other, imagines nothing that he
knows may hurt him, and therefore he is further from rejoicing and delighting
in it. No man can deny, but that we do owe love unto our neighbors: therefore
may not our thoughts have liberty by devise and desire, to hurt, harm, or
hinder them: in wishing their delights and comforts from them, or wishing our
use of them, which can not be but with the vexing or annoying of them. When
such things abou^d, it shall be proved that love is not true in us: for love
thinks not evil, neither rejoices it in iniquity: behold how we are sent
for trial of our love toward our neighbors, eue^ to our thoughts.

It is a common saying, that thoughts are free, that they pay no tribute any
where: and it is true among men, they answer not in any court. But the Lord
God requires tribute of them, arrayneth them, makes the^ hold up their hand
at ye bar, keeps a court for them, and sets fines and amerceaments upon
the heads of them: wherein, his court has the prerogative and preeminence above
all other. For bare thoughts fear not earthly magistrates: but the heavenly
judge, who searches the heart which can not be sounded by man, binds even the
thoughts unto obedience, and exacteth dutiful obedience from them, which
they neither may nor can, by any show of right withhold him.

This matter requires some plainer spech to conceive the clear sight of it.
Sometime our thoughts shall be wandering this way and that way, and yet the
desire not styrred to hearken after them, or to be set aflote with them: even
then is matter offered, to humble our selves. For why should not our thoughts
keep them stayedly upon good things, and stand unto their dutiful service?
And though the Lord be content to bear with us when there is no desire or
longing appetite, why should not we be grieved, that any thing in us should
make so many escapes from the Lord, and so many attempts to give him the slip?
This has in it matter of misliking, that there should be any such untowardness
in us, and that our thoughts should be so unruly, as ever and anon they are to
be called home to give their attendance. This surely ought to humble us even
in this respect.

Moreover, these thoughts are not only outstraying them selves, but also
soliciting and alluring our desires and affections to rebel with them: This
also can not but make us humble, careful, and watchful. Remember then, where
no desire does join with the thoughts of our mind, yet is there occasion why
such thoughts should be misliked of, and we even to be wearied with the^, and
vexed at them: desiring after a godly and patient manner to have this tickle
and unstable estate changed with that, which shall abide free from these
pricking prouocations unto evils: according to the example of the apostle, who
notwithstanding he had maruellously profited in all obedience, and maruellously
prevailed in keeping his consent from evil, so that he did the evil which he
would not, yet in this estate and in the consideration of the rebellion which
he did see in him notwithstanding he gave no consent thereunto, Romans 7.24
he cries out and says, Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from
this body of sin? Miserable therefore is that religion of Rome, that tells
a man there is no care to be had of thoughts, so that our desire do not with
full and settled affection follow after them and bathe her self in them.
Sometimes our concupiscence and coveting thoughts, get the desire and affection
of our will to hearken unto them for sometime, and to confer with them: which
desire and affection of our will (after some better aduisement taken) lets
them go, and yealdeth not any consent to join wholly with them: this is a
degree worsse then the other, and therefore more to be misliked: yet
notwithstanding the consent is not settled, without the which the Papists and
that religion of Rome say that the matter is a matter of nothing, nothing to
be weighed or esteemed of. In this kind, sometimes we beat back such
tentations very soon, when our desire has been but a little while with them,
having had very little liking of them or conference with them. Sometimes
again, after some long time of conference had, standing in a mammering what to
do, (sometimes liking well to go with them, and reasoning for them, and anon
conceiving something to the contrary,) at the last with much wrestling and
much ado, we wring our selves out of the hands of them: here is not yet their
full consent. But what the^, is not the occasion doubled, why we should bewail
our weakness and lament our poverty, that stand in so great danger, to
become even slaves unto sin, and to join wholly with it? Is there not cause
though it be pardoned, that yet it should be acknowledged faulty as it is? and
his mercy exceeding great in working our riddance from such a dangerous snare,
wherein we had entangled our selves with so great peril as that was? and also
our own too easy inclination thereunto is to be pitied, bewailed, and
confessed of us, yea, and with fervent prayer so much the more to be helped.
For in such lusts there needed but one blast more, and we had been wholly carried
with it, and the conception had been perfect, so that we could not have avoided
after this conceiving, but have nourished that monster whatsoever, until it
had been brought forth: for concupiscence after conception brings forth
sin. James. 1.15
The danger then is great for our desire to have any familiarity, yea, but a
time with those thoughts. For if it go hand in hand with them, there is
danger of such aioyning with them, as it shall conceive thereof, and nourishe
that monstrous seed, until it come forth a mighty and huge monster. This is
the cause why the Apostle warns us to take heed, least such desires make
any abode with us, and be suffered any time to rest upon us, least we conceive
by them, and so afterward willingly and wittingly nourish them, until they
come to light. In the same consideration we are warned in the Epistle to the
Ephesians, Ephe. 4.26
that the sun should not go down upon our wrath: that we should not sleep
with those passions, and suffer our selves to continue in them any time
vnrepelled and not driven back, least unhappily we should conceive of the
coming and continuing together, that mischief, which being once conceived, it
shall not grieve us to nourish, be it never so ougly and monstrous in the eyes
of others.

What shall we say then to those teachers, that say there is no danger nor
fear, save when conception is perfected, and the will has wholly rele^ted, and
is with delight set down in it? Can there be any conference about the
begetting of such monsters, that shall not have great blame justly laid unto
it? Can thoughts that are married unto the Lord, ever approach unto the bed of
such desires, and not be convict of faith and fidelity broken with the Lord
him self? Can she any longer be accounted chaste, that admits conference of
long continuance, about the enterteinment of others besides her lawful
husband? Yet would the Papists have such blameless: how often soever they
have such unchaste and ungodly meeting, if by co^ceiuing and fully consenting
they bring not forth sin. Psalm. 4.5.
The counsel that is given us by the Prophet David is far otherwise,
whereunto no doubt the apostle did allude in the place before alleged out of
the epistle to the Ephesians, for there we are charged, that we should shake at
such things, and not persevere in them, but deal earnestly with our heart
against them in our chamber, and not suffer such continuance in meeting, nor
continual meeting, whereby this monstrous birth and conception might justly be
feared. There is then occasion offered to stand upon our watch, and to
strengthen our affections against such coveting desires, whenever they
arise, least this concupiscence by long dallying with our affections, at length
get within them, and so overthrow them.

The infection of sin is so universally dispersed over our nature, that there
is no part free from it: for it has entered and infected the thoughts the^
selves, and they are poisoned with it, so that there is deadly danger in
following and persuing after the will of our own thoughts. The Apostle Paul
when he sets forth the fearful estate that he was in before his
conversion, and which all men are in by nature, (for he puts him self in
the rank with others) speaks no otherwise of it but thus, That he followed
the will of his own flesh and of his own thoughts. Ephe. 2.3.
No other guide had he but run after the direction of his own thoughts, even
then when his estate was most damnable. We must therefore learn to suspect our
thoghts, if we will be advised by the Apostle, and not to imagine with the
doctors of Rome that our estate is good, so long as the will (when it shall
have wrastled) at length gets out, not having wholly yealded nor flatly fallen
down. Thoughts therefore running this way after any thing of our neighbors, in
so doing, make manifest declaration of their poison and corruption: which if
they shall have no resista^ce, do carry us headlong through the broad way, into
destruction. If by grace they shall be stopped and resisted, in that grace, God
is to be magnified: yet we in that our corruption notwithstanding justly are to
be blamed and admonished, thereby to seek for more aid in that part of our
thoughts, least if ye tentation should lie sore upon us, satan should that
way get entrance into the heart. It seems a hard doctrine, that thoughts,
wishes, and desires should be condemned, that laws should be made for them,
and men charged with the ordering of them: and no marvel if it appear so unto
us, for it appears that the apostle Paul would never have suspected any
danger in concupiscence, lusts, and desires, if the law had not said, Thou
shall not lust or desire. Romans 7.7.
Nay, it appears plainly in that place, that he thought marvelous well of
him self, before he came to this commandment. He took him self before to be
living and in good liking toward God and godliness: but (as he confesses)
after he had looked upon this commandment, and beheld him self a while in
this part of ye glass, he saw him self plainly to be no body, a dead man,
sold unto sin. How necessary then is it to sift our selves, and to examine
us in this commandment thoroughly, yt we may be humbled under the grace of God
as apperteineth? For if he so singular a man was not thoroughly cast down before
he had wrastled with ye justice of god in this commandment, how requisite is
it yt we should truly try us here, least yt in supposing yt to be in us which
we want, we become careless in seeking the mercy of Christ, without the which
there is no hope.

In this commandment therefore above all the rest, it is required that we be
diligent and true tryers of our selves. For those who have no misliking of them
selves, for the lusting and coveting after the things of their neighbors,
which they do perceive to be in their thoughts, have no Christianity in them
to be accounted of. Evil being misliked in truth, will be misliked
wheresoever it shall be, whether in word, thought or deed. Evil being truly
resisted, will be resisted eue^ in thought: and therefore certain it is, yt he
who never has stroue^ with evil in his thoughts, has never truly strouen with
sin. It was meet yt the law should utter all our evil, and hide nothing of
our unrighteousness from us, that the manifold corruption thereof might force
us to seek the mediator and peacemaker Christ: that we being so many ways
convicted of corruption in our selves, might wholly give over the opinion of our
own works and meriting, and so make much of the mercy offered by Jesus
Christ: which is so much the more made of, by how much we do more clearly
see our utter vndoeing without it.

If only the act of murder, adultery, theft, and false wittnesse-bearing,
or the deliberate and settled consent unto any of those, should alone come in
question in the cause and matter of sin against our neighbor, many an evil
man would hope to make good shifte: but when thoughts and desires unto any of
those, are called for and examined, it will cause any man to cast down his
courage, and to fall a pleading of his pardon.

As before, we were endaungered by the doctrine of Rome, to conceive sin,
when they notwithstanding bad us live without any fear (in that respect) of
sin, so long as we keep our consent clear in the matter: So here (if we
shall hearken to their doctrine) we come in danger never to magnify rightly
the mercyes brought us by Christ Jesus: while we see not half the need that
we have of him, nor ye half part of ye misery that we are in without him.
For a man may make good shifts, if only deeds and full consents be asked
after, and so in his own judgment no great benefit is obtained by him that
shall supply that which is lacking in his behalf, and therefore he makes no
great haste to seek after him. But when thoughts and desires are sifted, he
must of necessity acknowledge him self greatly befriended, if so great want
of his shall by an other be found answered. We must look in this glass of the
commandments, and into this infinite nature of lust, desire, and
concupiscence, that we may be confounded in our selves utterly, that our
delivery may be from the gates of death, that we may know how that our
salvation consists in his mere grace: for we can hardly be brought to beg
abroad, till all relief be spent at home.

There is no danger in the feeling and acknowledgeing of our poverty: for the
Lord has promised, that if those that be heavy laden with sin shall come
unto him, they shall be refreshed: Matthew. 11.
neither was there ever found any that despayred, who before had not thought
too well of him self. All the danger is on the other side, least we not
taking those to be no sins which are sins in deed, and so thinking better
of our selves then there is cause, should in justice be judged of the Lord, 1.
Cor. 11.
because we would not proceed by a right rule to judge our selves.

By this that we have heard, it is plain, that a Christian must walk in
fear and care, not only to consent to evil toward his neighbor, but also to
be stirred and pricked with any, be it never so little or small a delight
thereunto: and that our thoughts are poisoned, and therefore the danger great
in ye not bridling of the^. The thing then commanded, is, to bring our
desires, thoughts, and delights unto the good and benefit of our brethren, in
matters wherein they are to be benefited: that we bring not only hands to do
well to our neighbors, but also hearts, thoughts, desires, lusting, longing,
and delighting therein, Romans 7.22.
according as the apostle testifies of him self, that he was delighted with
the law of God according to the inner man: whereunto accords the holy Ghost
in the Proverbs in these words: It is joy to the just to do judgment. Pro.
21.15.
Many have been brought to do outward things in them selves good, which never
had any joyful desire in them to glorify God with them: but ye holy ghost
works in his, not only a change of works, but also an alteration of
thoughts, desires and delights, that their desires may be holden within that
which is good. Wherein it behooves a Christian to be careful, even thus to
transform his delights: not taking it sufficient, if he shall have brought
them at any time from that which was evil, until he have joined them to that
which is good. Let our care be increased this way, to have such desire and
delight unto that which is good, as may retain our thoughts and keep them
diligently occupied in such services. Be it far from us to think that the
grace of GOD only reaches unto the deed and full consent, letting desires and
thoughts take their liberty in their corruption. We must confess (as the
truth is) that his grace not only bridleth thoughts from rushing into yt
which is evil, but also gives them a sweet taste in that which is good, and
holds them greatly thereunto. There is no man will deny, but that we ought
to delight in that which is good: and surely if the delight be once taken in
doing good unto our neighbor, it will gather the thoughts together, and
assemble them to that joy and delight. If when the delight is wicked, the
thoughts are spent therevppon, surely if the desire be changed, the thoughts
also will resort greatly thither. Let us therefore seek after the grace of
GOD, not only to season our deeds, but also our thoughts and delights
therewith, yt our study and thoughts may be occupied in that which is
acceptable to him. For if some deeds shall at starts be done of us, but the
heart nevertheless unchanged in desires and delights, it shall not profit us.
The understanding that Christians have of their estate, how it fares between
God and them, is better taken, and has surer proof and more certain
testimony from their desires and inward affections unto the law of GOD, then
from their outward doing of things commanded by the law. Evil things may be
left undone for fear of punishment, for desire of commendation, or avoiding of
evil speech, or for that we are not tempted with them, when notwithstanding
the heart shall not in any respect mislike of them.

Good things also may be done for praise of man, for hope of merits with God,
when yet the affection shall nothing be moved that way. And this is nothing
before God, to avoid evil from thy hand, but to embrace it nevertheless in
thy heart, or to do good with thy hand without any desire of the heart. So
that both in evil deeds left undone, and also in good deeds done, we may be
deceived.

But if the inward affection of the heart stand desireously affected after
that which GOD has commanded us to do unto men, and hatefully affected
toward that which God has forbidden, this change cannot be wrought there,
but by the spirit of GOD alone. As for the praise or dispraise of the people,
it reaches nothing so far. Let us then embrace this desire unto the duties
commanded us, not giueing any rest unto the Lord in our prayers before we
shall obtain this inward testimony which is above all exception to be taken
against it: Esaie. 62.
and without the which outward doeinges are of no account before the Lord, who
looks into the affections of man, and embraces a cherefull and delightful
giver.

Here are those men confuted that would drive affections out of the fleashe,
and kill nature, attempting such things as utterly tend to destroy it: as if the
nature of man should by regeneration beco^e altered into ye nature of Angels:
whereas regeneration kills not nature, but restores and repayreth it:
destroys not the affections, but transfourmeth them from that evil which
naturally they are inclined unto, into that which is good and commanded of GOD.

The angry man may not think his conversion and regeneration to be good, if
he shall bend him self never to be moved with any thing at all: but if that
heat which sometimes he felt unto evil, be now as fervent unto that which
is good, then is his conversion approved before GOD. The covetous man is not
then converted, when he shall have driven all desire and thirst after worldly
commodities out of his mind, unless that desire be repaired in him, to
bestow and use those commodities as GOD has commanded. Neither is that man
gone straight way out of the world, that has betaken him self to a wilderness
and cloister to have no dealings in the world, but he that in dealings of the
world has kept him self unspotted of the world, Iam. 3. 1. Cor. 7.
using the things thereof as if he used them not, he may truly say he has
left the world,

In all these duties toward our neighbors, we may never forget this which
has partly been touched before: that if it were possible for us to perform
all duties unto men, and yet not do them in obedience unto God, according
unto the rules which before we have learned, it were utterly to be abhorred.
For what avails it to deal well with men, and in the mean time to defraude
the Lord of his glory?

Let us learn thoroughly to examine our thoughts, not only blaming those that
fully consent, but even warring with those that any whit delight them selves in
coveting and desiring that which apperteyneth unto others: so shall we see
whether it be an easy matter to love our neighbor as our self, or
otherwise: so shall we also clearly give over the title of righteousness in
regard of our own doings, and wholly depend upon the free merits of God in
Christ, proceeding in the confidence thereof, with good courage to purify our
thoughts, that we may not only do good with the hand, but even with the longing
desire of our thoughts. For the accomplishment whereof, let us call upon God in
the name of his Son, saying as he has taught us.

O our Father which art in Heaven. etc.

The twelfth Lecture upon the first to the Corinthians.
Chapter.xiii.
4 Love suffers long: it is bountiful: love enuieth not: love does not
boast it self: it is not puffed up:

5 It disdayneth not: it seeks not her own things: it is not provoked to
anger: it thinks not evil:

6 It rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth:

7 It suffers all things: it believes all things: it hops all things: it
endures all things.


WE have learned out of the law, what several duties they be, that we owe
unto God, and also unto man: but in the law we are not only charged to do
those duties there appointed to be done, and to forbear the contrary, but
also of love to do them, and of love to keep us from the other. Therefore it
shall be expedient to examine what properties be in love necessarily adjoining
unto the same: whereby we must judge of our selves, how it fares with us:
whether that affection (without the which all doing of good, or ceassing to do
evil is to no purpose) rules in us both in our doings, and also when we shall
abstain from doing. The properties and fruits of love, are in no place better
set forth then in the former Epistle to the Corinthes: 1. Cor. 13.4.
from whence I mean to give you some light, thereby the better to see into
love, the nature of it, and how great things are contained in it. Where the
first note given to know it by, is that it suffers long, or is patient: a
property that moderateth the heat and hastiness of a man's mind, that he
follow it not, in the boiling appetite and desire thereof. This patience and
moderation of our affections, has great commendations in the scripture:
especially the book of the Proverbs painteth forth the excellency thereof
in so many places, and with so great titles, as I can not but give you a taste
of some of them. In the foureteenth Chapter of that book, it is thus written:
He that is stowe to wrath is of great wisdom, Prou. 14.29
but he that is of an hasty mind, (or to give it you as it is there word for
word, he that is of a short spirit,) exalts folly. In this place we see
this slowenesse unto wrath is not barely joined with wisdom, but with the
excellency of wisdom. For so it is said, He is of great wisdom that is
slow unto wrath.

It is a degree and profiting in wisdom, which not all men, no, not all
wisemen have atteyned unto, to moderate the headie and hasty affection of an
angry and passionate mind. Likewise in the same book thus speaks the holy
Ghost: The discretion of a man differreth his anger: and his glory is to pass
by an offense. A merueilous commendation, that it should be the glory of a man
to put up offenses: that he should have no manhood in him, or matter to boast
of any thing worthy of a man, that has not learned to pass by offenses, and
to qualify his affections, even toward transgressions and injuries. Nature
teaches us a clean contrary lesson: that it is the glory and zeal of a man
to pursue the infirmities of others, and revenge our affections the heat and
displeasure of them thereupon: and yt he is a beast and no man, that will let go
wrongs, transgressions, and injuries unrevenged, especially, if they shall
have touched himself. But the spirit of God teaches us, that it is love that
finds a way to cure a transgression, and yet notwithstanding to cover it,
and to reserve a place to cover it, until it shall be cured, as it is written in
this book.

Pro. 10.12. Prou. 21.24
Moreover we read in the Proverbs, that he shall be taken for proud, arrogant,
and scornful, that does his works in the wrath of pride. A good
testimony to tell us, not only what begins this wrath, (which is pride in
deed, and therefore fitly joined with it in this place in calling it the wrath
of pride,) but also what, is joined with it always: that such a one as he is,
so shall he bear the name and reproach of an arrogant, hautie, and scornful
man.

Pro. 29.28.
In a another place of this book, the holy Ghost compares that man that can not
restrain his affection, unto a city broken down, and without walls: but I
must contain my self within these few testimonies for that purpose: for it
were a very great labor to seek out all that is spoken hereof, if I should
go no further then unto this book. This patience and long suffering, being as
we have heard so excellent, even ye glory of a man, may justly clame the first
place among the properties of love. For what can be more fit to uphold love,
then to be of a patient spirit, when matter is offered and occasion, to break
love and hearty good affection? He does justly deserve well of love, and to
have his praise in all the fruits that follow it, who shall by patience
underprop it, when it shall be assaulted and shaken by hatred or evil dealing
howsoever. As for that man, who then lets love fall down, whenever any
burden of displeasure, offense, or unkind dealing shall be laid upon him from
the man whom he pretended to love, he declares plainly, that he never tasted
of true love, and hearty affection, the first and principal note whereof is
to be patient and suffer long. Let him cease therefore to make any account of
his love, who has not made reckoning to uphold it in injuries and
displeasures. And let him also cease to brag of any love that he has borne
unto any, who never was tried to have maintained it, through the discourteous
dealing of that man in one respect or other. For who is he (if he be not a
monster of men) that cannot live peaceably with them who never shall displease
him? But then is it thankesworthie, when our love by patience shall overcome the
unkindness of others.

This note of love is clearly seen in that love, which mothers bear to
their children: how much frowardness and causeless crying do the mothers
not only patiently bear at the hand of the child by love, but also appease,
not otherwise then by giving of them something to quiet them withal, by love
rewarding rather then revenging their frowardness. There is love, and
therefore the chief property thereof can not be wanting, which is to be
patient and long suffering.

The little bearing and forbearing one of an other both publicly and
privately, does plainly speak, that love is not to be found in the nature of
man, but is an especial gift of God. For so sick are we of self-love, and so
void of the love of others, that not only we cannot pass by the
transgression of our brother, and by a loving hyding of the same cure it, but
also we can hardly abide, that any should in any thing (though not evil)
either in opinion or affection be divided from us. Nay, which more is,
oftentimes we would have all our friends bear an heavy countenance toward
him, whom we for private causes have begone to mislike. But true love is
patient and suffers long, forgiving others, even as God for Christ his sake
has forgiven us. Ephe. 4.32.
Neither is there any thing in us worthy of praise in this work of love, if
this patience and long suffering be absent.

For as much therefore as both there has been and shall be also unto ye end of
the world in ye children of God weakness and wantes both in judgment and in
affection, it is most necessary for him that shall have dealing with any
whatsoever, to crave earnestly at the hands of God for this excellent stay of
love, which is called patience or long suffering, without the which it will be
impossible to live Christianly in any society how small so ever: especially
is this gift necessary in these latter days, where all places and persons
almost are full of offense.

It is to be observed, that this property of love is not only at variance
with hastiness that is so soon displeased and so easily offended, but also
with that other extremity, when a man is so overwhelmed with displeasure
conceived, as that notwithstanding he burst not out into heat, yet he
suffers his affection toward the man altogether to quench in him, ceassing
any more to show forth the fruits of a loving heart. Therefore in few words
to comprehend the nature of this property of love, it is that good affection
which passes through unkindness to utter it self, and breaks through
displeasures to make it self known by loving deeds, being in very deed the
power and work of God, and therefore able so strongly against such strong lets,
to prevail. The second property of love.
It is also said of this love, that it is Bountiful, a second note or effect
to discern it by. The word signifies him that is courteous, gentle, and
ready to pleasure an other, which is rather the cause of bountifulness, then
bountifullnesse it self. For when the heart stands so sweetly affected, it
cannot easily be let from plentiful witnessing of the same, as occasion and
ability will permit. That this is a property that cannot be sundered from
love, it does appear in the love and affection which parents bear unto
their children. How gentle are they to them, how ready to seek the
pleasuring of them, how plentiful and liberal therein? Which comes wholly
of a tender affection toward them. This fruit of love is fitly joined unto
the other: for when a man can not only bear the displeasures and unkindness
of men, but also is of a gentle and frank disposition, ready to deserve well
of men, how can there be any thing more required? For his patient spirit will
not easily take offense at the evil dealinges of others, and his mylde
affection will as hardely use evil dealing toward another. Therefore peace
is soon purchased and long continued, where there is plenty and store of
such affections. Every man may see how hard a thing it is to find either of
these fruits of love. For where is that man almost to be found, that will
bear any unkindness at the hands of another? Or where is that gentle
disposition, that has a grace and facility in readiness to do well unto
another? If any shall have obtained the one, he thinks it therefore almost an
unlawful thing to request the other at his hands.

For if he be a man that can bear somewhat with the untowardness of others,
he takes the desert thereof to be so great, as that it were not lawful to
look for any courteous dealing from him, but to hold them selves well
satisfied with that other: so as even that were to be unthankful for it, if
they did but seem to require any thing to be added more unto it. Likewise, if
any be found of a gentle and ready affection to pleasure others, he thinks
his so doing, to carry with it a dispensation and privilege for his not
bearing of unkindness at the hands of others: so hard a thing is it to
match these two together. But how hard soever it be to find these two coupled
together in any one, yet this is an assured truth, yt wheresoever love is,
there are apparent tokens of them both. There is both patience toward
infirmities, and readiness to deserve well of those how many soever we shall
love.

It is lamentable to consider, how far the dealings of men swerve from these
properties. Every man says, he is in love and charity with all men: yet if he
shall never so little be offended, he cannot be kept either from plain
revenging, or at the least from letting go al good liking of the man. And as he
cannot be kept from revenging, no more can he be dragged and haled to well
deserving of any: yet for all this persuadeth he himself, that al ye love and
charity that is required in a man, does dwell plentifully in him: so
unskillfully and uncharitably do we judge of love and charity, as if he loved a
man, who were not provoked by any affection boiling in him to hate, or at lest
to mislike him: whereas in very deed love is a tender liking conceived of a
man, and so greatly delighting and affecting of him, that it makes him both
merueilous apt and easy to do whatsoever may pleasure him, and also very
hard by any grief or displeasure to let go the good liking that once he
has conceived of him. The world knows not this affection, for it is the
special work of Gods grace. It needs no long speech to declare that the
world is not acquainted with it: for every man almost is careless in
offending other, so far is he from this affection that is so ready to
pleasure: and every man also is impatient of the lest displeasure that may be
offered from any other. This that has been spoken of the rareness of this
affection which we call love, may not beget in us a despair to come by it, but
a care earnestly to seek it where it may be had, and will be had of so many as
in the careful desire thereof shall multiply their petitions and prayers to God
for it: which must be so much ye more fervent and often, as this age has
most need of it, and is farthest from acquaintance with it.

This is also a note of love to discern it by, that it is not Envious. Love
(says the Apostle) enuieth not. This tender affection of love that knitteth
the heart of one unto another, is so far from envying the graces or gifts of
God whatsoever in any other whom he loves, that he wishes from his heart,
that they were more and better then they are. For trial of the truth herein,
let us consider of the affection of parents toward their children: where we
are sure that nature has planted love, and therefore this note of not envying
which always accompanies it, cannot be wanting there. What parents were ever
found (except it were some one rare monster in nature) that did envy their
children, because there were such plenty or store of gifts in them? Nay, we
see the plain contrary, that they are greatly delighted to hear them praised
of others for their gifts, and much given to speak of their praise
themselves: sometime thinking and affirming those gifts which they have, to be
more and greater, then in deed they are: nay, sometime imagining that to be in
them in great measure, whereof in deed they never had any portion, no not the
least part: so far are they from any envying of them: for by love they are
so as it were made one, that the praises of their children they take to be a
part of their own commendation, which willingly they would not loose.

This love does so join together and unite them, that there can nothing be
taken from the one, but the other takes him self to be maimed thereby: as if
he had lost some limme or joint of his own. For this affection makes them to
grow both into one: and who has ever envied the good or benefit that he
received by some member of his own body?

The Scripture teaches us that we are all members of one body, and that we
have our part of the profit that comes by the gifts of others, through the
marvelous working of God. What maddenesse therefore were it to envy our own
commodity? There can be no greater token of an hateful man, then is envy:
neither any playner proof that we are diverse from the body of Christ, then to
envy the gifts of the members thereof. There is great diversity between
love and envy, for he that loves takes himself to be benefited in the
benefit of him whom he loves: him self to be praised, in the praises of
that man whom he likes.

The envious man on the contrary part, thinks that another man is not
praised, but in the self same he is dispraised: yt another cannot be profited,
but yt in ye same he is hindered: and therefore stormeth when any thing is
attributed to another, as if in that deed something had been taken from
himself. Thus in all things the envious man deals as if he were a stranger
from the other, the loving man as if he were not diverse, but one with the
other, and a very part and member of the same. Let us therefore keep our
selves far from this envy, the truest token that can be of the absence of
charity, and all true fear of God or fellowship with his members.

For the driving away of envy, we have first to deal with our hearts, to
persuade them, (as the truth is in deed) that we have our benefit and
profit in their gifts, no less then the eye has benefit from the foot,
or the foot from the eye: which is brought to pass, by the secret and
wonderful working of God.

Secondarily, that we are of one body, and that therefore we are entitled
after a manner to the praises, commodities, or benefits that do redound unto
them.

Thirdly, that the Lord is the author of this diversity in gifts, and that
therefore the envying of others for their gifts given unto them, is in deed
to pick a quarrel with the Lord who has given it them, and to utter our
mislyking of his distribution and disposing of matters among men. And how
dangerous a thing it is to control the lord, I leave to them to consider of
at their leisure. Last of al, to feed our affection herein, is to bring a
continual torment upon us. For when will there cease to be diversity of
gifts in men? And if we be grieved when others have that which we have not,
when shall we cease to be vexed? Shall there not be this diversity unto the
end? Shall there be any time when all the body shall be but one member? Let us
not imagine yt when we shall give our hearts leave to envy some one, that this
affection will die when he is taken away, or when we shall have prevailed
against him: nay, it is made by yt means so much ye more stronger: and as for
ye occasion, it never dies.

For there shall be always some that shall deserve, and justly have true praise
and estimation for some thing, which we have not, and therefore cannot come to
have the praise of it for our selves. In deed the next way to have the glory
of it, is by love to be one: as one with the true owner thereof.

To encourage us to this love that drives away envy, let us remember that in
driving it away we join with the Lord, who has thus appointed it. We approve
his doings as good: we acknowledge by thankfulness the commodity that we
have of them: we rid our selves of an infinite and endelesse torment. To
conclude this property of love: it is requisite that we often consider, how
unworthy we are of those benefits that we do enjoy, to learn, both to be
contented with them, and to be thankful to God for them, and to keep us in
such thankful remembrance thereof, as may make us studious to walk worthy
of them, to so great goodness of God toward us therein, as may keep us
occupied in care, how by duties we may answer them: always taking heed,
least we should become unthankful, even for the good which God did mean
toward us in those gifts, the possession whereof he has given unto others.

As love is void of envy, so is it reported here by the holy Ghost that it
is void of dealing insolently, frowardly, or stubbernely, (for so sounds the
word,) and that it is not puffed up with pride against him whom he loves.
Moreover, that it does no uncomely thing against him, without having due
regard of the dignity of the man, his degree, estate, or condition whatsoever.

These things are expressed in three words in the text, and may be expressed
in these three words thus: that love deals not frowardly, proudly, nor
uncomely. These things do I join together in speaking of them, because they
are of such affinity one with another. Where true love is, there the man who
loves is so persuaded of the excellency of the other whom he loves, and so
ravished with the admiration of some one or other thing in him, that in his
judgment there is nothing, no not in himself like unto it, or worthy of it:
with the which he is so delighted, and in love withal, that often times he
thinks himself happy, if the submitting of himself to any service or
pains for him, may be accepted of and taken in good worth at his hands. For
the thing which he is in love withal, appears so glorious in his eyes, that
it darkeneth not only some little thing in himself, but even yt which is the
best in him, and that which before he made most reckoning of, now being set
by this which he is so inamoured with, appears scarce sufficiently worthy
to serve it.

A true proof of this nature, that it is in love, may be taken from that
proverb which is received among us, which is: That love and lordship can
broke no fellowship. For love magnifieth yt which it loves so greatly, that it
can suffer none to be fellows with it at that worthiness which it conceyueth
thereof, but will have all other with all submission to give place thereunto.
It was no doubt long tried experience that brought this into a common speech,
and we have the trial of it in the love that we bear toward our selves. For
our nature cannot like of such a praise, wherein others are thought as good as
we, having equal commendation with us. We esteem it nothing if we be not
magnified, as all others be put under us in that degree and measure of
commendation.

We see it true also in that love that the wicked man bears unto the harlot
and wicked woman: when once love is kindeled in his heart, he abaseth himself
to al kind of slavery, forgetting even the dignity of a man in his
subjection or rather slavery unto her: and all this comes, because there is
love kindeled in his heart, the nature whereof is to hold a man in a
wonderment at the dignity and worthiness thereof, even so greatly, that all
things in himself acknowledge subjection thereunto. Therefore to apply this
unto the matter which we have in hand: where love is, there can be no froward
and peevish dealing, no swelling and setting up of himself and his own
gifts against him whom he loves, no uncomely or vnreuerent behavior in
speech, countenance, or deed, toward him, other then the place,
worthiness, or condition of the man requires. For love thinks not that the
thing loved is sufficiently advanced, unless all other become therein abased.
For as was said before, Love and Lordshippe will abide no fellowshippe.

It is profitable to observe the diversity of these things that love drives
away. Sometimes a man for want of love toward another, deals frowardly and
stubbernely with him: other sometimes a man shall discern no insolent and
crooked dealing, albeit there be inward swelling, and setting up of him self
against him in his heart and secret thoughts. It may be also that both those
be lacking, and yet for all yt, no love reigning in him: which is perceived
herein, that he does not with reverent estimation thereof, humbly acknowledge
the graces and gifts of God in him, and himself also duetifully indebted
thereunto: or else that he enters not into such a consideration of that
estate that he is in, whereby he is moved to deal so, as unto that condition,
(whether it be prosperous or miserable) or unto that man, (whether he be
strong or weak) by good right apperteineth. Which declares plainly that he
wants love, whose property is to deal comely, either so humbly as besemeth
those gifts and great graces of God, or else so tenderly, as his afflicted
condition does require. The crooked and cross dealinges, the hautie hearts
declared by high looks do plainly speak, that love is a pilgrim among us.
But if the not reverent submiting of our selves unto ye graces of God in
another, and not tendering of those that be in necessity and want be added
unto these, in whom shall we not find one of these three reigning and bearing
rule? so rare a gift of God is love, and so much lies hid therein.

The opinion that commonly is received of love, what it is, comes no nearer
unto love in deed, then does black unto white, or light unto darkness:
which thing to be true we shall easily discern, if either we look unto
self-love, or into the natural love that parents do bear unto their
children. For concerning this last point of not dealing uncomely, but observing
with all reverence the dignity of the man: how plainly may we observe this in
self love? that takes it self then rightly regarded, when with reverence and
lowly submission it is honored: and when a man so aduaunceth him, that he
does with all lowliness put himself under him. For love finds such
worthiness and dignity, as may, by good right, (in the judgment of him that
loves) claim reverence and submission thereunto.

The reasons to persuade us to this humble reuerencing of the gifts of God in
men by love, and to forbear froward dealinges with them, pride and swelling
against them, or undutiful regard of them are many, and those weyghtie. For
first of all they are the gifts of God, and therefore he may not want his
honor in them. Secondly our gifts how good soever, are appointed to serve
the^, and ye more we have, the greater service is required at our hands:
neither may their neglect of duty toward us, be our discharge for want of
duty unto them. Besides this, they have gifts which we want. Moreover, we
do not see their gifts so defaced and stained with infirmities, as we do well
know that ours are, (if we know our selves:) which cannot but persuade us
more highly and reverently to esteem of them, then of our selves. For be it
that we do know great infirmities in them, yet is it sure, that if we do
know our own selves truly and thoroughly, we shall understand that there is
more lack in our selves then we can charge them with all. For what we want in
measure, we are sure to have it in number. If they shall be infected with some
one or few notorious offenses, which we are free of, we are privy to so
great a number within our selves (howsoever we be short in the weight and
measure of some sin which they are infected withal) as will match the
heynousnes of their offenses. This that has been said, that our gifts are by
the Lord appointed to the service of our brethren, in consideration whereof
they are our betters: that their gifts are not known unto us to be so defaced
with sin, as we are sure ours are: is spoken to this end, yt we should by those
and such like considerations be drawn to honor the grace of God in the^. For
we must se some great thing in them, before we shall in truth behave our
selves reverently, and not carelessly, or unseemly toward them. He that
loves, has in him reverence toward him whom he loves, and is void of this
uncomeliness, that knows not dignities, degrees, callinges, gifts, or
conditions of life: which reverence must partly arise of that which we
conceive to be in them, which we must search out, (rightly examining the
worthiness thereof) that we may be forced to have that love, lyking, and
estimation of him, which may drive us from all stubberne, proud, and
presumptuous dealing: yea from all uncomely and vnreuerent dealing toward him,
making his excellency to humble us even in yt wherein we did most glory.
Thus must we travel with our hearts to find out some great thing in him: for
we can hardly bow unto nothing, or by love reverence, but where we shall have
found some worthiness and cause thereof, yet if there be no great thing in
the man, the Lords authority must step in, to obtain this love toward him,
who has appointed our gifts to serve those that have need of them.

Love seeks not his own.
Love is also perceived by this property that It seeks not her own things:
this is set down also in this place, as a token and sure mark of it: the
meaning whereof is not that love lets go all care and regard of it self,
but that it is so careful of that which it likes, that in regard thereof it
is often negligent about it self, not inioying all the liberty, pleasure, or
commodity, that lawfully it might have. A proof of this may be had in
parents, whom nature has taught to love their children: they seek not with
how little charges they might be discharged of them, in putting them off their
hands to be apprentises of some occupatio^, which may be done with small
charges, and is very lawful for them to do, whereby also they them selves may
be the better able to live, as being with so little cost unburdened of them.
They inquire not thus with how little charges they may be bestowed, but will
strain them selves oftentimes above their ability, living very spareingly and
hardly at home, to maintain them at learning, or at some other thing likely to
procure their preferment,

This is love which seeks not her own things: which teaches them to forgo
that pleasure or profit which lawfully they might enjoy, to pleasure and
profit their children whom they love. This property of love did Paul
plainly declare, 1. Cor. 9.
when that he did not burden the congregation as lawfully he might. By this
property of love it comes to pass, yt men having once learned what is
lawful, begin to inquire then, whether that same be expedient to be done or
otherwise, because notwithstanding that it be lawful: 1. Cor 5.
yet love will not do it, unless it be also expedient. By this it comes to
pass, that those which be strong, will not always proceed in the strength of
their persuasion to do accordingly, Romans 15.1.
but forbear their right to win the weak withal. This property of love is
lacking every where. For almost all me^ will have all their pleasures and all
their profits; not forgoing any part thereof, although the Gospel and them
selves do hear much evil for it every where. If we may once say it is lawful,
I may do it by law or it is not forbidden, but permitted by the word, we never
inquire further. This proves manifestly that love is not in us, which seeks
not after all that it may, but is contented to depart from her own right,
oftentimes, thereby to declare her affection to them whom she loves:
especially when the holding of her to her own, is like to bring discredit
unto that which she loves. In preserving our commodities or our pleasures, we
always follow them, to the vttermoste of that which is lawful: we drive our
commodities as far always, as by any means may be accounted lawful: and if
at any time we be accused of hard dealinge, we answer, it is a covenant:
a plain bargain: true buying and selling: it is lawful: as if love unto the
Gospel (if it were in us) would not make us sometimes to give in, and relent
of that we might demand, to get credit thereunto, and to stop the mouths of
the evil speaker and slaunderer, when we see that we cannot hold that, but
we must procure evil speech to our profession. Likewise, when we are charged
with excessive using of recreations, or apparel: forthwith we answer,
recreations are lawful: apparel is lawful: we may use it. But love seeks
not all that it may. When our profession is evil spoken of, the Gospel blamed
to be a doctrine of liberty, should not the love thereunto make us cease to
seek all that we may, and begin to inquire what is most convenient to
purchase glory to God withal? When those which strive for maysteries are
desireous to get the garland, 1 Cor. 9.
and have a love thereunto, they do not sit down to reckon how many kinds of
meats they may lawfully feed upon, and yet be able to run with some speed,
but they consult how many they had need to abstain from, that they may be
likely to prevail and get commendation by running. Thus has love taught them
to defraude them selves of many sweet morsels which, lawfully they might take,
to enjoy but some corruptible thing. For love seeks not all it may, but
forgoeth much of her right, for their pleasure whom she so greatly likes.

Miserable therefore are these times, wherein so many go further in pleasures
and commodities, then by any lawful means they may do: and the better sort
stand at ye staves end with God, not yielding one jot of those profits or
pleasures that by any color of lawfulnes they can lay claim unto,
notwithstanding his name (that is so evil spoken of for this obstinate use of
their liberty) does even beg it at their hands, that they should relente of
their right, and something give in unto their God. Where are they to be found
whom the care of their brethren does so occupy, that it takes them up from
some of their lawful commodities, pleasures, and cares, to be occupied the
more where their love rests? Love is full of pains, where it loves: 1.
These. 1.
therefore does the Apostle give labor and labouriousnesse unto it, as the
proper note to discern it: whereunto accords that which is set down here,
that it is so much occupied where it loves, that oftentimes it neglects it
self. This property of love, notably descrieth idle and careless pastors and
preachers of the word: which so much seek themselves, that they neglect their
flock and charges: whereas if there were love in deed toward them, it would
beget in them the care thereof, even with the neglect of them selves, in
respect of the care and pains taken with them. This property must every man
try him self by, in his calling whatsoever. For if the Lord shall accept of
our dealings therein, it is mete and requisite that they be done in love which
is full of service and pain toward that which it loves.

To relent of our right unto God for his glory, is no work of supererogatio^
which we are not bound unto (as the church of Rome has taught) but due debte.)
For we do owe love unto God from the ground of our heart, and love seeks not
all her own, but oftentimes frankly and freely gives of her right unto God.
Herein also we may discern, that love has great things in it, yt it mightily
carries the affections to that which it loves, and keeps them occupied
there, even oftentimes to the neglect of it self. The rarenes of it and ye
great mesure that we shall see our selves come short thereof, must force us to
often and earnest prayer to God for it: wherein it shall be profitable to
remember, yt this not seeking of our selves but the good of others, is in
truth the next way to benefit our selves. For as the hand which is occupied
always in giving forth help to the mouth, or other parts of the body, does in
so doing provide for it self and has his nourishment, help, and health, of
that which it has given unto the mouth, so by ye especial working of God it
comes to pass, that our benefit is enclosed in that which we bestow upon
another, and he becomes the best husband for him self, that is most employed
according to his calling upon other. This is a special work we may see of
Gods grace: for our nature is wholly given to attend upon her self, little
regarding (so matters go well there) how it fares with others abroad. Love in
like manner is known thus, that it is not provoked unto anger: it is not
easily incensed, though wrong be offered unto it. For the heart is so knit by
love, that it can well bear many wro^gs. This note, whereby love is discerned,
differs not much from that property which was spoken of in the first place,
save that to speak properly, that is a meekness joined with doings, and this
with suffering. This hardness to be provoked unto anger, is procured by the help
of yt which follows, being another token of love, yt it thinks not evil, or
imputes not evil. For in as much as it stands not upon the matter,
examining ye evil dealing yt is in it, but by love either altogether passes
over it, or else twiteth and blames some other thing for it, as a cause that
moved the doer thereunto, and so remoueth it from him: therefore it cannot be
incensed therewith or provoked unto anger. Parents in dealing with their
children do plainly prove that love wants this diligent considering,
thinking upon, or through examining of the evil of their children. For how
many of their froward doings do they pass over, and not examine at all? In how
many things which they se to be offenses in the^, do they notwithstanding put
over the whole blame thereof, to some one thing or other? as that their
frowardness comes for lack of sleep, or want of meat, etc. For love cannot
ryfle into the evil, to be musing and thinking much upon it, diligently
examining the wickedness how great it is that does appear in it: love cannot
stand upon it, to gather together the conjectures that may be had of great
evil to be in it. Hereby it appears that love is far from suspicion of evil,
where there is no apparent toke^ thereof, seeing it passes with such speed,
and turns the thoughts so soon from musing upon, and examining seen and
known evils, in those whom it loves.

It is also incident unto love as a true mark to discern it by, not to
rejoice in iniquity, but to rejoice in the truth. So does ye holy ghost
report of it in this place. The truth, wherein he that loves is said to
rejoice, signifies true and sincere dealing, according to the usual speech of
ye scripture: which may also be understood, in that it is set here against
iniquity or unrighteousness, as being contrary thereunto. This property of
not rejoicing in iniquity, is very fitly joined unto the former. For in that
it was said not to think evil, but friendly not to impute it, it might be
thought that love had a delight in the evil dealing of him whom she loves:
therefore is this added, that it rejoices not in his evil dealing and
unrighteousness. For these may well stand together: not to search into evil
things to withdraw his affection from the offender therein, and yet for all
that to be grieved that the thing is done. For he well understands, that
that which is done unrighteously, can not but turn to his discredit and
reproach, which he would be loath should happen unto him whom he so tenderly
loves. The most wicked man that lives, would be loath that the man whom he
loves should do any thing, which (in his judgment) could not but bring
harm or hurt unto him: and when any such thing escapes him, he is grieved
and vexed at it. If it be said against the truth of this, that when one wicked
man loves an other, yet he will rejoice at many things done wickedly and
unjustly by him whom he loves: To this it may be answered, that he
(according to the blindness and hardness of his heart) thinks not that his
such dealing will any way turn to his hurt or discredit: but thinks
rather that it will work his credit, among those men that he uses to make
account of: as for fear of punishment from GOD against him, that is far out
of sight. Hereupon it is plain, that perfect love is not to be found but
among the godly: for all other through blindness and hardness of heart,
rejoice at many things done by those whom they love, which are not sincere
and righteous: and therefore must turn to their hurt, from the hands of the
Lord: which yet they do not so much as once surmise, because their judgment
of things is not according to the word of God. Here falls down that great
pillar of Popery which cries with open mouth for love and unity, and yet
smothereth truth, righteousness, and sincerity, rejoicing and triumphing in
that, which the truth and righteousness of God set down in his word,
utterly condemns. Here also is condemned that damnable sect which terms it
self the Family of love, who upholding their love like unto the Papists, are
clean gone from the truth and righteousness of God approved by his word,
unto a righteousness approved by the revelation of their own spirit, making
the word of GOD the playnesong which their spirit may descant upon, as
seems good unto it self: but always so, that there be no melody but from
their own mouth. For they will have the word to have no soundness nor
certeintie in it self.

Hereby is all the friendship of the wicked condemned, who will have no long
liking of any, but such as will joy with them in their wickedness: for they
will not hold friendship with them, that will not lend them the credit of
their countenance, and if need be of their oath also, to help out evil
causes withal. Here also are all these detected of want of love, who publishe
abroad the infirmities of their brethren to those, to whom in no
consideration it is behouefull to be known.

Love rejoices not in iniquity, nor in unrighteous or not sincere dealing of
him whom he loves, not in the unrighteous or not sincere dealing of others
toward him. For the love which he bears toward him, forces him to
mislike of all annoyance and wrong, that happens unto him. And because of
this, he can not but with grief hear of any wrong or hard measure offered
unto him: so far is he him self from dealing evil or hardly with him. Love
rejoices not in iniquity, but it rejoices or ioyeth together with him at the
truth, or sincerity, and uprightness of his dealing: because that will turn
to his good, and have approbation and allowance even from men.

Love so laceth it self in the commendable doings of him whom it loves, and
the man that loves, takes pleasure in the well doing of him whom he loves.
Therefore, if there be true love in us, we must not only not envy the good
doings of our brethren, but we must acquainte our hearts to joy with them in
their good doing, and good report for the same.

It is a good degree of profiting to have driven away envy: but we must
proceed further, to joy with him in his well doing, and deserved commendation
for the same. For men deal well with him, when they shall justify his
sincerity by their talk and speech: which if our heart repyne at, nay if it
do not joy at it, that plainly bewrays want of love to be in us toward them.

When we shall come once to this, to joy in heart at their vprighte dealing,
that their good dealing shall be the comfort of our heart, we shall not be
able to deny them any help that is in us of counsel or admonition, that may
either encourage them to good, or withdraw the^ from that which is evil, nay,
we shall be ready to offer it unasked for: especially, when we shall
perceive some need thereof.

These things which are in the last place attributed unto love, as that it
suffers all things: it believes all things: hops all things: endures all
things: do declare, yt a loving man is of a very patient spirit toward his
brother, even in his infirmities, and that he lays his hands softly upon the
soars of him whom he loves, and desires to have them healed, having a
great burden of grief upon him self for the^, which notwithstanding love
teaches him to go under and to abide, and not deintily or impatiently and
roughly with speed to cast it off.

Likewise it is declared here, that love is of a good and easy disposition,
to believe and hope well of him whom he loves. We may not think when it is
said that love believes all things, and endures all things, that love
wants all judgment to discern: but the meaning of the holy Ghost is by
that universal note, to declare how much they are inclined that way, and
easily induced thereunto, when there is any good matter to move them therein.
As for that lightness in believing, that comes for want of wit and
judgment, it is easily discerned from that which proceeds of charity and
love.

When we shall have tried truly our dealings toward God, our dealings toward
our neighbors, and our dealings in our several callings, by these affections
which are reported by the holy Ghost to be in love, it will appear, that to
be a Christian is a rare matter, a mighty, rare, and especial work of God.
Now let us pray, etc.

The xiij. Lecture upon the third Chapter to the Galathians, and third verse.
For as many as are of the works of the law, are under the curse: for it is
written, Curssed is every man that continues not in all things, which are
written in the book of the law, to do them.
Having learned what things are to be done of us, and in what manner they are
to be done, it remains to consider, whether any man can do all these good
deeds that are commanded by the law of God, in that form and manner that he
has commanded: that is, from the ground of a loving heart, which must be
discerned to have that tender affection of love in it, by these properties
which never are wanting where love is to be found, according as of late it was
proved unto us. The Scripture is plain in this matter, that no man can fulfill
the law. In the Epistle to the Galathians, the Apostle affirms all those to
be curssed that claim righteousness for the works of the law which they
have done: and he uses this reason, to prove that all such are under the
curse: For it is written, Gal. 3.10.
(says he) Curssed is every man that continues not in all things which are
written in the book of the law, to do them: taking it for an undoubted
truth, that no man continues in doing all those things. This reason is no
reason, if the Church of Rome may be believed. It is no reason with them, to
say every man is curssed that hops for salvation from the works of the
law done by him, because the law cursseth him that continues not in all
duties of the law to do them.

For they say, that a man may continue in all things that are commanded him
in the law, to do them, in that they say a man may fulfill the law. And if
a man may continue in doing all things that are commanded, then is he free
from the curse of the law: because the law curses none, but such as
continue not in the fulfilling of all things in it.

But the holy Ghost takes that, as granted of all men, that there is no man
that continues in all things that are written in the book of the law to do
them: and therefore thinks, that he has sufficiently proved, that which he
affirmed, that all men, who lay claim to righteousness by the works of the
law are accurssed.

The Apostle affirms every man to be accurssed that seeks for
righteousness from the law: because the law deals so strictly and hardly
with man, that it cursseth every man who continues not in doing all the
things commanded in it: which the Apostle takes to be impossible, and
therevppon is bold to affirm all men to lie under the curse of the law, for
not having continued in all the duties thereof.

But the Church of Rome acquiteth them of that curse, affirming plainly,
that a man may keep the law, and continue in all the duties thereof, for
want whereof and for no other cause the Apostle did lay the curse upon every
man. It may not be omitted, that there is such contrariety of judgment
between the doctrine of the Apostle, and the doctrine of the Church of Rome,
that the Apostle should take this as granted, that no man can continue in all
things commanded in the law, and therefore all men to be accurssed: and they
of the Church to hold it as a received doctrine and approved of them all,
that a man may continue in all the works of the law, and fulfill and keep
the law: in so much as they are not ashamed to pronounce him to be accurssed,
who shall hold, that the law does lay any impossible thing upon us.

The Apostle does take it to be so plain, that no man can keep the law, that
he will not bestow any pains in the proof thereof. The Church of Rome takes
it to be so plain, that a man may keep the law, that they do accursse him,
whosoever shall hold the contrary. But it behooves us to rest in the doctrine
of the holy Ghost, which therefore holds all men accurssed that stick unto
the righteousness of works, because no man can do all those works to the
which righteousness and life is promised. And righteousness is promised, not
unto him that shall do some few works, but unto him that shall have done all
that are written in the book of the law. Neither yet unto him that for a great
time shall have done all, but unto him that shall have continued from the
beginning, unto the end of his life, in doing all the works that are
commanded in the law. Whereby it appears, that that man who shall offend
but in one thing forbidden in the law, is in so doing shut out from all hold
and hope of righteousness thereby. For he is holden accurssed by the law, that
continues not in all things that are written in the book of the law to do
them. For the law does offer us wages for our work, but so, that it refuses
to pay any penie, but unto him that shall bring all his work finished and
done: because the covenant was so: and the law deals by Indenture and
covenant and not otherwise. He shall not want hyre for his labor, that shall
have done his whole task, and all that was set and appointed him for to do.
For the Lord did covenant with us for accomplishment of those works, that were
agreed upon and set down in the law, that when we should have performed
that obedience, it might be lawful for us, to claim our wages: which is, that
he that does them, shall live in them. Gal. 3.12.
But if we should come with our work half done and half undone, or any
(even the least) part undone, the law sends us away without wages: letting
us see the condition of the obligation, which is, that he stands accurssed,
without all hope of hire from the law, that shall not continue to do all
things that are commanded. For the law will not go one jot from covenant. In
deed it will keep covenant with us, if we keep covenant with it, and bring
our whole work accomplished according to the Indenture. If a man should for
ten, twenty, or forty year, or if it were possible that from his infancy
unto his dying day, he should have been a painful workman to the law, doing
all the works thereof truly and without blame, and yet slip in one thing,
if but in one thought, even upon his dying day, he does therein forfeit his
obligation, wherein he stands bound for continuing in all the works of the law
unto the end. Curssed is he (says the law) that continues not. Gal. 3.10.
And as was said before, the law deals not but by Indenture, and therefore
looks for and will have the benefit of the obligation and the forfeiture of
the bond at our hands. If it shall be said that the good works that we have
done shall discharge us of the evil that we have done, that answer will not
be taken: there is no reason in it, nor law for it. For when we are bound to
do those works (which we say will discharge us from the evil works that
we have done) and more then they be, (for we are bound to do all, and it is
due debt of our part,) how comes it to pass, by what right or reason, that
part of payment of one sum which is due debt from us, should not only
discharge that whole debt, (it being but a part thereof) but also should
discharge us of an other bond, wherein we stand bound for the payment of an
other sum of money?

We stand bound not only to do well, but also to abstain from doing evil.
The discharge of one bond (if it were fully discharged) could do no more,
but free us from the danger of that: it can not acquit us of the other bond,
wherein we stand other ways charged. To apply it to our purpose, the bond
wherein we stand charged for doing well, being in some part answered, can not
cancel the other obligation wherein we stand bound to abstain from evil.

There is no man that has an other bound unto him in two several obligations
for two several sums of money, that will by and by after that one is
discharged, take the other by that payment to be as good as cancelled: there
is in it neither law, right, nor reason.

Much less will any man be so foolish, as when but some part of the one shall
be paid, to imagine that then he must give over, not only the claim of the
other part yet behind, but also the whole debt of the other bond, which in no
part has been discharged.

These things being considered, we shall be forced to say with the Apostle, So
many as stick unto the works of the law, are under the curse. For it is
written, Curssed is every man that continues not in all things which are
written in the book of the law to do them.

If any man shall think with him self that this reason is not sufficient to
prove all accurssed, because every one that does not continue is accurssed,
imagining that a man may continue in all things: let him examine him self by
every commandment in every several duty thereof: adding thereunto the
properties of love, and considering whether his affection may be proved by
those effects, to bear love unto the law and the duties of the law, or
otherwise: joining with all his continuance in every thing, even in the
thoughts of his heart: and then, no doubt, it will be manifest unto him
self, that he is far from that righteousness which the law requires,
and he by it is bound to perform it. He shall then see, that he him self
is far short of that number of works which have promise of life made unto
the workers thereof, when they shall have accomplished those works in that
number of deeds, and that loving manner of doing, which ye lord requires:
especially if that prouiso be remembered, that there must be continuance without
interruption, both in the deeds and manner of doing, even unto the end.

Moreover, the punishments in this world which the godlyest that ever lived
have not been altogether free from, declare that no man keeps the law. For
the law does not only promise freedom from punishments, but also plenty of
al manner of blessings in the frut of our body, in the fruit of our ground, in
the increase of our kyne, cattle, flocks of sheep, in our coming in, in our
going out, in all that we take in hand, in causing all that rise up against us
to fall before our face. etc. But ye godliest man that ever lived, was never
free from all those punishments that there are appointed for the transgressors
of the law, nor yet blessed with all those blessings in all things which are
promised to them that keep the law: Deuteronomy. 28.
and therevppon we may safely conclude, that the godliest man that ever lived,
did never fulfill the law. For then surely the Lord would have stood
steadfast to his promise, both to have procured all these blessings promised
unto him, and also to have kept every part of those punishments from him,
which are appointed for the transgressors of the commandments of God.

Romans 1.18
In this manner does the Apostle prove that righteousness comes by the
mercies of GOD taken hold on by faith, because the wrath of GOD is revealed
from heaven, against all unrighteousness and ungodliness of men, withholding
the truth in unrighteousness: proceeding to the punishment of the Gentiles* to
declare what did befall them, declaring also as concerning the Jews, that the
name of GOD was evil spoken of for them, that calamity was in their ways,
and that they had not known the way of peace, taking his ground from the
punishments that light upon them, to prove that they did hold the truth in
unrighteousness, that their obedience did not answer unto their knowledge
which they had of GOD, that they could claim nothing in respect of their
deeds, which the Lord from heaven had reproved, by punishments brought in
upon them. And therefore he does strengthen his former affirmation, that the
just man shall live by faith, which was his purpose to prove unto them, and
unto the which end he directs all his speech in those four chapters.

In like manner, Romans 5.12 14.
the Apostle proves to the Romans, that all men had sin, (even children
that did never commit any actual offense,) because death (which is the
punishment of sin) did take hold upon all.

This one punishment therefore, if there were no other, may suffice to prove,
that no man ever did keep the law, because death which is a punishment for
transgressing the law does seize upon all men, of what estate, degree, or
years so ever.

It is the reason of the Apostle in that place, that because all had sinned,
therefore death came upon all: providing by the dealing of GOD against man in
punishing of him, that man had dealt against GOD, in transgressing of his law
and commandments: nay, providing (which is yet more,) that because GOD
punished al men, therefore every man has offended against him in
transgressing his laws and commandments: so that there is no man that can
say he has or does fulfill the law.

For if it might in truth be uttered of any man, that he were able to fulfill
the law, it might in like manner as truly be affirmed and hoped for, that
the same man should never dye or change this corruptible estate.

Wherefore then serves the law? May it stand with the righteousness of GOD
to command any thing that we can not do? Or to make promises of life, for the
keeping and observing of that, which he knew assuredly we could not
perform?

First, that the Lord might righteouslye require that kind of obedience at
our hands, though it were not possible for us to perform it, may be proved
hereby: because we should have had power to have performed it, if we had
continued in that estate that he had left us in.

Our sin therefore and weakness by the mean of sin which is our own
offense, can not now make that unrighteous in GOD which before was righteous.
Our unrighteousness and sin can not make us less indebted unto GOD then
before we were.

Is it not blasphemy to say, that because we had offended more, therefore the
justice of GOD should be less then before it had been? We confess it was
just before the fall of man to require all these duties at our hands, because
he had given us power and ability, to be able to perform them. And can our
sin so pull in the justice of GOD, that now it shall no longer be lawful
for him to keep the same rule of equity which he did observe before?

Moreover, who can let the Lord who is indebted unto no man, to promise
eternally life under what deeds or couenauntes so ever seem good unto him?
Shall it be unlawful for a man who has some portion of land to sell, to say
unto a poor man, (who is not able to give half so much as he does offer to
sell it for, and as it is worth in deed,) Thus much I mean to have for it
of him who so ever shall enjoy it?

Is it unlawful thus to price it, because the poor man is not worth so much
as will purchase it? Does his poverty make the land of less value, either
else make it unlawful for him to require any thing like as the goodness of
the ground does deserve?

No man will think this to have any equity or right in it. No more surely
has this other: that our poverty and want should make it unlawful for the
Lord, to esteem the treasures of his kingdom above all the obedience that
we can perform, and to set them at a greater price then this poverty and
want that we are in, shall ever be able to reach unto.

If it be further demanded what meaning the Lord had in promising life unto
us, for doing of that which he knew we never could perform and bring to
pass, it is to be answered: that the Lord did it, to let us (who are so
well persuaded by the nature of our own ability) see clearly into our
poverty and want, how great it is: that we might have true trial within
our selves, how greatly we are beholden unto the free mercies of GOD in Jesus
Christ. When we shall have seen plainly by the law, how unable we are to
perform, that there is required to be done of so many as hope for wages by
reason of their work, and that if we will lay claim to the mercyes of GOD
for our works, we remain accurssed for every sin and offense against the
law committed by us: because it is the written sentence of the law, that He
is curssed that continues not in all things that are written in the book of
the law to do them. Then not from the bare speech of our mouth, but from the
true trial of our heart, we are sent to the mercies of GOD alone, to stick
wholly unto them, acknowledging all our goodness to proceed from thence alone,
and are compelled by the sense and feeling of our own wantes made known unto
us by the law, to let pass all that opinion of our own works which we before
were so well persuaded of. As if some impotent and lame child, that were in
deed able to do nothing toward the earning of his liueing, (being
chargeable to his father, not only for him self, but also for one that should
give attendaunce unto him:) should in the foolish persuasion of some trifleing
work that he does, persuade him self that he is so far from chargeing his
father, that he is become very helpful unto him, bringing in a great portion
of that whereby the whole family is maintained: whereupon the father sets
him to some work, promising to give him wages for it, as he does unto
day-labouring-men, that the overplus of his charges may redounde to his own
profit alone. When the foolish impotent child sees by good experience, that
he is not able to do any thing to the maintenance of his liueing, then he
is forced to acknowledge his fathers liberality, and to confess his
undeserved goodness toward him, which before he made no reckoning of,
pleasing him self in the foolish persuasion of his own earning, until by
good trial it has been proved unto him to be nothing.

In like manner the Lord our GOD, willing that we should take our selves as
we are in deed beholden to his mercy, and only cleave to that, is
constrained to bring us from this folishe persuasion of our deseruings and
earninges by our own works, (the persuasion whereof keeps us from
magnifying of his mercies as we are bound:) and to set us to work for wages,
appoynting us hyre for labor, and wages for a certain number of works:
wherein when we shall have taken trial of our own insufficiency to
maintain our selves, we shall be forced to lay hold of his alone mercies, and
in true humility acknowledge the benefit thereof, which was a principal end
that the LORD did look at, in loading us with that so great labor of the
law, and exactinge a continuance in every work thereof, so straightly at
our hands.

For the promise to be received to mercy in the merits of Christ alone, was
made four hundredth years and more before the law, which came in to drive us
by due experience of our selves, to stick wholly unto the bounty of that his
mercy: which thing to be so, he Apostle proves by the nature of the law
that was given.

For such a law was given as (by means of our weakness) could not give
life. And therefore sure it is, that the LORD meant not that we should look
for happiness from the law and the obedience thereof, but wholly from the
mercies of God in Christ.

If there had been a law given (says the Apostle) which could have given
life, surely righteousness should have been by the law: Gal. 3.21.
But the Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by the
faith of JESUS CHRIST should be given to them that believe. Wherefore the law
was our Schoole-maister to bring us to CHRIST, that we might be made
righteous by faith.

The Apostle says, that if there had been given such a law as could have
given life, righteousness should have come by the law.

Sure it is, that the want which was in the law to give life, was not in it
self: for it did promise life unto them that kept it, which promise made by
the LORD to the keepers of the Law, it were blasphemy once to imagine that
he would not, or could not, perform.

Therefore the want that was in ye law to give life comes wholly of our
infirmity: by reason of the weakness that is in fleashe and blood, as it is
written to the Romans: Romans ^.3.
That that which was impossible to the law, in as much as it was weak,
because of the fleash, GOD sending his own son in the similitude of sinful
fleash, and for sin condemned sin in the fleash.

Great is the opinion that fleashe and blood has of it self, when the Lord
is constrained to bring a looking-glass of his law for us, before we can be
brought to judge rightly of our selves.

Great is the credit of our own deserving and earning by our well doing, when
the Lord to pull us from it, is forced to putt us to the trial of an
impossible work. Hardly are we brought from the opinion of our own wealthy
estate, when the Lord cannot be believed of us: telling us the contrary,
before he has laid before us in his accounting book, our several parcels
of debte.

A Christian therefore is taught by the end that GOD had in giving of this
law, to learn how hard a thing it is to lay down all lyking of him self,
and opinion of well deserving for his deeds, in as much as the Lord is driven
to reckon with us particularly, and prove unto us by plain evidence yt we are
worse then nothing, before we can be made to let go the opinion yt we have
once conceived of our own good estate. Therefore whosoever means to depend
truly upon God, must by the often sight of him self in the law, be weyned
from the opinion of his own doeings, while that in seeing his deformities so
much in every part (by means of the sundry and several duties that are
commanded,) he be compelled by good trial to acknowledge the benefit of his
blood, whereby they are wyped away. For it is the true trial of our selves,
that makes Christ to be of any reckoning with us. It is the true misliking of
our selves that causes us to like of him. How necessary then is it for us,
not only to acknowledge a kind of debte, but to see the several parcels
thereof in every commandment growing to such a great sum, as should offer
just occasion to think highely of him, who has brought us a free discharge,
for these so many and sundry bills of debte.

Let us learn then often to go unto ye counting book of our God: to see in
every commandment the great debt that we are drawn into, that we may have
occasion known to our selves to be very great, why we should wholly beetake us
to the mercyes of our God. It falls out oftentimes, that a man who is
deeply in debte, for want of earnest consideration had of the several su^mes
and parcels of the same, may take it to be no great benefit to be discharged
thereof: but when the particulars be summoned and brought in, and in the whole
thereof appears to be a great matter to discharge, he begins to change
his mind, and to take him for a special friend that would offer to answer
it: even so it comes to pass with us, while in general words of course we
confess our selves to be sinners, and therefore indebted unto GOD, but yet
never truly consider by true trial of our selves in every commandment, what
the particulars are whereof the general arises so great.

We make no great account of the mercies brought by Christ for the discharge
thereof, because the greatenesse of the debt and danger, for want of summing
the particulars, is not truly known nor rightly considered of: which is the
thing that makes a right reckoning both of our own want, and also of his
worthiness, in releasing us from so great danger and debte,

By this we may clearly perceive, that so many as shall not often look to
their lives by the law, do neither know what wretchedness is in them
selves, nor yet what mercy is in Christ.

For being ignorant of the several parcels, they do judge amiss of the
whole, and therefore of the greatness of that benefit that has discharged
all. Those men that are not acquainted with the often sight of their several
sins by the law and commandments, may fitly be compared to a man that
has some sore in his body which he discerns by some little hole appearing in
the skin, yet so as he makes nothing of it, neither thinks to be any
great benefit to be cured thereof: for it appears to him to be very
little, by reason of the small quantity of skin that is broken: but after yt
it being searched and lanced, there is known to be so much dead fleashe
about it, as (being taken out) makes the hole ten times greater then
before: then he begins to think what danger he is in for the decay of
his whole body, if that part be not well healed, and therefore takes it for
a great and singular benefit to be cured thereof, which before he did
nothing at all esteem,

No less necessary is it for us by searching into our several corruptions,
by every commandment, to cut away the dead fleashe of carelessenesse and
good lyking of our estate, or at the least of findeing no great lack in it,
which hinders the true enterteyning of the free mercies of Christ.

For it is the burden that we feel of sin by the law, which makes grace
sweet and acceptable unto us: and they that be laden with the weight of
sin, be those whom the Lord has promised to ease, as it is written in
Matthew: Come unto me all ye that are weary and laden, Matt. 11.2^
and I will ease you.

For what are they that do not well perceive in what a miserable condition
they should be without him, can never rightly esteem of him.

One contrary makes an other better known. Liberty is never so sweet, as
when it comes immediately after bondage. One day of liberty is more made of
while the burden of bondage is fresh in memory, then two days are after,
when there is no remembrance left of the former condition. It is misery that
makes a right account of mercy. It is misery that makes mercy to be
mercy. The law must let us see our misery, that we may have right regard of
mercy. If it were so expedient for Paul to have the messinger of Satan to
buffet him, lest he should be exalted out of measure for the abundaunce of Gods
gifts, that praying often that it might depart from him, he could not be
heard to have it taken clean away, 2. Cor. 12.7.8.
as appears to the Corinth. how necessary is it for us, that are in much
more danger then he, to be exalted with the liking of our selves, to be kept
humble with the continual sight of our infirmities in the law, that we exalte
not our selves against the free grace of our God?

Job. 33.16.17.
In the book of Job it appears, that the Lord, to hyde the pride of man,
usually brings them into some one great affliction or other, and that sundry
times. Job. 33.29.
For there it is said, that GOD will work thus twice or thrice with a man,
that he may turn back his soul from the pit. For these are the words of the
text in that place.

This doctrine utterly overthrows them, that rest in their works: looking
for righteousness and justification, from their own deseruings and good deeds,
because they have kept the law of God in their own opinion, and therefore may
justly lay claim to eternal life for those their good deeds.

This doctrine also condemns all secure men, that have no sense of sin: For
the law should so lay open unto us the soars of our sins, that the very
sight thereof might send us to Christ. For the end of it is so to charge us
with our own woeful estate, that we may be driven to give over ye strongest
hold that we have, which is the opinion of our selves, and fortify our
selves in Christ and in his mercies alone. It is the greatest work of the
Lord to win this hold at our hands: yet if we remain in it, we are but dead
men and cast away every one of us. The Lord therefore meaning to hyde us in
his mercies, and there to make a sure and safe harboroughe for us, does shoot
off this warning piece of the law, so to shake this ruinous hold of our own
good deeds, that we seeing in deed the weakness thereof, may take us to his
mercies alone: a hold that will hold in deed.

The practice of satan by the Law, is in extremities: for either he would
drive us to despair thereby, or else touch us not at all therewith. But we are
learned out of the word of God, that the office of the law is to join us to
Christ: and to keep us from both these rocks of security and despair
which are two dangerous rocks, and therefore needful for all men to take
heed of, in this voyage of Christianity. For either of them both, does
threat to make shipwreck of our salvation.

Let us therefore require of the Law to do that which unto it apperteineth:
that it would so let us see our selves, that we be no longer careless of our
estate: which must needs be, until that warning piece have awakened us and
scared us out of our selves. But if it shall presume to deal further with us to
drive us to despair, remember yt that is more then it has in commission: for
ye law is charged with no more save this: so to humble us, that Christ may
receive us. For as an evil body must be prepared, before the physic that
shall do good must be ministered, so must the law by true humbling of us, and
purging these hautie humors that we be full of, make way for the medicine of
his mercy to work well upon us. This doctrine gives God his true mercy: for
to give unto them that be unworthy, is a thing worthy and beseeming God, Dare
indignis, res mage digna Deo. It gives unto him true justice: for it ascribes
unto him such justice and righteousness, as no righteousness that is found
in man is able to stand with all, but must yield and give over. But the
doctrine of the Church of Rome, offends both against his mercy, and
justice: ascribing neither perfect mercy, nor righteousness unto God.

For it is no mercy to help him that has deserte in him self to be helped,
that is justice. Neither is that justice perfect and beseeming GOD, that man's
can match withal, and stand without check before it. That lifts man too
high, and abaseth God too low. The law then teaches us true humility, and
lets us see that it was the free and undeserved goodness of God, that has
begone whatsoever holiness and righteousness of life is in us. Moreover, when
we shall be assured that we have very well profited in Christianity, it is also
necessary for us to behold our selves often in the law and commandments of
God, thereby to see what infirmities are still in us: that the Lord may have
the praise of his undeserved mercy, as well for continuing his graces
undeservedly, as for beginning the^ without any our desert. For when we shall
perceive by true trial in our selves, what just occasion the lord has offered
him on our part, to stay, or rather utterly to give over his merciful dealing
toward us, we must acknowledge even from our heart, yt the Lord has taken the
occasion to continue his graces toward us, as well as to begin them in us,
from his free mercies alone: and so from an humbled heart yield unto him no
less praises for continuing, then for beginning true holiness in our hearts:
that he may have (which by good right does apperteine unto him,) the whole
glory of our new birth and regeneration.

What horrible wickedness were it with the Chuche of Rome to part the praise
of our Christian conversation, between God and us, which is wholly due unto
his undeserved grace? according as it is written in the Epistle to the
Philippians: It is God that works in you, both the will, and deed: even of
his good pleasure. This is spoken unto them that had begone and continued also
some good time in Christianity, yt they should continue in fear and
humility: because God wrought in them even of his own good pleasure, and not
at the deserte of their obedience: which may soon be perceived to be true, if
we shall examine our selves by the Law and commandments of our God, which
thundereth out curses against him, that shall not continue in all manner of
obedience unto the end. The law being looked truly upon, will let us see
much required and commanded, and yet unperformed of us: much forbidden, yet
for all that done of us: and therefore many curses due unto us, by our own
deseruinges: so that we shall be forced to confess the greatness of his
kindness, that continues through so great unkindness of ours.

We may conclude then, that in those who have begone in simplicity and
singleness of heart to serve the Lord, the law has great use: and the
often sight of themselves therein, is very necessary, not only to be humbled
under the freeness and vndeseruednesse of his grace, but also under the
greatness of his goodness: which is so much known to be the more, as our
deserte is known and perceived in our selves to be the less: so much the
more tried to be mighty, as it is well perceived not to have been beaten
back by so great force of our sin, as we are well privy unto (by trial had
of our selves in the law) to have stood in the way against it. Therefore, to
conclude this part: the law and commandments of God truly beholden and
considered, do teach us to give unto God, the honor that is due unto him, as
well for the free and undeserved beginning, as for the free and undeserved
continuing of his mercies toward us: that he that will glory, may glory in
the Lord.

Moreover, this use we have of the law of God, that by it we are truly
directed into the way of life, which of our selves we could never have learned:
and so, forewarned of these by-ways of our own devising and devotion, which
lead unto destruction. For it can never be lawful, that the rule to serve and
please a master by, should come from his servant, who is to please, and not
from the master himself who is to be pleased. And therefore miserable should
our estate have been, if we should have imagined, that the rule for us to
serve and please God by, were to be taken from our good intent and well
meaning: and not from ye Lord our master his good pleasure and liking. If a
master should not have prescribed his servant what to do, or to leave undone,
there were more to be said for his good meaning, although it did go from the
good liking of his master, which was not uttered unto him: but when the
master shall make known his will and pleasure by his word, there is no
excuse left unto good intent or good meaning, when his pleasure made known
and declared unto the servant from his own mouth, shall be neglected and not
accomplished by him.

The law therefore (being the will of our maisster uttered from his own
mouth) teaches us, truly and safely to serve him: and stops up that
dangerous pit of our good intent, devotion, and good meaning: a dangerous
pit to fall into at any time, but now most dangerous when we have learned
what is good devotion and good meaning, even from the Lords own mouth.

There is also an other singular benefit which we have by the law, and
several commandments of God, which does remedy a mischief that is over rife
in these days. Many not of the worste sort of men, content themselves
generally to have a liking of the word of God, and a general good meaning
toward his commandments, but never travel to approve their hearts before
GOD by profiting and goeing forward in the several duties of every several
commandment which is well provided for in the law, where we are charged
with several duties unto GOD, and also unto man: so as the neglecte of any
duty set forth by the law, redoundeth to the contempt of the Lord who is
the lawgiuer. The often perusing therefore of the several commandments, do
bring us from christianity pretended in general profession and meaning unto
Christianity approved in particular practice of several duties: drawing that
vain general profession and liking unto particular and several well doing.
It were a lewd practice of a servant, to pretend good liking of any thing
that his master should command, yet never to put his hand painefully to the
executing of his several charge. There is nothing so common among many
professors of the word, as to uphold the credit of professing the Gospel,
and favoring it, not with careful following after the things given by name,
and particularly in charge unto them, but only with their general liking or
rather their not misliking thereof: as if this were good service, to give our
master leave to command as seemed good unto him, so we might be at liberty
to practice and do as much as like us. It is a Christians profession to
uphold Gods honor, in what thing soever it is assaulted: and there specially
where it is most assaulted in any, and he most weak to resist: which kind of
warfare as it is the best, so is it well mainteyned by this light of ye law.
For there we se by often and true examination, which of ye walls of Gods glory
are most battered in us, and beat upon by ye adversaries power: whereby if
there shall be any care in us, we shall be provoked to bring all the help that we
have or can come by, to that part, to strengthen it withal.

For to what purpose were it, for us (the enemies entering in at one part of
the house upon us,) to let go the care of that, and there to keep watch and
ward, where there is no assault made against us? As if satan should sore
assault us with covetousness, and labor to enter there, breakinge down the
walls of sobriety and temperaunce in these earthly profits, (which we
should use so soberly and temperantly as if we used them not: and we doubting
no harm from thence, should convert all our munition and defense, to uphold
the walls of gentleness, love, and meekness, when as in deed we are not
assaulted with wrath or displeasure. Were not this a woeful kind of war, to
lay open where we are assaulted: and to be fenced on those parts where we are
not once attempted? Were not that a slender victory, for that man to brag,
that he has not one wound upon his legs, whose head and shoulders have
borne off all?

It cannot be denied, but many that go for Christians, boast themselves
greatly of such kind of victory: that their legs are safe, because some
gross evils, as reuengement or plain oppression has not prevailed against
them, when notwithstanding their head is yet bleeding with ye strokes of
ignorance in GODS word, or carelessness of his glory, and their shoulders
full of the scarres of covetousness, or such other like grievous wounds.

This mischief is redressed by the law, by the light whereof we clearly
perceive, where the force of the adversary lies soarest upon us: that we may
turn our prayers and all spiritual armor to that part especially: So shall
our prayers not be cast off without care at adventure and by custom, but
being both warned of great danger, (which without the alarm of the law we
would not have feared) and also having warning to what place the adversary
directs his power, our prayers may carefully and directly stand against it.
Now let us pray unto our Heavenly Father, that we may learn by the Law
both to be humbled under his mercies, and also to be directed unto his own
good pleasure and will to the praise of his name, and our own everlasting
comfort, etc.

The fourteenth Lecture upon the third Chapter of S. John verse 16.
So God loved the world, that he has given his only begotten son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish but have everlasting life.
AFter the knowledge of the Law and the use thereof, it is necessary to
speak of Christ (who is the end of the law) how by faith he is received
both to justify us from the curse and rigor of the law: and also to
sanctify our hearts to such a liking of those duties yt there are appointed to
be done, as brings with it the careful attending upon the doing thereof.
This doctrine has been somewhat touched in the law: but a more plentiful
discourse thereof is yet required, where the matter may be laid open more at
large then hitherto we have heard of. For the perfourmance whereof, this portion
of Scripture that now I have read unto you promises very much.

Wherein we may understand, that the first spring and founteine of our
salvation is the love of God. That is the first cause, the principal ground,
and chief beginning of all our happiness, and therefore it is set down here as
the cause why Christ was given for our sins. So God loved the world, says
the text, that he gave his only beegotten son.

The tender affection and love of God toward us, is placed before that great
gift to commend the goodness of it. For not so much the gift, as the mind
of the giver is wont to be considered. This is noted by the holy Ghost, with a
special note of commendation in these words. 1. John. 4.10
Herein is that love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his
son to be a reconciliation for our sins: Likewise in the Epistle to the
Romans. Romans 5.15.
There is set against the single transgression of Adam as an over match, the
grace of God, and the gift in grace, or by grace. The benefit and medicine of
Christ his obedience, was sufficient for the wound of Adam his transgression,
to make it whole withal: then remains as an advantage or overplus, the grace
and goodwill of the Father, wherein this medicine was lapped and closed up,
which is the cause why he makes a special note of the grace of God, and of the
gift in grace, or by grace. These things are diligently to be observed: for
they are the grounds of much good doctrine that is established strongly
hereby.

When we consider what that was yt first turned ye favor of God toward us, we
may not begin at ourselves, (as if it had come of our works preparing ourselves
for him, and addressing ourselves toward his obedience) we may not begin at
our merits: nay, we may not begin at the work of our redemption, and the
merit of Christ, to make that the first thing that ever turned his heart
toward us. For here it is affirmed by the holy Ghost that he loved us, and
therefore gave his only begotten son for us. When we come to the meriting of
Christ, we must not look upon the virtue of it without the good will and
favor of God, wherein it was founded, and from whence it has the worthiness
and merit that it has. So far off then are our own works, from bringing
their deserte with them, and opening by themselves the gates of his goodness:
that the good will of God the father prepares the way even for the merit of
Christ his passion. Our own works come short of being the first that has
commended us unto God, when both the good will of God the Father, and the
merit also of Jesus Christ have been there before them in our behalf. Let
men therefore cease to say or imagine that their own works were the first
that ever spoke one good word for them, when it is so assured by the word of
God that they have had friends in that court that have done for them when all the credit of their own doeings was utterly rejected and could not be heard.
Whenever therefore we seek out the chief cause and the first spring of our
blessedness, let us come to the love of God.

For it is said, that God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten
son, etc. Let us take heed of beginning at our selves, and our own doings.
For (as has been said) it was the love of God that did begin all our
blessedness: yea, and that even then, when we were enemies unto him: and
therefore far from deserving any good thing at his hands: which thing
commends his love, above all the love and affection that is to be found in
the world. For who has ever been known (the Son of God excepted) to give
his life for his enemies? Therefore does the holy Ghost upon just cause
affirm, that the love of God toward us, is herein set out and commended
above all love and affection that we have heard of: because while we were yet
sinners and enemies unto him, Romans 5.8.
Christ died for us.

The scripture bears record that Christ died for the ungodly: but (as it is
there affirmed) he is scarce to be found that will die for a good man. What
good man has ever been found that would have such compassion, as to offer
himself to die for a godless person? The Son of God gives his life for
ungodly men. Meruell not at these words, neither think there is any thing too
much spoken in this matter. For in that Chapter it is said plainly, that
Christ died for the ungodly, for sinners, for his enemies, and al to commend
the greatness of his love. It will be granted of all men, that in deed
before the death and passion of Christ, we were godless, ungodly, enemies to
God, without any hope of a better life: But all men are not persuaded, that we
do now come such men into the world and continue so: until by the special
grace of God working with his word we be reclaymed and reformed, which (for
that change) is called regeneration or new birthe. All men are not persuaded,
that when Christ begins Christianity in any, he does begin with his
enemy. Yet does the Apostle S. Paul affirm that he, as others, was by
nature the child of wrath, Ephesians. 2.4.5.
yt before his calling he, as other men, was dead in trespasses and sins:
walking after the course of this world, after the spirit that woorketh in the
children of disobedience: but GOD (says he) which is rich in mercy,
through his great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead by
sins, has quickened us.

There is no doubt of it, but that he who lives the most blameless life of
all men in the world, is an enemy unto God, and without all hope of any
better life before this especial woorking and calling of GOD. I do call
Christianity a special work of God, because it is not to be found in the
nature of any man, how great good thing soever it seem to have in it: but is a
peculiar work of GOD. This is a matter needful to stand upon, because it
gives unto God the commendation of that love which is not to be matched in
the world. And in denying this greatest kind of loving dealing, we darken and
diminishe the glory of his mercy, appearing so clearly and so abundantly
herein: we deal unthankfully with GOD, not giving unto him all the praise
that of duty belongs unto him. If two servants had received equal
commodities and benefits of one master, the one having been a very
profitable servant to his master, the other a very unthrift, and not only
not profitable, but also a waster of his goods: should the unthrift
sufficiently acknowledge the liberality of his master, if he should confess
that he had received as much of him as his fellowe-seruaunt, making no mention
in the mean time of his unworthiness in respect of his fellow?

Every man sees the good will of the master, to appear more in the one then
in the other, and therefore he should justly be accounted unthankful, if he
would not both think and confess, that he were more beholding to his
master then the other. For true thankfulness causes the benefit received
after a certain manner to remain still in the benefactour, by thankful
remembrance not only of the gift, but also of the manner and quality of the
gift: especially when it adds any thing to the worthiness and deserte of
the giver.

The cause therefore is great, and a part of our thankfulness unto God is in
it, to withstand with the Church of Rome herein, that not only we have had
these benefits that we have from God, but also that we have had them
contrary to our deserving: which utterly overthrows those works of
preparation, and setting our selves in a towardness for the Lord, and makes
the benefit to remain in God, by his just praise, not only for the deed
doing, but also for tne merciful manner of dealing with unworthy men: wherein
his love is tried to have more in it, then any affection yt has been heard
of amongst men, that we may truly say with the holy Ghost, not only that God
has loved the world, but as it is said in this place, So God loved the
world, noting in that word (So) no common affection, but the highest and
greatest degree of love.

By this that has been said before we do learn, that God did bear
tender affection toward his, not only before any deserving had gone before
to procure the same: but also when as yet they were enemies unto him, and
therefore the Apostle in the Epistle to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 1.3.4.7
brings the benefits of GOD to be considered in his free good purpose, and
gracious good will toward us, being the head and spring thereof: which
adds greatly even to the greatest of his benefits. And if the consideration
thereof be omitted, the whole deserving of the benefactour is not acknowledged,
nor deserved praise rendered thereunto.

When the Apostle had given praises unto God the father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, for that he had blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly
things in Christ: immediately in the verse following (which is ye 4. in number)
he has these words: As he has chosen us in him before the foundation of the
world, etc. As if his love toward us had not begone then first, when those
benefits were bestowed upon us, but that his good will (whereof those were
testimonies and fruits) was bent toward us, before the beginning of the
world: which is the cause why he lets us to see those fruits not barely
in them selves alone, but in that good will which so long before was inclined
toward us. And good will the longer it has continued, the more it is to be
esteemed: and the benefits of an old friend, and welwiller of long time, have
just occasion in the^ to be the more accounted of. It is not to be merueyled
then, why with ye gift he brings in also the good will of the giver. For the
gift is made thereby the greater, both for that the good will has been of
long time continued, and also for that it is his goodwill only, and not any
thing either had already, or else hoped for from us, that has brought all
these benefits unto us: as it follows in the next verse in express words:
That he has predestinate us to be adopted through Jesus Christ, according to
the good pleasure of his will, by whom (as it is there in like manner
affirmed) we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of
sins, according to his rich grace.

In all these places we are let to understand, that all our benefits, even the
forgiveness of sins came from the good pleasure of his will, and the riches
of his grace, and not (as has been said before) from any thing of ours,
either had already, or else hoped for. Let us learn therefore to set his love
before all his benefits, as the only cause and spring thereof. For if we shall
begin at our selves, to say that either that which already we had, as a
towardenes and preparation to goodness: or that which God did forsee would
be in us, was the cause why the Lord has appointed everlasting life for us,
and given us the graces that apperteine there unto: we darken and diminish the
greatness and goodness of the gift. Which cannot be so commendable, if it
come for the deserte of benefits, either had already, or else hoped for: as if
it had been sent from the frank and free good will of the giver, without any
such respect of any thing that should proceed from us. This is the reason why
the love of God is here set before the gift of the mediator and redeemer
Jesus Christ: and also why the benefit of election and all other, in ye first
cap. to the Ephesians are always coupled to the good will of God. For we are
given to imagine that the good things which are supposed to be in us, do turn
his heart, and purchase his favor toward us: when in very deed his good will
toward us, brought all those graces, and all the goodness that we have unto
us. In so much that both our election and redemption are recited to the Ephe.
Ephe. 1.
to have proceeded from the free good will of God, and are made not as matters
purchasing it: but as matters purchased of it. When this free goodwil of God is
not acknowledged to be the beginning of all his gifts, his gifts must of all
men yt are so persuaded be less esteemed. For it is the mind and goodwil of
the giver that does commend the gift, and makes it to be always the better
accepted. Men are wont not to esteem the gift so much, as ye mind of the
giver. Therefore the doctrine of the church of Rome has and does meruelously
pull away from the benefits of God and the deseruings thereof: because it does
not esteem of them as fruits of a well willing mind toward us, and of such
a one as-already likes well of us: because that doctrine professes that those
gifts of his in us, by our use thereof do first turn his favorable
countenance to usward. Moreover, because that love was bent toward us, when
we were bent as enemies against him: which makes his love so great yt it may
justly be said of it, So God loved the world, as being a rare kind of love, ye
like whereof we have not known. Therefore that doctrine of the church of Rome yt
gives unto man works of preparation, and making of him self fit to meet God
and to join with him in the purchase of his happiness, darckeneth greatly
this great degree of his love that was showed unto us, when we were so far
from preparing our selves to mete with him for our salvation, that we were
utter enemies both unto him and unto it. Which is so comfortable unto those
that are truly turned unto him, that it is the ground of their (...) (in their
affliction and distress) that their end (...) happy, because that if when
they were enemies they were reconciled by his blood, Rom 3.
much more being now made friends, they shall by his life be saved from wrath.

It has been declared at large, why the great love of GOD is set before the
benefit of our redemption, and the great gift of Jesus Christ given unto
us? Now it remains after the sight had of his good will, to see into the
gift, what it is that comes from so great good will. The text says, that
this gift is his only begotten son: For So God loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten son. Now we know the gift, it is his only begotten
son, which at the first sight does witness great good will, the gift
being so great as to pleasure us with his only begotten son. But yet it is
needeful that we unfold this gift, that we may understand of every
commodity that lies hid within it. ^. Cor. 1.30.
It is written to the Corinthes that Christ of GOD the father is made unto us
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. Behold the several
commodities that come with this gift of Jesus Christ, given unto us from God
the father, which every one of them is of that dignity and worthiness, that I
cannot join them all together, and in few words dispatch them: but am
enforced severally (and yet as briefly as I can) to stand upon every one of
them. First it is said here that he is made of God unto us wisdom. Christ is
become the wisdom of his servants, he teaches his chosen children true
wisdom, he is appointed of his father to be their scholemaister, as it is
written in the Gospel after S. Matthew: Matt. 17.5.
This is that my beloved son in whom I am well pleased, hear him. And to the
Colossians it is written, Coloss. 2.3.
That all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hidden in Christ. If it
shall be demanded, how it comes to pass, that so many men in the governing
of their lives and dealings, do follow their own wisedoms and their own
wit, going no further, but holding them selves well content with that, never
suspecting any want in it: and yet another sort shall so suspecte their own
wisdom and the devises of their own head, and see such want in it, that
letting it alone they betake them to the wisdom of God revealed in his word,
become paineful traueilers therein, and careful framers of their lives
accordingly: the answer is ready, that Christ (who is made of God the father
wisdom unto his) has laid claim unto the one sort and taken possession of
them as upon his own, but not upon the other. This is the cause of this
diversity, and none other thing. And therefore the Apostle proves that the
testimony of Jesus Christ was confirmed amongst the Corinthians because they
abounded in all knowledge. 1. Cor. 1.5.6


And here by ye way, it is manifest that ignorance is not mother, but
stepmother unto devotion and true Christianity. For Christ is made unto
Christians of God the father wisdom, teaching them the knowledge of his word
and will. In like manner, if it should be demanded why in their religion and
serving of God, some follow the invention of man (which has in it great show
of holiness, Col..2.
in humbleness of mind, not sparing the body, but laying much affliction upon
it: in doing many things unto God voluntarily, not being bound unto it by
him, but frankly and freely of their own accord.) And another sort
(contenting them selves with the bare and naked simplicity of Gods word, in
the worshipping and serving of him) do condemn and utterly reject all those
inventions of men and shows of holiness and humblenes of mind, which
stands so strongly upon the wisdom and reason of man: the matter is plain
and the answer soon made, Christ is made of GOD the father wisdom unto
his.

This is the cause why his servants find no wisdom but in him. This is the
reason why it seems madness and extreme folly unto his servants whatsoever is
not approved by his word, have it never so strong reasons of man's wit to
uphold it withal. It is not their wisdom: they can see no wit in it. For
Christ is become wisdom unto them, and they have learned no such thing of
him in his word. Therefore it is their wisdom to reject such wisdom.

It is a merueylous thing, that any man who has wit and reason, should
mislike that religion which has nothing else in it but force of wit, and
strength of reason. But let us cease to marvel, and begin to magnify the
goodness of that God, who vouchsafes to become wisdom unto his, teaching them
in his word another manner of wisdom, then that which is taught them of
there own wit and reason.

Here ye see then the first benefit that comes with Christ unto his, even
wisdom in his word. Do we mean to approve it before God and man, that we are
called unto the fellowshippe of Christ, and become Christians in deed? Let us
then become wise after his word. Let us give over our own wit and reason in
the gouerneing of our lives either toward God or man, and betake us to his
word, who is become our wisdom. Let the word of God dwell richely in us in
all wisdom, teaching and admonishing ourselves as we are commanded by the
Apostle. Col. 3.1^.
For if in our dealing with God or man, we like well enough of the counsel had
from our own wit, in vain is this boaste made that Christ is become
wisdom unto us. For he pulls his from the devises of their own wit in the
ordering of their conversation, unto the government of his word: letting them
understand and feel the want and wretchedness of the one, and the
sufficiency and blessedness of the other.

Christ (as you see) at his first coming changes our wisdom: this is his
work. Where is then our frank and free will unto that which is good? when it
is manifest we cannot see what is good, before Christ lighten us, who is
become our wisdom. We have no will unto any thing but that which our wit
approves, and our judgment does embrace and good things can we not in
judgment embrace and like: before Christ (who is our wisdom) shall have
changed our judgments. If Christ must open our hearts and change our
minds, before we can have true wisdom and understanding of good things
(which we must approve in judgment before we have a desire and will unto them
in our affection:) it follows necessarily yt not from our selves, but from
Christ, comes all the free will which we have unto that which is in deed
good. For we have no will unto any thing but that which we approve and like
in our judgment. We can approve and like in our judgment no good thing,
before our judgment be good. Good judgment and wisdom we have not of our
selves but are taught it of Christ, and have it with him who is made our
wisdom: therefore the desire and will unto good things, we have not from our
selves but from Christ, amongst whose gifts the very formoste is that he
gives him self unto us, when he gives us the knowledge of him self in his
word,

Christ our righteousness.
The second benefit that we receive from God the father by Christ, is
Righteousness. For it is written (as we have heard before) that he is made
wisdom unto us and righteousness, etc. This righteousness consists in two
points. The first is in discharging us of our sins. The second is in
presenting us blameless before his father, in such perfect obedience as the
law cannot reprove, nor justly charge with any want.

This is performed to us in Christ, who has satisfied in his suffering for
our sins, and wrought our full discharge: and also perfectly kept the whole
law and every commandment thereof in the behalf of us that be his. For he
being God, (and therefore above the law as Lord and giver thereof,) needed not
to have become a subject thereunto for him self. Whereby it appears plainly,
that he went under that obedience in our name and for us, and that the same
obedience of his is auaylable for us that be his: according as it is written to
the Romans in these words. Romans 5.19
As by one man his disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of
one shall many also be made righteous. The tree must be good, before the fruit
be good, and therefore we our selves must be righteous, before any good
fruit of righteousness proceed and come from us. The gift is never welcome
when we can not abide the giver: neither will the Lord have good liking of any
thing that is ours, before he shall think well of us. We are therefore
first to be settled by faith as righteous in Christ: before the Lord will take
in good part any thing that shall proceed from us. Our root was rotten in
Adam, and therefore brought forth fruit accordingly. We must therefore be
grafted into Christ, and then draw power from him to bring forth fruit that
shall be pleasing unto him, and acceptable in his sight: according as our
Savior Christ says in John. As the branch can not bear fruit of it self
except it abide in the vine, John. 15.4.
no more can ye, except ye abide in me. His servants find want of
righteousness in them selves, and therefore flee unto him for righteousness.
They see so much in the^ selves, yt they well understand that they cannot be
accepted for the^ selves, and therefore stick unto ye righteousness of an other,
which is Christ. When ye question is then whereupon arises this diversity of
judgments in men, that one persuadeth him self that the cause why he is
acceptable to God, first springs of him self, and an other number denies
all that is in him self, to have been any cause to make him accepted unto
God, and does attribute ye whole cause why he is acceptable unto God unto the
righteousness of Jesus Christ, which is become theirs by faith? from hence we
have an answer that may satisfy us, which is, that Christ is made
righteousness unto his. It is the work of Christ in them, to assure them to
be accepted for the righteousness of an other, and to give over all the hold
that they have, by the reason of any thing that they shall have done them
selves. Our natural wit and reason can not allow of that. It is apparent
therefore, that we have an other scholemaister that does teach us this
doctrine. Can one man for his good works that he has done, stand so strongly
assured in his opinion of salvation, and to be accepted for them, that he
shall offer his overplus to help other withal: and an other man (that is not
inferior unto this other, neither in wit, reason, nor good deeds) so give
over all the hope of them, that in flat denial and utter renouncing thereof,
he should lay claim only to the righteousness that an other has done, and
boast of that none otherwise, then if he should have done it in his own person?
Can this I say be thought reasonable unto any, that has not had an other
scholmaister then wit and reason to persuade him therein? Can the natural man
be persuaded that he must first be righteous, and then do righteous things:
and not rather that in doing of many righteous deeds, at length he becomes
to be accepted for righteous him self thereby? Or can a natural man be
persuaded, that his favor with God comes wholly in respect of an other his
doings, who has done him all this good: and not rather that his own doings
have done the most for him, and he that is especially beholding unto them?
This comes from an other teacher then any that we have at home: it sauoureth
not of the earth, it is from above. Cease therefore to marvel at such
diversity of doctrine, when the scholemaisters that teach are so far
differing one from an other, as heaven is from earth. The servants of God
give over their own righteousness, they find nothing in it: they do
clearly see it will not go for payment, and therefore do betake themselves
to the merits of an other. Neither do they only say, that they be
unrighteous in them selves, but with grief do find and feel it to be so
within them selves.

But howsoever they stand rotten in their own root, they are notwithstanding
strongly stayed in Jesus Christ: whose obedience they do make so great an
account of, as if it were their own performed by them selves.

Christ our sanctification,
The third thing that we do receive with Christ is Sanctification, or
holiness of life. This sanctification follows immediately after
righteousness, in the place which before I have alleged. For it is not only
requisite, that we should remain righteous by the obedience of one man once
performed: but that our whole life should continue consecrated unto the
service of him, in bringing forth such fruit as he has appointed. That
righteousness which before we have heard of is as the tree, and this holiness
is the fruit thereof. The nature of our Savior Christ was free from all
infection, not having in it any remnaunt or relic of sin, and therefore he
was sanctification it self, and perfectly sanctified. When we begin to
separate our selves from the common corruption of the world, and bend our
selves to pureness of life approved before God, this is the work of Christ,
sanctifying and working true holiness in us. For of our selves we are profane
and unholy, void of these fruits of righteousness which are wrought in us
by Christ. The cause why a number do mislike such deeds and conversation,
both in them selves and also in others, which an other sort of men do approve
and delight in, following after them, with all greediness of desire: is, for
that Christ is become sanctification unto the one sort of people, and not unto
the other, who continue in their profane and corrupt ways, not finding any
want therein: when the other sort are vexed and grieved to see such doings
abound in others, and tormented in them selves if at any time they shall of
infirmity slip into the like, not ceasing to apply the means whereby they may
get victory over them. Here arises a question necessary to be discussed,
whether righteousness be in the children of God before sanctification and
holiness of life, or good works and holy life do go before, justification
being in his, before they be acceptable unto God. Wherein notwithstanding that
which has been said already, may be thought sufficient unto any indifferent
man, yet it shall not be amiss to add some more force and strength unto it.
It is proved that righteousness goes before good works. Romans 4.6
Romans 4.6. where the testimony of David is alleged, pronouncing him blessed
and happy, to whom the Lord imputes righteousness without works.

And least any man should think this to be meant of the ceremonial works,
the very words of the Prophet are cited in the next verse following,
affirming blessedness to be in the remitting of sins unto us, and not in the
admitting of good works for us. If the Apostle do join with the Prophet in
this, that God imputes righteousness without works, then must I demand of
the adversaries, whether this righteousness imputed without works, does
exclude all works, or but some works? If it be answered that all kind of
working is not severed from this justification and righteousness, the question
is again, whether those works that stand with justification and
righteousness, go before it, or spring of it, and so come after it.

Here their answer is, we are justified without works going before, but
not without works following it, making this justification that is said to be
without works, to shut out only those works that are before a man be
justified, but not the other. For their opinion is, that we are justified by
them, whereupon it follows necessarily, that righteousness goes before
holiness of life, that good works do follow from a man justified already:
and are not sent before to justify him therewith, that was not accepted of God
as righteous, until those were performed. The Apostle is plain in this
matter to the Ephesians. Ephe. 24.5
God which is rich in mercy, even when we were dead in sins has quickened
us. etc. There were no works then that went before to quicken us, seeing it
is said, that when we were dead in sins, not only sinners, but also dead
in sins, God has quickened us.

This proves plainly, that our good works and holiness of life, did not
procure righteousness unto us, when the matter is clear that we were dead in
sins, when he in mercy quickened us. Romans 6.22
In like manner the Apostle proves, that holiness of life is a fruit of them
that be already the servants of God: but now (says the Apostle) being freed
from sin, and made servant unto God, you have your fruit in holiness and
the end everlasting life. There is no work acceptable unto God, without faith
and persuasion of his good will toward us, whether it be done at the desire
of vain glory, or at the motion and instinct of nature, judging that work to
be lawful and honest. For it is faith that does purify the heart, and the
end of the commandment is love, 1. Tim. 1.5.
but so that it be of a faith unfeigned. The tree must be good, before the
fruit can be good. Mat. 7.17.18.
For an evil tree can not bring forth good fruit. Against this it will be
excepted, that Abraham in offering of his son Isaac upon the altar (as says
the Apostle James) was justified, Iam. 2.2^
and therefore that the works of men either unrighteous before, or else but in
part acceptable, do justify them and make them rightly to be accepted of God.

It appears in Genesis, Genesis 15.6
that Abraham was justified before Isaac was borne, for the offering of whom
upon the altar, the Apostle James says that Abraham was justified. For in
that Chapter it is written, that the word of the Lord came unto Abraham in a
vision, saying: Fear not Abraham, I am thine exceeding great reward. And
Abraham said, Oh Lord God, what will thou give me, seeing I go childlesse,
Behold, to me thou have given no seed, wherefore a servant of mine house
shall be mine heir. Then the word of the Lord came unto him saying, One that
shall come out of thine own bowels, he shall be thine heir.

Moreover, he brought him forth, and said: Look up now unto heaven, and
tell the stars, So shall thy seed be. And Abraham believed the Lord, and he
accounted that to him for righteousness. By this testimony we see that
Abraham was accounted righteous, and not in part righteous, or half righteous,
but with out any addition it was said of him, that he was righteous (before he
had any son, and therefore before he could offer up his son in sacrifice,
even then, when he made complaint unto God for that he had no son, and
therefore a servant must be his heir) believing the promise that the^ was
made unto him for a seed and posterity that should come out of his own
loins, that faith was reckoned unto him for righteousness, and he him self
accepted of, as righteous before the Lord. James says, that he was justified
when his own son Isaac was offered upon the altar, and that this deed of
his, in not refusing to kill his only son for a sacrifice at the
commandment of God, did so please the Lord, that he was justified for it. In
the other place alleged, the holy Ghost affirms, that he was justified
before his son Isaac was borne, even at that time when the promise was given
forth that he should have a son, and that the believing of this good will of
God toward him herein did so please the Lord, that he accounted of him as
righteous for it. How then? Does the holy Ghost differ from him self? God
forbid. But the Apostle Saint James attributes that to the effect for being
joined with his cause, which the holy ghost in that other place gives unto the
true and original cause alone. As if one man would justify a workman, and
commend him above others for works that he has seen him do, and an other
would in like manner justify the same, but for the inward skill, knowledge,
and conceiving that he has of the rules and principles of that trade or
occupation what so ever: which skill he may discern by his speech, albeit he
never saw him work. And albeit a man may say that he is a good workman,
because his work is good, yet if a man will speak properly, he must say he is
a good workman, because his skill is good. For his good skill in that trade,
is the cause of his good workmanshippe, and the goodness thereof comes from
thence as from the proper founteine and cause.

Now every man knows that when any man is commended for his work, it is
because of the skill and knowledge that appears therein, and is joined
therewith, as the only cause and occasion thereof: Even so, because our faith
appears in our good works, as our skillful knowledge does in our skillful
workmanship: that is given to good works, which is peculiar unto faith, as
the proper cause thereof, and a man shall be called a skillful woorkman for
his skillful workmanship, when notwithstanding it is most assured, that his
skillful knowledge is before his skillful work, as also the cause thereof:
and he justly may be called skillful for it, notwithstanding he should be
kept from uttering that his skill in work many years after the perfect
knowledge thereof.

The holy Ghost therefore in Genesis, justifies Abraham as skillful for his
skill alone: and in that epistle of James he justifies him, as skilful of that
work wherein so much skill appeared. For it may be lawful unto me for the
better understanding hereof, to resemble faith by skill, and good deeds by
skillful workmanshippe, because as good workmanship has all the commendation
for the good skill that appears in it: so have good works all their praise
from the faith that has begotten them, and is necessarily joined with them.

This is also to be added, that because there is not in our works that
perfection that is required, we are constreyned to stand to the mercy of God,
and to seek refuge there by a true faith: and this is the cause why we
magnify faith, (which otherwise is imperfect as be all things that are in us)
because it applies the mercy of God unto us, whereby our sins are pardoned,
and the want that is in our work not imputed.

And for proof that the Apostle Saint James gives not that title unto
works to justify, but because of the faith which has begotte those works,
and which is joined with them, and covers the imperfections that is in them:
in the same place where he ascribes righteousness unto Abraham for offering
up his son, he says that this scripture was fulfilled: Abraham believed,
and it was reckoned unto him for righteousness, and he was called the friend
of God: So that all the commendation of this work is included in faith, and
given unto it for the faith of the doer. For other wise he should have said:
Abraham wrought, and that was received because it was righteous, seeing he had
stood upon the commendation of his works so much immediately before, and
was eue^ yet in the same matter. But he says, Abraham believed, and that was
reckoned unto him for righteousness.

They would match works with faith in justification, and the Apostle when he
speaks most of works, does shroud them under faith, saying: (after mention of
his best work) that this Scripture was fulfilled in it: Abraham believed, and
that was imputed to him for righteousness, and not received in the
righteousness and deserving of it self, and he was called the friend of God.

And in the eleventh Chapter to the Hebrews, Hebr. 11.
all the works of the godly fathers are ascribed unto faith, and by name in
the seventeenth verse of that Chapter, this deed of Abraham is fathered upon
his faith. For works are so far from justifying us, that the cause why they
them selves are justified, is in faith. Hebr. 11.6
For without faith it is impossible to please God. And in this chief work of
Abraham that now we have heard of, that Scripture of imputing righteousness
unto him, was fulfilled.

Therefore the work did not stand in any account for the worthiness thereof,
but only because the Lord did impute it unto him for righteousness: which
thing also it did not attain unto of it self, but because of faith which was
joined with it. It is to be noted, that the Apostle Saint James speaks here
but of one work (as the offering up of his son) and that work also not
done, but only purposed to be done. If therefore his meaning had been to
debate the worthiness of works, and what place they have in the purchase of
our salvation, he would have taken works not only purposed, but also
practiced: not some one work alone, but many works long continued.

Neither would he have said of that or those works, that they were imputed
unto him for righteousness, but that they wrought his righteousness, either
wholly or at the least in part. But the purpose of the apostle is to signify,
that a true faith is fruitful in good works, and is witnessed by the^, and
that it is impossible that a true faith should not be rich in good works, or
that righteousness should be without holiness of life. For it is impossible
that we receiving comfort in his mercies by faith, should not witness the same
by a life framed to the liking of him of whom we have those comforts.

The last of these benefits that we receive by Christ is Redemption, that is,
the delivery from all danger, affliction, and corruption.

It is the fruit of his resurrection to raise us out of all extremities even
from death and the grave, and to place us with his Saints in that glory that
he has purchased for us. Romans 8.23 Ephe. 1.14.
Thus is redemption taken for our fredome and delivery from our wretchedness.
For we hold not with the adversaries of god his grace, that our good deeds do
redeem us from the danger of our evil doings: neither yet that by prayers or
satisfaction whatsoever, we can deliver either our selves or other from the
danger in this life, and much less in the life to come. We confess, that
howsoever we humble our selves by repentance, prayers, and fruits of good
living, when his rod of correction is upon us, that it is only the free
benefit of Christ, to deliver from the danger thereof, and to put an happy
end unto it. We do not thank our deeds for it when we come forth of
trouble, albeit that we have plentifully brought forth the fruits of good
life. We acknowledge it to be only the work of Christ, who is made of God the
father unto us redemption, to deliver us from sin, and all those punishments
yt come unto man for it. In this benefit of Christ there appears a great
difference between ye children of God and the children of this world. For the
children of God glory in trouble, knowing that it will bring upon them
experience, and trial of god his goodness in the end, as the Apostle teaches
us. Romans 5.4
For Christ is made unto them redemption from sin and all the punishments
thereof: whereas the ungodly (how so ever in prosperity they fleshly brag
of their hope in God. Yet when affliction comes, they are without all heart,
comfort, or courage. For why, in truth they know not that Christ is made
redemption unto them, to deliver them from all that danger that comes for
sin as well as from sin it self. This persuasion causes the godly in all
their afflictions and necessities whatsoever, to stay them selves in godly
conversation, both toward God and man, with patience and assured hope of an
happy end: when as the ungodly either murmur against God, either else fall
into some one evil dealing or other, thereby to purchase their deliverance,
which is an assured testimony that they do not look to have it from the Lord.

Now we have heard what several benefits do come with Christ, and that we
do not receive him naked and alone, but according as he is given unto us from
God the father, clothed with wisdom, righteousness, holiness, and
redemption. Thus is he given unto the believers, and thus is he received of the
believers. And hereby we may clearly understand what faith is, even that
which finds all want in it self, and al plenty in Christ: that is poor at
home, and rich abroad: that in her necessity boasts, and is comfortable in
an other man's plenty: that never rests in her self nor any thing of her
own, (have she never so great plenty in respect of others) and yet is joyful,
comfortable, and well paid and satisfied with Christ in her greatest want.
For faith is not so highly commended as it is a work of ours, for so it is
imperfect as all others be that come from us: but because it gives all glory
from us unto God. Therefore has it so just commendation in the word of God,
we give the most unto it, because it gives nothing unto us, that God may have
all glory, and yt he that will glory, may glory in the Lord. We do not
exalt it above other things that proceed from us, because it does exalte us,
but because it does abase us, that Christ may be exalted, therefore do we
magnify it. For faith finds perfection in God, and imperfection in us. Faith
finds true wisdom to be in Christ, charging all the world with folly in
their wit, (be they never so wise in the opinion of men) before they be
lightened with the understanding of his wisdom set forth in his word. Faith
finds true righteousness in Christ alone, and charge all men with
unrighteousness in them selves, as withered branches proceeding out of the
rotten stock of Adam their first father, until we be grafted into Christ the
root of all righteousness.

Faith finds true sanctification and holiness of life in Christ, and
charge all men how ciuily and honestly so ever they live in the judgment of
men, to be of a profane and unholy nature and disposition, except they have
it reformed by special grace from Christ. Faith finds deliverance from all
danger in Christ, and charge the deeds of all men, with want of ability in
that behalf.

Thus we learn, that faith does find all those things in Christ, and the want
of every one of the^ in the nature of man: nay, which worsse is, a counterfeit
of every one of them deeply imprinted in us: a counterfeit wisdom of man his
wit and invention, for the true wisdom of his word: counterfeit righteousness
of our corrupt works, for the true righteousness brought and wrought by Christ
alone: a feined devotion grounded by our own good intent, for holiness, and
sanctification of life and well doing, guided and directed by his word: a
false persuasion to avoid dangers by our own satisfactions, in stead of an
assured standing to his redemption, and delivery in all our necessity and
wantes. These are the withered branches of that rotten root our old Adam: and
the nature and disposition of all men goes this way, except they be reclaymed
by Christ, as all those be (in his appointed time) that shall inherit with him
in his kingdom. In as much as we do clearly understand what is in us, before
that Christ shall call us: it shall be profitable to consider whether (after
that Christ has laid claim unto his, and given them that in truth which
before they had in show) faith does yet find any such want and lack, that
(notwithstanding such a change) it rests only in Christ, and refuses to
stand to any desert which this new obedience can claim. The Scripture is
plain, that faith finds lack and want in man, notwithstanding that he be
changed and renewed by Christ, from that he was before, and come to that
perfection that ever any man has attained unto. This will appear most plainly
in the consideration of those several commodities which (as we learned before)
ar brought with Christ. We that be Christ's, do receive wisdom from Christ, yet
is there want of wisdom in ye child of God that has received the greatest
portion thereof, 1. Cor. 13.12
according as it is written to the Corinthes. Now we se in a glass darckly,
but then shall we see face to face. Now I know in part, but then shall I
know even as I am known. We that be Christ's do receive righteousness from him
by faith, but we have such wantes in our faith while we be here, that this is
the prayer of the Church and every member thereof, so long as they live: Lord
increase our faith: I believe, Lord help mine unbelief. We receive
sanctification and holiness of life from Christ, but in that measure: that it
is the continual prayer of the church unto the end, Forgive us our
trespasses, as we do forgive them that trespass against us.

The faithful that have been delivered from many dangers already by Christ,
who is their redemption, have yet for all that many dangers and troubles
abiding for them: insomuch that it is thus written of the estate of them: Romans
8.36.
For thy sake are we killed all the day long, we are accounted as sheep for
the slaughter. And if they should escape all other, yet death will surely have
to do with them al at the last, and will not resign her right unto any. These
are plain proofs that the faithful never stand satisfied with any thing in
them selves, as being perfect in it, but always return unto their mediator
and redeemer Christ, where is the perfection of that which in small measure
abides in them selves: who has these things so perfect in him self, not for
him self, but for us: and therefore the holy Ghost does not say (which
notwithstanding in truth he might) that Christ has made us wise, righteous,
and holy, but he says that Christ is made unto us wisdom, righteousness and
holiness, adding the cause thereof in these words following: That he that will
glory, may glory in the Lord. For faith refuses to glory of any thing in
it self, finding want in all things: that it may glory in the Lord alone.
For it is no praise worthy of him, if he be but fellow with us in the work,
but when we are truly taken (as we are in deed) for nothing, and that that
comes from us as no sufficient payment, then receives the Lord the whole
right of his glory, which otherwise is clean darckened, when it is made to
patch up that which we had begun. Let us therefore never forget this, that we
do magnify faith above all that which does come from us, not simply, because
it fasteneth hard upon Christ: but because it so takes hold upon him, that
it lets go all the hold that it has of any thing in it self. We may not
therefore only consider whether we have any stay in Christ: but whether we
have such a stay, that acknowledges us unstayed in our selves, and therefore
to be vpholden by him alone. For faith joins riches to poverty, and brings
plenty unto the empty man.

Now let us pray unto our heavenly father, that his true faith may be
increased in us. etc. Amen.

The xv. Lecture upon the Gospel of S. Matthew, the 6. Chapter, the 9. and 10.
verses.
Our father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come. etc.
WE have learned already what faith is, and therefore order does require to
speak somewhat of prayer, being such a fruit and effect thereof, as cannot
be parted from it. For as faith is weak or strong, so are prayers cold or
careful, sparing or plentiful, because true prayer receives life from faith,
which without it is dead and nothing worth. And because faith quickneth
prayers, we may truly judge of faith by our prayers, cold prayers, cold faith,
few prayers, little faith, they increase and decay together, they arise and
spring up both at one time. In this treatise of prayer, before I shall expound
the petitions, that is, what things are to be asked, it shall be very profitable
to speak somewhat before, necessary for the preparing of us thereunto.

Herein the first thing to be considered is, the use and end of prayer,
which is to bring us to such trial and experience of Gods goodness toward
us: as may force us in truth to honor and praise him. For we cannot heartily
honor and praise him, of whose goodness toward us we have no certain
knowledge. And how shall we have certain knowledge and true trial of his
goodness toward us, but by receiving and tasteing thereof: and how can we
stand better assured what we have received, then by finding that given us,
which we know and well remember that we have asked and begged before at his
hands in prayer? So that prayer leads us to this certain and assured
knowledge of God his good meaning toward us, which is the founteine of all
true service and praise of God: while prayer goes in every necessity to try
for it self the goodness of God promised in his word, and brings with it a
true certificate and good experience thereof, in that his suit is granted and
he in his prayer is comforted. And this assurance of God his particular regard
and favor toward us, brings with it a serving and honoring of God in
truth. And therefore Solomon rendereth this reason why he would have the Lord
to grant the petition yt his servants should pray for: 1. Kin. 8.40
That (says he) they may fear thee as long as they live. It is his reason
also why he would have ye stranger (which was not of the people of Israel)
heard in all that he called for: that all the people of ye earth might know his
name, and serve him as did his people Israel. For it is this assured knowledge
of a special good will of God toward us, yt inclines our hearts to ye true
worshipping of him. All men know that God is good, but all men know not that
he is good unto them. All believe that he is good, but all believe not that he
is good unto them, yet is that the true faith, and therefore is prayer a true
fruit of faith yt confirms us therein: according as the Prophet David
testifies of him self, Psalm. 116.1.
that he loved the Lord because he had heard his prayers.

Our faith has need of all the helps that can be, to strengthen it withal
in temptations, and therefore this trial of it, (when we receive comfort of
our prayers, having his good will brought home unto us, and therefore by so
good experience assured us, that we can show good evidence for it) is not to be
neglected but highly to be accounted of. If God have made us many promises to
help us in our necessities, and we shall not once have sent our prayer to make
trial thereof: can we have any great hope at our need of his help, having
no hold but by his bare promises, which long time before were made unto us,
but never tried by us to have any truethe in them?

Let us not tempte the Lord, in differring this stre^gthening of our faith,
which has need of all the upholding that may be had: and all will be tried in
trial to be little enough. It behooves us to look up our evidence, for we
deal with that adversary that neither wants skill to espy his advantage,
nor will to hold it to the vttermoste: and prayer is ye which brings trial
of God his good will to us particularly, in that by prayer we are comforted and
relieved whenever we shall open our griefs and wants unto our God. For albeit
the Lord might give it us without asking, yet it is his will that we should
ask, that we may know we have been heard: and by that means receive
assurance of his goodwil toward us. It has been said before that it is one
thing to be persuaded that God is good: and another to be persuaded that he is
good to us, it is one thing to be persuaded yt God gives all things, and an
other that he gives them to us as a pledge of his special goodwill and
meaning toward us. The faith of God his children persuadeth them of goodwil
from the Lord, meant particularly to the^: and in their prayers they receive in
outward benefits no otherwise: but as special tokens of his favor, who now
is atone with them and tenderly does embrace them. And ye Lord has appointed
prayer to be a help unto our faith in this part, that a man obteining by
asking, might know that he were of some reckoning with the Lord: and might
bring out this proof against those temptations that should shake his faith, in
calling it into question whether he were regarded of the Lord or otherwise. We
see that David strengthens his faith in the hope to be heard for his present
suite, Psalm. 4.1.
because the Lord had confirmed his good will toward him in hearing his prayers
before. Sure it is that if the Lord will give us things unasked, much more will
he give us yt which we have intreted him for. And if we get no comfort that
way, our hope is small. This help of our mistrustful disposition, that we
should come by benefits through entreaty and prayer (where we may plainly
see that we are greatly regarded and not without reckoning before him, in yt he
vouchsafes to answer us in our motions made unto him for our welfare) is a
singular use and end of prayer, which merueilously adds to the force of
faith. This singular use and special end of prayer are they deprived of that
use to pray unto God in an unknown tongue. For if any particular benefit be
given them, they know not whether it has come at their entreaty or no,
because they know not what they have prayed for: and so receive they no sure
and certain testimony of ye Lords help. It is a singular blessing, to have
his goodness toward us particularly in assured experience. It will be answered
for them yt pray in an unknown tongue, that it skilleth not though they them
selves know not what they pray, in as much as God knows all things: and
therefore understands it. This answer were to some purpose, if the
institution of prayer were in regard of God alone without consideration of us,
but prayer is appointed (as we have already heard) yt our weakness of faith
might have as it were sensible hold thereby, and such as would suffer no
exception to the contrary, in that we have felt him help us there wherein we
have requested his help by name and special request: so yt there has been
friendly communicating together, we asking, and he giving that which we have
asked: we requiring, and he subscribing unto yt request. As for those yt pray
in a tongue unknown, how can they assuredly know that he favors the^, in
grau^ting that which they have required? when they know not what it is yt they
asked, and therefore their faith does receive no strength by their prayer yt can
stand in any trial. This use also of prayer which consists in bringing help
to our faith, reproves those that pray only in some universal speech, and
do never particularly and by name offer to God the redres of any thing that
does vex them. The example may be this: some only in general words use to
pray yt God would bless them, or yt God would make them his servants, or yt he
would keep evil from them. But they are not accustomed to pray for his blessing
in any special causes which they are destitute of: neither come they to God,
to crave his grace to serve him in this or that particular obedience, whereunto
they are bound, and yet know themselves to be wanting therein, and therefore
can they see no special fruit of their prayers to help their faith with
all. We do see then apparently, that this fruit and effect of prayer, to
strengthen our faith in the persuasion of God his good will toward us: is a
marvelous profitable mean to encourage us to prayer, being so strong a
fortress of our faith.

The second thing that is to be required of him that shall pray in truth, is,
to bear a good affection, and hearty love and good will to the word of God,
to see the Lord honored thereby, either in duties commanded of him, and
performed: or else in promises made by him, and fulfilled, The Lord reigns
by his word, and his honor is acknowledged when that is reverenced, he is
magnified when it is obeyed, he is justified and honored when things fall out
according to the truth of his word. For by his word has he made himself
known always, 2. Peter.
and by that as he made the world, so has he appointed to govern and judge
ye world, making himself glorious in performing ye truth thereof. And therefore
we seeking his glory and honor in our prayers, as we must do, (if we shall
pray to any purpose,) must join with his word in them, either praying to
have some grace given us, to walk in some duty that he has commanded, that
in that duty he may be honored: or else in our affliction to find some
comfort: (according as he has promised,) that he in the truth of his promise
may be glorified.

And because the prayer that is approved must proceed from the desire of the
heart, longing and lusting after that which in prayer he desires: therefore is
there in the hearts of them that pray aright, a love, liking, and hearty
affection, that longs hungerly after the righteousness and truth of the
word to see it established and vpholden: and namely after that duty or
promise, that in his prayer he desires to have performed. As there is love
toward the law where true prayer is, so is there grief and mysliking for the
transgressing of the law to be found in like manner within his heart, that
prays in truth unto the Lord. For if the keeping of the law be unto any
his delighte, the transgressing of the law in like manner must be his grief.
It is plain then, that true prayer must not only be directed by the law and
commandment of God, but also must join in desire and affection with the same.

The glory of God is coupled to his word, and therefore must prayers (being the
desire of the heart) go in desire after the same, according as we have the
example and practice of the Prophet David at large in the Psalms, Psalm. 119.
where it is apparanr that he places all the honor of God in his word,
sometimes praying to have his petitions granted that he might keep his
commandementes, some times taking comfort, and assuring himself that he should
he heard, because he had a love unto his law: plainly affirming (as appears
in that Psalm) that salvation is far from the ungodly because they seek not
his statutes, Verse. 155.
wherein his glory consists: as we may learn if we go no further for proof
thereof, then unto the Lords prayer it self. For after mention made of
hallowing of his name, and coming of his kingdom: there follows the request
of doing his will here in earth: because his honor, glory, and dominion is
seen in the obedience to his will revealed in his word.

Herein we may clearly see sentence given against all such prayers, as
(proceeding from a heart ignorant of the word of God) go after their own good
devotion which is the honoring of them selves: and not after his good will
revealed in his word, which they are utterly ignorant of. Where we may clearly
see what account is to be made of Popish prayers, where the word of God is
not known of the most, and not regarded of the rest: holding it for a sure
principle that ignorance is the mother of devotion.

To all such prayers the Lord does answer, (according as it is written in
the Proverbs: Prou. 1.28.
) They shall call upon me, but I will not answer: they shall seek me early, but
they shall not find me: because they hated knowledge, and did not choose the
fear of the Lord. A just recompense of reward, not to be heard when they in
their distress shall by prayer speak unto the Lord, because they refused to
hear the Lord speaking to them in his word.

Here also are the prayers of all such reproved (notwithstanding they have
knowledge of ye word, and follow not their good intents in praying unto the
Lord) as have no affection, joy, delight, nor good liking to see the law and
the duties thereof performed in their life: nor yet any vexation or grief in
themselves for transgressing the same. For prayer is a desire of the mind, and
therefore most desirously affected after that which it seeks, which is the
law and commandment of the Lord.

Whereby it appears also how fruitelesse those prayers are that come but from
the lips alone, the heart being altogether holden with other matters, and
occupied wholly about other delights. The third thing that is required to
prayer, is, that it proceed from an empty heart, which finds want in it
self of those things that it beggeth. For if a man feel no want of that
which he asks, he can never be earnest in asking.

The danger hereof is then most to be feared, when we pray for those
things, the means whereof we have at home: as when a man prays for success
in a matter, having either such wisdom in him self, such wealth, or such
friends: that it is likely their need to be no doubt made of the success. It
is hard in such like causes to come to God with an empty heart to beg it as
earnestly of him as if we wanted all such helps. And yet is all our prayers
but a dallying with God, when we shall nourish a secure opinion in our hearts,
that we have that help within us, for the which in words we are become suitors
unto him in our prayers. When a wise man goes about matters that usually are
compassed by wisdom, or a rich-man about that that commonly we see compassed
by riches, a learned man about that which is performed by learning, and the
like is to be thought of all such like matters: commonly there are either no
prayers at all to God for the accomplishing of such matters, or if there be
any, they are so cold and fainte: as bewraieth this secret opinion to be
nouseled within, that they shall not do greatly amiss, though there come no
help by their prayers. For surely, if the help at home were in truth doubted
not to be sufficient, the suit for relief abroad would be earnest.

The importunate suitor is he that speedeth of his suit as we read in Luke,
Luke 11.8.
and he that is pinched with want will spare no speech for his relief: but he
that feels no want, is to learn as yet how to beg. The prayers therefore of
such, as seldom or never examine themselves by the law and commandementes of
God, are greatly to be feared: nay, are plainly to be charged with dallying in
their petitions with the Lord. For there is the sight of all our poverty
plain and evident, and all the sight that we have of it otherwise, is but a
false light had in the shop of satan to utter counterfeit wares withal. The
fourth thing required to prayer, is, yt we have an assured hope of help from
the Lord: a sure belief to obtain that which we do ask: for therefore is
prayer an acceptable worship to God, because it ascribes unto him that honor
of mercy to be helpful to our misery, when he is called upon: neither tying
his mercy to good deserving, nor yet his power to second causes, as if where
they had no deserving, he had no mercy, or where they had no instruments of
helping, he had no hand or power to help. God is not truly honored of the
wicked, where either he is taken to be but a vain name and dead thing, in whom
there is neither mercy nor power to be found in our necessity (as ye Epicures
and bellie-gods think, whatsoever they say,) or else such weakness and
imperfection in both, as cannot go but by holds and helps from us.

Our sin then may not weaken our faith be it never so great, when there is
true repentance for it. For that should darken the praise of his mercy: nor
yet the want of all those means that have any likelihoode to help the matter,
must drive us to despair: for that were to abridge and diminishe his power.
The prayer therefore that is joined with faith, cannot but be acceptable unto
him, giving him the honor that is due unto his name, and because of that,
being an acceptable service and sacrifice unto the Lord. But prayer without
faith, (despayring to be heard) dishonors the Lord, and is returned without
any comfort or hope of help, James. 1.6
according as it is said by the Apostle James, that he that doubts and
wauereth is like a wave of the sea tossed of the wind and carried away, which
shall not receive any thing of the Lord. Yet herein we are to be admonished
that we do not take either that anguish and fear of the flesh in danger and
trouble, or yet the weakness and feebleness of faith, to be that wandering,
that the Apostle speaks of. For fear and anguishe in trouble, weakness
also in faith, are ever to be found in flesh, and will not be utterly removed,
so long as we abide in this mortal life. That prayer that by faith holds out
and continues, (notwithstanding this fear of the flesh and feebleness of
faith) to solicit the Lord, is sure to speed of her purpose at the last.
Romans 5.1
For patience will bring experience of his goodness, and experience brings
hope: for by continuing our prayers to the Lord in the time of trouble, we are
sure to find such mitigation thereof, as not only makes it so tolerable
that it may be borne: but also leads us to a further hope, in that experience
of mitigation already had: which thing is better learned with use, then it
can be made plain by any rule. Only we have to take heed, lest we should let
go the experience of his goodness toward us: either in having taken away
trouble at our request, or else in having asuaged the rage thereof, for
experience strongly vpholdeth hope, and mightily battereth down despair. And
now to encourage us to prayer, we have not only a commandment for it, Psalm.
50.
(which makes our obedience herein better then a sacrifice offered unto God,
and our contempt and neglecte of prayer, sin and rebellion against God) but
also most plentiful and loving promises to allure us with assured hope of
reward, as it is written in Matthewe: Ask and it shall be given you. Matthew. 7.7.
Knock and it shall be opened. Seek and ye shall find.

What man is there among you which if his son ask him bread would give him
a stone? If ye then which are evil can give to your children good gifts, how
much more shall your Father which is in heaven give good things to them that
ask him? These promises which are grounded in the mercies of God, have made
the godly conceive hope to pray unto him, and not their own worthiness: nay
they have turned away their eyes from the fear of their own sins, after the
hope of these promises made in mercy unto his. A notable example whereof we
have in Genesis where Jacob after he confessed that he was not worthy the
least of those benefits which he had already received: Gene. 32.10.
yet notwithstanding is imboldened to pray for other benefits, because God had
promised. The promises of God are founded in his mercy: and therefore
performed, because of his mercy. These promises made al ye godly that ever
were in any age bold to pray. We therefore having the same promises, have also
the same hope and hold of his mercies that they had, and the same commendation
of our cause and suites whatsoever.

For all their hope did hang and depend upon the goodness of God promised in
his word, therefore let us not be guilty of so great sin against our own
souls, as to be disobedient by our neglect of prayer to the law and
commandment of our God: neither yet so injurious unto the Lord, as through
infidelity and mistrust to call into question the verity of his word and
truth of his promises, 2. Cor. 1.
which are performed unto us in our mediator and redeemer Christ Jesus, in
whom all the promises are fulfilled.

When the question is then of our unworthiness, let us call to mind that
there was never any man upon the earth, no Saint or servant of God, how holy
or blessed so ever, that was heard for himself: or had the promises performed
unto him in respect of his own worthiness, but only in and for Christ, to
whom the promises were made, who is the heir of all things, as it is written
to the Hebrews: Hebr. 1.2
and therefore no man has true title to any promise of blessedness, but in his
name and for him, because he is a part and member of Christ, who is Lord of
all, and has true title thereunto. Our hope arises in the right of Christ,
our claim is good in his title, our comfort comes by his interest. We being
therefore members and parts of him, have lawful title in his name who is the
true and lawful heir of all the inheritance, notwithstanding that in any
title that we can show for our selves, (as from our selves,) we remain
without hope of any help or comfort by suite to recover any thing at all: a
deed of gift being before made unto the Lord Jesus, of that inheritance and
all that belongs thereunto. Every gift and grant that is made passes in
his name, and whatsoever suite is recovered apperteining to our happy estate
it is entered likewise in the title and right of him, and is given unto us
because we are members of him. The first Chapter of the Epistle to the
Ephesians makes plain proof hereof, Ephe. 1.3.
that we have no spiritual blessing but in Christ, because we are his, and in
him, whom the father has appointed the lawful inheritour of all things. It is
in plain words affirmed by the Apostle to the Corinthes, 1. Cor. 1.30.
that the faithful are by the appointment of God the Father in Jesus Christ,
(who is made unto them, as before we have heard, wisdom, righteousness,
holiness, and redemption,) that he who will glory may glory in the Lord.

Those therefore that enter their suites and petitions to God the Father in the
title and right of any Saint, Angel, or Apostle whatsoever: whether they pass
in their names alone, or in Christ his name and theirs together, they enter
their suite amiss, and therefore shall never profit by it. They take upon
them to frustrate that grant made from God the Father to Jesus Christ alone,
making an alienation thereof unto others at their own will and pleasure,
cancelling that deed of gift and forging a new, wherein the virgin Marie and
others are made parteners with him, affirming that the suites and petitions
must proceed in their name also as well as his. That blasphemous prayer of
theirs is not unknown unto any. Tu per Thomae sanguinem, quem pro te impendit,
fac nos Christ scandere, quo Thomas ascendit. Thou Christ for that blood
which Thomas for thee did spend, make us clyme thither, whither Thomas did
ascend.

If they would qualify their speech, their own practice will condemn them.
For they have prayed to be accepted in the title, right, and deserving of the
Saints, making mediators to him, who is for us already, and our alone
mediator in deed, making him as a stranger or enemy rather, to be appeased
by others: when as in very deed he is our best and dearest friend,
appointed our mediator, and standing on our part to appease other. Whose
affection that it stands better toward us then the affection of any Saint
or Angel, herein we may be persuaded, if we be not willingly and obstinately
blind: Phil. 2. Romans 5.
for that he has tasted of that infamous death of the cross for us, when we
were enemies to him.

The like affection was never found in any Saint or Angel toward us.
Shall we then make him further off in affection, then the Angels and Saints,
and that they should be sooner inclined to pity toward us then he, and
therefore we should begin with them in our prayers for the appeasing of
him? This is not to make him the peacemaker, but the party to be appeased.
This is not to make him the man that should make them one who were at variance
and debate, but to make him one of the two, that being at variaunce, were to
be made one. The word of God appoints him the only mediator and peacemaker
between the righteous God and the unrighteous man: it is therefore the word
of man, and no word of GOD that makes him the party that is at variaunce
with man, and must be reconciled by an other. Is he who came down from heaven,
leaving so great glory, and laying down his own life for us when we were
his enemies, now become so cruel, that Saints and Angels must be made for us
to stay him? Is the matter fallen out so far otherwise then he could
discern, that coming with the mind and affection of a mediator for us, he
cannot now without a mediator be at one with us? The Leuitical priesthood
did shadow out unto us the priesthood of Jesus Christ. Their high priest
was their mediator and peacemaker, that in offering up sacrifice made peace
between GOD and them, but there was never any means appointed to appease the
priest, nor any mediator made for the people unto him, neither yet any joined
with him. Leuit. 1^
It appears in Leuiticus that it was unlawful for any to abide in the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, when the priest went into the holy place to
make atonement, until he had made an end.

Wherein was plainly signified and established the truth of the alone
mediator Christ Jesus in whom the truth of this shadow and figure was
apparently seen: For when he was to offer up himself for our sins, had he
any help from any Saint or Angel? Was there at any time such infirmity
seen, even in the best of his Disciples, as then when the Lord went about the
work of our redemption, all forsaking him, and some swearing and forswearing
that they never knew him? For it behooved him to go about that work alone,
not being joined with others, nor having help or aid from any. It will be
granted that in the work of redemption, there is none to be joined with
Christ, but that he alone is the mediator of redemption, finishing yt him
self none otherwise then as the high priest was alone in making atonement for
the people: but in ye mediation of prayer and intercession they say yt others
are to be joined with Christ, and that Saints and Angels are to be made on our
part and for us unto him. Let it be showed then that there was appointed of
God, or practiced in the Leuiticall priesthood any mediator of intercession
for the people unto the high priest, which must have been shadowed out there,
if there had been any such thing in truth brought by Christ, and therefore
now to be used of us.

For according as it is written to the Hebrews. The priests that according to
the law offer gifts, Heb. 8.4.5.
do serve unto the pattern and shadow of Heavenly things.

This which has been said of faith in the mercies of God showed unto us in
Christ ye alone mediator and redeemer, teaches us to be humble in all our
prayers, refusing all our own righteousness and deserving, casting off all the
opinion thereof, having al our hope to be heard arising only in respect of the
mercies of Christ assured unto us by faith: remembering always that the proud
Phariseie boasting of his good deeds in his prayer is refused, when ye poor
Publicane is received making mention of nothing but his misery, sin, and
wretchedness, and therefore appealing unto mercy in earnest suite calling
unto God for that alone.

In that prayer which is appointed us by ye Lord Jesus we do call God, Our
Father, Luke. 18.11.
to assure us of his tender favor toward us. For that is (as we have heard)
above all things required, neither is it possible without this persuasion of
his fatherly affection to please God. For without faith, Hebr. 11.
it is impossible to please the Lord. Therefore is it set in the beginning,
because without it there is no entrance unto him nor hope of being heard at
his hands. Neither must we only be persuaded that the Lord favors us, and
is become a father unto us: but also yt in regarding our prayer, and hearkening
unto the petitions that we shall make, he will make known this fatherly
affection and good will yt he does bear us. For when we are about to pray unto
him we are charged to be mindful of this, that he is our Father, and so to
call him, because in the hearing of our requests, we shall be assured so to find
him.

Mark it well therefore that when we are to pray unto him, we are taught to call
him Father. The Lord cannot truly be said in any respect to be far from his,
yet in prayer is he said especially to draw nighe unto them, Deuteronomy 4.7. Psalm.
145.18.
as appears in Deuteronomie, and in the Psalms. This is the thing that we
ought to be resolved fully of, that it is the will of our heavenly Father by
hearing ye prayers of his to testify good will toward them, to give the^
experience and trial of it that way, to the strengthening and increasing of
their faith. Being therefore ready to pray, let us consider a while of the
promises made unto them that ask, Matthew. 7.7.
Knock and Seek, that we may be persuaded by them to find him Fatherly
affected and inclining to our demands. For that does this word Father in the
beginning of our prayers offer to our consideration.

His being in heaven, that is immediately spoken of after this naming of our
Father, does put us in mind of an heavenly majesty and power in him, able to
go through with the purpose of his good will toward us, that in nothing our
hope of being heard may be hindered. This help that is offered unto our faith
in prayer, does tell us that the heart of man is hardly resolved of this thing
in truth, that the Lord is so present always by good will, power, and effect,
at the suite of his servants, that thereby they take true trial of his
great good will toward them, matched with heavenly power, majesty, and
glory, for the perfourmance thereof.

And that there is great difference between this faith, and those opinions
that commonly men are wont to conceive of God. For the common prayer of the
greater sort: notwithstanding they be liberal of words and sparing of no
pains therein) yet are they far from this persuasion required of necessity
unto true and faithful prayer. Matthew. 6.
They receive hope and are confident by reason of the laboriousnesse of their
pains in the multitude of prayers, and other doings of their own devising:
they know not what the mercy of God means, which only works hope in
his, and makes them humble even in the doing of those things that are
commanded of him, because it is the mere mercy and good will of God that has
wrought, them in those that be his, and that does accept them and take them in
good part at their hands. The end and mark that the servants of God should
set before them in their prayers and petitions, is, to have the Lord
glorified by perfourming that unto his which he has promised, to have his
mercy and power to come unto the eyes and ears of men, so evidently
perfourming the truth of his word, that they may see and be forced to confess
that he rules here in earth.

When we are ready to pray either for good things to be given us, or for
evil things to be taken from us, the care to have God his mercies magnified,
and his goodness promised toward his to be seen and come to light thereby,
to the credit, name, and glory of the Lord: ought principally to provoke us,
and to be the chief thing that should move us to make suite either for any
good thing to be given us, or to be eased of any affliction.

And therefore are we taught in this his prayer, (which is a pattern unto all
our prayers) to begin them with the desire that his name may be hallowed, and
his kingdom may come. In the which petitions, by the consent of all the
godly learned, we ought to have our minds and senses wholly shut up within
the desire that he might have a wonderful name, and be seen and known to
reign as a king, in performing the truth of his word here upon earth. And
notwithstanding our good and benefit be not divided from this his glory, but
most nearly joined thereunto: yet must we fly over the care of that in our
thoughts, and begin our requests in the earnest desire to see the trial of
his mercies and power promised unto his experienced, and made known in truth
and in effect. Therefore you shall not look for at my hands any several
declaration, what particular things are contained under the hallowing of his
name, or the coming of his kingdom: for that were infinite, in as much as
there is no truth promised in his word performed, but in that same his name
is hallowed, and his kingdom comes. And I told you even now, that it was
the desire of his name, and his glory, that must send us to prayer, and go
before all our own private commodities and respects whatsoever.

When we do pray that his will may be done in Earth as it is in Heaven, we
are admonished in that petition, that the glory of his name, and the power of
his kingdom, are not fundered from his will and word. It may not once enter
into our thoughts, that the Lord will be glorified in showing forth the
greatness of his power and goodness, any otherwise, then as he has declared
in his word, which is the true witness of his will. Wherefore whenever we
are truly touched with the glory of God his name, or the advancement of his
kingdom, we are desirous to have some thing performed, which in his word he
has approved. In this petition, we have warrant to pray unto the Lord for any
thing that in his word he has promised to bestow upon his, and therefore are
we taught to inquire at his mouth, I mean even at his word what his will and
pleasure is. For to presume to advance his glory otherwise then he has
showed us in his word, is to tempt the Lord: and to imagine to glorify him,
or to purchase praise unto him, with that which by his word cannot be approved,
is not to honor, but to dishonor ye Lord, for he has coupled the glory of
his name and the honor of his kingdom to the doing of his will. It was
declared of late, that notwithstanding the glory of God and the coming of his
kingdom, be not divided from ye commodity of his servants: yet ought his
servants to cast their eyes upon his glory alone in ye recital of those
petitions: In like man^er ought we to judge of this petition: where we do crave
for the doing of his will that the in requesting of any thing agreeable to his
will, we ought not so much to look upon any commodity coming to us thereby, as
unto this, yt thereby his will and pleasure takes place, and he is seen and
plainly perceived to be just and true in his word, and so by that means his
kingdom is truly acknowledged, and his name hallowed. We do confess that he
rules according to his word, but when we see the experience thereof, yt which
before was faintly in the mouth, is now strongly conceived in the heart.

And who soever he be yt has the greatest portion of faith and most assured
persuasio^ of the good will and power of God, that it watches always for the
perfourmance of his will revealed in his word, he has need notwithstanding to
have his faith strengththened, by experience and trial of ye mercies of God,
visibly performed in the government of his church.

The Saints and servants of GOD are desirous always to have his honor
advanced and his kingdom acknowledged by the ordering and governing of things
here in earth according to his word, and therefore after that Solomon had made
an end of entreating the Lord to hear the prayer of his servant in their
several necessities (according as they are recited in the book of Kings) he
rendereth a reason why he would have the Lord to grant their petitions: 1.
King. 8.43.
That (says he) all the people of the earth may know that the Lord is GOD and
none other. This is the cause why the servants of God are desierous to have
their petitions and prayers which they make according to his will, to be heard
and granted, even that the glory of his name may be advanced, that it may be
seen that he rules and none other, and that experience may justify the
government of God after his word.

Here we see that blind and ignorant prayers (what devotion and good meaning
so ever be pretended) are no prayers that ever the Lord will accept of, and
that such as do not serve the Lord after his word, are cut off from all hope
to have their prayers heard to any benefit or comfort of theirs, because the
Lord has joined his mercy and power wherein he will be glorified, to the
performaunce of his will, for the comfort and good of those that do serve him
after his word.

Therefore does the Prophet David make his seeking out of the precepts of God
a persuasion that he shall be heard. Psalm. 119.94
Save me (says he) for I have sought thy precepts. And in the same 173.
verse. Let thy hand save me, for I have chosen thy precepts. Likewise in the
last verse of that Psalm he says these words. I have gone astray like a
lost sheep, seek thy servant, for I do not forget thy commandments. And
not in this verse alone, but in many other through-out this Psalm, he
conceiueth hope of being heard in his Prayer, because ye Lord had given him a
careful heart to the keeping of his word, wherein his glory does consist.

In as much therefore as he was careful of his glory, he conceiueth hope that
the Lord will not be unmindful of him, but is bold in a godly hope to say:
Psalm. 119.153
Behold mine affliction and deliver me, for I have not forgotten thy law.

And sometimes in this entreating of the Lord to hear him, he promises in
time to come that he will keep the statutes and commandments of the Lord, as
it appears in the 145. verse of ye Psalm in these words. Hear me O Lord
and I will keep thy statutes. These authorities from the Prophet are uttered to
this end, that we should not put those things a sunder, which the Lord has
coupled together. For the Lord his glory is not parted from his will revealed
in his word: and whenever we have in purpose to sanctify his name to get
praise unto him, and to advance his kingdom here upon earth: we must proceed
no otherwise then according to his word, being assured that it has allowance
and probation from the same: these three petitions do not so much note what
several things are to be asked, as with what mind those things that we ask
according to his will are to be desired: that is even with a hearty longing and
desiring to see his name sanctified, his kingdom established, and that which
is to his good liking and will accomplished here upon earth: by bringing
something to pass, whereof he has declared his liking apparently in his word.

If we shall crave any grace of him whereby to have our life bettered, and our
conversation amended: the care of his kingdom, the desire of his name, the
longing to see his will and pleasure take place: ought to be the thing that
should move us thereunto.

Our petitions also for temporal blessings, or to have evils removed from us,
ought in like manner to be made in the care and desire of his kingdom and
glory, who has promised in his word, that he will be nigh unto his that call
upon him in in truth, and that he will hear the prayers of his that attend
upon his commandments: both in blessing them with good things, and also in
turning evil things from them. Such things therefore, we should also desire
even for ye establishing of his name, credit and kingdom here upon earth,
according as the servants of God have done, as appears in many places of the
scripture. Help us oh God of our salvation (says the Prophet) for the glory
of thy name, Psalm. 79.9.
deliver us and be merciful to our sins for thy names sake. Wherefore
should the heathen say, Where is their God? being most of all careful least
the wicked should triumph over the Lotd, if that he should not stand by his,
according as he promised in his word: but lay them open to all injuries and
reproaches of the wicked, without hope of deliverance from him.

Now let us pray unto our heavenly father, that we may so be touched with the
glory of his name, the care of his kingdom, and desire that his will may take
place, as may comfort us in the assured hope to have our prayers heard when we
call upon him etc.

The xvj. Lecture upon the 11. verse.
Give us this day our daily bread.
WHen Solomon had made request unto the Lord for the people of Israel on the
dedication of the temple, 1. Reg. 8.
that he would vouchsafe to hear their prayers, when any of those several
occasions which there he makes mention of, should oppress them: in the end
of his prayer, he requesteth the Lord yt he would defend ye cause of his people
Israel always as the matter should require, that what soever necessity or
extremity time should bring upon the^, he would have a fatherly regard unto
them in that time of their necessity and relieve them. This is that which is
meant by daily bread, that the Lord would grant us every day whatsoever shall be
the necessity of that day, giving always the things of ye day in his day.
For those be his words in yt place according to ye truth of the Hebrew text. In
this petition we have warrant to call unto God for temporal benefits that we
shall stand in need of, 1. Kin. 8.59.
whatsoever. The servants of God have gone before us by their example, in
applying the Lord with prayer when soever ye want of any thing did vex them.
In the book of Psalms we shall see that David in all distresses flies unto
God by prayer: cureing all his griefs, whether of mind or body, with no other
plaster then prayer. That book of psalms being well perused, let us see the
manifold use and wonderful success of prayer, for sometime the Prophet cures
the grief and languishing of his heart with prayer: sometime he recouereth the
health of his body by prayer: in other places he puts all his enemies to
flight, with no other weapon then this of prayer: to be brief, he makes of
prayer a medicine for all maladies, and speedeth so well with it in all his
necessities, that we may not only say in bare words that it is a salve for all
sores, but even write upon the head thereof Probatum est, for it is tried to
have cured all griefs and vexations of what kind soever. Psa, 107.5.6
In the Psalm the Prophet declares that hungry and thirsty souls,
wandering in the wilderness, and calling unto God by prayer: are satisfied of
him and sent away replenished with good things. Verse. 10.
In the same Psalm he declares in like manner, that men being in prison
bound fast with chains and iron, without all hope of help, calling upon the
Lord in their prayers are heard of him, their prayers granted, and they
delivered. Verse. 17.
The same psalm makes mention of me^ pyning away with sickness, or heaviness of
heart, and yet by calling upon him in prayer to have been cured and to have
recovered that dangerous estate. To conclude, in ye 13. verse of the same
psalm the mariners yt call upon God when ye tempest does threten death unto
them, are reported there to have their prayers heard of the Lord, to be
delivered from that danger, and to be brought to the land that they longed
for. What man not well instructed, would once have conceived hope to have these
or the like things helped by prayer? What man (not well instructed in the
word of God) would not take it to be a casual thing that comes (as it is
said) by fortune, when fair wether comes after a tempest, or health does
succeed sickness, when deliverance comes after imprisonment, or plenty
after poverty? These are so often seen by experience to come one after an
other, that notwithstanding men have in their distress prayed for them, yet
hardly can they be brought to think that they are blessings granted to
faithful prayer: but rather imagine that they are things cast here and there
upon men at adventure.

And therefore where men are in those or such like distresses, they hardly, or
not at all, conceive any hope to he heard. Seldom do they make any suit unto
God in faith, especially if those afflictions lay sore upon them: but the
children of God (knowing that they are promised to have ye Lord near unto
them in all that they shall call unto him for) and that they shall be heard for
the thing of the day upon his day: as their occasion requires, so do they
seek unto the Lord, being sure in continuance to find comfort at his hands,
and why they know assuredly that the Lord will have his mercy and power tried
and seen here upon the earth, in hearing the requests of his in their
distress: that by that means he may be truly feared and honored of them,
according as it is proved in the book of Kings: 1. King. 8.43.
and also that by his hearing of their petitions in those their distresses,
they may be confirmed in the persuasion that GOD favors them, remitteth
their sins, and being at one with them is favorably inclined unto them in
all their needful demands.

Whosoever shall diligently consider of the places of Scripture in the old
Testament, applied by the Apostle to ye forgiveness of sins, shall easily
perceive, that the godly have taken their deliverance from their distresses,
as pledges of the remission of their sins, and assuraunces that God for
Christ was at one with them. For their temporal blessings were not received
of them, but as confirmations of his reconciliation with them: which proves
that which was said before, that the Lord hears ye prayer of his in their
necessity, to strengthen their faith in the remission of sins, and
persuasion that GOD for Christ is beecome fatherly affected toward them, his
promises being visibly confirmed to them.

In Deuteronomie there are promises made unto them that do give diligent heed
unto the law and commandments of God to obey them, Deuteronomy. 28.10
that they shall be blessed in the fruit of their body, in the fruit of their
cattle, in their coming in and going out, in all that they shall put their
hands unto, in causing their enemies that rise against them to fall before
their face, and the cause is added in the tenth verse in these words. Then all
the people of the earth shall see that the name of the Lord is called upon
over thee, and they shall be affrayde of thee.

It is therefore most assured, that the Lord will be seen to be the GOD of
his, and to have a kingdom here upon earth, by granting them their
requests, when they shall call upon him in their distress: by leaving
outward blessings as plain confirmations of his inward hearty good will
that he bears toward them. And for this cause do his people crave those
temporal benefits, even that it may be seen that he rules upon earth,
standing by his as he has promised.

Wherefore, whenever their enemies oppress them, or by the want of any his
accustomed benefits they seem not to be regarded of the Lord, they complain
unto him not so much in the consideration of their necessity, as in regard of
his glory: using these and such like kind of speeches, Wherefore should the
Heathen say, Where is now their GOD? As if their chief care were to have the
Lord his glory vpholden in the confirmation of his goodness promised unto
his: which is called into doubt of the ungodly, while they see those that
accounted themselves for his in affliction and oppression, necessity and want,
as if they were not regarded of him, whereby the ungodly are imboldened the more
to oppress the righteous, and by calling into question ye truth of his
promises made unto his, confirmed the rather in the continuing of their
disobedience. Very fitly therefore is the hallowing of his name, the coming of
his kingdom, and the doing of his will, set before the request of outward
necessities, because we should demand them rather in respect of his glory,
that he might thereby have a name and kingdom here in earth, and his will
performed, rather then we to have therein our alone necessity relieved.

The godly in like manner return the whole praise unto him, even when those
things are granted unto them that seem to be most casual, and to come at
adventure. Psalm. 107.
Therefore in that Psalm before mentioned they are willed to praise ye Lord,
and to tell unto others what he has done for the^, when those things which
seem to be mere casual, and coming by fortune and chance, are obtained:
which clause of praising the Lord, and telling unto others what things he has
granted at the requests of their prayers, is added in ye psalm unto the end
of every several benefit, granted unto the^. But al men conceive not this
doctrine, they are his children alone, who in heart are assured that these which
commonly we call casual things, are disposed by him at the pleasure of his will,
and granted as pledges of his goodwill, to those that in truth call upon him,
and therefore in ye last verse of that psalm, it is said: Who is wise that he
may observe these things, because they be only his children that have this
wisdom to observe this, to mark it, to know that he disposes these outward
things to ye good of his, as pledges of his fatherly goodness toward them: and
therefore they only call upon him for them in faith, and in receiving them do
assuredly in their heart reckon them as benefits received of him, confirming
their faith thereby, in the assurance of his especial goodwill toward them. By
this that has been said, it does appear, that when we are oppressed with
anguish of heart, or vexed with any calamity, either of body or mind: we
have to seek our remedy at the hands of the Lord by prayer, in assured hope to
receive no small comfort thereby, if in faith and hope of his mercies we
continue in calling upon his name. It is a very hard matter, and the work of
faith alone, when a man is sore distressed and sees no means to escape, then
to call upon God with faith and hope of being heard: and if help shall come,
it is as hard a matter to ascribe it unto the mercies of God as ye fruit of
prayer, and an assured token of his goodwil rendering from the ground of our
heart the praise that is due unto him for it, and strengthening our faith thereby
in the persuasio^ of his mercies toward us. The servant of God glorifieth God
in these things, acknowledging from his heart, that God is the giver and
disposer of them, but the ungodly whatsoever they say in word, think in heart
that they came by fortune and chance, and therefore do not give him the
glory for them, neither sanctify them by prayer as things received in
especial good will from God.

In the Psalm there is plentifully set forth unto us, Psalm. 91.
what protection the godly shall find against all dangers in their distresses,
and in the end of that Psalm, it is declared, by what means they shall escape
those dangers, in these words: He shall call upon me and I will hear him, I
will be with him in trouble, I will deliver him and glorify him, with long
life will I satisfy him and show him my salvation.

If any shall diligently read that notable book of prayer, the prayer book of
the holy Ghost, I mean the book of Psalms, he shall clearly see that which
before was said, that the prophet is no way distressed, but he runs
forthwith unto God by prayer, and finds comfort at his hands, knowing (as he
testifies in the Psalm) that the Lord is near unto all that call upon him,
Psalm. 145 18
yea to all that call upon him in truth, that he will fulfill the desire of
them that fear him, that he will hear their cry and save them.

It has been declared, that we in this petition are taught to call upon God
for deliverance, whatsoever our necessity shall be, and that with hope in God to
be heard, albeit we see no means how we shall be helped. It has in like manner
been declared how hardly this is performed of us, yt we should have hope when
we can see no means lightly to help: so that it is the faithful man alone
that gives this glory unto God. We learned out of the Psalm yt the faithful
man being tossed with the tempest upon the sea, and seeing no possibility to
escape, resorteth unto God by prayer, and finds the fruit thereof. This (as
was said before) is hardly performed in such extremities, where there
appears no means likely to deliver us. It is as hard a thing by reason of
our corruption, to seek at God his hands by true prayer, those outward
benefits that are procured by our labor, as by means appointed of God to
help us thereunto. As for example, when a man has an occupation to live by,
it is no easy matter for him to crave as heartily at God his hands for his
liueing, as that man yt wants all ordinary means to maintain him. We are
taught in this petition to beg at ye hands of God by prayer, those outward
things that have means ordained to bring the^ even then when we have the
usual means. For the man yt has friends of great credit, that are able to
compass matters of greater importance then he has any to trouble them
withal, must look and seek for success at the Lord by prayer, as carefully
as if he knew of no help or friendship at all. When men of wisdom,
credit, or power, go about their matters without any calling upon the name of
God, they plainly deny the Lord that honor that is due unto him: for he must
be acknowledged, as he is in deed, the disposer of all outward benefits,
as well of those that come by the means of our labor, endeavor, or other our
means whatsoever, as those that come so as we can give no reason of the same,
coming by casualtie or fortune, as men commonly use to speak.

And in this petition we are taught to crave all outward benefits, and the
success and goeing forewarde of all our labors of the LORD, who is the
only giver of them, and without whose especial blessing all healpes and
means are to no purpose: according as it is written in the Psalm: Psa. 127.1.2
Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it. It is
vain for you to rise early and lie down late: declaring hereby, how little
help there is in all our careful toil, to atteyne to wealth and earthly
commodities. And therefore in all our travails we are taught to resort unto
GOD by earnest and faithful prayer. It is he that must bless our going in,
and our coming out, Pal. 121.
as we do read in the Psalms. Wherefore the godly look for a peculiar
blessing of GOD upon their labors, and seek unto him for it, when as the
ungodly ascribe ye honor that is due unto God, unto those helps and means of
counsel, labor, or endeavor, which are but the instruments appointed of the
Lord thereunto. The daunget of this disease is so great, and man so easily
drawn to seek unto the healpes that he has without any due respect and
regard of the Lord: that in express words he gives his people warning of
this offense in Deuteronomie. Deu. 8.17.
Beware least thou say in thine heart, my power and the strength of mine own
hand has prepared me this abundance: but remember the Lord thy GOD: For it
is he which gives the power to get substance,

Let us learn to sanctify all outward blessings by prayer, seeking them
unfeignedly at the Lord, and acknowledging them in truth, and from a
persuaded heart, to have been given us from the hands of our God, what soever
has been store or strength of our means to procure the^ by. For otherwise
they are not pure unto us, if we be not resolved of the giver thereof,
reaching through all means into the sight of his goodness, who is the Lord
and disposer of these temporal things.

A Christian is taught in this petition not to be tormented before hand, with
the fear of an hard estate and evil condition in time to come, because the
Lord (who is the disposer of all outward things) has taught his to resort
unto him for the necessity of the day, in the day and time of their distress:
promising to stand by them in their troubles and wants, and to declare himself
to be their God by the benefits and mercies, that he will grant at their
requests. What a great burden therefore are we discharged of by the Lord, who
in promising to hear us in the day of our calamity, has cut off many cares,
griefs, and vexations which long before they come, torment the ungodly, and
when they are upon them, do drive them either to despair or to ungodly
shifts.

How just also is the plague and punishment of those, who refusing this
benefit of the Lord, will have their own care and fear usurp upon the
mercy and goodness of GOD: who in singular good will has returned unto us
the benefit of our thoughts and cares, to have them otherwise bestowed for
our good in his service, willing us not to be careful before hand for the
necessity to come, for the care of the day shall suffice for the same. Matthew.
6.34.
If the Lord in mercy abate and give back this benefit of our care, that we
may have it before the necessity come free to bestow upon his service for our
own profit: what madness is there in our refusal? nay, what wickedness and
contempt of the grace of God? That man therefore that learneth not to abate the
care for outward dangers and necessities to come, can never in truth pray
unto the Lord that he would give him this day his daily bread. For these
words of daily bread, and this day, do cut off the care and torment of times
far off. By the promise which in this petition we do trust and depend
upon, Hebr. 13.5
the holy Ghost to the Hebrews cures covetousness: willing them to be
content with that they have, and to see yt their conversation be without
covetousness, because the Lord has said, I will not leave thee nor forsake
thee.

This promise of the Lord, that he will not forsake his in the day of their
necessity, is set as a bulworke to beat back their fear of want, and
careful coveting that arises thereupon: that they may hold them well content
and apaide with their present state and condition. The holy Ghost makes a
great diversity between the godly and wicked touching these earthly things:
for they come to the godly as it were sleeping: for so does he term their
quiet labor, that wait assuredly for ye success from the Lord, in respect
of the careful toil yt the ungodly are tormented with, as if their living lay
only in their travels. There is a secret blessing of the Lord which must be
sought for at his hands by faithful prays, without the which all care and
travel that can be taken will not avail. It is the blessing of the Lord that
makes rich (says the holy Ghost. Prou. 10.22
) There is more in that then our fleshly and mistrustfull heart can easily be
persuaded of. Let us therefore learn to lessen our mistrustfull care, that we
may testify to the world ye increase of our faith, in the persuasion of his
mercy toward us, according as this petition does admonish us. For in
praying unto him for these outward commodities, we do acknowledge that they be
at his disposing, and that all the labor in the world will not fetch them,
unless it please him to give success. Wherefore we may plainly see, that
when we have traveled or used those outward means whereby commonly benefits
are procured, we have but accomplished one part, and the least part of that
that brings the benefit in deed. Prayer must also be used, and the Lord he
is to be entreated, and this is not the least but the chief part.

The godly tempt not the Lord by refusing his means, but even then when they
do use those means, they are much in prayer for the success and going
forward of them: whether it be labor, counsel, or friendship that they they
use to compass their matter by. For the want of this, we see it fall out in
common experience, that the wisest men have had such success with their
devises, as the most foolish man that is, could not have made a madder match,
then often times falls out even there where their care and counsel has
been the greatest: which teaches us to give the Lord his due, to acknowledge
him the Lord and governor of those temporal commodities, to beg them at his
hands by true and unfeigned prayer, and by faith to depend upon him, and not
upon our travel, no not where it is the greatest and promises the most unto
us.

Worldly men that depend wholly in the persuasion of their heart upon the help
of their hands, their wisdom, or their wealth or friendship: do dissemble with
the Lord in this request. For they seek that at him as his gift, which their
heart tells them that they have already at home. Covetous men that would
gather faster then he will give, how can they in truth seek it at his hands:
when they are not at any time content with yt measure or portion that he does
give, neither rest in his distribution, having such a hungry desire as would
prescribe the Lord, and not be limited or prescribed by the Lord? The
oppresser, hard and cruel dealer, yt pretends to beg his bread and temporal
commodity of the Lord, and in the mean time is the purueyer, and prouider for
him self, by such oppressing and unmerciful means as the Lord abhors,
does dally with the Lord, deceive him self, and makes his prayer a curse
unto his own soul, and a witness in the day of judgment against his own
conscience: in that he has professed in this prayer that to be the Lords gift,
which he sought of satan by such ways and means as he approves, but the
Lord abhors them. We pray here for others as well as for our selves, he
therefore that professes to pray for others their good estate concerning
temporal things, and yet conueyeth that which is others, or withholdeth it
either by violence or deceipte: with what conscience does he offer this
petition to the Lord? The children of God have their faith declaring it self
by outward things, while they do depend upon him for them: wherein the
ungodly bewray their want, howsoever they boast of their inward persuasion of
his goodness. For if the Lord speed them not to their contentation, they will
not stick to provide for themselves, by such either open or secret
oppression as he has plainly forbidden, as if he were only the God of the
soul, and not of the body also, and whole man, to provide for both, according
to the good pleasure of his will: and we by faith to depend and wait for a
special blessing from him, even in outward things which the ungodly cannot
see into. For they bind the Lord so unto the instruments whereby he works
his will, that in truth they have the glory, and he is altogether deprived
thereof.

They be only his children that in truth acknowledge him the giver of these
outward benefits, and therefore will use no means besides those which he has
approved. The other in seeking help by means forbidden of him, do plainly
speak in those their doings yt they have no faith nor co^fide^ce in him: we
may in faith and good hope ask those things, because they make for the glory
of God, who does reign and rule in earth by giving unto his their wantes, even
in these outward and temporal things, according as we may learn in ye Psalm.
Psalm. 146.
Where after many words declaring that God executes justice for the oppressed,
gives bread to the hungry, loses the prisoners, keeps the strangers,
relieueth the fatherless, overthrows ye way of the wicked: immediately it
follows, The Lord shall reign for ever, o Sion. As if the Lord should not be
known to reign, if he should fail his servants calling and depending upon him
in their distresses. For we may not think that he fails his servants, when he
gives them better benefits, then those which they do ask. As if they crave
deliverance out of present danger, and he by taking them in mercy out of this
life, works a final riddaunce out of all danger: shall we say that the Lord
has not heard them? Likewise if their necessity whatsoever, indureth longer
then they wish, or increase upon them after their suite made for deliverance,
because ye Lord will work a more glorious work in their deliverance for the
comfort and increase of their faith, notwithstanding it be some long time
after: shall we say the Lord has rejected their prayers, because he has
delayed so long? God forbid. For the Lord according to the good counsel of
his will, has not justified the innocence and good causes of his sometimes,
no not before their death. And as it has been said of the time, so likewise is
it to be thought of the means and manner of helping and relieuing us, if yt
has been other then we could have prescribed, shall we deny the Lord to have
heard our suites, because the help that we have had, has not been in the
same manner that we have conceived to be best? This one thing we have often to
call to remembrance, that before the request of these outward necessities,
there is the desire of doing his will here in earth: to teach us that the Lord
is thus helpful, in outward necessities oppressing them, unto the prayers of
such, as have not only the knowledge of his will, but also the desire to do
it.

For that goes before the other in our prayer, and therefore in our desire, in
as much as true prayer goes not without ye desire of the heart unto ye request
of the tongue. Those therefore, that look for these outward blessings when
they call unto the Lord, must learn both to know what his will is reveled in
his word, and also to have a desire to do ye same. For unto those that thus
worship him, the Lord has promised to incline his ear, according as it is
written in these words: We know that God hears not sinners, John. 6.31.
but if any man be a worshipper of God, and does his will, him hears he:
putting them in hope of being heard yt be worshipers of him, and making those
the worshippers, not that do unto him whatsoever likes them, but that are
doers of his liking and will, which is opened to us in his word. To the
confirmation of this may be added that, which is written in the first Epistle
of S. John in these words, whatsoever we ask we receive of him, John. 3.22.
because we do those things which are pleasing in his sight. By this it
appears that witches and sorcerers (which will have the name of wisemen and
wise women) who are thought to do so many things with prayer, cannot prevail
with the Lord to obtain these outward things of him in favor and goodwil:
for of all people they are the most ignorant of his will, and therefore of his
worship. But as even now it was proved, if any man be a worshipper of God and
a doer of his will, him hears he. Those are they to who^ the Lord has made
promise yt he will be mercifully inclined unto in their prayers and petitions, he
is nighe unto all that call upon him in truth, he will fulfill the desire of the^
yt fear him, he will hear their cry and will save them. Psalm. 145.19.20.
The Lord preserves all them that love him, (says the holy Ghost.) It may so
fall out that the prayers of witches and such like may be instruments of his
justice, for the punishment of sin in others: and for the hardening of their
own hearts: but it is as sure as the lord lives, yt they never obtain any
thing by their prayers to their good, in favor and good liking of ye lord. But
as for ye servants of God, they are in assured hope to have their prayers
heard, when they shall call upon ye Lord in their outward distresses: for they
are persuaded, (as ye truth is in deed) yt it stands upon ye name and glory
of ye Lord, to stand by his in their necessities for to succor and help them,
as the matter shall require. Wherefore they require it as a part of his own
glory, as an argument and assurance that he reigns here in earth, as a
matter that is agreeable to his good pleasure and will, according as they have
learned out of his word, which gives them an assured hope of being heard,
and makes them bold to call upon him, knowing that his own glory, the
renoune of his own kingdom, and a matter that is agreeable to his own good
liking and will, is in hand, while their distresses and wants are brought
before the Lord, to be helped, and relieved by him. A manifest confirmation and
proof of this is to be found in the Psalm: In the which place the prophet
speaks much in the beginning of extolling the name of God, Psalm. 145.
of meditating the beauty of his glorious majesty, of showing forth the
glory of his kingdom, and speaking of his power: after this it follows,
that the Lord vpholdeth all that fall, that he fulfilleth the desire of them
that fear him, that he will hear their cry, and will save them: as if the
glory of his name, and renoune of his kingdom were seen in this: to lift up
his that fall, to hear their cry and save them. And no doubt the Lord will
have it known here upon earth, that he is Lord over all true and faithful in
his word, by the help and defense that he will grant unto his, whenever in
their distress they shall by faithful prayer resort unto him. His meaning is
to leave manifest and plain proof that he rules herein earth, eue^ by that
mercy that he has to bestow upon his, who call and cry unto him in their
necessity with an assured hope of being heard. For the glory of his name, the
honor of his kingdom, and the good pleasure of his will go jointly together
with the hearing and regarding of their cause: according as they are set before
this petition, in this form of prayer that is prescribed by the Lord. Where,
before we make mention of daily bread, there is request made for the halowing
of his name, the coming of his kingdom, and doing his will, because even then
when he relieueth the necessities of his that call upon him, his name is
hallowed, his kingdom comes, and that is performed which is agreeable to
his will. This cannot but minister hope and comfort unto us in all our
necessities, that his honor and glory is after a manner darkened in our
distress, and as it were suffers in the same, which the lord God cannot but
erecte and advance, and therefore favor our distress, whereunto his own
honor is so nearly joined. Now let us pray, etc.

The xvij. Lecture upon the 12. and 13. verses.
12 And forgive us our debts as we also forgive our debtors,

13 And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil: for thine is the
kingdom, and the power, and the glory for ever, Amen.


IN this petition we do require the forgiveness of our sins, wherein we are
to understand that by this word sin, is not only meant the guiltines that
we have brought in upon us by offending, but also ye punishment whatsoever that
follows thereupon, as shall hereafter (God willing) most plainly appear. We
are therefore put in hope by this petition, to have as well the punishment as
the fault of our sin pardoned, and forgiven us, so that when any punishment
of God is upon his, they need not to despair: for we are taught and
commanded by him to make suite for the forgiveness of sins, which could not
be done in faith, if the Lord had not promised unto us the pardon and
forgiveness thereof. The godly at all times when any affliction was upon
them, have resorted to the Lord for the forgiveness of their sins. And why?
Are we not taught so to do in the holy scripture? 1. Kings. 8.
Does not ye prayer of Solomon leave this for a perpetual doctrine unto the
Church: that when any punishment is upon those yt be his, they should confess
their sins in truth, with an assured hope in so doing to find favor at his
hands: and ease of their grief when they shall truly turn unto him?
according as it is written in that Chapter in these words: Verse. 33.
When thy people Israel shall be overthrown before the enemy, because they have
sinned against thee, and turn again to thee, and confess thy name, and pray
and make supplication unto thee, then hear thou in heaven, and be merciful
unto the sin of thy people Israel, and bring them again unto the land which
thou gave unto their fathers. A plain proof we have in this place that the
people of God may resort boldly unto God, even then when his punishment is upon
the^ for the forgiveness of their sins: and as plain is this also yt his
mercy toward them, and pardoning of their sins, consists not only in the
removing of the fault from them, but also of the punishment that is due for the
fault and transgression. For he prays that when the people shall be led out of
their land by their enemies, because they have sinned against the Lord, yt if
they shall confess their sins and turn unto the Lord: then he would be
merciful and bring them again unto the land, which is to remove the punishment
from them, as well as the fault and guiltiness. This was that punishment to
be captives and prisoners in their enemies land: when they are brought home
this punishment is removed. The like proof we have of this matter in the same
Chapter, in these words: When heaven shall be shut up, Verse. 35.
and there shall be no rain, because they have sinned against thee: and shall
pray in this place, and turn from their sin, when thou do afflicte them,
then hear thou in heaven, and pardon the sin of thy servants, and give rain
upon the land. They that have sinned are encouraged to pray unto the Lord, and
are assured to be heard, when they shall in truth bewail and confess their
sin.

Mark it also, that as well in this place, as in that former, the pardon of
their sin remoueth the punishment, and reaches unto that as well as unto the
guilt thereof. I do note this because of that doctrine of the church of Rome,
which does affirm that God does pardon the fault of his, and yet retain still
the punishment, which they say must be redeemed by their satisfaction. A
dangerous doctrine that God should absolve them of the fault, and yet press
them with the punishment which does not apperteine unto them, but in respect
of their offense, because they are faulty: this doctrine charge the Lord
with injury. For if he shall remit and forgive the fault and yet reserve the
punishment, he punishes without a cause. For where the fault is pardoned, the
man is as if he had not offended, he is no longer accounted a trespasser. Can
it then stand with the justice of the Lord, to punish him whom he him self
has justified as no offender, in the free pardoning and forgiving of his
fault? We do see it throughout this chapter, that when they shall confess
their fault and turn unto the Lord, they are discharged of the punishmente,
and that the holy Ghost is ignorant of this diuorcement between ye punishment
and ye fault, which the church of Rome has invented to utter their mercha^dize
of satisfactions withal. And lest any should think that this prayer for the
forgiveness of sins, did but take place in these special causes in ye
removing of those particular and special punishments, the holy Ghost makes
it general in the seven and thirty verse.

When there shall be Famine in the land, when there shall be Pestilence, Verse. 37.
Blasting Mildew, Grasshoppers, or Caterpillars, when their enemies shall
besiege them in the cities of their land, or any plague, or any sickness, for
these are the very words of the text: that their prayers shall be available
when they shall confess their faults and truly turn unto ye Lord, for ye
removing of those punishments what so ever they are yt be upon the^ yea even to
make them yt shall have led them away captives to have pity and compassion on
them, as it is declared in yt chap. Verse. 50.
This is great comfort unto a Christian conscience, when he shall learn and
understand that there is a medicine that can cure him, even then when the Lord
shall have revealed his sin by bringing punnishment upon it. Moreover, least
it should be excepted against this, that in deed Solomon prayed that
punishments might be removed when they should confess and truly bewail their
sin: but how can it be proved that the Lord did ever promise to hear any
such prayers. 2. Chro. 7.12.13.14.
The matter is manifest in the book of Chronicles. And the Lord appeared to
Solomon and said unto him, I have heard thy prayer, if I shut the heaven
that there be no rain, or if I command the grashhoppors to devour the land,
or if I send pestilence among my people, if my people do humble themselves,
and pray, and turn from their wicked ways, then will I hear in heaven and be
merciful unto their sin and will heal their land. Psalm. 107.10
In the Psalm there is plentiful proof, that the Lord will be entreated to
forgive the sins of his servants, and to remitte their punishments when
they shall in true repentance, humble them selves before him. They (says the
prophet) that dwell in darkness being fast bound in misery and iron, because
they rebelled against the word of the Lord, when he humbled their heart with
heaviness they fell down, and there was no help, then they cried unto the
Lord in their trouble, and he delivered them from their distress: he brought
them out of the shadow of death, Verse. 17.
and brake their bands in sunder. In that Psalm there is likewise proof of
the same matter apparent enoughe in these words. Fools by reason of their
transgression, and because of their iniquity are afflicted, their soul
abhors all meat, and they are brought to deaths door, then they cry unto
the Lord in their trouble, and he delivers them in their distress: he
sends his word and heals them, and delivers them from their graves. It
were an infinite work to recite those places in the book of Psalms that
prove the mercies of God to remove punishments from the offenders, when they
shall in true repentance turn unto him. It is a hard matter in great
affliction to persuade the man that is sore afflicted for his sin, that there
is mercy with the lord to remove his punishment, if he shall truly humble him
self in repentance for his sin: yet, we see what plain proofs there are of
the same, to increase our faith in the persuasion to have our sins forgiven,
when we are truly grieved and penitent for the same.

This is a doctrine most needful to be stood upon, because the blessing that
the Lord has promised to bestow upon his, by reason of our corruption are
rather deliueraunces from evil, then preseruations in any continual course of
prosperity. I say they rather come in after our affliction, then stand
continually with us to keep affliction from us, which many mistaking, have
stumbled at the afflicted estate of the children of God: but the word of the
Lord does guide those that be his, to look to the end of the upright man.
Mark the upright man, and behold the just, for the end of yt man is peace
(says the Prophet.) And almost all those requests that Solomon makes for
the people of God, Psalm. 37.37.
are to have blessings and benefits procured unto them after their troubles
and afflicted estate. We see therefore how needful it is to hold this
doctrine of forgiveness of sins, that we stumble not at the cross of
Christ, that we do not murmur or despair in our affliction: that we should not
shake off hope, notwithstanding our grief whatsoever have had long continuance
and abode with us: that we nourishe no wrong judgment of the estate of the
Church and children of God, yt we decide not with the ungodly against the
servants and saints of God. A tentation that had almost shaken the faithful
servant and prophet of God David, until he went into ye sanctuary of the Lord,
to inquire ye end of those men. This doctrine overthrows ye heresy of the
Nouatians, who do deny the forgiveness of sins after baptism. That which is
joined with this petition of our forgiving them yt trespass against us, notes
not any deserving to have our sins forgiven, by reason of our forgiving of them
yt offend against us, for then we should not pray to have them forgiven, seeing
we remove them by deserte: but is added for our instruction, and for our
comfort. For our instruction, to teach us that the Lord requires this at our
hands, that we should be merciful because he is merciful. For our comfort
to tell us that if we which be men can remitte the wrongs and injuries done
against us, much more will our heavenly Father, who is without comparison above
man in mercy and compassion, forgive the offenses and sins of his servants,
when they shall in true repentance seek unto him. For the same it is needful
for our infirmity to receive persuasion of his mercy, especially when his
judgment shall be upon us, and punishment which is the assured sign of his
displeasure shall press us, it is then a hard matter to conceive hope that
the Lord will forgive us. For infidelity is as deeply rooted in our hearts
as any sin or iniquity whatsoever, therefore the Lord has left us (who are
taught by his spirit to forgive unto others their offenses committed against
us) an assured hope to find favor at his hands: who will never be found
inferior unto man in mercy. Therefore is it thus written in Luke, Luke. 11.4.
Forgive unto us our sins, for even we forgive every man that is indebted to
us. And as it is necessary that we should be vpholden with this hope, so is
it requisite that we remember that which is written in Matthew, Matt. 6.15.
If ye do not forgive men their trespasses, no more will your father forgive
you your trespasses: to admonish us that the Lord will have his to resemble
him, and hear this his image of mercy before the world. If we be taught to
remitt and forgive offenses unto others, when they shall have done us any
wrong, we may easily perceive that the Lord will not have us to cherish our
selves in the hope of being heard, when we shall offer unto other injury and
wrong. For if a Christian be admonished in this petition, so far to profit
that he learn to forgive injuries done against him: much more would the Lord
have him to be far from offending others by injuries done unto them.

The last petition wherein we crave that the Lord would not lead us into
temptation, but deliver us from evil, does admonish us that the almighty
uses to punish sin with sin, that when men shall have long continued in
sin, they shall become so blind and hardened therein by the just judgment
of GOD, that hardly sometime after much affliction, they can be cured of the
same. That the godly are subject unto a kind of hardness of heart, which is
a punishment for their former sins, laid upon them from the Lord, as may
appear by that prayer of the church of God, whereof we read in the Prophet
Isaie, in these words: Esaias. 63.17.
O Lord why haste thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened our
hearts from thy fear, return for thy servant sake, and for the tribes of
thine inheritance. It is not that hardness of heart, which is peculiar to
the reprobate, that is mentioned in this place, but to be so taken with the
snares of sin, and so ledd into temptation and blinded and entangled therein,
as the godlyest that lives may be, and yet afterward by affliction, or some
other means, delivered from the same.

For when it pleases the Lord to lay affliction upon his, no doubt there is
in them this erring from his ways, and hardness of heart from his fear,
which the Church of GOD complains of in this place, and which the Lord
purposes to cure. For he is not cruel to punish when there is no cause, but
his meaning is to mollify their hard hearts thereby, that they may be
humbled under the government of his holy word.

We pray therefore in this petition, that we may not be hardened through the
deceiptfulnesse of sin, for the avoiding whereof, ye children of God are
admonished in the Epistle to the Hebrews to exhort one another. Heb. 3.13.
Exhort one another (says the holy Ghost) while it is called to day, least
any of you be hardened through the deceiptfulnesse of sin.

This petition of not leading us into temptation, but delivering us from evil,
does well follow that of forgiveness of sins. For when it pleases the Lord
to forgive sin, he delivers them from being hardened therein: giving them
the sight of the deceit that is in it, and also power and maisterie over the
rage thereof. In that prayer of Solomon, which we have so often heard of
before, when he prays that the people of God may have their punishments
removed, when they call upon him: there is always added the condition of
turning from their sin, either in express words, or else in words that
necessarily importe the same. As to take one example for many, in that Chapter
he has these words: When Heaven shall be shutt up, and there shall be no
rain, 1. Reg. 8.35.
because they have sinned against thee, and they shall pray in this place, and
confess thy name, and turn from their sin, when thou do afflict them,
then hear thou in Heaven, and pardon the sin of thy servants, and of thy
people Israel, when thou haste taught them the good way wherein they may walk:
so that the turning from sin is necessarily required of them that do look
for the forgiveness of sin. And then especially when the Lord shall
testify against us from Heaven, by punishments laid upon us: we have to
call to mind our former sins, and cease to be careless and secure therein.
For when the Lord forgiueth sin, he also cures sin, not suffering us any
longer to sleep in the same, being snared with the baytes and allurementes
thereof, but begets in us a new care to shake it off, and a new
watchfulness over it.

There is added to ye end of this petition, For thine is the kingdom, the
power, and the glory for ever: which does admonish us of sundry profitable
instructions, for by it we are taught what should be ye end of our petitions,
why we would have the^ granted, even that his kingdom, power, and glory, may
be adua^ced. For (as we have learned before) while that the Lord frames his to
ye obedience of his will, gives good things unto the^, remoueth evil things
from them, his name is hallowed, his kingdom comes and his will is done here
in earth: for by dealing thus with his servant, he will be known to rule and
reign here upon earth, and be glorified in the same. This desire therefore to
have him glorified, should be both at the beginning and end of our prayers,
whether our suit be for spiritual graces, or for te^porall blessings. By this
also our faith is strengthened in the hope to obtain our petitions, because
the Lord cannot neglect the glory of his name, and the honor of his
kingdom, which depends upon the perfourmaunce of his mercies toward his
servants that call upon him: and therefore our hope cannot deceive us, being
joined so near unto the glory of our God.

Moreover in this we are admonished, that it is not the worthynesse of our
selves, nor yet of any other, but the honor of his name, yt commends our
suites and petitions unto the Lord. Finally, herein we are admonished of a
special worship and service, which is thanks giving unto GOD, when soever
we receive any benefit, of what kind soever. For we acknowledging in our
prayers, not only that he has the disposing of these benefits, but also
that his kingdom, glory, and honor consists in the rewarding of his with
the same: shall be found traitors to the crown of his kingdom, if after
benefits received, we do not by thanks giving, confess and acknoweledge the
same. This giving of thanks is a special worshipp and service of God, in
so much that the Lord rejecting sacrifice, places his honor in thanksgiving.
Will I eat the fleash of Bulls, Psalm. 50.13.
or drink the blood of Goats? (says ye Lord by his Ptophet.) Offer unto God
praise, and pay the vows unto the most high, and call upon me in the day of
thy trouble, so will I deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. And in the
last verse of that psalm, it is said that he who offers praise unto the
Lord, does glorify him. Whereby it appears that the Lord esteems
thanksgiving as a special worship and service of him, which may well be
perceived in sundry places of the Scripture, but especially in the book of
the Psalms. It is in deed a service of God, peculiar and proper unto the
children of God. For the wicked are not acquainted with it, they see not the
Lord his arm in their deliverances, they see not through the instruments that
God uses to help the^ by, into the especial goodwill and favor of GOD: from
whence the godly take those healpes to come as a plain proof thereof. Therefore
does ye Prophet say, The voice of joy and deliverance shall be in the tabernacles
of the righteous, saying, Pal. 118.15.
the right hand of the Lord has done valiauntly. He makes it the peculiar
work of the righteous, to rejoice in the Lord, and in heart to praise him.
For, notwithstanding all people taste liberally of his benefits, yet the
feeling of his fatherly goodness which procures giving of thanks in deed, is
proper only unto the children of God.

It is a singular privilege, that he does vouchsafe his elect alone, when he
gives such a sweet taste unto his benefits, as drives their hearts to
rejoicing and giving of thanks: not only in the comfort of the present
benefit, but also in that having received an assured token of his favor, they
peaceably pass over the course of their life, assuring them selves that they
are had in especial reckoning and account with the Lord. Therefore the
Prophet is bold to have this speech of them. Psalm. 89.15.16.
Blessed is the people that rejoice in thee, they shall walk in the light of
thy countenance. O Lord, they shall rejoice continually in thy name, and in
thy righteousness shall they exalt them selves. He makes it no common matter
to rejoice in the Lord, but matter belonging only to the elect and blessed
people of God, how greatly it pleases the Lord. The Apostle wittnesseth in
the Epistle to the Corinthes, 1. Cor. 1.11.
where he requires the prayer of the church of God for him in his affliction,
that when his deliverance is obtained by the prayers of many: many persons may
give thanks unto God. Which notably declares how acceptable a service it is,
to give thanks unto God, when the afflictions of the children of God serve
thereunto, and are beecome a special end of the same. As wittnesseth in like
manner the Prophet: Psalm. 102.19
The Lord has looked down from the height of his Sanctuary, that he might
hear the mourning of the prisoner, and deliver the children of death, that
they may declare the name of the Lord in Jerusalem and his praise in Sion.

Now if it be demanded why the sacrifice of thanks giving is so acceptable a
worship and service of the Lord? The answer is ready, because it ascribes the
government and distribution of all benefits unto the Lord: denying them to
come by casualtie or chance, as do the ungodly whatsoever they say, in that
they are neither comforted truly in them, nor yet thankful for them. Moreover
it acknowledges God not to be a dead thing and bare name, that regards not
men that serve him in the obedience of his will, but that in truth he has a
care of his Church, helps in their need, and regards them in perfourming
the truth of his promise toward them. This acknowledging of the mercies of
God by giueing of thanks, helps forward the faith of other in persuasion of
this tender care that he bears toward his.

Wherefore the godly were accustomed to open unto others the children of God,
the especial benefits and mercy which they had received of the Lord, that
they might not only join with them for the praise of his mercy, but also
receive increase of faith in the visible experience of his goodness. It is well
known that the people of God under the law had a solemn rite and ceremony,
in perfourming the vows of thanksgiving and peace offering, when soever they
had received any notable and singular benefit of the Lord. Which was a thing
so well pleasing the Lord, that they present this their purpose, to praise the
Lord, and to tell what he had done for them, as a reason to persuade him to
work their deliverance when they are distressed, according as we read: Save
me from the Lions mouth, and answer me, in saving me from the horns of the
Unicorns: Psalm. 22 21.
I will declare thy name unto my brethren: in the midst of the congregation
will I praise thee, (saying) Praise the Lord ye that fear him, magnify him all
ye seed of Jacob. For he has not despised nor abhorred the affliction of the
poor, but when he calls unto him, he heard. My praise shall be of thee in
the great congregation, my vows will I perform before them that fear him.
The pore shall eat and be satisfied: they that seek after the Lord shall
praise him.

This kind of persuasion have the servants of God often used, and therefore
we do read that the godly in their petitions have used often these words:
Shut not up (o Lord) the mouths of them that praise thee, open not the mouths
of the ungodly, that they may praise the power of their idols, and magnify a
fleashly king. They were persuaded that the Lord did greatly esteem his own
glory and honor: that it was a special service and worship that he delights
in, as it is in deed. For even the end of our salvation is the praise of his
free mercy and grace, and he has elected his to the praise of the riches of
his grace: and the end of our temporal deliverance is to acknowledge and
magnify that grace which we have tried to be true, and had good experience
of the same. So does the godly king Ezechias confess, that the Lord would
not have him swalowed up of the pit without the taste of his mercy in
deliverance, because if he had so departed, the Lord should then have wanted
that service of thanks giving for his deliverance which is so acceptable unto
him. For those that are so overwhelmed in their afflictions taste not of the
mercies of deliverance, which opens their mouth, and fills it with the
praises of the Lord. It was thy pleasure to deliver my soul (says Ezechias)
from the pit of corruption, Esaias. 38.17.
for thou haste cast all my sins behind thy back: for the dead cannot praise
thee, they that go down into the pit cannot hope for thy truth, but the
living shall confess thee as I do this day. The father to the children shall
declare thy truth: the Lord was ready to save me, therefore we will sing my
song all the days of our life, in the house of the Lord.

That he says: The dead cannot praise him, we have to take it as the truth
is, that when those that be his are not delivered in their distresses, he
wants that praise here in earth (where his glory is often oppressed) which
their deliverance would plentifully spread abroad.

And they do most thirste after the trial of his goodness here upon
earth, where there be so many enemies to his glory, that seeing ye plain
proof thereof, they may be plentiful in his praise. Therefore does David in
like manner require deliverance, that he be not overwhelmed in his afflliction,
and so the Lord want the praise of his deliverance: Return O Lord, deliver
my life, save me for thy mercies sake. For in death there is no remembrance of
thee, in the grave who shall praise thee? The Scripture is plentiful in such
proofs, where the servants of God have greatly longed for deliverance, that
they might praise his name, and have urged it as a reason to persuade the Lord
to hear their petitions, because then they would offer unto him that well
pleasing sacrifice and service of thanksgiving, a sacrifice that does so
greatly please the Lord, and therefore cannot but be well liked of all those
that be his.

It was declared before, that there was a solemn rite and ceremony among ye
Jews, in their thanks giving after so^e great benefit received, where the
godly met together not only to give praise, but also to be confirmed and
strengthened more and more in their faith, and persuasion of his fatherly care
and regard that he has toward those that be his. This is made plain unto us
in ye Psalm: He has brought me out of the horrible pit (says the Prophet)
and he has put in my mouth a new song of praise unto our God. Psalm. 40.2.
Many shall see it and fear, and shall trust in the Lord. It cannot but be a
singular worship of God, yt ascribes this right of government and care of his
servants unto him, that also has in it such force to increase faith which is
the founteine of all obedience. How great then is the sin of
unthankfulness, when men pass over the benefits of God, and the assured
pledges of his favor, without any thankful remembrance or comfortable
assurance of the good will of GOD?

Surely the neglect of this duty (I mean of thanks giving to God, when we
receive any singular benefit, as some notable deliverance from dangers, or
happy out going from our trouble) denies the Lord to be the disposer and
governor of things here below, and fathereth them upon fortune or chance.
How soever they deny it in words, it denies in deed any especial care to
be in God over his: it makes God to be nothing beside a bare name, and vain
imagination: it overthrows faith, (which persuadeth us of the special care
and good will, that God bears us in taking his benefits, not as common
things, but as pledges of his peculiar favor,) in that as common matters, and
no witnesses of any especial good will, by unthankfulness they are passed
over, and lightly let slip. Moreover, the want of this duty hinders the
profiting of others, in that they deny this help of strengthening their
faith, which the Lord has appointed, and the servants of God has practiced,
according as it was of late cited out of the Prophet, that many should see
what the Lord had done, and be drawn to put their trust in him. Now let us
pray unto our heavenly Father in the name of his son, that we may so pray
that we may obtain, and obteyning render from a thankful heart true praise,
and thanksgiving unto his name.

FINIS.
To the Reader.
Such faults (Christian Reader) as have escaped in the imprinting of this
book, the greater part whereof here vnderplaced, and corrected, and the
residue (being few or none, and of little weight,) omitted, we desire thee to
confer in reading, and charitably to correct that which, beside these, is
elsewhere to be amended, both in the poynting and in the matter.

Page 5. for Exo. 3.9. read 6.3. p. 6. For Ezec. 38.28.36.26. ibi. line. 19.
for renewing, removing. p. 8. l. 28. an, on. p. 14. l. 5. it, them. p. 15. l.
24. obedience, disobedience. ibi. l. 29. all, as. p. 19. l. 25. abeating,
abating. p. 26. l. 2. not, no. ibi. l. 9. out, us. p. 34. l. 9. untoward,
outward. p. 39. l. 21. put out, they are. 57. l. 22. we, unless we. ib. Heb.
6.16. p. 58. l. 7. it, in. p. 60. l. 1. Son, sin. ibi. in the margin.
Prou. 13.13. p. 61. l. 19. gadned, gained. p. 64. l. 16. nature. In, nature,
in, etc. p. 67. l. 9. Ezechiel, and, Ezechiel. And. ibi. l. 9. Apostles. The,
Apostles, the. 70. l. 26. no justice but his, no, his justice. p. 72. l. 20.
this, this age. p. 75. l. 21. put out of. p. 83. l. 23. as, it. p. 85. l. 10.
of, as. p. 86. l. 29. them, them the. p. 90. in the margin. Romans 12.10. p. 97.
l. 28. of the, of not. p. 105. l. 5. heart, heat. 109. l. 1. offered, offer.
117. l. 20. he, she. 119. l. 11. be had, hyde it. 124. l. 17. writes, witeth.
130. l. 19. put out (and.) 138. l. 17. over, our. 142. l. 8. debt, double. 144.
l. 30. by the their, in their. 148. l. 25. and as. 153. l. 26. we do, do we.
156. l. 29. to him, them. 172. in the mar. 2. These. 6. and 15 173. l. 17. lest,
least of all. p. 174. l. 8. would have, would not have. p. 176. l. 31. some
sin. 185. l. 4. has, had. 194. l. 17. his, this. 195. l. 5. put out, not. p.
199. marg. Iam. 3. James. 1.27.212. l. 2. be one: as, be as, 214. l. 7. not,
not so. 220. l. 3. preserving, pursuing. 223. l. 20. twiteth, witeth. 231. l.
24. the, that. 238. l. 3. providing, proving. ibi. l. 6. providing, proving.
140. li. 17. put out, the. 244. l. 6. put out, and. 245. l. 29. summoned,
summed. ibi. l. 30. put out, in. 247. l. 30. put out, what are. 263. l. 28.
withstand, stand. 275. l. 15. He that, that he. 277. l. 10. put the point
after the word justification. 278. l. 14. follow, flow. ibi. Ephe. 2.4.5.282.
l. 6. of, for. 286. l. 28. paid, appaide. 300. l. 8. secure, secret. 302. l.
10. wandering, wavering. 318. l. 10. on, in. 319. l. 6. let, will let. 325. l.
26. lightly, likely. 330. l. 5. prays, prayers. 344. l. 7. set the plain
point after same.


