A Sermon preached at Paul's Cross the Friday before Easter, commonly called
good Friday, in the year of our Lord. 1579.

By John Knewstub.

Printed in London at the three Cranes in the Vintree, by Thomas Dawson for
Richard Sergier. 1579.

A Sermon preached at Paul's Cross the Friday before Easter, commonly called
good Friday, in the year of our Lord. 1576.
By John Knewstub.
IT is thus written (right Honorable and well-beloved in our Savior Christ) by
the Apostle Saint Paul, in the second Chapter of his Epistle unto Titus.

11 The grace of GOD, that brings salvation unto al men, has appeared,

12 And teaches us that we should deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and
that we should live soberly, and righteously, and godly, in this present
world.

13 Looking for the blessed hope, and appearing of the glory of the mighty
God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ.

14 Who gave him self for us, that he might redeem us from al iniquities, and
purge us to be a peculiar people unto himself, zealous of all good works.

15 These things speak, and exhort, and rebuke with all authority.

This text does divide it self into four principal parts: The first part
commends a teacher unto us, in these words: The grace of God that brings
salvation, has appeared and teaches us. The second declares what it is that
he teaches us, to wit, To deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live
soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present world, waiting for the
glorious appearing of Jesus Christ. The third, notes what cost and charges
the son of God Christ Jesus our Lord and Savior was at, to have us good
scholars, and to profit well in this doctrine, and is contained in these
words: Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from al iniquity,
and purge us too be a peculiar people unto him self, zealous of good works.
The fourth and last part, describes the order of this School, and the manner
of teaching and training up of Scholars, in these words: These things speak
exhort, 1. Reg. 1.29.
and rebuke with all authority.

Concerning this Teacher (to resolve you in few words,) It is the Gospel of
God, which is the power of God unto salvation, for so many as shall believe it:
And therefore may well be called the grace of God that brings salvation. The
comparing of this verse, with the next before, will let you plainly see, that it
cannot be otherwise meant, then of the word of salvation, the Gospel of Jesus
Christ: Which for just causes, is commended unto us under this glorious title
of the grace of God that brings salvation. It is the Gospel then, that
teaches us to deny ungodliness, neither does it only tell us barely and nakedly
what is to be done. But with sweet promises allureth, and with great
persuasion and most loving counsel and advise, does exhort and provoke us
thereunto, craving, beseeching, and entreating us to yield and consent: not
leaving out any thing, that is likely to further the matter that is in hand.

The nature of man being (as it is) desirous of knowledge, how can he but be
welcome unto us, that professes to teach. If there were no more but the name
of a Teacher, it were yenough to drive us to some consideration for the good
entertainment of him, albeit we had never seen nor heard the man before. But
when these Teachers bring gifts with the^, the better to persuade, and when
those become teachers and perswaders, to whom for all our welfare and happy
estate, we are wholly beholden, may their advise possibly (think you) be
neglected, and not esteemed of any, who has but the least spark of humanity
or good disposition in him? And behold ye grace of god that brings with it
our salvation, teaches and entreats us, to deny ungodliness, and worldly
lusts: and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world.

If you like Teachers, that persuade and enter into the hearts of men by
gifts, you can not mislike him, I am well assured, that brings no less gift
then your salvation. If gifts do commend, I think he is sufficiently
commended unto us, and most true it is, that gifts and benefits, cannot but
commend their Masters that bring them. Solomon says, Prou. 21.14
that a gift laid secretly and closly in the bosom of him that is offended
with us, is able to assuage anger when it is grown so strong, that it may be
said to have sinews and bones. He says more and besides this, Prou. 17.8.
That a reward is as a precious stone, it prospers and prevails,
whethersoeuer it turns. Rewards and gifts received, hold a man as captive
and Prisoner unto the geuer, so that he is scarce his own man, but sees with
an other man's eyes, and deals with an other man's hands, for he who comes
commended unto us by some reward and gift, is able, as it were by some
enchauntment, to set what color he will upon his matter, and that so
cu^ningly, as the wysest man that is of us al, shall not bewray it. For do we
not read in Deuteronomie, That rewards blind the eyes of the wise, Dent. 16.1
and pervert the words of the just? And this is the cause, why in that same
place, the Judges are forbidden to take rewards, for such is the corruption of
man, that he will not stick to persuade his evil cause by those means, if he
shall understand that the Judge lies any whyt open on that part. But this
infirmity of man, who oftentimes furthereth his evil cause by gifts, may not
so prejudice the holy Ghost, who is without al suspicion to commend evil causes
unto us, but that it shall be always lawful for him to use what way of
persuasion as shall best like him: yea to enter upon us even by gifts, and to
cause the grace of GOD bringing with it our salvation, to entreat us to deny
ungodliness, and worldly lusts: to see if that which is so pearcing of
itself, be able too touch us: that which persuades so greatly, be of force to
prevail with us: that which oftentimes speedeth in evil matters: may find
favor with us to promote the best things. For what has he not obtained among
men, that by gifts has continued to persuade. And among gifts, there is some
diversity, some be more able to move us, (...)
then others are some persuade more effectually then others do: For those
benefits, have always been regarded above the rest, that have drawn us out
of some great danger, or have comforted us in some great extremity. The memory
of such, is wont to be of greatest continuance, and of most thankful
remembrance with us. When David would persuade Bethsabe his wife that Solomon
should be king after him, and put her out of al doubt, that she need never to
fear the matter any longer, he pledgeth for the assurance of his word, his
thankfulness unto God, for such benefits, as could not but bind his
obedience: That is, his often deliverance out of trouble. As the Lord lives
(says David) who has brought my soul out of adversity, Solomon thy son
shall reign after me.

The benefits are not lightly regarded, that are received in aduersitte: For
the present sense and feeling of the misery, does greatly enhance the price
thereof. And therefore David took away all occasion of doubting, when he
pawneth for assurance of his word, so great a matter, as was his thankfulness
for his deliverance out of adversity: For it could not be, that he should
forget to redeem so great a gage. And in this highest degree of gifts, comes
this benefit commended unto us, for it is the grace of God that brings
salvation: And bringing of salvation, proves our estate to have been damnable
before. It is not only misery the^, that we were plunged in before this
benefit came, but a misery of miseries: for we were holden under the thraldom
of death and damnation. Such a benefit deserves thankful remembrance, it
speedeth, where any persuasion will prevail: such a gift, a man would think,
should find favor, and prosper whither soever it turns. Having succeeded so
great and grievous a misery: how can it, but have ye cast of most bou^tiful
and sweet mercy: We may learn by this yt has bin said, what the cause is,
why the holy ghost says not simply The Gospel teaches and exhorts us: but
says the grace of God, which brings salvation, teaches and exhorts us:
for it is the Gospel that he means, and yet he calls it, The grace of God
that brings salvation: to make us more mindeful of the matter. This manner of
persuading by gifts and benefits, used of the holy Ghost: may learn us a
profitable lesson, how to withstand temptations unto sin whatsoever: to
wit, by keeping fresh in memory, the several benefits of God toward us,
making them as bulwarks, against our sinful assaults, so that when they
allure us, we may thus answer them, The God who has redeemed my soul from al
adversity, does forbid it me: The grace of God to whom I owe my salvation,
does deny it unto me: The goodness of that God, of who^ I have received life,
health, honor, wealth, deliverance out of these and these troubles,
preservation from the murderer, evil tongue, and slaunderer, does desire me,
that for all the good will that ever he has borne me, I would not consent unto
it.

If any Prince should by special pardon, deliver a subject from death, that by
law and Justice had deserved it, and after advance him to some place of honor
in the Land: hard and unthankful were his heart, if those suits especially of
the prince, which brought with them the remembrance of this mercy for their
better enterteinment, should nothing be regarded: and in very deed, the
benefits received from our God, should be notes of remembrance unto us, for
his several suits against sin, and should be always at the albowe iogging
of us, to remember him, when sin would pull us from him, And with these or
such like speeches to sound in our ears: That Lord that took thee off the
Ladder, when the sentence of everlasting death had passed against thee, bids
thee now remember him: that God who has picked thee out of so great a
multitude, that continue in their infidelity, hardness of heart and
obstinacy, and blessed thee with special knowledge, comfort and confidence in
him, now wills thee not to forget him. It shall be profitable for us, to
behold this in practice, which now in doctrine can not but delight us.

Joseph, warring with the wicked attempts of his Mistres, who would have
intised him to commit wickedness with her, bears off al her wicked assaults,
with this armor. For the very remembrance of his Masters good will and benefits
toward him, brideleth him so, that he dare not assent unto her shameful
demand, eue^ in respect of the injury, that he should do unto a master, so
good and well deserving at his hands. Behold (says Joseph unto her) my
master knows not what he has in the house with me, but has committed all
that he has into my hand, there is no man in this house greater then I,
neither has he kept any thing from me, but only thee, because thou art his
wife. How then can I do this great wickedness?

The benefits of his master toward him, seem so great a matter in his
eyes, that he would learn of that impudent and shameless woman, if impudency
it self could happily find out any color of reason or excuse, for so great
and grievous an offense: How then says Joseph, after he had recited the great
kindness of his master) can I possibly do so great wickedness? not thinking
otherwise, but that shamelessenes it self, would blush at such unkindness,
and unthankfulness, as that was, and with shame enough begin to give over, as
one who had nothing more now to answer, in so foul a matter. There is no
man so base, but in respect of some benefit received from God, he speaks
that sometimes in his heart, which Joseph uttered in word: to wit, there is
no man greater then I: but there are few that infer thereupon, as Joseph
did, how then can I do such wickedness against him, that has made me the
greatest. It were a godly advantage had of Pride, to make this gain of our
mounting and aspiring thoughts, which would persuade us that we be the
greatest: and thus to reply upon them: If I be such a one, how then can I
lie sleeping in security, ignorance of God, and his word, malice and
unmercifulness: being sworn enemies to his kingdom, that has thus advanced
me? You see by this that has been said, what is the use of God his benefits,
even to be the bane of ungodliness, and to smite through this old man of ours,
this corrupt nature: directing the Spear of Gods grace, eue^ to the heart
root of Sin, when it stirs within us: So that sin shall no sooner put
out the head, but we (calling to mind some one, or other special benefit of
God) shall be ready with that same weapon of his grace, to run upon it, and
wound it at the heart. Therefore we see what necessity lies upon us, (except
we will exceed in all unthankfulness) to yield our selves obedient scholars
unto this Teacher: even the grace of God which brings salvation.

Having spoken thus much of the scholemaister, order requires to tell you what
the lesson is, which this good Schoolemaister, would so gladly learn us, and
that is this: To deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly,
justly, and godly, in this present world. Let us see what this great grace
requires of us, even denial of ungodliness, and worldly lusts. Thus does
the spirit of God begin with us, for we are so wretched and wicked matter, that
we must be weeded ere any thing may safely be sown or planted in us. This
monstrous co^tagion and Leprosy are we admonished of, in the order of
teaching, used by the holy ghost, generally throughout the scripture. In the
Moral law, almost all precepts were negative: Thou shall do no murder: Thou
shall not commit adultery: Thou shall not steal. etc. to declare that the
chief goodness of a Christian, is to have conquered most evil in himself:
and that man to be the best, that has drained his corruption most: I mean
that has driven most corruption out of himself, and holden his affections in
most subjection and obedience. David demanding how he may do good of a young
man, sets out his meaning in these words: Where withal shall a young man
cleanse his ways. Psalm. 119.
Job after he has greatly commended wisdom, not finding any thing of
sufficient value to esteem it by, nor any creature that can point out the
place unto him, and say, here is the breed of it: in few words closes up the
matter, and says: To depart from evil is understanding: Job. 28.
So that a man, who does not weed evil out of him, can never look for any good
of that he has sown. But let us come unto the particulars: we must deny
ungodliness. What ungodliness is, I can not better tell you, then by opening
who be ungodly men, as they are described at large in the 21. of Job. They say
unto god, depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, Job. 21.
who is the Almighty that we should serve him? and what profit shall we
have, if we pray unto him?

The first note of the^ is, They say unto the Lord, depart from us. Not that
they are grown to such wickedness, as that this should be the speech of the
tongue, but the affection of the heart: neither yet that simply they would
have God go from them, but that they would meet him, and be acquainted with
him, without his word: For they say, We desire not the knowledge of thy ways.
That this is the true meaning, that they do not other wise put the Lord from
them, but because they would not deal with him in his word, is apparent in the
next chapter: where Elephas reputing Job among the ungodly, and willing him to
acquaint himself with God: uses these words: Receive the law at his mouth, and
lay up his words in thy heart. The Lord may not be divided from his Law for
that is to tra^fforme him, and to sunder him from himself, his wisdom being a
part of himself, and to make an Idol of him. Yet is no thing so common, as to
do those duties of serutre which perteine unto him, or unto our brethren,
without consulting or conferring with the word. For to let the Papists alone
who do transubstanciate the word, both into a foreign tongue, and also into a
strange sense: How many be there among us, that go into great matters at
adventure (as they say) even led by the common and ordinary course of custom,
because they have been so accustomed, Prou. 20.18
notwithstanding that Solomon does teach us, not to let thoughts tarry in the
heart, but such as have been placed there, by counsel and authority from
the word: and so does he think also of war, and charge us, that we
should not enterprise it, but by counsel from the word. Which both of them,
might seem of duty to plead privilege, and to claim pardon in regard of
the sudden coming, and unadvised bursting out of them.

Now when it comes to pass, that we are particularly pressed by the word,
to let go any pleasure or profit, that we long enjoyed, who sees not then,
how with full mouth we cry, depart from us, we will none of thy ways? Then you
see there is no remedy, but we must hold the Lord fast to us in his word, for
it has been always the commendation of the godly, to have walked with God. We
are not said to walk with God according to his infinite Majesty and Essence,
neither yet in that sense are we said to depart from him, for his divine
being, does not show it self unto creatures, neither is he visible unto us,
but he has drawn nie unto us in his word, and we must walk with him by
that. For how shall we fear that corrupt o^, that is so naturally ingraffed in
us, if his presence do not fray us from it? And what christian, who any whit
has known his own infection, dare but once dream, that his presence by his
word, should not be greatly needful, to awake him often, and rouse him out
of the sleep of mind, while he understands by the word ever and anon: that
the Lord goes quite contrary to him, and is departed altogether from him. We
are therefore to question with the word of God: how fares it with me in this
deed? am I gone from my god? have I in displeasure taken my leave of my Lord?
have I driven my Savior far out of my sight? Can it be well with me, while my
God turns his bark on me? But when men live without remorse of conscience,
while they cannot abide once to look upon them selves, in the glass of God his
word, while it is death for them, once to examine their doings, do they not
say depart from us, we will none of thy ways? When Jeremy the Prophet in in
his 8. Chapter, would note out the desperate state of the people in his time,
he sets no other mark upon them but this: There is no man that says what
have I done: Ierem. 8.
but every one turns to their raze, as the horse rusheth to the battle.
Then there is no way, unless we would join with this desperate people, but
that we must still hold God before us in the light of his word, and often come
into his presence, while we take at sundry times the accountes of our doings
by the word: accounting not only with the word of God, Esaias. 30. 1.
for the general duties of Christianity, but also for the several duties,
that our particular calling and place does bind us unto. We must needs
conclude then, that ungodliness reaches further then to Turks, Athiests, and
Papists, who set the Lord clean beside his word, even to those which without
remorse run on, without any presenting of them selves and their deeds,
before the presence of his word, wc the Lord sees to be so necesarie, as yt
we cannot want it, being otherwise as untoward scholars yt will do nothing when
their master his eye is not upon them. therefore let us al in the fear of God
pray that we may have love unto the word, and liking to be in the sight of our
God, which is, when we have our lust and longyng, to be under the government of
the Gospel. This is it, that Solomon spends so much time about, in the
Proverbs: vrgyng still, that Wisdom must delight us, and find some loving
entertainment with us: and that we never so please our selves in our
towardness, as to imagine, we could long want this necessary help of his
presence. Unto this familiar conversation with God in his word, he promises
all blessings, and deliueraunces from the greatest dangers. We must deny this
ungodliness, that speaks these words unto the Lord: Depart from us, for we
desire not the knowledge of thy ways. What wickedness were it, either with
the Papist, to set a visour upon the Lord his face, and to make him look as we
list: either else with the secure an careless Christian, to let him look as he
likes, so we need not to look upon him? The Lord has planted the ministry
of the word in his Church, not only to teach us barely, but also to comfort
us in our journey, and to quicken us in our duties, yea, and to fear us also
from sin.

Who is the Almighty, that we should serve him? This is a second note of
ungodliness, an usual speech of ungodly hearts, how so ever the tongue be
clear of it. For in deed they have no inward acquaintance with him, neither
do they in truth see any such deserts toward them, why why they should
be servants unto him. The benefits they have, they see them common with
other, but as for any special regard had of them, they do not understand of
it, and while they see nothing in God toward them, but that is general unto
all, they ascribe nothing unto him, but a general kind of goodness, which
they take to be indifferently cast down among men: to be taken up of so many
as will. Besides this, they never accquainte them with the sight of their
sins, and the desert thereof, which should lead them into a misliking of
themselves, and let them see other wages then benefits, to be by all equity
and right due unto them. Thus it falls out, that they would have him show,
wherein he has so hounde them, as he might demand so great things of them:
as if they should call for a reckoning, to see what is come in, seeing the
charges arise so great, and the duties laid upon them, so many and diverse.
Thus while the ungodly receive benefits, but not as tokens of fatherly
affections, while in the use of the benefit, they are no whit confirmed in the
peculiar care and affection, which he bears his elect, they cannot but say:
Who is the Almighty that we should serve him? What token have we of his special
good will, why we should in such difficult matters serve him, and with such
danger attend upon him? For in very deed, he that shall get out more then
ordinary service, had need see more then common good will in him, who shall
exact it. They enjoy the benefit as other do, but so as they do repose them
in it, and return no special thing into the accountes of the benefactour,
whereby they might know he makes an other reckoning of them, then of the
common sort: even such as a loving father does of his own son. Moreover,
their sins are seldom or never in their sight, I mean with this
consideration, that in justice they do deserve, not only the stopping of the
course of his grace: but even to have let in upon them, the fluddes of his
wrath. Which thing if it were truly seen, could not but set a great price
upon those benefits, that come in over such deserts. The mind of the
geuer, commends not the gift of them, for they see not so far: they join
them not as seals to his letters of free grace, I mean, to the free grant of
his grace: notwithstanding, we be forewarned of this dividing of them, and so
straightly charged to unite them: Beware least thou say in thine heart, my
power, Deuteronomy, 8.^ 18.
and the strength of mine own hand prepared me this abundance, but remember
the Lord thy God. For it is he which gives the power to get substance, to
establish his covenant, which he swear unto the fathers, as appears this day.
Is it not a great villainy, to taste so liberally of his benefies, and yet to
persuade us so sparingly of his good will? to have so friendly dealing with his
gifts, and so little liking of him self, that when we have deucured so many
benefits, we should inquire of the Almighty, who he is, that we should
serve him, as if yet we had seen nothing, to bind our service unto him? Can
there be more unkindness, then in so many benefits bestowed, to gain no good
will? so many benefits to be let out, and no good will to come in with them
again? That we may the more clearly see into his good will, and free mercy
through his benefits, we must be brought back now and then unto our sins,
and the just deserts thereof. For then shall we reckon them to be benefits in
deed, when we see what doeinges they have succeeded, and been joined
withal. Thus allayeth Moses the pride of the people of Israel, and gets GOD
his due honor among them in the ix. of Deuteronomie, Speak not thou in thy
heart, (after the Lord thy God has cast them out before thee) saying: eut.
9.4.
For my righteousness the Lord has brought me in, remember and forget not,
how thou prouokest the Lord God to anger in the wilderness, since the day
thou did depart out of the land of Egypt, until ye came unto this place:
ye have rebelled against the Lord. He calls to mind sundry of their
grievous cra^sgressio^s particularly reciting ye time and the place. By these
rules let us try, who in matters of any weight laid upon the^ by the Lord,
are like to return this answer: Who is the Lord that I should serve him?
Even so many as do find, no sweetness nor taste in him by his benefits, as
are no more confirmed by his blessings, in his fatherly affection toward them:
such as get thereby no strength of faith: such as do not hold themselves, the
more bound unto him: as are not the more delighted in him: as are not the more
desirous to walk worthy of him: as find not their heart the more inyfull in
him: as find them no better minded to his law, to the which he has set over
his own love: even those I say, that dwell in the benefits, and so they have
their desire, they hold that their heaven, and their happiness: that look no
further then the benefit, that stay upon it, and inquire no further whether
God do love them, and is become a father unto them, so as they may accounte
upon his benefits, as gifts from a loving father: those that think
themselves then to use his benefits best, when God and all goodness is the
furthest from their mind: those that can find no taste in these temporal
blessings, unless the mention of him who gives the taste and savor unto
them, be indented and conditioned withal, to depart far from them, for that
time which they have to use them: those that will never set their sins in
sight, that they may further the accounte of the benefit, and the good will of
the benefactour. We must deny this ungodliness, that yet demands, Who is
the Lord, that we should serve him? After so long use of his benefits.

Now would I know, where we might have a place for them, that are less
acquainted with him, then they were many years ago, who have less comfort
in his word, less Religion, less obedience, less good conversation: as for
them that take his benefits, and with them do war against him, their place
is taken up already in the nethermost pit, if the Lord give not great
repe^cance: therefore brethren for Gods cause let us hasten our beeter
acquaintance with him, who by benefits, has so long time commended him self
unto us, and let it be our shame that he should thus long be a stranger unto
us, that of so long time has had so loving dealing with us. Let us joy more in
his delights, set our hearts more upon that he commands, and commends unto
us: so shall we come out of their rank, which in heart say: Who is the Lord,
that we should serve him? Which men by his benefits, have received no earnest
of their salvation, no pledge of any special good will, no assurance of true
safety, no delight in his love, no more familiarite with him, nor greater
comfort of him: who are no more drawn out of the world, and her delights to
follow him, who has in so sundry gifts witnessed his good will: called them
unto him, and pledged these as earnests, that his own glory abides for them.

Now would I see where we might set them, if not in his rank who have so
often been fetched up from the love of the world, by so many messengers of Gods
mercy, and yet have so little joy to be above, and so hungerly pursue the
pleasures and profits here below, as if they had never (no not in meditation)
had the sight of any other delights. The benefits then lead us unto the Lord,
when in them we see him to be our father, and make the more have to come to
him having an eye to the endless life he calls us unto: coming more in
desire from these things here below, and getting more hold, and more hope
above: showing as well in prosperity as adversity, that we are not wedded in
our lust and desire, unto worldly goods, in wealth, by not being let by
it, to follow the way that God does set before us, nor yet to deal
mercifully with our neighbors, and to walk humbly with them: and in
affliction, by holding our selves well contented, insomuch as we want not him
who is a plentiful portion, and the best veritage.

The last note of ungodliness is this, they say, what profit shall we have if
we call upon him? These are no speeches of the tongue, as I have said before,
but the sense of the heart. No man so evil that makes not some reckoning of
his prayers, how some do value them, we cannot be ignorant. The holy Ghost
when he has reproved the people, for their out ward worship in sacrisices,
wills them to call upon the Lord in the day of trouble, promising that he
will hear them: and they shall glorify him: sal. 50.
making prayer a special worship of God, and setting it before the outward
sacrifices, in the 4. of Deuteronomy. Deuteronomy. 4.
it is made the peculiar prerogative of the people of God, because there are
none in such a case as they be, who have their Gods so nigh them, as our God is
nigh unto us, in all that we call unto him for. Then must it needs be, that
they are in an evil taking, that see no fruit of their prayers: it being the
special blessing of the people of God, to have him nigh in their prayers, by
granting their petitions. But for as much as it is said to be the voice and
affection of the heart, and no man being asked, will give out so slenderly of
his prayers: Let us come to a further examination of it. The most sort of men,
have no profit by their prayers, because they make not conscience to know and
do those things, which the Lord by his word has revealed, to be pleasing in
his sight: Whatsoever we ask, 1. John. 3.22.
(says. S. John) we receive of him, because we keep his commandments: and
do those things which are pleasing in his sight. No maruail then if those be
far from having their prayers heard of the Lord, who have neither knowledge
nor liking of his word. And a great sort of others, who in profession have
received his word, when they want any thing, if they see means how to come
by it, either pray not at all, but forthwith use the means: either else, if
they pray, it is but of fashion, as being in their judgment sure and safe
already: if they see no likelihodde to attain it, being without hope, they
let prayer fall. So if any thing fall out, where there was the work of an
ordinary mean, it steppeth between God and his praise, and darkeneth the
light of prayer: If otherwise any thing come, where prayer for want of faith
was let down, that is put over to miracle or fortune: therefore in heart and
of experience they cannot say, that they are any whitte beholding unto their
prayers. But we learn in the Book of God, that the godly pray in matters
most hard to be brought to pass, and most unlikely in regard of any usual
and ordinary means: and yet are heard, and give him the praise. There are
named in the 107. Psalm. 107.
Psalm, diverse matters that seem to be mere casual, coming without all
means, yet prayed for, granted, and with praise returned to the giver: and
under those are all other also understood, that may be thought to be as
casual. There is mention made of the mariners in the Sea, tossed with
tempests, now hoysed up, now plunged down, till their hearts fail within
them: yet when they pray unto the Lord, they are heard of him, and then do
they give him thanks. Other casual things are mentioned, and all
comprehended. But in the last verse the holy Ghost, makes it only the wise
and godly man's work, to understand this, in truth to comprehend it, and by
true and inward assurance thereof to give him the praise for it. The ungodly
therefore in ordinary things are hindered by the means: inextraordinarie they
see nothing but chance: and therefore they say: What profit shall we have if
we pray? The children of God, knew that nothing is pure unto them, unless it
be sanctified with prayer: and therefore they reforte to him in all their
necessities by prayer. They pour their griefs into his bosom, with desire to
obtain, 1. Tim. 3.
that they might praise his mercies, and they surely find, if they continue
asking, either deliverance, either else a tolerable condition: which does
assure them, that it is not in vain to seek the Lord, and that the end will
be happy. Prayer for benefits, acknowledges God to be the giver, and makes
praise to be given in truth: not to pray to God, is to be an utter enemy to
his glory: not to pray particularly, as necessity requires, is to envy him
and his praise, and the practice of David (in particular considerations making
his prayers and Psalms) does reprove it. The Papists take God his grace to
be thrown down indifferently. And men not experienced of his goodness
particularly, must needs think, that he has put all things unto a general
government, for as for any particular experience, of his good will toward
them, they have it not. We must deny this ungodliness, that grows by
prayer, into no experience of God his goodness. Do we think that any man,
shall ever fafely put himself over unto the hope of the promises, at the hour
of death: which all his life long, he never tried to be true before? We must
also deny worldly lusts, and not only those, which tend to hurt our
neighbor, in body, goods, or good name: but even those that hold us so in
this world, as we can get no true taste in the pleasures of an other: For we
are holden captive of worldly lusts, in one respect or other: until we become
new creatures, looking for that glory, which shall appear at the coming of
Christ. The next thing required is to live soberly. This sobriety, is a gift
that moderateth the mind in his delights and affections, and may therefore
well be termed The moderatour of the mind. It is a gift, that does keep the
mind from pleasures altogether unlawful: and in that these be lawful, it
keeps a man from the excess and abuse of the^. That it is not only
restrained to the filthy desires of the flesh, may be procued in the xii. to
the Romans: Romans 12.
Where the Apostle appoints this gift and grace of God, to order every man
in his calling, that he take not upon him, but according to that measure which
God has given him. For in very deed, the mind of man has many things,
besides the filthy desires of the flesh, too ouerturne it, wherein this gift
of God has good use. It was this gift that Paul had, when as he professed
him self to have learned, to be rich, and to be poor: to have been
instructed, to abound, and also to want: to to be content with all estates,
and to hold himself happy in them, as in a portion sent him from the Lord. It
may be thought no great gift, for a rich man to learn to be rich, yet does
the Apostle say, it is a matter that requires learning, and does ascribe it
unto Christ his work within him. It is therefore worth the labor, to enter
into some farther consideration, what he should mean in this matter. The
meaning he gives in the same place, when he says: I have learhed in what
estate soever I am, Phil. 4.
therewith to be content. A lesson necessary for all me^. A lesson necessary
for rich men, to learn them to be rich: that is, to hold them selves
contented, to remember they have their bonds appointed them, and there to
acquaint their affections, to find contentation, sufficiency, and a rich
portion. So shall they truly be thankful to God for it. For in very deed these
hearts of ours must find them in their own persuasion richly provided for,
ere they shall in crueth and vnfainednesse be joyful in the Lord. Let us then
learn from a contented mind to say unto our hearts: This is thy lot
appointed thee of the Lord, here are thy bounds, this estate has the Lord
distributed unto thee, There is good cause, not only to be content, but also
well apaide with it. We must learn our hearts to be content with it, nay to
take it as rich and liberal portions whatsoever it be, and as a bar to hold
in our affections from raunging into greedy desires. For our affections are as
guifes, insatiable, that would never rest with contentation in a thing, but
still be enflamed with the desire of more, which would still draw and hale us
forward and so hold us in continual torment. The remedy where of, the Lord
has appointed our own estate whatsoever to be: that it might appease our
affections, and settle them with the rest, peace and good liking, as in the
seat which our good God has seen to be convenient for us, and therefore set
us in it, to find ease, quiet, comfort and contentment therein. For if thine
heart be not settled in thine estate, with good liking and contentation, as in a
good provision: it is impossible, that ever thou should become thankful for
it. For to seem to joy without joy, is to play ye hypocrite, and to dissemble
with God. We must therefore take our selves to be rich already, and let go this
desire to be rich: 1. Tim. 6.
For as Paul says, They that desire to be rich, fall into snares and noisome
lusts, which drown men in perdition and destruction, which while some have
lusted after, they have erred from the faith. We must let go the seeking
greedly after that we have found already: for there is riches and sufficient
treasures in every estate, which must be found out of us to quench this
desire to be rich. Let us learn to be content with our estate, and to hold
that as a certain rule, for he that has no sure rule, shall be so tossed of his
affections, and so carried hither and thither, as he shall never find a time to
say, it behooves me to hold my self here within my bonds. Let every man with
S. Paul, learn therefore to be rich, and to take up good liking of his
condition and estate, and take heed he convey not the title of true
thankfulness from his God, while the unquiet desire of increasing his
condition, steals all comfort, which must be matter of true thankfulness, from
his present estate. But we must learn also with Paul to be poor, as well as
to be rich, for he had learned, and we must in what estate soever we be,
therewith to be contented. And this contentation of mindeis a medicine for
coue tousnes, Hebr. 13.
as the Apostle testifies, saying: Let your conversation be without
couctousnesse, being content with that you have. The rich man must be learned
to be poor, enen to be ready with contentation of heart to go under a poor
estate, and to assure him self to find the Lords blessing and comfort in it.
He must in his riches take out this lesson, and school himself herein, and
by exercise and meditation acquaint his mind to the liking of a lower estate,
if the Lord should be so good: hoping to find the Lord very good unto him
in the same. Behold a meditation in riches, and a lesson that is of all men to
be studied, and not that only, but learned also, and taken out: that if their
estate should yet be poorer, they should persuade them selves to find the
Lord good unto them, in that their condition, and therefore before to make
their reckoning of a poorer estate, by much meditation of it, and yet a rich
blessing in that notwithstanding, even a quiet and a contented mind. And this
would further the account of our present estate, when we should assure our
selves, of a very good portion and plentiful, if our estate were yet lower.
Neither ought we so to learn it, as a lesson not likely to come to prartice:
but as one, whose practice were not like to be deferred. This lesson has in
it, a very necessary use to try us by. For whatsouer he be, that cannot
bear a low estate laid upon him by the Lord: if he have an higher, he will
abuse that in like manner. For he that is ashamed of poverty, will be proud of
wealth. He that is impatient when he is humbled: will be insole^r, when he is
exalted. For what can bind him to true duty, if it be not conscience unto
GOD? which if he dare dispense withal in poverty, he will not greatly regard
in abundance. Thus we see for a man to learn to be rich, it is expedient he
learn to be poor. For a man to learn to be honorable, it is required he
learned with patience and contentation, to go under an estate without honor.
This sobriety then, that keeps the mind from being ouercharged, and drunken
with the desire of a better estate: is principally and chiefly required in a
Christian, yet rea cheth it further, and conteyneth within it those, who albeit
they be not greatly seeking after an other or better estate, yet be they too
much wrapped and entangled, in the cares and delights of that they already have.

This does the Apostle note unto us: 1. Cor. 7.2^.30.31.
in the first to the Cor. This I say brethren, because the time is short
hereafter, that both they which have wives, be as though they have none: and
they that weep, as though they wept not: and they that rejoice, as though they
reioysed not: and they that buy, as though they possessed not: And they that
use this world, as though they used it not: for the fashion of the world goes
away. And he does not only open the disease, but also give us the remedy of
it: the consideration of the shortness of this life, and the speedy passage
thereof. Which he would have to season our joy, to season our delights,
even our bying and sellyng. As if he should say, there were no place of right
joy, right grief, true hying, true sellyng, where the consideration of the
shortness of this life, and the step of ye other did not step in, to moderat
the joy, the grief, the bying and selling the cares that do accompany a
married estate. How needful it is that we should (even in lawful things)
have our affections temperate: The parable in the foureteenth of Luke does
apparanclie declare. Luke. 14
Where they that are bid to the Supper make their excuses, only by those
things that of them selves are lawful and permitted. For it is lawful to buy
a Farm, it is lawful to prove Oxen, it is lawful to marry, and to be married:
Yet it is said that rather the basest of the people, shall be compelled to enter
in, then that these (who have been bid and are hyndred by these things)
(though in themselves not unlawful) should cast of the Supper. We see then
how needeful this sobriety is, that keeps us from surfeiting with these
transitory things. The very Ethnickes hane found and taught that there is a
blessing, which a good men hathmay iynde in every estate. Seneca has these
words: Assuescendum itaque conditioni suae, enecae de anquilitate itae.
nihiltam acerbum, in quo non aequs animus solatiu^ inueniet. If Heathe^men
found joy in every estate, by custom and contimiance, shall we find none,
who have the promise of our GOD, for special blessings and asistaunce. Let us
answer our affections, which will not hear of our abusing: as David did
Michol, the daughter of Saul. 2. Sam. 6: who scornfully checking him, 2. Sam.
6.
that he had so abased himself, in bringing home the Ark of the Lord, and
that before the maids of his servants, received this answer from him: it
was before the Lord, who chose me rather then thy father, and al his house: and
commanded me to be ruler over all the people of the Lord: and therefore I
will yet be more byle then this, and will be low in my own sight: and of the
very same maid servants which thou have spoken of, shall I be had in honor.
Let us, I say, answer our affections, and say, it is before him, and for him,
of whom we hold all: let us say, we are yet ready to be more vile and lowly,
if need require, and our God see it so good: for we must cheyne up our
affections, with consideration that our bonds are limited unto us, and that
we are ready to be abased, if such a condition should he laid upon us, from
the Lord. Let us learn in the fear of God, to take up our affections, from
pursuyng these delights, reme^bryng that ye lord has pledged himself for
assurance of a sufficient provision: Let your conversation be without
covetousness, Heb. 13.
for it is said: I will not leave thee, nor forsake thee. If we had but the
word of some wealthy man, to assure unto us a sufficiency, how would it
comfort our hearts, and lessen our labors and cares? Behold the words of
the highest for him that is content with that he has: if this will not move
us, let us remember that in the eight of Luke: Luke. 8.
there is mention made of a cursed kind of ground, that received the precious
seed of Gods word into it: but either riches, cares, or voluptuous life,
does so choke it, as there comes no fruit of it. And if this will not
prevail with us, let us call to mind the watchwoorde that is given us by out
Savior Christ in the 21. of Luke: Take heed least at any time your hearts
bee^ oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness, Luke. 21.
and cares of this life. Now if ther^ happen to be any, who being weery with
the burden of their weakness, in this part shall become earnest suitors unto the
Lord, to prevail against their corruption in this behalf: let them assure
them selves that the unfeigned petition and prayer of a man laden with the
burden of his want, being continued: cannot return empty from that GOD, who
by name calls out such, to come unto him, with promise that he will hear
them. Therefore to conclude this matter of sobriety, let our lot given us of
the Lord, be our limitte, let a lower estate be well digested by meditation:
let GOD his assurarmce be sufficient, let his threatenings fear us: let his
promise (if we be weery) encourage us.

To live righteously, is so to order our life, as every man may have his own
at our hands: for justice is a virtue that gives to every man his due. The
lord to maintain brotherly love among his, has made one the storehouse of
necessaries, for another: So is the welfare of every man laid out of himself,
that love may by such means rather be mayntained. He that is in the place of
justice and judgment, is to remember, that he give to every man his own. For
the Fatherless, in his good cause, has the right of a father in him: The
widow, of an husband: the blind and ignorant man, that cannot discern where
the help of his cause lies, has the right and title of an eye in him: the
oppressed of a Patron. Thus does Job clear himself, in the 29. of Job. I
delivered the poor that cried, Job. 20.
and the fatherless, and him that had none to help him, the blessing of him
that was ready to peryshe, came upon me, and I caused the widows heart to
rejoice, I was the eye to the blind and feet to the lame, I was a father to
the poor, and when I knew not the cause, I sought it out diligently: I brake
the jaws of the unrighteous man, and plucked the pray out of his teeth. Thus
did Job discharge him, of the defense he did owe unto them: lendyng his eye
unto the blind. to spy out the right of his cause: and his hand to the
oppressed, to pluck the pray out of the vnrightecus man's teeth. Mare and
besides this, the whole land has title, to a defense and saftie by them
fromsinne. Forsimre and wickedness unpunished, ^^keth the land guilty of blood,
and brings the wrath of GOD upon it. Which we have notably proved unto us,
in the 21. of Dent. Deuteronomy. 21.
A man is found dead, it is not known who sine him, the elders and judges
must come forth, and measure to the Cities, that are round about him that is
slain: the Elders of the City next to the slain man, must take a Heyfer out
of the drove, and bring it into a stony valley, and strike of the Heyfers
neck: and wash their hands over the Heifer that is beheaded, and testify,
and say: Our hands have not shed this blood, neither have our eyes seen it: O
Lord be merciful to thy people Israel, and lay no innocent blood to the charge
of thy People Israel, and so the blood shall be forgeuen them: so shall ye take
away cry of the innocent blood. This care and prayer was there, to unburden
the land of blood: even when the malefactor could not be found, and this
confessing of a kind of guiltiness, in the Elders and Judges, next unto that
City: for that (if justice had been straightly looked unto by them) it is
credible, the malefactor durst not have approached so near. Thus would the
Lord teach us, that wickedness unpunished, cries out against the (...)
wherein it is committed. Now seeing by the express commandment of God,
there was such care taken to purge the land of murder, or manslaughter, when
the author thereof was unknown: And that not otherwise, then by sacrifice,
prayer, and solemn protestation before the Lord, of their innocence, either
for doeyng it, or seeing it done, they were discharged of the danger thereof:
What conscience and care ought ye, and all other that sit in judgment, to
have, that you make not your selves, and this land guilty of the blood, by
winking at sin and wickedness: especially, by letting the murderer that is
manifest escape you? And if the whole land, (where wickedness committed
against the second Table, is winked at) be found guilty of the blood: we
stand in greater danger of that iniquity that directly concerns the glory
of God: I mean the offenses done against religion, and the true woorshyp of
GOD: And the whole land, is to look for defense against so great danger, at
the Magistrate his hand. And because it is a duty they owe unto us, it
stands them upon to seek the peace of their own conscience, in that
calling: which cannot be other wife compassed, then in the true discharge of
that: which is det and due on their behalf. That which is recorded in the 22.
of Joshua, does notably direct magistrates, Joshua. 22.
with what care and vigilancie, they are to deal against corruption, in the
worship of God. It is worth the notyng to observe, how they were afraid of
the Altar erected by Jordan: insomuche that they geathered them together, to
goevy to war against their brethren, so soon as they heard, that an Altar
was builded in that place: Albeit their brethren had no ill meaning in that
matter. Nay as afterward they do profess, their meaning therein was very good
and godly: but conscience of duty, and experience of plagues, where such
offenses as there they feared, had escaped without punishment: made them ielous
over every occasion, and afraid of every light suspicion: as appears by the
speech, which they had to their brethren: Have we to little (say they) for the
wickedness of Peor, Joshua. 22.17.
whereof we are not cleansed unto this day? ye are turned this day from the
Lord: and even to morrow he will be wroth, with all the congregation of
Israel. Did not Achan trespass greatly, in the execrable thing, and wrath fell
on all the congregation of Israel, and this man alone perished not in his
wickedness. The Lord put it into the mind of our magistrates, in like manner:
that when soever they shall hear of an Altar erected, in any secret corner
of this land, and false worship used, they make no delay, until they have
seen the offense punished. We see the^, what cause magistrates have to watch
over evil, and what occasion we have to commend them to God, by fervent
prayer, that they may sincerely serve the Lord, in so great a calling, least
the whole land should be araigned, before the judgment seat of the highest,
and all found guilty of much blood, outrage, and Idolatry, which has long
laid upon the land unpunished: which plague, the Lord in mercy keep far
from us.

Justice and Judgment, they are the strong holds, and fenced places of this
land, they are the keys of our Country. they keep us better then all the
Blockehouses, or places of defense wheresoever: they are better able to
encounter with our enemies, then any garyson of men, how well practiced soever
they may be. But contrariwise, the neglect of justice, is worse then
rebellion: it pulls Princes out of their thrones, makes the land cast out
her inhabitants, joins with forra ne power, opens the gates of all our
castles and houldes, takes the weapon from the warrior, takes the heart from
the valiant Soldier, wisdom and forecast from the wise Cou^cellour, poisoneth
al our munitio^. And in the fifth of Esai, The Lord under the similitude of a
Vine, Esai. 5.
does most lively declare, how he will deal with his people, when judgment
and righteousness can not be found among them. He will break down the wall
thereof, and it shall be trodden down, he will take away the hedge, and shall be
eaten up. It is our part therefore to pray for our magistrates, and those that
be in place of justice, that they may look to the cause of the Widow,
Fatherless, and oppressed, that they may purge the land of blood, by taking
punishment upon malefactors: that they may have courage and the fear of GOD,
that they may hate covetousness, so that our Prince may sit sure among us, our
holds strongly fortified, our hedges still vpholden, that we may long enjoy
peace, to the better honoring of our God. And their own safety does require
great care in this behalf. Shall thou reign (says the Prophet to Iehoikim)
because thou closest thy self in Cedar? Iere. 22.
Did not thy father eat, drink, and prosper, when he executed justice and
judgment? when he judged the cause of the poor he prospered: was not this
because he knew me (says the Lord) but thine eyes, and thy heart, are only
for the covetousness, and for oppression: therefore thus says the Lord of
Iehoikim, he shall be buried as an Ass is buried.

The Lawier he must deal justly, and give every man his own: for he is the
living land mark, that limitteth men their inheritance, that points out
their right and title, how far it goes, and so breaks controversy, and
tells every one in his doubtful cause, where his claim and title lies, what
law and equity will bear him in, and where it will forsake him. He (I say)
is a living land mark, that by true opening of the laws, boundeth every man
within the compass of his own title. And because of that, does highly
deserve of the common wealth, as a most necessary, and profitable member
thereof. Such men are the common treasure house of the Lord, whereunto the
evidences of every man are committed: and they put in trust withal, to reserve
for every man his title: that when he is incombred for his right, they should
out of that Treasure house, of the law, bring good evidence for him, and so
forthwith, clear his innocence. The law is the house of every man, where
being tossed with many storms abroad, he finds a place to hide his head
in, and being in safety, does boldly contemn both wind and weather, and
quietly take his rest. For being tossed with injuries, either in body, goods,
or name, we have no house of refuge, and rest beside ye law: no sanctuary in
our unjust vexation, besides that. The place which they serve GOD in, who are
ministers of the law, is very high and honorable: the good they may do, very
much, if GOD give them conscience and care of it. The hurt in like manner, is
exceeding great, where the fear of God does not rule. For is it not a
merueilous mischief to remove the landmarke of any man? It is that sin,
that had a solemn curse, called for against it, by the ministry of the
Levites, whereunto all the people were commanded to say, Dent. 27.
Amen. And what diversity or difference is there between him, that sets in
the land mark, and so boundeth a man shorter: and him, that either by
wresting of the law, or hyding the true meaning of it, is an occasion of
cuttyng short, or empayring the true Title of any man? Every man will grant,
that if a man of no conscience, had the custody of all the Evidences of this
land, he might do much mischief, by cancellyng, crossing, interlining,
putting in and out, at his pleasure, hidyng, or showing, renting, or reserving,
as him lusts. And is not this performed, while the law is made to speak,
that they knew in truth it did never mean: and too burye that in silence,
which it was appointed to give testimony and witness unto? And if all this
were nothing, what can be so miserable, as when a man has been all the day
abroad, in the storms, and tempests, at night when he comes home, he shall
find his house in that case, that it can neither hold out wind nor rain? And
do not many, who are forced by reason of the Storms and Tempests abroad, to
take them to this their house and harborowe, I mean the Law: find the tempest
often as grievous there, as before they did in the plain? would to God there
were none turned out of their own doors in the midst of the storm, without
any hope at all of harborowe from thence? or if a man that had been dogged, to
his own doors, by Thieves, and having gotten his house upon his head,
begins to breath himself, and rejoice, for his good escape, thinking all to
be safe, and suspecting no harm: who could sufficiently bewail him, if in
the midst of his Triumph, they be found in his own house, that fall upon
him, and murder him? And is not the law, the house of the troubled, and vexed
man? Yea, Westminster Hal is the poor man's house. And therefore does he pay
tax, and subsidies, that it might be an house of defense unto him, able to
keep out wind and weather, how tempestious soever. If a man that is
oppressed, and wronged abroad, in any part of this land, shall bring his
matter unto hearing at Westminster Hall, look that ye be good unto him in
his own house, let him take no harm at home: His grief is great enough
abroad. It has always, even by the laws of man, been counted an heinous
offense, to vex and annoy a man in his own house. What ye think of the
matter, I cannot tell, this I am assured of, it is his due, to be well dealt
withal there, and ye are to answer the Lord, not only for denying, but
also for delaying and deferring of judgment. For why? the man has right and
title, in his good cause, unto as speedy a dispatche at your hands, as
possibly may be had. And therefore Job professed, that he had not weeried the
eyes of the wydowe, Job. 31.16.
with waytyng long for help, before it came. It is a true saying of that
Heathen man: Bis dat, qui cito dat, He doubleth his gift, that gives it
speedily. It was a grief to Iethro, Moses his father in law, to see the
people stand from morning to evening about Mose, waiting for the dispatch. How
would, he have taken it, if he had seen men, (which commonly happens here
among us) to wait from term to term, nay from year to year?

We are all of us severally, to deal righteously with our brethren, in all
our conversation with them, and thereby declare, the love we bear them. And
the Lord has appointed us to show this love, not only unto them, but unto the
things that be dear unto them, as goods, and good name: even unto these,
has the Lord bound us, as well as to their persons. For we must thus
intermedle one with another: and find succor one from another. And their name
and goods by his appointment, go through our hands and charge, as well as his
person, and must find succor there. This is the charge from our God, that
when any thing of theirs passes through our hands, it find that affection
toward it, which may give testimony of our brotherly good will to them, and
witness our obedience unto GOD. And the same GOD that forbids the murder of
his body, forbids also the stealth of his goods. And the same God that
has bound over our love, and good affection to his body: has in like manner
done it toward his goods. Hardly shall any man be persuaded, that he is
loving unto him, who is empayryng him, in any thing that is dear and precious
unto him, always gayning by his loss. The poor man, whose money must pass
through the hands of the Merchant, the Farmer, the Draper, etc. By that time
that every one ouerselling his commodities, has gotten a fleese, brings the
sweat of his brows (that is his blood) which he has plentifully powered out,
and made no spare of it, throughout the whole year, into a narrow rowme:
Neither can he give a true report of any love he found at their hands, more
then one might find at the hand of a Turk, or Infidel. In the 25. Leuit. 25.
of Leuiticus, the people of GOD are charged, not to oppress one another, in
buying and sellyng, but as the year of Iubile was nigh, or far of, so to
sell dearer, or better cheap. Wherein the seller was bound, to regard the
profit of him that bought: for longer then the year of Iubile he could not
possess it: At which time, by the law of God it must return to the owner
again. The year of Iubile is abolished, but the law of conscience (being the
equity of that law) remains, that a man should regard, not himself only,
but also the state of another. Whereby it is apparent, it was not lawful for a
man, to take whatsoever he could get, without regard, what a hargaine his
neighbor was like to have at his hands. We are exhorted by the Apostle, to make
conscience of such matters, in the first to the These. 4. 1. These. 4.
Let no man oppress or defraude his brother, in any thing, for even the Lord
is a revenger of such things. Know you not (says Saint Paul) that the
unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? 1. Cor. 6.9.
And what right has any man to another man's money, not giving him the vaiue or
worth of it in wares or marchaundize? Be not deceived (says the holy Ghost in
the same place.) Neither Thieves, covetous persons, nor extorcioners, shall
inherit the kingdom of GOD. The want of equity and conscience in this
behalf, is notably taxed by Solomon, Proverb. 20. It is naught, it is naught,
says the buyer, but when he is gone apart, he boasts. It touches this
natural corruption, where every man would have regard only of him self,
even without any respect of another, when not only his own thoughts, but
even his own words, do oftentimes condemn his dealyng, both of injury, and
dissunulation. Our careful walking in the ways of righteousuesse, have
plentiful promises of blessing from the Lord: so that if his word be of any
credit with us, we may be well assured, that by such dealinges our gains
will grow, to be the greatest. Prou. 20.7.
He that walks in his integrity (says Solomon) is just, and blessed shall
his children be after him. He that follows after righteousness and mercy,
Prou. 21.21.
shall find life, Prou. 28.20.
righteousness and glory. A faithful man shall abound in blessing, but he
that makes have to be rich, shall not be innocent. Men who being greedy of
gain, had suddenly attained unto wealth, were the most infamous of al other
men, even among the Heathen, so that (...) grew with them to be a name of
greatest reproach. A verlet is not more odious with us, then he was with them,
The order that is here observed, may in no wise be neglected: for sobriety
is set before righteousness in this place: We must live soberly and
righteously (says the Apostle.) Without sobriety and temperance, righteous
and just dealing cannot be holden up, and mainteyned: for if a man have not
learned to be rich, and to be poor, he shall never hold out the course of
justice and righteous dealyng: when it lies upon the loss of favor,
estimation, credit, wealth, or countenance, to proceed in justice and
righteousness. He shall never buie and sell with conscience, that has not
accounted with himself to carry a low sail, and lower then he has done, (if
God see it so good.) We should have more justice, if we had more soberness
in the land: for if whatsoever come, the old estate must be holden, justice
and righteous dealyng must some time be stretched. It is this temperaunce and
sobriety, that strengthens righteous dealyng and justice. For if we could
be content to be humbled in the world, if GOD could not otherwise be
served, or a good conscience maynteyned: we should have more power to do
justice, and to live uprightly in our calling what soever. But while men are so
drowned in profits, pleasures, and honors in the world they are never put to
any strait, but justice is stretched, that the old compass may be kept, and
their estate vpholden. Let us embrace this temperaunce and soberness, so shall
we hold fast this reine of justice and upright dealing in our places and
callinges. Many good laws we have made, to cause us to live justly one with
another, but little fruit of them: for why? the root is not touched. We have
taken so large a measure of port and countenance, being void of this
temperaunce, that the cloth must needs be cut out thereafter. The sobriety
that pleased our fathers in attire, in fair port, in cositenance, will not
suffer us, we have taken a larger measure, and therefore must we not stretch out
the cloth? they have left us accordingly. Must not our rents be raised, our
revenues increased, the prises of our ware augmented, our pains dearer, our
gifts greater, our pleasuring of men better considered, our pains more
rewarded, our liberality to the poor or to any good purpose lessened, our
compassion abated, and so our fathers good report decayed? Let every man cast
more of temperaunce, so shall he be able to afoorde a better peniwoorth of
righteous and upright dealing in his calling whatsoever. For sure, while the
measure is so infinitely enlarged, the cloth must needs be set upon the
Tainters, and excessiuely stretched. It shall be in vain to make laws against
injurious and unrighteous practices, if before, this great excess and
intemperancie, that rules in all estates, be not repressed. For if that in no
case may be abated, how can it be but that the old ordinary dealinges in
righteousness, and equity, must be racked? The great want of sobriety that
is every where, speaks that there is much unrighteousness in this land, and
so consequently does plainly and evidently foretell us, that the righteous God
has a quarrel with the inhabitants of this our country, for the
unrighteousness thereof, which increases in every kingdom as moderation and
sobriety abateth. Now how sobretie decays, and intemperancie is daily
augmented, even he that is most guilty herein, will not seem to deny it.
Whereby it is evident, that this land shall not be able any long time, to bear
the unrighteousness thereof. For this great intemperancie tells us, that the
burden of unrighteousness which it bears, is grown to such greatness, as
cannot long be fusteined, if our reformation herein be not speedily attempted
and taken in hand: which the Lord in mercy grant, may be thoroughly thought
upon by you, who have especial help in your hands to perform it.

Toliue righteously is the request of our God: The grace of God that brings
salvation has appeared, and teaches us to live justly. His graces offer them
selves to take up their consideration, in our righteous conversation, they
crave that our vpryght dealyng may speak, in what regard we have to them,
how we think our selves beholden unto them, they have set over the
pleasuring of them, to upright living, there they would have it seen, how
they are valued, prysed, and esteemed. Let us then behold a Christian
Meditation, for men of all callynges and trades, when they deal in the work
of their callinges, to move them to equity, conscience, and regard of those
with whom they deal: Behold, my GOD calls me to witness to the world, my
thankfulness for his benefits, he calls me now forth, to value his
deseruinges, now am I called to set my price upon his mercies, and to leave a
record behind me, how highly or basely Iesteeme of his goodness: for the
recompense of his kindness has he turned and set over, to be answered in
obedience, and upright dealyng one with another: The grace of GOD that brings
salvation has appeared, and bids us live righteously. Now am I to signify
unto the world, how I think my self indebted unto God, for the benefit of
redemption, for the benefice of his word, for honorfor health, for children,
for friends, peace and wealth: these are now crauyng some consideration. Were
it not great cruelty, that craving so little, they should nevertheless be
repelled? bringing al things, their consideration should be nothinges Now
therefore will I consider of my God for this blessing, now will I answer in
dutiful remembrance, for that benefit. And so draw forth his special mercies,
to have the^ severally considered in our upright life and just dealing with
men. Not with the Papists, to seem to requite him by merit: but with the
godly Christian, to show himself not unmindful of them, in humble obedience
to his will. Saying after our best obedience, with David in the building of the
Temple, 1. Chro. 29.
Who am I, and what is my people, that we should be able to offer willingly
after this sort? for all things come of thee and of thine own hand, have we
given thee all this abundance. That we have prepared to build the an house,
is of thy hand, and al is thine. This meditation is in like manner meet with
our crooked and disordered affections, in our dealinges, which are void of all
consideration of justice, and mercy. While that we shall in this manner urge and
press them: do thou thus answer thy redemption? Is here the price of thy
sanctification? do thou thus requite thy salvation? is this the thankfulness
for thy health? and al thou may find in thy heart to affoorde God of thy
wealth?

It follows, we must live godly, this necessarily is joined to righteousness.
For it were but a vain thing to be precise in giving man his right, and then
to withold the Lord his, through impiety. We must communicate with him, as I
told you before in his word: Receive the Law of his mouth, Job. 22.
and lay up his words in thy heart. David having declared before how the
heavens do declare the glory of God, and how the creatures do lead us unto
some knowledge of him, immediately as one ravished with the majesty and
excellency of that knowledge of God, which we have by the word, and as one
who takes that other kind of teaching, to be nothing in respect of this:
affirms that the law of the Lord conuerteth the soul, and that it gives
wisdom to the simple, gives light to the eyes, and brings joy to the heart:
making these to be the special prerogatives, of the word of God, wc neither
by the creatures, nor yet by any other outward means, may be attained unto.
It behooves us therefore, to have often use of the word of God, not only to
take our knowledge from thence how to serve him: but also to seek for
encouragement and quickening thereunto from it. For the word of God
quickens us to our duties, and stirs up the slownesse, that by nature is
in us. A notable example whereof we have in the second of the Chroni. 2.
Chroni. 15
Chap. 15. We are likewise to rest upon his goodness, whereof he has made us
such large promises in his word, to apply his benefits as special helps
to strengthen our faith, in the persuasion of his fatherly affection toward
us, and to provoke our obedience the rather thereby, and to be often and earnest
in prayer with him, both to have our strength and ability to serve him by that
means increased: and also to provide that neither by our subtle adversary,
nor yet by our own frailty, we be intrapped in the net of destruction. For
albeit by his grace our spirit be ready, yet have we a weak flesh, which is
to be dragged forward by strength obtained through prayer from our God. These
things must we be given unto, and neither by a plain rejecting of them, and
erectyng of our own devotion: neither yet by a cold and careless use of
them, to tempt the Lord, and to uphold us in vngodlnesse, and the fruits
thereof. The Papists, Anabaptists, Libertines, and the Family of love, are
all sworn enemies unto godliness, forasmuch as they will have the word
altogether subject to their spirit. For they will have it not to speak, but
as their spirit shall indite, and hereupon they build, that they are the
Church: and therefore have a promise of the holy Ghost, to keep them that
they err not. Enquire of a Papist, from whence come their unwritten verities,
and many fold traditions, they answer, there were many things that the
Apostles then were not able to bear, which the holy spirit being now come
has taught them. The Anabaptists, Libertines, and house of Love, urged with
the Scripture, will ask you, what says the spirit, affirming that to be but
the killing letter. Thus both of them, howsoever in other things greatly
differyng, have this common principle for their foundation and beginning: that
the Scriptures being but an ABC to Christianity, the spellyng and readyng
thereof must be drawn from their spirit, as if the Gospel should give place
to revelations, and so carry with it the stayne of imperfection: or as if the
spirit could be divorced from the written word, which it was sent to teach
and confirm. As it is written; John. 14.26.
He shall bring al things to your remembrance, which I have told you. What
can be a more shameful abasing of Christ, then to make him but usher, and
their Spirit in place above him, chief Schoolemaisters? that as the law
brought us by the hand to Christ: so Christ should be our guide unto
revelation, and resign unto it, as the lash did unto him. They will not deny
the word, but in truth, they make it a matter of nothing. For they will allow
no sense unto it, but such as their spirit shall set upon it. So that in
very deed how soever they would be thought to lead us to the word, they
do lead their disciples, only to the dreams and devises of their own head.
In the time of the law when visions and revelations were often and usual, yet
were they then subject to the word, and to be cried by it, nay to be ouerruled
of it. According as we read: If there arise among you a Prophet, Peut. 13.
and give thee a sign or wonder, and the sign or wonder which he has told
thee come to pass, saying: Let us go after our gods: thou shall not hearken
unto the words of the Prophet, ye shall walk after the Lord your God, and
shall keep his commandments, and hearken unto his voice, but that Prophet
shall be slain, because he has spoken to thrust thee out of the way, wherein
the Lord the God commands thee to walk. If in the times, when visio^s and
revelations had their best alowance, and the most lawful title that ever they
had: all that notwithstanding, they were to give up their account unto the
written word of God, and from thence to receive their Quietus est. We may not
then in those times, receive such wares, under the alone warrant of their own
weights, when faith must fight against miracles and revelations, for the
word, which in the infancy of the Church, was helped by miracles unto the
word.

How can there be any true gedlinesse among this people, among whom God is not
licenced to speak in his word what pleases him, but the word strained by
their spirit, to speak after the liking of miserable men? Great is the
ungodliness likewise of those men, who having banished superstition and
fantastical revelation: yet for all that, leaning unto the hold of their
profession of the truth, as unto a sufficient fortress: do not submit
themselves to any often and earnest use of the word and prayer, with
conscience and care to have their ways reformed by it, and with persuasion of
any great necessity that they have of it.

We can not give our selves unto these duties, unless we shall be in the
expectation and looking after the hope of an other life, and therefore very
fitly does the Apostle join unto these several duties that we have heard of,
this speech: Waiting for the blessed hope and glorious appearing of the
mighty GOD our Savior Jesus Christ. For it cannot come to pass, we should
be taken of from things here below, unless we be assured else where. No man
wyllet go things assured, for uncertain. Faith must give us assurance of
greater glory from GOD, ere we can let go the houlde that we have here.
Therefore it is made a special note of God his Children, and necessarily
joined to his worship: to be in expectation of the latter day, and the glory
thereof. When Paul will set out the commendation of the Thessalonians, and fame
that was given out of them in all places: he does no otherwise commend them,
then that they were turned from idols to serve the living God, and to wait for
his son from heaven, which should bestow upon them this benefitete, to
deliver them from the wrath to come. And in the second to the Thessa. 1. These.
1.
persuading them by that which was in mosle reverence and regard with them,
and likest to bring them into the earnest consideration of his words: he
frames his speech thus: I beseech you brethren by the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, 2. These. 2.
and our gathering together and uniting unto him. So that the looking for the
last day, seems to him to be in great reverence, regard and assured
expectation among them when he makes their reverence unto that the matter and
ground of this exhortation. And when he labors to lift them of the earth,
commonly he reareth them up with no other instrument than this: the waiting for
the glory and hope of another life. In the 3. to the Col. he reasons thus:
Collos. 3.
When Christ which is your life shall appear, then shall you appear with him
in glory, mortify therefore your earthly members, uncleanness and covetousness,
which is Idolatry. And in the 3. to the Phil. opening ye mean of their stay
from hunting after the earth, wc the false Apostles, which minded earthly
things: He says thus: But our conversation is in heaven, from whence we
look for a Savior, even the Lord Jesus, who shall change our vile body that
it may be like his glorious body. In the xi. to the Hebrews, Hebr. 11.
the obedience of Abraham in leaving his own country, not knowing where he
should become, is ascribed to this that he waited for a City that had a
foundation, whose maker is God: for all things in the world are subject to
corruption. The great things that are spoken of Moses, in accounting the
rebuke of Christ, to be of more value then the treasures of Egypt, and his
not fearyng the fury of the king, is only imputed to this, that he was as if
he had seen him that is invisible. The coming of the glory of that great God,
was always before his eyes. The greatness of the thing and the excellency of
it is noted in these words: The glory of the great God our Savior Christ.
It is the same glory, the great God our Savior Christ inheriteth, that we
wait for. It is worth the waiting for, there is cause why we should be
moved to sobriety, having so great things in expectation. We beseech you
(says Paul) that ye would walk worthy of god, 1. These. 2.
who calls you to his own kingdom and glory. The glory of this world
deseleth our eyes, and therefore must we be drawn up by meditation of greater
things, before we shall be able to let these be of small reckoning with us.
The greatness of that glory once thoroughly digested, would set these in a
base and low place, it would make them vanish assmoke from our presence. The
expectation of a transitory kingdom, when it is once devoured and digested by
hope, we see it makes men neglect lives, goods, lands, friends, children
and country to hazard all. The merchant that is in expectation of some great
gain, we see into what unknown countries, into what dangers by the Seas he
will commit himself. The great regard and care that is had every where, to the
things here below, the greedy followyng after them, the careful pursuing of
pleasures, profits, and honors: do plainly speak, that the hope of another
life, is not yet settled in the hearts of a great number. Let us call to
remembrance, how that this is our day to wait, it is our time to serve: when
Christ which is our life shall appear then shall we be glorious and appear with
him in glory. There is no pleasure which the lord has not matched with some
grief and pain, to take of (if it might) our delight, and to fasten it in
surer things. If the glory of God cannot prevail with us, if it cannot
change our taste, how shall we look for renewment? If so great hire as is
his own glory, cannot allure us, brutish and senseless must our nature needs
be. What a greater argument can we have of our blockishnesse, then that so
great things can get no more attendance? The truth is, we are persuaded of the
excellency of them, and therefore in all such places alleged for the waiting
of his coming: there is the benefit set forth with it, and the greatness of
it, which points at our darkness and unbelief herein, and tells us that
the glory of this world, stands as a cloud between it and our sight. To
concludle, set us enlarge our hope, and by meditation and prayer, enter into
some consideration of the length. breadth, and depth, of that glory: so shall we
see such a portion in it, as will comfort us even in our greatest afflictions,
countiing it a great honor, that we are vouchsafed his service, as the
Apostles have done.

Now we are to consider of that, which is the third thing in this our division:
to wit, what was given to make us good scholars in this his doctrine, and to
become a people zelously given unto good works. The gift is so great as
himself, for he gave himself for us. He laid not down his life at the
pleasure of his adversaries, being otherwise unwilling, but franckly and freely
of his own accord did yield it up for us. This is that which we esteem above
the benefit often times: the mind of the geuer. Great gifts are darkened,
when they come from an unwilling mind, and leese their commendation: but a
willing mind aduau^ceth the least gift, that can be. No man takes my life from
me, John. 10.
(says our Savior Christ) but I laid it down of my self. His wyllingnes
also appears in this, that he went forth to meet them, asking of them whom
they sought, and confessing him to be a man, John. 18.
As his adversaries did not compel him by violence to leave his life, no more
did good deserving on our part procure him thereunto: 1. John. 4.10
And therefore S. John does herein note a special thing that he began with us,
and provoked us unto love, and not we him. This love was voluntary and not
forced. It had likewise the pre-eminence of beginning and provoking: and was
neither borne nor begotten, of any former benefit of ours to himward. In this
gift that was given, we are to remember, not only that moment of his passion,
wherein he passed immediately from life to death: but also the whole course of
his life, while he had his aboade with us here upon earth. For he served us
with his life, as well as with his death: performing in it all that obedience,
which the Lord requires of man. And this obedience unto the law, could not be
urged of duty upon him who was Lord of the Law, in his own name, and for
himself: but only in respect of us, whose cause and person he was content to
sustain. Touching his life, what a rare argument and token of good will was
this to begin withal: that he would be abased so far for us, as to lay down
the majesty and glory, wherein he was nothing inferior to his father, and to
take upon him the estate and condition of a poor and miserable servant, to
leave the highest estate in heaven, and to go under the basest condition here
upon earth, to change the highest dignity, with the basest condition, the
greatest glory with the greatest infamy: the place that has superiority over
all, with that which is to serve all? What is the glory of all kingdoms in the
world, if they were joined together, to the glory of heaven? and yet how
impossible were it to entreat him, who is king of the least Islande in the
world, to change his estate with a servant, to leave the glory of his
kingdom, and to embrace the estate of the meanest subject and servant in the
land.

What subject, how friendly soever in former times he had been to the prince,
could after long suit prevail thus much with him? and behold the king of
heaven and Lord of life, doe^, force this friendship upon his enmies. It
requires our earnest meditation of the matter, to consider the greatness of
the goodwill that lies under it: for it has never before or since been
heard of, that the son his life, should be thee price too purchase unto
the servant his freedom: that the son should be sold to serve, to the end
the servant (nay enemy) might be made free. Wonder at this work thou earth,
and be amassed at it ye heavens, for from the beginning, if all your registers
were searched, the like shall not be heard of at any time to have happened. The
gift had been exceeding great, if we should have had no more at his hands,
then is the service of his life, lead in all manner of obedience for our sake
here upon earth: but after this obedience unto the will of his father in all
duty accomplished, he himself must pass through death, and so become a
slain sacrifice for the sins of his servants. Wherein let us a little behold
the weight of such a work, so shall we make the better account of him, who has
wrought it for us. Let us behold his behauior, when ye time approached of his
appearing before the judgment seat of the righteous God for sinners. Which
although it be but the entrance into his passion and suffering, will
notwithstanding let us have some sight and taste, whereby to discern how heard a
work he had in hand. When he was to enter the answering of sin, he went, as
appears in the Gospel after Saint Matthew, into a place called Gethsemane,
Mat. 26.36
saying to his disciples, Sit ye here, while I go and pray yonder. While he
was on the way, he began to wax heavy, sorrowful, and greenously troubled.
Insomuche that he (complaining of his grief unto Peter and the two sons of
Zebedeus whom he took with him) says unto them: I feel my heart heavy unto
death, tarry ye here and watch with me. The pain pressed him so sore, yt he
craves the comfort of their presence in that combat. Ye may well consider that
it is no small matter, which drives the soon of God, to entreat his
Disciples to watch with him. But are they able to afforde him any help? In
truth they can give no help unto the matter he has in hand. It is no great
thing that is required, and yet for all that it cannot be obtained. It is no
great matter to look on, though the matters which be in doing, were never so
dangerous: and yet the Scripture does tell us, that the chief of the Apostles
could not hold up their heads, and help their master at his desire, while
he yet was but in the beginning of his conflict, with so much as a comfortable
countenance, no not after he had complained of their great unkindness, and
expostulating the matter with them, had used these words toward them: What,
could ye not watch with me one hour? A wonderful matter, that Peter the prince
of the Apostles, should bewray so great weakness, that being sundry times
requested by his master, could not perform toward our salvation so little a
matter, as is the looking on. So far was he from afoording either
countenance or speech of encouragement, in this cause. The Lord had a special
purpose in it, and we are therefore to draw special instruction from this,
that there did never greater want appear, neither more infirmities break out
of the Apostles, then when the work of our salvation was in hand. For had they
given but the least help unto that work, how should men have been kept from
matching them with Christ in the matter of mediation? For many be so mad, that
notwithstanding the best of them could not help with a comfortable
countenance, when our salvation was to be procured: yet will they have the
meanest of them, at least fellows with Christ at half of the Mediatorship?
for they will not be persuaded, but that they must pray unto them, and so have
them fellows with Christ in the office of intercession. How has the holy
Ghost met with man his infirmity herein, and removed all stu^bling blocks,
that we might have free passage to ye alone Mediator between God and man, the
man Jesus Christ? Who can deny but that the only wise God did foresee, what
great folly and superstition many would fall into with the Apostles and Saints
of God? and therefore would have the work of our salvation so clear and void
of any help from the Apostles, that the chief of them could not be kept from
sleeping at the beginning: neither from perjury and forswearing, after a little
farther proceeding in the same. For so far were they from helping our
salvation forward, that being requested to watch and solace their Master
with their sight in his agony: that they are daunted, and lie like dead men.
And when they are wakened, and reproved for that they would not watch one
hour: by and by they fall fast a sleep again, so that no manner of comfort
can be had from them. And no marvel, for the Almighty had determined, that
the co^bate should be single, performed of one alone, and therefore it could
not he, that Peter and Christ should suffer together. In deed there were two
the eues crucified with him, but there was no doubt (which thing the learned
do well note) that the sacrifice for sin, should have any supply from their
suffering. The form of prayer which our Savior Christ used unto God the
father, when he entered into this agony, does likewise tell us what pain and
anguish he did sustain. For sundry times he made this petition unto God. O my
father, if it be possible let this cup pass from me. Let us cease to
marvel that the Apostle did bear no part in it, for this his prayer does
declare, that Jesus Christ had his hands full of it. Let us not marvel why the
Apostles had no more lust nor affection to deal in it: for Jesus Christ him
self, if he had followed the sense and persuasion of his flesh, had flatly
refused it, fainted at ye first, and never have gone through with it: O my
father, if it be possible lot this cuppasse. How heavy a weight of our sins
was upon him, not only is bewrayed by his prayer: but also by the drops of
blood that fell from his face, and by his often passage, as a man greatly
distressed and in sore anguish: from his Apostles, to the place where he
prayed, and from thence, to them again. Sometimes waking them and seeking
comfort from the sight of them, and sometimes again entreating his father for
favor. Neither does he this once and away, but sundry times does he renewit,
and make often attemptes to have ease by it. This was the beginning of this his
conflict much anguish was in it, as you have heard, and little comfort coming
from any, yet the farther he proceeds, the more his pain increases, and the
less comfort he feels. Before he had the sight of his Apostles, albeit they
could not be kept waking for his comfort, now they all flee and forsake him,
save Peter, who did abide by it a while, but in the end did forswear him. His
father whom before he did attempt to entreat, now stands forth taking the
place of justice, and the seat of judgment, and summoneth all his servants
to appear and answer for their sins: The^ the son of man Jesus Christ
comes forth to the bar, and appears in the person of al sinners, there
stands he to receive sentence, and afterward execution accordingly, which
could be no slender punishment, for it must be a sufficient satisfaction for
the sins of all his servants. It could be no little blow that he did bear,
for why it was such a one, that the sins of all his servants did die of it.
How could it be a little stripe or stroke, that was the death of so manse
sins? Nay universally of all the sins in his servants: When he went under
it, this speech of his: [O God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?] did
sufficiently testify what weight and burden he had of it. Before he was
forsaken of men, and his dearest Disciples had left him: Now sin has set his
father against him, and he feels him an utter enemy unto him. For that he
wrestled not with an ordinary and usual kind of death, his words to his
father do bewray. He was to bear the punishment for sin, which must touch
him, else how should we be persuaded, that the punishment was sufficient, and
meet for such a matter. Behold a true balance, wherein to way sin, a Glass
that will give us the true sight of sin. Look upon this glass ye, which
think that at your last hour, ye shalde well enough able to drive away sin with
a sigh. Behold this spectacle, ye that take sin in young men to be the grace
of those years: and so slender a matter in old men, that it can not abide the
least breath, or sight of one that has gray hears. You see when sin is to
be answered, the Apostles left it, and Christ him self did sundry ways
declare, that he had enough of it. We may see sufficiently by this, that they
never felt the sting of it, who in their speeches and remedies appointed to
redress it, do give out so slenderly of it. There is one thing whereof we are
especially to be admonished, that we never make our selves guilty of so great
vnduettfulnes against our God, as to call his divinity into question, because
he was humbled unto this anguish and pain in our person, and bewrayed such
sense and feeling thereof in our nature. For how do we answer the Lord, if
we will let him have no longer any honor from us, for that he was so greatly
humbled for us? Hereby we may sufficiently see and discern, what a cursed and
counterfeit Christ, that is, which H. N. has brought into the world. For H. N.
his Christ, was not first God, and then after when he was to suffer made man,
but first man, and after by his suffering, was Godded with God. He gave no
special arguments of good will unto us by his passion and suffering: for
himself had the greatest benefit by it, in so much as that he could not have
bin saved without it. He is not this true Christ, who offered him self a
sufficient price, for all the sins of his servants: for he leaves every one
to answer for his own sin, telling him that he him self and no other is to
answer for it. And therefore look what the sins of H. N. his Christ cost
him, the same price must they pay for theirs, if they will believe him. All the
help that they have from him, is that he has paid his money before them, so
that now they shall not need to trouble them selves, either about the price,
to spend any long time in learning what is required: neither yet about the
manner, to understand where and how it is to be paid. If any do meruell how
H. N. can make away this so plain an history, let them understand, that it
is well known to those, who be any thing acquainted with him, that to sink
any history, H. N. will require no more, then one single shot of an Allegory.
The Lord grant that they which thus abolishe the true Christ, and his office,
to set up so cursed a creature in his place, may be looked to in time before
they shall draw others into the same condemnation. Christ Jesus gave him self
for us, to purge us, that we might be a peculiar people unto him self, zealous
of good works. Here are all the carnal gospellers condemned, who live in hope,
that under the countenance of their profession, all liberty of life, will well
enough be borne out: that make Christ his death to be nothing else, but a
bawd under their lewd life. Here may we see that the Lord has not laid
down his life, to purchase no other thing at our hands, beside a profession
of the truth: but that he bought with his blood a zealous addicting of our
selves to christian conversation. It is a wonder to see how the wicked will
boast of the benefit of Christ his blood, how mighty it is to merit, how
sufficient to save from sin: But for all that will they not give over any
liberty of life, that before they have enjoyed: whereas it was given to
purchase a new conversation, as well as a new profession. For he gave him self
for us, that we might give ourselves unto him, a peculiar people zealous of good
works. Let us mark it then my brethren, that he gave himself for us, to have
the honor of a christian life from us. He left his life for us, that our life
might be let out to honor him. He made not so sle^der a purchase with so great
a price, as that if he had a good sigh, or a good word at our last breath,
that would suffize him: his life was given for the purchase of a zealous giving
of our lives to ye works that please him. And therefore does the Apostle tell
us, yt we are not our own me^ to frame our life after our own liking, but are
to serve the Lord, both with our body and with our spirit, because they are
the Lords, bought of him with a price. If we humble not our selves to a
zealous following of good works, we withhold the Lords due, for he has paid a
great price, to purchase a good life at our hands. He has with no small
price, but dearly bought of us the honor of a life, led in zealous obedience
unto his word. For we are not barely to give some good words, either else to
show some good countenance toward religion and christian conversation: but to
have our conversation declare that we are affected with the same, and become
studious of such an estate of life. Such men declare themselves to be that
peculiar people, for whom the Lord laid out his life. As for those who walk
so inidifferently between true religion and false, that a man can not discern
whether they are more inclined unto: As also those that walk so even between a
civil life, and a christianlike behavior, that the difference is not easily
discussed: they do declare themselves as yet not to be affected in desire,
toward those duties which the Lord has laid upon his. Now where this purchase
of his has taken place, they are become a peculiar people zealous of good
works. If cold christians have so little comfort from the death of Christ:
what shall become of them, that are sworn enemies, either to true religion, or
else to good life, and christian behavior. It is said here by the Apostle,
That we must be purged, to become a peculiar people unto our God, zealous of
good works: which office of purging, the holy Ghost performs not by miracle,
but by means: wherein we have great cause to be thankful unto God, that
whereas our food was exceeding gross under the government of the Pope, as
having only for diet, the inventions of man: Now that pure and fine food of
the word of God, is not only made lawful unto us, but also liberally laid out
for us. But herein again, we are both to confess and acknowledge our want,
that seeing we are not void of sin, while we remain in this flesh, and
therefore have need to be often purged and cleansed: our purgations (for all
this so great a change and so good a constitu^tion of the mind under the
Gospel) be now at this day nothing diverse from those, that were used in that
great grossenes which we had under the Pope. The Canon law (I confess) might
purge somewhat in those times of ignorance, when because the food was so
gross, the mind could not but be full of great and grievous humors: but now
the constitution of our minds being altered, by reason that the food is so
clean diverse from that it has been, how ca^ it purge to any purpose? Let us
therefore every one pray, that seeing by reason of this good diet of the
Gospel, the state and constitution of our mind is changed: in steed of the
Canon law, which passes over many dangerous humors, and purges them never a
whit, by reason of the great grossness that is in it: we may have rules and
Canons out of the word of God, which will pearce further, and purge other
humors, whereof we have great store, and those such, as do greatly blemishe the
Gospel, and causes so great slander unto our profession, as hinders many
from coming thereunto. How often does the whole body of this Realm assemble
together in that high court of Parliament, to redress those evils that are
among us, either in body goods, or name: making new statutes, and repeling
old, according as by that wisdom and experience which God has given them,
they see and perceive any danger, either present, or shortly like to fall upon
them? But as for the church, which Satan maliceth infinitely more, and
therefore makes many sorer assaults against the same: how slenderly in all
such assemblies is her estate thought upon? And what statutes are there made,
to prevent the practices of Satan? Or what old ones be once repeled, how
unprofitable or hurtful soever experience does tell us that they be? The Lord
touch them with the care of it, who have especial authority to redress it. I
have already been very long, and the weather has been tedious unto you, a
word therefore or two of the last point, and so I make an end.

The manner of teaching, and trayning of scholars in Christ his school, is by
teaching, exhorting, and rebuking these things, says the Apostle. Speak,
exhort, and rebuke with all authority. We can not conceive the matters of
salvation, by and of our selves, they must be taught us, and when we yield unto
the^ in judgment, being persuaded of ye truth thereof: it is another labor the^
the former, to be rightly affected with them. And therefore they must be pressed
upon our affections by exhorting, and rebuking, for we are not by and by
truly touched with our duty, and humbled to the obedience thereof, when once
we have subscribed in our judgment, to the truth and equity of the thing.
Men must have special cunning and skill from God, that shall come within us,
and make us in judgment and affection, to yield unto duty: how shall they
preach (says the Apostle) unless they be sent? This argues a strong and a
wonderful corruption to be within us, which has so blinded our reason, and
hardened our affection, that they must be men of special gifts and graces, that
shall be able to open the eyes of our mind, to conceive the truth, and to touch
our affections so, as they shall be moved to make conscience of the same. We may
well discern then how unprofitable those ministers be in their place, who
know nothing how to exhort and rebuke. Who would hyre into his harvest a
Mower, that could not set an edge upon his since, when it should happen to be
blunted by stones or other things, that were hid in the grass: And is not
teaching exhorting, and rebuking, the edge of the word, which makes it cut?
And be not our hearts of them selves, if Satan should cast in no outward
occasions, a ground that is full of stones? And what should he do then in the
harvest of the Lord, that can not give an edge to the word, by strengthening
the truth of the doctrine, if false prophets and teachers should cast in
stones of heresy, and errenious opinions: nor yet by waking and rowsing the
affections of men, by exhorting, and rebuking according to sound doctrine,
when Satan shall (as he daily does) cast in great and mighty stones of
security, and hardness of heart? Now the Seripture has plainly foretold us, yt
in these latter days especially, the Lord his field shall be full of such
stones. It is a matter, that ought to get both tears and prayers from us, even
in the behalf of the Lord, as well as in respect of our selves: to see so many
unmeet men in our country, carry sithes into the Lords harvest, who when once
they meet with any stop, and be set but a little beside their book must be
forced to rethrne home with their sithes upon their shoulders, and let the
Lords medon^ continue, until it shall be withered, or eaten up of the
adversary.

The Lord give them hearts to think of it: whose labor although it were but
a little, might do great good for the reformation thereof. And as the Church
has a great plague of these men, so has it of another sort, who have gifts,
and are well able teach, and to exhort, but yet for all that they will not abide
and be resident upon their flocks, to discharge that duty in their own
persons, but carelessly commit them over unto others. An offense that in the
greatest darkness of Popery, has been found fault withal among them selves,
and taken to have been the only decay of their kingdom. And therefore a
pitiful thing it is, that in this light of the Gospel it should not be
acknowledged, that there is great sin in such things. Espensaeus a Popish
Prelate, affirms that a famous Preacher of his time, did oftentimes thu^der
out against those men, that so carelessly set over their charges unto others:
telling them plainly, that the Lord would serve them in the world to come,
according as they did serve him here: Adibunt per vicarios Paradisu: in
persona, inferos. The Lord (says he) will send such men to heaven, by Vicars,
and to hell, in their own persons. He confesses that the Preacher, did openly
denounce such judgments against them: Solitus est palam illis polliceri
vicariam salutem, personalem vero perniciem. Others shall go to heaven for them
(says he) for as for themselves in their own person, they must be of
necessity resident, unto a personage of theyrs in Hell, which is called
perdition. The speech as he confesses, is over pleasant, for so weighty
and grave a matter, as also for so heavy and hard judgment. God grant that so
pleasant speech, may sinde gentle and courteous intertainment, with so many as
shall be found fault herein. Well, so great is the corruption of our nature, that
we have need of diligent teaching, exhorting and rebuking, if we shall yield
any glory unto our God, or good example to our brethren. To conclude therefore,
(for I have stand long, and am afraid, have weried you as well as my self.) The
Lord of al Majesty and power grant, that as Christ Jesus, when he came into
the world, found the Sheepheardes of Jury, carefully looking to their
flocks: so when he shall come again too judgment, he may find those
Sheepheardes, who have his Church, and chosen people for their flock, so
diligently watching, and faithfully attending over the same: as that by the
means thereof, he may have great glory from his people, by plentiful fruits
of godliness, righteousness, and sobriety: and that the Gospel being in all
places thus glorified, our consciences may be truly comforted in Christ Jesus.
To whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, one true and everliving God, be al
honor, glory, and dominion, both now and ever. Amen.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Dawson, dwelling at the three Cranes in the
Vinetre for Richard Sergier. 1579.


