A CATHOLIC APOLOGY AGAINST THE LIBELS, DECLARATIONS, ADVICES, AND
CONSVLTATIONS MADE, WRITTEN, and published by those of the League, perturbers
of the quiet Estate of the Realm of France. Who are risen since the decease of
the late Monsier, the Kings only brother. By E. D. L. I. C.

Answer a fool according to his folly, least he should think him self
wise. Proverb. 26.

Imprinted at London for Edward Aggas.

THE PREFACE to the Reader.
O Christian and Catholic Frenchman, never was there offered better means
then at this time to discover and smell out the subtelties of our enemies, and
with what money Satan usually paieth his servants, when we see some of the^ so
blinded, that being upon the point of their destruction, they promise to
themselves all assurance, still coveting to conceal their abominable
wickedness, with sleights, shifts and lies. Nevertheless, when they do most
hide themselves they are foonest spied. For, to say the truth, what goodlier
or more apparent pretense could the perturbers of the quiet of our France take
hold of, then Religion and the relief of the people: but as the enemy of
truth has allured the^ unto him by lies, so has he for their repaste left
them no other food upon his Table, and yet does that also fail them, when
they make it an usual mess, and truth remains Mistress. According hereto,
the lies and horrible slau^ders, that to this day have been spued forth
against the King of Navarre, and the Lord Prince of Condie, by certain
strangers, enemies to this Crown and the Royal Progeny, under the pretense
of zeal of Religion does overthrow them, because continually they have sought
to persuade our souraigne Lord the King and all the French Nation, that these
Princes were his evil servant, Rebels, and disobedient persons, enemies to
his Estate, in the preservation and increase whereof, they have greater
interest then any other worldly person next unto his Majesty, unto whom they
have the honor very nerely to appertain. As also in truth, we are heartily to
give GOD thanks, especially, in that after so many false and slanderous
inductions made unto the most Christian Majesty against these two Princes, his
good kinsmen and most faithful subjects and servants (by whose relief this
feeble, weak and pale Realm has oftentimes escaped falling) it has pleased
him to open the Kings eyes, and to let him perceive that all the illusions unto
him presented, tended only to the overthrow of himself, his Crown and Estate,
in offering hitherto to his view one thing in liewe of an other. For hereupon
his Majesty smelling out the causes of passed mischief, has finally in
earnest done as the good Phisitio^, who when he sees his Patient pale, weak,
faint, and grievously sick, begins his cure with bringing him to his bed,
and discharging him from all painful toil, and causing him to take some rest:
even so our King, casting his eyes upon his poor realm afflicted with civil
wars which so long have been kindled under a false and slanderous pretense,
to the end to begin the cure, has first sought to set it in peace, that after
some time of rest he might have better opportunity to heal the rest of the
causes of the disease, and to put from about him those who under his authority
had by their false and wicked perswasio^s so hardly entreated it. Which when
his evil Counselors perceived, and seeing that they could no longer go
forward in the same path, they have sought with open play to compass that
which so long they had craftily practiced, and now have plainly showed that it
was the State and Crown that they leueled at, procuring the writing of diverse
Libels aduices and consultations of their suffraga^s, to the end not only to
diminish and blemish the King of Nauarres undoubted and lawful succession, if
it should please God to work his will of the Kings Majesty without leaving
any issue Male, but also to aduau^ce their own false, slanderous and supposed
titles and prete^ces. Howbeit, although the said Lord King of Navarre need not
yet to plead his cause or presently to answer all these sleights and
counsels of the wicked, in respect of the sufficient term and small
likelihood of occasion ever to put the same in execution, considering the King
is (thanks be to God) young, in health, and in good disposition, together with
the small interest that in my opinion the said Lord King of Navarre, pretends
to any such succession, as being a Prince both wise and circumspect, and such a
one as has not so small forecast but that he knows undoubtedly, that the
greatest wealth, relief, good hap and contentation that may redound to him
consists in the prosperity, health, and long and happy life of the King his
Lord, to the end perpetually to be under him the same that he is, to live
under his liking and in his protection, whereby and under the favor whereof he
shall be not only preserved from the co^spiraties which his enemies work against
him, but also, which is more, if it please God to increase him, he shall always
be by the King favored and advanced, unto who^ he has the honor to be the
first Prince of his blood. Nevertheless, how ever it be, I do not think that
any man at this day ca^ with reason and judgment conceive any bad or sinister
opinion of the said Lord King of Navarre, though he lay open his just causes,
since those that have no right, and for who^ there can be no likelihood at all,
are so impudent, rash, and indiscreet, as to bring to the bar a matter
whereupon even their most affectionate servants durst not before have thought:
which to say the truth, is one of the co^sideratio^s that moved me to set
hand to the pen, to the aunswering of such diffamatorie Lybelles, discourses,
aduices, and co^sultatio^s, as within this year have come to my hands: and I
protest that I have done it without either commandment or commission of the
said Lord King of Navarre, unto whom I never had the honor to approach, neither
is it of any affection or desire to advance the Religion that he professes,
since my self am and all my life time have been a Catholic, and lived under the
authority of the Apostolic Romish Church: But the only cause has been that
being borne a Frenchman, I have thought it my duty to uphold the rightful
cause of the French Princes, unto whom, after his sovereign Majesty, and for
whose service, we are naturally bound and holden to procure all honor, wealth,
and prosperity, to maintain and defend them from slau^ders and such deceipts
as Satan would stir up against their excellency and greatness: besides
that every man may perceive that these Tragedies are kindled to the utter
ruin, loss and fubuertion of this miserable Realm, so as the love of my
Country, Christian piety, and that compassion that I take in beholding my
fellow Citizens and my self with them in danger to consume our selves in that
fire that by those civil wars, which under this cursed and detestable
pretense are like to be kindled, will seize upon al degrees, have been to me
as a spur to hasten my pen to answer these damnable writings, fearing
least the people should suffer themselves to be won thereby, and so might
withstand y^ truth and equity if ever occasion to debate thereof were
ministered, or that these prete^ders should propou^d or bring this controversy
in question.

I do therefore most humbly desire the French and Catholic Reader (laying a
way al passions) to call to mind first the bond and commandment wherein by God
he is bound to the King and the Princes of his blood according to the order and
natural succession by the Laws of this Crown. Secondly, the love of his
Country, considering we all are men, all Christians, all Frenchmen, and al
lovers of our selves, and that if we should stoop under the yoke of these
tyra^ts that would bring us into subjection and abuze us with lies, falshoodes
and forged titles, they would afterward bear us the like mind, and their
faith as tainted and corrupt as by corruption, fa^^ehood, and untruth, they
had abused our simplicity, and suborned and withdrawn us from the obedience
of our true and natural Lords. For, in as much as they are deriders riders and
contemners of God, in whose name they have dared to begin, and endeavored that
the most abominable felony that ever was, might be made manifest to all, it
can not be that we should look for any other thing of the^, but that hope
that they have conceived to entreat and handle us after the Turkish manner,
with a more detestable and dangerous inquisitio^ then that which now reigns
under the Spanish tyranny. Let therefore every person diligently and
faithfully employ himself to serve our King and the Princes of his blood,
whose cause we ought eue^ with the price and venture of our lives to uphold, to
the end the state of this Realm being assured, at the least our children may
live peaceably under the obedience of their natural Lords, who by that means
shall have the greater occasion to cherrish and entreat them well as they have
done us, remembering that with the grace of God by our fidelity and loyalty
they have been preserved in that greatness and dignity wherein the divine
goodness has suffered them to be borne in this Realm to the glory of the
King of Kings, to whom only it be and remain everlastingly. So be it.

FINIS.
The names of the chief Authors cyted in this Apology.
ABbot of Vspergue. Ado of Vienne. Aegn. Agathius. Aimoinus. Alexander the
Martyr S. Ambrose. Anges. Antonius. Appian. Aristotle. Auentinus. Augustine de
Ancona. S. Augustine. Baldus. Bale. Benno. Blondus. Capitolinu. Cassiodore.
Charles Molins. Chron. of Chronikles. Chrysostom. Collenutius. Counsels.
Cromer. Decrees and Decretals. Demosthenes. Dyon. Dionis. of Hali^ar. Doctors
civil, and Canonistes. Edmond Boulay. Euripides. Eusebius. Floart. Fulgentius.
Gaguin. Garib. Geof. of Viterb. Geof. Ardoyn. Goth. Iornandes. Gratian. Grego.
of Tours. S. Gregory. Guichardine. Guil. Occham. Guil. de Monte. Heman.
Herodote. S. Hierome. Hillary. Hostiensis. James de Terano. John Andrew.
Ignatius. Illustrations of Gaul. Innocent 3. Pope. Io. Magnus. John of
Terrano. Irineus. Isidore. Justin. Iuuenall. Lawyers, Civil and Cannon.
Master of Sentences. Marianus Siculus. Martinus Polonus. Massaeus. Matthieu
Zampin. Molinaeus. Munster. Nicephor^^ Nice^^ Vignier. Nicol. Aegidius. Nicol.
de Vbald. Oldrad. Onuphrius. Optatus Milcuitanus. Osorius. Otho. of Erisingen.
Paulus Diaconus. Paul Emile. Pausanias. Platine. Plin. Jun. Plutarque. Polid.
Virg. Procope. Regino. Renatus Chopinus. Richard of Wassenbourg. Robert
Cenalis. Rozieres. Salicke law. Sanctiones Pontif. Iuris Orient. Sansouin.
Sigisbert. Socrates. Sosomenes. Strabo. Suetonius. Tacit. Tertullian.
Tiraquell. Tite Live. Tritemius. Turpin. Valere the great. Vgo Gemblac.
Vigneus. Vincent Historial. Witichi^dus. Xiphilinus.
THE CONTENTS OF THE first part of this Book.
1. The causes of the troubles of this Realm.

2. The Genealogy of the Lords of Lorrain by Edmond Boulay.

3. The true descent of the house of Lorrain from the Counties of Louayn.

4. The Salick Law takes not place in the Duchy of Lorrain.

5. An Inhibition not to dispute of succession during the kings life, decreed
by the Counsails.

6. The Realm of France is successiue not hereditary.

7. The nerest male in blood by agnatio^ succedeth in whatsoever degree.

8. Realms successiue are more perfect then elective.

9. Saint Jews the common stock of the house of France and Bourbon.

10. Robert S. Jews younger Son. His marriage with the heyr of Bourbon. The
cause of the name of Bourbon in that family, and the erection thereof into a
Duchy.

The County Dauphin of Auuergne in the house of Bourbon.

11. The Alliance of the house of Sauoy and Bourbon.

12. The cause of disco^tentme^t of Charles of Bourbon.

Baronage of Mercure, issued out of the house of Bourbon.

The erectio^ of the Duchy of Montpensier.

13. The Cou^ties of Vendosme and Castres, The principality of Conde and
others in the house of Bourbon.

14. The first Alliance of the houses of Bourbon and Navarre.

James of Bourbon King of Naples.

The erection of the Duchy of Nemours.

15 The alliance of the house of Boulogne and Bourbon.

16 The erection of the Duchy and Pairry of Vendosme.

Antoinet of Bourbon, wife to the L. of Guise.

A Catholic Apology against the Libels, Declarations, Aduices, and
Consulatations made, written, and published by those of the League, perturbers
of the quiet estate of the Realm of France: who are risen since the decease of
the late Monsier, the Kings only brother.
By E. D. L. I. C.
1
IF wisely we do consider the ambition of some that are borne, nourished and
brought up in the greatest honors, wealth and favors of this Realm, we shall
as it were with our fingers touch and evidently perceive, that they resemble ye
same which the ancients do write concerning Vipers, who do eat out the
entrails of her that gives them life, and do maliciously endeavor by such
civil wars as they have kindeled in this Estate within these 25. years, to
become, (as occasion may serve) masters and usurpers thereof, by such sleights
wresting the true French from that bond and duetifull good will that they ought
to bear to their natural Princes: For it is most certain and infallible, that
as the course of the Water mainteineth the River, so the continuance of civil
wars yields the bad minds of the people immortal: yet are we
nevertheless so blinded, indiscreet, and unconstant, as never to have had
judgment to know our disease since the time we were first afflicted with the
condition of such as can not be satisfied with the Dominion of the whole
world, and who voluntarily do hazard whatsoever their own assured, as wealth,
quiet, and life, to make themselves Lords of that which they can conceive no
hope of, without merueilous effusion of blood and utter ruin of their
Country: Whereunto undoubtedly it seems that time, through the diversity of
religion among us, has invited them: as also, in that they see a number of our
natural princes maintain the one part, which is least plausible and agreeable
with the French nation, much less aucthorised by Princes and foreign
potentates, whose weapons they hope to use when need shall require.

To the end also, with less labor and greater pretense to hoyst up the Ladder
of their driftes, they have procured the writing of a number of books, which
within these few years are come to every man's hands, concerning the discents
of the Princes of Lorrain, whom gladly they would bring aboard into this
quarrel, if possibly they could, meaning with them in men's hearts to imprint
and falsely to persuade, that our Kings and Princes are no lawful Successors,
but tyrants and usurpers of this crown from those of the ancient race, of
whom they would make the Lorrains to be descended: so to procure them to be
Captains of their conspiracy.

2 But these Princes have evermore sought to be accounted too wise, just, and
upright dealers to have their ears so ticklish as to let them selves be led
with such false inductions, which could bring them no other but speedy shame,
and perpetual ignominy of their race for doing as the husbandmans Serpent,
who when he had well refreshed himself at his fire, would have driven him
also out of his house. As also to show, that they never thought upon so
detestable a deed.

That every man therefore may know it to be too evident an abuse, to say that
they be come of the famely of Charlemagne, I will use only that Book that
themselves did in the year 1549. to cause Edmond of Boulay the chief Herault
and King of Arms of their house to publish: wherein with the common opinion
they do maintain that Charles of Lorrayn, brother to Lothair King of France
the last of Charlemagnes posterity, of whom the seditious do make so great
account, left a Son named Ottho, who was Duke of Lorrain, and died without
issue: so as in him ended the males of Charlemagne. In deed the said aucthor
says, that Godfrey with the beard Earl of Ardenne succeeded his Cossen. If
then he were Cosen to the said Ottho, the same kindred might come by being
descended of a daughter of the said Charles, wife to La^bert Earl of Bergues,
or Monts, who was Merquize of the Empire, and Earl of Brabant, and so
consequently by the Salique Law incapable of this Realm. By reason whereof
Pope Benedict the eight, being at Pauy, with the Emperor Henry the second,
and Robert son to Hugh Capet, in the year a thousand two hundred and three,
declared the said Robert to be lawful King and Lord of the Crown of France.
Besides, the Author is forced to confess that this Male ligne of Godfrey
County of Arden failed again, Sigisbert in his Chron.
and fell into the person of I Would wife to Eustace County of Bolongne on the Sea,
the father and mother to Godfrey of Bolo^gne, King of Jerusalem: who in
Lorrain succeeded his v^kle by the mother Godfrey with the crouch back: so do
the Males of the house of Bologne are by the same writer continued until Lady
Isabell, the only daughter and heir of Charles Duke of Lorrein, who in the
year. 1418. married Rene of Aniew, pety son to King John of France. Thus we
see by the domestical testimony of the Princes of Lorrein, the third distaffe
in the house of Lorrein since the said pretended Ottho Son to Charles of
France, of which the first had been sufficient to deprive them of the
Succession Royal, not withstanding their auncesters had drawn their
Orriginall from the Masculine house of the said Charlemagne. For in respect of
the house of Aniew, extract out of the royal stock of France, and grafted
into the Duchy of Lorrain by the marriage of the said Rene with Isabell of
Lorrain, the same Lorrain Historiographer agrees yt it ceased in Nicolas
Marquize of Pont son to John the second, that dyed in ye year 1433. whose
succession was gathered up by his Sister Yolland, wife to Ferry of Va^demont,
who was the younger of the ancient house of Lorraine, son to Antony, son to
Ferri, brother to Charles, Father to the foresaid Isabell.

3 I will, and that truly auowe, that the house of Lorrain now being, is so
far from being issued out of the race of Charlemagne either by Male or
Female, far or near, that contrariwise the Duchy of Lorraine has changed
stock or family four or five times since the posterity of Charlemaigne. First
in the house of the Counties of Ardenne, when after the decease of Ottho, Son
to Charles of France, in the year 1005. Henry the second Emperor, gave
Lorraine to Godfrey, the son of Godfrey Earl of Ardenne, whose service he
had used against the sons by whom the Duke of Lorrain had been emprisoned,
Sigisb. fol. 233.
and soon after deceased without issue. After him succeeded his brother
Gothelo, in the year 1019. in the time of Robert King of France. Then in the
year 1033. Idem. fol. 595.
Conrade the Emperor gave to Gothelo Mosele, after the decease of Frederick
Earl thereof, so as he grew mightier in Lorrain then before. Against this
Gothelo marched Odo Earl of Cha^pagne, and seized upon Bar, but the Lorrain
gave him battle, wherein the said Odo deceased. Gothelo had a son named
Godfrey, Idem. fol. 596.
unto whom the Emperor Henry the fowerth refused to give the Duchy of Mosele,
and therefore he would not also be Duke of Lorrain, but in the year. 1044.
rebelled against the Emperor who took him prisoner, and after released him,
taking his son for Hostage, Idem. fol. 597.
who being dead, the father revolted again, and stirred up Baldwin Earl of
Flanders to help him to war upon him. And this Godfrey slew Albert, to whom
the Emperor had giued Mosele, for which cause the Emperor invested Euerard of
Alsatie in Mosele, and Frederick uncle to Baldwine of Flanders in the Duchy
of Lorraine. Godfrey seeing him self so oppressed, passed into Italy, and
there married the daughter of Marquize Boniface, but was by the Emperor soon
after driven out of Lomberdie, wherefore he retired into Flanders, and
accompanied with the said Baldwine, besieged Frederick in Antwarpe, but the
Lorrains came to his succor. This Godfrey had a brother called Frederick,
son to Gothelo, Idem fol. 599.
who retourning from Constantinople, became a Monck at Mount Cassin, and was
after ye 157. Pope called Steven, in the time of Henry King of France. After
the decease of Frederick of Flanders invested in the Duchy of Lorraine,
Euerard of Alsatye was Duke of Lorrain, but both the said Godfrey and Euerard
being dead in the year 1070. the Emperor gave Mosele to Deoderick son of the
said Euerard, Idem fol. 601.
and restored Godfrey with the crook back son of Godfrey aforesaid to
Lorraine. This man wholly destroyed the Frizons, but was in the end slain by
Richarius in the year 1089. so as by his death began the second house of
Lorrain in the person of I Would sister to the last Godfrey with the crouche back,
and wife to Eustace Earl of Bolongne, whose Children were Dukes of Lorrain,
namely Godfrey of Buillon so called, Sigis. in his Chron.
for yt he was nursed in the Castle of Buillo^ which now y^ Bishop of Liege
holds, Heman in his contraction of Chron.
and his brother Balduin: But these remaining in the holy land, the kingdom
whereof fell to them by the election made of the said Godfrey, the Emperor
Henry the fowerth in the year 1101. Idem Sigis. fol. 611. Idem fol. 612.
gave the Duchy of Lorrain to Henry Earl of Lembourg, whom after he had
rebelled against him, he had taken again into favor: And in troth this Henry
of Lembourg was a very bad man, for besides infinite other his misdeedes, we
find that at the provocation of the Pope the^ being, he moved war between
Henry the fowerth and the fifth, the father and the son. The father gave him
the Duchy, yet he took the sons part, and then returned to the fathers
side, Idem fol. eodem.
after whose death he went and fell at the sons f^^te, Munster. Cosmog.
Sanso in his Chron.
who committed him to prison, and in the year 1106. invested Godfrey, by some
named William, Earl of Louaine, in the Duchy of Lorraine, Vign. in the orig.
of the French.
whose service, while he was at Liege, he used in taking Mountfaucon a
hold, the Lord whereof was very insolent. Of this Earl of Louain sprunge
that house of Lorraine which yet continues: for unto him succeeded Thierry, to
Thierry, Thibault: after Thibault, a certain Matthewe was Duke, and so
successively unto the said Lady Isabell wife to Rene of Aniew, as is
aforesaid. So as it is an abuse and manifest deceit to search the race of
Charlemaigne in the house of Lorraine, since it is 580. years since it vanished
and was quite lost, even after that four sundry Famelies have succeeded one
after another in the said Duchy of Lorrain. One of the youngest of which house,
who was Graundfather to the Dukes of Guise, and Maine now being, drawing into
France with very small wealth, received (as also after him his Children) so many
benefits at the hands of the Kings, Francis the first, Henry the second, and
his posterity, that they have through the liberality of their Majesty's,
increased their Patrimony to a Million of Frankes of Rent that they houlde in
this Realm, whereas their grandfather Claude when he married Lady Antoynet
Bourbon, daughter to the Duke of Vendosme, had not above 14. or 1500. besides
they have been honored with the greatest offices of ye Crown, as the office of
great Master, which was wo^t to be in the house of Montmorencie, and other of
the most honorable: So as it might be hard to think that now they would
imitate the Moyle, whose nature is to kick and spurn at his Mother when he
has sucked enough of her Milk: either that they had so vntha^ckfull a mind,
as to take weapon against the Royal Famely whereunto they are indebted in
whatsoever they are, yea, and that under a false persuasion, that they should
be disce^ded from Charlemagne, which is contrary to all truth.

4 To verefie therefore that the Princes of Lorraine never came out of the
house of France, it will be sufficient to show that in the succession of the
Duchy of Lorraine they observe not the Salicke law, as it was judged by the
Fathers assembled at the Counsel of Basil on the behalf of Isabell of
Lorrain wife to Rene of Anieow and daughter of Charles of Lorraine against her
Cosen Antony of Lorraine the son of Ferry the younger son of Charles.
Hereby it manifestly appears that thus they declare the Princes of Lorraine
to be no Frenchmen, neither ever to have been of the blood royal of France
or capable of the Crown: for the which and in the sovereign succession
whereof, the Salicke law has of old time even since Pharamond been
religiously observed: and thereby not only the daughters but the males of them
proceeding have been excluded from the Realm of France, according as the
decree of the said law imports in these words. leg. Salic. lib. p. ca. 26
Of the Salicke lands the woman shall challenge no portion, but the succession
thereof shall appertain to the males. The reason of this constitution is,
because our fathers did horribly detest the government of strangers, which
undoubtedly must needs have often happened if the males of daughters that were
wives to foreign Princes might have been capable, as some would persuade y^
children of Lorraine yt they may pretend, as wrongfully as did Edward of
England, whose cause was solembly ended by the whole states of France. for
Philip of Vallois afterward King against the said Edward the son of Lady
Isabell daughter of Phillip ye fair, after that Prince Robert of Arthois had
openly made an Oration to the Estates for the said Phillip, and had among other
alleged the reason aforesaid, the original whereof he drew from before the
Emperor Justinian: and Paul Emilie speaking of the joy and contentation that
the French conceived, after this sentence writes thus. King Phillip making his
entrey into the chief Town of his Realm, was received with as great
pleasure, Paul. Aem. in Philip. Vales.
joy, and triumph of people, as ever was King of France, where was a world of
people crying, God save the King. The streates were paued with Flowers
according to the seazon, and adorned with the most triumphant Furniture that
could at that time be found. To be brief says the History, the people
forgot no kind of demonstration of their contentation for the coming of this
King to the Crown. He says moreover, yt the Town feasted his Majesty, ye
Princes of his blood, and Officers of his Crown, praising and publicly
extolling him as the preserver and defense of the French Majesty and the
liberty and dignity of the Salicke law, whereby the Frenchmen who were
accustomed to prescribe laws to Strangers were never ruled by them. Then he
ends his speech: saying, that the most part of the night was put away with
the light of Bonfyers throughout ye Realm, and the hours of sleep consumed
in daunsing, singing, and all sorts of honest and delectable mirth: especially
at Paris y^ towns men marched in great troops to congratulate each other for
the welcomming of this King, whom they termed the Bulwark and preserver of the
best of their laws. These good fathers were no basterdly French, as are those
of our cursed world, and would have kept themselves far from informing, much
less from begging those means that might be imagined for the breach of this
goodly Salicke law, which is the only Oracle of France, and true rampire of
the French dignity: which also, since it is evident that the Princes of Lorrain
have not used, it is an undoubted demonstration that they are not descended of
the race of our Princes, who have so highly commended it in their Empier and
sovereign government.

5 In deed our deceivers since considering that this foundation was too rashly
propounded, and might breed hatred in the King against the Princes of
Lorraine, whom they would bring into this bad action, because his Majesty
being justly agrieued, has power enough and ready to chastize the Authors of
such writings as guilty of treazon, have dissembled this mean and flatly
disaduowed the miserable wretches who for the publishing of these untruths had
hazarded their lives. But returning into the path of their first intent since
the death of Mounsier the Kings only Brother, they have persuaded themselves
that his Majesty may one day happen to dye without issue. But howsoever it be,
providing long before for their affairs, they have coasted and sought to win
one of the first Princes of the blood descended of the house of Bourbon, the
true and only Heir of the Crown, if it should please God so far to punish
us as to deprive us of our good King without issue male: and have gone about to
persuade this Prince that it is he who ought to be the lawful successor, and
therefore that he had need presently and already to cause the same openly and
with effectual and strong reasons to be published.

6 Wherein both the one and the other do highly offend the Kings own person,
in that in his life time they dispute of succession, (which if it might please
God to send him a son to enjoy it, shall never fall to them) besides that
thus they seem to conspire his death: which in effect is as much as to league
themselves against nature, against good manners, against Christian piety, and
against that good will which we owe to our King, unto whom we are bound to
pray for good, wish for good, and prognosticate good, and therefore to wait for
such his hap and misfortune is repugnant to all laws civil and natural.
Neither can good men like, that against the Kings will and during his life men
should argue or call into question the doubt of his succession, which is
nothing so long as it shall please God to leave him in the world. Upon this
cause did the fifth Counsel of Toledo in Spain which was holden during the
Popedom of Honorius the first, Council. vol. 2. cap. 4. fol. 739.
about the year 622. in the time of Heraclius the Emperor and Chintillus King
of Spain, by decree excommunicate all such as do enquire or seem to have any
care or do seek to understand who shall be their King after him that has the
Scepter. Because then says the text, it is repugnant to piety and dangerous
to man to think upon unlawful matters to come, or to inform themselves of
the accidents of Princes, or in respect thereof to provide for the time to
come: for it is written. It is not for you to know the seazons and times which
the Lord has reserved to himself: we do by this decree ordeyne, that if
there be any informer of such matters, and who during the Kings life respects
any other in hope of the Realm, or that allureth any unto him in that respect,
that the same be by sentence of excommunication banished the company of the
Catholics. The same decree was reiterated in the sixth Counsel holden in the
said Town of Toledo, whereto was added a very convenient reason whereby the
Authors of such discourses are reproved as men curious of the time to come,
whom God will not peradventure permit to attain thereto: Mark therefore how
such people who would be taken to be zealous of Catholic religion and the
Commonwealth, do by making such questions offend God and his holy Church.

7 Furthermore, this good Prince of whom they seek to make a buckler, is (if
it please him) to consider that these alterations are wouen for the subuertion
of him and his famelie: to the end that being by the force of the same
disunited and divided, the Authors of this faction may remain Masters of both
parts, and by the loss of the one may more easily disperce the other. That
this is so it appears by that Lybell that secretly they dispersed abroad into
our hands, wherein is one of the most impudent maxims that they dare set
down, namely: That no one of the Princes of Bourbon (and do expressly name
the person of the Cardinal, under whom nevertheless they would shroud
themselves) is capable of the succession of the Crown of France, because now
they are grown beyond the tenth degree of agnation to the royal house,
whereby only enheritances and successions are by the Civil laws deferred to
the nearest, and beyond the which also the heritage being vacant should come
to the fisck, which in this case is the assembly of the Estates and Peers of
France, who are to proceed to a new election. But herein they do maliciously
deceive themselves, because the royal title of the Crown of France is not
simply a patrimoniall enheritance or feudal, neither runs by simple
enheritance civil, but the nearest of the blood royal is thereto called by
succession and surrogation perpetual, without end, after the order of
consanguinitie or masculine agnation, whether he be or be not particular heir
to the King deceased, in his own proper goods. Also, say our Masters this
right of the Crown is in deed not hereditarie, I. vel agnatis ff. de relig.
l. ius sepulchri. C. cod. Ign. in disput. an rex Franc. recog. snper Mol. in
co^s. paris. tit. p. ff. 8. Bald. in ff. vnic. de feud. March. Ioh. de Teran.
in lib. co^t. reb. reg. Tract. p art. p. council. 9. 10. 11. and 12. Guil. de
Month. in tract. de suc. reg. Franc.
but of the famelie and of whom soever appertains thereto, notwithstanding no
one of them might be heir to the deceased. Whereupon Balde and others that
have particulerly written of the succession of this Realm, do uphold that
therein succeeds the next of the Kings blood being come of the male although
he were 1000. degrees of, and that by the right of blood and perpetual custom
of the Realm, therein bringing for especial example the famelie of Bourbon,
which only after the famelie now reigning is to succeed in the Crown of
France. Besides that, returning to our purpose, all the reasons that may be
alleged in the behalf of this Prince or of any other whosoever, except of the
King of Navarre, have so small likelihood that every one may soon judge that
those that have set abroach this matter are mere perturbers of the peace and
laws of this Crown, particular enemies to the house of France, but chiefly
to the said Lord Cardinal of Bourbon, in that they endeavor themselves to
ship him in this so unjust a qu^rrell, and to persuade him to leave such a
blemish to his memory, that the posterity may say that so great a Prince as
he, wise and discreet, a Clergy man even from his youth, being now come to ye
Graves side, should without reason bend himself against his own blood, and
peradventure be an occasion or instrument to the enemies of his Family to
deprive his blood of so fair, great, and mighty a realm, which the laws
thereof has provided them, if God should not send the King now reigning a sone.

8 Now to the end to lay open mine intent, I willl say no more but the truth,
which is, that among all such as profess observing of the estate and
government of ancient common wealths, this Realm of France will appear to
be one of the most assured and best ordered that ever was in the world: which
also through the Laws and politic government thereof, has longer continued
then ever did any other Monarchy, how ancient or mighty soever, as being
above 1200. years, since under one form, and with one kind of laws it was
governed under the majesty and authority of Kings, of whom this last race
has continewed 600. years. But among the chiefest and most perfect ordinances
of this Crown, that is most commendable whereby the realm does by succession
belong, by virtue of the Salick law, to the next Male of the deceased King,
discending of the Masculine ligne: For in truth our Kings knowing that those
of their own blood are to succeed them, have the greater cause to keep,
housband, and preserve the estate and demains of their Realm as their own and
certain Patrimony: besides that the successors of the Crown that are
nourished and brought up in this greatness do never become tyrants, because
even from their mothers wombes they are used to command, and ordinarily do
become the better, more just, valiant, hardy and courageous, by representing to
their own view the greatness, commendation and majesty of their
predecessors. On the otherside the subjects of the Realm, that have s^^e the
birth, nourishing and bringing up of their Princes, do the better know their
humors and wills, and do more freely obey such as are borne to rule their
estate, the^ others that are newly elected, whom they remember to have known
in the like calling as them selves, without either preeminence, authority or
government, so as there is nothing so perfect as that which nearest does
imitate nature, and which seems to be altogether immortal and infinite by
Succession from the Father to the Son. Besides that thereby the Kings
subjects, how wealthy or mighty so ever, do contain themselves in duty,
humility and obedience to their sovereign Prince, when they remember that so
long as any of the royal blood do survive, the same be capaple to attain to
that mark, and that purposing to attempt any bad matter against the Estate and
person of the King, there remain as many reuengers of the injury offered to
his Majesty as there be Princes of his blood.

Hereupon do I presume yt in our France, wherein this royal succession has
time out of mind been strictly observed, it was never found, neither do we
read, that the French men did at any time enterprise or practice aught against
the person of their King, whether in respect of that natural affection that
always they have borne him, and whereof they bear the bell among all other
Nations in Europe, or else because God never permitted the royal blood of
France to rest only in one, whereby the presumpteous conspirators might after
the trespass committed escape without punishment. This royal succession
therefore resting without doubt or co^tradiction in this Realm, the subjects
thereof do well know, even naturally and presumptiuely who is most likely to
become their King, so as now to call in question this succession, is the only
direct way to cause the King yt holds the Scepter over us to think and with
himself to imagine that in his Realm there are some, who for the satisfying
of their ambition, could willingly wish to have his place, and for the same
purpose do harken after his end. But since the bold impudency of men is so
great that they blush not, neither are ashamed to disclose themselves and to
give all men to understand of their bad entents, besides that necessarily the
Commune must be satisfied, who otherwise might sooner believe the false then
the true, before we proceed any further in aunswering the chief points of
the Lybelles that they scatter abroad, to the end to say that after the
decease of the most Christian King without issue male, it is not the now King
of Navarre, but his Uncle the Lord Cardinal of Bourbon that lawfully should
be King: or the better to express their entents, that it is neither the one ne
the other, but that they must proceed to a new election and nomination of a
Prince, I will here protest that I never desire to see the adventure of that
substitution which they pretend, but heartily do wish to the King my
sovereign Lord a most long and happy life, with as great number of issue
capable of this Crown as there be Stars in the Firmament.

9 After which protestation, to come to the purpose and succession of the house
of France, I will first speak to those yt are not brought up in the state of
this Realm, but only have learned of their Fathers that the Famely of Bourvon
has the honor to be issued from our Kings, therefore that the Princes thereof
may succeed, when God shall permit, to the Crown, by the Law of succession
of the realm. Turning my self then to these commons, I say that it is well
known, that King Laws the ninth, canonized and called saint Jews, had two
sons, the elder Phillip the bold, of whom are come our Kings yet reigning,
who also had two sons, the eldest Phillip the fayer who succeeded him, and
after him his three sons, Jews, Phil. the long, Charles the fayer, and the
yo^ger Charles County of Valois, who begat Phillip of Valois, who succeeded in
the Realm after his Cosen Charles the fayer. After Phillip succeeded his
soune John, and after him Charles the fifth called the wise, son to John.
This Charles had two sons, the eldest Charles the sixth King of France, unto
whom succeeded Charles the seventh, Jews the eleventh and Charles the eight
his son, petie son and petie Neuew. The younger Jews Duke of Orleance, who
by Lady Valentine of Millan had two sons, Charles the elder father to Jews
the twelfth King of France after his Cosen Charles the eight was deceased
without issue, and John Earl of Angoulesme, who was Father of Charles also
Earl of the same land, and Grandfather to king Francis the first, who
succeeded his cossen Jews the twelfth, of which King Francis came Henry his
second son, and father to Henry now reigning. Hitherto therefore the branch
of Phillip the bold, eldest Son to Saint Jews, never failed, and so must
that fable needs be false which the enemies of the house of Bourbo^ have
sought to root in men's minds, namely, that the discontentation of the late
King Francis the first against Charles of Bourbon that dyed at Rome was for his
pretense to the Crown of France, which since have continued in all the Princes
of this house, and from whence should be derived the troubles and Civil Wars
of this realm during the minority of the Kings, Francis the second and
Charles the ninth, brothers to the King now reigning. A matter utterly false,
and falsely inverted, to the end more and more to bring into the hatred of the
people the Princes of Bourbon, who never accounted more dearly of any thing,
or had greater delight in ought then to acknowledge, obey and faithfully serve
the Majesty's of our Kings, as their true and sovereign Lords, having the
honor so nearly to be to them allied, that they are of the same House and
Arms without difference, except that our Kings are extract from the elder
son of Saint Jews, and the Princes of Bourbon from the younger.

10 The second son of said saint Jews, was Saint Robert of France, to whom
his father gave for his maintenance ye Cou^tie of Clermont in Beauuoys. This
Robert married Beatrix daughter and Heir of Archembault of Bourbon, and they
two had issue, a son named Jews, who succeeded his said father in the
County of Clermount, and so was also Earl of March, besides that in the right
of his Mother he enjoyed the goods of the said Archembault of Bourbon, namely
the Lordship of Bourbo^, which in respect of the appertenaunces thereto was of
such account, that King Phillip of Valois in the beginning of his reign, which
was about the year. 1327. erected the said Lands into a Duchy, whereby the
said Jews took upon him the name and state of Duke of Bourbon, which since
has continued in his posterity. This Jews had two sons by whom this stock
was first divided into two branches, the one was named Peter, the other James:
Peter is now quite worn out as concerning the Masculine ligne, nevertheless
we will briefly rehearse his issue, and then return to the posterity of
James, who was the younger of whom is descended the house of Vandosme from whom
the Princes of Bourbon now living do fetch their original.

Peter of Bourbou being the elder of this house, as is aforesaid, was of great
credit and authority in the time of King John, and had many daughters, among
whom was one very fair, whom Charles the fifth covered to marry, rather then
Margaret of Flanders who had three goodly Counties to her marriage: Flanders,
Artois and Henault, whom he caused his brother Phillip the bold Duke of
Bourgondy to marry. An other named Blanch, was married to the King of Castile, a
third to the Duke of Sauoy, a fourth named Catherin, to the Earl of Harcourt.
He had also a Son called Jews who was of great fame, as well toward ye end
of Charles the fifth, as in the beginning of Charles the sixth to whom he was
appointed tuter, as also to his brother Jews Duke of Orleance, together with
the Duke of Burgondy their uncle by their father. The said Jews of Bourbon
was Captain and Leader of the army against the Turk in Affrike, in the time
of Charles the sixth, and had to wife Lady Anne Daulphine, who brought into
that house the County Dauphine of Auuergne, and the lands of Co^brailles, with
the Lordship of Mercure in the said land of Auuergne, and by her he had a Son
called John, who married Mary daughter to ye Duke of Berry. To this man was
given the Duchy of Auuergne, with the Duchy of Bourbo and County of
Clermount.

11 At John, the said principal branch bearing away the eldership, the
Famelie began to be divided, for he had two Sons Charles and Jews. Charles
succeeded his father in Bourbon, Clermont and Aunergne and Jews had
Montpensier, which in ye end returned to his posterity. Charles married Agnes
of Burgondy sister to Duke Phillip of Burg. and they had issue principal two
sons John and Peter. It is said they also had two more of one name, viz.
Jews, of whom the one dyed young, the other was Bishop of Liege and Abbot of
Saint Vaast. Others do say that they had two Sons Charles who was Cardinal
and Archbishop of Lyo^s, and John who was Bishop of Liege. They had also
sundry Daughters, as Jane married to the Prince of Orange: Isabell to the Duke
of Burgondie, and Margeret to the Duke of Sauoy, of whom are descended
Philibert Duke of Sauoy deceased without issue, and Lady Loise of Sauoy married
to the Duke of Angolesme, of whom came the late King Frances the first. But to
return to the said John and Peter, sons of the said Charles of Bourbon and
Agnes of Burgondie: John the eldest had his fathers goods and married Jane of
France Daughter to King Charles the seventh and sister to Jews the eleventh,
who nevertheless in the war for the Commonwealth reposed no confidence in
the said John of Bourbon, as well because he was come of a Daughter of
Bourgondie, as for that he had not been paid his marriage money. The said John
had no children by either Lady Jane of France or Lady Jane of Bourgondie his
Cosen whom he took for his second wife, and so his whole succession fell to
his brother Peter, who was called Lord of Beauuiew. This Peter married Anne of
France daughter to Jews the eleventh. He was in great credit during Jews
reign, but in greater during Charles the eight, so as in the voyage to Naples
the said King left the said Peter Regent of France. The said Peter also left
no issue Male but one Daughter called Susan, who might have great controversies
for the goods of that famelie: for the preue^ting whereof it was wisely advised
to marry her to a male of this house, which was brought to pass as hereafter
shall be showed.

12 To Jews of Bourbon of whom we spoke before fell the County of
Montpensier, and so continued the name and title so long as the ligne of the
said Charles his elder brother lasted. He married Gabriel of the Tower, of whom
came Gilbert of Montpensier Viceroy of Naples after that Charles the eight had
gotten it. He married Clare of Bousaigne of whom issued five children three
sons and two daughters, Charles, Jews, and Frances, of whom the two last
died without issue. Charles succeeded his father, and with the consent of King
Jews the eleventh married the aforenamed Susan of Bourbon his Cosen, whereby
all the ancient goods of this house were left to them and confirmed in their
persons, whereby also was exting uished a quarrel already framed for the said
goods, which nevertheless soon after brake out again more fiercely then
before, because y^ said Susan of Bourbo^ wife to her Cosen Charles and heir
of the elder house of Bourbon dyed before her said Husband Charles without
leaving any issue of her body, and therefore Lady Jews of Sauoy mother to
King Frances the first and Rege^t of France entitled and bare her self for
heir to her said Cosen Susan, and in deed was in degree nearer to succeed
her then the said Charles her Husband: whereupon the process and controversy
began, whereat it was said that the syd Charles took such displeasure that he
withdrew himself out of the Kings obedience: and therefore his Majesty had a
decree of judgment of his goods and rightes by confiscation. Also since that
time was a composition made between the King and his said mother upon condition
that if he deceased without heirs male then the said goods should return
into Lorraine. But his Majesty not willing so rigorously to use his rightes
and coveting to deal favorably with the sisters of the said Charles, he left
to them part often he said goods: as to the Lady Duchess of Lorraine the
Baronage of Mercure, to the Lady Loise married into the house of Roch-sur-you
the County of Montpensier and lands of Combrailles: which in so doing he
rected into a Duchy meet for the heirs of the said Lady, who at this day do
bear the same name of Bourbon, and are extract out of the second principal
branch of this house which we left of above until we had ended the first
branch of the elder. And now to return to the said Sir Charles, in him dyed
the ligne male of the principal stock of the house of Bourbon. As for his two
Sisters the one called Claude was wife to good Duke Antony of Lorrain, whose
stock yet remains. The other Loise was married into the other principal
branch of Bourbon, who has left issue of the name of this house.

13 Now let us take the second branch, the first and chief partition of this
race, which is the stock of the latter younger borne, and yet remains to this
day, in the room of the eldest, and bears the Name and full arms thereof,
as remaining alone after the default and ending of the elder. Concerning y^
males this ligne begins again in James of Bourbon the younger Son of Jews
first Duke of Bourbon, of whom we have spoken before. This James was Constable
of France after Charles of Spain, who flew Charles King of Navarre in the time
of King John. He had to wife Iehane of Saint Paul, and was and so named
himself Earl of March. Of him came one only son named John, who succeeded
him and married Catherin Countess of Vendosme and Castres, who brought into
this house those two Counties together with the lands of Carcuecy, Lupe,
Conde, Espernon, Mo^doubleau and others. Of these two issued three children
Male, James, Jews, and John: also three daughters, Anne wife to ye Duke of
Bauiere, Charlot married to the King of Ciprus, and Mary to Robert of the
Crosses, who took his said wife by force and therefore fled, and it was said
he was drowned: In his time he governed King Charles the seventh. Now to
return to the issue male. James had to his protion the Counties of March and
Castres: Jews the Cou^tie of Vendosme. As for John he had the Lordship of
Carcuecy, and married a gossip of his called Margaret a Vandosmois, by whom he
had some Children, and got a dispensation to have her to Wife, notwithstanding
the said children were not aduowed into this famely, neither succeeded in his
goods, but by sentence were declared illegitimate, and which is more, the said
John of Bourbon the Father in his Testament willed great gifts, and
substitutions to the behoof of his other two sons James and Jews, in whose
persons he planted him self, and raised the first after bough and under twigge
of this second principal branch.

14 This James of Bourbon eldest son to John, lived in the time of Charles
the sixth, and had two wives, the first Beatrix of Navarre the yo^ger daughter
of the house of Navarre, which was the first allia^ce of those two houses. They
two had issue a daughter named Leonor. After the decease of the said Beatrix,
the said James of Bourbon allied him self by marriage as it is pretended with
Jane Queen of Naples who had before (as the speech went) promised marriage to
the King of Arragon, and deceived them both: So as the said James of Bourbon
being gone into the Realm of Naples was in the end forced to leave the said
Jane and to retire into France, where after his return he still bare the
title and name of King of Naples, notwithstanding the said Jane had afterward
given it to others, and finally deceased, leaving for his only heir the said
Leonor his Daughter, who succeeded him in the said Counties of March and
Castres. She married Bernard of Armanack Earl of Pardiar a younger son of the
house of Armanack. These two had issue two sons John Bishop of Castres and
James who succ^eded in the said Counties of his father and mother, and besides
in the right of his said mother Beatrix of Navarre laid claim to the land of
Nemours, which he procured to be erected into a Duchy, took possession
thereof and enjoyed it. He married the Daughter of Charles of Anieow Earl of
Mayn and of Isabell of Luxembourg his wife. This James of Armanack at the
beginning was in favor, but afterward fall into suspicion with Jews the
eleventh, and was executed at the Halles in Paris the 24. of August 1147. he
left four Children, two Sons and two Daughters, James Duke of Nemours and
Jews Earl of Guyze, the two Daughters Margaret and Charlot married into the
house of Rohan, who deceased without issue of their bodies, so as in them
failed this under twigg both male and female.

15 Now remains to be spoken of the ligne of Jews brother to James. He for
his part had the County of Vendosme, and was taken at the battle of Agincourt
in the time of Charles ye sixth: He married first Lady Jane of Roussy, secondly
Lady Jane of Lauall of whom descended one only son called John of Bourbon,
who married Lady Isabell of Beaumount: of these two were borne two sons, the
one called Francis, the other Jews: They had also six Daughters, Jane wife to
the Lord of Ioy^use, the scond Jane first married to John Duke of Bourbon, who
was of the line of the elder of this house, and secondly to John of the Tower
Earl of Bologne, of whom is issued Lady Katherine of Medecis Queen mother to
the king: Kitherin wife to Sir Gilbert of Chabaues in Limosin. Charlot married
to Gilbert of Cleue, of who^ came the last Lord Duke of Neuers. Rene Abbess of
Fronteuout, Isabell Abesse of Caen: as for the two Sons Francis the Eldest
succeeded in the County of Vendosme, Mondoublean, Espernon and other Lands
houlden of that famely, whereto was added the Lordshippe of Saint Calais. Jews
the younger was made Lord of Rochsur-yan, and of the lands of Lupe and Conde in
Henault.

16 Now because concerning the question now to be dealt in, we are to argue of
the succession of the elder, we will seek out the farthest, and will first
speak of the Branche of Jews the younger son, Prince of Roch suryen. He
married Loise of bourbon who was of the elder live, and sister to Sir Charles of
B^urboun the last. Of this marriage proceeded two Sons and a Daughter, the
elder son was Jews who died but lately, bearing the title of Duke of
Montpe^sier, by the composition made in the time of the late Francis the first
after the decease of Sir Charles of Bourbon. He left one heir Male, named
Francis of Bourbon now Duke of Montpensier and sundry daughters. This Francis
has of his marriage with the daughter of the Marquize of Mezieres one only
son called Henry Prince of Dombes. The other son of Jews Prince of
Roch-sur-you, and of Lady Loyse of Bourbon was Prince of Roch sur-you, who died
within these few years without issue. We must now then return to the line
of Francis the Elder, who married Lady Mary of Luxembourg daughter to Sir Jews
Constable of France, who brought great goods to that Famely in Picardy, Artoys,
Flanders, and other places. Of these two issued diverse children, namely,
Charles, Frances, Jews, Antoinet and Loyse of Bourbon. Charles the Eldest
succeeded in the County of Vendosme, and procured it to be erected into a
Duchy and Pairry. Francis had the County of Saint Paul, and married Lady
Adriane of Touteuille daughter and heir of a great famely. They had issue, a
daughter. Jews was a Cardinal, Anthoinet was married to the Lord of Guyze, of
who^ is descended the house of Guise now living. Loise was abbess of
Fronteuault. Now the said Charl^s the eldest married Lady Francis of Alencon,
sister to the deceased sir Charles Duke of Alencon last deceased without
children in the year 1524. of this marriage issued Antonie, Francis, Charles,
Jews and John. Antony the Eldest and Heir of this family, married Jane of
Albret Queen of Navarre, of whom came Henry of Bourbon now king of Navarre,
who has married Margaret of France Sister to the most Christian King. Francis
was named Lord of Anguien, who gat the victory at the journey of Serizoles, and
died without issue. Charles the third is Cardinal of Baurbon and Archbishop of
Rouen. Jews was Lord Prince Conde, who when he died, left four sons: Henry
Prince of Conde, Francis Prince of Contie, Charles Cardinal of Vendosme and
Charles County of Soissons. John, who after the decease of Francis was
entitled Lord of Anguyen, died also without Issue. There were also some
daughters, of whom here we have nothing to say, as having in this argument to
treat only of the Succession of the house of France which can not descend but
to y^ Males of this famely. The only controversy therefore and different that
might through the Counsel of the mischiuous be moved, rests between Henry
of Bourbon King of Navarre, son of Anthony the eldest of that famely, and
Charles Cardinal of Bourbon and Archbishop of Rouen, his uncle by the father.

The end of the first part.
THE CONTENTS OF THE SEcond part of this Book.
1. Objections moved against the King of Navarre.

2. The marriage between Lady Jane of Albret Princess of Navarre with the Duke
of Cleue dissolved by the Ecclesiastical sentence and the Popes dispensation,
and auctorized in Parliament. Also the marriage of the said Lady with Anthony
Duke of Vendosme the eldest of the house of Bourbon from whom is descended the
King of Navarre.

3. Marriage is by the Civil law void being contracted before age.

4. The holy decrees have inhibited the blessing of marriage of maidens before
twelve years of age, and of men before foretene, and the East Church have
proroged the Matrimony of the man to fifteen, and of the woman to thirteen.

5. The honesty of Civil pollice forbids marriage before age.

6. Examples of marriages disanulled by reason of the noneage of the contracted.

7 The explication of human policy wherefore heretics are incapable of
successions.

8. The right of Realms is houlden immediately of God by the continuation of
the successiue laws of the same: Neither can the Estates depose a King
incapable or otherwise disabled. Or the people transfer the right of their
Lord unto the person of any other to whom it ought not to be given.

9. The office and duty of the Clergy toward Kings and Princes. King Henry
the second protested against the Counsel of Trent.

10. Why those of the League would not take the Catholic Princes of the blood
therinto. Those of the league have sought to suborne those of the pretended
reformed Religion.

11. Kings are Stewardes of the Church goods. The Church is in the
Commonwealth, not repugnant thereto. Policy, Jurisdiction, and collation of
Ecclesiastical functions apperteineth to sovereign Princes. The Kings of
France have evermore preserved the state of the persons and goods of the
Clergy in their Crown. The Clergy were in old time not capable to
distribute Church goods.

12. The King never dies in France because of the successiue law thereof. To
what end the Coronation of Kings was instituted. The ancient manner of the
Coronations of heathen Kings. How long it is since anointing was instituted and
wherefore. It is not necessary to annoint or crown Kings in one only place.

13. Antiquity is no necessary argument to auctorize common custom.

14. The Church never disturbed the succession of Kings, no not for heresy

15. Whether it be likely the K. of Na. will force the conscience of his subject.

16. The estate of Bearne and Navarre.

17. The cause of the protestation that the King of Navarre made the last year
at Montauban.

18. The King cannot infringe the successiue law of the Realm. The successor
comes not to the Crown in the quality of heir to the deceased

19. The Popes reasons whereby he pretends authority to transfer
Kingdoms. The Popes have ever exempted France out of their wonderful power.
Gods law without polliticke confirmation is no sanction upon earth. Priests
have no imperial Jurisdiction. Bishops and Popes have acknowledged Kings and
Emperors for their Lords. The punishment of heretics is executed by the
seculer Magistrate.

20. The opening of sundry places of Scripture concerning Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction. Wicked Emperors were never deposed. The Pope cannot excommunicate
any body politic or Town subject to the King of France. Appeals in cause of
abuse from the Pope and other Clergy men, observed in France.

21. The Church cannot excommunicate a Prince that is an evil liver. Subjects
after the excommunication of their Lord are not discharged of their duties
toward him.

22. The sentence of the excommunication of a Prince cannot contain any clause
of deprivation from his Lordly rights.

23. A Prince may lawfully arm himself against the Popes wrongful
excommunication and appeal therefore as in abuse.

24. The K. of Nauarres reason to prove him no Heretic.

25. The usurpations of the Counsel of Trent over the Crown of France.

26. Most dangerous drifts of y^ Leagued in the reformation of the Realm.

27. The wicked intent of the Leagued. Also what envy they bear to the Duke of
Espernon and others.

28. The remembrances of Advocate David now put in execution by the Leagued.
The Kings duty in matter of Religion.

29. Foreign rule and government is wretched.

FINIS.
THE SECOND PART OF the Cath. Apology.
1 SVch as mislike the king of Nauarres cause, do object against him in this
libell fonre principal points, whereof three do perticularly touch the
quality of his own person^, the fourth concerns the ancient controversy
between the Uncle and the son of the elder brother. But we will ende^our to
show that in all and throughout all they have but a weak foundation.

Concerning the first, they aleadge that the said Lord King of Navarre is not
borne in lawful matrimony of Anthony of Bourbon, eldest son of the house of
Bourbon, because Lady Jane of Albret mother to the said lord King was married
to the Duke of Cleue when she joined with the said Lord Anthony, and so
consequently the King of Nauare descended of the said Anthony of Bourbon, and
Jane of Albret is illegitimate and incapable to succeed in the Crown of
France, wherein Basterds did never succeed.

2 This point is easy to be answered by the truth of the matter, which is,
that the late King Francis the first desirous to draw to himself, and to
disunite from the Emperor Charles the fifth the Duke of Cleue, urged and
forced his sister Lady Margaret of France, and Henry of Albret King of Navarre
father and mother to the said Jane who then was a young Princess of eight or
nine years of age at the most to marry her to the said Duke of Cleue, with whom
the solemnity was accomplished and the maiden conducted to the nuptial bed in
the Town of Chastelerauld: but before the time of marriage was lawfully perfect
and accomplished in the said Lady Jane, she complained of this pretended
marriage, craving the dissolution thereof, which by the sentence of the Church
and the Popes dispe^sation afterward in the year 1541. enrowled in the Court
of Parliament was broken: After all which acts, the said Anthony of Bourbon
father to the said Lord King of Navarre married the said Princess.

3 It follows therefore that the pretended marriage between the said Duke of
Cleue and the said Jane of Albret was void and of no force or effect, as well
by the Civil law of the Romans which ordinarily we do use, as by the holy
decrees of the Catholic Church. l. 9. ff. desp. l. 32. parag. si quis spon
sam ff. de don. int. vir.
Antistius Labeo and after him Papinian and Vlpian gave sentence against
Saluius Ialianus: A maide^ under twelve years of age brought into her husbands
house, is not so much as espoused if the aff^ancing went not before. In an
other place Papinian arguing whether the promise of dowry eonteineth in it a
condition, if the marriage do ensue, sets down for an assured resolution,
l. 66. ff. de iur. dot.
That if a maiden under twelve years of age be brought into her husbands
dwelling house, having there accomplished her lawful age she may as of age
require her dowry. Labeo upon the propo^itio^ of donations by the husband made
unto his wife which in law are prohibited, l. 65. ff. de don. int. vir.
maintains that whatsoever the husband gives to the pupil his pretended
wife, is in Roman policy good and of force. l. 30. ff. quand. die leg. ccd.
In an other place he says: Whatsoever is bequeathed to a pupil at her day of
marriage, if she contract matrimony before her perfect age, ^. 10. ff. de cond.
and. de monst.
the gift is deemed unprofitable, and the condition judged not to be performed:
which Vlpian does expressly confirm. In an other place the same Author
repeateth the rescript of the Emperor Seuerus whereby the husband is
forbidden, l. 13. parag. si minor. ff. ad leg. iul. de adult. l. 4. ff. de rit.
nupt.
in the quality of a husband to accuse his wife of adultery committed during
her noneage. Pomponius has left us the general rule of this question in
writing, containing, A maiden under twelve years of age shall be a lawful wife
when in her husbands company she has atteyned the said age of twelve years.
l. 17. and 18 ff. de bon. auth. iud. possid.
Which likewise Vlpian and Paulus do repeat in their discourses upon the
privileges granted to the wife for the redemand of her dowry.

4 The holy decrees of the Cath. Church are full of such decisions. Pope
Euaristus who held the Sea of Rome about the year of Jesus Christ. 110.
confesses that he had learned of ye fathers his predecessors, that the
inequality and insufficiency of age do make the wife unlawful. We read a
decre of the Counsel of Foruile, holden under Charlemagne and Pepin his
eldest Son, concerning this question. Moreover (says the text.) For the
remedying of all, we forbid all persons to join in matrimony before their ripe
age, also all such as are of unequal years in any wise to match together, but
only those who in respect of equal birth bear like mind and consent. Pope
Nicholas the first who sat about the year 858. to the same effect writes,
That where consent wants, can. I. 30. q 2. cap. de spons. imp.
it is no marriage. Such therefore as do make alliances of their children being
yet in their cradles, do no whit bind the^, unless the co^ioyned, having
atteyned the years of discretion, do allow thereof, notwithstanding their
parents would marry them. Upon this text also John Andrewe teaches us that
we must enquire the wills of the pupilles when they are of ripe age, can.
illud 20. p. 1. can. de. his 28. did.
therein following that which Pope Marcel co^curring with the second decree of
the Counsel of Toledo has written of those who before the time appointed do
make and promise the vow of Religion: cap. puberes de des. impnb.
for although according to Isidore Puberes do take that name of Pube, l. fin.
C. de test. milit.
and that ripe age appears in such as are able to engender, yet must we not
judge this ability by the only natural power in the act of generation, but
by the judgment, counsel and discretion of the will, because marriage is an
act of discretion, policy, and housholdrye, even as the making of a Will.
Which was the cause why Pope Alexander the third declares that such as before
the age of discretion are married both may and ought by the censure of the
Church to be separated, considering they have not consented, if when and after
they have atteined ripeness of judgment they do not ratefie the same, or
that there have been no carnal knowledge between them, in which case, Malice
is said to supplye age. This the said Alexander decreed by the authority of
the Connsaile of Lateran holden in the year 1180. in the assembly of 280. cap.
de illis cap. accessit cap. a nobis extrade desp. imp.
Bishops. Urban the third writing to the Bishop of Man's, declares that these
constitutions ought to be observed, yea, notwithstanding the two conjoined had
done their endeavors to corrupt each others virginity. cap. attestationis
extra de desp. imp cap. fin. exead.
Innocent the third also does judge such a pretended marriage to be rather a
simple promise to contract in time to come, then any certain or firm
obligation for the time present: c. nostrates 30. q. 5.
Upon which reason also the aforesaid Pope Nicholas expressly forbids the
ceremonies institued by the Church, as the blessing and others, before the age
prescribed and ordained for lawful marriage, leas^ they should be ministered in
vain and then could not easily be revoked. This have not been observed in the
West church only, but also ye Emperors of the East have caused their Subjects
religiously to keep the same as a matter most holy and Catholic. As we
read in their nouel Co^stitutions, wherein they have moreover proroged the
time of marriage unto 13. years in the maiden and to 15. in the man, expressly
decreeing that the blessing given before that age in such conjunctions shall
be of no effect or force to make the marriage indissoluble, leon nouel. 74.
89. and 109. nouel. 1 lex. co^m. cap. 2. Basa mon. ad Phot. can. tit. 13. ca. 2.
but be accoumpted as a simple promise or civil covenant. Furthermore, to
prove that the East Churches have allowed of these constitutions, Balsamen
Patriarck of Constantinople does to the same purpose repeat some decrees of
Nicholas Patriarck of Constantinople and of Simon Metropolitan of Greece. In
sanct. Pontif. iur. Grient.
Also among other the Ecclesiastical aunswers of the Pat^iarkes of
Constantinople is to be seen this of Germanus to the Bishop of Ara, who
enquired how he was to proceed against a maiden that had been blessed and
corrupted before her ripe age, also against the Priest that had ministered these
ceremonies. Whereto answer was made that the maid should be separate and the
Priest put from his charge.

5 As in truth in all well ordered Commonwealthes there have evermore been
established a certain age for the conioyning and marriage of the Citizens of
the same, Genes. 2. Mat. 19. 1. ad Corin. 7 ad Ephe. 5. Enlgent. Epist. p. ca.
3. Isid. lib. 2. de off. eccles cap. de coning. lib. 7. de Rep.
because, as says Ful^entius, the law of marriage is by the will of God
ordained f^r having of issue it is meet that it be contracted at lawful age:
So as by the policy of some Cities, l. si mayor C. de leg. haered.
it was considered that the time of generation does for the most part by nature
end in the man at the 70. and in the woman at the fifty year. Aristotle is
of opinion that after that age marriage is not to be permitted. Whereto seems
to agree that which is found in the establishment of the Romans. Among whom
those Citizens were not judged to have satisfied the law Iulia which was made
for marriages: who to the end not to be subject to the penalties limited in
detestation of vowed chastity, did contract matrimony the man after sixty
years or the woman after fifty. For Justinian also writes that some accounted
it almost a wonder in nature to see a woman with child after she were fifty
years of age: And it seemed such marriages were contracted not so much in hope
of begetting children into the Commo^wealth, as in respect of some wealth or
other particular commodity that the one hoped for of the other, by which
reazon we read that Antigonus persuaded his son Demetrius to marry an old
woman named Philla, using the authority of Euripides which he altered to his
purpose, and in liew that the verse said (...), he said, (...), to the end the
sense might importe that for some benefit he should not differ the marriage of
a wife, though of a contrary age. As on the other side also overmuch youth was
never accoumpted meet for the conjunction of marriage, because therein
generation cannot be but lame and utterly imperfect: the mother in greater
danger at her childbirth: the father more indiscreet in the conjunction, and
so the more hindered from atteining to that perfection and force which Nature
reserueth to their bodies: whereupon the ancients imagined that the Idol of
Apollo gave the Trezenians warning, Arist. lib. 7. de Repub.
when he had them beware of casting their seed over hastily upon the fields
of their country.

6 Finally, concerning this present argument although the said Lady Jane of
Albret had offended in marying with the late Antonie of Bourbon Duke of
Vendosme, because she had been before married to the Duke of Cleue, yet were
that no let why the King of Navarre now reigning should not be borne of the
lawful marriage of the said Antony of Bourbon his father, who doing amiss and
that upon simplicity under the authority and in the face of the Church with
public credit did solemnize the said marriage: in which case there is no
doubt but the Children of a putatiue marriage, c* ex tenore extera qui fill. sine
legit cap. fin. extra de re iud.
as say the Canonistes, are legitimate, because in a doubtful case sentence
must pass in favor of the marriage and of the children borne in the same, the
question depe^ding upon the simple meaning and conscience of him that means
to marry a wife: c. tanta, extra qui filij^ sint leg. Alex. in l. i. ff.
solut. matr. and in caquod nobis qui fill. sint legit.
for by the laws and decrees of the Church, opinion has the vpperhand of
truth: so as by the common resolution, it is enough for the legitimation of
children, that either the one or the other of the co^tracters meant good faith
in that conjunction, believing it to be a thing lawful for him. Abbas in c de
quarta, extra de praesc.
Thus do you briefly see how children borne of such marriages are legitimate.
In our case we have moreover aduowed that the pretended marriage of Lady Jane
of Albret, mother to the now reigning King of Navarre, was void and of no
effect, and for such by all reason justly broken and disanulled by the
judgment of the Church, with whose authority the said Lady Jane was permitted
to marie where she pleased, which was not done without president. For we read
in the ancient Chronickles, that for the like cause the Emperor Ottho the
fourth was divorced from Margaret Daughter to the Duke of Brabant: and Jews
Daulphin of Viennois son to King Charles ye sixth a little before he dyed,
used, as some say, the like pretense to return Catherin daughter to ye Duke of
Bourgondy home again. In later time King Charles the eight of France, in the
year 1480. was by his father Jews the eleventh, before he was foreteene
years old, affianced by words present, and so by indissoluble marriage unto
Margaret of Austrich, daughter to the Emperor Maximilian, who being then but
two years old was conveyed into France and there brought up for the space of
ten whole years, after the which they were nevertheless divorced by a
dispensation from Pope Innocent the eight, who also for the like reason
dispensed with Lady Anne of Britain, and gave her leave to marry where she
pleased, notwithstanding during her minority her father Francis Duke of
Britain had matched her with the Emperor Maximilian, and by proxye had
celebrated the said marriage. Nicholas Duke of Lorrain, while his father Duke
John lived, did in the year 1460. by present words affiance Lady Jane of
France daughter to King Jews the eleventh, and yet coming to the age of
foreteene years, he did through the Popes dispensatio^ betroth Lady Mary of
Bourgondy, Daughter to Charles the last Duke of Bourgondy whom he was going to
marry when death, even during the preparatiues of the solemnity of the
marriage, prevented him. So the manifold decrees and judgments passed in like
matters, do manifest unto us the exceeding malice of the enemies of the said
Lord King of Navarre.

7 Their second objection imports that the said Lord King of Navarre is an
Heretic, and therefore unworthy to succeed in the Realm of France, whose
Kings are entitled most Christian, in respect of the oath that they take at
their sacring in the hands of the Archbishop of Rheimes: which is, that to
their powers they shall defend the Catholic Religion and faith: which the
said Lord King of Navarre cannot do, as professing an opinion already
condemned by the Church, and so consequently can not pretend aught in the said
Crown, neither may the subjects thereof obey him, according to the decree of
the general Counsel holden at Room under Innocent the third, 3. Volum.
Conc. cap. exco^muni. ext. de haeret.
about the year 1215. repeated out of the ancient constitutions of Theodosius
the younger, Valentinian the 3. and Martian, all most Catholic Princes, 2
volum. Co^c. f. 136. 2. 15. 216. 530.
upon the confirmation of the general Counsels of Ephesus and Chalcedon, and
afterward recited by Justinian the first in the fifth Counsel of
Constantinople, ^. Manichaeos, l. quicunque. l. fin. C. de haeret.
about the the time whereof he thereupon declared his will, as is to be
gathered by the dates of the said Counsel and the Emperors decree inserted
into his last Code, and afterward confirmed by sundry the novel constitutions
of the said Prince, whereby heretics are debarred all right of ^uccession.

Assuredly this objection at the first blush bears a great show: but we must
therein of necessity resolve two points, the one of the law, the other of
the deed. In the first we are to dispute whether an heretic may be deprived
of that Realm that falls to him by succession, as this does to the King of
Navarre. In the other, whether in this present action the King of Navarre may
be termed an Heretic, and as such a one be deprived of his succession.

8 For the first I say and maintain, that those Ordenances of Emperors, and
Canonical decrees, which do deprive heretics of successions, are written and
speak only of particular Christians, whose goods and successions are subject
to the politic laws of the Magistrates of the land: but it is otherwise in
case of Empires and Realms, which may not be wrested out of their hands that
are the true Lords of the same either for heresy or other cause whatsoever,
Prou. 8.
because they be holden immediately of the hand of almighty God, and not of
me^, as it was argued and concluded in the Counsel of Paris, holden under
Jews the meek and Lothair his son, Kings of France, and Emperors, Dan. 4.
about the year 829. which was ratefied upon the saying of the Wise man:
Counsel, equity, wisdom and knowledge are mine, by me do Kings reign, and
Counsailors publish their decrees in righteousness: Dan. 5
of me are Empires holden. The like is to be read in the prophecy of Daniell.
The sentence is according to the decree of the watch men, and according to the
word of the holy one, to the end the living may know that the most high has
power over the kingdom of men, Cap. 7
and gives it to whomsoever he will, and appoints over it the most abject
among men. The same Prophet soon after says as much to Balthazar King of
Babylon, in representing to him the force of Nabuchodonozer the Monarke of
Assiria. The Prophet Jeremy in his speech of the King of Kings teaches us
also, I have made the earth, and man and beast upon the face of the earth
through my force, and with my outstretched arm, and have given it to whom it
has pleased me. So that ^ubiects are not to search into their Kings, neither
are borne but to obey and serve whatsoever their Princes be, without any
further inquiry of their righteousness. Romans 13.
Fear the King, and know that his election is of God, says the Apostle. And
when any of them do command or wield the Scepter royal, it comes of the
favor, goodness and grace that God purposes to extend to his people, in
granting them a good King endued with piety, justice and Christian Religion:
the others also are the scourges and rods of his wrath and justice, whereof
the Prophet Ozee says. In my wrath will I give thee a King. And Job: Of. 13.
Job. 34.
Who makes the hypocrite to reign for the sins of the people: for Gods
wrath being kindled against us, he will send us a King, such a one as our
offenses shall deserve, because as it is written in the same book of Job: If
we have a wicked King we are yet worse then he. The place of Isidore is very
fit to this purpose: It is (says he) a hard matter to make the Prince amend,
if he be given to vice, in Decret,
for the people stand in awe of the Magistrate, but Kings, if they be not
withholden by the only fear of God and dred of the torments of hell, do
abandon themselves to all liberty and run headlong into the bottomless pit
of sin. I say therefore that it is not for the people, otherwise then with
humility and obedience, to control the actions and qualities of their King,
but their duty is only to cast up their eyes to heaven, and to consider with
themselves that by the will of God the Scepter is fallen into his hands and
power that bears the Crown, whether he be good or bad, especially, being
there to called by lawful succession, such as is in our France, wherein by the
Monarchiall law the people have not only referred al their power into the
Kings hand and might, but, which is more, have also tied their own hands, so
as they can have no redress so long as any male of the blood royal do
remain, according to the law of the Realm, being the nearest male in
agnation to the deceased after the general custom of France: l. 1. ff. de
bon. poss. inf. l. fin. pa rag. tali. C. decur. fur. parag. fin. de haered.
qual. Ioh. Ignae. in disp. de Reg. Franc. col^. 3. and 8
yea, notwithstanding he be unable, incapable, and do want discretion to
govern the Estate: in all which causes they may only appoint him a tutor and
administrator of the public affairs, the order whereof have been practiced in
our France upon Charles the Simple, and Charles the sixth. For notwithstanding
the Realm, especially ours, be not properly hereditary, patrimoniall or
f^udall, yet it is successiue, Cap. grandi de supp. negl. prael. vbi per
innoced. and ca Bald. in vni de succ. feud. and in auth. hoc amplius C.
defideic.
and falls to the nearest, not in quality of heir to the deceased, but as
to the next in blood in masculin ligne: so that consequently what ever he be,
he is called: and whatsoever default be in his person, either of age,
judgment, or what else soever, yet may the Estates and Peers of the Crown do
no more but appoint a tutor to govern him, and by counsel to supply
whatsoever his imperfections, because he was elected in heaven so soon as he
came into the world: All such also as shall resist him who by succession is
lawful King, shall encurre the wrath and displeasure of almighty God, because
we are not to stand in argument, or murmr against the divine wisdom, who
for the afflicting of his chosen people and the house of Sio^, did many times
suffer them to be governed by young, wicked, frantic, and unfaithful Kings,
yea, mere Tyrants: such as in Judah were Roboam, Ioram, Ochozias, Amasias,
Achas, Ozias, and others who were either Idolaters, or misbeleeuers in the true
God of Abraham. Likewise in Israel, Nadab, Baaza, Achab with his wife
Iezabell, Manasses, and the most part of the rest of their Kings, who reigned
with more Idolatry and tyranny against the favored of God, then in man's
opinion was requisite. With the like scourges also God has visited his Church
since y^ time of grace, wherein it pleased him to send his dear son into the
world with his most precious blood to redeem us from our sins, permitting to
sit therein not only many unfaithful Emperors and Kings, conspired enemies to
our faith, and heretics, but also particular Pastors ordained for the feeding
of the souls of Christians, evil livers, and of pernicious example.
Constantine son to great Constantine, Valens brother to Valentinian the
first, and Zeno son in law to Leo the first Emperors, were Arriens.
Anastase and Justinian the first of that name, were infected with the error of
Eutiches. Heraclius was a Monothelite. The stories are full of many Popes of
Rome, heretics, adulterers, Magicians, Scismatickes, and men confect in a
filthy quagmire of vice, who all nevertheless did peaceably by Gods will sit
in Moses chair, to the end to punish and afflict his flock as he has thought
good by such Tirants, cap. quod autem de iure patronat. c. Adibertu^q. 17
whom with his own hand he chose to be the executioners of his justice, and
against whom the people neither ought nor might conspire: for (says
Panormitan) since they are not free, but subject, they have no power to
transfer the jurisdiction or confer the title, Bald. in cap imperialem de
prohib. feudor. alie. coll. x. did. in cap. cetede iudic. Abbas co^c. 3. in 2.
part.
neither is he accoumpted to have given, that has no right to give. In an
other place the same Canon Doctor writes, that the vassal cannot consent in
the person of any other then his Lord, no not by prorogation of power, to that
purpose alleging many other skillful persons opinions. Howbeit all good
Catholics do to their great grief know that most of the Ecclesiastical
persons and Clergy of France do seem to be parties in the Conspiracy that
long since have been devised against the state of this Crown: which
nevertheless I can hardly believe, notwithstanding I hear our ordinary
Preachers openly in the chair of truth and humility, preach war, blood,
weapons, rebellion, and contempt of ye King, and the Princes of his blood, a
matter detestable and abominable before God.

9 My Masters, ye Bishops, Priests and Doctors, what ween ye to do? Is this
the commandment of God? Is this the doctrine that ye are bound to plant in
the Christian Church? Is this the light that you show to the flock which God
has committed unto you? Is this y^ peace that you ought to teach, and for the
which the Church pours forth her daily supplications? What correction may
the people look for at your hands, whiles your selves are the authors of evil?
Will you do or say as Lucifer, I will ascend into heaven and become like unto
the most high God? Will you justly have the name to be the very enemies of God,
who commands obedience only to the Kings and powers that he has
established, and who takes no delight in any thing more then in peace, hating
all shedding of blood? Does the way to cure the rage of poor mortal creatures
consist in vnclothing them of all humanity? in thrusting into their fist the
sword wherewith to make away them selves? by the authorizing of their fury
with your decrees? nay, which is more, by stirring them thereto through your
Sermons? May we not reproach unto you that which Jeremy prophesied in his
time? The Prophets have prophesied lies, the Priests have approved the^, and
the people have embraced them? Must we needs say of you as Ezechiel writes of
your like? I will stretch forth my arm over their Prophets that see lies,
and those that tell fables, or do not serve for discipline to my people whom
they have seduced: saying, The peace of God be with you and yet it is not
peace that they seek? My Masters, this is not the fruit of the spiritual
doctrine that you have in custody: beware it be not said of you, that an evil
tree cannot bring forth good fruit: you preach war, rebellion,
disobedience: you contribute to Conspirators against your King and the Princes
of his blood: you deliver the Towns to them and do put your flocks into
their hands: you seek out strangers to rule over you, and do set them
against your King: where will you become? Is this the Catholic and Apostolic
doctrine that you do sow? Know you not that Jesus Christ is the foundation
of the Church, so that whosoever will lay any other shall destroy himself and
whatsoever he dare undertake? Is not the doctrine of Jesus Christ peace,
humility, obedience, and cleme^cie? Is it not written of you, Be ye wise as
Serpents and simple as Doves? Are not you termed the sault of the earth, which
being shed abroad, where may we gather it again? I wot what you will say:
There be, say you, a number of heretics which must be rooted out with the
sword, because their life is repugnant to Gods honor. No, no, my Masters, you
are yet deceived: for you must first show how they be heretics, and for
such cause then to be lawfully condemned, which as yet you have not done:
because in ^rueth your pretended Counsel of Trent whereby you have condemned
them was not lawful, as the King of France confessed even while it was
assembled, and therefore did not only forbid the Bishops of his Realm your
predecessors to go thereto, but also by his Ambassador did protest that he
could not accept it for a lawful and general Counsel, but only for a
particular assembly gathered together for the profit and authority of the
Pope and King of Spain, unto whom they went about to give the presedence above
the most Christian Majesty: furthermore declaring that he meant not that he or
his subjects should any way be bound to the decrees thereof: but that
contrariwise he was determined, if need were, to employ all remedies
necessary which his predecessors had in like case used to procure the
disanulling of the same. Besides I say unto you that weapons are not the
means to cure this mischief. Know you not that the doctrine of Religion,
either the error thereof is a disease of the Soul and mind? seek therefore
for your parts the spiritual Medicines wherewith to heal the same, as
admonitions, prayer, fasting, and amendment of your lives which are the true
and only Weapons of Gods Church. But what? are you not content with the
extreme diligence and care of our most Christian and Catholic Kings for the
reunion of their people into one only Apostolic Romish Religion? what have we
gotten by so many fyers, so much blood, such battles, and destructions within
this Realm for the same? Those that now would rule you, are they not the same
persons that led the armies and practiced y^ occasions of the passed wars? have
they not sufficiently proved, that neither ster nor sword are meet remedies
for this evil? and that in one day of such troubles Gods Church is more hurt
and offended through the disorder of one lewd Soldier, then in a whole year
of pacient tolleration, whereby God may be devoutly served, the King honored,
the Clergy assured, the Law feared, the gentry cherished and the people
eased? to be brief, every one by little and little reduced into the way of
good life? which to be brief are the effects and glory of the militant
Church, and of the good Shepherdes of the the same. We have burned them quick,
they have quenched the fires with their blood: we have drowned them, they have
Spawned in the concauities of the water: we have murdered them al in their
sleeps, within few days they have revived again: We have fought with them
and beaten them, but have not cast them down: To be brief, if we consider how
we have behaved our selves toward them, we shall surely find that we have left
no more to do, but either to destroy our selves and perish all together,
whereby the one shall not scorn the other, either else to let them live among
us one with an other in peace and liberty of conscience, and never be so
desirous to drive them into heaven with the edge of the Sword. But will you
have me tell you the truth? your pomp, your pride, your ambition and the
ignorance of yours is cause of all this mischief. Notwithstanding you see the
the Church on a flame, who is there among you (I will except some small number)
that endeavors to amend his life, and to distribute y^ Church goods in such
sort as he ought? See we not still the Kings Courts, the Towns and Country
full of superfluity of our Bishops, and other Clergy men? such a number of
Abbots called Commendatories, who are of no professed order of Religion, but
do nevertheless devour the revenues that belong to the poor? so many
beneficed persons with diverse Bishoprics, Abbayes, Priories and Cures: some
in title, others in commendam, of the which they never see so much as one,
unless it were to the end to farm the same forth? You may see their
Churches fall in decay, and the Priests who^ themselves have anointed beg
their food, the rest of the poor dye for hunger at their gates. And in one
word to say all, these Masters have no money to do their duties wtall, no
not so much as to procure preaching which themselves can not do, or for
performing the divine service, either to instruct the youth. For every one does
sufficiently know that the late King Charles the nineth, whom God pardon, and
King Henry the third now reigning, visiting and coming to those Towns wherein
the principal Universities of their Realm are planted, did ordeine that the
Clergy of certain Dioceses should contribute some small portion toward the
salaries of the Doctors and Rege^ts of the same, yet was it never possible for
these poor people, who are the seeds of justice and virtue, to reap any one
penny. Our Masters have now money enough to help to maintain war against
the King under an imaginary and false pretense of defending the Catholic
Religion. You deceive your selves if you hope to convert others before ye make
clean your selves, no never look for it: for it will still be objected unto
you that you can see a mote in other men's eyes, but cannot take away the whole
block that blinds your selves. Why follow you not the example of Moses, who
when he beheld and saw Gods people offend the divine Majesty with Idolatry,
did not take the sword to put them to death, but began to cry: O Lord this
people have sinned, forgive them, or else blot me out of thy book which thou
have written. Let us live well, let us reform our selves, and let us not be so
careful for the wealth of the world. We have so long cried out against those of
the pretended Religion concerning this point, that now they can say of us: The
Doctor is to blame, who reproaueth other for the fault that himself has. Yea
they will say worse, for still they stand upon the defensive, you are the
assailants: They have evermore acknowledged the Kings Majesty for their
sovereign Lord, and never contemned the Princes of his blood, as the King
himself in his Edicts has not sticked to confess: but you endeavor to
enstale Strangers against the estate and dignity of his Majesty, who both
before he was King and since has prodigally ventred his life and hazarded his
Crown for the glutting of your desires, and putting of your over rude
counsels in execution. What reason therefore have you now to match your
selves with the mere enemies to the peace of the Church? enemies to your
Commonwealth? enemies to your King and the Princes of his blood? I say to your
most Christian, and Catholic King, one that fears God, and one who has
(peradventure) done more then he ought for the getting by arms that contention
which you do wish for. I am moved so to say, because in truth I believe and
experience has taught us that the more we stir up this evil, the more it
increases: wherefore herein the best counsel that wise men have left us,
were to resolve our selves that if this pretended reformed Religion be not by
the decree and establishment of Gods word, it will without any wars perish
and vanish of it self, as have done so many former heresies: but contrariwise,
if it be according to the will of the holy Ghost, we may cry out at our
pleasures, but it will fulfill his work.

10 But my Masters, if you be not led by malice, are you so blind as to
think that the authors of this conspiracy, which they term a holy League,
be led by any zeal of Catholic Religion? If that were their drift,
wherefore have not they also called into the same such Lords Princes of the
blood, as still continuing Catholics, and living according to the Romish
Church, were never so much as suspected to be of the pretended reformed
Religion? We know very well that the Lord Cardinal of Bourbon (whose years they
have seduced, and whom under a vain hope of smoke they make to wear the knife
wherewith to embrue his hands in his own blood, having wrested from him the
fairest and most of his Benefices, whereof, by their suggestion he has
deprived his own Nenewes) before he altogether became unnatural, and when
they bound him to this peevishness, offering unto him their feigned League to
sign, requested that his Neuewes the Lords Cardinal of Vandosme, Prince of
Conty and Earl of Soissons might be included in y^ same, whereto these our
Masters could not intend. Whereof do they suspect the Lord Duke of
Montpe^sier, and the Lord Prince of Do^bes his son, both being most
Catholic Princes? only that they be of the house of Bourbon which they
seek to root out, and so do make accoumpt to transfer the Crown into
their own hands, trying themselves only upon the said Lord Cardinal, a man
worn and of small continuance: so contenting themselves to make him the
standerd whereby to establish their arms: neither would they auctorize the
rest among their troops, fearing least they should have better eyes then the
said Lord Cardinal to discover their wicked entents: besides that if it
should so fall out that they should come to the drawing of l^ttes for the
bean in the cake, the people would rather have recourse to these Princes as to
the branches and sprigges of their Kings, and those who only in their degrees
and order are capable of the Crown of France: either else least the French
Nobility should blush for shame at the preferring of the tirannous dominion of
strangers, before their French Princes and lawful Lords. This is not the
first day that the house of Bourbon have been subject to the envy and malice
of these Espaniolized conspirators: for it appeared more evidently when the
Duke of Vendosme father to the now reigning King of Navarre, married the heir
of Navarre, whom one of their predecessors was very desirous to match withal.
The said Lord of Montpensier should be very blind if he could not (by the
welcome that the parrisans gave him lately at Orleans with Cannon shot)
perceive that it is not Catholic Religion that they fight for, but the
rooting out of the royal famelie. As also before when in his absence while he
was gone to accompany the late Monsier the Duke, brother to the King into
Brabant, they procured the taking away of the government of Britain from
him, which now they claim to be theirs, some in the right of their mother and
other of their wife. But I hope the King shall be able notwithstanding they
endeavor to dispossess him, to make himself whole, to ye and after to hear
them in their petitions, if he find the same reasonable. Moreover to return
to you my Masters of the Clergy, I will set you down most pertine^t
demonstrations of their zeal to the Catholic Church, and will tell you that
after they had failed of their enterprise against the Town of Straus borowe,
(by the spoil whereof they hoped for mean sufficient to demand Mets, Thoul,
and Verdun, and therewithal, together with other the Towns upon the shore of
Rhine, which easily they would have forced, to have prosecuted their purpose
for the rest of the Realm of France) they endeavored to win those of the
pretended reformed Religion, unto whom they promised not only such free
exercize of their religion, as y^ King now reigning had permitted them, but
also, if need were, with greater liberty and assurance, and to the same end
offered to send their male children and young Cousens for hostages into
Germany, under the pretense of learning the Dutch tongue: persuading the French
of the said Religion, that they should never live assured under the King: that
by that which was passed they might believe that he would enfringe his Edicts
of Pacification, upon his first opportunity: that neither y^ King of Navarre,
neither the Prince of Condy had authority sufficient to defend them: to be
brief, that it was their best to offer themselves into their protection, who
had both the men of war, the Clergy, and the governors of the Provinces at
their devotion. To the same effect they also sent the late Lord of May, to
Duke Casemire, to win him into this League, and also to practice the same
with those of the pretended reformed Religion, offering to commit their forces
into his hands: besides setting before him that he was descended of the race of
Charlemagne as well as they: that they might make the one a great Emperor, the
other a great King: that the Capeti^s had over long enjoyed their inheritance,
and that they were resolved no longer to suffer it. As in deed about the time
of the siege of Fere, the said May practiced all that he perceived discontented
to sign the said conspiracy, until he was wounded at the said siege:
whereof when the chief of this drift had notice, he posted from Paris unto him
to get from him the Articles of the League: as also after the decease of the
said May, he sent to his house to make search among all the papers and
reme^brances of the said deceased. Believe not therefore my Masters, that it
is the love of God that leads them, either piety of Catholic Religion, but
say boldly that it is no other but ambition, a wicked and abominable intent to
lose and alter this Estate and to get it into their hands, and so to make you
bondmen to their passions, or executioners of their tyranny. Wherefore I
beseech you to call to mind the saying of Joel. Awake (my Masters) you that
are dronken with your Wine, weep and lament, for all your joy and mirth is
gone far from you. Put on your mourning weeds ye Priests that serve at the
Altar, for our land is become miserable: and our fields do now weep, since
they are become barren: our Wines withered, our Oil diminished, and our
laborers brought into necessity. And again: weep ye Clergy that serve God,
and in liew of other weapons say, Lord forgive this people and forsake not thy
enheritance. As for your lives, direct them after the example of the Apostle,
who says: ad These.
We are as young children among you, or as the nurse preserves her little
ones, even so we do merueilously love you, and do covet not only to teach
you, but to offer our lives for your preservation. Put away all hatred,
malice, guile, emulation, envy and backbyting: feed upon milk that we grow
therein to our salvation, for almighty God is merciful. My Masters, I pray
you pardon me, I know I might have spoken more gently unto you, but to what
purpose is it only with the fingers to touch the wound, or to annoint only the
outside thereof with too easy an ointment, when you see it is time to crush it
thoroughly: to expel all corruption that marreth the whole body? What had I
been the better to have ministered a tent of lint, when it wanted a sharp
corosiue. Take therefore in good part this that I say unto you, for it is the
doctrine y^ I have learned in the School of the Catholic Apostolic and
Romish Church: the greatest Doctors whereof without human passions will
grant that all the Sermons and Preachings wherewith you stir up the people to
take arms and shed blood, are no other then the deuilles Tro^pets and Drommes:
as also surely if you seek any other weapons then clemency and Christian
piety do teach, and that with Tertullian you say not you had rather be killed
the^ kill, I do foreshew unto you the wrath of God upon you, and that
undoubtedly the prophecy of Malachie will be verefied in you in these words:
My wrath is kindled against the Shepeheards, whom I will visit among the
flocks.

11 Much less are we also to care for the complaint that some of the vnwisest
of your men do lay upon the King for exacting some of your tenths, and using
sometimes, as the necessity of his Estate requires, the temporalties of his
Churches, wherein they are much to blame, and do ouergreatly abuse the liberty
that the conniuence of Princes have tolerated in your predecessors, in respect
of their piety and endeavors in the distribution of their means, possessions
and almoses given to the poor unto who^ the Church goods do appertain, and
not to you. Besides that I will by the way tell you that the wealth of the
Church is the only poison thereof, for that the greatness thereof consists
not in temporal goods and worldly pomp, as the devil has persuaded most of
our Clergy, but in the holy and commendable life of our Pastors, and in that
heavenly food that they give to their flocks over y^ which they watch night
and day: Homil 84. in Matthew.
And as Chrysostom does well show you: the wealth of the Church brings you
into suspicion among both rich, poor, Thieves, and Slaunderers, that seek
your spoil, besides that you are thereby filled with cares, lyings in weight,
braules, strifes, hatered, fear, covetousness and perpetual sorrow, such as
the misery of our world can teach us, wherein it is true that the most part
of the Clergy have no other mind, neither do move war for any other cause,
but only for fear of losing so great rents and revenues, which wrongfully
they devour out of the goods of the poor. Whereby we may perceive that in
such men we have no more left but the shadow, remembrance, and be wailing of
the Christian Church springing and flourishing in piety, for whose sake the
Apostles would never possess any thing: and before Gods people nourished the
Levites, widows and Orphans. Deuteronomy. i 2. and 1 4.
For, when the Church thought it good to have and retain any thing for the
relief of the poor, and of the Pastors thereof, it committed the distribution
and ordering thereof to such among them as by the Church were thereto elected,
because the people, but especially the Princes were either sworn enemies to
the faith and persecutors of the Spouse of Jesus Christ, either at the least,
weak, of small zeal, or but meanly grounded therein: whereupon the treasure
and common Storehouse was usually committed to the custody of the Bishop, as
unto him that was accounted most glorious in piety and duty in the holy
distribution that he made, Sosom. lib. 8. cap. 12. Socr. lib. 7. cap 25.
whereof he reserved only sufficient for the necessity of his own living.
Like as Socrates writes that Chrisantus daily reserved only two Loves for his
own sustenance. Of this common store committed to the hands of the Bishop, is
it come to pass that when he began to serve him self, and badly to employ to
his private commodity, like a thief, that thing which to him in the quality
of a steward only subject to render account, was committed, he found him self
far richer, more mighty, and better at ease then the rest of the Clergy,
and thereupon by the sligtes of the Devil, who had thrust into his hands so
much wealth to corrupt the holiness, example and eminency of the Church of the
son of GOD through the evil housbandry of the heads thereof, began to brag
above all other: But so soon as Princes began to taste of, and auctorize
Catholic Religion, they sought also to become Stewards and housbanders of
Church goods, as making a part of their common wealths, because as O^tatus
Mileuitanus did very wisely say. lib. 3. ad Parm^nian.
It is certain that the common wealth is not in the Church, but contrariwise
the Church is in the common wealth under the aucthritie whereof she displaieth
the Sun Beams of her fair face. Hereupon do we read that the Emperor
Constantine the great, was the keeper and disposer of the treasure and goods of
the Church, after the example of the ancient kings of Judah, of whom among
other it is found of Ioas, the he, by the counsel Ioiadas the Priest, 4. Reg.
12. 2. Pa^al. 24
fearing lest the Priests should bestow that money, which the people had
contributed toward the reparations of the Temple, amiss, commanded it to be
put in a Cofer, and distributed in the presence of one of his men. And in deed
at the beginning the Church was under the authority of Christian Princes not
only in respect of the temporal goods thereof, but also as concerning the
institution of the charge, Jurisdiction, government and correction of the
manners of the Clergy, by the said reason of the aforenamed Bishop of Afric:
whereof I will seek no better Testimony then that which saint Augustine
writes, Epist. 68.
who teaches us that the notice of Ecclesiastical causes was committed to the
Emperor Constantin: saint Hierom also aleadgeth very good reasons in his
Commentary upon Hieremy, 2. Reg. 23. d. 5. Deuter. 17. Bald. in prooem. de
eret. Archid. eu c. lectis 63. did. Panor. in c. venie^s extra de accusat.
whose opinion is confirmed by Gratian in his Decrees. For in troth kings by
this care and diligence do testify their zeal and piety to Religion. In
consideration whereof Gregory reports that the first Emperors and Christian
Kings did give and confer the Churches: in which power the Cannon Doctors,
Bald. Archid. Panorm. and some others are forced to grant that by reason of
their Crown they are grounded upon common Law. And before them Saint Ambrose
in his Discourse De tradendis Basilicis did maintain the same. Nevertheless
such asdoe read Histories are not ignorant what Tragedies the Popes within
these six hundredth years have for this article raised against the Emperors of
Germany, whom in the end they have driven to give over the game, so as there
remains but little of that former aucehoritie Royal in Christendom, saving
in the Majesty of the Flowerdeluce, which God be praised has hitherto kept
it self hole and a Virgin, and so will still keep it self, if the good and
natural Frenchmen would put to their helping hand as by y^ oath of Nature that
they owe to the Dignity of this Crown they are bound. For they must
understand that it is one of ye greatest points whereupon the Pope is so
importunate to publish his pretended Counsel of Trent in France, through the
assistance of the Spaniard, by the ministry of his Proctors, the unthankful
Nourse children of this Realm, for the abasing and deminishing of the dignity
of our Crown, which evermore thanks be to God has had sovereign power,
institution, jurisdiction, and police over the Clergy, and the Officers and
Magistrates under the Kings authority in his Parliaments and great
Counsel, even since the planting thereof, have power and authority by
appeal of abuse fallen before them by his Majesty's Subiecs to break,
disanulle and cut of whatsoever shall be found to have been made, pronounced,
decreed, adjudged, established and ordained by the Pope, the Bishops, or other
Delegates of the Ecclesiastical de- audience against the holy Decrees, Laws,
Edicts, and Ordenaunces of his said Majesty, or arestes of y^ said sovereign
Courts, because in truth the Prince is the guardian, revenger and reformer of
Ecclesiastical discipline, as the ancient Bishops and Popes more honest, and
not so ambicious as the most part of ours, c principes seculi c. ad
ministrato^res 23. 45.
have often openly confessed. Yea, it so appears in the Epistle of Pope John
the eleventh, which begins Inter claras, C. de Tri. written to the Emperor
Justinian, at such time as no doubt the Church was under the dominion of the
Emperor, c. vides c. quid autam c. fin 10. distinct.
as all men may perceive by the first book of Iustinia^s Code and by his
novel constitutions. 3. 5. 6. 16. 37. 56. 57. 58. 59. 67. 83. 117. 123. 133.
146. Also since by the edict of Tiberius the second, Basil, Leo the
Philosopher, Alexis, and sundry other Emperors of the East. In our France the
Pope and Clergy cannot deny the ordinary collations evermore made by our
Kings, as testefieth Gregory of Tours, Aimonius, with the rest of the ancient
Historographers of our Nation, neither the goodly orders and reformatio^s of ye
Church, Aimo. lib. 3. cap. 55. l. 4. cap. 83. Vinc^nt.
made by Clouis in the Synod that he called at Orleans, by Dagobert, if we will
believe Floart, by Childebert, Pepin, Charlemaigne, Paul. Diac. and les autres.
Vincent li. 22. Ange s. in capit Carol. Mag. Clot. and Lud. pij c. Sanctorum
63. distinct. c. volumus xi. q 1 Platin. i n vita greg. 4.
Jews ye Meek, and Lothaire, as witnesses their goodly Chapters: also by
Phillip given of God, Saint Jews in his Pragmaticall sanction of the year a
thousand, two hundred, sixty eight, Phillip the Fair in his Edict in the year
a thousand, three hundred and thirty, Charles the seventh, in the year 1453.
Charles the nineth in the Estates of Orleans, and Henry the 3. now reigning.
Which also was most learnedly declared to Jews the eleventh by two Presidents
of Inquestes of the Court of Parliament, in a treaty that unto him they
exhibited in the name of all the company. Yea, we do perticulerly find that
the general Estates of France assembled in the Town of Tours in y^ year 1483.
did desire Charles the eight to reform the Clergy, as being of his charge
and authority, because the Pope had no Jurisdiction over the Bishops of
France, as by an Edict general it was published in the Parliament under
Charles the seventh in the year 1407. and is to be seen in the Registers of
the said Court. Yea, that Court has so far proceeded, as sometimes to decree
that the Popes Bulls and rescripts given out against the liberty of the French
Church and Majesty of our King, should be cancelled, broken and torn: Neither
was it lawful for his holiness to send any Legate into France, except with
his Majesty's good will, and without prejudice to the rightes of his Crown: as
by an Arest of Parliament it was declared in the year 1484. After by the same
Court have oftentimes the power of the said Legates sent with the Kings consent
been restrained from al authority to enteprize against the rightes of the
Crown of France: In Epist de. Trad. Bas^lic.
which limitations and liberties the Popes never controuled. Since therefore it
is the King that gives you the Bishoprics, Abbayes, and Ecclesiastical
functions: that your manners, orders and correction depends upon the royal
Majesty and rightes of his Crown, why will you not suffer me with S. Ambrose,
to auowe that he may sell, dispose, and employe the temporalties of the Church
upon the necessities of his Estate, without procuring the lisence of the Pope
of Room, always provided that his Majesty leave sufficient for the
sustenance of the Priests and others that have charge of the deuiue Service?
For you also do know that whatsoever you take more then for the necessity of
your life only, is theft, or mere robbery, and so termed by the holy decrees
founded upon the express commandment of the Apostle, 1. ad Tim. cap. fin.
that you should be content with your food and sustena^ce: and by the Canons
you are straightly forbidden not to give any portion to either kinsman, c.
Episco. 1. q. 2. c. Episcopus 12. q. 1.
allie, or friend whosoever. And in deed so soon as the Church perceived that
your Predecessors did abuze that too much confidence which the first Christian
Emperors had reposed in their piety touching the distribution of Church
goods, which by little and little through the conniuence of very zealous
Princes, who did too much assure them selves of the honesty of Bishops, they
had recovered, she did again take it from them. Also in the fourth Counsel
of Charthage they were forbidden to meddle therewith. ^p. 25.
In the general Counsel of Chalcedon holden under the Emperor Martian, were
Stewards established to such purposes, who were neither Priests, neither
Clergy men. In the seventh general Counsel holde^ under Justinian the
first, e. eum scimus 9. q. 3. mouell. 6. 7. and 133.
the same were renewed, and it was decreed that the Archbishops only should be
called to their election, whereof Justinian makes mention. Saint John
Chrysostom cries out and greatly complains, that in his time the Bishops
and Clergy would needs be the distributers, stewardes, and husbanders of
Church goods: 1. ad Cor. 16.
and therefore says this good father in his 86. Homely upon Matthew: They
endeavor as much to rule the Temporal as the Spiritual. The Apostles would
not distribute that money which they had common among them. Our great Lawgiuer
and King Charlemaigne, lib. 1. c. 80. and 83.
does expressly forbid them to convert any to their particular profit, or
otherwise to employe it then upon the necessity of the poor. It is well
enough known in what order and to what use the Church has decreed the
dispensation of the Revenues thereof. Greg. in Regest. li. 12. cap. p.
Saint Gregory reports that oftentimes they were wont to divide it into
four parts, whereof one to the Bishop and his small famelie: an other to the
poor Priests and officers of the Church: the third to the rest of the poor:
and the last was appointed to the reparatio^ of the Churches. But our Bishops
and Abbots do well enough keep themselves from proceeding in any such manner,
for among themselves they retain the assotiation of the Lion, whereof our
laws do make mention and easily permit the poor Priests and others to part
with as much as they list, so that themselves be not admitted in the exaction
thereof: but contrariwise if any Prince for his necessity would employ any
part of their superfluous abundance, they straight spread rumors among the
people that the devil has carried away one: that an other has been seen in
hell: that an others body have not been to be found in his Tomb: with a
number of such fables, wherewith our Christian Histories for these seven or
eight hundred years are poisoned, in liewe of quietly obeying the will of
their Kings and sovereign Lords, in whose Co^monwealths and under whose
discipline they are bound to live simply and poorly, casting down their high
looks in all Christian humility and obedience, taking their parts and
portions of the revenues and Church goods, and of that Altar which they serve
at the hands of their Kings, yea and only so much as may suffice for their
sustena^ce, and in liew of yielding part to the necessities of their Princes,
to complain, murmr, and arm themselves against them, because they would
employe it to such uses as their affairs do require. I beseech you therefore
my Masters, ye Bishops and Prelates of France, whom many good men do accuse
of countenancing the wicked deliberations of Spaniards, Italians, and
Lorraines, that seek to seize upon the Crown against the King and the Princes
of his blood, remember the example of Magnulph Bishop of Tholauze, repeated by
Gregory of Tours, when one Godoald, terming himself son of Clotaire the
first, li. 4. ca. 27.
and vpholden by Disier, and some others the perturbers of the peace of the
Realm, such as our pretended Mascontents, required pertition with Gontran, and
Childebert, the children of the said Clotaire. For the history imports that
the said Disier and most of his partakers, were let by the exhortation of
this good Bishop, who used this oration to the people. We know Gontran and
his neuewe to be the children of our Kings, but for Godoald we wot not what he
is nor from whence: Prepare ye therefore ye Frenchmen, and if Disier would force
you to do this injury to your Kings, defend your selves, and let him perish
as Sigulphus, that he may be an example to all other, to the end no stranger
do presume to violate and taint the Majesty of the Realm of France.

12 To all the premises, and to the discourse of the duty and respect that
subjects owe in our case to their Kings and Princes, the disturbers of the
peace and laws of this Realm do answer perticulerly against the King of
Navarre, y^ he shall never be King of France, before he be after the ancient
manner observed (as they ween) ever since Clouis the first Christian King,
consecrated, anointed, and crowned: and that nature only cannot make him
King, without the ordinary Ceremonies observed at the coming in of a new
Prince. And so consequently they dare infer that, notwithstanding al our
former discourse be true, yet can it not be applied to the said Lord King of
Navarre, to whom the French men cannot be bound without his anointing and
coronation, 1. proponebatu. ff. de Iudic.
which the Catholics will never permit, unless he abjure the pretended
reformed Religion. Also that in case they should withstand him, c. ven rabi
le^de clect. c. quoniam Abbas de off de leg c. si gratiose de rescript. in 6.
Rusae. in tract. de iur. reg. Guil. de Montserrat. in c. act. de succ. reg.
Franc. Bald. in l. generaliter parag. in his. C. de le cund. nupt.
yet should they not thereby withstand their King, but a pretender to the
Realm. But in truth herein lies the difficulty of the matter, wherewith they
seek to deceive the ignorant. For this they must know, that in Realms
successiue, as is ours, the King lives perpetually, and leaves the Realm to
his nearest by virtue of the law successiue; By reason whereof he is true and
perfect Lord before he be crowned: neither does his coronation serve but for a
declaration and publication of the honor of the mark of his calling, which was
obtained to him before, both by nature and by the law of succession, which
needs no further declaration of the successor, cap. 1 de fe^d. cog. vbi gl.
B^ld. in l. cum antiputo. i^us C. de iur. del. Barb. in rub C. qui admit. ad
hon. poss. posfint.
in that it is not simply hereditarie to the deceased, but custumary and
legitimate at the very instant of the former Kings decease, which seazeth not
the natural successor of the Lordship and royal power only, but also of the
possession and effectual enjoying of the same. Whereupon all our Interpretors
do maintain that in feudall causes and matters the successor is in a manner
seized in his predecessors life time, Guil. 2 rolhius in still. parlam. in tic
de feud. parag. item de conSuetudine.
under whom he is half possessioner without any further inuestiture:
especially in our France, where it is observed without contradiction. For that
concerning the Realm, the coronation ensuing is but the habit and royal
ensign, and therefore al good men will grant that the King is anointed and
crowned because he is King: but contrariwise that he is not king because he is
crowned: for so thieves and Tyrants being the stronger might become lawful
Kings, and with over much facility alter the cause of their possession through
that ceremony. So was the Emperor of the Romans lawful, after he had been
elected and saluted, in testimony and for a proof of which election only he
set a Crown upon his head, a Scepter of Iuorie in his hand, and being
apparelled in a Purple robe, did always walk forth with four and twenty
Huissiers, Plutach. in Amax.
every one bearing a Torch and an Axe. It was was moreover a custom to carry
fire before the Emperor, after the ancient manner of the Kings of Persia, who
went to Pasargades, that the Priests, might there consecrate them in a Temple
dedicated to one of the Goddesses of wars, where the Prince putting of his
own Robes, did put on the same that the ancient Cirus used to wear before he
was King: he also did eat of a Cake made with Figs and Turpentine, and
drancke a potion made of Vinegar and Milk. The ancient Kings of Greece, in
liewe of a Diadem, were wont to carry a Spear, or a Staff, which the Grecians
termed (...). Justin. lib. 43. Liu App. Tacit. Valor. libr. 5. cap. 7.
The Romans sent to him to whom they gave the royal dignity, a Crown of
Gold, a Cup, and an Iuorie staff, and afterward added the seat or chair
fashioned like a Chariot. Afterward, when Christianity was planted in the
hearts of the people, having proceeded to the election of the Emperor, and
being agreed of his person, the manner was to cause him to swear, yea,
sometimes by his handwriting to subscribe, that he would stay himself upon the
doctrine confirmed by the Catholic Church and the ecumenical Counsels of
the same, and that he should not raise any trouble in the Church of God: Aimon.
lib. 3. ca. 36. 49.
after which protestation, the Patriarch of Constantinople in the peoples sight
set a Crown upon his head, girt a sword about him, presented him a Scepter,
and put a gold Ring upon his finger. The tokens of the German Emperors, c.
venerabile^ de elect. c. Roman. de iureiura
are by the decree of Charles the Great, a Scepter, a Sword, a Spear, a
Cloak, a Chain, a Crown, a Cross like a Sphere, a Buckler, an Eagle with
2. heads, and a purple Ensign: all which are delivered to him by the
Archbishoppes of Cologne, Mentz, and Treues. Like as the Archbishop of Toledo,
does the office at the coronation of the King of Spain: the Archbishop of
Canterbury, at the King of Englands: the Archbishop of Mentz, at the Bohemians:
the Archbishop of Strigon, at the Hu^garians: the Archbishop of Guesne, at the
Polonians: the Archbishop of Vpsale, at the Danes: the Archbishop of Tours, at
the ancient Kings of Armorica, which we call Britain: the Bishop of
Pampelune, at the King of Nauarres, even as in our France it is the Archbishop
of Rheimes, that crowns and annoynteth our King: although sometimes it is
done in other places. Aimon lib. 3. cap. 61.
As we read of S. Jews, who was sacred at Soissons, others at Orleance: whom
before the time of Christianity, they used to proclaim by lifting the^ up,
and showing them upon a buckler. But it has since been thought more expedient
to minister these ceremonies in the assembly of the Church, there to call God
to witness of that faith which the subjects vowed to their Prince, and of that
duty wherein the King bound himself to his Estate: to the end also that
afterward the people might know, that from a private and particular man that he
was wont to be, he was now promoted to the Empire, to the end to command. Thus
did Atatolius first deal with the Emperor Leo the first in the year of Jesus
Christ 461. and Euphemius with the Emperor Anastaze in the year 494. of whom
he exacted a particular promise in writing, because both before and at the
time that he was proclaimed Emperor, he had been and still was an Eutichean
heretic, whose errors had been condemned by the decrees of the Counsel of
Chalcedo^, holden in the presence of the Emperor Martian in the year of Jesus
Christ 455. Of later days immediately upon the decease of Justinian the first,
they added that the Patriark of Constantinople, should after the example and
imitation of the Kings of Judah, consecrate, annoint, and crown the Emperors
with a Crown of Gold in the assembly of the Church, which was first observed
in the Emperor Justin the second, and afterward by Pope Leo the 3. translated
into the West to the behalf of Charles the Great, before whom, or not long
before we do not find in any History that the Kings of France were ever
anointed or consecrated, but only simply crowned, as Gregory of Tours makes
mention in his history: whereby it appears that none of our Kings of the
first famely did ever observe this ceremony. Greg Turon. lib. 2.
The first then that used it was Pepin, father to Charlemaigne, whom Boniface
Archbishop of Mentz, did consecrate, anoint and crown by the commandment
of Pope Zachary of Rome: and that in my opinion, because he was the first of
his race, who of a private and particular person, was established King against
the Merouingiens. After his decease, Pope Stephen the second did the like to
Charles son to the said Pepin, when he was King of France, whom also Pope
Adrian again consecrated, anointed and crowned, when he was declared King of
the Lombards: and finally Pope Leo the third did the like to him with the
Imperial Diadem. And this ceremony have ever since been observed by our Kings
of France, not that thereby they be Kings, but to the end it may seem as a
testimony that they are Christians and Catholics, and of private persons are
become Kings to command the people. So that in consideration hereof, the first
French Emperors, Jews the Meek, Lothaire, Jews the second, and the rest,
who being by natural succession Kings, were promoted to the Empire, did not use
to take the title of Emperor, at the day of their consecration or coronation,
but at such time as their father or former predecessor thought good to nominate
them for their successors, from which they began to number the years of their
Empire, nothing respecting the ceremony or sole^nitie of their Coronation: as
appears by many the ancient Charters and documents of their days. Yea, the
Histories do note, that Charles the Fat, youngest son to Jews the Meek, was
the first that in his years made mention of the day of his Coronation, and
took not upon him the title of Augustus, until the 8. Calendes of January
ensuing, in the year 866. on which day Pope John the 8. anointed and crowned
him: which in subteltie he thought good to note, as one that obtained not the
Empire by succession: for Jews the second, his neuewe, last deceased, had not
named nor instituted him his heir: much less had any chosen him: but the
histories do affirm that he for a great sum of money bought the Imperial
dignity of the Pope, because there were other more fitter for it then he, that
laid claim thereto, as his elder brother Jews and his children Kings of
Germany: so that Charles, fearing least (as reason and justice required) they
should be preferred before him, thought good to advance himself, and to get
the Pope to consecrate him. To conclude therefore, it is most certain that this
ceremony does make nothing to the right of the Kings lawful succession:
neither is any more then a simple token of honor in his behalf, whom nature
and usual order has caused to be borne or suffered to be elected to rule and
govern the Estate: so that to ween to persuade that he that is borne to be
your lawful King by the Laws of the Realm, has no authority over you before
he be consecrated, anointed and crowned, is a mere fallation.

13 It follows, since I have proved unto you, that in this case the said King
of Navarre (whom the deep dissemblers dare not openly in their Libelles deny
to be the nearest of the blood) should be your natural, true, and lawful King,
let us agree together that it were mere wrong for you to withstand or resist
him. I say further, that in this Realm there is neither law nor order that
debarreth him from lawful reign and the Crown, notwithstanding he would
remain in his now professed Religion. But contrariwise, that such as are of
and do profess the same, are declared meet and capable of all kinds of
succession, by infinite the Edicts, Decrees, and declarations of our Kings,
published, enrouled, and daily put in execution by the Arrestes of the
sovereign Courts, and other Magistrates, who under his Majesty's authority
do minister Justice in this Estate, and whose common cry tends to oblivion
and perpetual forgetting of the passed miseries and troubles. As also in
truth it is more then a Catholic passion to compare the Huguenot with a Jew
or Turk. For besides that our Kings do auctorize and permit the one, and not
the other, in truth and without affection, (for my self am a Catholic, and
in the same faith do wish to dye) we all do agree in our faith, so as there
remains no more but to decide for the most part of controversy, the
institution of outward ceremonies, which either the time or the necessity of
the peoples instruction have procured to be brought into ye Church, and be not
contained or authorized in the holy Scripture. Since therefore we do agree,
that in the first times the Christians did live and serve GOD without them, we
can not now less do then hear the reasons of those that crave abolition
before we condemn or pronounce them Heretics, least the condemnation go
before the proof, and so they have greater cause to complain, (as already
they do) that we have judged them unheard, and have ended their Process upon
defaultes and contumacie. Wherefore the^ protest they are ready to pourge
themselves, if we would grant them free access into the assembly of the
church, and not stand upon the points of not receiving them, grounded upon the
long time that we have been in possession of the observing of these
traditions, from hand to hand received by the consent and common agreement of
the Church, because if we had no other argument, we should not be able to
deny, but that our fathers when they brought them in were men, and therefore
subject to human frailty, as in many other things experience may teach us. I
will content my self with one only example to our purpose. Auent. in Annal.
Boiorum.
Virgill Bishop of Saltzbourg in a Sermon about the year of our Lord 755.
saying that there were Antipodes in ye world, was for the same by Boniface
Archbishop of Ments, accused of Heresy, because by inducing the Antipodes, it
seemed he would also bring in an other Christ. This matter was debated before
Vtilo King of Bauiere, who at the commandment of Zachary, denounced the said
Virgilius to be one of the most abominable Heretics that ever was: So great
was the obstinacy of the knowledge conceived in this age of the Antipodes or
Arteques, and yet since it has been verefied for truth: This nevertheless I
do not allege, to the end to reprove the institution of the ceremonies of
the Church, with which I do daily serve GOD, especially knowing, that in
alteration of Laws and Orders, necessity must be very apparent in the
correction of matters long before allowed, but only to admonish all men, that
in as much as they are men, it is no marvel though some will be inquisitiue
whether the authors of the same were led by the will of God, or whether therein
they enterprised any thing repugnant thereto, especially, since the question
concerns the maintenance of the peace, lives, and souls of so many millions
of parsons, who either might, or are already lost upon this quarrel. And this I
will say more, that since the fault has proceeded of our Prelates, who have
fallen a sleep, and have not maintained the fare that they ought for the
nourishment of their Flocks, who being ignorant in the most part of the
principles of their religion, have gone out of their rank, and do
perticulerly require the reasons thereof: it is most necessary gently to give
them a taste of the same, without sword or fire, until the condemned be at
large heard in their defenses and lawfully convict.

14 Moreover I dare aduowe, that in Realms and Empires natural Succession,
received by the estates, is of such force, that the best and most Catholic
Parsons never enterprized against y^ progress of the same, as occasions have
been ministered, no not for Heresy, although it were condemned, and with all
solemnity accursed by the Church of GOD: Notwithstanding undoubtedly by other
dealing, they might have hoped for better, and that they were in manner assured
of manifold afflictions at hand? Had not certain Bishops Arriens infected
Constantius, when he succeeded his father, although he were very young? What was
the cause that Zeno being an heritick, was nevertheless made Emperor after
his father in law Leo, but that the Empire was atteyned for his wife AriadNe,
and little Leo son to the said Zeno, whom his Grandfather had instituted to
be his heir? in consideration whereof the Christians were content to bear
that affliction. Constantine the third and the fifth, when they were called to
the Empire were heretics, but yet in as much as they were lawful successors
to the last deceased, the Church would not meddle with them. When Anastaze the
first was chosen, no other cause moved ye Patriarch of Constantinople and the
people to force a promise from him that afterward he should be a Catholic,
or at the least that he should not make any alteration or stir up any broyle
in the Church of God, but only because he was then an Eutichian, who was
condemned by the Counsel of Chalcedon: and the same is the only caution that
you may exact or require of your King, in case he were other then a Catholic,
since the Christian Church never desired greater assurance of the aforenamed
then their faith and royal promise. I might be tedious if I should rehearse
unto you an infinite number of other examples, whereby every one may manifestly
perceive that the holy Primitive Church never accoumpted it so small a matter to
violate the laws of the Estate, or to habandon that obligation that we owe to
such a Prince as is either lawful successor to the deceased, or else solemnly
elected. Who is he that will not think the Bishops of those former times that
I speak of to have been far more zealous in their charge and better livers
the^ the most part of ours? in respect whereof they might even with their
credit only have sooner persuaded the people that they governed, for Religion
and godliness sake, to have expelled, deposed, and banished those heretical
Emperors, as well as to have admitted them into that succession that by the
politic order of the Empire was unto them due, either to obey, or yield them
al fidelity: was it want of power, all the world being Christian, even in the
Prime of the Church about one hundred years after that the Temples of the
Greek Idols had been shut up, whereby not so much as the memory of them
remained among the subjects of this great Monarchy? I will by the way rehearse
unto you a Decree of the Church made for ye posterity of Kings, least you
should thinck me either to be led by affection, or to have told you fables.
Hear therefore the words of the Fathers assembled in a Counsel. Like as the
Insolency of wicked Kings have evermore been odious and abominable to the
subjects, so have the people always liked well of the provident foresight of
the good: who therefore could suffer or behold a Christian offending in that
poinct, or that were desirous to expel the posterity or ligne Royal from
such rights and dignities as thereto do apperteyne? Such dealing do we
therefore expressly forbid, and in favor of the posterity of the most
excellent Prince Chintillus, we do renew and confirm the decree that was made
the last year at the Synod houlden in this Church concerning the love and good
will that every one is bound to bear to the Kings ligne, and to the defense
and preservation which all subjects of the Estate do owe thereto, to the end
the successors be not maliciously defrauded of the merits of their
predecessors in the augmentation of their Crown, or their great liberality
toward their subjects. Also that none do enterprise to hurt them, because it
is meet that by the authority of a Counsel we do grant peace to the
succession and posterity of those by whose means and under whose protection
we have aforetyme been preserved. Admit therefore that the Church made this
Decree in respect of that obligation that she deemed the subjects ought to the
posterity of their Kings, either for the love and reverence of those that had
well governed their Commonwealths: even as GOD, who is the author and holder up
of Monarchies, would never take the Scepter wholly from Judah, for his servant
David's sake: yet if our selves would but call to mind so many good Kings of
this race, especially the father of the house of Bourbon, the Lord S. Jews,
who^ for his good life the Church has canonized, and whose memory ought to be
unto us holy and honorable, we should show our selves most wicked, periurde,
unthankful and disloyal persons, if we should seek or but make any
countenance to think upon innouating any thing against this posterity.

15 Good men are not ignorant of the pretenses that these great bucklers of the
faith do take hold of: which are, first that the King of Navarre being King,
would polute, subvert and abolish Catholic Religion in France, and force his
subjects to become huguenots. But to say the truth, this vizard is less then
nothing: for his former behauiours will presently force us to confess the
contrary: because our selves have seen with what importunacie he has besought
our Kings, as being their subject, and persuaded them to suffer him and his
partakers to live under their obedience in all liberty of conscience.
Wherefore then should we think, that when he were soueraign he would practice
against his people any enterprise repugnant to that law, which himself, being
in their race, sought to enjoy under the Kings, his Lords? Shall we presume
that such a Christian and wise Prince, instructed in the fear of God, would
become a Tyrant and torment the souls of his subjects against that Religion,
which with uniform consent have so many hundred years been received in the
Church? especially considering that himself could not abide to have his own
brought into bondage. Moreover, with you, ye trompets of sedition, I do agree
that then he should be no more able then now: that such as would persuade him
that the third part of the French are Huguenots, are no good Arithmeticians:
also that for our preservation in that estate wherein we now live, we need no
more but to set against him our walls. I would therefore ask you what cause
you should have to fear that he would endeavor to force you to live in any
other Religion the^ the same wherein he find you and your selves do desire,
when in so doing he may happen to have but evil success, and therewithal
lose the love of the whole world? were not this as much as (according to the
Proverb) to go about to shave an Egg.

16 As also the objection that they make, namely that in the lands of Bearne
and low Navarre where he is sovereign, the Catholic Apostolic Romish
Religion is not permitted, is in truth full of subteltie, slander and envy:
for hereunto he does pertinently (in my opinion) answer, that in respect of
the land of Bearne, it was not he that forbad it, neither are his adversaries
able to prove any inhibition thereof in his name, or from him, but contrariwise
he assures himself that it will appear that immediately or soon after the
decease of the late Queen of Navarre his mother, his Majesty by the Lord of
Gra^mont, dispatched his Letters into the country of Bearne, importing that his
will was to restore and therein to set up again the exercize of the said
Religion: Upon which commandment the States being assembled, they denied to
put the same in execution, fearing such troubles and seditions as might ensue,
the people being haughty, mutinous, and difficult enough to be contented,
together with such small store of Catholics in the said Country to
prosecute the execution thereof if need should require. What would you then
have him to do more? He did not the harm, but went about to cure it, there
was none that desired to take his medicine. What more can the Physician do to
his Patient but prepare him the potion which may be to his health, and for
want of the which if he lose himself, is he not rather to blame his own
obstinacy, then him that could not make him take his appointment. For since
that time, the Estates being diverse times assembled in the said Country, did
nener require his Majesty to restore the said Catholic Romish Religion, which
always he offered to do, and still so long as he live, will, if they do
require it. As for low Navarre, the exercize of Catholic Religion is there
most free: yea, which is more, throughout that Country there is no assembly of
the pretended reformed Religion, but only in two places, as is most evidently
known, neither has his Majesty innouated any thing at his coming throughout
the said lands of Bearne or Navarre. But what, is it meet for these fears and
frivolous doubts of a matter that never can come to pass, to destroy this
poor Realm with immortal wars? and so make us miserable before the time?
cry out before we be touched? and to hasten and advance the sorrows of our
pretended mischiefs? will you begin to crucify and tie us to a Caucasus for
our whole life time? or will you force us here to begin our hell? Is not the
King (thanks be to God) young enough, in good health, and of sufficient
disposition to see the raking both of the King of Navarre, and of the rest of
the Princes of his age? why the^ should we mistrust the grace of God?

17 As for the Protestation that the said Lord King of Navarre made the year
1584. in a Synod by the Ministers of his Religion holden in the Town of
Montauban, whereby he protested and declared that he would live and dye therein,
and defend the same: I wot not well why we are so slye as for that cause to
blame him, or be more vehement against him then before, as in deed a number
of persons too much ouerruled with unreasonable passions, have misliked it, and
have thereupon gathered some sinister judgment of the affection of the said
Lord King of Navarre to the Catholics, whom most heartily I beseech with me
to consider. First, that his protestation imported not the rooting of us out,
neither together with us the Religion of the Romish Church, as the League does
him and his partakers: so that his protestation is simply defensive, and could
not therefore be more gentle, for the which we are rather to commend then to
reprove him, since our selves are bound daily to make the like profession in the
Catholic Apostolic Romish Church: also that every faithful Christian is
likewise bound by the Sacrament of Baptism to make the like declaration:
especially Kings and Princes, who ought to be mirors and spectakles to their
subjects: yea, the confession of their faith should serve for a public example
in the assemblies made for the Estate of the Church, such as are ye Counsels,
Sinodes, and other like, wherein it has evermore been noted, that Emperors,
Kings and Princes thereat assistant, did make profession of their faithes, with
protestation to defend the same. Hereof we have for testimony Constantine the
Great, in the Counsel of Nice: Theodose the Younger, in the Counsel of
Ephesus: Martian, in the Counsel of Calcedon: Justinian the first, in the
Counsel of Constantinople: Charlemaigne, in the Counsel of Francfort, with
infinite other Christian and Catholic Princes. Since therefore the King of
Navarre has been brought up in that Religion which he holds, and that the
King by his Edicts permits the free exercize thereof throughout his Realm,
why should we mislike that he assisting at an assembly thereof, protests to
live and dye in the defense of the same? especially seeing that it is no let,
but that when by a lawful Counsel, either general or national, (which the
King and his Counsel shall think most sufficient for that purpose) we shall
have persuaded him not to be carried away without reason, he may immediately
return and protest that he has been misled, and that he wears not the
sword but for the defense of the Romish Church, as now he voweth the
upholding of his own. Moreover, I would that such as are offended at the said
Protestation, should know that the occasion that moved the said Lord King of
Navarre to be present at the said assembly at Montauban, was not small,
neither of small importance to the reputation of him and his Estate: for it is
not unknown to all that his enemies had raised a speech as well among al
foreign Nations, and throughout Europe, as also perticulerly in this Realm,
that the said Lord King of Navarre, had put from about his person the
Ministers of his Religion: that he went to Mass: to be brief, that to the
end by the death of the late Mounsier the Duke, to insinuate himself further
in his Majesty's favor, and to be nearer unto him he had determined to al^er
his Religion. Which was a subtle? ^llicie both to bring him into suspicion
with his own partakers, and into contempt among the Catholics: so as by that
means both parts might have forsaken and despised him, and so he might become
a pray to their feigned League, as a man light, unconstant, and of small
steadfastness, which is one of the chiefest things that every Christian Prince
ought to abhor, especially in causes of Religion, which we may not lightly
change, neither without great notice of the cause, and the discourse thereof
publicly argued in the Church of God, but especially in our own consciences.
Wherefore good men neither ought, ne ca^ mislike that the said Lord King of
Navarre does protest to live and dye in his Religion, permitted under the Kings
authority by his Majesty's Edicts, published even by ye decree of the States
of the Realm: neither are we to term him an heretic or obstinate person,
until we have lawfully by a free universal or national Counsel, (whether
shall seem most expedient) condemned that opinion which he holds. Will ye
likewise that I show you what mistrust the Catholics may conceive of his
goodness and singular clemency? Then would I pray the most passionate to
consider and look upon his famelie: They shall find the same to consist for
the most part of Catholic Officers. But of what sort? Even such as are
nearest about his person, who have him in their hands upon their honors and
consciences, to whom he commits himself, and upon whom of himself he does
depend, as upon his keepers, Masters of his Guardrobe, Stewardes, and many
others, who before his face with his liking and contentation being in his
train, do ordinarely go to the Mass, and assist at the divine Service
ministered after the manner of the Catholic Romish Church. To be brief, even
with this quality he acknowledges the^ for his good, faithful and loyal
servants. This could they not assure themselves of, neither yet serve him with
good hearts, being such men of honor as they are, if in his behauiours they
could perceive any mistrust (which is the nource of hatred and malice) against
the professors of their Religion, or if they could find (which were easy to
do) that he did evil entreat or forbid them to serve God after their manner,
and so sought to be the tormentor of their consciences. To conclude, al these
considerations alleged against the King of Navarre, which are neither true
neither of any outward appearance, cannot in ye consciences of good men, and
truly French, debar him from being sufficient and capable of the Crown of
France: yea further, I say that the same notwithstanding, he is your true and
lawful King, to whom only you are bound to obey in case during his life,
the said occasion of substitution should fall out, which God forbid, and which
also neither he ne we ought or should desire, if either we were Christians,
either else did bear any jot of hearty good will or affection to our King.

18 To proceed, let us see whether a king houlding the Scepter, or reigning
over any estate, especially over ours, may appoint and nominate any other
successor then him whom nature and the Law of the Realm have given him. This
question I do not move without cause, for in truth the perturbers of the peace
of this Crown, and such as iniustly do pretend to set thereinto a foot, have
made a League which they entitle Holy. but al good med do truly name Bloody
with the Pope. the Spanierd and the Sauoyan, the conspired enemies to France
and the Royal blood thereof, through whose help they hope to leauy an Army,
wherewith to come into the heart of the Realm, only, say they, simply to sommon
the most Christian King to name a successor at their devotions. Oh what an
execrable mischief! to seek to force us to enfringe the successiue law of
this Realm, whereof we have so many worlds enjoyed the blessed good hap? What
impudency those that have not almost whereof to live in their own houses, to
go about to prevent and overthrow the order and Estate of so great an Empire?
This is a wonderful boldness, to endeavor to compel so mighty a Monarcke
as the French King, and their own lord being young, healthy, and such a one as
it if please God, he may grant him the blessing of the posterity of Abraham,
to choose him a man to be his Heir. But the French men do assure them selves,
that they have a King that is of better bringing up then so, one that is
valiant, fears God, and is ielous of his honor, yea such a-one as would not
for the getting of the whole world make such a breach in his conscience,
reputation, virtue, and memory that our, Children should have cause atro
carbone illum notare, saying that he had so far hated himself and his own
blood, as to have corrupted the Laws, whereby after his predecessors he does
reign even since the original of the Monarchy, and to have transferred the
Crown out of his own famely, for the satisfying of the rashness of those,
who finding them selves in Arms, might hasten his time, to the end, to cause
him the sooner to leave them his room. For what dares not Ambition and desire
to Reign undertake? Moreover, I do most humbly beseech his Majesty to pardon
me, though I boldly show him, that it is a thing that he may not do: Also
that the Law of the Realm, whereby him self is King, forbids him to
meddle therewith, because the same taken order therein, unto whom it is
commendable in the Majesty of a Monarke to acknowledge him self bounden. And
thus was it judged, declared, and put in execution by the Parliament of the
Peers of France for Charles the seventh against the treaty which king Charles
the sixth in the year 1420. made in ye town of Troy in Champagne at the
Marriage of his daughter Lady Katherin unto King Henry the fifth of England,
which imported the grant and mind of the said King Charles the sixth, to be
that the said King of England or his issue male coming of the said marriage,
shonld be called to ye Crown of France, and the said Charles the seueuth be
thereof debarred and disinherited for ever. Bald. in l. ex hoc iur^ fl. de
Just. and Iur.
This is not now, say our Masters, the first time that it has been and
perpetually shall be observed by ye Salick law of this flourishing Crown, which
the King that houldeth the Scepter cannot alter, because he is but a tutor,
protector, collector and administrator thereof, salua eius substantia: itaque
nec donare, nec perdere poterit, neither otherwise dispose of the proximitie of
his blood then the law of the Realm will bear, neither yet transfer it into
any other hand then that whereto it apperteineth, although he can have no
cause to love the same: Deuter. 21.
A man having two wives, the one loved, the other hated, and that they have
both brought him sons, as well the loved as the hated, and the son of the
hated be the first borne, when the time comes that he will divide his
inheritance, he shall not make the son of the beloved his eldest to the
prejudice of the son of the hated who is the first borne: but he shall
acknowledge the son of the hated for his eldest, and he shall give him two
parts of whatsoever he has, for the same was the beginning of his strength,
unto whom the right of promogeniture belongs, says the text: so that the
nerest of the blood is creditor: yea he is moreover I say factus dominus by the
decease of his predecessor, Ioh. And. in cap. licet de vor. Panor. conc. 3 Bal.
in par. illud de proh. feud. alien. Jason in l. nemo ff. de leg. 1. Bened. in
cap. Raim. verse. in eodem testamento x. de testam.
by the decease of his predecessor, and holds nothing of him: but whatsoever
he has he holds by the virtue and authority of the law of France. Thus
do Ih. Andrew, Balde, Panorme, Jason, Will. Benedict, and all other Writers
expressly speak of our Realm, so as who so would take any other course and
maiore vi corrupt nature, it would be a blemish to his conscience and soul,
and thereof he should answer before God: besides that whatsoever he should
take in hand, should be void and of no effect, but subject to restitution by
public justice, to the prejudice of his reputation. All men do know what
small love was between Charles the eight and Jews Duke of Orleance, when he
was called to the Crown and bare the name of Jews the 12. also the stout
mind of Charles to have put his will in execution against the other, if he
could have found any argument or pretense to put him back: which
notwithstanding matters were then ordered according to the rule of the law of
France. Now the King shows sufficient demonstration by that good will and
care whereby he has honored ye King of Navarre so far as to account him for
his Brother in law, that he both loves and cherishes him, and also will take
him into his protection: so far is this good Prince from going about to
blemish his memory with such a deed, as the perturbers of the Peace af this
Realm do persuade themselves.

19 Since therefore the people and subjects to this Crown may not put to their
hands, neither dispense upon whatsoever occasion with the oath that they owe
to their natural Princes: moreover that the King can take no other order then
the foundation and law of the Realm will bear: let us see whether it
apperteyneth to the Pope of Room, as head of the Church, to meddle therein. I
know that the Pope worshippers being more passionate then the true
Catholics, do so thinck and believe. Augustine of Ancona a Doctor of Sorbonne,
has not forgotten it in his book that he sent to Pope John the 22. wherein he
excepteth not so much as ye Realm of France: as also do not James of Terrano
Chamberlain to Urban the sixth, in his treatize of the Papal Monarchy, wherein
they do maintain that unto him belongs all power both Spiritual and
Temporal, as being head of the Church, cap. significasti extra de elect.
even above the general Counsels, which says Pope Pascall are not to
command him: And in the explication of the decretall of the said Pascal, the
Canon Doctors do uphold that it lies in the Popes power to revoke ye decree
of a Counsel, over the which he has all authority, according to the
conclusion of all the adherents to the holy Sea of Rome, which opinion was
nevertheless, as heretical, condemned in the general Counsels of Constance
and Basil, in the presence of John the 23. and Eugenius the 4 then Popes: 3.
Volum. Conc. sess. 4. and 4. Volum Co^c. sess. 12.
according to which Counsels the ancient Bishops of Rome did protest to
denounce unto the Church whatsoever them selves could not remedy. And as for
Temporal jurisdiction over al Emperors, Kings, c. praecipue xi. q. 3.
and Monarcks of the earth, they have made less difficulty, yea, they have
dared to say, that the Emperor, who is Lord of the world, both did and ought
to yield his oath of fidelitte unto them. c. omnes de mayor. and obed.
And feign would they make us believe that they took this principle of Saint
Clement the third Bishop of Rome, who protests, say they, that he learned it
of Saint Peter. can. alius ^5. q. 6.
They also persuade them selves that Pope Zachary deposed the King of France,
the last of the Merouingian race, although in trueeh it was but his advice or
counsel given to the Nobility of ye land, Quaest. 2. cap. 8.
as W. Occham very well says in his treatize of the power of the Church. About
a hundred and fifty years after, Boniface the seventh endeavored by
Sacrilege and other bad hehauiours, publicly to usurp this Tyranny: which
Pope Gregory the seventh otherwise named Hildebrand, durst openly maintain,
and withal put it in practice against the Emperor Henry the fourth, to whom
he opposed Rodolph Duke of Sweue, grou^ding his proposition, not upon ye fable
of Constantines donation, neither upon the liberalities of Pepin, Carlemaign,
or Jews the Meek Kings of France, but upon God himself and Saint Peeter:
saying, that of them he had received the two swords, the Spiritual and the
Temporal. In an other place using these words, Pasce oues meas, for the
deposing of the Emperor. He said also that he bare Claues regni Coelorum,
elem. vnic. de Iurejus.
to usurp authority and enterprise against all the Kings in the world: by
which his great cunning, he became King of most part of Italy,
notwithstanding the Emperor Henry gave him 62. Battles: Abbas Us. pergen. in
Henr. 4. Benno de vit. Pontif.
therein exceeding the great Marcellus that was termed the sword of the
Romans, and the invincible Caesar: of whom the one fought two and thirty
pitched fields, the other two and fifty. The like did Pascall the second, and
Calixt the second against Henry the fifth, Son to the aforenamed, upon the
same reasons: as did also Adrian the fourth and Alexander the third, who set
his feet upon the neck of the Emperor Frederick Barberousse: Neither was
Innocent the third more modest in the behalf of Philip son to the said
Frederick, against whom he stirred up Ottho, son to the Duke of Saxony, who
after was Emperor by the name of Ottho the fourth, after that with most
arrogant, proud, and commandatory speeches, grounded upon these words: Tues
Petrus, c. Venra. bilem ext. de elect.
and super hanc petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, adding thereto the saying of
almighty God to Jeremy, Ecce constituit^ super gentes, and regna: so comparing
himself to the Sun, Ierem. 1.
and the Emperors and Kings to the Moon, he had pronounced sentence of
excommunication and deprivation of his Empire against him. In cap. solitae ext.
de mayor. and obed.
So great also was the malice of the said Innocent, against the Emperor
Phillip, that to spite him, he disanulled the election of Luipoldus to yt
Archbishoprik of Mentz: wherein says the Abbot of Vspergue, he did most
unjustly. Gregory the 9. as says Sabellicus, c. bonae memoriae extaa de elect.
and the said Abbot, deprived Frederick the second of his Lands and Realms
for frivolous causes and of no importance: Aenead. 9. lib. 9.
whose sentence nevertheless was confirmed and again published by Innocent
the fourth, successor to the said Gregory, and after by Boniface the eight, c.
ad Apostolicae de re iud. in 9.
inserted into his sixth book of Decretals: in which place he uses these
words of the Scripture, Quodcunque ligaueris etc. as an authority wherein to
ground the execution of his will. Bald also and John Andrew, very Catholic
Glozers, do confess that in deed he seemed rather a party then a Judge.
Ni^holas the 3. who followed soon after, seeking to take the whole government
of the Town from all but the Pope, forbad yt neither King, Duke, Earl, or
Marquize, should be established, or accept the authority of Senator, or
Governor therein: declaring that the Jurisdiction thereof belonged privately to
the holy Sea, before all other: not in respect of Constantines donation, but
through these words, In omnem terram exiuit sonus eorum: c. Fundamenta de
elect. in 6.
and such other which he interprets as he thincketh good. Which in effect
are the very reasons whereupon Boniface the eight excommunicated King Phillip
the Fair of France, and gave his Realm for a pray to the first that could
seize upon it, extrauaga^ti vnam sanctam de mayor and obed.
as we read in his constitution in deed extrauagant: in the which he
exempteth neither Emperor nor King from his subjection, even in Temporal
causes, as he says. c. pastoralisdereiud. in 6 in l. liberti C. de oper. liber.
Also by virtue of that great power, Clement the fifth disanulled the sentence
given by the Emperor Henry the seventh of Luxe^bourg, against Robert King of
Sicille: after he had procured the proysoning of the same Emperor by a
Muncke, in ministering to him the Eucharist. Which Balde confesses to have been
a presumpteous and wrongful deed. Finally, by those Tragedies that John the
22. Benedict the 12. and Clement the 6. stirred up throughout Christiandome
against the Emperor Jews of Bauiere: as also in our days Alexander the sixth,
and Julius the second, did no less, neither had any other ground. We may see
the causes whereby the Popes do pretend authority to depose Kings, subvert
Realms, and give them in pray to whomsoever they think good. True it is, that
such of them as have most dissembled, have ever exe^pted the Realm of France.
Innocent the third, writing to the Prelates and French Nobility for John
without land King of England, c. no^^t ex ^ra de iudi.
declares that he will enterprise nothing against the Majesty of the French
King. But Hostiensis, who knew the Story, does in this place write, that the
Protestation was contrary to the effect, because the said Innocent went about
to hinder King Phillip Auguste from using his feudall right over the Duchess of
Normandy, Guyenne, and other the Lands holden by the English, and fallen into
the lapse through the murder committed upon Arthur his elder brothers son. In
an other decretal Epistle the same Pope confesses, c. per vene rabilcm ex tra
qui fill. sint legit.
that the French King in Temporal causes and government of his Realm
acknowledges no superior. Clement the fifth in his extrauagant, for appeasing
King Phillip the Fair, who was stirred up by the insolency of Boniface the
eight, disanulled, and revoked his declarations against the Realm of France,
extrauaga^timeruit de priuil.
and aduowed the same not to be subject to his Sea by virtue of the said
constitution. The same Pope also protested that the power which his Officers
used against the said Kings subjects, during his being in the Realm, was by the
permission of the said Lord King: as appears by the protestation the same
time enrouled in the Court of Parliament: for in truth it has ever more been
resolved, and is a case most certain that the King of France does upon earth
acknowledge no superior in whatsoever concerns the policy and government
of his Crown, neither was ever subject to the Romain Empire, from the which he
wrested the Gauls with the point of the sword. And although the French Kings
were sometimes Emperors them selves, yet did they never submit this Crown to
the Diadem Imperial: whereupon the Kings Atorney general would not suffer the
Emperor Charles the fourth, being in the Parliament, there to make a Knight,
without king Charles the 5. his express permission: As also the Emperor
Charles the fifth passing through France, obtained the good will of King
Frances the first, to pardon sundry offenders, because no other then his
Majesty has power or authority over the temporal causes of his Realm. among
which is undoubtedly the punishing of transgressions, yea, even of heresy, of
the which we now speak, the notice and Jurisdiction whereof have ever more
been left, and with good reason belongs to the seculer Magistrate: because we
ought to consider the law of God, first in this world, whereto the politic
and temporal Magistrate, preserver of the society of men, and earthly
policy, for the avoiding of confusion and trouble, forces every one to obey.
Secondly, in the world to come, wherein God only judges and punishes, not
leaving in this world, in respect of himself, any Magistrate to be the
auenger of the injury to him done in y^ transgression of his ordinances. Lu.
5. and 22
For the Priests who are the guardians and Schoolemasters of Gods law, are
not co^stituted Judges, but easy Physicians to the soul: and Gods
commandments are no such Sanctions as importe punishment, but most loving
doctrine and admonitious: otherwise if by the sword we should be forced to the
observing of Gods law, the desert were small. Upon which point the Apostle
said: 2. ad Cor. cap. 1.
Not that we rulee over your faith, but are helpers to your joy. And in an
other place: 2. ad Tim. cap. 3.
All Scripture is inspired from above, and is profitable to teach, to convince,
to correct, and to instruct to righteousness. in Dialog. de dignit. sacerd.
He says not to force, or to punish. Chrysostom very carefully deuideth the
royal power from the ministry of the Gospel, saying that the ministry is
a function committed by God, to the end to teach without weapons, also that it
is no power to give or take away Realms, neither to make laws for politic
government. Our French Bishop S. Hilarie writes as much to the Emperor
Constantius: also against Auxentius Bishop of Millan. And this the good Fathers
learned at the mouth of the Son of God our Lord Jesus Christ, Matthew. 20. Luc
22.
when he said to his Apostles, The Kings of the nations have dominion over
them, Math. 19.
but it shall not be so with you. Matthew. 10. Luc 12
In an other place he promises them that they shall sit with the Son of
God, when he shall come in Majesty to judge mankind: but that contrariwise so
long as they remain in ye world exercizing their Ministry, they shall be
brought before Kings and politic Magistrates for his sake: Joan. 6.
so far shall they be from being Kings and Judges themselves. Joan. 18.
The head of the Church, even Jesus Christ, fled when they sought to make him
King, declaring y^ his Kingdom was not of this world, wherefore he would not
be judge among those that were at controversy: yea, he submitted himself to
the Kings of the earth, Luc. 12.
paying unto them the tribute which was unto the^ due, together with that which
was assessed upon Matthew. 17.
the heads of every of his Apostles, evermore referring the reward of his
grace, Joan. 18.
and revenge of trespasses against him committed, unto the kingdom of heaven:
enioining his Apostles to do the like, and to imitate his example, as they
have done. 2. ad Tim. and 1. ad Cor cap. 6.
The Apostle Saint Paul said: Let no man that fights in the Lords warfare
trouble himself with the matters of this life: Again, The minister of the
Lord ought to be loving to all men, meet to teach, patiently bearing with the
wicked, with modesty reproving such as withstand the truth. Briefly in one
word to say all: there be two kinds of Jurisdictions: the one earthly committed
into the hands of Kings and Princes, to whom every one of whatsoever degree or
calling, Spiritual or Temporal, Romans 12.
Priests, Bishops or high Priests ought to obey, as it is written, Let every
soul be subject to the superior powers, upon which place Chrysostom says
the Apostle used this word every, to show that there is no creature that may be
exempt, whether he be says he, Apostle, Prophet, Evangelist, Priest, Monk, or
other whosoever. We also find, that in the Primetiue Church, before pride and
Ambition took root in the Bisshops hearts, that the Popes of Rome never made
any question thereof. We have also amoug us a request exhibited by Boniface
the first to Honorius Emperor of the West, wherein he beseeches him to
decree, that afterward the Bishops and Popes of Rome might not be chosen by
favor, or any other unlawful mean, c. Ecclesiae c. victo. 97. did. c. si
duo 79. distinct.
whereto the same most Catholic Prince makes an answer worthy such a
request. In the time of Odoacer, King of the Herules, who began to reign at
Rome in the year 471. and ruled full 14. years, after he had put to death
Orestes and his Son Augustulus the last Emperor of the West until
Charlemagne, there were goodly decrees published and received in the Church by
the Clergy, until such time as Theodoricke the Wisigot, c been q^i de 96.
did.
whom Zeno the Emperor of the Eeast sent into Italy, had overthrown him.
Pelagius the first, made confession of his faith, and swear in the hands of
Ruffin the Ambassador of of Childebert King of France. Pope Leo the fourth
swear and protested, c. satagendum 25. did.
that he would and did intend to observe the Laws which the Emperor Lothair
the first, son to Jews the Meek, and Neuew to Charlemagne, made at Rome in
the presence of Pope Eugenius the second, whereof some are inserted into the
Book of Digestes, cap. Constitutio feudi dr Lotharij lib. 1. fud.
the inscription whereof do import that the Emperor made them ante ianuas
beati petri ad limina, in atrio: which was the place where the Christian
Emperors were wont to make and publish their Edicts, if we may believe
Cassiodore, and others. The said Emperor also created certain Magistrates in
the Town to exercize the imperial Jurisdiction. Casssod. lib. 9. Varior.
Blo^d. Sabell. Aegen. Platin.
The same Leo does sufficiently declare what respect the high Priests of Rome
did in those days bear to the Emperors, when he sued to the same Lothaire
and his son Jews the second, to confer the Church of Rheatine or Tusculum
to one Colonus a Deacon, c. Rheatina. 63. distinct.
assuring their Majesty's of his sufficiency, and promising in the name of the
said Colonus, that he should pray to God for them. This was the same Leo that
pleaded his cause and purged himself of the treazon whereof he was accused
before the Emperor Jews the second, c. de captulis c. fin. 10. distinctr
son to the said Lothaire, as appears in the decree of Gratian. The like
declaration did Pope John the eight make to the same Emperor Jews the second,
c. si nos incompetenter 2. q. 7.
son to Lothaire. By the decretall Epistle of Honorius the third, who lived
about the year 1216. it appears that as yet the remembrance of the
Emperors laws was not utterly abolished out of the Catholic Church, c. 1.
extra de Iuram. calum.
and that the Priests and high Priests had not as yet wholly shaken of the
yoke of y^ same, no not in those that they term Spiritual causes, as, if any
question were moved of an oath in law for the decision of process, l. 1. C. de
iure. calum.
in which case he renews the ancient edict of Martian, and Iustinia^ the
first. To conclude, for the stopping of the mouths of those that do
maintain, that the Pope, Bishops, or other of the Clergy, may establish any
earthly Kingdom apart, which shall not be subject to the Emperors and Kings
of this world, but rather such a one as may at pleasure command and supplant
the same, let them dilligently search throughout the whole Scripture, what
authority the Kings and Princes of Israel, had ou^r the Priests and Clergy
in Gods law, which since the time of grace is not deminished, and there shall
they evidently find their great authority over them, notwithstanding it was
never lawful for the Kings to execute the office of the Priests: for
undoubtedly the ministry is one thing, and the orders and discipline of the
Clergy is an other, c. siquidem c. sicut. xi. q. 3.
and merely temporal. The other head of Jurisdiction is in heaven, which we
are to look for at the judgment of GOD, and yet not to persuade our selves
that the law of Jesus Christ is lame or imperfect, because in it it contains
not any punishment or earthly revenge of trespasses against evil livers,
considering that the same being heavenly and spiritual, it will yield reward
or punishment in the everlasting world: so that (as said Alexander Seuerus of
perjury: l. i. C. de reb. cred. and iute iu^.
Whosoever offends against God, has God a sufficient revenger.) our good God
has referred to himself all the punishment, to the end the sinner may have
means to acknowledge his offense, and repent the same in this world. Mat. 28.
1 ad Tim. 3. an Tit. cap. 1.
True it is, that if ye earthly Magistrate has in his policy taken any order
for such causes, then is it his office to revenge the injury done to his
edicts and decrees: for so, c. principes. 23 q 5. c. fin. 2. q. 7.
as says Isidore, The Kingdom of God increases through the means of earthly
Realms, to the end such as be of the body of the Church, if they offend or
blaspheme, may be punished by the rigor of Princes, and so that discipline
whereto the Church can not bind them, may nevertheless be preserved through
the authority of Monarchies. The like whereof have been used against heretics
by all Christian Princes, especially in our France, by an infinite number of
laws both old and new of our most Christian Kings. Lud 9. Feanc. 1. Henr. 2.
Barol. 9.
And in troth, if the Bishops or Priests should take notice of the punishment
of heretics, it would breed confusion of Jurisdictions and offices: as well
might the Goldsmith be judge of the gold that himself had wrought: The
Physician of his own cure: to be brief, every one should plead and decide
his own cause, contrary to al reasonable order. The example also of the
Apostle Saint Paul, Act. 25.
whom the Jews accused of heresy, does sufficiently teach us, when by
himself it appears that he was brought before Festus the Emperors
Lieutenant, unto whom the accused did confess that y^ notice of his cause did
apperteine, and therefore required assignation for his accusers before the
Imperial Majesty. The Emperor Honorius appointed the Provost Marcellus for
Judge and Arbitrator between the Catholics and Donatistes. Opt. in hist, Afr.
Dulcius also was Provost of the Empire, who at the pursuit of the Catholics,
was enjoined to make up the process of the said Donatistes in Affricke, as
Saint Augustine does report: and they required to have them condemmed by his
ordenaunces, tract. 2. ad 3. cap. Ioh.
as testifies Gratian in his decree: wherein in an other place is written the
opinion of Pope Pelagius, c quando 23. q. 5.
importing that it were meet that heretics were punished by the seculer
power, according to which reason Saint Austen also does testify that the
Emperor Valentinian sent the Provost Dalmatius unto him to assign him in his
privy Counsel. Epist. 32.
So as we are not to doubt but that the punishment of heretics apperteyneth
to the Princes temporal Jurisdiction, l. nemo ^. de Apo. stat.
who by his decrees has limited the punishments which they may deserve.

20 In deed it is the duty of the Priests and Bishops to know, Mat. 18. 1.
ad Cor. 5.
and withal to declare by the holy Scriptures, together with the judgment of
the universal Church, who it is that has transgressed the will of God, and
being a Christian, has departed or disunited himself from the body of the
Church. Those be the true kayes of heaven which God has put into their
hands, Mpt. 16.
and the two Swords that they bear, whereby the Priest shows and poynteth
out such as are soluti vel legati ab Ecclesia: wherein only consists his
power to bind or lose in heaven: as S. Hierome does very well note in his
opening of y^ place of Saint Mathewe, Distinct 18. cap. 7.
which concerns this authority: as also the Master of Sentences is of the
same opinion: neither is this power so small that the faithful Christians
should contemn it: For without doubt sin proceeds of offense, and so
immediately is brought in the bond that thereby we make to Gods enemy, which
unless we do revoke, we must of necessity be driven out of the Church, and
as rotten members of the same be given over to Satan. Nevertheless, he who by
contrition for his sins, and confession of the same will reclayme himself,
does immediately recover three benefits repugnant to the other: which are,
forgiveness of sins: the cancelling and discharge of the Obligation made
unto the devil, and reconsiliation to the Catholic Church: Magist. sent lib.
4. distinct. 28. cap. 4.
wherein consists the true penance that the Priest or Bishop does minister
and enioine us by virtue of his authority to bind or lose in heaven or in
earth. So as it is evident that the order of Priesthood and Ecclesiastical
power, has evermore been necessary in the Church of God to keep, teach, and
maintain our souls in the knowledge of his holy will, to the end thereby to
obtain his grace and favor in the life to come. For notwithstanding man was
created to the Image of God, and of his everlasting Kingdom, whereby he was
perfect, and needed no other instruction or Schoolemaister, yet after his fall,
and the corruption of our first father, he stood in great need to be restored
to his former knowledge, and the favor of his Creator: for the obteyning
whereof, he was enjoined to keep sundry precepts, and very straight laws,
under pain of deadly and everlasting damnation, until the time of grace,
wherein it pleased God to break and take away the veil and rigor of the
ancient law, and to forgive our offenses through the passion of his dear
Son Jesus Christ, for the enjoying of the fruits whereof, he has left us in
pledge his holy Sacraments, for the administrations and discipline of the
which, he has committed and sent his Apostles, Priests and Doctors, the
administrators and guardians of the same: In such wise that as the end and
purpose of the Architect is the perfection and finishing of his building and
house, so the only end and office of the Clergy, is sufficiently to teach us
those things that appertain to our faith and belief, reforming our actions by
admonitions and gentle persuasions, that thereby together with Gods grace, we
may atteyne to everlasting salvation: neither has God given them any other
dominion over us, but only admonition and instruction in his knowledge,
setting before us the reward of well doing, and the revenge of wickedness in
the universal doom of the heavenly Majesty.

21 But in as much as the people have not to deal therewith, also that the
Bishop of Room in that quality which he pretends, has no such power, his
authority being merely and simply Spiritual, and in no point concerning the
Realms of the world: what shall we then say if Emperors or other sovereign
Kings were (as they are men and subject to corruption,) heretics, or otherwise
evil livers? were it not a marvelous offense to see them reign with all
power, and be as scourges and persecutors of Gods Church? In this question I am
to desire the French to weigh the answer of that wise and great personage
Saint Augustine. If Emperors, says he, Epist. 50. ad Bonif.
be in error, and according to their error do prescribe laws against the
truth, whereby the righteous may be tried and crowned, he answers not that
they must be expelled or deposed of their Empire, c. Imperatores xj. q. 3.
but only, we must not do those things that wickedly they command. Iulianus
xj. q. 3.
Neither does Saint Ambrose find fault with the obedience that the Christian
Soldiers yielded to the Emperor Julian the Apostata: only he warns them to
do nothing repugnant to the honor of God. S. Peeter persuaded not the Church
to depose Nero, the conspired enemy of Jesus Christ, but contrariwise
admonished all Christians to honor and pray for him. The holy Legion
Fulminatory made no difficulty to go to the Wars, and to venture their lives
under the Emperor M. Antonius the Philosopher, l. 30. ff. de pen^
a Prince that was but a bad Christian, and such a one as contrary to the
piety of Religion made a severe Decree, Eusebe. lib 5. caeteri in M. Anton.
vita. Tertul ad Scapul.
the marks whereof are yet to be seen in our Pandects, and Eusebius,
Capitolinus, Dion, Xiphilinus, and others do make mention of the same.
Tertullian in his Apologeticall treatize, sufficiently sets down the
malice of the Emperor Seuerus against the Church of the Christians, In Apolog.
and yet let us mark what he writes of their affection to the Prince. We are
(says he) discryed unto the Emperors Majesty, and yet were the Christians
never proved to be Albinians, Nigrians, or Cassians, who were the conspirators
against the Emperors, M. Antonius the Philosopher, Commodus, Pertinax, and
Seuerus, each after other, but contrariwise those that lately took the oath
and condemned the Christians, have been found to be the Emperors enemies:
never a Christian was there in that faction, as knowing that the Imperial
Majesty ordained of God, must be loved, reverenced, and honored, whose
prosperity, as also the welfare of the whole Roman Empire, they are to
desire, so long as the world stands, for so long shall the same continue. We
do therefore worship the Prince, according as is lawful and requisite, his
Majesty being second after God, of whom he houldeth his authority, and has
nothing greater the^ the heavenly power. Constantius, Valens, Zeno, Anastazius,
Justinian the first and second, Heraclius, Leo the 3. Phillip Bardanes,
Constantin the 5. Leo the 4. and some other Emperors, who were adjudged
heretics, were never deposed, notwithstanding the Catholic Church condemned
their errors, which nevertheless is permitted to excommunicate Kings and
Princes, Sectaries of false opinions, or otherwise evil livers, in case the
same will not acknowledge their vice or tra^sgression: which one only Bishop
or high Priest whatsoever may not do without the judgment and notice of the
Church, after it has heard the King or Prince in his exeptio^s and defenses:
wherein undoubtedly ought to be strictly observed all order of Justice, c.
praecipue c. si episcopus c. siquis. presbiter. c. si quis episcopus xi. q. 3.
in respect as well of the gravity of the cause as of the quality of the
person in question, whereupon may depend the trouble and subuertion of
Christian policy, through such civil wars as might ensue, together with the
blood of the poor faithful, which the weapons of the provoked Prince might
shed: as Saint Augustine to the same purpose does confess, and discourse upon
in his Gloss upon that precept whereby we are commanded to obey our Kings.
Moreover, excommunication denou^ced contrary to the orders of the ancient
fathers observed in the Church, ad Romans 131. ad Cor. 6.
and without the knowledge thereof, would prove unjust, and utterly void, and
thereby not the taxed but the taxer might take harm: as Gratian teaches,
expounding a place of S. Hierome upon Leuiticus. c. siquis non rect. 24 q. 3.
c. manet 24. q. 1.
Pope Leo also affirms that the privilege of Peter is in force wheresoever
judgment is given according to his equity. Innocent the third, how zealous he
was of his authority, confesses that if the excommunicated pretend that
unjustly he was so denounced, he may complain and exhibit the case of his
innocence. In France by the privileges of the Flowerdeluce, c. per tu^^ extra
de sent. excom.
it has often by arrest of y^ Court been adjudged, yt the King, his officers
or subjects in body or communaltie, cannot be excommunicated by the Pope, or
any other Bishop whosoever Whereupon Charles du Molin, a famous advocate, and
one of the greatest Lawyers of his time, testified that he had to that end an
express Bull of Pope Martin the 5. In. 4. part. still. parl. extrauaga^ti
frequentes de iudic.
which was nothing repugnant to the law by the Popes commonly observed: for
John the 22. declares, that he may grant privilege to some one, that he
shall not be excommunicated: whereupon Pope Eugenius the fourth, concurring
with the Court of the holy Apostolic Sea, granted to the French that no
Bishop whatsoever, should entangle them in the sentence of excommunication. But
we have not for this occasion to deal either with Bulls, extrauaga^ti diuina
priuil.
or privileges of ye Church of Rome: for by the rights, authority, and
dignity of the Majesty of our king, it is not lawful for the Pope, or any
Bishop whatsoever, to excommunicate either town, or communaltie subject to the
Realm of France. By reason whereof in the year 1488. the Attorney general
appealed as of abuse from the excommunication that the Pope had laid upon the
Inhabitants of Gau^t, because they had dealt hardly with the Emperor
Maximilian their Earl, and Vassal to the King of France, to whom only he
ought to have had recourse, as unto his Lord, for remedy: the Pope having no
authority over the subjects of this Crown. To y^ same end also Charles the
fifth by an Edict verefied in his Parliament in the year 1369. expressly
forbad all Bishops, and Prelates, for whatsoever cause, to lay the sentence of
exco^municatio^ upon any Town, Communaltie, College, or body corporate of his
Realm, the same being under the only correction and power of himself, and
of none other in the world: which Edict was also renewed by Jews the 11. in
the year 1467. whereof is grown a custom inuiolably observed in France, as
the Oracle of Apollo, of Appellations as of abuse in the Court of Parliament
against the Pope and his Clergy: without which remedy, the Priests would in
France erect an other and more mighty Monarchy then the Kings, for the
maintenance and dignity of the which al good Frenchmen ought rather to dye
then suffer it to be diminished. So, that the Pope and Bishops can proceed no
further, then to excommunication of particular persons, according to the order
of old time observed by the holy Decrees and Canonical constitutions. Thus to
conclude, you see how to proceed against Kings and sovereign Princes,
Heretics, or otherwise offensive to the Christian Church: which
excommunicatio^s (being by order of law evermore observed in the flourishing and
Primitive Church) denounced, we are to dispute whether by the same we be
discharged of yt faith and oath, that by nature we owe unto them. Wherein are
but too evidently known the constitutions of the Popes Gregory the 7.
Honorius the 3. Lucius the 3. Innocent the 3. and others, by the which they do
not only declare the subjects of an heretical or excommunicate c. iuratos c.
nos sancto rum 16. q. 7. cap. ad abolandam c. verge^tis c. fin. X. de he ret c.
fin. X. de pen.
Prince absolved from their oath of fidelity: but, which is more, do upon the
like penalty forbid the vassals to obey their Lord after he is adjudged such a
one. Nevertheless, I think not but such decrees proceeded of a marvelous
passion of the Popes of those days against the Princes of their time: And in
deed John Andrew, Innocent, Archidiaconus, Panorme, and many other learned
glozers upon the Decretals, being of a contrary advice, do allege great
difficulties thereupon, and in their hypotheses do perticulerly expound them,
in case by the sentence of excommunication it be expressly set down that y^
subjects shall be discharged of all right of vasselage: otherwise they do
judge the obligation not to be extinct or diminished by the excommunication of
their Lord, which last in sundry considerations full of Religion and civil
piety seems to be of great appare^ce and too too true. First, that we are
bound to obey our Kings, whether good or bad, because they are chosen and
given to us by the hand of God, even such as it please him to give to rule over
us. Secondly, that the excommunication imports no alteration or diminutio^ of
the quality of the person, nec habetis capitis minutionem, as the Lawyers do
say, to contain or comprehend therein deprivation, or publication of goods,
l 3. ff. de Senate.
sed motionem ab ordine, and Christianorum coetu, as says Modestin of Senator,
qui Senatu motus, capite minutus non est, and Romae morari potest. Moreover,
excommunication is a Spiritual discipline, medicine, and admonition, and has
no participation with worldly and temporal goods and means, 2. ad Cor. cap
10.
whether great or small, as S. Paul says, The armors of our wars are not
carnal: therefore, since Realms and Lordships are for the most part
patrimoniall, l. in agris. ff. de acq. rer. dom. l. fin. ff. de calum. l.
obligatio mum ff. de obl. and act
or at the least terestriall, whose property and possession does no way
concern the kingdom of God, the declaration of the loss of the one, brings
no consequence for the deprivation from the other. Paul the Lawier also
teaches us, that quod alicui debetur, certis modis deberi desinit, among which
is not to be found the excommunication of him to whom we acknowledge our
selves bound: for otherwise the vassal and subject should reap benefit,
commodity, and discharge, in the destruction and hinderance of his Lord:
Besides, that the excommunication tends not in worldly matters to impouerish
the party condemned, but only to deprive and declare him unworthy the
fellowship of men, or to be thought a member of the Church of GOD. He is also
denounced such a one, first to be an instruction and example to all other the
faithful, when they shall consider the gravity of the offense, and thereby
way the public slander arising thereof. Secondly, to drive the condemned to
call to mind, abhor, and be contrite for his offense, seeing him self
delivered into the hands of his mortal ennemy Satan, and humbly to crave
reconsiliation at the catholic Church, from whence he is banished, Epist. ^.
in exilio sinitimo, said Alexander the Martyr: which we may sufficiently
learn by the ancient form of satisfaction, which the Primetiue Chnrch
enjoined to the parson excommunicate, that is, to confess his fault before the
Priests and assembly of the faithful, Luc. 7. 2. Reg. cap. 12.
in whose presence he was reproved, blamed and condemned to abide in a
certain place without the communion and assembly of the Church, with certain
outward works of a penetontiary as well in habit and behavior as especially
in his diet, in which form he should exhibit petition and supplication, both
to the Priests, and to the whole congregation, 1. ad Cor. cap. 5. item 2. cap.
2. and 7. Iosu^. cap. 7.
to be forgiven and unbound from his offense: whereupon the Church by the advice
of the Ministers thereof, sometimes condemned him in great amends, and so by
little and little received him again as she thought good: For at the first he
was only admitted to hear the word of God: after that he was received to the
prayers of the Church: Itaen. ii^. 1 cap* 9. Tertul. de Eusebius. lib 5. cap. 28.
lib. 6. cap. 25 Sozomen lib. 9. cap. 35. can. quudragema ^0. distinct.
and so consequently to the Communion of the faithful: finally by the
imposition of the Priests hands he was restored to his former estate, and
then was it not lawful for any to reproach unto him what was passed. So as by
this form of excommunication and penance, or satisfaction extract out of the
ancient Counsels of Ancira, and Nice, we may evidently judge that it no way
concerned the temporal goods, as of those that the Church has not to dispose
of, neither did it importe other then the exemplary correction of the
excommunicated, for the s^au^der by his offense committed against the Church,
either else according to ye holy scripture, for the subduing of the flesh,
whereby the soul may be saved in the day of our Lord Jesus. Moreover, 1. ad
Cor* cap. 5.
it seems that Gregory the seventh, Innocent the third, and other the high
Priests did so understand it, when in the excommunication of the Lords, and of
those that were conversant and had dealings with the^, they would not include
their officers, servants and others, who by necessity do owe them obedience,
as do the vassalles and subjects of the Crown, can quonia^ multos xj. q 3.
cap. cu^ illoru^ x. de sent. exco^.
who naturally and ciuilly are bound to their Kings and Princes: So that the
necessity of their bondage exempteth the^ by the judgment of the Church, out
of the general excommunication denou^ced against all other persons that have
dealing with the excommunicated. And perticulerly Innocent the third in his
decretall Epistle written to the Doctors of Boulogne, c. inter aliu x. de sent.
e^xco^.
declares that the debtes, letters, and obligatio^s of excommunicated persons
are not called in question, neither are the debtors discharged of the same:
much less to be blamed for paying and satisfying their creditors, considering
that the necessity of their obligatio^s do thereto bind them. Arist lib. 2
Politic.
And there is no doubt but the private famelie and household of every one is
likewise a little Commonwealth, as well as the Commonwealth is a great famelie,
whereof the King that rules it is the father and defender, so elected and
ordained by God, as father of the household among the children. Innocent the
third therefore exepted out of the excommunication of those that were conversant
with the condemned, all such persons as by necessity of the laws of household
were bound to yield their due obedience, which shall never be more strickt,
great, or commendable in the children of the household servants, toward the
father of the household, then it ought to be in the subjects toward their
King or sovereign Prince. And effectually to show that the excommunication of
the King discharges not his subjects from their vowed faith, let us call to
mind the ancient examples meet and commodious for this argument. c. eu^ apud
xj. q. 1. volu^ Conc. fol. 553. Nicepb. lib 13. ca. 34. can. praecipue c.
Theogal. dum xj. q. ^.
The Emperor Theodosius the first was justly excommunicated, for the murder of
the Inhabitants of Thessalonica: His son Arcadius, for expelling and deposing
S. John Chrysostom from the Church of Constantinople: Zeno, and Anastazius,
for being Eutichians: Lothaire the first, for his adultery committed with
Gualdrade: which notwithstanding their subjects were not discharged of their
bonds and oaths whereby they were to them bound, against the which also they
never made any difficulty to obey those Emperors, as their lawful Lords.
Dagobert King of France who became a Nero, and after the first years of his
quiet and Catholic government, began about the year 637. to trouble the
Churches, destroy the Temples, banish the Clergy, and commit an infinite
number of other insolences, for the which Seuerinus Bishop of Room, did
greatly reprove him, was not nevertheless driven away by his subjects, who
with earnest prayer, obtained at the grace of God that this Prince repented,
and ever after served God faithfully all the days of his life. When Pope
Celestin the third had excommunicated Phillip Augustus King of France in y^
year 1197. for forsaking without lawful occasion his wife Isambergue, sister
to King John of Denmark, his States and subjects did not nevertheless expel
him or deny to acknowledge him to be their King and Sovereign. When Boniface
the eight had cast forth his poisoned Bull against Phillip the Fair: the
Nobles and Prelates of the Realm assembled at Paris decl^red that the Bishop
of Rome had no authority so to do. When Pope Julius the 2. excommunicated and
interdicted King Jews the 12. Massaeus in Chron.
whom justly we term father of the people, the Prelates and Nobility
assembled at Tours, protested it to be lawful to contemn the said Thunderbolt,
and the same notwithstanding did swear to him their due faith and homage. When
King Henry the 2. of England was by Alexander the 3. excommunicated and
interdicted for banishing Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, whom after his death
the Pope canonized, yet was he not cast out from his kingdom, neither did his
subjects with earnest affection deny him their accustomed obedience. John
without Land King of the same I Will, was never dispossed, neither did his
subjects molest him, in respect of the curse that Innocent the third had
denounced against him in the year 1212. until he became a Tyra^t and extreme
oppressor of the people, who then, being provoked, under pretense of the said
interdiction, did him some displeasure: Howbeit, so soon as he seemed willing
to mend his manners toward the English nation, they fell at his feet, and
expulsed Jews of France, whom they had subrogated in his place, and so soon
as the said John was dead admitted his son Henry. King Henry the eight of the
same I Will, was very faithfully obeyed by his subjects, after that Pope Paul the
third had excommunicated, interdicted, aggrauated, and reaggrauated the curse
against him, whereby some were somewhat shaken from his obedience. Su^noo King
of Denmark about the year of our Lord 850. John. Magn^i^hist. Goth.
was justly excommunicated by y^ Bishop of Roscholech, for becoming an
Apostata, and procuring to slay sundry of the Princes of his blood in the
Church founded in the name of the holy Trinity in the same Town of
Rhoscholech, the entry into which Church this Bishop forbad him, together with
the communion of the faithful: but he did not nevertheless deprive him of his
Crown, neither did his subjects refuse him their faithful service, although
Canutus and Wademarus, two of his chiefest favorites and privy Counsailors, who
sought to share the Realm with Suercherus King of Sueden, did thereto suborne
them. Brigerus King of Sueden, who reigned about the year 1300. was one of the
most wicked and cruel Kings that could be, especially against the Church and
Churchmen, but chiefly against Nicholas Archbishop of Vpsale, whom together
with the rest of his Bishops he committed to prison, whereupon they
excommunicated him, and Turgillus Canutus his Lieutenant general, and author of
his behauiours: nevertheless the people, though thereby stirred up against
their King, and having greater opportunity to rebel and shake of the yoke of
his obedience, under the conduct of Wademarus, and Henry his brothers, who
sought no better occasion to put out their brother, would never hearken to
the^, neither hinder or become cruel to their natural Lord: so as the two
brothers were forced to employe their other friends for the executing of their
inte^ts against Brigerus, whom when they had taken prisoner, they were
nevertheless compelled to force all the towns, neither found they any one that
would yield to them: so greatly did the Subjects of the Realm accoumpt
themselves bound to the service of their King, whom they knew to be wicked,
excommunicate, and an evil liver: besides, a prisoner, and captive in the
power of his brethren, whom in the end they forced to set him at liberty, and
to submit themselves to his obedience: Of such force is the bond of good people
to their King, whatsoever he be. In Poland Boles^aus a Prince of most wicked
life, Cromer. in hist Polon.
a common adulterer, an enemy to the Church and Clergy, after Stanis^aus
Bishop of Cracouy, had often admonished him to amend, was by him at length
excommunicated, whereat the King being offended did put the said Bishop to
death: for which cause Pope Gregory the seventh did confirm and aggrauate the
said excommunication, with a general interdiction against the Realm, about
the year 1079. yet did he still reign by the consent and with the obedience
of the Polonians, over whom he ruled a whole year and more, until in his
journey to Ladislaus King of Hungary, he flewe himself, peradventure through
the just judgment of God. The Emperor Sigismund and his faction could never
win the Bohemians from the due affection that they ought to his brother
Winceslaus their natural King, though vicious, wicked and filthy, for the
which offenses through the practices of the said Sigismund, he was often
emprisoned and excommunicated by the Bishops of that country, yea by the
Electors deposed from the Empire: so as in the end he dyed in Boheme, still
taking the place, order, and quality Royal, through the goodwill of his
Subjects, who deemed, that the same could not perticulerly conteyne any
dispensation to discharge the subjects thereof of the oath and faith that to him
they ought: as also they may not be discharged from his bondage but only by
death, or his own liberal cession which he would make to an other: as did
Albert King of Sueden, about the year 1388. being prisoner to Margaret Queen
of Denmark and Norway, to whom he yielded whatsoever his right to the Crown of
Gothland and Sueden: whereby the States of the country swear their faith and
homage to the said Margaret, and after they had secretly enquired of their
King, and sundry times solemnly desired him to show them his mind, or else to
discharge them of the duty wherein they stood bound to him, although
undoubtedly the Suedens had great cause to seek his mishap: for all Histories
do agree, that never Prince committed so many outrages, and wrought so many
injuries to his subjects as had this Albert. It therefore remains that by the
law of Nations, the inviolable keeping of the obligation that the subjects
do owe to their natural Prince, and not to depart therefro at the appetite or
sentence of others, have even among the most barbarous people been evermore
observed, so as we ought, in respect of the bond that we owe him, say of the
King and his blood, as of Matrimony, whom God has joined together, let no man
put a sunder.

22 But let us more perticulerly learn whether the sentence of
excommunication, were lawfully, upon reasonable cause and exemplary occasion,
pronounced against a King, and done by the judgments of many Popes of Room
within these five hundred years, against such Kings and Emperors, to who^
they have borne bad minds. Although I think it not meet to ground any law
upon the examples of these men, in troth, full fraught with ambition, and more
then human affection: but it is requisite to examine this question by the
rules of Gods law and politic reason, established for the preservation of
the society of mankind. Herein therefore I say yt the sentence of
exco^municatio^ denou^ced against a King, how just soever the cause be, and
conteyneth dispensation for the oath and duty that the subjects do owe unto
him, this license and tolleration unto the people granted, is repugnant to the
law of God, and all man's reason. For, since the subjects are by Gods
commandment bound to obey their Princes whatsoever, without any further
inquiry of their consciences and behauiours, John. 8.
they cannot by any tradition or permission of man, either general or
particular, be dispensed with: in can. sicut 14. did c. sunt quida^ 25. q. 1.
because no man can enterprise upon Gods ordenances: and every dispensation so
granted is void, as being repugnant to the divine providence: As Pope Leo
and Urban, have very wisely confessed. Especially since this dispensation cannot
be put in execution without great sclaunder and shedding of blood, by reason
of such wars and quarrels as will be raised through the rebellion of the
Subjects against their Prince and their Kings resistance, not only in respect
of his conscience, but also for his Estate, and the defense of his Crown. In
such necessities therefore, Pope Gelasius teaches us, that we are especially
to beware of those things that cannot be received without great inconveniences.
c. elfi ^^ta 11 q. 7.
Besides that the Jurisdiction and power of the Church, extends not to
temporal goods or causes, but as all men know, Caesar shareth Empire with
Jupiter: neither is the Ecclesiastical power other then Spiritual, concerning
the Kingdom of heaven, and therefore unprofitably and wrongfully they should
thrust their Sithe into other men's harvest, and without authority or
Jurisdiction should meddle with the government of ma^s policy, and the
governments of Realms or earthly Empires, considering the kingdom of God,
whereof they are Stewards and do wear the keys, is not of this world. As
also of such dispensation would ensue to great injustice, because that since the
holy Church gives remission for whatsoever sin, and receives the
excommunicated, after he has made sufficient satisfaction and done penance
worthy his misdeede, it should come to pass that such a King or Prince,
notwithstanding he were reunited to the Church, and had satisfied the
commandment thereof, must nevertheless remain banished from his estate
already possessed by the first of his neighbors, that shall have received this
rebellious people, and of this trouble taken occasion to become master
thereof, at whatsoever price: from whence it would be impossible to avoid him
without wars and general trouble arising of such dispensation: and so should
the damage done to the excommunicate King through the sentence of
excommunication, which was laid upon him only for correction and admonition to
confess his fault, and to ask pardon openly of GOD and his Church, remain
irreparable. To be brief, of extreme law would arise extreme injury, whereof
this poor, miserable, excommunicate and desperate Prince finding himself
agrieued with the permission to his subjects to rebel, would grow more
obstinate in his vice for fear of losing his Crown: so in liew of urging him
to penance and satisfaction to the Church for the offense arising of his sin,
he shall wax worse, and the Ecclesiastical discipline bring forth no fruit,
and thereby grow into contempt: And undoubtedly therein consists the
discretion of a Lawyer and Judge, so to make his laws, and so well to order
his judgments, that immediately without difficulty, how notable soever they
be, they may be put in execution.

23 Consequently a question may be propounded, whether it be lawful for a King
or Prince to appeal therefro as of abuse, but also by weapons to resist and
withstand the execution of such a sentence, because it permits the
subjects to shake of the yoke of his obedience, and refuse him the duty of
their obligation: which is the same question, which Jews the 12. of France
moved to the Bishops assembled in Tours in the year 1510. concerning the
peevish and rash excommunications laid upon him and his confederates by Julius
the second: whereto the said Bishops made answer, that by all laws the said
King was permitted by whatsoever means, yea even by arms to withstand such
the Popes frivolous and wrongful declarations. Which answer, in my opinion,
is founded upon all reason as well natural as civil, because it is certain
and evident, that the clause of the sentence of excommunication of the King, l.
vt vim. ff. de Just* and Iur.
which conteyneth permission to the subjects to r^bel against him, is a public
force and violence, that the Pope wrongfully employeth contrary to his function
and authority, and against the which the King may oppose himself and
withstand him with the like or a greater power. I. 23. ff de iniur. l. 31 ff.
de per. and com. rei ven. le. 26. ff. 7. ff. ad
Secondly, it ought not to be lawful for the Pope under pretense of a
Shepherd, and the care that he should have of the Christians to enterprise or
attempt any unreasonable thing to the injury of his flock: For if the
Magistrate does any thing injuriously, either as a particular person, either
upon confidence of his authority, he may be sued of injury. Besides that we
have before proved that the ordering, Jurisdiction, and notice of worldly
causes and Kingdoms belongs not to the Clergy, to whom is committed only
the publication of the spiritual and heavenly s^orde, I. fin. C. ^i a non co^p.
iud. l. f^. ff. de iurisdi. om^. iud.
and so consequently sentence pronounced by an incompetent Judge, is void in
this head, neither is any man bound to obey that Magistrate that has judged
above his authority. To this purpose Pope Gelasius, writing to the Bishops of
the East, does confess, that if the judgment be unjust, the less need the
condemned to care, ^. cui est il lata xi. q. 3
for that such a sentence cannot make the condemned guilty before God and his
Church. c. no^ debet xi. q. 3.
And therefore he concludes, that he should never sue for absolution, beeause
it hurts him not. In an other place Pope Gregory confesses, that he cannot
incur canonical pains that is not canonically condemned. In the
interpretation of which place John Andrew the gloser does teach us, that it is
lawful to withstand the execution of a judgment known to be none, and given
by such a one as has no authority. The same does Celestin grant when he
speaks of the election of a Bishop, against the minds of the Clergy of that
Dioces where he should sit: l. denotat. C. de met. lib. x. c* nullus inuitis
61. distin. gl. in c. ex literis de off. deleg. innocent. in cap. si quando eo.
and in ca. dilecte de excess. praelat. l. si quis prouoca torum C. appell. no^
recip. Paul. de Cast. post Bald. in l. vt vim ff. de Just. and Iur. so^n. in
443. fall. Cinus. in l. ab executore C. eod ^uor. appe^^. no^ rec^^. and in
(...). C. vnd. vi clem. (...)
and the Gloss expressly says, that the superior abusing his power, willing
and prete^ding by force to be obeyed, it is not forbidden to withstand him,
especially in case the hurt be irreparable, as in this now in question, because
every one naturally is permitted to withstand violence, yea even against his
superior. In an other place we learn that it is for every one in default of
the Magistrate, to do himself right, or to bend himself against the wrongful
oppression of an other. Infinite are the examples of Emperors and Catholic
Kings, who authorized by the Church, have made no difficulty to take Arms
against the bishop of Rome and his adherents, whenever he so far forgot his
duty, as by force to enterprise that which Princes could not with reason
grant him. When Pope John the eleventh writ to the Hungarians, and persuaded
them to rebel against the Emperor Ottho the first, and the said Emperor being
in Italy, this Pope together with Albert Marquize of Spolete raising war
against him, the Bishops and Prelates assembled at Rome, deposed the said Pope,
and having surrogated Leo the fifth into his room, permitted the Emperor by
Wars to pursue him. When Henry the black understood that Benedict the ninth,
Siluester the third, and Gregory the sixth Antipopes, sought each to thrust
other out of Italy, and to establish him self by arms, he went speedely to
Rome with a great power to decide the controversy, and with the advice of a
Counsel assembled by his imperial authority, these three Popes were all
deposed and disgraded, and in their room the Emperor established Suidiger
Bishop of Bambergue, who named him self Clement the second: When the Emperor
Henry the fourth understood that Pope Gregory the seventh had forbidden the
Bishops to require inues^iture of the Emperor, also that he found, that y^
wicked man stirred him up enemies, yea, proceeded so far, as to cause the
son to rebel against the father, against whom he opposed Raoul Duke of
Sueue, he desired the Bishops to gather together at Bresse, where in their
Sinode they excommunicated and deposed the Pope, and elected Clement Bishop of
Rauenna to be his successor, for whose establishment the Emperor took Arms
and entered Italy. Henry the fifth was forced to War against Pascall, who
had moved the Romans to mutiny against him, to the end to have slain him,
because he endeavored to maintain the ancient rightes of the Empire concerning
the collations of Bishoprics. Frederick the first understanding the arrogant
presumption and obstinate resolution of the Popes Adrian, Alexander the third
and Victor, importing that it lay in them to give the Empire to whom they
pleased, did seven times enter Italy with an army, where he fought a blooddy
battle, in the which dyed 12000. of Pope Alexanders partakers, who therewith
provoked, caused the lively Picture of the ^ame Emperor to be drawn, Bal^us
in catal. script. A^gl.
and sent the Table to the Soudan of Egypt, against whom the said Emperor was
gone, withal aduertising him, yt unless he procured his death by treason, or
otherwise he should never have peace: whereupon the Emperor recreating himself
a little from his Army, was taken and brought before this heathen, who showed
him the Popes Letter, together with his Picture: and yet nevertheless put him
to his Ransom, and so sent him home honestly, as abhorring the treason of the
great Priest of the Christians against this Prince, who ventured his life for
the maintenance of his Religion. Hereat was the Emperor so offended, yt at his
return he entered Italy again, and forced ye Pope to flee in counterfaite
apparel, after yt the Bishops had in a Synod condemned him as a traitor to
the Empire, yea, which is more, as a conspired enemy to Christian faith.
Phillip, this man's son being by Innocent the 3. sclaundered among the Princes
of the Empire, was counseled by the Bishops of Germany to have his revenge
by arms. Ottho the 4. being in Rome, was so s^arred by the driftes of the same
Innocent, that he was driven to have recourse to force, in which conflict
perished a number of the Citizens of Rome. Frederick the 2. in whose time
Innocent the 4. Honor and Gregory the 9. did in Italy begin y^ quarrel of ye
Guelphes against the Gibelins, who mainteyned them selves under the ancient
obedience of the Empire, was by the advice of al his Princes and Prelates,
compelled to oppose himself against the practizes and conspiracies which these
high Priests wrought against him. The Emperor Albert, and King Phillip of
France, doubted not to bend them selves against the oppression of Boniface the
eight, and to contemn his excommunications, until King Phillip assembled the
Prelates of France, by whose sentence he was declared a Scismaticke,
Heretic, inuader of the holy Sea, and a perturber of the peace of the Church,
as having molested all Italy, with the factions of the Whites, and the Blackes.
Henry the 7. of the house of Luxembourg, to the end to withstand Clement the
third, the mainteyner of Robert King of Sicill, a rebellious vassal to the
Empire, was driven to come to handy strokes with him and his partakers: the
like did Jews of Bauier against John the 23. and other ye Popes of his time,
who without either cause or reason had declared him an Heretic, because he
would not yield to them the Imperial authority in Italy, neither put the
Empire into the subjection of the Bishop of Romes Sea. In our time Jews the
12. King of France, and the Emperor Charles the fifth, how dealt they most
justly with the Popes that would have dispensed with, and exceeded the bounds
of their duty? To be brief, in other the Provinces of the Empire, infinite
are the examples of Kings and Princes, who with the advice of the Prelates and
Nobility of their Dominions, have with arms withstood the ambitious and
passionate practizes of the Popes, in whom it had been more seemly to have
governed the Church and spiritual Hierarchy, and not to have thrust their
Sythes into other men's harvest: whereof is without doubt proceeded the
destruction and deformity of the West Catholic Church, together with the full
fall of the East Church, into the which by those means is entered the Wolf
that has devoured Gods flock, whereof they shall assuredly answer.

24 Now have we yet the second question to enquire of, for our better
instructions in this matter: That is, whether the King of Navarre be an
Heretic. His adversaries do say that his opinion of Religion was lately
condemned in the late oecumenicall Counsel holden at Trent. Molin. in Co^s.
supra Co^d Trid.
Hereto he answers, that the same pretended Counsel was not lawfully
assembled, because therein the Pope executed the room of both Judge and party:
also that such as prosecuted reformation in the Church were not heard. To be
brief, there may be debating, and many nullities may be alleged, as well in
the form, as in the decrees of the said Counsel, whereto need no more
respect ^ee had then to the counsel of the wicked, of which the Psalmist does
speak, or unto those that the Prophet terms Counsels of vanity: yea,
Psalm. 1. Psalm. 26. Ioh. 4.
and Saint John writes, Believe not every spirit, but prove whether they be
of God. Saiuct Hierome also teaches us, that the doctrine of the holy Ghost is
the same which is set down in the Canonical Scriptures, against which if the
Counsels determine any thing, it shall be wicked. Action 3. co^c. Chal. 2.
Valum. council. l. nemo C. de summa Trinitare.
Also when the Emperor Martian in the Counsel of Chalcedon, forbad to dispute
or call into question such things as had been well decreed in the same holy
assembly, he thereby meant not to grant free liberty to Counsels against
Gods word: but he speaks only of such things as were well and lawfully
ordained, according to ye rule of the holy Scriptures: by the which those that
uphold the same opinion with the King of Navarre do pretend to show, that the
Clergy, who were assembled in the Counsel of Trent alone, have greatly
erred: which their inquisition and search being by Gods own mouth permitted
to the Church, may not well be refused. Try all (says the Apostle) and hold
that which is good. 1. ad Thessal. cap. 5.
And in deed if the Counsel of Trent be aunswerable to the doctrine of
Jesus Christ: If the truth has appeared therein, then need it not to fear
the trial at the fire thereof, which is the true touchstone of human
traditions. The word of GOD is pure, Psalm. 12. Tertul. in Apolog.
and fears not the fiery trial: for it is a true saying, The law that will
not be tried, may justly be suspected. After then that in a general and free
Counsel, all parties have been heard, and that by the only word of God, and
without affection they have debated their cause, so that finally the opinion
which the said Lord King of Navarre holds, be adjudged heretical, he is so
Catholic and zealous a Prince, and one that so fears God, that he will not
stick publicly in the Church to confess he has strayed and hither to been
mis^ed. In the mean time, and waiting for the said lawful Counsel, neither
ye French King, neither his Courts of Parliament, would ever in this Realm
publish the decrees of the assembly of Trent, neither do any other receive
them then the Clergy, who are the suppostes of the Popes Monarchy. But
contrariwise the late King Henry the second sent Ambassadors expressly to
withstand the said pretended Counsel, also to declare that he meant not in
any wise to allow thereof: as in ^rueth it cannot be admitted without
infringing the rightes and authorities of the King of France, the ancient
decrees ordained in the general Estates of the Realm, under the form of a
pragmaticall sanction, and the most holy liberties of the French Church,
whereby the Majesty of this flourishing Crown is preserved.

25 Neither is it any new matter to say in France, that the King and his
French Church will not receive the same Counsel, because our Kings have
evermore vpholden and preserved above al other, the liberty and franchize of
their Church, and never bound themselves to the Popes co^stitutions, or late
Counsayles, no further then the same were conformable to the decrees of the
universal Church, and nothing derogatorie to the rightes of their Crown. For
proof thereof, we know that the general Counsel of Vienna, was never wholly
received in this Realm. In that of Constance, the liberty, franchizes, and
privileges of the French Church were admitted, according to the declaration
exhibited by the Ambassadors of the most Christian Majesty. As for that of
B^sill, King Charles the seventh would not permit his subjects to appear at
the conclusion of the same: after the which at Bourges he assembled al his
Church, by whom the decrees of the same Counsel were perused, and only part
of them accepted with such qualifications as were thought meet to that effect:
whereupon was formed the Pragmaticall sanction, soon after published in the
Parliament, wherein these words are often repeated. Item, our Synod accepts
the decree following: thereby to show that in France we are not bound to the
Popes ordenances, constitutions, or decrees, neither to the assembly summoned
by his authority, Vsurpatio^s and en^reptises du Co^cile de Tre^te sur la
Majeste du Roy de ^^ance.
which he calls a Counsel. And now may we truly say, that never was there
any holde^ that was more prejudicial, or of greater misprision against the
dignity of this Crown: for if we search narrowly into it, we shall find that
a great part of the decrees thereof do dyametrally oppose them selves against
the liberty of our Churches, and the Majesty of the most Christian King,
against whom they above all Christian Kings, for these 1000. years: so that
his Majesty allowing of this pretended Counsel, should confess a matter
very prejudicial unto him, Council. 418. 1. volum.
because as says Balde, he wears y^ Crown of liberty and glory. Secondly,
as for reformation of the c. sacroru^ 73. distin. c. vota ciuium 63. distinc.
c. cler. 93. distinc. c. qua^to 63. distinct.
the consent of the people and authority of ye Magistrate are not necessary:
which is quite contrary to Gods law, the observation of the Primitive Church,
the ancient Canons, the ordinances of Charlemaign, and Jews the Meek: and
more perticulerly, to the determination of the three Estates of this Realm,
holden at Orleans in the year 1360 and confirmed in the Court of Parliament,
where it was decreed that together with those of the Clergy there should be
12. Gentlemen for the Nobility, and 12. Burgeses, who should be chosen out of
the town house, and goods, as well by the Bishops officers, as their
officialles, notwithstanding in France they never had that authority, no not
over the Clergy, and therefore it is mere encrochment upon the seculer
power. It inhibiteth the Pragmatical sanction of Saint Jews, inserted into
the style of Parliament: yea, and contrary to the defense made at the said
Estates of Orleans. It permits Bishops, goods, contrary to the Counsel of
Vienna, holden in the year of 1310. and infinite ancient arrestes of the
Court. It donation, or construction within these forty years, which is a
great intrusion upon the are drawn to the Court of Rome and Popes Consistory,
c. siquis Episcopus 6. q. 4. c. si inter episcopos c. si episco. pus xi. q. 3.
c. decer nimus. 3. q 6.
contrary to the dignity of the royal Majesty and the ancient Canons of the
universal Church, whereby the criminal causes of Bishops, yea, in case the
same concerned their deprivation or discharging, did belong to the Bishops of
the Country or Synodes provincial, and not to the Pope: as by many the
arrestes of the Court concurring with the general Counsels of Constantinople
and Carthage it does appear: besides that herein the said Counsel greatly
derogateth from the Kings sovereignty and Jurisdiction that evermore he has
had over the Bishops of his Realm, witness the examples of Giles Bishop of
Rheims: of Pretextatus Bishop of Roa^: of Didier Archbishop of Vienna, and many
others, of whom Gregory of Tours, Aimoinus, Ado, and Vincent the Historiall,
do make mention. In of this realm, which under the authority of the King
with his good liking, and under the protection of his Edicts of pacification
have contracted Matrimony and begotten Children, who thereby should be declared
illegitimate, deprived of their Parents Successions, and their ^Wues denounced
Concubines and Harlots to their true Housbands, contrary to all equity, which
in sum is as much, as to bend themselves against God: to erect in other men's
Realms assemblies of people not subject to the same: to bring into the Church
a greater deformation: and to make the King of France his Serieant or
executioner of his commandments, yea, such a one as should have no authority
to order his Realm: So that those which now so earnestly do prosecute that
publication of the said Counsel shall never persuade me that they are French
men: but rather that they show them selves Solliciters of the Popes affairs
and dignity, rather his Servants, the^ their Kings and sovereign lords. Thus
do you seee, how by the advice and judgment of the honestest and greatest
French Catholics, living under the traditions of the Romish Church, this
Counsel of Trent may not be accounted other then a notorious conspiracy and
coniuration against the authority and dignity of this Crown, and of the
Subjects thereof, of whatsoever calling that shall find them selves offended,
and therefore we should greatly injury any one of ours of whatsoever estate, in
calling him Heretic, for not obeying, submitting him self, or consenting
against his Country, to the malicious conspiracies of the Pope, and strangers
that do envy the greatness of this Estate. Especially the King of Navarre,
whom the matter chiefliest does concern, should have greatest cause to be
agrieued, in respect that at this day he has the Honor to be the principal
branch of the Royal tree of France, and so consequently more nearly bound
then any other to preserve and mainteyne the rightes, liberties and dignities
of this glorious and redoubtable Monarchy.

56 Moreover the said Lord King of Navarre demands of you, by virtue of what
do you esteem him an Heretic and obstinat parson? For it is certain, that
he only may be termed an Heretic, who vpholdeth a false doctrine contrary to
the holy Scriptures of the old and new Testament, believing amiss in any one
of the Articles of our faith, as did ye Manicheans, Nestorians, Sabellians,
Arrians and their like. Now to say truth, they would persuade us, that the
opinion houlden by the said Lord King of Navarre was monstrous: we have been
hallowed after them like Dogs: we have been forbidden their company as of
infidels and miscreants. I beseech you therefore, let us carefully look into
the confession of their faith, and we shall find them Christians, such as agree
with us in the articles of our belief: do worship the same God: seeking
salvation in the same Jesus Christ: Chrildren of the same father: believing the
same Bible, assuring them selves in the same Gospel, as in the same Buckler of
their faith: requiring part in the same inheritance and in virtue of the same
Testament, as we. The whole controversy between them and us consists in
that, that they finding many men's additions and constitutions in the Church,
and among the simple and pure ordenances of the Gospel, do crave pourging and
reformation, and in case of refusal thereof for fear of their souls and
desire of salvation have withdrawn themselves, as men content with the simple
form ordained in the Primitive Church, and we have thought that saving our
consciences we may stay therein attending necessary reformation. Either of us
seek salvation and tend to one end, and by the same means are all one and
the same work of Gods hand: all faithful servants in the faith in one
Baptism: all Grapes of one Vine: yea, all branches of one Grape: we must
therefore know why one should be an Heretic rather then an other, since we
are all of like faith: use like books: and tend to like end. This is it (in my
judgment) that causes the King of Navarre to complain, that wrongfully he is
termed an Heretic, before his opinion has been condemned in a free, holy,
and determined Counsel, whereat every one may safely appear. As for the
obstinacy to him objected, I would weete for what benefit he should in this
cause be obstinate? what good? what advancement? what peace? what ease may he
therein hope for? He has habandoned the Court of his Sovereign Lord the
King: he has long through the subtelties and slanders of his enemies, been
out of his favor, which is the mishap that with greatest impatience he has
borne: He has been deprived of most of his houses: always in the field:
sometimes badly provided, armed, environed* and his life in a thousand
dangers: where as otherwise he had been assured at his Majesty's hands of all
favor, amity, honor, peace, and human felicity. Any man therefore of
judgment can never be persuaded that this Prince, whom in other matters we
know to be wise and discrete, would have chosen to have spent the most part of
the flower of his youth in misery and perpetual care, only upon a
contradictorie and obstinate mind, not proceeding other the^ from his affection
to the honor of God and the salvation of his soul. Moreover, besides the
infinite abuses of the said Counsel, whereby it is utterly none, it is not
unknown to al men that in France the King of Navarre is not such a one, as by
the policy of the Realm ought to be deprived of the succession of the Crown
when it should fall to him: because those of his party living therein under
the Kings good liking and obedience are not incapable to enter upon all kind
of goods and inheritances which to them may apperteyne either naturally, or
ciuilly, according to the laws commonly received in this Monarchy, by the
ordenances of the general Estates of the same, as the subjects thereof do
know and ordinarely it is adjudged in the sovereign Courts of France, therein
ensuing the Edicts made within these twenty years under Charles the nineth,
and Henry the third now reigning: so as to esteem the said Lord King of
Navarre, to be in worse estate concerning succession in the Realm, then the
meanest subject thereof, and to his prejudice to restrain the public and
general law, were under correction, besides all reason, order, or appearance,
l. illud. ff. ac leg. Aquil. l. ae^ Titio. ff. de f^rt.
since the cause both of one and other is all one. These be the effects of the
reasons, which every one according to his capacity may extend, whereby the
said Lord King of Navarre says and vphouldeth that he is no Heretic. First,
the law and decree whereon the enemies ground their slander, which is the
Counsel of Trent, is argued of diverse nullities. That we must accoumpt of it
as of foreiudgements, for the force of law is to be maeinteyned until the
cause of Nullitie be decided: with this exception, Quod praeiudicium legis
fiat. Especially in France where the most Christian King and Sovereign Courts
did never approve the said Counsel, as it is most certain and evident. So
that although the nullities thereof might be covered under a consequent
approbation of the Counsel, yet could not that take place in this Realm,
which, by the testimony of the Popes themselves is not bound to take law or to
accommodate it self to the sentence, publication or pleasure of any Prince or
Potentate whatsoever in the world. Let therefore the Spanyard or Sauoian compel
their subjects to live according to the decrees thereof, yet have not the most
Christian King and his Parliaments prescribed it for a law to them selves.
Besides, to come more perticulerly thereto, the King of Nauerre,
notwithstanding he be a Christian King and sovereign Prince, and so
acknowledged by his adversaries, especially by the Pope, yet was he never
summoned or heard in the said Counsel, so that consequently the decrees and
judgments there passed are not deemed against him, to bind him, either to
force him to the observing of the same. Again, admit he had been heard, also
that the law of the Counsel of Trent had been lawful, yet who did ever
hear that the sentence of death or other punishment was executed against those
that sinned or did transgress the law, contrary to the order established, but
ye Magistrate, Guardian, or Priest thereof had first examined, heard, or
convinced them, at the least, called, summoned, and proclaimed the^ to the
outlawrie or otherw^se, after exact observing of the solemnities of law. Do ye
use (my Masters) to send even the ranckest thief in the world to the
gallows, without other form of law? Will ye then execute your passions upon
one of the greatest Christian Princes that Heaven has permitted to be borne,
capable of ruling you whenever it shall please God to permit? or deprive him
of that right which Nature has given him, without hearing, or summons, either
understanding of his reazons? Is the manner to proceed in such causes, to come
with the sword drawn and force men to believe you, at whatsoever price? Will
you be his Judges, that be his enemies, and are armed to deprive him of his
life and goods? Shall the Pope, whose reformation is chiefly in question, be
his party? No, no, Wars and weapons were never means to atteyne to union.
If one be in the dark, me^ use to light him and not to cut his throat: If he
be infected he must be washed, not drowned: If he be sick, tend him, end
him not: Who so will reunite the Church, must seek to bring back those that
are out of the way, and to call again such as have strayed: for on the other
side, war and rigor tends to stay and root them out, not to bring them
again, but to make them to be no more at all, which in deed is a remedy
worse then the disease. For so me^ may say we have but a bad cause in hand,
when in liew of reason we have recourse to force. But Christians, what must ye
then do? as men capable of reason ye must convince the King of Nauarrre, and
all that be of his opinion by apparent reasons. For the understanding whereof,
assemble the Catholic Church, and so consequently the Christian Princes of
the same: hear the parties: cause the King of Navarre to appear: at the least
summon him to come in in all assurance: In such an assembly denounce him an
Heretic: excommunicate him: or deal otherwise with him, according as the
holy Ghost shall think meet. Until you so do, you are but thieves, enemies
to the Catholic Church: perturbers of Christian peace: and very Atheistes, in
seeking to use Catholic Religion, which you do least respect, to estabish
your prosperity withal.

27 It is requisite, say you, to root out Heretics. That is a good, godly,
and Catholic Counsel: I am of your opinion: But mark, ye Frenchmen, the
means, effects and purpose which these zealous persons, these firm pillars of
the Church, and these bucklers of the faith do go about to take herein:
Weapons, fellonie, and deprivation of our King both of his Scepter and life:
for if we flatter not our selves, this is their mark. We must give almouse to
the poor: but not by robbing the rich. We must punish transgressors: but we
must not proceed thereto by cutting the Magistrates throat, whom we think
ouerslowe in perfecting the proceducers. We must relieve the people: but
neither we, nor you, nor any other must deal therein or enterprise to do it,
chiefly by rebellion or wars against our King. This is not the first time
that the Commons have complained of the Kings exactions, and yet did they not
thereupon take occasion to oppose themselves against their Majesty's good
pleasures: neither was there ever found Clergy man, being the servant of God,
who to the mutinous would become a trompet of rebellion against their Prince
upon such consideration as these perturbers do represent unto us the Lord
Cardinal of Bourbon, the Popes Legate in France, and which is more, himself a
Prince and of the race of the Kings. Esa. 1. and 3.
The Prophet Esaias complained of these too great exactions of his time. Ezec.
45. Amos 4.
Ezechiel notes them and discovers the vices of Princes. Amos calls them
oppressors of the poor, and cruel to the needy. Mich. 3.
Micheas sets before them the reproach that God will lay upon them, if they
flay the poor. Sopho. 3.
Sophony does bitterly reprove them: yet does it not appear that ever these
men of God embraced conspiraties or entered League, to the end upon any such
considerations to arm the subjects against their Lord. The King, say our
Censors, must reform himself: but we must not tell him so with weapons,
reproving and iniurying his Majesty by word, writing and deed, yea by
captiuating his affections, and forcing him to hate that which he loves, as if
he were not a man capable of the love of those whom perticulerly he
acknowledges for his faithful servants. This were a miserable state for a
King, to be forced to hate where he loves, and to love where he would hate: to
be able to do what he would not, and to desire to do that he cannot: to be
brief, to be a slave to the enuies, strifes and diversities of his subjects.
It is too much: even the greatest Aristarchians cannot like of it. Whereupon I
would feign ask these reformers, what made them so rich and mighty as now to
undertake to raise war against their King: but even the excessive benefits
of his Predecessors and him self? What place does or may the stateliest of
them hold in France, but of mean Gentlemen, and such as it has pleased the
King to love? Were they not our Kings that have advanced them, and maintained
them in their wealth? wherefore then do they so much envy the good hap of
those who have no other beginning or advancement then such as urged themselves
on? Why do they so much mislike that the King should love the Lord Duke of
Espernon, or any other, like as his predecessors favored their au^cesters?
Know they not that all things have their time, their beginning, progress,
increase, and end? what further favor do they hope for at the successor, whom
they would cause the King to nominate by provision? since in the mean time they
suborne his subjects, yea so far to turn them from receiving any Garnison on
his behalf? and spread a brute among the people that there yet remain some of
the race of the ancient Gods worthy to rule over them? To be brief, they
take the course too truly to fulfill the prophecy of the late King Frances
our Kings Grandfather, whom many honorable persons did many times hear say,
that if they used the service of those who now set not a straw by them, they
would do their endeavors to strip his Children into their dublets, and his
people into their sherts: and unhappily these Mastiues have so well learned to
bark, that now they seek to byte their Lord. Call to mind ye Frenchmen, a
true saying of Saint Austen, importing, that it is impossible for that
Counsel to be blameless, whose means, end, and effects are vile, vicious,
and reprehensible. Neither is it Religion or piety that stirs them up, but
a South wind and Spanish heat, wherewith they be driven, that kindles them.
For in troth, it is of more importance for the King of Wisigotes wholly to
subdue the King of Navarre and to destroy him, whatsoever it cost, the^ to
lose all his low Countries, which by that only means he might perpetually
assure, together with not only the rest of whatsoever he wrongfully now
deteyneth of the Realm of Navarre, which seems to be already prescript, but
also generally of the whole Spaynes, and most of his other Lordships, whereof
he might stand in great fear, if GOD should permit him to have so strong and
mighty an enemy as the King of France. Let not therefore the most Christian
Majesty, and the King of Navarre, flatter themselves, but be assured that the
Piedmontain and the Pope with their partakers, are determined to do yt
Spaniard that good turn, and to employe whatsoever their habilities to assure
him on that side. Considering that withal the purse of the Romish Court, which
finds great ease in the French Crowns, of the sum which often do pass the
Mounts by reason of the Annates renewed in this Tridentine conspiracy, and
might in time stray by the way, as by the ancient Edictes of our Kings, and
arrestes of our Courts of Parliament they have hitherto done, have interest
therein. For this cause none need to marvel that the Pope will not willingly
forgo so lickerous a morsel and the best dish on his table. Besides, it is
most certain that the subjects of France, and others that are bound to the
Crown, and Majesty of our King, who have risen and do daily rise, are but
the instruments and gates whereby to make way for the loades of gold which the
Spanyard sends to do his business in this Realm, by the same means giving
them occasion to take hold of and use the time to do also their own, and if
they may, to seize upon this Crown, which they have leueled at ever since the
decease of the late Henry the second, without employing themselves in any other
affairs then seeking the means to atteyne thereto: yea even partly they give
out that it were better to conquer the Realm of France, then to go to
Jerusalem to seek for the succession of Godfrey of Buillon. I do therefore
most humbly beseech the Queen the Kings mother (whom our Espaniolized
Frenchmen do call upon for their succor) to be ware of being deceived in the
fair pretenses of these conspirators, but to assure her self, that
notwithstanding whatsoever their flattering and sweet tongue, they will never
be satisfied but with the life and Scepter of her son and her self.
Moreover, I beseech God to grant the King the wisdom of Salomo^ when his
mother Bethsabe came to desire him to like of the marriage of Adonias with
Abisag the Sunamite, 3. Reg. cap. 2.
who had been King David's Concubine in his latter days: under the pretense
whereof he had undertaken with the help of Abiathar the Priest, Ioab and
Semei, to have deprived the King of life and kingdom: which this fountain of
wisdom speedely perceiving after he had heard the petition of the Queen his
mother, in liew of granting it, and considering how this traitor under a false
proposition had abused her, commanded to put him to death together with Ioab
and Semei, and deprived Abiathar of his Priestly office and function.

28 Know we not the occasions of David the Advocates (one of the wickedest men
that ever lived) journey to the Pope and Court of Rome, whose instructions
these good Scholars do from point to point ensue? and those men that have
seen the same, can tell whether their beginning and the course that still they
take, be not at large therein contained. Who is he that perceives not the
importance of the disputation holden at Sorbonne, about three or four year
since, by a poor bachel^r drawn in, who had dedicated his Theses to the Abbot
of Cluny, the late Card. of Lorrains Bastard. Wherein he did what in him lay
to prove that it was lawful for the people to depose, drive out, kill and
murder tyrannous, wicked, evil living and Heretical Kings? whereat the King
being moved, as at a most dangerous and detestable proposition, this poor
instrument of Satan was at the bar of the said College of Sorbonne, slain
by one who of late days have withdrawn him self laden with Spanish
Pistolets and Jewels, and then cloked this goodly deed, least the author of
this so unchristian learning and knowledge should by his mouth have been
disclosed. Might not we have noted what servants were procured to be placed
abont Monsier the Kings brother, and to what end, among whom the forwardest had
been trained up in the Schole of these perturbers of our peace, as being their
creature, witness that now he is with them, and then used all his endeavor to
plonge that young Prince in all voluptuousness, lechery and heat of youth: yea
he did better his business: for he betrayed him to the King of Spain, and
sold the Spaniard to the States, and the Huguenotes to all others. Whereby he
made money of all with the price of the honor, reputation and life of his
Majesty, or rather of all France. The like did also three or four other bad
parsons, who all had been brought up, and were given to his highness by one
self hand, to the end to habandon him for a pray, to the first mischaunce
that might happen, among a great number that night and day they devised for
the atteining to their entents: yea they went so far as to set him at debate
with the King his brother, and by means of some of theirs that were near to
either of them, to cause nature and blood to live in mistrust of it self, so
to procure the ruin and loss of one or the other, or of both together, and
with them of this miserable Realm. During which their sleightes, they did
nevertheless perticulerly thinck upon the king, whom when they found to be
merueylous zealous in Catholic religion, they began to practice some Spanish
workmen to draw unto him, and under the veil of Religion to bewitch him, and
so wholly endeavored themselves, if they could, to have cast him headlong into
some mishap, as great as the same wherein they prolonged poor King Sebastian
of Portugal, who by such means served for a warm breakefast to the Spanish
King, and got him a fair corner of land through the subtelties of the Spanish
Jesuits, concurring with the Portingal Jesuits, or peradventure both
co^spired against the estate of that poor young King, so to cause him
desperately to venture him self, whether he dyed, and with him the Scepter of
Portugal, which undoubtedly God had long used to the great benefit and bless
of all Christiandome. These were the driftes of the good servants of our Kings,
who (thanked be God) was more circumspect and wary to put from about him such
wicked spirits. Certainly it is most necessary and expedient for a King to be
Christian, devout, zealous of Catholic faith, and to fear God: but withal
it is most dangerous for his person and Estate, if he become supersticious
and an hypocrite. First he thereby loses all judgment to discern the envious
friends or enemies to his Scepter: then he forgets the principal cause for
the which he is a King: which is the care and government of his people, for
the exercize whereof only he is bound, chosen and bound to serve God in that
ministry: lastly, in the world that we live in, among the most corrupt souls
that ever were, the whole world does mistrust and wonderfully suspect him whom
they see make so great a show, whether for envy that every one bears to his
more then common zeal, either else for that in truth it often falls out,
that things of greatest appearance conteyne least truth. Now then, these
malicious persons have but one only subtle intent left, which also it is
meet for the people to know. For yet they go reasonably gently about their
matters, and do give out that they require only abolition of the Edicts of
pacification, and to procure the exercize of one only Religion in France, to
the end under that pretense to embarke the King, and almost to force him (as
aforetyme, fearing least the over long peace of this Realm should close up the
passed ulcers, they had done) to break off that amity and good will which it
pleased him to show to the King of Navarre, and those of the pretended
reformed Religion, so that by such means they will cause him with the sword
that he should hold in one of his hands to cut off the other: whereof must
ensue the loss and sworn death of the said Lord King of Navarre, against
whose person perticulerly, as being their principal mark, they are determined
to arm themselves. After whose end also, if the King (of whom they shall then
stand no longer in need) will not in the mean time dye, either through
melancholy, or choler, and so speedely quit them his room, they know in
their Italian League Articifers enough to send him into Abraham's bosom:
whereby they shall for so many good and commendable services done to our
France, be thought more worthy to be crowned then now, notwithstanding at this
present they cause over loud to be song their pretended merits by all the
Spanish pentioners, and feed Spies in the Court, at whose mouths they set out
their wounds received in the wasting of this Crown, after the manner of the
ancient Romans, who exhibited themselves naked to the people in beggiug the
Suffrages of dignities and offices. Thus when through their wisdom they shall
have killed the King and the King of Navarre, who are y^ two thorns that
trouble their feet, for the one they will procure the singing of a
Deprofundis, and for the other Te Deum laudamus, whereby, together with an
absolution sealed in lead in the Cource of Room, they shall be whiter then
Swannes. For of the rest of the Princes of the blood they make no accoumpt,
neither do think them subject sufficient to put the^ in any chafe about the
rooting of them out: so great is the fury of Satan in these days. This is
the whole story which those that love them are forced to confess.
Nevertheless, it seems that we sleep our our mishap, or ratherthat we make
have to this fire, even with our back burdens of wood to kindle it, in stead
of water to quench it withal.

29 Hereafter I pray you what dignity or Majesty may restrain from vice,
those that are so cruel to their King, as to take arms against his person,
against the peace of his estate whose subjects they are, and against the
establishment of his Realm? Neither Equity, Justice, Custom, Laws, respect
of land, love of their fellow Citizens, or reverence to the Magistrate, can
permit those men that contemn the soueraign authority of the Majesty royal:
and such as without respect to Justice or public honesty, do show them
selves more cruel and barbarous in procuring, under pretense of reformation
and zeal to Catholic Religion, the engendring in France of an immortal
war, the mother of all impiety, wrong, revenge, ruin, deformation and utter
subuertion of most mighty Kingdoms and flourishing Empires, to blush for
shame. What eminency is the Church to look for among the execrable
blasphemies and infinite sacriledges that will be committed in the wars? What
power? what authority? what light may we attend of Justice when she is
snared, mastered, become prisoner, and ouerruled by the weapons of the most
vicious and corrupt persons of this Realm? What honor? what degree? what
respect may the Nobility hope for, being in perpetual hazard to loose life,
children, wealth, peace, and free commandment over their vassals and subjects?
What ease, what profit, or what increase may the ouertoyled laborer, the
venterous Merchant, the quiet Burgess, or any other whosoever in this poor
Realm, buyld upon? Every one must provide for famine, pestilence, fire, blood,
and spoil: to be brief, for all the scourges that spring of the disorder,
barbarousnesse, ambition, and insatiable desire of those, who, if they may
find assistance among the French, will never lay down weapons, but either by
an establishment of a perfect tyranny proceeding out of their affections, more
grievous and inspportable to those that shall remain then war it self, or
else by the self ruin and utter extirpation of their wretched followers,
together with most of the good men that shall have withstoode them. Let us not,
O Frenchmen, persuade our selves that this mischief will be a matter of three
or four months only. For if it be Religion, for the which they seem to bring
you into the field, your selves do know that our Kings have not spared
life, state, means, or friends for the remedying thereof within these five
and twenty years: which notwithstanding, what effect have so many murders,
such plenty of battles, and such store of blood spilt, wrought? Ween you
that these who so long have found means to defend themselves cannot withstand
you, but must so easily yield unto you? See you not the stranger that look
upon you, and do prepare to hasten our destruction, if we be so foolish as
to beat our selves? The authors of this co^spiracie, being now alone, are no
stronger then when they fought so sharply under the authority of King Charles
the 9. and the King now reigning, and were vpholden by the same means that now
they assure them selves of out of Spain, Italy, and other places. You know
they were chief of their Majesty's Counsel, Leaders of their Armies, or
rather, authors of all passed mischiefs: enterteyning the King in that will
and opinion wherein he then was, namely, that weapons were ye instruments to
appease Gods wrath, and to reunite us in one only Religion, until his
Majesty upon better advice confessed the fruits and effects of the contrary,
and by the examples of his neighbors did very wisely consider, that the
disease of Religion is so rooted in man's mind, that he were far better to
tolerate it, (since we all agree in one belief and Creed of the Apostles,)
then to hazard his whole Estate, by weening to heal up a wound, which God
willing, may by daily conversation be suppled: for undoubtedly some diseases
are of such a nature, that it is more expedient for the Patient to bear the
grief thereof, then for his cure to use over dangerous and doubtful
remedies, whose trial is more sharp and intolerable the^ the disease it
self. With which counsel, truly royal, fatherly, and worthy a Christian
and peaceable Prince, these zelators of their own wealth, rather then of
Christianity being offended, do now evidently show their bad minds, and do
buyld their prete^ces upon the diversity of Religions, upon the oppressions of
the people, upon the deformations of Justice, and upon the distribution of
Dignities, notwithstanding all men know, that in respect of the last they are
better provided, and have greater cause to praise the parting, then to
complain of that honor that the King has done them. As for the rest,
themselves are the only cause of all mischief, engendered by civil wars,
which ever since the resolution upon their forecast they have nourished in this
Estate: because it is certain that peace is the mother of piety,
establishment of Justice, and the true spring of man's ease. Neither can we
deny the good, holy, and commendable affection wherewith our most Christian and
peaceable Prince set hand to the work, so long as it pleased God to let us
enjoy peace: whether in the example that he set us in his Religion, desire that
he showed in reformation of Justice, or in the ease that, so much as he might,
he procured to his good subjects. What is there more to do then, fellow
countrymen, but again to sheath up our weapons, and devoutly to pray to God to
grant us peace, and by means thereof to reunite us in the Faith and Religion
of the Catholic Church? so to serve him faithfully, and with our good King to
set to our shoulders to help to support the burden of commanding in this
Realm, laid upon him in heaven, yielding our selves pliant, simple, and
obedient to his commandments, to the end altogether we may serve and praise
the divine Majesty holily, and peaceably, every one according to his duty:
the Prince in peaceable and wise government of us, as hitherto through the
grace of che holy Ghost, he has done: our selves in loving, reuerencing,
obeying, and faithfully serving his Majesty, as we are bound under pain of
eternal damnation. For, so long as we are in this world, if we do otherwise,
we shall resemble the Mariners that in the Ship quarrelling with their Pilot,
oppressed with the tempest, and environed with the enemy, do in the end
find themselves forced to sail away with some mercenary strangers, who will
no longer have any care of their safety then the commodity and sweetness of
their wages shall continue. Surch surely will be the life that we shall lead,
in case we become so detestable as to disunite our selves from our King, and
the sacred blood of his Crown: abroad standing in fear of the enemy, at
home, not only of our fellow Citizens, but also of our domestical servant,
our allies, our cossens, our brethren, our parents, our wives, and our
children, whereby we shall have war with the stranger, sedition in the City,
and mistrust in the householde, always in in fear, miserable, needy, and still
past hope of better: for the good will habandon us as unworthy their succor,
and the bad will devour us. What bless then, what pleasure, what contentation
may we hope for so long as upon earth we lead this life? and be led by
those yt belly the form, countenance, gesture, speech, and behavior of the man
that they bear, no less the^ Satires, Apes, or Bears? as also we may rightly
term them Wolves and monsters borne in this Commonwealth, for the nourishing
and bringing up of whom I fear we may be called enemies to God and our own
nature, which by companying with these wild beasts we do corrupt. But to
return to our purpose. Concerning the heresy falsely pretended against the
King of Navarre, although the reasons aforesaid be most true, weighty, and
such as can have no contrary answer vailable, yet as a Catholic, I do most
humbly beseech the said King of Navarre, diligently to thinck upon his
affairs, yea, although in his mind he could conceive no other consideration
then the preservation and peace of so much people (in that he by whom the
offense comes is accursed of God) whether he shall not more grievously offend
God and his own conscience, in being a cloak and pretense of so many miseries
to his Country and the French nation, for whose defense he is borne, then with
his fathers and common custom of old received, in erring, if there be any
error therein. Let him also judge whether he be not bound to answer before
God, for the lives of so many persons, who through his occasion shall perish,
also for the blasphemies that consequently will be committed. Let him advise
himself whether he were not better to do as the good and gentle Householder,
who sometimes omitteth the severity of his age to play with his children, and
with clemency gives them space to measure the force of his amity excusing
their insolent youth and bold rashness, joining and going close with them:
after the example of the wise and well advised Athenian, when his people were
most obstinatly resolved to oppose the^ selves directly against his meaning.
For my part (Sir) I beseech your Majesty to give me leave to tell you that
all good Frenchmen, true Catholics, and faithful subjects to you and this
Crown, do even in human reason greatly bewail the state of our poor
France, in seeing that your enemies are so well at ease, or do (peradventure)
nourish about your Majesty some such persons as keep their vizarde from be
plucked off. For in truth (Sir) it lies in you through the grace of the holy
Ghost, to yield more fruit to the Church of GOD, (for the advancement whereof
you have hitherto thought to fight,) and more over to procure your self to be
esteemed more profitable, commodious, and honorable to all, by planting peace
in time in this Realm, and giving an example to the rest of Christiandom, with
assurance to the King that reigns over you and his subjects who look upon
you by your good life, and gentle common conversation, which in all other
actions your adversaries them selves do seem to confess, then by any other
worldly means that you ca^ choose. Besides, that it is an undoubted and
political maxim, mislike it who will, that it is not for Kings, who have
authority and government over so many several brains, which GOD may reserve
unto you, if it so please him, or he be so determined in his private counsel,
notwithstanding all the Deuilles do rage, to set other where then in their
Closets, upon any of these extremities: because it would be impossible to
toyne and compose these together, especially in the world wherein you are borne,
wherein also your self do well know, and have by domestical examples
learned, that it behooves you and all other the Princes in this world, to bow
to make your selves to be obeyed, and to preserve your estates by means more
then artificial, and full of human wisdom, in respect of the frowarnesse,
peevishness, and bad nature of subjects. But more perticulerly in this case,
wherein our common enemies have for these 25. years accustomed the French
nation to the use of weapons, and the veryest fools, (of whom there are over
many,) to contemn the Majesty of their King, law, and Justice, and to the
contrary have suborned, flattered, and stolen away the most of their hearts,
under a false pretense and zeal of Religion, which your servants do wish you
to win again, as it were an easy matter to do, being desirous of your
quiet, honor, and to the advancement of Gods glory, the peace of this Realm,
and the increase of the Crown of France, fearing least all Christiandome
should swarm to the tearing of it in an hundred pieces, or the mutinous
Rebels that are within the Realm should rent and dismember this goodly
Kidney of Europe, which without doubt is the goodliest and most perfect
Kingdom upon earth. At the least, sir, since these great Dukes of fained
Catholichisine, who in a iolitie have declared themselves your adversaries, do
bear for their devise the destruction and blood of the innocent Frenchmen,
which by their often murders they have shed, and are not yet satisfied, as
their Bugbearlike terrors that they propound unto us, do show, I do most
humbly desire you to the contrary to be the Pelican, and to bear the same
devise that the Great Alphonsus the 10. of that name King of Spain, from whom
your predecessors the Kings of Navarre are descended, was wont, viz. Pro lege,
and grege, setting forth in your actions, as many desires of peace, clemency,
fatth, honesty, and Christian piette, as they do of violence, bitterness,
and perfidie, being banded against the Justice of God.

The end of the second Book.
THE CONTENTS OF THE THIRD part of this Book.
1. The gravity of Treason.

For what causes a Prince of the blood may be declared incapable of the Crown.

Abuse of the crime of treason.

The malice and supposition of the leagued, against those of the pretended
reformed religion.

2. A true exposition of the crime of treason. The King never suspected the K.
of Navarre of treason. An infallible argument of the King of Nauarres piety.

3. The house of Navarre disce^ded of the house of France. The Original of the
K. of Nauarres grandfathers by both father and mother.

4. The Capetz and Carliens come of the same stock as Clouis and the
Merouingiens.

5. The Capetz and Carliens are of one famely. The original process and
genealogy of the Capets.

THE THIRD PART OF the Cath. Apology.
THE third objection that the seditious do in their Libells disperse against
the K. of Navarre, imports him to be a rebel, a traitor, and a protector of
Conspirators against the King, and therefore an ennemy to the state and common
wealth, wherein he is for those causes unworthy to command.

1 This objection is not so small, but that being well considered as it ought,
the gravity of the offense will surpass the discourse of our senses and
understandings. For, for that only offense came death into the world, Genesis 2.
22. 23.
and Adam was banished Paradise. Also by human policy offenders therein,
being thereof conu^et and adjudged, are unworthy all successions, especially in
Empires, Kingdoms, or other dominions, Ioh. de Teri. in tract. ^ tra rebel. ^.
Reg. 1. tract. conclus. 19.
although the same should fall to them by the right of natural succession as
do ours. For in this case, if the nearest of the blood Royal should be found
unthankful and guilty, not only against the King his Lord, but also against
the Estate, commonwealth and Majesty of the Crown, he and his posterity may
be attaint, convict and adjudged for ever unworthy the succession that nature
and blood had gotten him. So was it judged by a Court of Peers of France in the
year 1457. against John the second, Duke of Alencon, in the presence of King
Charles the seventh in the town of Vendosme, notwithstanding the said
Sentence was afterward abolished, and the judgment made void by Letters of
restitution from King Jews the eleue^th, entered, published and registered in
the Court of Parliament, the Chambers assembled by the consent of the Kings
Attorney general. Wherefore I can not with silence over skip such an
accusation against the person of the said Lord King of Navarre, considering
also the enormitie of such a scander against the said Prince, who never had
his own life so dear or in such recommendation as the service, honor and
wealth of the Majesty of our Kings and this Crown, as being the man whom it
nearest concerns, and who has greatest interest of all worldly parsons in
the preservation of this Estate, as having the honor to look so near thereto.
But surely by this detestable and sclanderous discourse, I see the misery and
calamity of our France, wherein within these 25. years, during the minority
of our kings, the mutinous seeds of quarrels have made, and at their pleasures
forged Articles, heads of Rebellion, and crimes of Treason as they have thought
good, yt therein, as Tacitus said of ye Empire of Tiberius, might be the
perfection of all accusations, imitating the continual evil doings of Princes
Counsailers under the pretense of their Majesty's service. Tacir. li. 1. Sue.
in Tiber. cap. 53.
For it is found, yt in the time of the said Tiberius, this crime was
comprehended under friuilous occasions, as, if any man had in selling of his
land sold therewith the Image of Augustus, or if he had erected his own
Picture higher then the Emperors, either had employed the same in any
Domestical usage. Tacit. li. 3. Suet. in Nerone.
Nero put to death Cassius, one of the most excellent men of his time under
such a pretense, and because he bare the Picture of Cassius, one of the
murderers of Caesar in his Arms: Caracalla, so far extended this crime, that
eue^ those were accused who had made their Urine in any place where the picture
of the Prince was erected: and this license extended so far, that it was
offense to the Majesty, to beat a slave, or change aparell before the
picture of the Emperor, either to carry the same into any shameless or foul
place, veluti si latrinae, aut lupanari intulisset. To be brief, in those days
the crime of treazon was defined in the closet, and secret will of the
Monarke, or his flatterers, as Iuuenall testifies.

Nil horu^, Iuuenal. Sat. 10.
verbosa, and grandis epistola venit
A Capreis: been habet, nil plus interrogo.
The like have been done in our miserable Realm, when the conspired enemies of
the Princes of the blood Royal, did govern the affairs of Estate under
Frances the second, and had afterward got hold of the person of King Charles
the nineth, whom they nourished in wonderful and dangerous mistrust of his
subjects: whereof are proceeded so many murders, massacres, troubles, and
civil wars, which we have seen, and too much felt, to the ruin of the
subjects of this poor France, by reason their Majesty's have by these
firebrands been misenformed, that the King of Nauarres partakers conspired
against their Estate, and refused to yield them that obedience, which by Gods
commandment they ought: and in respect thereof under this pretense, did
oftentimes cause them to be proclaimed Rebels, Traitors, enemies to the
Commonwealth. Moreover, to make this mischief incurable, because the
innocence of this people, afflicted through the wrath and indignation of their
Kings, was sufficiently known to their fellow cou^trymen, and fellow
Citizens, these spirits of Satan have sought to enta^gle the^ in partialities,
and ba^di^g one against an other, thereby to urge the^ into irreco^siliable
hatred and perpetual mistrust, whereof they might never conceive cause of
reunion, through such excess and injuries as the one should do to the other
during the civil wars: also that while the same continued, themselves might
have opportunity to practice the hearts of those whom they should find most
meet to receive the object of their traiterous and disloyal ambition:
together that by this means they should diminish the love of the people to
their King, persuading the most passionate that the fault was in him why
France had no greater peace, under which pretense they have spued forth and by
their creatures dispersed abroad an infinite number of diffamatorie Lybelles,
and more then sclaunderous discourses, to the prejudice of the honor and
reputation of our Prince, whom nevertheless they went about to persuade, that
those of the pretended reformed Religion were the authors of these deceipts.
But the end of their intents do now sufficiently lay open the truth, when
under pretense of withstanding the King of Navarre, and hindering him from so
much as the very shadow of any vain hope of succession, they dare presently
take arms against our Kings Majesty, and shake his Estate, so to make
themselves Lords under the couerture of a sack dipped in a few Imaginary
rights, as perniciously as lightly invented. For good men will ever confess
that it is not propter Iesum that now they run to arms, but rather for the
satisfying of their insatiable ambition, whereof, how bad soever the intent be,
yet will the effects be more detestable, except God take pity upon us, and
the people with the Kings good servants do open their eyes to see clearly into
this matter, and to acknowledge it to be the catastrophe or last act of that
Tragedy, which these wicked people have long played in this Realm, under the
shadow of zeal to Catholic Religion, with the cloak whereof they go about to
shroude the most foolish, in an irreconciliable divorce from the King their
sovereign Lord, and the natural French Princes, and perticulerly against the
said Lord King of Navarre, the nearest in blood to his Majesty, whose
destruction lies them more upon then all the rest.

2 In his respect I will only say, that the crime of Treazon whereof falsely
they accuse him, ought not to be judged by the sole occasion says Modestin,
for the reverence of the Princes Majesty, but for the truth. Pliny writing
in commendation of Traian, says: The crime of treazon was wont to be
singular, and almost peculier to him that could not be charged of any other
matter: wherefore Traian abolished the same, as one that contented himself with
the force of other accusations, this Prince holding opinion, that sueh Monarkes
as were so ieloux of their Majesty, had none at all. And for the same cause
was this kind of accusation likewise abolished in the time of Claudius,
Adrian, Pertinax, Alexander, Seuerus, and other good Princes, who deemed other
public accusations to be sufficient for punishment of evil livers, how far
soeur they should forget themselves. Howesoeuer the case stands, concerning
the King of Navarre, he may yet more boldly speak in the presence and face of
his enemies, then might Cruentius Cordus, being under Tyberius, accused for
saying that Cassius was the last Roman, when he showed the Senate that they
would punish him for his words, because his deeds were irreprehensible: For
this Prince, thanks be to God, never offended his King in word, nor deed,
neither can his sclaunderers either generally or perticulerly tax him of any
action nere to rebellion or disobedience: yea, the whole pretense that these
trouble some persons do take of his Religion, is suppressed and beaten down by
their own ordinary and public confession, by the Princes Edicts and
declarations, and by infinite other writings, appro^ued in all the Courts of
Parliament of this Realm. And in deed the whole rebellion and fellonie
wherewith they may charge him, is, that he would not suffer the knife to cut his
throat, but did quietly withdraw himself out of the prease, when he see that
his enemies would force him to bear infinite injuries unworthy his greatness.
Otherwise, who can say that ever he refused the duty, faith, obedience, and
subjection which he is bound to yield to the King his sovereign Lord? much
less then that he has co^spired against his person? that he has sought to
make himself King, or enterprized any thing prejudicial to the advancement
and peace of the French Commonwealth? Showed he ever any token of desire to
be named his Majesty's heir or successor? Has he changed his garment, or
augmented his Estate, for his approach to the King, through the evil hap and
misfortune of this Realm grown upon the loss of the late Mounsier, the Kings
only brother? Has he called together his friends, or craved the counsel of
Atturneyes, to learn whether himself be now the nearest of the blood Royal?
Who can show that ever he used any confederacies which justly he might have
made, as King of Navarre, and sovereign Lord of Bearne, or did ever employ any
other then to the service of the King, and wealth of this Crown? who will be
so malicious, unnatural, and senseless, as to impute to fellonie, ye
withdrawing, and cherishing of his fellow Citizens, the professors of the same
Religion wherein he was borne, bred, and brought up even from his cradle, when
he found them in like misfortune as himself, and oppressed with the force of
their adversaries, who under the cloak of the Kings authority have often
endeavored to root them out, either the withstanding of the stripes, and
fortefying of himself for the safegarde of his life? Since so soon as it has
pleased his Majesty to stretch forth his arm to them, and to offer them such
conditions of peace as himself liked of, with liberty of conscience, he has
not only together with them unarmed himself, and yielded his Houldes into the
hands and power of his Majesty, and fallen down at his feet, but which is
more, have returned their whole power together against those that have come to
his and their succor, (witness the siege of Newhauen) and have disunited
themselves from all confederaties and Leagues, which in respect thereof they
were entered into with strangers, and all this to the end to submit them
selves to the Kings good will, who has liked thereof, and so confessed in all
his Edictes of Pacification, with other the particular good deeds and favors,
which the said King of Navarre confesses to have received of the hand and
good will of his Majesty, who has freely and liberally for the wealth of his
Estate, permitted to those of the said Religion, the free exercize thereof,
notwithstanding the co^spired enemies to this Crown, and to the Princes of the
blood, have often gone about to bring into suspicion the actions, not only of
the said Lord King of Navarre, but also of all other the Princes of Bourbon,
who only of the Royal famelie do remain. Besides, I assure my self if any
man would endeavor (as it were necessary and meet) by effectual reazo^s
debated in a lawful assembly of Gods Church, to inform the said Lord King of
Navarre, that hitherto he has been deceived: and that his bringing up in his
Religion has been very bad, he is not obstinate, but easily may be reduced
and brought to submit himself to sentence given by force of Gods word. In the
mean time, we cannot blame him who^ his mother has noursed and brought up in
a certain Religion, publicly permitted by his Majesty's Edicts and
ordenances, for standing firm in the same, and desiring to continue in that
which he believes to belong to his salvation. O Frenchmen, is it meet the
Kings Edicts should stand the wicked in stead of a bayt, to root out, and with
the sword or guile more then barbarous to destroy, the hearts and lives of the
Princes, who^ God has granted to be borne over us? Will we grant that to
force that belongs to reason? In my opinion, we deceive our selves, if we
ween by weapons to wrest any thing from Mars: especially in whatsoever
concerns Religion, which among honest and the best men goes nearer, and is
of greater efficacy then all other human actions. So as to the contrary, I
do steadfastly believe that we have the more cause to hope well of the
government of the said Lord King of Navarre, if it should happen: For since his
enemies are forced to confess that of himself he is a Prince wise, well
taught, discreet, and reasonable, also that our selves see him assured and by
weapons in expugnable, in that which from his infancy he has been persuaded
to be good for him, in respect of yt fear that he has of God, how great a
piece of the work soever offers it self to his view, or whatsoever human
hazard there be any appearance that he should fear in the conservation of a
mighty earthly Kingdom, whereof as yet he is presumptiue heir, it is an
invincible argument for us to know, that he loves and fears God above all
things. Let us therefore give him a taste of our reasons, since he is so very
capable, to the end we may at his hand win that we desire, and which we
ought and may spedely hope for, without perticulerly hating his person: without
offending him, without provoking him, and without encurring the wrath of God,
by procuring the shedding of the innocent blood of so many thousands of our
brethren, and together with them the destroying of our poor Country. As yet
in troth it is too great an abuse to term the said Lord King of Navarre a
Rebel, or Traitor to the Kings Majesty, for keeping himself from being
slain, and for opposing to his enemies the walls of those, who being shadowed
in their own houses, did only withal instance, and most humble petition
require the King to permit them to live in peace of conscience under his
obedience, against the which they did n^uer strive, neither would ever had
recourse unto, or craved the said Lord King of Nauarres protection, whom they
know never to have so much loved any thing as to live his Majesty's most humble
and most obedient subject, whereof we all in our consciences are eye
witnesses, neither need we any greater proof for the justification of him who
neither does, neither ever did desire of the King his Lord, any other thing
then to live in his good favor, and to be of him accoumpted a most humble,
and most obedient subject and kinsman.

3 For this cause, in this action let al good Frenchmen consider, that the said
Lord King of Navarre is, as they, the Kings good subject, a Christian, one
that fears God, and a lover of his Country, so as for his sake we need not
take arms or beat our brains, as do some that be persuaded by the wicked
counsel of these firebrandes: he is the son of the famely: he is not a
Spaniard that comes to your walls, and to ye doors of your houses: he is a
true Frenchman, one that desires peace, and one that would obey the King his
Lord, in whatsoever lies in him: he is a lover of the laws of the Realm, a
sworn enemy to the sedicious, an oppressor of the wicked, and a defender of
the Commonwealth. Besides, he has above all other the French nation the honor
to be the first Prince of the blood royal, and heir apparent to the Crown,
in case God should call our King without leaving any issue male of his body. Let
every one therefore consider, that al his enemies objections are but mere
cauillations: Let the French nation judge whether they have not more cause, or
are not greatlier bound to love and acknowledge the King of Navarre, then and
other next to the Maiestrie of our sovereign Lord the King, seeing we have
chosen for our tutors, governors, and lawful administrators, the most noble
and courageous famelie of the Capets, to be our Kings of France, from whence
is descended in right masculine ligne on the fathers side, the said Lord King
of Navarre, as is aforesaid, also that every other way he has thence taken
his original: for his Grandmother on the fathers side was Lady Frances of
Alencon, daughter to Rene Duke of Alencon, and sister to Charles last deceased,
all descended in right ligne of ye males of Charles of Valois, who first took
the name and title of Alen^o^, and was brother to Philip of Valois King of
France, both sons to Charles of Valois, brother to King Philip the Fair,
which two were sons to Philip ye Bold eldest son to S. Jews, and his
successor in the Realm. Again, the said King of Nauarres Grandmother by the
mother was Lady Margaret of France, sister to King Frances the first. As for
the Kings of Navarre, whom by his mother Jane of Albret, daughter and heir to
Henry of Albret King of Navarre, whom he has succeeded, they also are
descended from father to the son of the house of France, by the interposition
of daughters capable of succession in the Realm of Navarre: for Henry Earl of
Champagne and Brye, by his mother Blanch, King of N^uarr^, married a daughter of
Robert Earl of Arthois, son to King Jews the 8. of France and brother to S.
Jews: of which marriage was borne Jane heir of (...) and wife of Phillip the
Fair King of France: of them two came Jews Hutin, successor in the Realms of
France and Navarre: when he dyed, he left a daughter Jane, who after her Uncles
Phil. the Long, and Charles yt Fair, was Queen of Navarre: she married Phil.
of Eureux, son to Jews of Eureux, Son to Phillip the bold King of France,
and brother to Phillip the fair: Of their marriage issued among other children
Charles King of Navarre, who married the daughter of King John of France, and of
them was borne a Son of the same name, for whose sake King Charles the sixth
erected the land of Nemours into a Duchy. At his decease he left two
Daughters, of which Blanch the elder succeeded in the said Realm, and of her
and John of Castile her houseband issued Eleoner, wife to Gaston of Foix, who
seized upon the Succession of the realm of Navarre and other great goods. Of
that marriage came Gaston of Foix that married Magdalein of France sister to King
Jews the eleventh, who had Frances Phoebus king of Navarre, after his
grandmother Eleoner, and Catherin, who succeeded her brother Phoebus: she
married with John of Albret, father to Henry of Albret, and grandfather to
Queen Jane late deceased at Paris, mother to the said King of Navarre now
reigning. So as it adpeareth, that he is on every side true french, and issued
of the blood royal of France. Let us not therefore any longer give ear to
these sclauuders: but only have recourse to God by hearty prayer, that if the
said Lord King of Navarre, or any other of our Princes have in him any thing,
as he is a man frail and full of humanity, it may please him to touch his
heart: Let us seek peace, fly debate, above all serve our God, honor our
King whom he has established over us, and after him love and regard the
Princes of his blood: Let us call to mind the mishap and miseries hapened in
our time through eiuil dissentions, and let us set before our eyes the
afflictions and oppressio^s which we are upon the point to bear if we be so
wicked, perjured and disloyal, as to prefer strangers and enemies to our
Crown before our natural Princes, to whom we have solemnly sworn our faith
before God, and who for these 600, years have so graciously governed us, which
is a double prescription to that which Iephta Judge of Israel objected to the
Ammonites, who pretended by Arms after 300. years to recover the Land which
the Israelites had conquered from them. Quare tanto tempore nihil super hac
repetitione tentastis? which we may reproach to those that falsely do say, that
our Kings have usurped any thing of those from whom they pretend to be issued,
and whereof they ween to make a great show, if we had no stronger defenses
wherewith to uphold the possession of our Kings.

4 For contrariwise, our King and Princes of Bourbon who are all of one blood,
descended of the Capets, are the same who certainly are issued of the agnation
and famely of the same Charlemagne, from whence these Iuglers would fasty
pretend the original of ye Lorrains: even as he also was of the race of the
Merouingians. Pope Innocent the third writing to the Nobles and Prelates of
France, about the year 1200. eloquently testifies the truth of this story,
speaking of Phillip Augustus petty neuewe to Hugh Capet, and Grandfather to S.
Jews, who^ he evidently reports to be come of ye said Charlemaign, so as
otherwise we must argue this ye Popes decretall Epistle of falsehood. Moreover,
Regino the Historiographer, who lived almost in the same time, Ado of Vienne,
Ottho of Frisingen, Martin of Pole, Sigisbert, Aimoinus, and others, do name
Robert great Grandfather to Hugh Capet, Ottho his great Uncle by the father,
and Robert his Grandfather, Princes and Dukes come of the noble ligne of
France, of the which likewise, even of the Kings of France, Odo before he was
elected King, did bear the arms and blason which were Flowerdeluces sowed
upon an azure field without number: which also were not altered before the time
of Charles the sixth, who reduced them to three. And certain it is, that Odo
durst not have enterprized to bear the arms of France if he had not been a
Prince of the Royal famelie: The proof whereof is clear of doubt, in that
we do moreover know ye the said Odo was by the Estates of France, nominated
for tutor and governor to Charles the Simple in his minority: which in this
Realm is never granted to any but those to whom the succession may likewise
fall: as was adjudged after the decease of Charles the Fair in the year 1327.
in favor of Phillip of Valois, ordained tutor to the womb of the Queen then
great and the child to come: Again, after the decease of Charles the 5. and
Jews the 11. Also in our age the Estates offered the same office to the late
King of Navarre, father to the King now reigning, in respect of the minority
of Charles the 9. Finally, we read that by a common consent, the Frenchmen
declared the said Odo King of France, and after him his brother Robert: and
after them Raoule come of a brother to Hugh Capet, who was the fourth of his
famelie that bare the title and name Royal, but the first peaceable possessor
of the Realm: so that since every man sees by our ancient Histories, with
what virtue and marvelous assurance our Predecessors did evermore resist the
force of strangers that sought to plant their name in the Royal famelie, we
may not, neither can think them to have been so fainthearted, foolish, and
unconstant, as of their own motion and free will to have chosen the Capets, if
they had not been of the house and famelie of their Kings, mere for succession
in the Realm: To whom, for the proof and verification of the contrary, we do
find they had recourse for the conservation of this law, so relligiously
evermore observed among them, and upon the which they have still accounted the
liberty and dignity of this Realm wholly to depend. Besides, I would gladly
desire these makebates of our time to show me any one History that makes
mention of any, that ever made difficulty or objected to the Capets, that they
were no Princes of the blood of the Kings their predecessors, and meet to
succeed in the Crown.

5 But to take away all ambiguitie, and to verify the distent of our Kings and
the Princes of Bourbon, to be of the famelie not only of Charlemaigne, but
also of Clouis, and other the Merouingians of the first ligne, whereof also was
the said Charlemaigne, (as Matthew Zampin a most learned personage, has to y^
purpose discoursed, who has not used falsified Chartres and Documents, as has
De Roziers Archdeacon of Thoule, in his genealogies of Lorrain, against whom
Nicholas Venier the true Treasorer of the Stories of France, has argued
falshoode in his treatize of the original of Frenchmen,) we must first
understand that Dagobert King or Duke of the Francons in the East France about
the year of Christ 306. had two sons Clodomer and Genebaui^t, of which two
brethren disce^ded in direct ligne Clouis the first Christian King of France,
and S. Arnoul Marquize of the holy Empire, at Antwerpe, afterward Bishop of
Metz. This appears in the Chronickle of Chronickles, in the Illustrations of
the East and West France, in Robert Cenalis, Geofrey of Viterbe, and many other
good Authors. Now S. Arnoule, before he took the holy orders of Priesthood had
been Mayre of King Clotaire the seco^ds li. 5. ca. 5. lib. 4. ca. 17. li. 1. 2.
part. hist. ann. 540
Palace about the year 546. who made him tutor of his son Dagobert the
first of that name, as says Otto Frisingen. Aimoinus, Regano, Antoninus, and
Vincent the Historiall, who writes that this Arnouldes Duchy lay near to
Flaunders toward Lorrain, and Sigisbert witnesses that he married Doda, Vgo
Geblac. lib. 6. cap. 7. ann 649
who after became a Nun at Treuers, of which marriage issued three Children,
Ansegisus, Walchisus, and Clodulph. The eldest otherwise called Anchises, was
Mayre of the Palace to Clouis the second, and married Begga daughter to Pepin
the elder and sister to Grimoald, as says Sigisbert and Paul Emilius, of whom
came Pepin father to Charles Martel, who of the fister of Childebrand begat
Giles Bishop of Roan, Carloman a Muncke, and Pepin father to Charlemaigne.
Walchisus S. Arnouldes second son had a son called Wandragisillus, ann 693
both, as says Sigisbert, Canonized, neither was their posterity of any long
continuance. Clodulph the third, otherwise called Elodulphe, was (as says
Sigisbert and Tritehemius) after his father Bishop of Metz: lib. 1 in comp.
but he had before married Mary daughter to King Ann. 640.
Clotaire the 2. after some, but as others say, Almabert daughter to Carloman
Duke of Brabant, of whom he begat a son named Martin, Sigisb, 687. supple^.
Aim. lib. 4. ca. 45. lib. 1 lib. 10. decad. 1. lib. 11. ca. 109. lib. 2.
illust. Neust. lib. 3.
who was Mayre of the Palace of Thierry King of Austrasy with Pepin son of
Ansegisus: and Paul Emilie calls this Martin Cossen to Pepin the Fat: and
Blondus names him his brother. This Martin left a son called Childebrand,
and a daughter wife to Charles Martell, says Paul Emile: whereupon other
writers do term this Childebrand brother to Charles Martell, and Uncle to
his Children, in respect of the alliance that was between them. Nicholas Giles
calls Childebra^d, Uncle to Charles Martell, Chron. volum. 1. lib. 2. Wass.
lib. 2
Richard of Wassembourg names him Lambert, he left a son called Theodorie,
or Theodowald, who flourished under Charlemaigne, and being in his youth in the
battle of Ronceuaulx, was made governor of Saxony, Paul. Ac mil. li. 2
about the year 780. and thereof was termed the Saxon: he also led part of
Charles Army against the Huns, about the year 791. Suppl. Aim. li. 4. cad. 82
Vrsperg ann. 792
Paul Emile, and others do call him Charles Cossen, which cannot be but by
the said Childebrand. In an other place, the said Paul says, that this
Theodorick had the precede^ce because he was a Prince of the blood, before
Geilo Constable of France. Thierry married ye daughter of Witichindus a Prince
of Saxony, who a little before was Baptized, and this marriage was made to ye
end by the alliance of the blood Royal, the Saxon might be kept in duty and
amity with the Estate of France, after the example of Charles the Bold,
toward Godfrey Duke of the Normans, whom he caused to marry Giles daughter to
his neuew King Lothair, and as Charles the Simple deit with Rollo the Norman.
Gaguin, l. b. 5.
Of this marriage of Thierry with the daughter of Witichindus, descended
Robert: In respect whereof the Abbot of Vspergue, speaking of Odo the first
Capet that was crowned King of France, says that his father was called Robert,
Sigisb. ann. 866 Otto li. 6. cap. 3. Reg. lib, 2 ann. 867.
and his Grandfather Witichindus: This man was Marquize of Aquitaine against
the Normans, who slew him, and Ranulph Duke of Guyente, in the time of Charles
the Bold. Whereby we may learn that y^ Princes of this house were termed
Saxons, either in respect of the government of Theodorick in Saxony, either else
because of the alliance entered with Witichindus the Saxon: whereof our
deceivers being ignorant, took occasion to think the Capets originary Saxons
and strangers, Regino lib. 2.
notwithstanding in troth they were very Princes of the blood royal of France,
Earls and Marquizes of Anieow, in which Province the Annals of the Country
do testify that Thierry father to the said Robert, deceased at the age of 80.
years or more, and his said son Robert after him: after whose decease the
County of Anieow was committed to to the custody of one Hugh an Abbot, during
the minority of Odo, Nic. Vign. in Chron. Burgu^d.
Robert, and Thierry, sons to the said Robert, to whom it was rendered after
the decease of Hugh, whom some do make brother to the first Robert. Thierry
one of Roberts children, was Earl of Bourgondie, and had a son called
Richard Duke of Bourgondy, who begat Raoul, who with the help of his Cossen
Hugh the Great, was upon the resignation of Charles the Simple, proclaimed
King of France, and was the third Capet that before Hugh bare the name and
title of King of this Crown: which still fell out by the nomination and common
agreement and consent of the Nobility: which is a most sufficient testimony
to prove that the Capets were undoubtedly Princes of the blood, since the
Frenchmen, so sore enemies to foreign government, had even at once respect to
those me^, and so often had recourse to their arms as to their natural
Princes. Richard likewise begat Gisilbert Duke of Bourgondie, Paul. Aemil. lib.
3 Vgo Ge^blac lib. 6. cap. 19.
who had one only daughter that was wife to Ottho, brother to Hugh Capet, to
whom she brought the Duchy of Bourgondie. Odo second son of Robert, and
Earl of Paris was tutor to Charles the Simple, Gng. lib. 5. Sigisb ann. 890
Otho Fris. lib. 6. cap. 18
and afterward being proclaimed King of France, dyed without issue. Robert
the third son was Constable of France, and admitted King after ye decease of
his brother, whereby he grew into great hatered with Charles the Simple, and
finally dyed about the year 922. leaving issue Hugh the Great, Earl of Paris,
Sigis. Abb. Us. perg. Vgo G^blac.
Duke and Constable of France, as says Paul Emile. This man in revenge of his
fathers death, endeavored (as says the Abbot of Vspergue) to make his Cossen
Raoule Duke of Bourgondie King. He married Hauide daughter to the Emperor
Henry, supplem Aim. lib. 5. cap. 43.
and sister to Ottho the first, of which marriage descended three sons, Hugh
Capet the first peaceable enioyer of the Realm of France of that famelie.
Ottho, who by his wife was Duke of Bourgondie, and Henry who also after his
brother Ottho was Duke of the same land. Thus may you see the progress and
true genealogy of our Kings descended of the said Capet: whereby appears the
falsehood of our sclaunderrs liedgerdemain, who give out that the Capets being
strangers did vsurp the Crown of the house of Charlemaigne, whereof
nevertheless I have heretofore showed you that it is 580. years since that
race was utterly extinct: so far are the Princes of Lorraine from taking
their original thereof: neither need we believe the fable of adoption
invented by du Rozieres, as false as blockheaded, and doltish a Chronegrapher,
and Historigrapher, and a worse Lawyer. l. fidei commissum ff. de cond. and
demo.
For he should have known that his pretended adoption made by some one of the
Carlians of that name, from whom he would bring the descent of the Lorraines,
could not take hold in the Realm of France which is successiue, so long as
any one Prince of the blood lived. l. uec eniml. na^ ira. l. si pater ff. de
adop.
Besides, that at all assaies it had been requisite, even in default of heirs
of the Crown, that this adoption with the notice of the cause had been made by
the general Estates of the Realm, so to have made the adopted capable of the
succession: as I could at large show him, if there needed any confutatio^ of
those fables, which they would suppose unto us in the underpropping of the
pretenses of strangers, our enemies, with a rotten post: but I will content
my self with the representation of the genealogy of the Capets aforesaid,
whereby you see how they abuse us. Wherefore let us there leave the^, and among
our natural Princes let us put of all passion, and judge what is right, also
what preeminence the one may have over the other, both by reason and civil
discourse. If it were to any purpose to lay open to the French, the rules of
establishment of a Tyrant stranger, an usurper of an Estate, there is no man
(how greatly soever affected to the fellonie which good men do find to be
now conspired against the honor of the King, and the Princes of the blood Royal
by these perturbers of the peace of this Crown,) but would abhor even to
hear the same spoken of. To conclude, therefore I will now content my self
with warning every one, to mark and consider the means, which such always as
have gotten the upper hand of a Lordship, whereto they had no other right but
ability have houlden: and then I hope they will think that the government
of a natural Prince is gracious, loving, and favorable, in respect of ye
mistrustfull, suspicious, and tyrannous stranger, unto whom not only the
deeds and words, but also the gesture, behavior, yea, the goods and wealth
of his Citizens are suspected, because he fears his own shadow. Remember
the ancient Fable of the Pigeons, who when they had elected the Ringdoue to
rule them, were soon weary of her courteous and gentle government, which they
termed, soft and delicate, and in her room chose the Kite, who in liew of well
entreating of the^, did eat, beat, and daily tear some one among them in
sunder with her beak and wings: whereat these miserable fools being offended,
could have been content to have returned under the yoke of their first
election, but the Kites tyranny could never brook it, whose successors do yet
to this day practice their roine upon them. Once it fell out that the Frenchmen
through wicked counsel, in liew and place of their natural Prince whom they
bare somewhat heavy, were suborned to elect one Giles a Roman, of whom they
were soon weary, after they had casted what it was to live under one whose
humor and birth did not agree with his subjects: and it fell our well for them
that their King was of power sufficient to resume them again into his
protection.

The end of the third part.
THE CONTENTS OF THE FOVRTH part of this Book.
1 The authorities of Doctors for the preferment of the Neuewe before the
Uncle.

2 Examples of the preferment of the Neuewe before the Uncle.

3 Reasons in law for the Neuew against the Uncle. The Neuewe succeeds in the
eldership of his father in proper person as being substituted to his late
father.

4 The right of eldership is transmissible and perfect, wanting but execution.

5 The right of eldership is legal, or custumary.

6 The Lord Cardinal of Bourbons acknowledgeme^t in the favor of his neuew
the K. of Nauarres marriage.

7 Answer to the examples of the Uncle alleged against the neuewe.

8 Answer to the Uncles reasons against the neuewe. Substitutions and
continuatio^ from the father to the son in collateral ligne by Justinian.

9 Successiou once roored in a ligne, never departs the same until it be
finished or worn out.

10 The order of Tutorship, and the succession of free borne, and Libertines is
unlike.

11 The Kings youth never debarreth the^ from the Crown. The opening of the
saying, that personal right is not transmissible.

12 Successions made by civil law and custom, confessing the right of
eldership, are far unlike.

THE FOVRTH PART OF the Cath. Apology.
IN the fourth Objection the King of Nauarres adversaries do oppose against
him the Lord Cardinal of Bourbon, his Uncle, as nearer by one degree, and now
by the decease of the late Anthony of Bourbon, Father to the said Lord King
of Navarre, the eldest of the house of Bourbon.

1 This question is one of the most tossed of all others, Lib. 1. cap. 26.
and can not be decided by the arrestes of the Salicke Law that we have in
these words. De terra vero Salica in mulierem nulla portio haereditatis
transit, sed hoc virilis sexus acquirit, hoc est, filij in ipsa haereditate
succedunt, sed vbi inter nepotes, and pronepotes post longum tempus de Allode
terrae contentio suscitatur, non per stirpes, sed per capita diuidantur. But
the decision hereof we must seek in the Commentaries of our Doctors, which
Accurtius, Odofrede, Pope Innocent the fourth, Durand, Ric. de Malumbris, John,
Andrew, Alberick de Rosatis, Barth. Balde, Paul de Casiro, Angel. Aret.
Martin. de Land, John Faber, Pet. de Ancar. Barbat, Felin, Ausrerius, Will.
Benedict. Cassanee, Jews Bolognine, Matthew. de Afflictis, Andreas Sicul. Abbas
Panormitanus, Bartholomeus Sosinus, Jason, Alciatus, Tiraquel. Jews, Charond.
Choppinus, and many other have concluded in favor of the Neuewe against the
Uncle, who terms himself eldest by his brothers decease, either indirect or
collateral line in successions indeuided as Realms, Empires, Duchies,
Cou^ties and Marquisates. c. Imperi ale^ ff. prae te. ea de prohib. fend. alie^
Per Frid. coll. x.
Yea, Decius imitating Socinus, does write, that among the Interpreters of
Civil and Canon law, hi qui pondere, numero, and mensura praeualent, have
always consulted and determined against the Uncle: so that by the authority
of so many skillful persons, the said Lord King of Navarre has the better
cause of the Cardinal his Uncle. Secondly, the foreiudgements must be alleged
for the decision of this controversy. Balde ho^ldeth, that evermore it has so
been observed and decided in all contradictorie judgments of France and
England. And Paul makes mention of the Spanish law in this respect solemnly
sworn unto by the states of the same land, and in deed we read goodly
examples both of these and many others.

2 First in France, for the same house of Bourbon in the time of Jews the Fat,
king of France, about the year 1110. Hanno had expulsed his Neuewe Arcembault,
Paul. Ac (...). in Ludou. Crasso.
a young child, son to his elder brother, pretending that the Lordship
perteined to him as being entered into the Law of the eldership, by the decease
of his elder brother: But the French Nobility forced the uncle to give place to
the Neuew, whom they substituted in the room and place of his brother,
reserving to Hanno only some portion of the goods, as to one of the Children
of the same house. An other example we have in the posterity of Henry the
second K. of England, who had three sons, Richard Cordelion, Secondly
Geffrey, who had married Constance, the Heir of Britain, and dyed in his
Fathers time, P^lid. in hist. Ang Paul. Aem. in Philipp. August.
leaving his Wife great of Arthure, afterward Duke of Britain, and John
surnamed without land: Soon after the fathers death dyed Richard also without
issue, whereupon Phil. Augustus King of France, who reigned about the year
1141. adjudged the Duchy of Normandy, with other the Lands that the said
Richard held in France, unto Arthure son to G^ffrey his elder brother: but
afterward the said John made peace with Augustus through the marriage of his
son Jews unto Blanch. Niece to the said John by his Sister, wife to the King
of Castile, together with some Lands that the said John habandoned to the said
Phillip. So that Arthure still prosecuting his right, was slain by his uncle
John, whereupon the King of France took occasion for that felony, to
confiscate all those lands as having always favored and aucthorised the
cause of the said Arthur. The third judgment passed in the time of Charles the
Fair, King of France, about the year 1331. for the Earl of Flaunders: for
Jews of Neuers was by the Peers of the Realm declared Earl of Flaunders,
and preferred before his Uncle, after the decease of Earl Robert, because he
was son to the elder who dyed before his father. True it is, that for entering
upon the said County, and taking upon him the title of Earl, before he had
taken his oath and done homadge to his Majesty, he was arrested at Paris and
imprisoned in the Castle of Louure, from whence he was soon after delivered
again. An other solemn arrest passed in the time of Phil. Idem in Philipp.
Val.
of Valois, about the year 1328. for the Duchy of Britain, by reason of the
decease of Duke John, who dyed without issue, leaving behind him his third
brother Ih. Earl of Montfort, and the daughter of his second brother Guy
Vicountie of Limoges, then wife to Charles Earl of Blois, Renat. Chop. de
Doman.
unto whom by sentence of the Court the said Duchy in the yerre 1341. was
adjudged, because Charles of Blois showed, y^ by the custumes of Britain, the
succession belonged to the eldest, the^ to the second, and lastly to the third:
thereupon inferring that his wife, daughter to the second, did represent the
same person. But where the house of Montfort did afterward enjoy the same
Duchy, that came by virtue of a certain agreement afterward made at the
entry of Charles the fifth in the year 1364. An other sentence passed in the
time of Frances the 1. in the year 1517. for the County of Foix, and other
the lands belonging to the same famely, between Odet of Foix Lord of
Lautrect, and Villemur, and Henry of Albret King of Navarre, Grandfather to the
King of Navarre now reigning: for Gaston of Foix, and Eleanor of Navarre had
two sons, Gaston the eldest, and John Vicountie of Narbonne the younger:
Garib. in hist Nauar. li. 33
Gaston dyed before both father and mother, leaving suruiuours by his wife Lady
Magdalem of France daughter to Charles the seventh two children, Philip
Phoebus and Ratherine, whereupon their Uncle John Vicountie of Narbonne, having
married the sister of King Jews the 12. made suite against the said Phoebus his
neuewe, pretending eldership by the decease of his brother Gaston: The cause
pleaded in the Court of Parliament, was by the Counsel compounded in the year
1488 but soon after began again by Gaston of Foix Duke of Nemours, son to
the said John, being in great favor with his Uncle King Jews the 12. but
because he dyed at the battle of Rauenna without issue, it seemed this
process might have ended, but it fell out otherwise, for Odet of Foix his
Cossen and pretended heir, took the same cause in hand against Katherin
sister to the said Phoebus deceased, and proceeded so far that by arrest of
the Court in the year 1517. he was put by, and the said Cou^tie together with
other the Lordships of the same famelic, adjudged unto Henry of Albret son to
the said Katherine, and his posterity, of whom, as is aforesaid, is descended
the now Lord King of Navarre. Polid. Verg. in hist. Ang.
In England, after the decease of Edward the third in the year 1378. Richard
son to Edw. Prince of Wales, was without contradiction crowned, and preferred
before his Uncles the Dukes of Lancaster, of Clarence, of Gloucester, and
York: but above twenty years after for his evil behavior and
misgouernment, Phil. dec. co^c. 44. 2. part. 3. volum. Nicol. de Vbald. in
tract. de success. ad intestat. numer. 62.
he was deposed, and his Cossen Henry son to John Duke of Lancaster set up in
his place. In Portugal King Alphons the fifth had two children, Fernand, and
Henry, who being the elder deceased before his father, leaving a son named
John: after the decease of the said Alphons, the said John commonly called John
the second, who^ the common Histories do falsely term son to the said
Alphons, Garib. lib. 22. Osor. lib. 1. hist. Lusit.
did peaceable enjoy the Crown from the year 1482. unto the year 1495. when
he dyed without issue, and then his Cossen Emanuell son to Ferdinand
succeeded him. The said Emanuell having reigned 22. years, among other children
left his son John the third, who was crowned after him, and Henry the
Cardinal. John the 3. during his reign, had a son of the same name, who dyed
before his father, leaving his wife with child of Sebastien, who after his
Grandfather John the 3. was preferred before his great Uncle Henry, Tiraq. de
Iur. primog. quaest. 4. numer. 5^.
brother to the said John the 3. notwithstanding the said Sebastiens father
was never King, and that the said Henry might have objected the same: but he
reigned not until the said Sebastien dyed and left no issue: which question
says Tiraquell, does so resemble ours, as one Be may an other. In Castile,
King Alphons the 10. had two sons, the elder Ferdinand who married Blanch
daughter to S. Jews, and of her begat Ferdinand and Alphons. The younger
called Sanxi who seeing his elder brother dead, and waying his neuewes right to
the Realm, could not tarry the decease of his father the said Alphons, but
during his life time raised wars to the end to procure himself to be
declared heir: whereat this good old man was so wrath that he accursed him.
Marian. Sicul.
Besides that the French King Phillip the third Uncle by the mother to the
said young Princes, after he had thereupon asked advise of the wise men of his
Realm, led an army unto the frontiers of Spain, and had gone forward, had
not the Popes Legate lingered him with words, together with the assurance which
the said Alphons made him viz. that he would uphold the right and cause of
his said neuewes: which nevertheless he soon after he forgot, and sent out
his Letter sealed with gold, and his own Image therein graven, to his
subjects, repugnant to the former, and by means of the same by
forc^establish^d Sanxi his second son, so as the orphelins were not overcome
but with the swor^, without any show of reason, as the history do import.
Just. lib. 23.
In Sicill, the like quarrel being moved between the son and the neuewe of
Agathocles in the extremity of his sickness, the neuewe by the will and
judgment of God, overthrew his said Uncle, and remaining victor was King over
the whole Land. Witichind. lib 2. Sigis. in. Chron. circa. annu^. 942.
In Germany, upon the like controversy under Henry the 3. and after under
Ottho the Great, the histories do report that the States of the Empire met and
agreed that this debate should, as the custom of that time required, be ended
by a co^bat, wherein the defendants of the cause of y^ neuew son to his
brother yt would have had his fathers room were conquerors, and thereupon the
said Estates did so conclude and adiudge it. More solemn also is the sentence
which Licurgus the true Oracle of human wisdom, gave in his own cause,
about the 17. Olimpiade, and in the time of Numa King of the Romans: Plut.
i^n Lycurg. Just. lib. 3.
for we read that his father Enomus King of the Lacedaemonians had two sons,
Polidectes and Licurgus: the first dyed before his father leaving his wife with
child: Enomus dead, Licurgus took the royal Diadem, and kept it a few
months, until at a banquet among his friends his neuewe the after borne was
offered unto him, whom he named Charilaus, and withal set the Crown upon
his head. To this example has relation also the same judgment that Pausanius
writes of the Senate of Sparta, above 400. years after Licurgus, concerning
the children of their King Cleomenes who had two sons, Pausan. lib. 3.
Cleonimus and Acrotatus the elder, who dying beforr his father, and leaving
his son Areus, the Realm came in question between them, where sentence
passed for Areus against Cleonimus, who was so wroth therewith, that he called
Pirrhus King of Epiro son to Earida, and caused him to enter the land,
whereupon he was declared enemy to the Commonwealth. In Italy, Robert the
second King of Sicill son to Charles the second, Oldrad. co^c. 224 Bald. in
l. liberti C. oper. libert.
about the year of Jesus Christ 1310. when there was controversy for the
County of S. Seuerin, between Thomas son to the elder, and James the
younger, gave sentence for the neuewe: so that the said Robert, whom our
Doctors term an other Solomon, John. An dr. tn ad dir ad specul. in tit. de
feud.
being in Auignon accompanied with a number of Doctors, and other skillful
personages, adjudged the said County to him.

Ottho of Frisingen rehearses the custom of Bourgondy, which says he, was
evermore observed among the Gauls, concerning the fathers succession, which
was adjudged to the eldest and his posterity, unto whom the rest as to their
Lords, ought to yield all respect, honor, and duty. Demosthenes also makes
mention of the Athenians law whereby brothers children had part in the
succession of their Grandfather, as branches and bodies substituted in the
Roumes of their deceased parents. So as the great number of arrestes passed
might at this day be reason sufficient to restrain the Lord Cardinal of
Bourbon, and those who under pretense of favoring his cause, do practice their
own advancement by the destruction of the Royal famelie: especially since these
judgments passed not without great notice of the cause, ripe and most sound
considerations, which learned men shall conceive, as drawn out of the fountain
of the Civil and Cannon laws, from whence the best and most of our policy
is taken.

3 The first reason is, because the father and the son, says Justinian, are
natura, but one person, so as the father seems not dead in respect of the
substitution that nature has made in the person of his son, who is part of
his flesh and bones, and is therefore termed son of the household, as the
other father of household, l. 1. C. de Priuil. dot. l. etiam ff. solut. ma trim.
with the sole difference of the title of generation. And in Ecclesiastes it is
written: The father is dead, and in a manner not dead, because he has left one
like himself. And after the fathers decease the son purchases not a new
his rightes and succession, but takes upon him the administration and use of
the same, l. vt intestato C. de suis and legit. l. posthumoru^ ff. de iniust.
rupt.
whereby the same matter that was to be considered in the father, is no doubt
transported to the person of the son, how personal soever the same be, and
he is thereof capable, as a stranger enheritour cannot be: in such wise that
the son by nature and civil law substituted in his fathers room and place,
is to enjoy all privileges, dignities, and rightes that might to the deceased
have apperteyned. This civil reason conformeth it self to infinite examples
of the law. First, we know that the son dying before his father, the
neuewe enters the room of the deceased, and enjoys the same rights as his
father, if he had lived, should in his Gra^dfathers succession, as appears in
the Counsel of Gallus Aquilius: by the law Vellea, and other the heads of
our wisdom: so that no reason can be alleged why we should otherwise
think in this deed, which depends of the right obtained by the father in
respect of seuioritie in the succession of his predecessors: Paul de Cast.
co^c. 264. in 2. part. Oldrad. co^c. 224.
for although the son of the deceased elder do maintain the seuioritie to
be his, by his own right and person, yet is he as it were substituted in the
place and person of his said father, and admit the quality of senioritie were
by the fathers decease dead and extinct, yet the power and ability to
succeed thereby is not extinct and lost, l. Lucius ff. de haered. inst. l. 1.
C. de condit. insert.
which being diverse, and separated from the eldership, is continued and
transported into the person of the son. Whereupon in law we do say, that
the same departing before the father, his son succeeds in his possibility,
because the same occasion, if any dies without children, is accomplished in
the wise counsel of the testator, if there remain any issue of the before
deceased son. Hereupon by the arrest of the Court in the year 1555. was the
daughter of the eldest son of Thibault of Vitry preferred before her Uncles
in the right of eldership, to the lands and noble Lordships of the said
Thibault. Secondly, it was determined that the free borne children were not
bound to lay together their own goods in pertitio^ of their fathers, or if it
happened the same being under his fathers jurisdiction to decease, leaving his
son alienated to some one of his brethren of the same calling, the neuew who
in his own person could not attend the relation of his Uncles proper goods
in the succession of his Grandfather, might nevertheless demand the same in
the behalf and as substitute to the person of his deceased father, and
therefore the same right that he had in the same relation is adjudged to his
son, who of himself was imperfect and badly grounded in his demand. Novel.
^18. cap. 2. and nouel. 127. cap. 1. nuth. cessante C. de legit. h^^red.
By our Laws also the brother by father and mother, is in the succession of
his deceased brother, to be preferred before the rest of his brethren of the
same belly, or kinsmen: Let us now presuppose the brother both ways were
deceased, leaving one son. The son is to take up the inheritance of his
Uncle, before the rest of the brethren of the deceased, being of one belly,
or kindred: which he cannot do by his own right, because he was not brother
to the deceased, and therefore necessarily he takes it in right of
substitution and succession to his late father transported into his person,
whereby he not only succeeds with his Uncles, but which is more, excludes
them as might his father have done if he had lived. l. quae de tota ff. de rei
vend.
Moreover, that which is noted in part, must take place in the whole, and yet
in the substitution of the deceased fathers succession, the children of the
deceased do take their part and portion of their deceased Grandfathers goods
by stock, not by head, that is, in consideration of their fathers person,
which we call in stirpes non in capita, which also concurreth with Gods law,
as we may note in the portion that Abraham gave to his neuewe Lot the son of
his brother Aram, Genes. 11. 13. and 13. Nouel. 118 ff. ceterum.
in the succession of their general father Their. In the collateral ligne,
the text of Justinians novel says, that the neu^we son to the brother
succeeds in such part as his deceased father might have done: why the^ should
we not observe the same in things wholly undivided, as in a Realm, Empire,
Duchy, and such other like, which can have but one master? so that the
neuewe taking his fathers room may exclude his Uncle, even as his deceased
father might have done, because in such successions there is place but for one?
Moreover, we know that the obligations wherein the father stand charged to
his son, are in like force and virtue in the persons of his issue, and
therefore the Grandfather is bound to endowe his niepce for her fathers sake,
l. dedit dotem ff. de coll. bonor.
so as the same right whereby the Daughter may force her Grandfather to marry
her, is in consideration of his son, because, says Celsus, the Grandfathers
duty to his niepce, arises of his fatherly love to his son, and thereby his
children ought to have the same that to him had apperteyned, if he had lived in
the world. In an other place the Emperors Zeno and Justinian have decreed,
that at the decease of one of the children of the first bed, the part that he
should have had in the gifts between his father and mother at their marriage,
cannot arise to his brethren, but must (by their wills) apperteyne to his
children, if at his decease he left any during his fathers life. Pomponius
speaking of a Libertine, l. si operaru^ l. a duob. ff. de oper. libert.
who had promised his endeavor to two Patrons, is of opinion, that if the one
dye, the same duties belong to his children, notwithstanding the other do
live. Which can not be, but in respect of the Obligation wherein this boundman
was bound to their father. To be brief, I might be tedious in discoursing
upon infinite continuations and substitutions of Children in the roumes of
their deceased Fathers. Neither is to any purpose that answer of those of
contrary opinion, which allege, that whatsoever we have said takes place
only where the father is of him self perfect, and in his own person does
certainly obtain: For I say moreover, that in case there were no more but the
only and sometime vain hope, yet were it lawful for the son to use the
same, and to seek out the effects that may come to hand, as it appears in
the father: Haereditatem non aditam, ad quam nullum adhuc habet ius quaesitum,
nec actionem ad liberos transmittit, quinimo and conditionale fidei commissum,
querelam in officiosi testamenti non praeparatam, iudicium operarum non
contestatum, and such like, wherein do very often consist the power and force
of nature, although the children be not heirs to their father.

4 The second reason is mere civil, whereby we say the right of eldership is
borne and formed in the person of the Father at his first entry into the world:
Moses terms it, primogenita tua, by a possessiue pronoune. The Interpreter
do describe it, e. quam periculgsum 7. q. 1.
Ius prioris aetatis, honorificum and vtile competens filio, quia primus est in
ordine nascendi. So consequently he is of nature, and therefore transmissible.
whereby also during the Fathers life, the eldest son is called King, Duke,
Earl, etc. of his fathers quality, the hope of which senioritie he may sell,
Genes. 36. Decius council. 443. in 2. ^arte. Abb. co^c. 85. Andr. Siculus
council. 10. l. emacipatum ff. fin. ff. de senate. l. diuo. C. de quaest. l. vt
Iuris^ trandi ff. si liberis ff. de oper. libert.
give, dispose, transfer and resign to an other man's person: as Esau did to
Jacob: especially, because he has notable interest therein, as in this matter
in respect of the natural affection he bears to his son, and the desire
that nature has planted in him to leave his son substituted and successor in
his room: besides that since eldership is an excellent and notable dignity,
death or any other mishap of the father cannot be prejudicial to the son,
who in this poinct is not considered as inheritour to his deceased father, but
only in the quality of a son, Paul. de Cast. co^c. 294 in 2. part. Oldr.
conc. 224.
whereby all whatsoever his fathers rightes are to him obtained, and without
difficulty reserved: It is not therefore properly transmission, whereby the
son succeeds in his fathers seniority, Bald. in l. cum antiquioribus C. de
Iur. ^elib.
but more truly it is termed continuation, represematio^, and natural
substitution in his own person, and therefore divided from the fathers right
and quality, though extract out of the same: whereof it oftentimes falls
out, according to the doctrine of Barth. Aret. Alex. and Jason, that it can not
perish by the death of the father first borne, in l. is potest. ff. de acq.
haered.
for commonly we say when a person is the only cause of a privilege, he
loses him self and vanishes therein, otherwise if he be brought forth of any
quality separate, and diverse from the man, although resident in him as in a
free birth, l. non solu^ ff. de rest. in integr. l. haered. C. ap Vell l.
minor. ff. fin. and l. seq. ff. de minor.
in which case it is transmissible, and may be obtained to his successors, in
whose person he was resident. Even in this case our interpreters do uphold
that the right of eldership, because it is formed, and wauteth no more but
execution and full possession, may justly be compared, Iuri accescendi, and
Iuri deliberandi, which are transmissible, and do extend to the heirs.

5 The third reason for the neuewe, is, that the right of eldership is a
constitution and decree, or rather a legal and customary institution,
established in the favor and benefit of the first borne, to whom by the same
order are substituted the younger, in case the elder dye before them. Now it is
certain that the law is of like, l. non imp^ss^oile ff. de pact.
or greater authority then composition or contract between parties, by which
compact, whatsoever is to us merely or conditionally due, is transmissible,
and may be obtained for the successors, or heirs of the obteyner: and so
consequently although the right of eldership were not perfect, or fully
obtained to the first borne, as it is, but had therein any modification or
natural condition, yet should it together with all the qualities thereof, be
obtained, l. si pactum ff. de probat.
and belong to the son of the elder, to whom the law has had regard, no
less then they qui paciscu^tur, tam haeredibus, quam sibi ipsis cauent: which
is the reason of the difference, whereby that which is to us due conditionally,
by virtue of a later dispostion, cannot belong to our heirs before the
condition accomplished, l. vnic. ff. sin aute^ C. de cad. toll.
because the deceased thought not to give it to any other then him whom he
named, but contrariwise contractors doc covet to obtain whatsoever their
rightes to their substitutes after their decease. Besides that this
substitution by custom made of the younger to their elder brothers, cannot be
understood, but in case the elder dye without issue: as we say out of Papinians
opinion, that the substitution of the father made unto the son is meant, if
this should dye without issue. The fourth is, that although the son of the
elder be a degree further of then his Uncle, yet being substituted in his
fathers room and place, he must be preferred, because the right of
preferment is not obtained to us only, but also by the right and person of an
other: so that so long as any portion or rellique of this senioritie shall
remain, l. 1. C. de testa. tut. l. si quis sub co^ditione ff. cod.
no other ca^ take place by any mean whatsoever: even as we do maintain
that how small soever the toke^ of the former tutel be, it is in respect of the
son sufficient to hinder any other, or diverse course of the same: and so
consequently the son, qui est portio viscerum patris primo geniti excludet
secundo genitum. l. 3. ff. vl. csi seq. ff. de assign. libert.
The fifth consideration is taken, ab exemplo patroni, qui vni ex liberis
assignauit libertum, to whom and to his he is due, and illis extantibus, alteri
non est locus. So then the law, custom, and public ordena^ce having called
the eldest, and to him assigned yt right of the Realm, it cannot belong to any
other but him or his being sufficient, so long as they shall remain in the
world, to take up that succession, which the right of eldership has given
him. c. 1. de nature. succ. feud. cap. 1. de success. feud. March.
The sixth reason shall be that the same laws and customs that are observed in
siefes and vasselag, are considerable in Realms and (...) ruling. And it is
certain that in beneficio quod feudum appellant, nepos ex filio, solus
succedit, and in default of him only the Uncle is called to the said
succession, notwithstanding our writer dare falsely mainteyne the contrary, and
allege the textes that make ad litera^, as they term it, against him. Why
then should we not say as much of the Realm and Crown, which is the rule and
government of the said stefes? Finally, l. 1. ff. si tabul. test. null. ex tab.
l. 1. ff. de success. Edict.
without doubt the right of eldership is a quality that passes to every of
the children, from the first to the second, from the second to the third, and
so consequently, as do the heads of succession ordained by the pretors edict,
de liberis ad agnatos, and de his ad cognatos: at vero certum est successionem
quae fit de gradu in gradum, potiorem esse illa quae fieri solet de capite in
caput: so as post omnes liberorum gradus vocantur agnati, post vniuersos
agnatos cognati. Thus are the first borne the first head, whose degrees are to
be considered in their issue. The other head is of the second borne, whose
degrees are to be observed in his children. etc.

6 Yet is there in this cause one especial reason for the said Lord King of
Navarre, which cannot be answered, that is, that his said Uncle, the Lord
Cardinal of Bourbon at the marriage of his neuewe the King of Navarre to Lady
Margaret of France, acquitted, demissed, yielded and transferred to the said
Lord King, all and every the rightes and tles, voices, and actions present and
to come, that any way might to him apperteyne, as coming of the house of
Bourbon, expressly acknowledging his said neuewe the Lord King of Navarre,
for the true son, heir, successor, l. 1. C. de pact. l. de fidei commisso.
C. de trausact. c. cum co^tingat x. de jurejur. cap. ficet eode^ in 6. cap.
qua^uis de pact. in 6.
and in all and by all, representer of the senioritie of the said house. To
think therefore now to go against the said renunciation, made under a vain
hope of succession in this Realm, comprised under this general eldership of
his late brother the Lord King of Navarre, there is no appearance, since spes
fidei commissi, and conditionis in certum remitti poterit, yea, that
iusiurandum reuunciationi interpositum tale est, vt obseruari possit sine
salutis aeternae dispendio, also that by the Cannon laws a renunciation
confirmed with an oath can not be broken. Besides that the renunciation was a
part of the donation in the contract of Matrimony, whereby the marriage of the
said Lord King of Navarre to the said Lady of France, was more easily
accomplished, and by the restoring of the same, the children of the said
Matrimony might be endamaged: which may not be permitted, especially because
the said Lord Cardinal can allege no likelihood of hurt through his
minority, force or other causes of restitution, against the said Lord King
of Navarre his neuewe, who at that time was young, and under the said Lord
Cardinals authority. Dionys. Halic. lib. 1.
On the other side, the learned do for the said Lord Cardinal, bring in the
example of Siluius King of the Latins, who was preferred before Iulus his elder
brother Ascanius son: but in this matter the argument is not alike, for
Ascanius dyed not in his father Aeneas time, but had worn the Crown 38.
years, or there about after his decease, and when he dyed the succession
thereof was restored to Siluius, to whom it rightly did apperteyne, as being
the true enheritance of his mother Lauinia. For it is evident that Aeneas after
the destruction of Troy, landed in Italy with his son Ascanius, and so well
ordered his affairs, that he married Lauinia daughter to Latinus King of Alba
Longa, whom he afterward succeeded, and of that marriage begat Siluius: so
that Ascanius reign over the Latins in Italy, was by tyranny, and without any
vailable, or more apparent title then the sword: for the Realm belonged to
Siluius in the right of his mother Lauinia. Secondly, they allege a judgment
of the Senate of Sparta, Pausan. lib. 3.
between Agesilaus and his nenewe Leotichides, son to his elder brother
Agis, whereby the Uncle was preferred and the Diade^ royal to him adjudged.
But herein I would also desire the^ to have recourse to y^ reason that
Pausanias yields for y^ said judgment, which was because he was by his
father Agis denounced a bastard, whom in such cases the Ephores commonly
believed, as appears by a fore judgment long before by them given in the
person of Demaratus, idem eodem libro.
who was driven out of the Realm which he did enjoy, because of the like
speech used by his father Ariston, and in his place as insufficient, was
substituted his Cossen Leotichides.

Their third example has yet less appearance, Aimoin. Monach. lib. 3. cap. 62.
and is of Gontran King of Orleans, of the sons of Clotaire the first, who
was preferred before Childebert, son to his brother Sigisbert King of Metz,
in the succession of Cherebert King of Paris: for they say not that it was by
force, either that the Realm of the said Cherebert was divided, even in the
life time of the said Sigisbert, father to the said Childebert, among all his
brethren, and yet that afterward the weapons of the said Gontran were the
stronger, when Fredegond had procured the death of Sigisbert, which soon after
Gontran repented, and having no children adopted his neuewe Childebert, who in
the end enjoyed all his possessions.

The fourth is of Honoricus son to Gisericus King of the Wandales, Procop.
lib. 3.
who was preferred before Gondabundus son to Genson the said Gizericus
eldest: but to this purpose they should withal have set down the words of the
said Gesericus the fathers last will and testament, importing, as says
Procopius, that he would have the eldest of his children to succeed him: which
peradventure he had learned of the ancient Nomades, Strabo lib. 16.
among who^, says Strabo, the prerogative of years was relligiously observed,
in consideration whereof sentence passed for Corbis the eldest against Orsna
his Cossen, Liu. lib. 8. decad. 3.
and son to the last King, whose controversy was decided by a Combat. But in
France we regard not the age, but only the order of senioritie, wherein the
neuewe continues by substitution of him in the room and place of his father,
the prerogative of the son. The like was observed in Barnarde son to Pepin,
Charles the Great eldest son, before whom was preferred to the Empire Jews
the Mecke, second son to the said Charles. But this example may most easily
be answered, because it was the same Charles their common father, that had
divided his Dominions among his children, and had given Italy to Pepin his
eldest son, which also was reserved to the said Bernard his son, and
therefore after the pertition made by the said Charles, he could pretend no
further in ye succession that might come in question: besides that at that time
the Empire was not properly successiue: for notwithstanding the nearest in
blood to the deceased Emperor did succeed, yet durst he not so entitle
himself, until by the consent of the Romans he had been publicly anointed
and crowned. Onuphr. de Commit. Impor.
Much less also was the Imperial dignity successiue after the creation of
the Princes electors of the same in the time of Ottho the 3. of the house of
Saxony, or by the opinion of the skilfullest of our world, in the time of
Frederick the 2. so as there is no likelihoode to draw an elective Empire
into consequence, with hereditarie and patrimoniall Kingdoms. The 5. indgement
is of the Cou^tie of Arthois, Paul. Acmi. in Philip. Pulch.
which was in strife in the time of Philip the Fair King of France, between
Maude wife to Ottho Earl of Bourgondie, daughter to Robert Earl of Arthois,
slain at the battle of Courtray, and Robert the son of Phillip, who
likewise was son to the said deceased Earl Robert: in which case the
aforesaid County of Arthois, was by the said French King adjudged to Maud,
who was preferred before her neuewe Robert, being yet in infancy. And in troth
the history sets down no other particular occasion of this judgment, but
yt it was given by the mere motion of the said King Phillip, Lord of the fief.
Neither is it said that his Majesty took any other advice but of his own
will, and the need that then he had of Ottho the said Maudes husband: together
with the small service that of long time he might attend of the said Robert a
young child, 1. l. ff. de vsucap.
and at that time there needed a good warrier to be opposed against the
Flemings, to the end to suppress their boldness and customary rebellions. So
as in respect of the said Roberts very youth, the said King Phillip thought it
meet to infringe the law and custom usually observed in like causes. But God
be praised, in whatsoever may happen between the said Lords the King of
Navarre, and his Uncle the Cardinal of Bourbon, we cannot incur that
danger, but rather were to be feared the great years of the said Lord
Cardinal already old, worn, and by reason of his order estraunged from al
use of arms, in respect of the flouring time of the King of Navarre, a Prince
brought up in the same, and in gonernment of Estates.

The sixth is for the County of Champagne, between Henry the second son of
Earl Thibault, Geofroy Ardoin du voyage de la terre saint.
and the daughter of the said Earls eldest son wife to Erard of Breno, in
which case by arrest of the Court of Parliament of the Peers of France, in the
year 1216. the said County was adjudged to Henry the Uncle, against his
neuewe, daughter to his elder brother. But it may easily be answered, the
eldest son of the said Thibault going into the holy Land, had expressly
ordained that in case he dyed in the said expedition, or otherwise without
issue male, then that his brother should succeed in the said County, with
endowing his daughter, wife to the said Breno with a compete^t sum. The
seventh happened between the children of Charles the second King of Sicil,
Collenut. in hist. Neapol.
son to the brother of King S. Jews, who married the heir of Hu^gary, and
of that marriage begat Charles Martel and Robert. The father gave and appointed
to the said Martell the Realm of Hungary, and in his life time caused him to
be thereof crowned, whereby he did a while enjoy it and then dyed, leaving his
son Charles, to whom Charles the Grandfather confirmed the donation of the
said Realm, made to his father Martell: and to his second son Robert he gave
the Realm of Naples. So that by the truth of this history, it appears that
this was a pertition by the said Charles the second made between his
children, which they could not resist, and whereof neither ye said Martel, nor
his son Charles had cause to complain: for the Realm of Hungary was far
greater, more rich and wealthy, then that of Naples, which was already rent and
dismembered by the Arrago^s, as it is evident, by all histories of those times.
Our Interpretors do yet more briefly answer this preferment of Robert the
second, Bald. in l. liberti C. de oper. liber. Oldr. conc. 224. Panor. conc. 3.
in 2 part.
before the son of Martel his elder brother, aleadging that Pope Clement the
5. pretending authority over the Realm of Naples, which he aduowed to be of
the fiefe of the Church, pronounced this sentence lightly enough therein, doing
the office of a party rather then of a Judge: besides that of the said Realm
in respect it was subject to Saint Peter's chair, was not properly successiue.

The last example that they allege is of Jews Sforce, Guichard. lib. 1.
hist. ^^al
who was preferred to the Duchy of Milan, before the son of John Galeas,
but they might rather say that he preferred himself by force, and through
execrable tyranny which the said Jews exercised against this poor orphan,
under pretense of governing and defending him. Besides, it is so far from
being our case, that it is certain that the young child enjoyed his fathers
Estate, when this Tyrant his Uncle seized thereon, and put him to death, as
unjustly, as in the end God did justly punish him, in causing him to end his
days in misery and captivity. Having thus answered such examples as they
may allege, l. pater filiu^ ff. de in of. ff. 1. de leg. agn. success.
let us now consider whether the reasons that they propounde be sufficient to
cause us to alter our advice.

8 First in all Successions it is a general rule, to call thereto the nearest
to him whose state is in question, so that it is by privilege and
extraordinary license, that we admit the the Children of the deceased brother
to share with their uncle in such goods only as will baare division. Which is
the cause that our Doctor alleges Butr. in his Tree of the succession of the
Realm of France in these words. in sue pratict. rit. de success. feud numer.
63.
Succssit ergo illi Carolo in regno Franc. Philippus filius alterius Caroli,
qui erat ei in 4. gradu, nec successit Robertus pronepos Roberti Comitis
Atrebatensis quendam, quia ille erat in 8. gradu, nec successit Robertus nepos
Caroli Regis Siciliae, and Jerusalem, quia ille erat in 7. gradu, nec successit
Ludouicus nepos Beati Ludouici, quia ille erat dicto Carolo decedenti in quarto
gradu. l. filio que^ pater. ff. de iniust. rup.
Therefore, since otherwise the Uncle retains still the chief degree, the
especial regard that Justinian had to the posterity of the deceased brother,
to make them equal with their Uncles, can not serve them in undivided matters,
wherein can no room or place be found but for one, in which cause it is more
meet to prefer nature, that is to say, the uncle, who naturally is nearest
rather then the Neuew, who can not be so accounted, but by the fiction of the
Emperors decree, and the improper explication of the word proximus, l. 3. C.
de legit. haered.
which is yet more odious, because it contains alteration of the Law, whereby
the nearer only is admitted to succession: and in the same cause the Emperor
Decius speaking to the sister of the deceased, writes, Unto thee rather, that
art in the second degree, does the inheritance belong, then to thy brothers
children, who are in the third: Because also, in case of inheritance we admit
rather the immediate cause, then that which is farther of, according to y^ that
is argued, de eo qui filio impuberi sub hac formula substituerat. Quisquis sibi
haeres esset. So that it was not in vain that the Emperors Theodosius and
Valentinean the third said, l. fi viua c. de bon. matem.
that in this case the children should not be made worse then the Neuewes, who
are nearer then the elder brothers Son in both age and degree. Thus they
should be thought more capable, so that in what so ever concerns the Neuewe.
l. common dissime ff. da lib. and Posth.
The cause of birthright ceasing, the effect also should be none: because a
case by Law omitted, is to be adiudhed os omitted, otherwise this writer
adds a trim consequence, which imports, that in the case now in question,
the children of the late Lord Prince of Conde, being four in number, should
divide with their uncle the said Lord of Bourbon and the King of Navarre their
cosen, whereby the succession of the Realm of France should be divided into
three parts or portions.

The first heads of this Reason might be true, if we should consider the
Neuewe only and in his own person, but in this action we regard him as
substitute in the continuation of his late Fathers right, and yet not by any
extraordinary fiction or privilege whatsoever, as they say, but by the proper
interpretation of the Law, and man's natural motion, whereby the father is
said to live so long as the son remeyneth, and the senne is termed the
natural portion of his fathers body, so that it is no odious explication, but
by our men is called an extensiue interpretation by natural reason induced,
which never was forbidden, but contrariwise have always justly been received
in caces most stricely observed, and such as can not bear even the least
alteration that may be. Consequently therefore, although before Justinians
brothers children could not concur with their Uncle in collateral ligne,
(because the ancients would not corrupt, but so little as might be the
degrees of kindered,) yet this Prince considering that there is no greater
reason to make this substitution and paternall continuation in direct ligue
then in collateral, Novel. 118. ff. caeterum.
also that nature of her self was each way alike, he did justly and natually
in all sorts of successiue lignes, continue the person of the father by the
substitution and succession of his posterity: which has also been imitated in
feudall customs, c. ad audi entiam c. cu^ dilectus de cler. non resid.
as is aforesaid. So that to omit nothing, ex eo nec prior aetate, nec gradu
propior patruus iudicari poterit: quin and causam huius successionis in nepote
conspicimus. The effect whereof should withal ensue, without thinking this
case omitted, since that by natural interpretation, an other like to the first
does follow: or rather to say the same which is considered of the father in
the person of his son: whereof the second brother cannot complain, no more
then he that has promised or constituted some real servitude for the benefit
of his neighbors land, l. 1. ff. penult. ff. de aqua plu. arcend.
which afterward was obtained and fallen into the hands of many and diverse
heirs: of whom every one uses that whole service, so as if the manner thereby
be over sore charged, yet as is the Lord of the serving manor compelled to
suffer it, as being the nature of the thing. And merueilous unlearned is the
consequence that our Attorney makes, when he says, because the King of
Navarre will have like degree of proximitie as his Uncle, therefore the
children of the late Lord Prince of Conds might say as much: for it is
evident to all men that the King of Nauarres reason has no community with the
pretense that this man imagines of others, because the said Lord King of
Navarre represents the elder, and is substituted in his room and place, by
virtue of which substitution he excludes not his Cossens only, being children
to the younger, but also the said Lord Cardinal, who had been more capable then
they: whereby we are come to the rule, l. de a coes. sionibus ff. de chuers.
and tem. praescrip.
If I overcome him that overcomes thee, much more shall I overcome thee,
considering that the Realm and sovereign Lordship is not yet subject, iudicio
familiae Hercis. neither can brook the light of two Suns.

9 Yet are we to annswer the deduction of James de Per. where he says that the
reason why Robert King of Sicill, Jews Duke of Bourbon, and Robert Earl of
Arthois succeeded not Charles y^ Fair King of France, but that Phillip Earl
of Valois, his Cossen german, obtained it, was, because he was found to be
in the fourth degree to the deceased King, and the Earl of Arthois in the 8.
and the King of Sicill in the 7. But immediately he cutteth off himself again,
when he confesses that the Duke of Bourbon was also in the 4. and therefore by
reason should as soon have succeeded, not that we must deny that the
succession of the Crown of France, non deferatur proximiori agnato, but I say
first, that we have more then sufficiently verefied that the said Lord King of
Navarre, is not vlterior gradu, then the said Lord Cardinal his Uncle, and
that according to natural and civil reason. But I will moreover add in the
example by this writer propounded, that the proximitie of degrees was not the
cause of the alleged judgment in favor of Phil. of Valois, but it was
because certainly when once the succession of a Realm is entered one ligne and
progeny, the rest of all that branch must fail before we may pass into an
other, or inhable the same, how near soever it be. The reason is most
evident, because since the Kingdom is gotten to their kinsman, they al are
accounted more capable then any other kindred, feudorum exemplo, wherein to
them only, and to all those that are of the same ligne whereof the deceased
was, the commodity does apperteyne, and that is it that is said ad proximiores
deferri, because these are accounted proximiores in respect of other lignes.
These are the words of the text in feudall cases. (...) 50.
This was the reason why the King of Sicil, neither the Earl of Arthois could
pretend nothing in the Crown of France, which once obtained to S. Jews,
excluded the ligne of the aforesaid, who descended of Robert Earl of Arthois,
and of Charles the first King of Sicil, children to Jews the 8. and brother to
S. Jews. Likewise Jews Duke of Bourbon could not be admitted to make
challenge to the same Realm, because he was son to Robert of France, the
younger son of the said S. Jews, whose succession was entered into the ligne
of Phillip the 3. surnamed the Bold, his eldest son, of whom came two
sons, Phillip the Fair, who was King by right of eldership, and Charles
Earl of Valois, father to the said Phillip, true successor to his Cossen
Charles the Fair, son of Philip the Fair, who both were come of the branch
of the said Phillip the Bold, eldest son to S. Jews. The like observation
fell out after the decease of Charles the 8. King of France, to whom succeeded
Jews the 12. son to Charles Duke of Orleans, and after him Frances the 1.
son to Charles, and petty son to John Earl of Angolesme, both descended
of Jews Duke of Orleans, son to Charles the 5. surnamed the Wise, whose
coming to the Crown procured his posterity to be by right preferred before
all other the Princes of Bourbon, then being, and those of Alencon borne in
direct masculine ligne of Sir Charles of France, youngest son to Charles of
Valois, and brother to Phillip of Valois King of France..1. ff. proximus ff.
un. cogn. l. cum ita ff. fin. ff. de leg. 2.
The second consideration is, because by the law of the Realm, the nearest
must succeed to the Crown: but be must be proximior at y^ time of deferring
the inheritance, l. A^ethusa ff. de stat. hom.
and when the succession is open, as si familiae fidei co^missum debeatur, hi
ad petitionem admittuntur, qui ex nomine defuncti fuerint, eo tempore quo
testator moreretur, and qui ex his primo gradu procreati sunt: in which case
he is called prior, whom none preceedeth, l. 3. ff. ff de tracta ff. de nox.
act. Bald. in l. 2. C. de iur. (...) phiteut.
because prius and posterius do consist in the time, and that the quality
(say our Masters) in a conjoined word must be expounded after the time of the
word: namely, it we should otherwise mean, and would note eldership at the
time of the birth, there must ensue an euitable inconvenience, which is, that
y^ eldest dying, the second should never take his rouine, because he first
included himself to the excluding of an other: which in this argument is
utterly false, wherein by the decease of the elder, the second is without doubt
made the first borne, for in effect, par est talem esse, aut ex post facto
talem fieri, neither can this quality of senioritie bear any comparison
between the elder deceased, and the younger suruiuing, whereof it follows
that the dead being unable, as not being in reru^ natura, his some must have
the like bar, as succeeding in the person of his father.

Al these gay reasons might take place and were to be considered if the son
of the elder non esset in medio, neither were the discourse of the same any
hinderance, for by him and in him pater primogenitus, censetur viuere tempore
delatae successionis, and in troth, extante nepote, inclusio primogeniti
continet exclusionem secundi, since that filius fratris fratr^ aequiparatur, and
ita succedit atque pater si viueret, ff. caeterum Novel. 118.
says Justinian: also this new constitution, facta in casu vero, extenditur ad
alterum vero aequiparatum, after the opinion of Paul de Castro in his
explication of Sceuola, upon y^ Counsel of Gallus, together with many other
skillful persons: so that the father is not quite extinct while his son
lives, l. cum pater ff. haereditatem ff. de le. 2.
though by a new soul, he be a new man, neither says Papinian in totum falsum
videri, quod veritatis primordio adiuuaretur. So that though the Uncle cannot
be termed younger in respect of the elder deceased, who neither in himself,
neither in any quality yt we may suppose unto him, is any way to be
regarded, yet when he shall behold his neuewe, the successor, continuing and
making a part of his late father, he shall find a fair argument, and object
of comparison of the others senioritie with his iunioritie. First, this
principle is not always true, neither does the ability or inhabilitie of the
father perpetually take hold of the children. As for example, eius qui ante
amissam patris dignitate^ natus fuerit: Again, de liberis illius liberti, qui
in seruitutem redactus sit. To be brief, herein we may say as Alphons teaches
us: The father takes not from the children those things that kind, Country,
and nature gives them, liqueritue l. de bon. ff bert.
as is y^ right of eldership, which is truly set in the person of the father,
being eldest of the house, but it is granted to him and his by the law,
custom, and common order of the Realm: and therefore is transmissible to his
children. Moreover, the deduction made by those of the contrary opinion, might
be admitted, si per filium patri incapaci quippiam quaerendum foret, and not
otherwise, as we find illius exemplo, qui ex haeredatus liberto patris
succedere non potest, eius tamen filius emancipatus non vetabitur. supra in
rat. nepo^.
And in one word, the incapacitie, or inhabilitie of the father, might hurt the
son afterward borne, but not him that were begotten before, to whom his
fathers calamity can be no detriment: so that the right of eldership being
perfect, sound, and to the father obtained in his life time, is continued and
transferred to his posterity.

The third reason is, that the right which is not obtained, cannot in any
whatsoever quality, be transported or transferred to any heir whatsoever:
and therefore we do usually say that haereditas no^ adita, non transmittitur,
as does not also the age, which is inseparable from the person, and which
being in question, we have no more respect to the successor then to his
predecessor: now the right of eldership proceeds of the years, l. ca quae C.
de tem por. in integr. restir.
and precedent light of the deceased father, who nevertheless did never
obtain the succession in his life time, l. si paterfam. ff. fin. ff. de dop.
ff. mino te^ de adopt.
as not being open, and so it follows that the son of the elder can pretend
nothing, neither could the father obtain to him the right of his years,
wherein the son were more to be considered then the father deceased, as
Constantine writes, si minor minori successerit, ex illis persona
restitutionis tompus connumerari.

To this objection the answer is easy, because we have already showed that
the right of eldership is perfectly obtained to the eldest so soon as he sees
y^ light of the world, and is made man, and the. pro secundo which is alleged
to the contrary, has relation to that which presently is not obtained, neither
in hope, but may be altered by the only changeable will, even until the death
of him whose goods are in question. Therefore in this matter we argue not about
the transmission, ^iraquell. in tract. primoge^^^^ numer. 109.
or transferring of the life and years of the elder deceased into the person of
his son, but only of the right and preeminence that his senioritie has
brought him, which being in him is according to the former discourse continued
in his posterity.

The fourth objection is taken of the vulgar consideration observed in the
common dispositions of every one, to call into the first degree their own
children, and then their neuewes after their degrees and order of nature, which
is evident in the counsel of Gallus Aquilius, l. cu^ pater. ff. penult. ff.
de leg. 2.
and more expressly in the answer of Papinian in two places, wherein he
acknowledges, inter liberos ordine, gradu fidei commissi praescriptos, Paul.
de Cast. council. 164. Oldr. co^c 224.
ex ordinata affectione defuncti, quae cadit inter personas sub eadem
alternatione comprehensas.

This reason were hard to be decided, if we would consider the neuew only in
his own person and cause, but we have often said, that in deed in his own
right: but by his father successively, he continues the same right of
eldership that his deceased father had, for the which as first borne, he is in
the first degree and order of succession.

10 The fifth reason is taken of that we know that the same degrees that are
observed in tutele, are likewise kept in succession. But it has been decreed
of the son and neuew concurring together for the tutele of the fathers
libertine, the son only remains tutor, and not the neuewe, son to the
deceased brother the like therefore must be observed in matter concerning the
successiue right of the one and the other. In this argument the Doctors that
make the objection, do not note, that the same was first advised, for the
benefit of the neuewe, ne oneri tutelae astringatur. Secondly, that the reason
of tutele is particular for the wealth and benefit of the pupille, Pano^m.
conc. 32 pas Paul. de Castr. and Panor. in Conci. supra alleg l. 1. C. de
haered. tur.
to the end the eldest of those that are capable of the succession, may only
be admitted his governor. Besides the quality of a tutor resembles the
procuration and preeminence which are not tra^smissible to the heirs of
whatsoever condition they be: whereof proceeds the reason, ^. si libertus ff.
1. ff. de bo^. li. bert.
whereby alio modo tenentur tutores, aliter ipsorum haeredes conueniri solent.
Finally, since the succession of the libertin is in like sort disposed of, the
like regard must be had in the delation and decree of tutele: for Julian
writes, si libertus intestato decesserit relictis patroni silio, and ex altero
filio duobus ne potibus, nepotes non admitte^tur, quandiu filius esset,
although it be otherwise in ingenuorum successione, because the right of
patronage is mere personal, itaque non transmittitur, at vero in ingenuis:
the natural affection of the father to the son, or of the Grandfather to the
Neuewe has caused this representation to be ever observed in the direct ligne,
and afterward in the collateral, ex co^stitutione principum. And we also see
that the goods of the deceased libertine, are parted by the number of heads
among the patrons neuewes, contrary to disposition of common right in free
persons, whose under Children do distribute the succession of their Graundsire
by stocks, l. cu^ pater ff. pluribus ff. de leg. 2. c. quibus 20 did c. fin.
84. distinct. c. sciendum 26. b. 3.
in consideration of their Fathers already deceased.

11 Sixthly they object, that the government of y^ said Lord Card. is more
necessary to the realm, because he is of more years, and therefore better
advised, more prudent and capable of public knowledge in the world. But this
presumption sometime deceiptfull, taken of the years of the successor, must not
be prejudicial unto the right obtained to a third, especially this third
being capable of discretion and judgment as is the King of Navarre, who goes
now in the 33. year of his age: but also more perticulerly in the succession
of this realm wherein, so far are we from preferring the eldest, that eue^
our selves do admit children in their Cradles and Infancy to be our lawful
Kings, as apeareth by the History of Saint Jews, who was consecrated ween
he was but nine or ten years old: of John son to Jews Hutin, borne after
his fathers decease, Puul. Aemil. in Ludon. 9. idem in Hut. ide^ in Carol. 8.
who lived but fifteen days, and dyed in his Journey toward Rhemes to be
consecrated: of Charles the eight, who was crowned in his infancy, as also was
the late Charles the 9. in our time. The like whereof have been very
religiously observed in all successiue Realms and kingdoms: In Judea and
Jerusalem, David, Solomon, Azarias, Manasses and Ios^as were anointed in
their youth. Augustulus a young child was Emperor of the West, although in his
nonage, whereof, says Procopius, he was named Augustulus. Athalaricus was but
eight years old when he succeeded in the Realm of the Goths, under the
government of his mother Amasasiuntha: Baldatus being almost in his Cradle, was
King of the Lombards. Sapor was declared Monarke of Persia in his Mothers
womb. Herodotus rehearses the History of Aeropus King of Macedonia, who
being in his swath, was carried in the Army against the Illiria^s, and presented
to the Soldiers, who seeing him, were so embouldened, that they defied their
enemies, and expelled them their country. To be brief: Agathius makes
mention of the ancient Law of our French men, whereby the children how young
so ever, were called to their fathers Realm.

Their seventh objection is drawn out of a rescript of Pope Innocent the
third, edicet ext^^ devot.
wherein he threatens Andrewe, the second son of Bela the third King of
Hungary, that if he fulfilled not his fathers vow in going into the holy land,
he would trasport his crown to his second brother: to which iniunction the
said Andrewe obeyed very carefully, and after for beating the Soudan of
Babylon, was surnamed Hierosolomitan. But touching our question, it does not in
the text appear that there was ever a Neuew, son to Andrews brother, that
might resist or make head against the second brother: so that this decretall
makes nothing to the purpose, no more then the discourse of Pope Clement the
fifth against the Emperor Henry of Luxembourg, c. lem. pastoralis de re jud.
in favor of Robert the second King of Sicile, whom usually they allege in
the proof of their advice.

The eight reason by our Doctor alleged, is taken of the rule of ancient
right, l. 68. ff. de reg. jur.
whereby we ordinarely say, that where the condition of the person makes
place for the benefit, when the one fails, the other also perishes. But the
age and particular forebirth gave this privilege to the late Antony of Bourbon
King of Navarre: therefore his Son cannot have the like right, as, not having
the said qualities: besides that, when the Law has given any thing to the
son, the same never passes the words of the decree, as ordinarely we say,
tutorem datum, ne potibus ordinatum non censeri.

This reason conteyneth the same that the former: and so to be answered, that
it were to true, if the person were the only cause of the privilege, as
appears in the consulters examples. But we have said before, that in our
question we regard not so much the person of the elder, as the quality in him
reside^t: whereby the right and cause of succession is to him obtained, which
is not extinct with the person, since now it cleaves to his cause and goods,
like as we say that it is the reason why restitutiones in integru^
adolescentibus concessae haeredibus illorum competunt, quia laesionis occasion
minoribus indulgentur, eademque ratione S. C. Vell^iani exceptio succcessoribus
quique prodest. Item actionis funerariae priuilegiu^ haeredi, ac caeteris
successoribus non denegatur, and tempus iudicatis datum haeredibus proficit: so
that since this quality of eldership has perfected and obtained this right and
cause of succeeding the deceased father, he shall seem to have transferred the
right that he had in his goods to his son. Who also shall be capable of a
more personal privilege of his father: for in truth by the order of law, if
any thing rests in actions, petitions, prosecutions, or law, it shall be
numbered with the goods. So that in this argument, since the right and cause was
in the father perfect and absolute, wanting no more but execution, it will not
be amiss to say that the same right may be said to be comen to him, as in
lege Julia, that word peruenit Vlpian takes for accipiendum. For
notwithstanding succession should never fall or take effect in the person of
the eldest, yet has the law made him during his life possessor of successiue
possibility and quality: so that he has obtained that right to himself both
vnweting and unawares, which proceeding of the authority and virtue of the
law is transmissible: and as depending of the cause and matter, is to the
son transferred, who is part and portion of his fathers bowels, as we have
sufficiently showed, and thereof it ensues that the elder had not this in his
own person only, but rather illud idem in persona ipsius residebat, l
liberoau^ ff. de ucrb. signif.
ab ea tame^ diuersum and seperatum, illudque idem est, acsi non filio, id est,
certae personae lex ipsa detulerit, sed liberis. i. genero, and cognato
primogenito datu^^ fuerit, ff. fin. de satisd. apud instin.
which may stand for an answer to the text before alleged to the contrary,
of him qui filio tutorem dederat vt nepoti dedisse non videatur.

12 The last reason is taken out of the text of the custumary of the town of
Paris, the head City of the Realm, whereby the universal Estate thereof
should be ruled: Now by the same it is expressly inferred that the
representation can take no place in collateral ligne, ff. placebat de legit.
agn. success. Novel. 118. and 127.
except between the brother and the brothers son, in the pertition of their
deceased brother and uncles goods: neither has our writer forgotten to say
that it is the order of the Romans law contained in the ancient decrees of
the Emperors, before the which in the old decemuirall law, there was no
representation in collateral ligne.

Hereupon we may allege reason of double difference, first in respect of
the Civil law, which has had no consideration at all of enheritaunce
undivided, and not subject to pertition among successors, as also it has not
respected senioritie or innioritie of the heirs of the deceased, but being in
like degree, has equally acknowledged them in the succession to them fallen:
whereupon it follows, that since contrary to our policy, moribus and fere
iure gentium omnium instituta, require these two qualities in the obteyning of
a Realm, that is, that only one and he the nearest: but among those of equal
degree, the first borne be preferred: The same law, and observation of
birthright, might and ought therein to have perpetual place of representation,
which it has as is largely before discoursed: so that to argue between the
qualities of civil and Roman enheritances, and ours both political and
quite altered, there is, under correction, no purpose, reason, or appearance.

The other reason shall concern the article of the customary of Paris, cap. 1.
parag. praeterea ducatus de proh. feud. alu^n. vbi Bald.
which cannot be understood of the succession of the Realm, because therein
the nearest successor to the Crown, is not therefore called heir of the King
last deceased, (to cause in this controversy, the common rules of successors
are to be observed) but the Realm belongs to him in virtue of the common law
thereof, whereby the next male of the blood Royal must succeed, not in
quality and as owner of the goods of the last enioyer of the Crown, Alexan
conc. (...) Bald (...) digna ^ deleg.
but by his birthright, although in troth, in whatsoever concerns
Commonwealth and commodity, he be bound to keep and observe the covenants
and agreements of his predecessor, and therein only may he be accounted heir
to the King whom he has succeeded.

These be the strongest reasons that those of the contrary opinion can
allege, which also I have further augmented then our writer, least it should
seem to the learned Lawyers (to whom only in this last article I mean to
speak) that I would omit or dissemble any thing that they could imagine against
the truth, which by this means I think to have laid so open, for that every
one may perceive it an easy matter to answer all their frivolous allegations,
by the grounds of the knowledge of the laws, which both the one and the other
would use. Wherefore there is no more for the Frenchmen to do, but when
occasion shall fall out, to resolve upon the most certain and reasonable
opinion for the said Lord King of Navarre, son to the elder brother, allowed
by a great number of Doctors both Canon, and Civil, even by the two notable
lights of the Law, Innocent for the Canon law, and Barthole for the Roman
policy, who make no difficulty thereof, neither is the doubt dispersed over
the Land to any other end, but to destroy both the one and the other, and so
to give opportunity to a third, to become Lord of the Realm, under whom this
Estate will never flourish, and the tyrant, the instrument of the devil, who
durst enterprise the same, shall perish miserably with all such instruments as
to that effect he may have used. Let therefore the perturbers of the peace of
this Realm, if they be, I say not Christians, but even men, capable of
natural reason, ponder, not the politic Justice of the society of this
civil life, but only the hazard wherein they shall at once plunge their
memory, honor, wealth, life and soul: and they shall see, unless they will
wilfully be blind, those men that shall most employe them selves in favor of
the detestable conspiracy now discovered by all good Frenchmen, remain also
overwhelmed in the greatest misery and ruin, which shall leave unto them more
affliction without comparison, then to the veriest clownes and poorest pesants
in the country, over whose bellies they shall so often have marched: because
at ye least, the life, peace of conscience, and divine vengeance, shall stay
in favor of these: when the others may assure themselves of the loss of the
love of God, the light of the world, and their good fame with ye posterity,
for having tainted their hands in the blood of their Kings, Princes, and
fellow countrymen, and for evil entreating them, and assisting the Tyrants,
tormentors of their consciences, and abusers of the honors that they have
received of our Kings, and the Princes of the blood of the house of France. Let
them mark the miserable end of Absalon, and Achitophel his counsaylor,
against the Majesty of David: of Adonias, Athalia, and infinite others, who
with their conspiraties have dyed in confusion and misery. Oh noble Frenchmen,
will you abide in the world, I will not say to look upon, but which is more,
to hasten and advance the cursed drift of the translation of the scepter of the
Flowerdeluce, out of the hands of your King, and the Princes of his house, to
whom only you do owe your condition, your wealth, and your very life, not in
courtesy, and honesty only, but by Gods express commandment, who has
therewith burdened your consciences? Will you more then villanously forgo that
great commendation which all nations in the world have so greatly commended and
honored in you, for being more faithful and ielous of the hononr and service
of your Kings, and Princes of their blood, then any nation that ever was upon
the face of the earth? Will you stand as instruments, and offer the ladder to
those y^ wrongfully would make them selves Kings, and cause you to commit the
most abominable fellonie that ever was conspired? Do you not plainly see that
those who do solicit you, are not able to vphoulde you, as having no other
means then such as your enemies minister unto the^, to whom both you and they
shall serve for pasture the next day after? Is it not most certain that they
cannot pretend, since God has given us a King, (I will speak without
s^atterie, as wanting the honor to be known of his Majesty,) of whom the
least of them can not say the pertinent occasion of his coffeehouse? but
yet, when GOD shall have wrought his will upon him, are ye not certain who ought
to be his successor? Live you not under a Christian Monarchy, that has laws
established for that purpose? Would you live to be called corrupters, and
perturbers of the foundations of the Crown, under the which, and by the
succession whereof your fathers have obtained and left unto you the name,
honor, and title of Nobility, which ye bear? What ween you the curious
posterity may think of you, when they find it written that the French
Nobility took Arms against their King, to name unto him a successor, and
under the pretense thereof to deprive him of all authority, respect, and honor
unto him due, even by him that should succeed him according to the Salick law,
who with this declaration should still be assisted by these firebra^ds of this
time, to the end to make him withstand and eclipse the bright sun of his
Majesty? What opinion would you wish Christian Princes to conceive of your
fidelity, when they shall know that without regard of your bond to this
Crown, you shall have assisted the enemies thereof against your King and the
Laws of the Realm? Would you your King should have occasion of ielouzy
against him whom they pretend to cause to be nominated, who also by such as
shall have advanced him, might be persuaded to lift his horns over high, and
so to become a censor over his Lord? To be brief, I tell you the world could
never bear two Su^nes. What greater recompense may ye hope for of strangers
that you know not, then of your natural Princes who^ God by his holy will has
established over you? Is it not felicity enough for you to be borne men? to
be made Christians? to have been brought up Frenchmen? See ye not well enough,
that the Lord Cardinal of Bourbon is but the vizard and pretense to run into
arms for the glutting of their ambition? there is great zeal and likelihood
in their deeds, when they would name a successor above 60. years old, broken
and crooked, to succeed a young King, healthie, lusty, moderate in his
exercizes and manner of diet: yea, and all this contrary to Justice and the
laws, not only of this Realm, but also of all other the best ordered Estates
that ever were, whereby together with infinite reasons I have showed you, that
it is the King of Navarre to whom the same should apperteyne. Shall I with
Cicero speaking of Caesar and Pompey, tell you all? They here offer unto us ye
Image of the Lord Cardinal of Bourbon, but would set up their own: They will
with that good man arm them selves, and become more Kings then he, who^ they
make show to love more then any other, and yet do they love themselves better,
even to the prejudice of your honor, life, memory, and reputation, if ye take
not heed: so that God will undoubtedly suffer them to be swallowed up, when
they have been the occasions of infinite murders, robberies, and spoils. For
the letting whereof, as also of all other mishap, or destruction, that we
attend of such civil wars, as under this contention are brewed, let us
withdraw our selves to God, and most humbly beseech him to order our hearts in
one consent according to his holy will, to the end, according thereunto we
may acknowledge and embrace our King, who is the same to whom next after God we
owe al, and after the divine power ought to be unto us above all. Let us also
weete, that next unto him we are bound to have respect unto him, whom it has
pleased God to cause to be borne into the world to govern us in the Royal
dignity, whenever it should please him to call away our king without issue
capable of ye Crown: and together with him, whom for us he has elected and
blessed in his mothers womb, let us with one heart and mind cry, peace,
peace, be among us, glory to the Lord on high, and peace and good will unto
men. Amen.

FINIS.

