AN ANSWER TO A LETTER OF A IESVIT NAmed Tyrie, be Iohne Knox.

PROVE. XXVI. Answer not a fool according to his foolishenes, least thou be
like him: answer a fool according to his foolishnes least he be wise in his
owe^ co^seat

THE contrariety appearing at the first sight, betuix their two sente^cis, stay
it for a time, both heart to meditate and hand to write any thing, co^trair
that blaspheamous letter. But when with better mind, God gave me to considder,
that whosoever opponis not him self bouldly to blasphemy and manifest lei^,
differis lytill fra tratouris: cloking and fostering, so far as in them ly, the
treasoun of tratours, and dampnable impiety of those, against whom Gods just
evengance mon burn without end, unless spedie repentance follow: To quiet
therefore my own conscience, I put hand to the pen as follows.

IMPRENTIT AT SANCTANdrois be Robert Lekpreuik, Anno. Do. 1572.

IOHNE KNOX The seruand of Jesus Christ, now weary of the world, and daily
luiking for the resolution of this my earthly Tabernakle, to the faithful,
that God of his mercy sall appoint to feght after me, desyris grace, mercy, and
peace, from God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, with the spirit of
sanctificatioun, to resist all kind of impiety, in their last and most wicked
dayis, wherein Satan rages, knowing that he hes a short time to trouble Goddis
people.
WONDER not (gentill Reidar) that sic ane argument should proceed fra me in their
dolorous days, after that I have taken gudenight at ye world and at all ye
fasherie of the same, except to lament for my awin sinnis, and for the sinnis
of vtheris.

Of whom (allace) I feir money can not lament for them selves, because they have
sauld the^ selves to wirk impiety, with all gredynes, without sens and fealing
of any dolor that proceadeth from God. Yet Lord thou knows thy owen, and thou
draws from iniquity, all, that unfeignedly incall thy name. There are seuin
years past, sen a scrole, send from a Jesuit to his brother, was presented
unto me be a ^aithfull brother, requyring sum answer to be maid to the same:
whais just petitioun, I willing to obey, I pat my hand to the pen, al^hogh I
^and small time of quyetnes: for it was immediately after that I was called back
from exyle, be the Kirk of Edinburgh after David's Judgment. Amongs my other
caires, I (...) that which follow is, and that in few day is: which being
finished, I ^epented of my laubour, and purposed fully to have suppressed it.

Which na^ dout I had done, if that the Devil had not steirit up the Jesuits*
of Paris to ^^ouble godly hearts, with the same arg^mentis which Ty^ie vsis:
amplifyed and set (...), with all the dog eloquence, that Satan can deuyse,
for suppressing of the fre progres of the Euangell of Jesus Christ, and for the
cuiring of the wou^dit ^ead of ye beist, tha^ Roman Antichrist: who shall to
destruction in despyte of all those that study, either to erect, or yet to
manteane him and his dampnable abusis. Which God hes disclo^^t to sic as the
Devil hes not blinded: so that they can not discern betuix darkness and light.
The ordour that is keped in an swering of his proud arrogancy and presumpteous
foolishenes, the entres of the treatise will declare. I have added unto this
pref^ce, a meditatioun or pr^yer thrawin forth of my sorrowful heart and pro
(...) be my half dead tongue, befoir I was compelled to leave my flock of
Edinburgh, who now dispersed, suffering lytill les calamity, then did the
faithful after the persecu^ioun of Steaphen. Lord comfort and strenthen them
to the end: that anes we may meit in glory. For all worldly (...) is bot vane,
and an occasioun of new dolor. Call for me deir brethren, that God in his
mercy will pleis to put end, to my long and panefull battle. For now being
vnabill to feght* as God (...) gave strenth, I thrust an end befoir I b^ moir
troubilsum to the Faithful. And yet Lord let my desire be moderat, be thy holy
spirit: and giu^ me patience to beir whatsoever it pleisis thy godly Majesty
to lay upon this my wicked Carkaso.

THE PRAYER.
Lord Jesus receive my spirit, and put an end at thy good pleasure, to this my
miserable life: for Iusti^e and treuth are not to be found among the sons of
men.

Iohne Knox with deliberat mind to his God.

BE merciful unto me. o Lord, and call not into Judgment my manyfold finnis:
and cheiflie those, whereof the world is not able to accuse me. In youth, ^^yd
age, and now after many battelles, I find nothing into me, bot vanity and
corruption. For in quyetnes I am negligent, in trouble impatient, tending to
disperation, and in the mean state, I am so carried away with vane fantaseis,
y^ (allace) o Lord, they withdraw me from the presence of thy Majesty. Pride
and ambitioun assault me on the ane part, couetous^es and malice trouble me on
the other: briefly, o Lord, the aff^ctionis of the flesh do almost suppres
the operatioun of thy spir^te. I tak the, o Lord (who only knows the secreitis
of hearts) to record, that in nane of ye foirsaid I do delight: bot that with
them I am troubled, and that foir aganis the desire of my in ward man, which
sobbis for my corruptioun and would repose in thy mercy alone. To the which I
clame: and that in the promise that thou hes maid to all penitent sinneris, (of
whose number I profes my self to be one) in the obedience and death of my only
Savior our Lord Jesus Christ. In whom be thy meare grace, I dout not my self
to be electit to eternal saluatioun: whereof thou hes geuin unto me (unto me,
o Lord, most wretched and vnthan^full creature) most assured signs. For being
drowned in ignorance, thou hes geuin to me knawledge above the co^moun sort of
my brethren: my tongue hes thou vsit to set forth thy glory, to oppoung
Idolatry, errouris and falls doctrine: Thou hes compelled me to foirspeak,
asweil delyuerance to y^ afflicted, as distructioun to certane inobedient: the
performance whereof, not I alone, bot the verray blind world hes alreddy s^ne.
But above all, o Lord, thou, be the power of thy holy spirit, hes sealed into
my heart remission of my sins, which I acknawledge and co^fes my self to have
received be the precious blood of Jesus Christ ones shed. Be whose perfyte
obedience, I am assured, my manyfould rebellionis ar defaced: my grievous sins
purged, and my ^aule maid the tabernackle of thy godly majesty: Thou, o
father of mercyes, thy Sone our Lord Jesus, my only Savior, Mediator, and
Advocate, and thy holy spirit remaning in y^ same be tr^w faith: which is the
only victory that ouercu^meth the world. To the there^oir, o Lord, I commend
my spirit. For I thrist to be resolved from this body of sin; and am assured
that I ^all rise agane in glory: howsoever it be that the wicked, for a ^yme,
^all trod me and others thy seruandes under their feit. Be merciful, o Lord,
unto the Kirk within this Realm: continue with it the light of thy Euangell:
augment the number of true preicheris: and let thy merciful prouydence luik
upon my desolate bedfellow, the fruit of her bosom, and my two deir Children
Nathanael and Ele^zer. Now Lord put end to my misery,

At Edinburgh the 12. of March. 1565.
AN ANSWER TO A LETTER OF A Jesuit named Tyrie, be Iohne Knox.
OF leat dayis, there came to our hands a Letter, direct unto you, right
worshipful, from James Tyrie, who styleth him self your humble seruitour and
brother: The beginning whereof, shaweth the care that he beiri^ of your
saluatioun, his cheritie, that hes moved him so often to write unto you, and
thairwith covertly he accuses you, yt he hes received no answerof his former:
and yet that the same cheritie moves him, still to co^tinew in his former suit.
In the progres of the said letter, he planely furthshawis, what is his scope
and purpois: to wit, to alien at your mind from the treuth of God, now of
Goddis greit mercy, after long darkness, offered to this Realm. The purpois, as
we suppone, wherefore ye send ye same letter unto us, is, y^ we may give
solutio^is to they thingis that he obiectis aganis the treuth. Which to do, were
not verray hard, prouydit that his dytement were sensible, and his argumentis
formal and propir, to that which he wald persuade. But because, in writing he
appears to us, rather scabrushly to have translatit that which he wrytis
forth of latin, or of sum other forane tongue, the^ freely to haif expressit his
a win mind: And because that his argume^tis, are not only impertinent, but also,
sa general, that in na wise they conclude that which h^ would prove: Our
answers must exc^id y^ measure of a missiue: and yet, we sall auoid^ sa far as
we can, all vnprofitabil prolixitie. But leist that any should think, that we
deprave, either his dytement, or argume^tis, we shall insert his hole letter,
from parcel, to parcel: and give answer, to sic headis, as either ar
blaspheamous aganis ye treuth of God, or yet, may be offe^siue to y^ wa^k
conscience of men. In other thingis, (...) ^all not be curious: his letter thus
beginis:

TYREIS LETTER.
SCHIR, after hartly co^mendatioun, of service, and prayeris: That I have
writtin sa often afoir (we keip his a win wordis and ortographie) It come of my
cheritie, that I aucht to zow, for sindrie ressounis: and of the solicitude,
that cheriti^ causit me to have, of the eternal saluatio^^ of zour saul:
desyra^d, be zour answer to have knawin zour mind, in that behalf: quhilk sen I
have not obtenit, as zit, I have thocht, haifand opportunity of yis beirer, to
write this writing amangis the rest: and to exhort zow thairby: that ze wald,
ernistly (as it becu^mis ane man, to quhome God hes geuin sa money giftis and
talentis) and rypely considder be quhat way ze mon cu^ to that end, to the
quhilk God hes creatit and redemit zow.

ANSWER.
TO this long preface, we only answer this: that if the Scribes and Pharesies,
who compassed sea and land, to make a proselyt, gat a curse be ye mouth of our
master Jesus Christ, Math. 23.
notwithstanding all their appeirand zeal, and panefull travel: who ca^ dout,
bot that sic as study, to draw back agane to superstitioun and Idolatry, sic
as God hes called from the same, shall receive ^ dowble maled^ctioun, under
what pretense that ever they do it. For if they who brought Ethnickis, and
manifest Idolatouris, to sum Religioun, were accursed? How much moir ar they
detestable that travel to bring men from a true Religiou^, to the deapest
Idolatry that ever yet was upon the face of the earth? Which long hes been
manteyned in ye papistical Kirk, whereto we persaue the writer of the letter
would entyse you, as his subseque^t perswasionis manifestly declaireth. For thus
he writes.

TYRIES LETTER.
QVhilk appeiris to me, to be the only Faith and Religioun, keipit in the
Catholic Kirk of Christ, sen the beginning thairof. Quhilk appeiris cleirly,
be the may plane wordis of the Propheit Isai, quhair he speikis of ye Kirk.
Gens and regnum quod non seruierit tibi, peribit.

Quhilk words gif any wald apply to yair new found Kirkis and specially to zour
inuisibil Kirk of Scotland (bot zit aucht zeir auld) he is co^uictit. For it is
manifest yat befoir a thousand zeiris in all the world was yair pepill yat trow
it as yai do quha defendis the contrary quhilk na man bot he that wald schaw
his impudence and his ignorance togidder dar deny, and of the Kirk, quhairof
the Propheit speikis. It is said be him in the secund Cha. that it sal be
manifest and visibil throw all ye world. Quhairfoir gif ze can not schaw quhat
place of the world afoir three hundredth zeir zour Kirk was into, it follow is of
neces^itie that it is na Kirk. etc. Thus far of his letter.

ANSWER.
THE first part of his counsall we approve and add thereto that the life
Everlasting consistes in the knawledge of the only true God, Joan. ^^*
and in y^ knowledge of him whom he hes send Jesus Christ.

That he that beleuis in the Sone of God hes life euerl^sting, Joan. ^
and is alreddy past from deith to life, bot he that beleuis not, sall not le
life, but the wraith of God abydes upon him. We further affirm, y^ without the
society and bosom of the true Kirk, never was, is, nor salbe saluatioun unto
man. In their and like general heidis we disagre not from the Papistis, The
h^idi^ of differe^c^^ betuix the true worschipperis of God and the Papistis.
but the difference and dout standis in y^ speciallis, to wit, what Faith is,
and what ground it hes, what is religioun, and wherein i^ differis from
superstitioun and from Idol^trie. And finally what is the true Kirk* and how
it may be decerned from y^ Sinagoge of Satan. Their heads we say, ought he in
special to have intreted unto you if he had been minded to have instructed you
in a treuth. But because (as y^ progres of his letters declares) his mind was
to draw you to the bondage of that Roman Antechrist, he takis general
propositionis most true and most certane in them selves, whereupon he would
conclude that which is most falls and altogether pernitius to the saluatioun of
man. To let the craft of Satan moir evidently appear, w^ shall draw his
perswasioun in form of argument, and after return to the farther meaning of
the Propheit, and to the declaratioun of their termis Faith, Mayor.
Religioun and Catholic Kirk.

The Propheit affirms, that whosoever sall not serve Jerusalem, shall perish.

But the promeis maid to Jerusalem, Minor.
appertenis unto the Kirk. Ergo whosoever seruis not the Kirk sall perish.
Co^clusi.
This hol^ argument we admit, and m^st constantli^ we do affirm it, and yet
sall he never be able to prove his intent, why the Pap^ and Papists have the
Kirk of Scotland.
which is, that y^ Kirk of Scotland is no Kirk. We will oppin the wound which
the writer of the letter keapes couerit, and yet it most greuis him, as it
does the rest of al papistis. The Realm of Scotland (all praise to God) hes
refused the Pape that Roman Antechrist, and not only be preaching, bot also be
the publict Laws hes dampened his tyrannical laws, his odious
superstitiounis, and usurped jurisdiction. And therefoir cry the papistis that
we are declyned from the true Kirk, and ar fallen back from the Catholic faith.
what Pap^stes must prove be^oi^ they be able to convict us or any other Natioun
of apostasy (...) the Kirk and (...) Faith.
But befoir that they be able to co^uict us of those crimes, they mo^ preif two
things, former, that whatsoever was promised to Jerusalem dois properly and
only appertene unto Rome, and this mon they do not be conjectures, but be plane
wordis as God pronounced be his Prophet of Jerusalem. This is the first. The
secund is, that albeit Rome were as able to prove a promise maid to it, as
Jerusalem was of whom it was said: This is my rest, hear will I dwell, because
I have chosin it. And albeit that the papis of Rome whom he stylis the
perpetual successioun of that Kirk, had as an assured and plane probatio^,
that be god they were called, be God they were admitted, and that be God they
should be ma^teyned in their ministry and functioun, as that the Levites and
successioun of Aaron had to produce at all times for their defense, yet if they
(we say) who call them selves the successouris of the Apostlis be not able to
prove that they have co^stantlie remaned in the first league and co^uena^t
which Christ Jesus maid with his Apostlis when he send them forth, to preach
the glaid tydingis of the Kingdom, and to establishe his Throne, not only
among the Iewis, bot also among the Gentiles, according to ye former
propheseis. Albeit we say that all their former they were abil to prove (as they
ar never able to do) yet have they said nothing y^ may help their cause, nor
^urt ouris, onles that they thairwith planely prove y^ the Kirk of Rome and the
successioun of the same hes remanit and yet remaneth in ye original purity of
the Apostlis, in doctrine, life, laws and ceremonies. For their being
corrupted, the tytill of successiou^ will na mair help them then did the
braging of the Preistis under the Law, who cryit aganis the Propheit Jeremy,
(...)
the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord. What
was answered unto them, let ye ^. Chap. of his Prophecy witness. But farther of
the s^ccessioun and of the assurance thairof after. Now mo^ we sumthing speak
of Faith, Religioun, and Catholic Kirk whairwith he would ter^fie your
conscienc^ and deface the treut^ and then mon we answer to his blaspheamous
tau^tis and mockage, befoir we have confessit that to leave without faith,
without Religion, and without the society of the Catholic Kirk, bringis with
it most certanely death and dampnation. But yet we affirm, yat all opinion
that is commonly received under the Name of faith, is not faith which God
approuis, bot true faith mo^ have for the ground and assurance thereof Godis
expressed word, of his mercy promised in Christ Jesus, whereto the heart of ye
faithful mon consent, so moved be y^ haly gaist. And therefore we fear not to
affirm, what ground ^aith h^th.
that the Papistis having no better ground for their faith then consent of men,
decreis of counsallis, and antiquity of time, have no faith bot a fond, yea,
a dampnable opinion. And the same we affirm of Religiou^, which if it be
pleasing and acceptable unto God, The warra^d of religiou^^
must have his a win commandment and approbatiou^ for a warrant: other wise it
can not be bot odious in his presence, as a thing repugning to his expres
commandment: saying, not that which, appeari^ good in thy a win eyis sall thou
do to the Lord thy God, Deu. 4. and ^^
b^t what the Lord thy God hes commanded the, that do thou, ade nothing to it,
diminishe nothing from it. Be this precept of that Eternal God, who is
immutable, and that can command nothing but y^ which is just, or all people,
Realms, and Natiounis (that will auow them selves to be the inheritance of the
Lord) bound and oblist to measure their Religioun, Not^.
not be the exemple of other Realms, nether yet be their owen good intentioun,
or determinatiou^ of men, but only be the expressed word of God. So that what
therein is commanded, aucht to be done, and what is not commanded be him, aucht
in na wise to be done be the people of God, what apperance or external shaw of
holiness that ever it hes. And thairfoir have we most justly rejected the Rabble
of ceremoneis which the Papistis held for the chief exercise of their
Religioun, as thingis having na better ground then the inuentioun and consent
of men. Now shortly of the Kirk commounlie callit Catholic. The name of the
Kirk is commoun, and is taken as well for the congregation of the wicked, as for
the assembly of the godly, as it is plane be ye words of David, saying,
Psalm. 2^.
I have hated y^ Kirk, or the assembly of the wicked, the term Catholic,
which signifyis universal, he^ not included in it that vertew which Papists
allege, That is, that whatsoever is catholic, y^, must be good. For if so
were, then sin in the original world should have been good, for it was so
Catholic (that is universal) that it ouerflowed y^ hole earth only one house
excepted. How universal Idolatry was amongis the Gentiles, Historeis
witness, and how braid the pestilent sect of Machomet is this day spread,
experience dois teich us. And yet we suppone, that no man of right judgment
will either approve the one or the other, notwithsta^nding of their
universality, and there fore we must have a better assurance of y^ Kirk, to
the which we aucht to join our selfis then that it is Catholic, or
universal, To wit, it must be holy, and the co^munioun of Sanctis. For in the
confessioun of our faith, we say not I believe the Kirk universal, bot I believe
the holy Kirk universal, the communion of Sanctis. Wherefoir we affirm, that
if that Kirk which is called Catholic or universal have not holiness in the
heart be true faith, and the Confessioun of the same in the mouth, and in the
foirhead, it ceissis to be y^ immaculate spous of Jesus Christ, in whose boso^e
the sons of God ar nurished to the life everlasting. And so befoir that the
writer of the letter shall be able to convict us, that we have declyned from the
holy Kirk, he must first defyne what is the verray holiness of the Kirk, wherein
it consistis* fra whom it flowis, and what is the effect of the same. And when
thus he hes done, he must prove yat ye Kirk of Rome hes been and is only holy,
so that no Kirk befoir it did ever enjoy that tytill, nether yet that any that
after may ensew it, may sa be justly callit, and thus we think salbe verray
hard to Master Tyrie and all the Jesuits in Europe to prove. Bot now that the
vanity of his argument may ye moir euide^tlie appear, we will in as few wordis
as we can examine the mind of the Prophet. Sic as diligently markis the scope
of ye Propheit Isaias, sall cleirly se, that from the 40. Cha. of his prophecy
to the end of the same, he trauellis principally to comfort Jerusalem, and the
Natioun of the Iewis, whose miserable destruction and fearful captivity he
foresaw in spreit. Prounced the same in his publict sermonis, and left ye
memorial and undoubted Register thereof to the post eritie that was to follow,
and was to be partakeris of all the plaigues that were befoir spoken. And least
that they in the myddis of yair calamity should have disparit of any
delyuerance: from the same 40. Chap. back we say, that the Prophet as y^
Messinger of Godis mercy pronounces to Jerusalem, to Mont Syon, and to the
afflicted Iewis, delyuera^ce from captivity, the protection of God to be their
defense, the distructioun of Babilone, and of all their enemeis. The coming of
the Messiah promised unto them the felicity of his Kingdom, the vocation of
the Gentiles, and finally the promyses flowing from mercy that he had maid unto
them to co^tinew for ever. And among their many fold promysis this was one, the
Kingdom and the Natioun that sall not serve thee, sall perish. Now glaidly
wald we learn of the writer to what Realm, to what Nation, to what Province
or Cietie will he appoint us, that therein we may serve Jesus Christ, and his
immaculate spous the Kirk: to the end that we shall not perish, If he will name
Rome and the Kirk thereof, then must we demand two things, y^ former. What
become of all the faithful (...) space of a thousand years that flowed b^^uix
the making of the former promyses, Answer Papist^^.
and the dayis of the Apostilis, what time y^ ^uangel began publictly to be
offered unto the Gentiles. All which time Rome was nothing bot a Den of
Idolatry, we think he will not say that the faithful perished. And wear bauld
to say that the faithful served not Rome, nether yet the Kirk contenit thairin
all that time. This is the first whereof we would be resolved. The secund is,
that if the writer will allege, that during all the time the promise foirsaid
apperteaned to Jerusalem and unto Mont Syon: but that after the ascension of
Jesus Christ, and after that the Euangell was received of the Gentiles, the
promise which befoir was maid to Jerusalem was transfered unto Rome. If so be,
we pray the writer that after he hes consulted with the fynest Papistis be they
Jesuits, or be they others, that he will shaw unto us where we shall find the
resignatio^ and y^ assurance thereof. We clearly read the promises maid to
Jerusalem and unto Mont Syon. We find that the Euangell was there preached in
dispyte of Satan. We find that from thence Peter and Iohne ^er send to
Samarea, and the refter the Euangell was planted among the Gentiles: we find
farther that Paul wrote to y^ sanctes that were at Rome, and that he him self
was caryit presoner to it, and that he remanit two years there under custody
in his ludgeing: bot that ever the promises maid to Jerusalem were transferred
unto Rome, we find not. And therefoir albeit that we of the Realm of Scotland
have refused Rome, Not^ and answer dir^^^lie.
and the tyrrannie thereof, we think not that we have refused the society of
Christis Kirk: but that we are ioynit with it, and daily ar fed of our mothers
breasts, because we imbrase no other doctrine then that which first flowed
forth of Jerusalem: whose Cietizenes be grace we auow our selves to be. But now
to the taunting blaspheamies of the writer: It pleisis him to term our Kirkis
new found, invisible, yet but aucht year auld. etc. and our Euangel newly
invented. Which blaspheamies albeit that man spair, yet we are assured the
Eternal our God sall not suffer unpunished in this life, and in the life to
cum: onles that speadie and vnfeaned repentance blot away the same.

But the writer left to the Judgment of God, Tyries reasone.
we would know of him why he calle^h our Kirkis new found, and our Euangel but
new inverted. He appears to give his reasone in these words (for sayis he)
it is manifest that befoir a thousand years in all the world was there people
that trowit as they do quha defendis the contrare.

This reasone conteyneth in it sic folly besides the obscurity and generality
of it, Answer.
that we stand in dout at what member we shall begin to confute the same. But
because his greatest streng^h appears to stand in this, that befoir a thousand
years, there were people in all the world that believed otherwise then we
believe: To that h^^d we will first answer and say. That granted, that befoir a
thousand years there was people in all the world that trowed as Papists now
trow, what shall thereof yet be concluded, that our Kirkis ar new found? And
will he say that our Euangell is but newly invented? A good dialectis^^ne would
answer: that albeit the antecedent were granted, the consequent may justly be
denied. And the reasone is, because that nether does the Kirk, the faith of the
same, nor the authority of the Eua^gell of Christ Jesus, depend upon that
which men believed befoir that it was published. Nether yet is the age of the
Kirk to be compted from the time, when it pleased God of his mercy, either to
reveal his word to any Realm or Natioun that befoir was ignorant of it, or
yet to reform abuses which have taken root among the people of God be the
negligence of men. And that this reasone and propositioun is true: the
consideratioun of the planting of the Kirk, and of the diverse reformatiounis
maid within the same shall witness. When God called Abraham from Vr of the
Caldeanes, G^n. ^2.
and maid to him y^ promise of the bli^^ed sead, and after gave unto him the
sign of Circumcision: were there not people dispersed universally upon the face
of the earth, wha trowit and thought that they had a good and perfect
Religioun? Yea, euin that same Religioun (as they supposed) wherein Noha served
God. And yet we know that the spirit^ of God dampneth the multitude of that
age of Idolatry: and thereintill magnifies the mercy of God, who from that
corrupted multitude called Abraham, and be grace maid him the Father of the
faithful. No^ would we dema^d of the writer of the letter, if the age of
Abrahames faith, should have been measured from the error of y^ multitude that
past befoir him: and if that the age of the Kirk gadderit within his house
should have been called an aucht year auld Kirk, when that Abraham had so
long obeyed God, while that all the world continewed in their Idolatry? We
demand (we say) if their auld Idolatry, maid Abrahames Faith to be but a new
found Faith: and if their multitude and universality having for them
antiquity, maid the Kirk that was in Abrahames house to be a new found Kirk? We
suppoue that men of Judgment shall otherwise pronu^ce and subscriue with us:
that the Faith of Abraham had the same antiquity that the word had which he
believed. Now plane it is, that the word which he believed was the self same word
which God pronu^ced unto the woman in the Gardine, speaking aganis the Serpent,
saying: I shall put inimitie betuix the and the woman, betuix thy sead and her
sead, Genesis 3.
that sead shall break down thy head, and thou shall break dou^ his heal. This
promise we say, being especially maid to Abraham in these words: In thy sead
shall all the Natiounis of the earth be blissed, was the ground of his faith
like as that it was the ground of the faith of Adam, Abell, Seth, and of all
the faithful befoir him: so that his faith was no new faith, bot was that same
faith which had continued among Godis elect from the beginning. For true
^aith may not be measured from the error of men, bot from the word and promise
which the faithful believe. Is the word from the beginning, and the promise
undoubted? then must the faith that thereupon is grounded, not only be true,
but also of the same age and antiquity that the word is. And therefore
whenever the Papists and we shall cu^ to reaken of the age of our faith: we
dout nothing but that there faith, in mo principal pointis nor one or two,
shall be found verray young, and but lately invented in respect of that only true
faith which this day in the Kirks of Scotland is professed. And the self same
thing a^firme we of our Kirk, and of the Euangell preached within the same: to
wit, that the Euangell which of Godis mercy is revealed unto us, is not forged
be man, but that it is the self same Euangel which Jesus Christ taught be his a
win mouth, and that his Apostlis at his commandment published unto the world.
And therefore we say that our Kirk is no new found Kirk (as the wrytet
blaspheamously rayleth) but that it is a part of y^ holy Kirk universal, which
is grounded upon the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostlis: having the same
antiquity that y^ Kirk of the Apostles hes, as concerning doctrine, prayers,
administratioun of Sacramentis, and all other things requisit^ to a
particulare Kirk. But yet will y^ writer of the letter allege, y^ we believe
not as the most part of men have believed a thousand years and moir. For they
believed the Mess to be a Sacri^ice propiciatorie for the sins of the quick
and the dead: The Pape to be the head of y^ Kirk and Christ's vicare in the
earth: The material body of Christ Jesus, flesche blood and bane to be in the
Sacrament of the Alter, after that the wordis of consecration were pronunced be
a Preast, Super materia debita: that the prayers of the leuing profit the
departed, and sic others as the Catholic faith of the Papists have concluded.
These Artickles will the writer say we believe not: and therefoir how can it be
denied but that our Kirk is new found and the doctrine thereof is new. We have
answered and yet we answer agane, That whatsoever Papists have believed befoir
us, which has no better ground then y^ determinatioun of their ow^n counsall:
Can nether preiudge our faith grounded upon Godis expressed word, nether yet
can prove our Kirk to be but a new found Kirk. For if ane commoun error, and a
superstitious ^orshipping of God, received of a multitude, should have y^
strength that it should preuale against Godis simple treuth, and against his
worshipping prescriued in his word: then had the Propheit Helias been into a
miserable condition: Who being but one man opponed him self to the King, to his
counsall, to his Prophets, Preastes and people, and in plane words accused
them all of Apostasy from God, from his true worshipping, and from the
obedience of his Law: and planely convicted them to be Idolatoures, because they
had imbrased a worshipping of God not contained in his word. It is a wonder
that the King with his Preastes and Propheites excepted not against the
Propheit and said: how can y^ be Idolatry, which our Kings and people sense
the dayis of Ieroboa^ have used and manteyned for Gods true service. Thou art
but one man, and we are a multitude: how can it be that we all should err, and
that thou alone should please God. But no such thing find we objected unto the
Propheit. But his requeast, being but one man was obeyed: quhilk was, that God
him self should judge betuix him and the^, as that he did be fire from the
heaven.

This privilege crave we to be granted to us of the Papists in our days: to
wit, that they suffer God to Judge betuix our Religioun and theirs: What he
approves, let it be approuen of both, and what be him is not commanded, nor
be the Apostles of Jesus Christ established and practiced, let it be of both
rejected, and so shall we suddanelie aggre. But if that they will still cry,
that we are Schismatykes and Apostates, because we refuse to defyle our selves
with their abhominationis: We ca^ not but appeal from their corrupt sentence
to the vncorrupt Judge, of whose favors we are assuredly persuaded in y^
point, because he has said follow not the multitude in evil doing: and because
that we find Kingis, Propheites and people befoir us, to have done the self
same thing in their days (and therefore to have been approved of God), which
we in Godis fear have done in our dayis. To wit, they have distroyed the
monumentis of Idolatry, and have repressed the same externally be power and
force, notwithstanding the antiquity thereof, and that great multitude
adheared unto it. And this much for the multitude, and that which the
multitude most commonly believes. Now to the further ressounis of the writer.

He first tauntis and mockis us and our Kirk, calling it your invisible Kirk of
Scotland. Secundly he affirms, that the Kirk whereof the Prophet speaks
shall be manifest and visible through all ye world. And for his proof alleges y^
secu^d Chap. of the Prophet Isai. And last he co^cludes in these words.
Wherefore if ye can not shaw in what place of ye world, afoir three hundredth
year, your Kirk was into: It follows of necessity that it is no Kirk.

To these heads we must answer in ordour, and first we will pray the writer in
his nixt answer, to signify unto us, why he calls the Kirk of Scotland
invisible: seeing that the ground and the persons inhabitant within the same ar
subject to the senses of all those that list to look vpone them: yea, the
doctrine taught unto us is so patent, that the verray enemies them selves are not forbidden to hear and to judge of it. And finally the administration of
the Sacraments within our Kirkis are so p^blict, that none justly can
co^pleane, that they are either debarred from hearing or from sight. And
therefore howsoever it pleases the writer to delight him self in his owen
vanity, we fear not to affirm, That the Kirk of god within Scotland this
day, is as visible, as ever it was in Jerusalem* after that Christ Jesus
ascended to y^ heauenes, or as that it was visible in Samarea after that it
received ^he Euangell: Yea, we will further affirm, that y^ true Kirk of Jesus
Christ is as visible, yea, and as beutifull in all her proper ornaments this
day, within the Realm of Scotland, as ever she was in Corinthus, Galacia,
Philippi (yea or yet in Rome it self) what time that any of the Apostles rewled
them: or that when they were saluted be the Apostle in his Epistles for Kirkis.
And this for the first head.

The answer to the secund can not be so short, for his assertion aggreis so
little with the place of the Propheit, that we stand greatly in dout whether
that ever y^ writer hes traveled to understand the mind of the Prophet. His
assertion is this. Of the Kirk whereof the Propheit speaks, It is said be him
in the secund Chap. that it shall be manifest and visible through all the world.
The words of the Propheit are these.

It shall be in the last days, that the mo^tane of the house of the Lord, Isai. ^
shall be prepared in the tope of the montanes, and shall be exalted above the
hills and all Nationes shall flow unto it. And many people shall go and say:
Cu^ let us go up unto the montane of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob,
and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths. For the Law
shall go forth of Syon, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem, and he shall
judge among the Nationes and rebuke many people. etc.

In these words of the Prophet we find no such thing as the Kirk shall be
manifest and visible through all the world, We acknawledge a promise of glade
things to cum to be joined to Jerusalem, and unto Mont Syon, after the
miserable distructio^ of the same. We find the time appointed, to wit, the last
days. But that the promise may be the better tried, We must know of the
writer, when these last dayis began, and when they shall be compleit. We must
further know if there be any one certane place appointed, Question of the last
day^*
in the which it is said, y^ the Kirk of God shall be visible and manifest in all
ages. These two heads being considdered, it shall be moir easy to iudg^ of the
assertioun of the writer, and how it aggreis with the mind of the Prophet.

And first we think that the writer will not deny, but the last days whereof
the Prophet speaks, began long befoir y^ ever the Euangell of Jesus Christ was
known or publictlie received in Rome, Nota.
To wit, at the appearing of Jesus Christ in the flesh, when that he revealed
unto the world the hole will of his Father. For so are we taught be the
Apostle saying: god in auld times spoke unto our Fatheres in diverse manners be
the Prophets: Hob. 1.
In y^ last dayis he has spoken to us be his sone. etc. And the Apostle Peter
in that his most notable Sermon made to Jerusalem, the day of pentecost, Act.
^.
affirms, That the Proph^sie of Ioell made, as concerning the pouring forth of
Gods graces upon all flesh in the last days, was even then co^pleit, when
that the holy spreit descended down upon those that believed. So the^ we have
gotten the last days to have begun with Jesus Christ, who is the glory of the
secund Temple: when think we that they ended? If the writer will say, when Rome
received the Euangel then was the acco^plishment of the last days. As men
justly may dout thereof, so will y^ Apostle planelie deny, saying: The spreit
speaks evidently that in the last times some shall depart from the faith.
(...)
etc. Whereof we may gather, that the Apostle appointet^ the l^st time* to
contine^ longer, then y^ the Eua^gell was (...) p^blictly preached: To wit,
till that men should begin to fall from the faith, and give ears to the
doctrine of (...). Yea, if ye will search the Scriptures we shall (...) that
the last d^ves co^tine^ from the (...) appe^ring of Ies^s Christ in flesh,
Nota.
unto ^is l^st returning unto I^dge (...). So y^ the (...) days do not only
include the first (...) of the Euangell, but also the defectioun from it, yea,
and the restitution of it agane unto the world: be the brightness whereof, that
man of sin should be revealed, and distroyed: Whereof we conclude, that if y^
last days do yet continue, whereof the Prophet makes mention, the things
promised to be performed in them, are not yet altogether compleit: but are in
their progres, and shall so procead till that all be finished that is
foirspoken be the holy Prophets and Apostles of Jesus Christ.

And so may Jesus Christ this day be working in Scotland, albeit that Papists
rage against his Euangell, as in those days he wroght in Jerusalem, when the
Preastes and the hole visible Kirk (for y^ most part) raged against the same.
But now to the secund head.

We would know if the writer can appoint unto us any one certane place, where
this holy montane of God is promised to remane, manifestly and visible. For
this we make known to the hole world, That for the lufe we bear to the
buylding and reparing of Gods holy house, we have endangered life and all
things temporal. And therefore if the writer can appoint unto us a certane
place, whereunto God hes maid promise: we shall every one exhort an other,
with all diligence, to go up thereunto. But if he ca^ appoint none, having
greater ass^rance be Gods mouth moir then an other: Then will we cheritabillie
desire him to desist from taunting and mockage of so notable works of god, as
he of late years hes shawen in mo Realms then one. Our Master Christ Jesus
apointes us to no one certane place, where that we shall be assured of his
presence: but rather forbidding the obseruatioun of all places, he sendes us to
his owen spiritual presence, saying: wheresoever two or three are gathered in
my name, There am I in the midst of the^. And in an other place, Math. ^^.
Behold I am with you to the end of the world. Math. 28.
We being grounded upon these promyses, have good hope through Jesus Christ,
that in our Co^gregationis we have the favorable presence of Jesus Christ,
as well in his word, as in his holy sacraments. For in his name alone conuene
we, be him alone we call upon God our Father: and be him alone we are assured,
through y^ power of his holy spreit, to obtene our requeastes made according to
his will. We ^onder greatly, that the writer considderis not, that the promise
of the Prophet is, that all Nationis shall cum to that holy montane. We are a
Nation (how abject y^ ever we appear) why the^ will the writer deny unto us,
fre passage to the house of y^ Lord: seeing that the term of the last days is
not yet expyred, and seeing that we desire to be taught in the ways of the Lord
and to walk in his paths: yea, seeing that thousandis in Scotland refuses not
to be rebuked of the Lord, and to suffer him to judge among us. If the writer
will say, because we will not acknowledge Rome, to be the mother of all other
Kirkis: We answer as befoir, let us hear the commandment of our God, charging
us so to do, and our obedience shall not be long craved. For we are most
willing to obey our mother: Prouyding that she shaw the undoubted signs of a
natural mother. But an usurped title without farther assurance, we dar not
admit. And this far for his assertion, and for the mind of the Prophet. Now
follows his conclusioun in these words.

Wherefoir if ye can not shaw, what place of the world afoir three hundredth
years, your Kirk was into, It follows of necessity, that it is no Kirk. etc.

How this conclusion may be rightly gathered of the words of the Prophet, we
suffer the readers and the writer him self to co^sidder. And yet because, y^
till us it were a thing most grievous so to be excommunicate, that we ^er no
Kirk: That is, no parcel of the holy Kirk universal. We answer for our entres
and say: Nota.
That befoir 15. hundredth years our Kirk was in Jerusalem, Answer.
in Samaria, in Antiochia, and wheresoever Christ Jesus was trewly preached,
and his blissed Eua^gell obedientlie received, whether it was among y^ Iewis
or Gentiles. There we say was our Kirk, which is not bound to any one place,
but is dispersed upon y^ face of the hole earth, having one God, one faith, one
baptism, and one Lord Jesus, savior of all that vnfeanedly believe. And so we
fear not to receive the title and authority of a particulare Kirk, because we
have all things be Gods word that thereto apperte^nes. Yea, we are farther
bold to affirm, that if ever it shall please God, to bring y^ Kirk of Rome to
her original purity, that she shall not be ashamed to imbrase and reverence
the pure Kirk of Scotland as her dearest sister, and nixt resembling her in all
things: before that pride and avarice, joined with Idilnes and ryatous leuing,
corrupted her Ministers, and that the inuentionis of men were preferred to Gods
simple treuth. We say yet again y^ whenever the Kirk of Rome, shall be reduced
to that estate, in the which the Apostles left it, we are assured that she
shall vote in our favors, against all such as shall deny us to be a Kirk: if
God continue us in y^ simplicity which this day is mocked of y^ world. Now let
us hear how the writer proceadeth.

TYREIS LETTER.
AND swyftlie gif ze or any of zour cunning Ministeris of zour new inverted
Euangell schaw me the dew succession of his Kirk sen Christ, and by that, aggre
the manifest contradictioun that both I have red and seen with my ene amangis
y^ Doctouris and principallis of zour new doctrine, I sall not only re^unce the
sentence quhilk I haif haldin heirtofoir, bot als sall afoir all that will
hear me confess my ignorance and fa^lt, and sall employ all my strength to the
furthsetting of zour Religioun. etc.

ANSWER.
OF this part of the writers letter, and of that with is past befoir it is easy
to consider, that he will acknawledge no Kirk to be the true Kirk of Jesus
Christ, onles y^ it can shaw the dew succession thereof, from the days of Jesus
Christ. And farther, y^ the teachers of it, do so aggre in doctrine, that in no
point they be found to differ one from an other. We answer Answer.
if the immaculate spous of Jesus Christ were, bound to these two extremities,
The bondage thereof were most miserable: but because we find our master Jesus
Christ, is moir favorable to his pure Kirk, then Master Tyrie craves, we are
decreed to stand in that fredome and liberty, whereunto our head, and only
souerane Lord, hes called us. We find yt he sendes not his afflicted Kirk to
seak a lineal succession of any persons, befoir that he will receive the^: but
he with all gentilnes calls his sheap unto him self, saying: cum unto me all
ye yt laubour and are laden, and I will ease you. Math. 11.
And agane, all that the Father gives me, shall come to me: Io. 6.
and him that comes to me I cast not away.

O golden and most comfortable sentence, pronunced of him who can not lie.
Heir is no mention of any succession that we should clame to, befoir that we be
received of him, who is the head of y^ Kirk: but only it is said: that that
which the father gives, and that the sone receaueth, shall not be cast away:
nether yet will he lose any that cu^meth to him, but that he will save them and
raze them up at ye last day. And the Apostle speaking of the vocation of the
Gentiles sendes them not to seak a succession: but in the person of y^
Ephesianes pronunceth this sentence in favors of all that believe in Jesus
Christ.

Now therefore ye ar no moir strangers and foraners, but Cietizens with y^
sanct^s and of the household of God. Eph^s. 2.
And ar builded upon the fundatioun of the Apostles and Prophets. Jesus Christ
him self being the cheaf corner stone: in whom all the buylding coupled
together grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord. Heir we find men who befoir
were strangers maid Cietizenes with the saints and of the household of God, we
find them buyded upon the ^undation of the Apostles and Prophets: we find
Jesus Christ to be the cheaf corner stone: but we find no mention of any sic
succession as master Tyrie seameth rigorously and without Gods commandment
to crave. And there^oir we ca^ not but wonder why that mortal man shall crave
of us that, which nether God y^ Father his sone Christ Jesus nether yet the
holy Apostles in their Ministry craved of any Realm or Nation. And therefoir
let Master Tyrie tak this for an answer.

That an iniust requeast may justly be denied.

And yet least that the writer or any other should think the^ selves rather
mocked then answered. Nota.
We ade to the premises, that we are able to shaw the succession of our Kirk
directly, and laughfully to have flowed from the Apostles. And our reason is,
Direct answer.
because that in our Kirkis we nether admit doctrine, ryte, nor ceremony, which
be their wrytingis we ^ind not authorized. And albeit that this shall not
satisfy the new start up Jesuits: yet our consciences are at rest, because we
are assured to be auowed of the supreme judge.

The secund which he requires is, that we shall aggre the manifest
contradiction that is among the principal Doctoures of our new doctrine, and
late invented Euangell. His blaspheamie we remit be Gods hand to be punished,
and yet we would know what doctrine is that which he terms new. Our Euangell
(as befoir is said) is that same which Jesus Christ be him self and be his
Apostles manifested unto the world, Answer to Tyr^i^ vnr^asonable (...).
as all sic as hear y^ form^ of our doctrine ca^ witness. Where he desires us
to aggre all controversies amo^ge^ our teacheris: we answer, bona fide, that we
know no controversy in doctrine, especially of that which concerns man's
salvation within the Realm of Scotland: but that all the Preacheours within
our Kirkis uniformly aggre in doctrine and judgment, notwithstanding the
diversity of gifts. If Master Tyrie would send us to consiliate all
controversies that are in Germany and ellis where his secund petition hes no
greater reason, then had the former. For of God we have no farther charge, but
to watch over that flock with is subject unto us. God hes reased and appointed
us Preacheours to the Realm of Scotland: In the boundis whereof if we plant
not true doctrine according to the talent committed to our Charge, and oppone
our selves to all kind of erroures y^ may infect the flock, we shall be
criminal befoir God. But y^ we are precisedly bound to ryn from country to
country, to aggr^ all controversies, albeit it were euin in the matters of
Religion: we find no expres commandment geuin to us in that behalf of our God.
And therefoir we must desire y^ inspection of Master Tyrie his power, be
vertew whereof he may charge us to that paneful travel, befoir that we can
promise obedience. But Master Tyrie we know will allege, that in writing of
his letter, there was no such thing in his mind: but that his meaning was, that
because we did not aggre fully among our selves in all heads, therefoir he
would not be of our Kirk. For that in plane words he declares. etc. Now all
contention laid aside, we will desire Master Tyrie, and the rest of his
faction deaply to co^sidder, if they be builded upon a sure fundatioun: whill
y^ they have none other cause why they appone them selves to the treuth of God,
now of his mercy revealed to the world, but because that such as profes that
treuth aggre not in all heads among the^ selves. We demand then what if they
had leued in the dayis of the Apostles, Not^.
when y^ preaching of Christ Jesus was no les odious to the visi^le Kirk: To
wit, to the posterity of Arahon and Leui, who then rewled in Jerusalem, then
hes the light of the Euangell been, of late years, to that Roman Antechrist,
and unto such as live be his Merchandice. Would Master Tyrie (we ask) and his
faction, have refused the Eua^gell, bec^us that in the bosom of y^ Kirk there
arose great controversy, and that in the especial heads of Religion? For did
not some boldly affirm in the Kirk of Antiochia, (...).
that onles the Gentiles were circumcised, according to the law of Moses, they
culd not be saved. Which doctrine and affirmation was moir, dangerous and moir
sclanderous in those days, then all the controversies that yet ar rissen
among such, as have refused the dampnable ways of the Papistrie: for it
concerns the cheaf head of Justification. And will any yet say that therefore
the Euangell was not the glade tydinges of Saluatioun? And they that imbrased
it ^rewly were not the true members of Jesus Christ? We look that men will be
moir moderat, the^ some shaw them selves to be: who for certane controversies
of far les importance then that was, dare boldly da^pne y^ treuth and the
professoures of the same, because say they, Proprium est hereticorum a se
inuicem dissentire. That is, it is proper to Heretykes to disagre among the^
selves which sentence how ancient that ever it be, if it should be so
understand as the Papist does: that is, whosoever disagreis among them
selves in materis of Religion they are Heretykes. If the former sentence (we
say) should be so understand, then shall we accuse mo of Heresy then ca^ be
excused in any on^ age from Christ Jesus to this day. For did not Paul disagre
from Peter? Yea, Gal. ^.
he did so disagre from him, y^ he did resist him planly to his face, because
that he walked not according to the right way of the treuth of the Gospel.
These were two pre^cipall pillars: the one appointed to the Jews and the other
to the Gentiles: A^^. 15.
what shall we say of the hot conte^tion which fell betuix Barnabas and Paul,
which separated the^ that befoir were joined, in as strate conjunction, as ever
were two mortal men upon the earth. If Master Tyrie and his Jesuits will
allege y^ t^ese were but suddane passiones, and did not concern any cheaf head
of doctrine: The holy Ghost will prove the cont^^^e. For the one tuiched the
conscience of me^, concerning the fredome of meats, and the other the
admission of Ministeris, after y^ they had ones fallen back from that function:
which heads were of greater weght in those days (as heirtofoir we have said)
then any controversy which the Papists ar able to shaw, to be, or yet to have
been, betuix us that professes the Euangell, and do abhor their
abhominationes. Farther reasoning of this head for this present we omit, and
will procead with Master Tyries letter.

TYRIES LETTER.
QVhair^oir Schir considdering that in that Kirk in the quhilk I am be the
grace of God their is continual succession of doctrine, and that same self
quhilk is preachit now hes been teichit in all ages, as it is manifest till o^y
man that hes red all ancient wryteris afoir our times. And mairouer I find it
spread throw all y^ world as in like manner it is manifest and the experience
dois teich zow, for ze will cu^ to na place quhair Christis doctrine is
ressauit, bot ze will find the Religion at leist in money personis. Quhairfoir
gifze can not schaw in na other Religion the samin. It followis evidently that
na other Religiou^ is the true Religioun.

ANSWER.
TO this Epilog and argument gathered thereof, we answer only this: Nota.
That of a manifest lie, there can no treuth be concluded* His manifest and
impudent lie we say, Tyries impude^cie.
is, That he affirms, That in that Kirk in the which he is, there is
continual succession of doctrine: and that the selfsame which is preached now
hes been taugh in all ages. This we affirm is a most impudent lie. For now,
and of late years it has been taught and of the people received, that the
Mess was a ^acrifice propitiatory for the sinnis of the quick and the dead:
That the Pape was the head of y^ Kirk, and such other heads of most heretical
doctrine, approved in the Papisticall Kirk.

Which heads we affirm were unknown in the age of the Apostles, or yet of the
Fathers that immediately followed them.

And for the probation thereof, we desire their wrytingis to be produced, ever
beginning at them who were appointed of God to preach, and to plant the veriti^
in the world. We are not bound to cr^dite whatsoever the Fathers have spoken:
But our faith (as is befoir said) is builded upon the sure Rock Jesus Christ,
Ephesians. 2.
and upon the fundatioun of the Apostles and Prophets. So far as any Fathers
aggre therewith, we reverently do imbrase it: But if the Fathers have affirmed
any thing with out the warrant of the written word of ye Eternal our God, To
whose only voce the sheap of his pasture ar bound: It is as laughfull to us to
reject that which proceadeth from man and not from God, Nota.
as it is easy to them to affirm it. Master Tyrie may know that we use the
words of the Ancientis.

It appears to us be the hole progres of Master Tyries letter, The effect of
Tyries letter.
that he and his factioun, can acknowledge no Kirk, which in all ages hes not
been visible to the eyes of men: having lykwise a visible succession. For first
he affirms, that the Kirk whereof the Prophet Isaias speaks, His affirmationis
should be manifest and visible through all the world. And hear last he
alleges that we can cum in no place where we sall not find that Religion
spread: at the least in many persons. And thereof he concludes, that if we can
not prove the like of our Religion: It followis that it is not the true
Religion.

If Master Tyrie recant not this assertion he must correct his creed. Answer
to his affirmationes.
And where universally before we use to say credo sanctam ecclesiam. etc. Nota.
He must say video sauctam ecclesiam. For if there be no kirk upon the face of
the earth, but that which is visible, and that which may be shawen first, be
certane notes external, then superfluous and vane it were to us to say, I believe
the holy K^rk universal: but confide^tly we might affirm, I see y^ holy kirk.
If Master Tyrie will say we may both se and believe, and be our sight our Faith
may be strengthened. For Thomas saw y^ wou^des in the hands, (...) and side of
Christ Jesus, and believed: and so may we se the Kirk and yet bele^e it. If we
should grant so far to M^ister Tyrie, yet were his argument nothing helped. For
the question is not, whether that we may noti^ie those things that we are bound
to beleleue. But the question is, if that we are not bound to believe those
thinge^, which somtymes ar utterly (...) from the external senses of men.
M^^ster Tyrie will acknowledge no kirk except that which hes been and is
visible. We in the co^trare acknowledge and reverence the spous of Chiist
Jesus, Apocal. ^^.
somtymes exyled from the world, receiving somtymes the wings of an Egle, that
she may fle to the wyldernes: Whereof God and not of man, she has her place
prepared. We reverence her with does complane, that she has been desolate,
barrane, a captive, and a wanderer to and fro. That spous of Jesus Christ
brages so little of her succession, visible to man's eyes, Isai. 49.
that she is reft in admiration, who should have nurished her Children, during
the time of her baniwement. If master Tyrie be so well seen in the ancient
Writers, as in his writing he would shaw him self to be, then can he not be
ignorant that it is not without great cause that the holy Ghost has taught us
to say: Note diligently.
I believe the holy Kirk universal. To wit, because that oftentimes it is, that
the Kirk milita^t is so afflicted. Yea, the beauty thereof is so obscured, to
the most part of the world, that the Synagoge of Satan usurps the title of
the true Kirk: and Babilone is preferred to Jerusalem. Psalm. 74.
So that the elect are compelled to compleane and say. We s^ not our owen
signs, now is there no Prophet any moir among us. Let the days of Helyas
and his complaint witness whether that the Kirk of God is always so visible,
that it may be pointed forth with the finger of man. Thus we write shortly to
give occasion to Master Tyrie, and to such as are blinded with that error,
moir deaply to considder that artickle of their believe, and not so rashely to
condemn such as God of his mercy calls from darkness to light. Now to the
rest of his letter.

TYRIES LETTER.
Their is sum I know perchance for laik outher of good discourse or wit
measures the verity of the thing they follow be the warldly succes they have
in the following of it. Bot surely I ca^ not esteem zow to be of that rank, and
gif ze were, I wald exhort zow to reid amangis the rest the seuintene and two
Psalm, and ye hundredth forty and three Psalm. Quhairby ze will easily
understand, that nouther the prosperous succes of zour part (in warldly things
I mean) preifis it that ze follow to be of verity, nor zit our decay and
adversity makis our part to be convicted, ze rather the matter being
considderit as it aught to be, zour prosperity is rather a manifest argument
of Goddis wraith nor of any treuth of verity. For it is said be ane godly,
haly and cunning man ane xj. hundredth zeir by past, Quod nihil infelicius
felicitate peccantium, quia and penalis nutritur impunitas and mala voluntas
velut interior hostis roboratur. etc.

ANSWER.
WE might have passed by this parcel without answer, because that nothing in it
conceived, justly can be laid to our charge. For our warldly felicity,
prosperity and rest, nether is, nether yet hes been at any time, sense we have
imbrased the Euangel of Jesus Christ, such as may nurishe us in wickedness:
nether yet are the Papists able to co^uict us of such impiety, as all the
world know has roung among them of mo years then an hundredth thrice told. And
in the mean time to what honor and worldly dignity they are ascended, we make
them selves judges. If they say the doctrine which we teach, is wondrously
spread within this hundredth years: So that now it hes almost red y^ self forth
of bondage. We would demand of the Papists, if the ^uangell of Jesus Christ,
ceased to be the doctrine of Salvation, what time the Ki^kis gat rest in Judea
and else where, in the days of the Apostles. If they answer, y^ they mean no
such thing. Then yet we demand, if the hand of the Lord be more shortened now,
then that it was in the primative Kirk: So that now he may not as well manteane
his tr^uth, and enlarge the Kingdom of his only Sone, as that he did in the
dayis of the Apostlis. Whatsoever the Papists shall answer, we are assured
that nether is his power diminished, so that he may not manteane his treuth:
nether yet is his lufe so waxen cold toward his Kirk, but that he will in his
anger remember upon mercy. Why do not those cruel men considder, what innocent
blood has been shed for the testimony of Christ's E^angell, within these
three score years. Would they that God at no time should shaw piety upon the
patient suffering of his afflicted kirk? Would they that the sword should
still deuor? Would they that the flaming fyres should never be quenched? If that
so they would, they shaw them selves the Sons of him who has been a murderer
from the beginning, and yet continue in the same malice. But our God bears
toward his weak Children, a fatherly affectioun whereby he is moved somtymes
to stay y^ fu^ie and rage of Satan for a ceason: To the end that his chosen
moir gladely may prepare the^ selves to a new battle, True it is, the doctrine
of saluatioun is greatly enlarged, and thereof we praise God: True it is, that
Satan has not universally such power to persecute as somtymes he has had.
But will Master Tyrie thereof conclude, that in our Kirk there is no strength?
But now to the Scriptures which Master Tyrie coateth.

True it is, that David in his 73. Psalm according to the count of the
Hebrews affirms that nether the worldly prosperity of the ungodly, nor yet
the affliction of the godly, ought to discourage such as fear God. In this
general head we aggre with Master Tyrie and with all Papists. But we
affirm, that the notes and signs, which y^ holy Ghost gives in that place,
be the which the wicked shall be known, do no wise apperteane to us: but of many
years most evidently have appeared, and to this hour do yet appear in the
Pape, and in many of those that manteane his kingdom. For whether that the
generation of y^ Roman Antechrist has been exemed from the troubles of me^,
whether y^ their pride hes been as visible as ever was their garment: whether
that their eyes have start out for fatnes: And finally whether that their
licentious leuinges, their oppression and presumption, have not planely
declared, yt they have set their mouth against the heaven, we are content that
the world (be it never so blind) the histories of their lives (not written be
us but be their owen scribes) and the verray experience which all men now have,
and heirtofoir have had of their proceadinges, bear record whether that they
or we be noted in yt psalm. We give Master Tyrie to understand, That we a^e
better acquented with the lives and conuersationis of the Papes and
Cardinals, then they think us to be: and that we know the strength of their
laws, decries, Nota.
statutes and counsalles better the^ the lesuites knows the reule of Jesus:
albeit that presumpteous^y they have usurped his name. And therefoir we will
crave of Master Tyrie and of all his faction, that in writing either to us or
yet till such as they would persuade: that they use treuth and simplicity, and
so shall they find the^ selves better contented in reading of our answers. For
this befoir the Lord Jesus, we protest that it is the treuth which we teach,
and wherein we delight: The luf^ whereof causes us abhor all man's invention,
superstition and Idolatry. And thus far to the answers of the Scriptures which
Master Tyrie coateth.

Now to the sentence of the ancient writer, whose name he suppresseth. We
answer, that his words cut the throttes of the proud Papists of that age and
of all their followers sense those day is. For the^ began the taill of the
Dragoun, to draw the stars from the heaven to the earth: Then began the
fontanes which sometimes gave clear and wholesome watter to become bitter: yea,
to be turned unto blood, and yet did they prosper in all worldly felicity.
Which was the cause that many godly men lamenting that publict corruption, were
compelled to pronunce, that, and like sentences, against the verray Kirk me^
that then lived. And least that Master Tyrie should think that this we
affirm without authority. We remit him to the wrytings of Jerome, Augustine,
Ambrose, Bernard, and others that were nether come long before nor after the
time that he whose wrytinges if he shall diligently examine, he sal find, what
was their judgment of the seat of Rome in their days, and what others yt
after followed, added to the former impiety of their Fathers: from the day
that ones the Popes were decored or rather deformed with a triple Crown, let
the writers of all ages sense bear witness. And least that Master Tyrie shall
think that we put him to to much pane, when that we send him to all writers in
general. We shall releue him somewhat, and appoint him to two only, who^e justly
he can not suspect to have been corrupted be us. The one is Abbas Ioachim, a
man sometimes of great authority and reputation among the Papists. The
other is Ioa^nes Aue^tinus historiographur, whose history was prented be
command and with privilege of the Empreour Charles the Fyft: Let the Wrytinges
we say of these two bear witness, what hes been ye judgment of diverse men in
diverse ages, of Rome, of the pride of the prelacie, of their corruption, in
life and doctrine, and finally of their defectioun from the treuth. Abbas
Ioachim writing upon the words of the Revelation of sanct Iohne, The sext
Angel powered forth his Phyol^ upon the great flood Euphrates. etc. Hes this
sentence. Si autem aquae huius fluminis quod vocatur Euphrates, populi sunt,
and gentes, and linguae, quae parent Romano imperio: Si quide^ ciuitas Romana
ipsa, est noua Babylon. etc. That if (says he) the watters of this flood that
is called Euphra tes be people, Nationis and tounges that obey the Roman
Impyre, for the Cietie of Rome it self is new Babylon: This place and that
which ensewes of the drying up of the watters evidently shawes, what was the
judgment of the writer in his days of Rome. To wit, that it was become new
Babylon. And least that any should think that the Author means of the ancient
Roman Impyre, and not of the regiment of the Kirk that was in it, or in the
dominion thereof, he explanes him self after, whill that he interpretes the
great hoore, and the Kings of the earth, who commit huredome with her. The
great hoore he says, the universal Fatheris affirmed to be Rome. Not says he
as concerning the Congregation of the just, which sometimes was a pilgramer in
it, but as concerning the multitude of the reprobate: who be their wicked
works blaspheameth and impungeth the same Kirk, being a pilgramer with her.
Let Master Tyrie mark that the writer saw in Rome two Kirkis, the hoore, and
her multitude dispersed in all y^ places of that Impyre: and the Kirk which was
a stranger blaspheamed and impunged be the multitude. And yet after he explanes
him self more planely: saying, Reges vero terre, dic^i sunt praelati, quibus
co^cessum est regim^n animarum. Quorum nonnulli fornicantur cu^ Babilone,
quumquidem vt placeant hominibus, paruipendunt and negligunt mandatum dei. The
Kings of the earth (says he) are called the Prelates, to whom the Regiment
of saules is committed, of whom nevertheless some commit fornication with
Babylon: Because that they for the pleasure of men neglect and dispyse the
commandment of God. And least that any should think y^ such a sentence had
recklesly eschaped him, he dowbles the same words over agane: saying, Reges
vero terrae esse praelatos ecclesiarum, quorum aliqui fornica^tur cum Babilone
supertus dictum est, It is befoir said (says he) that the Kings of the earth
are the Prelates of the Kirkis, of whom some commit hooredome with Babylon.
And proceades farther saying.

Et quod sequitur: Et mercatores terrae de virtute deliciarum eius, diuites
factisu^t: ad fal^os sacerdotes and hipochritas, re^erendum est. qui
negotiantes regnum dei temporalibus lucris. etc. That is. And that which
follows (says he) and the merchandes of the earth were made rich of y^
power of her pleasures. That is to be referred to the false Preastes and
Hypocrhites, who making merch^ndice of the kingdom of God, gapes for temporal
advantage. etc. And after a little upon these words, and the merchandes of the
earth shall murne. etc. He says.

Negotiatores terrae qui sicut superius dictum est: ipsi sunt sacerdotes bruti,
qui nesciu^t que dei sunt. Sacerdotes animales qui dati sunt in atrium
exterius, vt manducent peccata populi: qui ven dunt orationes and missas pro
denarijs, facientes domu^ orationis apotheca^ negotiationis, facie^tes inquam
forum publicum and speluncam latronum. etc. That is, the merchandes of y^ earth
(as is before said), they are y^ brutish Preastes that know not those things
y^ apperteane to God. Sensual Preastes that are placed in the outward court
that they may eat the sins of the people, Rejoice papists, hear^ are Messes,
but mark that they are sold.
who sell prayers and Messes for money: Making y^ house of prayer ane chop of
merchandice: yea, making it (I say) a publict and oppen market, and a den of
thieves. etc. If Master Tyrie or any other of that sect, blame us of railing (as
commonly they use to do, when that we speak the treuth) Then let him and them
considder, that we learned not of Martyn Luther, what kind of men the papists
were: but that which we speak and affirm now we have received of the Papists
them selves. For this has been the merciful prouydence of God toward his
little flock ever from the beginning, That when an universal corruption began
to spread the self, the^ were rased some as it were one or two among ye hole
multitude, till admonish the present age and the posterities to come, how far
men had declyned from the original purity: that at least God might have some
testimony, that ye verity of God, was not altogether buried in the earth. But
now let us hear the judgments of others.

Such as be any thing acquented with y^ Histories of the antiquity, can not be
ignorant, how vehement was the contention betuix Nicolaus the first, and
certane of y^ Bishops of Germany, for the diuorcement and secund marriage, of
Lotharius King of Vngarie. Which of the two parties had the just actio^, we
dispute not: but what were the crimes lade to the Pape in those days, we shall
shortly tuoche. After that Tetogaudus and Guntherus, who were y^ two cheaf
Bishops that opponed the^ selves to the pride of yt Roman Bishop, had
largely purged the^ selves of all things wherewith he charged them. They enter
in into most bitter accusation of the said Nicolas Pape. And after other
things they lade to his charge, that most tyrannically he had oppressed the
liberty of the spous of Jesus Christ. And after that they have rehearsed the
principal ornaments wherewith y^ true Kirk was decored. They, say, Quae
benesicia tu veluti latro intercipis, Auenti. lib. 4. foli. 428.
templo dei preripis, in ^eque transfers. etc. And after. Tu pontificis quidem
persona^ prae te fers, ac tyrannum agitas: sub habitu and cultu pastoris, lupum
sentimus: titulus parente^ me^titur, luce factis iouem oste^tas. That is,
which benefits thou as a murderer cutteth of, and takis away from the Kirk
of God, transferring them unto thy self. Thou shaw is the person of a pasture,
but planely thou plays the tyranne: under the habit and cloithing of a
sheapherd, we feale the cruelty of a Wolf. The title lies, for it calls the
father: but thou thy self into thy works shawes, the thundering of Jupiter.
etc. And therfoir (say they) we know not thy voce: we regard not thy
statutes: nether yet fear we thy bulls, nor thunderinges. Let the Papists
confute this o^ (...) absol^e us.
If thou pretend to interdite us, we fear not to cut thy throt with thy owen
sword: For the holy ghost is author of all y^ Kirkis whersoeuer they be
dispersed upon the face of the earth.

This was the judgment of many otheris then of these befoir expressed, of the
seat of Rome in those days about 800. years after the ascension of Christ,
and how y^ the pride and iniquity of that seat augmented, as also the fre
speaking of men against the same, the subsequentis will declare.

What lamentable tragedi^ was played betuix Hildebrand called Gregor the
s^uint, and Henry the fourt Empreour of Rome, mo Historiographoures then one
or two do witness. Nether yet do those writers who were most addict to the
faction of the Pope, to wit, Gerochus, and Paulus, so cover the shame of that
deceauer, but that they give sufficient light to men, to se what mischeaf
lurked within the boso^e of that p^stilent seat. For writing what y^ said
Hildebrand did, what time that he was first deposed from that seat, which be
craft and without all ordour he did vsurp (they say) that he spared not largely
to bestow the patrimony of the Kirk upon soldiers, and vpone capitane of
war: upon the which, the pure, cheafly, should have been susteaned: yea, they
affirm, yt he show him self more rigerous against y^ empreour, the^ it b^came
a pasture to have done. If this was their judgment who took upon them to
defend his action and cause, what think we was the judgment of others?

That shall we better understand be his accusation and be the sentence
pronu^ced against him, be all the Bishops of France and Germany. Who with
one voce concluded, that Hildebrand was ambitious periur^d: an usurper of the
Empreoures autho^itie: one that violated and brak the concord o^ the Kirk: and
therefore that he was unworthy of that seat. This sentence was pronu^ced in
his owen face, whil that he was sitting in counsal in Rome be one Rulandus,
cheaf Preast of Parma.

Who boldly and without any salutation, offering the decreit of the counsall,
together with the Empreoures letters, said. This Hildebrand is no Bishop, no
Father, no pasture: he is a theaf, a Wolf, a murderer, a Tyranne: and
therefoir let him he deposed. etc. We are not ignorant yt hereof ensewe great
tumult, sedition, and trouble. But as that purged nothing his former infamy,
so did it not stop ye mouths of many, planely to pronunce, what Judgment they
had of him and of that seat. To wit, that he under the title of Christ, did the
verray work of the Antichrist: That he sat in the Tempell of god, which then
was become Babilone: That he was worshipped and extolled above all that wc was
called God: That he glorified as if he could not err. etc. These and others
crimes of no les weight were lade in that age, to the Bishops and seat of
Rome: and this was far without the term of three hundredth years within the
which Master Tyrie would limitat the doctrine of our Kirk. But let us hear
farther.

As the practices of the Bishops of Rom^, ^er more and more espied, the
Bishops of Germany assembled them selves in counsall at Regmoburgiu^: where
the Bishop of that same cu^trie in his most vehement orison, made against the
authors of sedition, among other things, pronunced this sentence against the
Bishops and seat of Rome. Christ our Savior (says he) most diligently
foirwarned us, to be ware of falls Christ's, and falls Prophets, whom he willed
us to discern and know be their works. Nota.
Whom presently onles we be more then blind we may se.

For (says h^) Romani flumines arma in omnes hab^nt Christianos, This day ye^.
audendo, falle^do, and bella ex bellis fere^do magni facti, omnes trucidant,
occidunt, pacem concor diam terris depellunt. etc. That is, these Roman
Preastes (he not^s the hole Rabble) make war against all Christianes, some
times malepa^tly, sometimes craftily, and be deceat they still continue war
upon war. They them selves being made great, murder and slay the sheap.
Briefly they tak peace and concord from the earth. And after a little in the
sam^ which is to be found in the seuint book^ of the History foresaid he
says: A^en. l^b. 7.
Hildebrandus ante annos centum atque septuaginta, primus specie religionis,
Antichristi imperij fundame^ta iecit. Ho^ bellum nephandum primus auspicatus,
est quod per successores hu^ vsque continuatur. etc.

That is, Hilldebrand (says he) before an hundredth and seuintie years, first
under apperance of Religion, laid the fundation of the Impyre of the
Antechrist, he first began this unhappy war which to this day is continued be
his successoures: he farther proceades and says, Believe the man that he^
experience. These Preastes of Babilone desire to regne alone: Let the world
judge.
They shall not cease unto such time as that they have oppressed the honor of
the Roman Impyre. And consequently the true pastures that would fead the
slocke, being oppressed, and the barking dogs being removed, they shall
extinguishe the treuth, they shall murder and trod all things under their
feat: They shall sit in the Temple of God, and be extolled above all that is
worshipped. etc.

These and many other grave sentences were pronunced be the said Ebirhardus, and
were ratifyed and confirmed be the hole Bishops, and Senate of Germany:
whereby it is evident what judgment that age had of the Bishops of Rome, and
their Colleges. To avoid farther pro^ixitie, we omit the orison and judgment
of probus, the Bishop of Tullos: The publict edict set forth against the Pope
and against his practices in the days of Lodouicus y^ fourt Empreour, together
with the judgments of many other: which such as are exercised in Reading of
Histories may note. So that if Master Tyrie or any of his sect shall, after
this accuse us* that we are the first that have disclosed that man of sin: The
most ancient writers shall co^uict him, and purge us. Now shortly to the rest
of his letter.

TYRIES LETTER.
SEN my departing fra zow I have seen sindrie co^gregationis, specially in
Germany, Professing as they pretendit the true word of God and his Euangell,
bot in verity betuix them their selfis and them and zow, I find sa greit
difference and repugnance in materis of greit consequence, that gif their were
na other argument to let me not depart fra the Catholic Kirk, in the quhilk I
was Baptized, that were sufficient. etc.

ANSWER.
WHen Master Tyrie shall accuse in special, wherein the Congregationis in
Germany, differ among them selves, and that we differ from them: then shall
we shaw our Judgments, whether the difference be of such importance, as it
ought to dissolve the unity of the Kirk. The confession of our faith and the
ordour of our Kirk, is pate^t to all that list to read the same, when either he
or any other shall oppunge any one or two heads of the same, so long as God
pleases to reteane in this miserable life, such as of his mercy he hes made his
Ministers to blow the trompet of his judgments to this most wicked generation:
nether he nor any other that please to oppone them selves to our confessio^n,
shall long crave an answer, an answer we say of any one or two heads which
they please to oppoung. For Master Tyrie ought to understand, that the
preacheing Ministers within the Realm of Scotland, are oxen, ever lauboring
under the Yock: and that into the husbandry of the Lord. And therefore they
ca^ have no time vacant from their necessary cures, to compass countries with
the Jesuits (who ar subject to none other yocke then to that of their owen
election) to espy what faults they can find among the Congreationis. As we
have no vacantes (we say) to considder all tryfles that offend delicate men,
who can acknowledge no Kirk, but that which in all points be absolute and
perfyte: so albeit that both^ ^e did considder them, and condemn them, yet we
usurp no authority about our brether: but remit all men to their owen judge.
And do reverence all Congregationis, who do aggre with us in the principallis
of our faith: as the particulare Kirkis of Jesus Christ: albeit that in all
ceremoies there be not uniformity: yea, and albeit that in some heads of
doctrine also, there appear repugnance, yet will we not brek brotherly
concord, prouyding that we aggre in the principallis. Principallis we call
those heads of doctrine, without the confession and consent whereof, the Kirk
was not planted. Be these few words Master Tyrie (if he be wise) may
understand what we mean, and so we procead to the conclusion of his letter.

TYREIS LETTER.
QVhairfoir Schir I exhort you as I begouth, to think on this matter as deiply
as it becu^mis a Christian man, and quhen ze have swa done advertise me of
zour sentiment. In the mean time I sall pray almichtie God be his grace to
illuminat zour spreit to know in this matter y^ richt way, and to gif fortitude
and strenth quhen ze haif knawin it to profes it sa far as salbe convenient to
zour estate and saluatioun, having na farther occasioun of writing committis
zow to the protectiou^ of Almichtie God.

Writtin at Paris the vj. of December be zour may humbill Seruitour and
brother JAMES TYRIE.
Gif ze pleis to answer ze may send zour writing to the Baillie of Arroll, quha
will cause it to be send to me.



ANSWER.
AGainst this exhortation will we object nothing. For our ernest desire is that
men diligently considder what doctrine they imbrase, what fundation and ground
their faith hes, and finally what way they follow, thinking thereby to atteane
to eternal felicity. For this careless security that universally may be
espied in me^, we dampne, and ever have dampened: But this we fear not to
affirm, as before we have written, that the doctrine of the Papisticall Kirk,
now many years bypast, has been altogether corrupt: that their opinion which
they call their Catholic faith, hes no sure ground within the word of God: And
that the way which they for y^ most part have followed, was the verray way of
perdition, to all such as without true repentance departed this life in y^
blindness. And much more shall be to all persons and estates, that now shall
manteane those abhominationes, because the light is come and hes sufficiently
declared the ^ormer darkness. That man of sin is so manifestli^ reveled, that
excuse of ignorance there rests none: But a fearful judgment abydes all
such, that yet farther will follow his dampnable ways.

This Schir ye have our judgment, which albeit ye shall receive laitter then
we would: yet the state of time being considdered, we dout not but ye shall
interpret all things to the best. Use our letter so we pray you, that it may
come to the knowledge of the writer to you, whose conversion we no les seak
then he appears to seak youres. And thus we hartly commit you to the
protection of the Omnipotent.

Of Edinburgh the 10. day of August Anno Do. 1568.
TO THE FAITHFVLL REAEDR.
WHAT malice, Inuy, and heatrent of the treuth, hes moved men to brust forth
against me and my behauour, in Scotland, Ingland, and else where: I little
regard. For a good conscience susteanes me, before my God, against all ye
odious lies, that have been laid to my charge, now many years past. For the
which I dout not, but the blaspheamers shall answer: (onles repentance preuene
Judgment) when the secreates of hearts shall be disclosed.

The cause that I add this imperfyte letter, to ye former discourse is, That
they whom Satan has not blinded by inuy, may see and understand, what a
troubled conscience craves, into the day of battle. Because that God now in his
mercy has put end, to ye battle of my dear Mother Maistres Elizabeth Bows,
before that h^ put end to my wretched life: I could not cease, but declare to
the world, what was the cause of our great familiarity, and long acquentance.
Which ^as nether flesh nor blood, but a troubled conscience upon her part,
which never suffered her to rest, but when she was in the company of the
faithful: of whom (fra the first hearing of the word at my mouth) she judged
me to be one. Now seeing her battle is ended, and I am upon the point shortly
to follow: this I leave to the posterity, for discharge of my conscience, and
to the instruction of her children. That in Scotland, Ingland, France and
Germany, I have heard the complaints of diverse that feared God: but of the
like conflict as she sustained, fra the time of her first acquentance and long
before (as her owen mouth, ofter the^ ones, confessed to me) til this hour, I
have not known. For her tentation was not in the flesh, nor for any thing
that appertey ned to flesh: (no not when she was in greatest desolation) but
it was in spirit.

For Satan did continually buffette her, yt remission of sins in Christ
Jesus apperteyned nothing unto her, be reason of her former Idolatry and other
iniquities: For the which notwithstanding any worldly comfort, I have seen her
(not for a starte, but in long continuance) power forth tears, and send to God
dolorous complaints, ofter then ever I heard man or woman in my life. Her
company to me was comfortable (yea honorable and profitable, for she was to me
and mine a Mother) but yet it was not without some Croce: For besides trouble
and fasherie of body, sustained for her: my mind was seldom quiet, for doing
somewhat, for the comfort of her troubled conscience. Whereof this rude letter
is the least, and of basest argument, amongs many which ly beside me, and so
must do, be reason of my inabilitie in mo sorts then one. I hartly salute and
take my goodnight, of all the faithful in both the Realms: earnestly
desyring ye assistance of their prayers, that without any notable sclander to
the Euangell of Jesus Christ I may end my battle. For as the world is weary
of me: so am I of it.

Of Sanctandrois the 12. of Iulij. 1572. IOHNE KNOX.


Lord be mercyful to England and Scotland, for we stand both in a dangerous
estate: and that because we would not obey thy wholesome admonitionis: which were
thine, how contemptable that ever the persons of thy Messingers were. Yet Lord
remember mercy for thy treuthes saik. Amen, Amen. And give us not to the
opprobrie of thy enemies, of whom the Castle of Edinburgh are the
principales, within this Realm. Convert them Lord, or else confound them:
that the world may one^ agane understand, that thou art a true and a righteous
God. Amen. Amen. Amen.

FOLLOWS THE LETter as it past from my hand at Deip the 20. of Iulij. 1554.

TO HIS LOVING MOTER MAISTRES Elizabeth Bows, troubled in spirit, whom God
comfort for his great mercyes sake. Amen.
PSALM. 79. RISE LORD, STREACHE out thy hand, forget not the sobbes of the
oppressed.
RIGHT dearly beloved Mother in our Savior Jesus Christ,
now is our dolor appointed by God, and forespoke^ by his Prophets come upon
us as the dolor of a woman in the birth of her first Child, The (...) part of
John Knox preaching in the last days of King Ed^ard was of trouble approaching.
and so is it come, as with your ears, both oppenly and privately, oftentimes
you have hard declared. When I remember your great infirmity, and the strong
battle that continually ye feght, and calls to my mind how small comfort you
have in earth: I am compelled to ^ob and groan to him that only may give
strength, comfort, and consolation, without help of any creature unto you, in
these most dolorous days. And good hope I have that my petition shall not be
repelled, but for Christ Jesus sake accepted and granted: albeit not in such
sort as you and I most gladely would, I praise (...) God he hes shawen hi^ merry
on her and me in dispy^e of Satan if my batt^ll (...) at an end (...) is.
yet I dout not but in such sort we shall obteane it, as his glory and our
Everlasting comfort and proffeit requires. It hes not been without the most
special provide n^e, and favors of God that these many days by past, you
have been grievously t^^pted, and sore assaulted, to revolt and turn back agane
to that abominable and blaspheamous Idolatry: which now in G^odes anger is
erected, before the vtterm^st of his plaigues be pow red forth upon the
stubburne and inobedie^t which never would delight in y^ treuth of his word. And
therefore of his just judgments, (...)
most justly hes he given the^ over according to there hearts desire: to
delight in lies to their eternal co^dempnatio^. In the days I say (dearly
beloved Mother) that no apperance there was, y^ ever such abhominationes should
have taken place, (...)
so suddanely, within this Realm of England, you were tempted and assaulted, to
turn back agane to Idolatry: which tempting spirit, God our heavenly Father
permitted to trouble you: partly for that he would have you exercised in the
battle, Nota.
before the great danger approached, least (perchance) that ye might have been
overthrown, (...)
if inprouydedly, both occasion and temptation at ones had assaulted you: and
partly that by continual ^epugnance, ye might learn, how odious is all kind
of Idolatry, in y^ sight of God. For Satan uses seldom to tempt, but in
those thingis where with he knows god most to be offended: as pride, lust,
covetousness, ad^lterie, idolatry, and such others: the committers whereof (and
continuers in the same) pronunces Paul, Galath. 5.
to have no portion in the Kingdom of God. This is my hope (beloved Mother)
That in zour continual battle, so far ye have profited, that in this case,
almost, ye nead no admonition of me. But because it is my bounden dewtie, I had
maid ^ faithful promise before witness (...) Mariorie* Bows (...) daughter, and
so as she ^uk me for sone, I hartly imbrased her a^ my mother.
not only by a common Christian cheritie: but also for that most vnfeaned
familiarity and tender love (according to godlynes) that we have kept, sense
our first acquentance, to do the vttermoste of my power for your comfort. By
pen therefore will I write (because the bodies be now put a sunder to mete agane
at Gods pleasure) that which by mouth and face to face ye have often hard. If
man or Angel shall l^ubour to bring you back, from the profession that ones ye
have given: let the^ (in that behalf) be accursed and in no part (concerning
your faith and religion) obeyed of you: if any trouble you above measure
(whether they be Magistrates or c^rnall freindes) they shall bear their just
condempnation, onles they suddanly repent. But whosoever it be that shall
provoke, or solist you, to that abominable Idol, resist you all such boldly
to the end: learning of the holy Ghost not to defyle the Temple of God with
Idolles, nether yet to give your bodylie presence unto them, but obeying God
more then man, avoid all apperance of iniquity. The n^cessitie that all man
has so to do (that willingly will not deceive him self) I remit partly to y^
which often you have hard, and partly to a general letter, by me written in
great anguissie of heart, (...)
to the Congregationis: of whom I hear say a great part, under pretense that
they may keep faith secret in the heart, and yet do as Idolaters do, be
ginneth now to fall before that Idol. But o allace, blinded and deceived are
they, as they shall know in the Lords sharp visitation: which so assuredly
as our god lives, Let treuth this day speak of (...) one or (...) within (...)
Realm
shall sho^tly apprehend those back starters, amongis the mids of Idolaters.
With the verray greaf of heart I write.

Better it had been unto the^ never to have known the treuth, the^ so
suddanely with Gods great dishonor, to have returned to their vomet. God of
his infinite mercy grant unto them suddane repentance: for if the sin sleap
long I fear it shall a walk to their perpetual confusion. But now dear
Mother comfort you my heart (God grant ye may) in this my great afflictioun and
dolorous pilgramage. Co^tinew stoutly to the end, Iohne Knox requeast ^o his
mother in his exyl^.
and bow you never before that Idol, and so will the rest of worldly troubles
to me be more tolerable. With my owen heart I often common, yea, and as it were
comforting my self, I appear to triumph, I praise his mercy who suff^rred me
not to be deceived.
that God shall never suffer you to fall in that rebuke. Sure I am, that both
you would fear and eshame to commit that abomination in my presence, who am
but a wretched man subject to s^n and misery, like to your self. But (o dear
mother) though no earthly creature should be offended with you: yet fere you
the presence and offense of him, Approbatio^ of sin excuses not before God.
who present in all place, searches the verray heart and raynes: whose
indignation ones kendilled against the inobedient, (and no sin more infla^meth
his wraith then Idolatry does) no creature in heaven nor yet in earth (y^ only
is creature) is able to appease the same. And therefore dear mother avoid and
fle from it even as from the death Everlasting. Verray love and careful
solicitude (which God knows) my heart takes for you, compels me so
oftentimes, to dowble and rehearse one thing: being vncertane, when God shall
grant any opportunity to visit you agane. But the spirit of the Lord Jesus
shall by his owen omnipote^t (and yet inuinsible) power supply in you, that with
lacks of worldly comfort, that the glory may be known to be Gods alone,
who for a time uses to comfort, susteane, and fead, one creature by another:
but in the end he draws us (his owen Image) unto him self, that by him alone
without the help of all other we may live, rejoice, regne and triumph, (...).
1^.
as he hes promised by Jesus Christ his sone. One thing will I not conceal
from you dear Mother, Nota.
That nether are we sure, nether yet in our hearts, can we glorifi^ God, as
our dewtie requires, so long as that we have the carnal comfort and defense
of creatures with us. The hole man in body and saul shall evidently prove
this coclusioun. For that body that lives by meat, drink, sleap, clothing, and
nurisheme^t, we se it subject to infirmity, yea, to mutabilitie and sin, as
the final death of all man declares: and the saul even of Gods verray
elect, living by the lively word of the heuinly father, having a teacher that
caries flesh, is always flowing, and troubled, with some fear: as in
Christ's Apostles and many others, Nota.
most manifestly we are instructed. But when all earthly creature ceases, then
shall the sufficiency of Gods spirit wirk his owen work. And therefore
(beloved Mother) fear not the battle that ye susteane, The fear of that
godly woman.
nether yet the infirmity that ye find either in flesh or spirit, only
absteane from external iniquity, That you make not your members seruandes to
sin, Nota.
and your Imperfection shall have no power to dampne you: for Christ's
pe^fection is reputed to be youres by Faith which ye have in his blood. Be
assured (Mother) I willingly would not deceive you, if any such infirmity were
da^pnable, long ago I would have shawed you the treuth. But no more then God is
displea^^d, albeit sometimes the body be seak, and subject to diseases: no more
is he offended albeit the saul in yt case be dis^ased and seak. And as the
natural Father will not kill the body of the child, Note the similitude.
albeit through seaknes it faint, and abhor comfortable meats, no more (and
much les) will our heavenly Father, kill our saules, albeit through spiritual
infirmity and weakness of our Faith, Nota.
sometimes we refuse the lively food of his comfortable promises. Where
contempt of God is by his grace removed, and a love of Justice, and of the life
to come ingrafted in the heart, there is the infallible seal, and testimony of
the holy Ghost: 1. Cor. 12.
who shall perform his owen work in dew season. For the power of God is known
in our infirmity: and thus commit I you to the protection of him who by grace
hes called you from darkness to light: by Faith, hes purged your conscience, and
heart: and of his fre mercy shall glorify you, according to his promise, made
unto those, (...) 3.
that obedie^tlie receive the Message of life, in Christ Jesus our Lord. Whose
omnipotent spirit rest with you for ever and ever. At Deip the 20. of Iulij.
1554. After that I had visited Geneua and other parts and returned to Deip to
learn the estate of England. Postscript.

My owen estate can I not well declare, but God shall guide the footesteppes of
him that is wilsome, and shall fead him in trouble, that never greatly
sollisted for the world. If any collection might be made among the
faithful, it were no shame to me to receive that which Paul refused not in his
trouble. But all I remit to his prouydence, that cares for his owen. Rest yet
in Christ.

Youres Sone with troubled heart. IOHNE KNOX.



