AN ANSWER TO A GREAT NUMBER of blasphemous cauillations written by an
Anabaptist, and adversary to Gods eternal Predestination. AND CONFVTED By John
Knox, minister of Gods word in Scotland. Wherein the Author so discovers the
craft and falshode of that sect, that the godly knowing that error, may be
confirmed in the truth by the evident Word of God.

PROVE. XXX. There is a generation that are pure in their own conceit, and yet
are not washed from their filthiness. Printed by John Crespin. M.D.LX.

To the Reader.
FOr the understanding of the nombres, the readers shall observe, that as the
writer in his pestilent book has divided the hole into certain arguments, so
likewise have I divided mine answers into certain Sections. And because that
many things in his railing reasons are either unworthy of any answer, or else
not necessary to be answered so often as he repeteth the same, I thought good to
sign those things in every several section, which I thought in the same
most necessary to be answered. And this I have done as well in his reasons,
as in mine answers, so that the figure of 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. which be
marked in the merge^t of his reasons, are answered where the like nombre is
found in mine answers. This I thought good to admonish the reader.

The Preface.
Amongst the manifold blessings where with God has blessed his chosen
children (whom before all beginning of times he has predestinate to life in
Christ Jesus) it is not the least (most dear brethren) that he has given unto
us plain aduertisment, Ephesians. 1. 3
how diverse, unto diverse persons shall be the effect and operation of his word:
so often as it is offered unto the world. 2. Cor. 2. 1^
To wit, that as he him self was appointed by his heavenly Father and
forespoke^ by the Prophets, Esaie 8. 14
to be the Stone of offe^se, the stombling block, and a snare to the two houses
of Israel, and yet that he should be to others the Sanctuary of honor, the
Rock of refuge, and author of liberty: so should his word (I say) truly
preached be to some foolishnes and the savor of death, 2. Cor. 2. 16
and yet unto others, that it should be the sweet odore of life, 1. Cor. 1. 28
the wisedo me and power of God (and that to salvation) to all those that
believe. I purpose not at this present to entreat nor to reason, how and why it
is that gods eternal word, which in it self is always one, works so
diversely in the hearts of those to who^ it is offered, but my only purpose
is in few words to admonish us (to whom it has pleased God of his own fre
mercy more plainly to reuele the mysteries of our rede^ptio^ the^ he has done
to many ages be fore us) not to esteem this a small and common blessing of God
that we have not only his truth, but also the effect and operation of the
same confirmed to us by experience of all ages. Great and infinite is that
benefit of God, and rightly can it never be weighed, when so ever he does offer
his truth unto the world. But such is either the dulnes of man orels his
extreme ingratitude, that he will not acknowledge the face of theveritie, John
1. 5
shine it never so bright. The ingratitude of the Jews, is hereof unto us a
sufficient witness. For albeit that long they did look for the Messiah and
Savior promised, yet nevertheless, when he came with wondrous signs and works
super natural, Matt. 27. 38.
they did not only not know him, Act. 2. 23
but also refusing and utterly denying him, they did hang him bewext two thieves
upon a cross. The cause hereof in some part we know to be the carnal liberty
which continually they did thirst after, and their preconceaued opinion of
worldly glory: which because Christ Jesus appeared not to satisfy according
to their fantasy and expectation, therefore did they conte^pteously refuse him,
and with him all gods mercies offered unto them. Which fearful example (dear
brethere^) is to be observed of us. For by nature it is evident, that we be no
better, then they were. And as touching the league and society with God, which
prerogative long made the^ blessed, we be far inferior unto the^. For in
co^pariso^ of that league made with Abraham the time is short, that the
Gentiles have been auowed for gods people and beloved spouse of Christ Jesus*
yea Paul fears not to call the^ the very natural branches and us the
branches of a wild olive. And therefore if their co^te^pt was so punished, that
blindness yet remains upon the^, what oght we to fear? They not considering
the office of Christ, and the cause of his coming, were offended with his
presence and doctrine. Companions of the truth
And does any man thi^ck that we be free from the same dangers? Few shall be
found, that in mouth praise not veri^ie, and every man appears to delight in
liberty. but such co^panyons do follow bo^^ the one and the other, in this
life, so that both are despised and called in doubt, when they be of fered
most plainly to the world. To speak this matter somewhat more planely, it is a
thing (as I suppose) by many confessed that after darkness light has appeared:
but alas, the vices that have abounded in all estates and conditions of
persons, the terrible cruelty which has been used against the saints of God,
and the horrible blasphemies which have been and daily are vomited forth
against Christ Jesus and his eternal verity, has given (and justly may
give) occasion to the imprudent beholder of such confusion, to prefer the
darcknes of superstition, which be fore did reign, to the light of salvation,
which God of his great mercy has now of late years offered again to the
unthankful world. For what natural man can think that the justice of faith,
planelye and truly preached should be the occasion of sin? That grace and
mercy offered should infla^be the hearts of me^ with rage and cruelty? And
that gods glory declared should cause me^ impude^tly to spew forth their
vennom and blasphemies against him, who has created the^? The natural man (I
say) can not perceive how these inco^ueniences should follow gods word, and
therefore do many disdein it, a grea^e number deny it, and few as it becomes
with reverence do embrace it. But such as with grave judgment shall consider
what was the common trade of living, when Christ Jesus, him self did by
preaching and working, call men to repentance, what was the intreatement of his
dearest servants, who^ he sent forth to preach the glad tydinges of his death
and resurrection, and what horrible sects followed, and daily did spri^g after
the publication of that joyful atonement made between God and man by Christ
Jesus, by his death, resurrection, and asce^sio^, such (I say) as diligently do
observe these former points, shall not only have matter sufficient to glorify
God, for his graces offered (be the lives of me^ never so corrupted, and the
confusion that thereof insueth never so fearful) but also they shall have just
occasion more steadfastly to cleave and stick to the truth, whose force and
effect they se always to have been one from the begi^ning. The giuers of
these offe^ses shall no doubt sustein the woe pronounced against them by Christ
Jesus. Matt 1. 7
But yet must the children of God understand, that of necessity it is, that
such offe^ses come: that the elect may first be tried, 1. Cor. 11 19
and after be partakers of that blessing pronounced by our master in those worcester
des: Luke 7. 13
Blessed is he that is not offended in me. The cause of these my former words
is, that as Satan ever from the beginni^g has declared him self ennemie to
the fre grace and undeserved love of God, Satan has euerraged against the fre
mercies of God.
so has he now in these last and most corrupted days most furiously raged
against that doctrine, which attributes all praise and glory of our
redemption to the eternal love and undeserved grace of God alone. By what
means satan first drew ma^kynd from the obedience of God, Ephesians. 2. 8
the scripture does witness. To wit, by pouring into their hearts that
poison, How Satan drew ma^first from God.
that God did not love the^: and by affirming that by transgressio^ of gods
commandment they might attein to felicity and joy: so that he caused them to
seek life where God had prounced death to be. This same practice has satan
ever from the beginning used to infect the Church with all kind of heresy, as
the writings of Moises, of the Prophets, of the Apostles, and of the godly in
the primative Church do playnelie witness. But alas to such blasphemy did never
the devil draw ma^kynd as now of late days, in the which no small no^bre are
become so bold, so impudent, and so irreuerent, that openly they fear not to
affirm, God to be unjust, if that he in his eternal counsel has elected more
one sort of me^ the^ an other to life everlasting in Christ Jesus our Lord:
which thing of late days, is more planely come to our knowledge the^ before
we could have suspected, and that by the sight of a book most detestable and
blasphemous, co^teinyng (as it is intiteled, The co^futation of the errors of
the careless by necessity) with that odious name do they burden all those that
either do teach, either yet believe the doctrine of gods eternal predestination*
which book written in the english tongue does co^tein as well the lies and
the blasphemies imagined by Sebastian Castalio, and laid to the charge of that
most faithful servant of God, John Calvin as also the vane reasons of
Pighius, Sadoletus and Georgius Siculus, pestilent Papists, and expressed
ennemies of gods free mercies. The cause of the writing of this work.
The dispitefull raili^g of with book, and the manifest blasphemies in the same
contained, together with the earnest req^sts of some godly brethren, moved me,
to prepare an answer to the same: others I dowbt not might have done it with
greater dexterity, but with reverence and fear do I lay the tale^t committed
to my charge, upon ye table of the Lord to bring to his church such advantage
as his godli wisdom has appointed. But lest that some should think, that my
labors might better have been bestowed in some other exercise, I thought
expedient to admonish all brethren, and charitably to require of the^, not to
esteem the matter to be of small weight and importance* for seeing that gods fre
grace is openly impugned and disdainfully refused, I judge it the duty of
every man that looks for life everlasting, to give his confession to Christ
Jesus, whose glory is by these blasphemers to ye vttermoste of their power
suppressed. Some do think, that because the reason of man can not atteine to
the understanding, how God shall be just making in his counsel this diversity
of manki^d, that therefore better it were, to keep silence in all such
mysteries, then to trouble the brains and minds of men with curious
disputatio^s. I willingly confess, that al curiosity oght to be avoided, and
that with great sobriety we oght to contemplate and behold that
incomprehensible mystery of our redemption. But yet I say, that the doctrine
of gods eternal predestination is so necessary to the Church of God, that
without the same, The necessity of the doctrine of gods eternal
predestination.
can faith neither be truly taught, nether surely established: man ca^ never
be brought to true humility, and knowledge of him self nether yet ca^ he be
ravished in admiration of gods eternal goodness, and so moved to praise him as
apperteineth. And therefore we fear not to affirm that so necessary as it is
that true faith be established in or har tes: yt we be brought to vnfined
humility, and yt we be moved to praise hi^ for his fre graces received, so
necessary also is ye doctrine of gods eternal predestination. For first there
is no way more proper to buyld and establish faith, the^ when we hear and
undoubtedly do believe, The stabilitie of faith.
that our election (which the Spirit of God does seal in our hearts)
consists not in our selves, but in the eternal and immutable good pleasure of
God. And that in such firmitie that it ca^ not be overthrown nether by the
raging storms of the world, nor by the assaults of satan, nether yet by the
wavering and weakness of our own flesh. Then only is our salvation in
assurance, when we find the cause of the same in the bosom and counsel of God.
For so do we by faith apprehend life and peace manifested in Christ Jesus,
Romans 5. 1.
that by the direction and guyding of the same faith we look farther: to wit,
out of what fountain, life does proceed. In Christ Jesus now presently do we
find liberty and life, John 14. 6 1. Cor. 1. 30
he is made unto us of God, wisdom, and righteousness and sanctification and
redemption: and in the promise of his Gospel is founded the stabilitie of our
salvation. But yet we have a joy which, far surmounteth this. To 1. 26
For albeit that we should hear that the mercies and the graces of God were
offered unto all men, and albeit also that we should feel that our hearts were
somewhat moved to believe, yet onles the very cause of our faith be known, our
joy and comfort ca^ not be full. For if we shall think, that we believe and
have embrased Christ Jesus preached because our wits be better then the
wits of others, and because that we have a better inclination and are of
nature more tractable then be the common sort of men, satan (I say) can
easily over throw all comfort builded upon so weak a ground. for as the heart
of man is vain and inscrutable, so may it be, that those that this day be
tractable and obedient, having also some zeal toward godliness, yea and also
both sense and feling of gods mercy, such (I say) may shortly here after
become stubborn in some cases, disobedient in matters of great importance,
tempted with lusts, and finally they may be left so barren, that rather they
shall tremble at the sight of gods judgments, the^ that they can rejoice in
the free adoption of his children. And therefore (I say) that except our comfort
be grounded upon that foundation which never can be moved, it is not perfect.
The immovable ground of faith.
And that ground is this: That when we understand that presently we believe in
Christ Jesus, because we were ordained before the beginning of all times to
believe in him: Romans 8. 29
as in him we were elected to the society of eternal life, then is our faith
assuredly grounded, Ephesians. 1. 14
and that because the gifts and vocation of God are without repentance. 2.
These. 2. 13
and he is faith full that has called us. 2. Pet. 1. 2. and 20
his infinite goodness which moved him to love us in an other the^ in our
selves, that is in Christ Jesus, Romans 11. 29
according to his free beneuole^ce, which he had purposed in him, is to us a
tower of refuge, with satan is never able to overthrow nor ye gates of hell
shall never preuail against it. For how so ever we be changeable, yet is God in
his counsel stable and immutable, yea how weak, how feeble, how dull that ever
we be, yet is there nothing in us (even when we be in our own judgment most
destitute of the Spirit of God) which he did not se to be in us before we were
formed in the womb, yea and before the beginning of all times, because all is
present with him. Which imperfections, infirmities and dulnes, as they did not
stop his mercy to elect us in Christ Jesus, so can they not compel him now
to refuse us. And from this fountain does flow this our joy, that with the
Apostle we are bold to cry: who is able to separate us from ye love of God
which is in Christ Jesus? Rome. 8
for seeing that the father, who has given us for a peculiar inheritance to his
only Son, is so mighty, that owte of his hand is none able to take us
away, what danger can be so great? what sin is so grievous, or what
desperation so deep, that is able to devour us? for seeing it is God him self
who will absolve us from all iniquity: and seeing that Christ Jesus his Son
will aduowe us to appertein to his body, what is he that dare rise against us
to condemn us? The comfort hereof does none feel except the chose^ children
of God, and that in the day when man's justice fails, and the batt^lle of
their conscience is most grievous and fearful. Therefore as faith springs
from election, so is it established by the true knowledge of that doctrine
only which this day is most furiously oppugned, by those who do not
understand the same.

And from that same doctrine flows the very matter of true humility. For
while we behold the condition of those whom nature has made equal to be so
far diverse the one from the other, it is impossible but that the children of
God in their own hearts unfeignedly shall be humbled. For whither so ever they
shall direct their eyes, they shall behold fearful examples of blyndnes and
of such iniquity as all men justly oght to abhor: but when they consider
them selves to have received light in the midst of such dareknes, and them
selves to be sanctified in the midst of so wicked a generation, from what
fountain can they say that this proceeds? who has illuminated their eyes,
while that others abide in blyndnes? who does bridle their affections, while
that others do follow the same to perdition? if they say nature, their own
conscience shall convict them: for nature has made us all equal: by nature
are we the children of wrath as well as other: Ephesians. 2. If they say education,
reason, or their own study, common experience shall diclare their vanity. For
how many have been no rished in virtue, Ham. Ishmael. Esau. Abshalom.
Achitophel. Judas.
and yet become most filthy in life? And by the contrary how many have long
remained without all virtuous education, and yet in the end have atteined to
gods favor? And therefore we say that such as attribute any thing to them selves
in the grace of their election have not learned to give to God the honor which
to him apperteineth, The Ninevites. Manasses. Paul. Magdelene. The thief.
because they do not freely confess what makes the^ to differ from others.
It is universally received for a sentence most true, that as humility is the
mother of all virtue: so it is also the root of all godlynes. But how is it
possible, What humility is
that that man shall be humbled, that can not abide to hear the former misery
in the which he was borne? neither yet the means by the which from the same he
was delivered? If a beggar being promoted to great honors by the liberality
of a king, should be remembered of his former condition: and for declaration of
his gratitude he should be commanded to reverence the ambassador, or herald
that thus should say unto him: Remember and call to mind how wretched, poor,
and miserable somtymes thou wast, and praise the goodness of the king, by whose
mercy and gentleness thou live now in this honorable estate: If this beggar
(I say) should stomach that his poverty should be so often objected unto him,
who would say, that either he were humble, either yet thankful to the king? No
more can it be said that such as can not abide the mention of gods eternal
election (by the which only the elect be extolled to dignity in Christ
Jesus) be either humble in gods presence, either yet thankful, for that
infinite benefit, which excedeth all measure. To wit, that we be elected in
Christ Jesus to life everlasting, and that God according to the good pleasure
of his eternal counsel, has made separation betwext those who did fall into
equal perdition, as touching the offense and sin committed. Such as desire
this article to be buried in silence, and would that men should teach and
believe, that the grace of gods election is common unto all, but that one
receaueth it, and an other receaueth it not, proceeds either from the
obedience or disobedience of man, such disceaue them selves, and are
unthankful and injurious unto God. For so long as they se not, that true faith
and salvation (as in the discourse shall be more plainly declared) spring from
election and are the gift of God, and come not of our selves, so long are they
disceaued and remayn in error. And what can be more injurious unto gods free
grace, Ephesians. 2. 8
then to affirm, that he gives no more to one, the^ to an other? seeing that
the hole scriptures do plainly teach, that we have nothing which we have not
received of fre grace and mere mercy, and not of our works, nor of anythi^g
in us, lest any man should boast himself Ephesians. 2, 28. And therefore let
wicked men rage as they list we will not be ashamed to confess always, that
only grace makes difference betwext us and the rest of the world. And
further we fear not to affirm, that such as feel not that comfort inwardly in
their conscience, can never be tha^kfull to God, neither yet willing to be
subject to his eternal counsel, Which is the only cause that these wicked
men most irreverently do storm and rage against that doctrine which they do
not understand. But let us (dear brethren) be assured, that none other
doctrine does establishe faith, nor makes man humble and thankful unto God,
and finally y^ none other doctrine makes man careful to obey God according to
his co^ma^deme^t, but that doctrine only, which so spoileth man of all power
and virtue, y^ no portion of his ^aluatio^ consists within him self, to the
end that the whole praise of our redemption may be referred to Christ Jesus
alone who^ the Father of very love has given to death for the deliverance of
his body, 1. Cor. 1. 30
which is the Church, 1. John. 4. 10
to the which he was appointed head before the beginning of all times. Ephesians.
1. 22
To him therefore with the Father and holy Ghost, be all praise and glory for
ever and ever. So beit.

THVS BEGINS THE BOOK OF the adversaries of Gods eternal predestination.
The first error of the careless by necessity. The first section.

ANSWER.
WE are not ignorant, nether yet do ye dissemble, whom ye accuse, but how
justly you term our doctrine error, and us careless, at this time I omit to
speak because that after we shall, have occasion more largely to common with you
in that matter. Only at this present I demand of you with what conscience can
you burden us with the odious name of stoicall necessity, which so often most
impudently ye lay to our charge in this your most ungodly and confused
work: seeing that no men do more abhor that deuelishe opinion and profane
name then we do? It is easy to persuade you as I suppose that we dissent not
from the judgment of the reverend servant of Christ Jesus John Calvin (whom
ye in skoffing and dispite use to term and call our God.) And therefore from
hencefurth to put silence to your venomous tongues and to cause your impudency
more appear to such whose eyes satan has not blinded with like pride and
malice as in you are more then evident: I will faithfully recyte his words and
sentences in this behalf written thus in his Christian institutions. Cap. 14.
Sectio^ 40


Those (says he, that study to make this doctryn meaning of Gods eternal
providence and praedestination odious falsely do calumniate, that it is the
Paradox, that is doubtful and hard opinion, of the Stoiks who did affirm that
all things chanced and come to pass by fatal or mere necessity. Libr. ad
bonifa. 2.
The which also was ob^ected to saint Augustine. As touching us, we do not
willingly debate nor strive for words, Cap. 6. and 40.
nevertheless in no case admit we nor receive the term which the Stoikes used
in latin called Fatum. As Well because it is of the nombre of those words, the
profane and unprofitable nouities whereof Paul wills us to avoid, as also
because that by hatred of it, our ennemies go about to charge the verity of
God. As touching the opinion, we are falsely and maliciously burdened therewith:
for we imagine not a necessity which is contained within nature by a perpetnal
conjunction of natural causes, as did the Stoiks, but we affirm and menteine
that God is Lord, moderator and Governor of all things, whom we affirm to have
determined from the beginning according to his wisdom what he would do, and now
we say, that he does execute according to his power what so ever he has
determined. Whereof we conclude, that not only the heaven and earth and
creatures insensible, but also the cou^seles, and the wills of men are
governed by his providence, so that they te^d and are led to the scope and end
which he has purposed. He proceeds further answering the objection which may
be made, saing: what then, is there nothing done by fortune and chance? I
answer. That well and godly it is written by Basilius called the great: That
fortune and adventure are the words of paynims, the signification whereof oght
in no wise to enter in to the heart of the faithful. For is all prosperity be
the benedictio^ of God, and adversity, his malediction, there remains no
place the fortune in such things as come to me^. Retract. lib. 1. cap. 2.
And further to the end of that section he brings forth the mind of
Augustine concerning fortune, whereof parchance we may after somewhat speak.
This one sentence is sufficient to co^uict both your master and you of
malicious envy and most unjust accusation: for herein does not only John
Calvin, and we all with him abhor from the term of Fatum called destiny,
but also from that diabolical opinion which the Stoikes maintained. When I
consider what should be the cause that thus maliciously ye should burden us with
that which so planely by word and writing we oppugn, I am compelled to
suspect, that either ye understand not the nature of the term which ye lay to
our charge, orels that ye have a further fetch, then at the first sight does
appear.

We planely do affirm, that the opinion of the Stoikes is damnable and falls:
Stoi^^^ necessity
for they did place such power in the sterres and in their oppositious, that
impossible (they affirmed) it was to change or avoid that which by their
constellation and influence was appointed to come. In so much that they held,
that Jupiter him self (whom they called the great, and supreme God) could
neither alter nor stop the operation of the sterres and the effects that
should follow therevpo^: and so they affirmed, that the mutatio^s of ki^gdomes
the honors of some men, the deiectio^ of others, and finally that both vice
and virtue were all together in the power of the sterres. Against this
pestilent opinion strongly and learnedly disputes Augustine in diverse places,
Cap. 1. 2* 3. 4. and 5.
but chefely in his fifth book of that work entitled of the city of God:
affirming, that only by the providence of God are kingdoms erected, maintained
and changed: that sterres have no power, neither to incline man to virtue nor
to vice: that such blasphemies oght to be repelled from the ears of all men.
Which sentences, because they do most perfectly aggre with gods infallible
word, we reuerentlye embrace, and constantly do believe: And so, why that ye
should thus impudently accuse us of that which we never thought, wise men may
wonder. (...)
O say, you, ye take away the word of Stoicall necessity, but yet ye affirm
the self same thing which they affirmed. I answer: if ye can make no
difference betwext the omnipotent, most perfect, most just, and immutable will
of God, and the opposition of sterres, called constellation, you have evil
profited, not only in Gods scoole, but also in those arts, in which (...) of
you would seem to be subtle. Do we affirm, that of necessity it was, that
Pharao after many plagues sustained, should with his great host be drowned?
that Nabuchadnezer should be tra^sformed in to a brute beast? that Cyrus should
first distroy Babylon, and after proclaim liberty to the people of God (after
their long and dolorous captivity) because the influence of the sterres did
lead them to that end? or do we not rather most constantly affirm, that the
aeternall counsel of God, his immutable decre, and most holy will (which only
is the most perfect rule of all justice and equity) did bring all these
things to pass by such means as he had appointed, and by his Prophets fore
spoken? But here you storm, crying in your accustomed fury: What is this else
but stoicall necessity, to make Gods will the only cause of all things, be they
good or bad? How dull and ignorant you are, if ye can not make difference
betwext Gods will and that necessity which the Stoikes mainteaned, I have
before touched, and how maliciously ye impute unto us, words and sentences,
whereof ye be never able to convict us, shall shortly God willing) be declared.
But by this I perceive where the shoe does wring you. If Gods will, his
counsel, his providence and decre bear rule in the actions of man's lief, Why
the Anabap. mystlyketh the doctryn of predestination.
then foresee you and fear, that your free will shall be brought into bondage:
and so can ye not com first to the perfection of Angels, and in process of
time to the justice of Christ by the means of your free will. Whether I
wrongously suspect you, and so have erred in my judgment, your own words
shall after witness. For seeing that we have planely proved, vt most unjustly and
most maliciously ye accuse and traduce us of the vane opinion of the Stoikes,
I will proceed to that which ye call our first error, after that I have (for
the better instruction of the simple reader) declared, what we understand by
Prescience, Providence, and praedestination, which terms do so offend you,
that ye can not hear them named.

When we attribute prescience to God, Prescie^ce.
we understand, that all things have ever been and perpetually abide present
before his eyes, so that to his eternal knowledge nothing is bypast, nothing
to com, but all things are present, and so are they present that they are not
as conceived imaginations or forms and figures, whereof other innumerable
things proceed (as Plato teaches that of the form and exemple of one man,
many thousands of men are fashioned) But we say, that all things be so present
before God, that he does contemplat and behold them in their verity and
perfection. And therefore it is, that the Prophets often times speak of things
being yet after to com, with such certentie, as that they were already done.
And this praescience of God do we affirm to be extended to the universal
compass and circuit of the world, yea and unto every particular creature of
the same.

Gods providence we call, Providence.
that souerane empire and supreme dominion, which God always keeps in the
government of all things in heaven and earth contei^ed. And these two (that
is, Prescience and providence) we so attribute to God, that with the Apostle we
fear not to affirm, that in him we have our being, ^^uing, and lief: We fear
not to affirm, Joan. 10.
that the way of man is not in his own power, but that his foot steps ar
directed, by the eternal: Proverb. 20.
That the sorts and lottes (which appear most subject to fortune) go so forth
by his providence: That a Sparro falls not upon the ground without our
heavenly father. Prou^r. 16.
And this we give not to God only praescience by an idle sight, and a
providence by a general moving of his creatures (As not only some Philosophers,
Matthew. 10* 29.
but also mo then is to be wished in our days do) but we attribute unto him
such a knowledge and providence, as is extended to every one of his creatures.
In which he so works, that willingly they tend and incline to the end, to
which they are appointed by his. What comfort do the sons of God receive in
earnest meditations hereof this time will not suffer to entreat. But at one
word to finish, alas to what misery were we exponed, if we should be
persuaded, that satan and the wicked might or could do any thing, otherwiese
then God has appointed: Let the godly consider. Predestination


Predestination (whereof now this question is, we call the eternal and
immutable decre of God, by the which he has once determined with him self,
what he will have to be done with every man. For he has not created all (as
after shall be proved) to be of one condition. Or if we will have the definition
of Predestination more large: we say, that it is, the most wise and most just
purpose of God, by the which before all time he constantly has decreed to call
those whom he has loved in Christ, to the knowledge of him self and of his
son Christ Jesus, that they may be assured of their adoption by the
justification of faith, which working in them by charity, makes their works
to shine before men to the glory of their father, so that they (made conform
to the image of the son of God) may finally receive that glory, which is
prepared for the vessels of mercy. These latter parts (to wit of vocation,
justification of faith* and of the effect of the same) have I added, for such
as think that we imagine it sufficient, that we be predestinate, how wickedly so
ever we live. We constantly affirm the plane contrary: To wit, that none
living wickedly, can have the assurance, that he is predestinate to lief
everlasting. Yea although man and Angel would bear record with him, yet will
his own conscience condemn him, unto such time as vnfeanedly he turn from his
wicked conversation. These terms I thought good in the beginning to explane, to
the end that the reader may the better understand our meaning in the same, and
that we be not after often compelled to repete the^ again. Now to that Wc ye
call the first error.

THE ADVERSARY.
God has not created all men to be saved by any manner of meannes, The second
sectio^.
but before the foundation of the world he has chosen a certain to salvation
which is but a small flock, and the rest which be innumerable he has
reprobate and ordained to condemnation. Because so it pleases him.

ANSWER.
They are not only reputed liers and called falls witnesses, that boldly and
planelie affirm a lie in plane and express words, but such also as in
reciting the minds of other men, change their meaning by altering their
words, by adding more then they spoke, or by dyminishing that which might
explane the things that remained obscure or more fully might expres the mind
of the speakers. And in all these three vices are you criminal in this your
first accusation or witnessing laid against us. For our words ye have
altogether altered: to them ye have added, and from the ye have diminished that
which ye think may aggrauate and make odious our cause. And therefore I say, ye
are detestable liers, and malicious accusers. For probation hereof I appele to
our writings, be they in latin, french, Italia^, or english (in so many
tongues this matter is written) if that any of you be able to bring forth our
propositio^s in any of the^ in this your form, and co^teining your whole
words, I offer to make satisfaction unto you, (whether ye will be word or
writi^g) y^ I have hieghly offended in calli^g you detestable liers. But if ye
be never able to show any such words used by us (as plane it is ye be not)
the^ yor master Castalio and you both are far from yt perfection (to speak no
more bitterly) with ye pretend. Liers are the deuilles sons.
For ye are manifest liers: and whose sons they are called, you can not be
ignorant, accusing me^ of that they never me^t. For thus forms Castalio his
first falls accusacion against Master Calvin. God has created to perdition the
most part of the world by the naked bare and pure pleasure of his own will. And
this same ye affirm in mo words more impudently patched* so both you and he
do add to our words of your own malicious mind. These sentences: God has
created the most part of the world, which is an innumerable multitude, to
perdicion, only because it so pleased him, you steall from our words, and
suppress that which ever we join when we make mention of gods predestination,
to wit, that he has created all things for his own glory. That albeit the
cause of gods will be inco^prehensible, secret, and hid from us, when of y^
same mass he ordained some vessels to honor, and so^ to destruction, yet it
is most just, most holy: and most to be reverenced. Now to y^ further
declaration as well of or mind as of your shameless malice, I shall recite some
s^ete^ces of master Calui^, as does that godly and learned man Theodorus Beze
against the crafty surmyse of your master Castalio. I say (faieth John Calvin)
with Augustine, that of God they were created whom without doubt he fore knew to
go to perdition: and that was so done because so he would. Why he would, it
apperteineth not to us to inquire, who ca^ not comprehend it: neither yet is it
convenient, that the will of God shall descend and come down to be decided by
us. Of the which so often as mention is made under the name of it, is the supreme
and most hie rule of justice nominated. And further we affirm, that which the
scripture clearly shows, to wit, that God did once by his eternal and
immutable counsel appoint, whom somty me he should take to salvation, and also
whom he should condemn to destruction. Institut. Cap. 14. Sect. 5.
We affirm those whom he judges worthy of participation of salvation to be
adoptate and chosen of his free mercy for no respect of their own dignity:
but whom he gives to condemnation, to the same he shuteth up the entres to
life by his incomprehensible judgment. But yet by that judgment, that neither
can not may be reproved. And in another work. De aeterna Dei praedestinatio^.
If we be not ashamed says he of the Gospel, it behooves us to confess that
which therein is manifestly taught, that is, that God of his aeternall good
pleasure, whose cause depends upon none other, has destinate to salvation
whom it pleased him, the rest being rejected And whom he has honored with his
free adoption, those he illuminateth by his Spirit, that they may receive the
life offered in Christ: Others by their own will so remaning unfaithful, that
being destitute of the light of faith, they continue in darkness. Also that
which saint Augustine writes: So is the will of God the hieghest rule of
justice, In^titu. Cap. 14. Sect. 14.
that what so ever he will in so far as he wills it, it is to be holden just.
Therefore when the question is why did God so? It is to be answered: Because so
he would. But if thou proceed asking, why he would, thou sekest a thing greater
and more hie then Gods will, which can not be found. And after says he: We
must ever return to the pleasure of his will, the cause whereof is hid
within him self. But to make this matter more evident, I will adduce one or two
places mo, and so put end to this your forged accusacion for this time. In his
book which he wri^^th of the eternal predestination of God, thus he says.
Albeit that God before the derection of Adam had determined for causes hid to
us, what he was to do, yet in scriptures we read nothing to be condemned or
him, except sin. And so it rests, that he had just causes (but hid from us)
in rejecting a part of men: for he hates nor damneth nothing in man, but that
which is contrary to his justice. Calvin upon Isaiah.
Also writing upon Isaie the 23. chap. upon these words: The Lord of hoostes
has decreed, to profane the pride of all the noble ones etc* he says, let
us learn of this place, that the providence of God is to be considered of us,
that to him we may give the glory and praise of his omnipotecie, for the
wisdom and the justice of God are to be joined with his power. Therefore as the
scriptures teach us, that God by his wisdom does this or that, so do they teach
us a certain end why he does this or that: for the imagination of the absolute
power of God which the scholemen have invented, is an execrable blasphemy: for
it is as much as they should say, that God were a tyrant, that appointed things
to be done not according to equity but according to his inordinat appetite.
With such blasphemies be the schools replenished, The schoeles of Papists full
of blasphemies.
neither yet differ they from the Ethnicks who did affirm, that God iested or
did sport in the matters of men. But we are taught in the schole of Christ,
that the justice of God shyneth in his works what so ever they be, yt the
mouths of all men may be stopped, and glory may be given to him alone. And
therefore the Prophet rehearses just causes of this destruction (meaning of the
destruction of Tyrus) that we shall not think that God does any thing without
reason. Those of Tire were ambitious, proud, auaricious, lecherous, and
dissolute.

What is he so simple, which may not now consider and understand, what was your
malice and deui^ish intenion* in patching up this your first accusation? not
the zeal of gods glory, as you falsely pretend: but the hatred which ye have
conceived against them who have soght your salvation. For if ye had meant any
thing simply, ye should not have added that which ye be never able to show in
our writings: neither yet can ye laufully prove, that we have spoken the same
in reasoning with any of you. We (so taught by the scriptures) with reverence
do affirm, that God, for just causes albeit unknown and hid to us, has
rejected a part of men. But you (making no mention of any cause) affirm, that
we hold, that he has created the most part of the world (which is
innumerable) to no other end, but to perdiction, in which shameless lie your
malice pa^^eth measure: For neither do we rashly define the number of the one
nor of the other, howbeit the scripture in diverse places affirms, Christ's
^^ocke to be the little flock, the number to be few, that finds the way that
leads to life* this notwihstanding (I say) we use not boldly, to pronounce,
whether of the nobres shall be the greater, but with all sobriety we exhort the
people committed to our charge, not to follow y^ multitude to iniquity. For if
they do, there is no multitude that can preuale against God. And so to us in
this behalf ye are greatly injurious. But yet in ye second part, your malice
is more manifest: for ye burden us, that we should affirm, that the end of the
creation of the reprobate, was none other but their eternal perdition. From
which calumny master Calvin clearly purges us in these words. Inst. cap. 14.
sect. 17.
All oght to know (says he) that which Solomon says, yt God has created
all for him self, and the wicked also to the evil day. Consider and mark, that
we (instructed by the holy Ghost) do first affirm, that the cause and end why
the reprobate were created, neither was, nor is not, their only perdition (as
ye burden us) but that the glory of God must needs appear and shine in all his
works. And secondarely we teach, that their perdition does so depend upon
gods predestination, that the just cause and matter of their perdition is found
within them selves, and that albeit the decre and counsel of God be
incomprehensible to men's understanding, yet nevertheless it is most just and
most holy. And thus have I so plainly and in so few words as conveniently I
could expound in what points ye are malicious liers, what ye have added of
hatred to our words, and what ye suppress that the equity of our cause
should not appear to men. God grant you (if his good pleasure be) with greater
modesty to write, and with more humility to reason in those hieghe mysteries,
which far surmount the reatch of man's capacity. But now I proceed to the
preface of your confutation which thus begins.

THE ADVERSARY.
The confutation of the first error.
To prove this true, The third section.
they can bring forth no plane testimony of the word. For there is no such
saie^g in the holy scripture that God has reprobate man before the world: But
the sentences which they allege be far set and forged, contrary to the
meaning of the holy Ghost, as God willing it shall planely appear. And where
scripture will not serve, they patch their tale with unreasonable reasons for
their hole intention is contrary to true reason.

ANSWER.
In very deed, if all were true wc ye have heaped up in your unjust
accusation, I for my part, would not ashame to confess, that more were
affirmed then plane scriptures do teach: but your additio^s which before we
have touched, being removed, and that added which of malice ye have omitted, I
hope, that our proposition shall be so plane and simple, that the reasonable man
(if he be godly,) shall neither lack good reason nor plane scriptures to
confirm the same. Albeit that ye are bold to affirm, that we have neither
scripture nor good reason, and that our whole inte^tion is contrary to true
reason. But now let us form our own propositio^s. Two chief propositio^s
God in his eternal and immutable counsels has once appointed and decreed
whom he would take to salvation, and who^ also he would leave in ruin and
perdition. Those whom he elected to salvation, he receaueth of fre mercy
without all respect had to their own merits or dignity, but of undeserved
love gave the^ to his only son to be his inheritance, and the^ in time he
calls of purpose, who as his sheep obey his voice, and so do they attein to
y^ joy of that kingdom which was prepared for them before the foundations of
the world were laid. But to those whom he has decreed to leave in perdition,
is so shut up the entry of life, that either they are left continually
corrupted in their blindness, orels if grace be offered, by them it is oppugned
and obstinatly refused, or if it seem to be received, that abides but for a
time only, and so they return to their blindness and crooked nature and
infidelity agane, in which finally they justly perish.

Because the hole controversy stands in this whether God has chose any to
lief everlasting before the begi^ni^g of al times leui^g others in their just
perdition, or not, my purpose is first by plane scriptures to prove the
affirmative, and after in weying the same and other scriptures, that by Gods
grace shall be adduced, so planely as I ca^ to show unto you, what horrible
absurdity, ineuitably follows upon your error in which ye affirm, that God
has chosen no man more one then an other* that either your blindness removed,
ye may turn with all humility to the eternal son of the eternal God,
against whom you arm your selves, orels that your damnation may be the more so
dayne and just, for your refusal of the plain light offered. That God has
chosen before the foundation of the world, witnesses the Apostle, saing:
Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1.
who has blessed us with all spiritual blessing in heavenly things by
Christ as he has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world was
laid, that we should be holy and without blame before him by love. Here the
Apostle in express words affirms that God has chosen a certei^ nombre,
(for he speaks not to the hole world,) as you either ignorantly orels
maliciously do after allege, but to his beloved congregation of Ephesus who
with all obedience had received the word of lief offered, and with great
patience had continewed in the same even after the departure of their Apostle
from them yea after his bo^des and impresonnement. Such I say does the Apostle
affirm that God has chosen, and that before the foundatio^s of the world were
laid: So that we have Gods election before all beginning planely proved. Here
might I bring forth many places but I having respect to brevity stand content
with this one place. That this he has done once in his eternal and immutable
counsel without respect to be had to our merits or works (which you allege
to be causes of Gods election) witnesses the same Apostle proceeding as
follows: who haeth pr^destinat us, that he should adoptat us in children by
Jesus Christ according to the good pleasure of his will that the glory of his
grace by the which he has made us dear, by that beloved may be praised. In
whom we have redemption and by his blood remission of sin according to his
abundant grace, of the which he has plentifully poured upon us all wisdom and
prudence, opening to us the secret of his will according to his good pleasure
which he purposed in him self to the dispe^sation of the fulness of times,
summarely to restore all things by Christ both those that be in the heavens,
and those that be in the earth, by whom we are chosen in a portion or lot,
predestinate according to the purpose of him by whose power are all things
made, according to the decree of his will, that we should be to the praise of
his glory. Here the holy Ghost as it were of set purpose, forseing man's
unthankfulness uses words not only most propre, but also most vehement, and
often repeteth the same, to beat down all pride and arrogancy of man
presuming to arrogate any thing to him self in the matter of his salvation. He
first says: God has pr^destinate. And lest yt some might have thought as you
folowi^g the Papists, do now blasphemously affirm that so he did in respect
of our worthiness, of works, or faith, in one sentence he secludeth all which
is without Christ Jesus and without him self, saying: he has predestinate us
to adoptate us in children by Christ Jesus in him self, according to the good
pleasure of his will. If Christ Jesus, yea if God the Father, his aeternall
counsel, his decree and purpose, be other then our worthiness, our faith, our
quality, or our good works, then neither for the^ nor in respect of any of
them were we chosen to life. For plainly he affirms that by Christ in him
self according to his good pleasure which he had purposed in him self, were we
adoptate to be children yea and that according to the purpose and decre of his
will. Here have you the same and mo words then we used. For here are those
words: the purpose of his good will, that he has purposed in him self to
predestinace and adoptate us in children* which words do most lively express
that which we affirm. But yet perchance ye lack the proof of this part,
that God in his immutable counsel has once chosen. For after, I perceive, yt
this does much offend you. I trust ye will not reject the testimony of S.
James, for ye seem upon his words much to lea^. And he says, that every good
and perfect gift is from above, discending from the Father of light, with whom
there is no variablenes, neither shaddowing by turning, he has (says he) of
his own will begotten us by the word of verity. If with God, as he
affirms, there be no variablenes, then must his counsel be immutable. If in
him there be not, now dareknes and now light, but that as he dwells in the
light which is inaccessible, so are and ever have been all things present in
his sight. Then in his eternal counsel there falls neither ignorance nor
repentance: and so what he once decreed, that he faithfully will perform to
the praise of his own glory. But if ye will not admit my reasons, then must I
bring unto you plain scriptures. That God has chosen before the foundations of
the world, that he has predestinate, purposed, and decreed, to adoptate us in
children, is before proved. The Prophet I saiah from the forty chapter of his
prophecy to the e^d of the same, entreats chefely these two arguments, upon
the one part to comfort the afflicted, and despised church (which then was sore
oppressed and after was to be led captive to Babylon.) Upon the other part to
threaten just vengeance as well upon the contemners of grace offered, as also
upon the cruel ennemy. The estate of the church was such, that all hope of
liberty, redemption, and comfort was taken from them. They were as dead
carions, buried in disperation, against the which the Prophet continually
fights, calling them from the contemplation of the present miseries, and
from the sight of such impediments as to them appeared to stop their liberty,
to the infallible promise of God, and to his counsel, which he affirms to be
constant, and to his love which is immutable. And therefore so often does he
repete. It is I the eternal, who has created the heavens, and has laid the
foundations of the earth: It is I, It is I, that will do it for my own names
sake* I will establish the word of my servant (he means, of Isaiah and of his
other Prophets, who in his name promised delyuerance to the people.) and I
will perfourm the counsel of my messingers. Is^i. 44.
I say to Jerusalem be thou inhabited, and to the walls of Zion be you
builded. By these and many other places the Prophet traualed to lift up the
people from the pit of desperation in which they were to fall by reason of
their grievous calamity and long captivity, and that he might with more
efficacy persuade the same, he brings them to the league made with Abraham,
to the remembrance of their wonderful deliverance out of Egypt: and to the
lenity of God which their Fathers had found at all times. But in vane had all
his labor ben if gods counsel, decre, and purpose had been changeable. For
easily they might have objected: to what use serves us the promise made to
Abraham, or the kyndnes of God which our fore fathers tasted? We have refused
God and therefore has he refused and rejected us, he has broken his league and
covenant with us. But against all these desperate voices, and against your
blasphemous error, who affirm that gods counsel and purpose changes, as man
does, ^ighteth and preuailleth the Prophet, Saing: My cogitations are not
your cogitations, neither are your ways my ways (says the eternal). Isaiah
55.
But like as the heavens are hyer then the earth so do my ways excel your
ways, and my thoghtes your thoghtes. And the word yt pas^eth forth of my
mouth, shall not return void to me. But it shall do what so ever I will (note
and give glory to God) and it shall prosper in those things to the which I
have sent it: I doubt not but that the godly reader does clearly se the mind
of the Prophet to be, to rebuke the vanity of the Jews believing that gods
counselles, covenant and love, were subject to such mutabilitie as they them
selves were in there counselles love, and promises. But the Prophet makes so
much difference betwixt the one and the other as is betwixt the heaven and the
earth, and does further affirm, that as the dew and rain do not fall and
come down in vane, so shall not the word which God s^eaketh (which is of more
excellency then all creatures) lack his effect: but it shall work the will of
God, and shall prosper as he has appointed it, and that because it is God who
has spoken that, which was purposed in his eternal and immutable counsel
before all times. Upon this ground and foundation (that is upon Gods immutable
love and counsel) build^^h the Prophet the salvation and del^nerance of the
church, Isaiah. 54
as more planely he speaks in these words: For this shall be to me as the
waters of Noah: for as I have sworn, that the waters of Noah shall no more
ouergo the earth, so have I sworn, that I shall not be angry at the neither
yet rebuke thee: Rather shall the mountanes leave their place, and the hills
shake, then that my goodness shall leave thee, or that the covenant of my peace
shall waver (sai^^h the eternal, who ha^h compassion upon ^hee). Which only
one place is sufficient to prove what so ever we have affirmed, that is, that
gods counsel, love, and goodness, toward his church, is immutable. For the
example and the similitude which he brings in, The constancy of Gods prom^s.
are most plane and evident. The waters have never universally over flowe^ the
earth, since the days of Noah to who^ he made his covenant to the contrary,
and yet no les iniquity (yea greter) has reigned in all aeges since, then did
before. What is the the cause that the like or greater vengeance is not taken?
The certentie no doubt of his promise, which he has made to his church in
Christ Jesus his only well-beloved. The montanes we se in all te^pestes and
storms do keep their place, they do not flitte, neither yet are they shaken
with the v^hemencie of winds. But if they should (says the eternal) my
goodness shall not leave thee (o mercy without measure) neither shall the
covenant of my peace shake nor waver. Thus I suppose, that the godly reader
does perceive and se, that we lack not scripture (as ye affirm) to prove, that
gods love and counsel toward his elect is stable, and that because it is
grounded upon him self and not upon us, as, (to your condemnation, if by times
ye repent not) ye falsely imagine. But yet lest that ye shall complain that these
scriptures be not plane yhough, I will bring in yet one, and so end this part:
Hear me o house of Jacob, and all you residue of the house of Israel, Isaia.
46.
who are borne of me from the womb, and borne of me from the birth: and even
to the aege I am he (the same God) and even to the white hears I shall bear, I
have done, and I shall bear, yea I shall bear and deliver. What words can be
more vehement and more plain to prove, that the love of God can never change
from his elect? For that is his conclusion which he collected upon the former
parts, Saing, I shall bear, and I shall d^lyuer. And why? because I have born
you. Is this a good reason: that God shall deliver because that he has once
born? How so ever it seem to the Anabaptist, it seems good to the holy Ghost.
And David and Job did with the like remembrance comfort them selves in their
greatest tribulations. The one saying, Thou art he that have drawn me forth of
my mothers womb. Psalm. 2^.
In thee have I trusted hanging upon my mothers breasts: upon the was I cast
from the birth: from my mothers womb thou art my God. In these words David
did arm him self against the horrible tentations, which did assault him in
those most grievous persecutions which under Saul he sustained. For so must not
that Psalm be interpreted of Christ and his passion, that David had no
portion of it: by the which when to his own judgment and to the judgment of
all men also, he appeared to have been oppressed, he gathered new strength and
comfort by ye benefits of God, which before he had received. And so he
concludes here: Thou that art the author of my life, thou that did norish
and preserve me even in the midest of darkness, will continue my God still and
so shall thou deliver me. What is the reason of this conclusion? David him self
does expres it saying: O Lord thy mercy is everlasting, thou shall not leave
the works of thine hands. Isal. 138.
In which words David from the midest of troubles is lift up to the
contemplation of gods nature: who as he chooses of fre mercy and bestows his
gifts upon his children, before that either they can deserve the^ or yet know
them, so does he continue the same most constantly to the end unto the members
of Christ's body, and upon this same ground alone stayed the faith of Job in
his most extreme anguishe for in these words he does as it were complain to
God. Thy hands have made me, and facioned me wholly round about and wilt thou
destroy me. Job. 10.
Remember I pray the that how have fashioned me as the Potter does his clay,
and will thou bring me into dust again? Have thou not poured me out as milk
and turned me to cruddes like chese. Thou have clothed me with skin and flesh
and joined me together with bones and synewes. Thou have given me life and
grace and thy visitatio^ has preserved my spirit. Though thou have hid these
things in thine heart I know tha^^t is so with the* Here it is plain, that Job
fights against desperation which vehemently did assau^t him by reason of his
pains intolerable. And in his battle he apprehe^deth this hold: God has
begone to show mercy unto me which in many things I have felt, and I still
depend and hang upon the same, therefore my God may not dispyse the works of
his hands. And so far proceeds he in this disputation, till that he makes
this conclusion (which God after did approve.) I know (says Job) that my
revenger lives, whom I shall se, yea my n^cis shall se him, and none other.
Upon what ground I say did this faith of Job stand? No doubt upon this, that
gods counsel is stable, and that his love is immutable toward such as once
he had taken in to his sauegarde. And if ye doubt that this is rather our
collection then the plain sentence of the holy Ghost, confer our
proposition with the former words of Isaiah, and let it be judged by them. And
if that yet ye cry that we have brought forth no plain scripture affirming
that the counsel of God is immutable, then hear what the same Prophet
says. It is I (says he (that from the beginning show the things that be
last and from the beginning those things that be not done. It is I that do
speak and my counsel is stable. Isaia. 46.
and what so ever I will, that I do. Consider and behold that the Prophet
affirms the counsel of God to be stable, yea to be so immutable, that
neither could the tyranny of the ennemies neither yet the former sins of the
people, neither yet their present unthankfulness stop God from showing his
mercy. Because that his infinite goodness found away even in the midest of
death to manifest his own glory. Such as by malice be not altogether blinded,
having any exercise in the scripptures of God, may easily perceive, that I have
wrested no part of the Prophets mind. For continually one thing does he beat
in their ears, to wit, that God will show mercy, will deliver, and will be
Savior unto them for his Names sake for his promise made to Abraham, and for
the glory of him self. But now shortly let us hear two or three places of the
new testament spoken to the same purpose, and so let us put end to this part.
Our master Christ Jesus plainly affirms, that all which the father gave him,
should come unto him, pronouncing that who soever comes he ^old not cast him
forth, John. 6.
but will raise him up and give him life. For this (says he) is the will of
the Father that has sent me, that I shall lose nothing of all those which the
Father has given to me, but that I might raise them up in the last day. for
this is the will of him that has sent me, that all that sees the Son and
believes in him, may have life everlasting. Of those words of our master, it
is evident, first that the Father has given some to the Son Christ Jesus,
yea and also that some be, that are not given. But of that after. And
sec^ndarely that it behooves the same to come unto him, for so he affirms
sayi^g. All that my father gave unto me, shall come unto me. He leaves it not
in doubt, but planely affirms they shall come. Thirdly the end and fruicte of
the commi^g is expressed: to wit, y^ they obtain life everlasting. Which to
them that of the father are given and of the Son received, is so sure, that
Christ Jesus him self pronou^ceth, yt out of his hands is none able to
pluck them away. Plain it is, that the counsel of God is stable and his
love immutable toward his elect, because (al other conditions set aparte)
Christ affirms, that the life everlasting pertains to the^ that are given
by God, and received by him in protection and sauegarde. But more planely does
he speak in that his solemn prayer: Joan. 17.
for after that by diverse means he had comforted the sorrowful hearts of his
disciples, he gives comfort to the whole church: Affirming, that he did not
pray only for those that there were present with him, but also for all those
that should after believe (by their preaching) in him. These words he added for
our singular comfort: I have given unto them the glory which thou have given
to me, that they may be one as we are one, I in them and thou in me, that they
may be made perfect in one, and that the world may know, yt thou have sent me
and yt thou have loved the^ as thou have loved me. O that our hearts could
wit^^out contradictio^ embrase these words: for the^ with humility should we
prostrate our selves before our God, and with unfeigned tears give thanks for
his mercy. Three things in these words are to be observed, first that the
same glory which God the Father has given to his Son, the same has he
given to such as believe in him: not that either Christ Jesus had then the full
glory, as he was man (for as yet he had not overcome the death) neither y^ his
elect at any time in this life can atteine to the fruition of the same, but
that the one was as assured in gods immutable counsel as was the other. For as
the head should overcome the bitter death, and so triumph over satan the
author thereof, so should his members in the time appoi^ted, as he does
further express, saying: I will (Father) that where, that I am, there also be
those which thou have given unto me, that they may se my glory. The second is
that so stre^t and ^ere is the conjunction and union betweixt Christ Jesus and
his members, that they must be one, and never can be separated. For so did
Christ pray, Saing: That they all may be one, as we are one. I in them and
thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one. Let the conjunction be
diligently marked: for much it serves to our comfort. As the Godhead is
inseparably joined with the humanity in Christ Jesus our Lord, so the one that
is the God head, neither could nor can leave the humanity at any time. how
bitter that ever the storms appeared: so ca^ not Christ Jesus leave his dear
spouse the Church, neither yet any true membre of the same. For that he
includes under the general word (all) for any accide^t, how horrible that
ever it be, that came to pass in their life. And albeit that this appear
strange, and also a doctrine that may seem to give liberty to sin, yet may
not the children of God be defrauded of their fode, because that dogs will
abuse the same. But of this we shall (God willing) after speak. The third thing
to be noted, is, that the love of God toward his elect given to Christ is
immutable. For Christ puts it in equal balance with the love by the which
his Father loved him. Not that I would any man should so understand me, as that
I placed any man in equal dignity and glory with Christ Jesus touchi^g his
office. No that must be reserved wholly and only to him self: that he is the
^lie beloved, in whom all the rest are beloved: that he is the head, that only
gives life to the body: and that he is the souerane prince, before whom all
knee shall bow. But I mean, that as the love of God the Father was ever
constant toward his dear Son, so is it also toward the members of his
body, yea even when they are ignorant, and enemies unto him, Romans 6.
as the apostle witnesses Sai^g: God specially commends his love toward
us, that when we were yet sinners, Christ died for us: much more being
justified now by his blood, we shall be saved by him from wrath. For if when we
were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more we
being reconciled shall be saved by his life. To some, these words may appear
contrary to our purpose, for they make mention of a reconciliation, which is
not made, but where there is enemitie and dissension. But if they be
righteously considered they shall most evidently prove that, which we affirm,
which is, that God loved the members of Christ's body, even when they are
ignorant, when they by them selves are unworthy and ennemies. For this is his
first proposition, that we being justified by faith, have peace with God by our
Lord Jesus Christ. Where he makes mention of peace, he puts us in mind of
the dissension and war which was betwext gods justice and our sins. This
enemitie (says he) is taken away, and we have obtained peace. And le^t that
this comfort should^ suddenly euanish, or else that men should not depely wey
it, he brings us to the eternal love of God, affirming that God loved us
when we were weak. Where we must observe, that the apostle speaks not
universally of all men, but of such as were and should be justified by faith*
and had the love of God poured in to their hearts by the holy Ghost which was
given unto them. To such says he. if God did love us when we were weak and
his ennemies, much more must he love us when we are reconciled, and begin in
faith to call him father. The Apostle affirms, that our reconciliation
proceeded from gods love: which thing saint Johan more planely does witness in
these words: In this appears the love of God toward us, that God has sent
forth his only Son into the world that we should live by him. In this I say
is love, 1. Joan. 4.
not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and has sent his Son the
propitiation for our sins. so that both those apostles in plain words do
speak, that which before I have affirmed to wit, that God loved the members
of Christ Jesus even when they were enemies as well touching their knowledge and
apprehension, as also touching the corruption of their nature, which was not
regenerate. And so I conclude as before, that the love of God to vardes his
elect is stable and immutable, as it which begins not in time, neither
depends upon our worthiness or dignity: which truth is contrary to that
which I perceive ye hold and affirm. Thus far (I trust) we have sufficiently
proved, and that by plain scriptures, and by no patched unreasonable reasons
(as the author of your book accuses us.) That God has his elect, whom in
Christ Jesus he has chosen, and that of decreed purpose, to give them life.
Which purpose, counsel, and love of God is sure stable, and immutable. Now
rests to prove, that God has rejected some, and also to note the absurdities
which follow upon your doctrine, and so shall I not be compelled after in the
discourse to spend time and travel to confute your error.

That God ^ath reprobated any, appears to you horrible. Yea, and ye affirm,
God to be more cruel then any wild beast, if so he did. For thus ye writ in
your book as follows.

THE ADVERSARY.
God has given to all his sensible creatures a natural inclination to love
their birthes, The fourth section.
then does God also love his birthe as he says, shall I cause other to bear
and shall not I also bear? Likewise shall God make other to love their
birthes, and he not love his own birthe? Man is the birthe and child of God
created to his own image and similitude (as the Prophet says have we not alone
father? Zach. 3.
Has not one God made us? And Paul says: Act. 17.
we are the generation of God. Wherefore God loves his own birthe, that is man.
Then did he not reprobate, and cast away man before he was. For that were a
proof, that he hated and abhorred his own birthe above all other. Now there is
no wild beast, much les any man which would bring furthe their birth to
destruction. How much les then becomes it the goodness of God to make and bring
forth like to his own image and similitude unto perpetual^ confusion?

ANSWER.
How bold, how shameless, and how blasphemous thou declarest thy self (I speak
to thee and they co^pagnions that collected these blasphemies) It shall shortly
appear after that I have by gods grace with simple perspicuitie declared the
truth.

True it is that to the natural man nothing appears more absurd, nor more
repugnant to good reason (as men term it) then that all shall depend upon gods
will and appointment for so think they, that God can not avoid the suspicion of
injustice, yea say they he can not be purged nor made fre from malice and
cruelty. But such as entryng within them self do but in a part consider what
is their own condition, what is there ignorance, and how far they are inferior
to y^ angels in justice and knowledge, to his holy angels (I say) that be most
obedient and continually stand before his face, and yet nevertheless do cover
their faces, and of very reverence neither darre nor will rashly behold the
brightness of his glory. If further we shall consider yt as in God, his wisdom,
his power, his goodness and mercy are infinite, so are his judgments and
justice (in the self most righteous) incomprehensible to the dulnes of our
wits. For as his wisdom and power far surmounte all that we can imagine, so
are his judgments and justice a great deep (as David affirms, and in the
book of Job, is planely described) able to swallowe up and utterly to cofounde
all our senses. Alas, shall I, whose corporal eye is so feeble and weak, that
directly it can not behold the son which is a visible creature, but that it
shall be bli^ded and dasylled: shall I, I say, direct the eye of my mind
(corrupted by sin) to measure and co^prehe^de the brightness of his justice,
who dwells in the light inaccessible? If man could impose or prescribe to
God a law and measure of wisdom, power, mercy, and goodness, so yt none of the^
should otherwise be in his eternal God head, the man could understand and
approve: the some apperance might they have to bring his justice (which is no
les infinite and incomprehensible then the others) under the censure and
examination of their judgment and reason. But what bold and foolish
presumption is this? that man, who knows not fully what lie^h within his own
heart, shall without all reverence enter to judge the secret mysteries, the
full knowledge whereof does only abide in the eternal God head. That
impudently he shall pronounce: this can not be just, because we do neither se
nor understand the cause of the justice. God grant us greater humility, more
reverence and fear (which righteously is called the beginning of wisdom) then
that so rashly and proudly we shall presume to damn that which we understand
not. Lest that doing the contrary, that malediction pronounced by ^ saiah fall
upon us, where he says: Isaiah. 45
Woe be to him that reasons with his maker, the vessel of claie with the
potter. Does the clay say to the potter, what make thou? and thy work has no
hands, woe be to him that says to his father, what shall thou beget?

This I thought expedient briefly to admonish the godly reader, before I did
enter in to plane battle with the adversary. Beseching further such as do not
err in this article of set purpose and malice but rather of ignorance and
simplicity, not to be offended, as though I did stomach against them, if at any
time I shall handle the impudent writer or collector of this book (whose
nature is better known unto me then unto many of them) according to his
malicious frowardnes: But now shortly to the matter. The proposition and
conclusion of this writer are both one: to wit, God has not rejected nor
reproba^ed any man. His reasons and arguments (as the reader may perceive)
are: for that were against the nature of God, we he thus proves, God causes
others to bear and therefore he bears. And so bringing his argument from this
similitude: The saying of a blaspphemous mouth.
God maket^ beasts love their birthes: therefore ^eloueth his birthes: but al
men are the birthes o^ God. For God is the father of Adame, of who^ are al me^
borne. Therefore he loves all me^. If he loves, the^ did he roprobate none,
for that should declare, that he hated and abhorred, and were more cruel then
a wild, beast. These be thy arguments, (blasphemous mouth) In answeri^g
whereto if I shall seem to excede modesty, let the godly consider, that thy
horrible blasphemies are intolerable. And first I call the heaven and earth,
the insensible creatures, and the judgment of reasonable men to witness with
me, how beastly be thy cogitations of the eternal God head: when thou say.
God must love his birthes, because he has given a natural inclination to all
beasts to love their birthes. If thy reason be good, then must God forget some
of his birthes in their youth, and reiecte all care of the^. For that same
nature gives God to some fowls, as ye book of Job does witness in these words
(speaking of the Estrich) which leaves his eggs in the earth and makes them
hot in the dust, Job. 39.
and forgets that the foot might scatter them or that the wild beast might
break them. He shows him self cruel unto his young ones as they were not
his and is without fear as if he traualed in vain. For God has deprived him
of wisdom and has given him no part of understanding. If thy reason I say be
good, God must love his birth, because he causes all other beasts love their
birthes. Then I say, it must also follow, God shall forgett, and hardly entreat
some, for such nature and inclination has he given to some of his creatures as
is plainly proved. What the adversary will say.
I do mean (thou wilt say) of love only: but the scripture (which either
ignorantly, orels maliciously thou corruptest) declares the contrary for thou
wilt make God to bear, because he causes others to bear. That scripture I
say thou do peruerte, as thou do all the rest. For what the Prophet of
God applies to the miraculous restoration of the church which then was most
afflicted, that thou do allege to make God have like asrections with brute
beasts. And that neither thou nor any other shall have occasion to report,
that I accuse the wrongfully. Isaia. 66.
I will recite the hole words of the Prophet, who thus speaks: Before she
has traueled of child birth she has borne, and before that doloure come, she
brought forth a man, who has heard the like? or who has seen the like unto
this? was ye earth builded (he means set in order) in one day? was there ever
a nation borne at once, and yet Zion has traualed of child birth, and at once
has she brought forth her children, he adds the cause of this supernatural
multiplication and felicity, Saying: shall I bring to a strait? and shall I
not cause to bear? saves the eternal? shall I cause to bear and shall) make
restrai^te says thy God, They are more then blind which do not se, that God in
these words has neither respect to the natural inclination of beasts,
neither yet to any common love that he bears to his creatures. But to that
incomprehensible and unchangeable love which he bears to his church: the
multiplication, the joy and felicity whereof, he will at once bring forth in
such sort that his elect shall never remember to their grief that they
sustained any passion or pain: Let the indifferent reader compare this
interpretation with the plane words of the Prophet: and so let thy self
judge, how irreuerently thou do abuse the most confortable words of the
holy Ghost, to establish thy error. But let it be, that thou did mean of
love, and of no affection else, Art thou becume so bold, and impudent, that
thou darrest subject God, to the law, lymites and bounds of nature? To speak
the matter more planely. I ask of the first if thou wilt deny the love of God
to be perfect except that he do for all manner of men that which beasts
naturally do for their birthes. Secondarely if thou filthy earth dare burden
God in his presence with cruelty) as now thou do in thy blind raige, if he
has not created and made all men of equal estate condition and dignity.
Thirdly if thou shall stand in judgment, and lay injustice to his charge, if
he show mercy to who^ he will, and also indurate and make hard who he will.
For all these three, The works of God can not be subject to our reason
will I planely prove, that God does, first yt he does not for his dearest
children to our judgment, that which beasts naturally do for their birthes, I
trust thy self will easily confess. For the Tygar, the bear, the Lion and others
do so tender their whelps, that even against the strength of man (were he
never so valiant) will they fight for defense of their young ones, but we do se
that God commonly does so permit his dearest children to the cruel appetites of
the most wicked men, that for a season he appears to have forgotten them, and
to have turned his face and countenance from them. And shall we therefore
think, that gods love is not perfect or that his power is diminished or his
good will toward his children changed? The reason of Anabaptists.
God forbid. But this say you does not offend us, but that God should reprobat
any man whom he created to his own image and similitude that we ca^ not bear,
for it repugneth to his love and justice. Well of your first reason which you
draw from nature, Answer.
I suppose we have obtained that God is not bound in all things to follow the
natural love of his creatures. The adversary falsely and irreverently alleges
this word birth.
For he does often suffer, (and I trust ye will not say that he is enforced so
to do) his dearest children most cruelly to be handled, which no beast
willingly will do. Now let us wey your second reason. man says your book is,
the birthe, and child of God created to his own image and similitud (as the
Prophet says) wherefor God loves his own birth (that is man) Then did he not
reprobate and cast away man before he was: for that were a proof that he hated
and abhorred. Omitting your ignorance by the which ye apply generally to all
men those promesses which the Prophet Malachie spoke to the people of God.
Answer.
Let it be granted unto you that as all men were created in Adam, Malac. 2.
so God some manner of way is their father: what will or can ye thereof conclude.
That God loves all say you. If you understand and affirm that equally God
loves all because all were created by him, the common experience and the
diversity of gods gifts shall reprove your vaniti^for unto one man we see
greater gifts given then unto other, some we se verteouse and others given to
nothing but to iniquity. If you say, he loves them in that he offers unto
the^ his grace which when they refuse, then begins he to hate them, you have
proved nothing of your intent, and further the plain scripture confuteth this
your error. and first I say that before ye can prove your conclusion to be
good, ye must prove that all men stood, do stand, and be born in the same
perfection that Adame was created in. For it does not follow, that God still
loves all men, because he loved Adam (created to his own image and
similitude.) The reason is. Adam did fall from that image, became rebellious
inobedie^t, and slave to the devil. And in the same damnation wrapped all his
posterity. What we have in Adam.
So that now from Adam we can clame nothing, but sin, wrath, death, and
hatred, as the apostle affirms, that of nature we were all the sons of
wraeth. If ye allege that the apostle speaks in that place, of man as he is
corrupted in Adame, and so justly deprived from gods favor, then I demand of
you (if man does yet stand in Adame) which if ye confess, the holy spirit
shall convict you of alie. For by the mouth of the Apostle he affirmed that by
one man sin entered in to the world and by the means of sin death came upon
all men, so that in the first man Adame (who fell from his purity, have we
neither love, justice, nor life, but ye co^traries, to wit hatred, sin, and
death. But God as he had chosen his elect before all beginning in Christ Jesus
his Son, so has he placed these gifts in the second Adam alone* that of his
fulness we may all receive even grace for grace. And thus ye may easily
perceive, how vane be your arguments which you judged most strong. Your first,
drawn from nature and natural inclination, proves nothing, because that God
who is always fre, can not be subject to the laws of nature. Albeit that for
our weakness he some times uses similitudes taken from nature. Your second is
like vain, seeing that neither Adam him self did stand in his perfection,
neither is any of his corrupted sede as he is the so^ of Adam borne in that
condition and dignity: But contrary wise, we must refuse flesh, and blood,
nature and our first Ada^, if ever we shall be partakers of life. This only
were sufficient to confute, both your unreasonable reasons. But that, here
after ye shall have no accasion to complain of obscurite, neither yet that we
relent in any part, I will first simply propose what we teach and believe, and
there after by gods grace evidently prove the same. Error of Anabaptists.
You make the love of God common to all men and that do we constantly deny, and
say that before all beginning God has loved his elect in Christ Jesus his
Son and that from the same eternity he has reprobate others: The
affirmations of the true Christians
whom for most just causes in the time appointed to his judgment he shall
adiuge to torments and fire inextinguible. Here you stomak, and storm, here
ye cry blasphemy, and here you say, that we affirm that, which can not be
proved by gods scriptures. How sure is the probation of the former part, let
the indifferent reader judge by that which is all ready spoken. Let us now come
to the second. And that ye shall not think that I shall more depend upon
arguments and reason then upon scripture, Genesis 3.
I will begin with scripture, and let arguments and reason serve only instead of hand maids, which shall not command but obey scripture pronounced by
the voice of God. After that by rebellion man was spoiled of all graces, and
that the contrary vices had taken place and possession in the hearts of both
these miserable creatures, of Adam I mean, and of the woman. God pronounced
this sentence against the serpent. Because thou have done this, cursed art thou
amongst all the beasts of the earth. I shall establish enemitie betwext the
and that woman, betwext thy sede, and her sede. That sede shall break down thy
head and thou shall break down his hele. As I suppose no man will be so
impudent, as to deny that this is the voice of God, pronouncing and promising,
that he will stablish and put a battle, where none was appering to be: for
satan before had obtained such victory, and so had vanquished both the woman
and Adam, that they could never have resisted that servitude by them selves.
And therefore does he disclose the bowelles of his mercy, and does communicate
with them that counsel which was secret with him self before all beginning.
Question.
And if ye demand, How can it be proved, that this was his eternal counsel?
I answer because, Answer.
that he in whom there is no changeing nor variablenes, has now pronounced it:
and whether this reason be sufficient or not in answering to your objection we
shall after consider. Now rests it only to be observed, whether it was the
will of God or not to make a difference betwext man and man. Plain it is that
before his face as touching the first birth, there stands but one lompe, or
mass (as saint Paul terms it) and yet from the same are two seeds appointed
to spring, which are the two churches: The elect contained under the sede of
the woman, and the reprobate or malignant church comprehended under the name of
the serpents sede. The church of Christ and the serpente^i sede.
To the one is promised victory, to the other is denounced by the irreuocable
sentence of God the* broosing of the head, which is destruction and confusion.
I think ye will not say, that he was constreined there to by any force exterior
as we speak, seeing he is the eternal which changes not, ever abiding Lord
over all creatures, who may and does perform what so ever he will in heaven
and in earth. Then of necessity it must follow, that this battle is appointed
by his will. And that do the words plainly bear. For he says not I know
that there shall be a battle, or I will suffer and permit [as you use to
interpret such places] a battle to be, but he plainly says, I will put and
stablish the battle and enemitie, declaring thereby, that as he was the force,
strength, and the conductor to the sede of the woman so would he most
assuredly give victory to the same. Which thing S. Augustine diligently did
note, and godly admonished. De bono perseuera^t
Affirming, that our condition in Christ Jesus is now better and more sure,
then before was the condition of Adam in his own fre will. For that, that he
had non other strength, but that which might be and was overcome. But we have
the strength that is invincible because it is the power of the eternal. This
one place I say does most evidently prove, that God willingly makes a
difference betwext man and man, appointing to the one sort victory, Reply of
the adversary.
and lief, to the other subjection and death. But yet ye reply this can not be
proved to be the eternal counsel of God. for it is pronounced in respect of
the faith works and obedience of the one, and in respect of the infidelity
vicious living and inobedience of the other. Your objection (which here I now
entreat that after I be the les troubled) has two members, the former will I
now touch, abiding better opportunity for the other. Where ye allege, that
this can not be proved to have been the eternal counsel of God, because it was
pronounced in time, your reason appears (and is) more then foolish. For what
is he that against he plain scripture of God will affirm this reason. The
kingdom of heaven s^albe given in the end of the world to the elect of God,
therefore it was not prepared to them before the beginning. Does not (I say) the
plain voice of Christ condemn this vain reason: Or if I should say: the
death of Christ was four thousand years after the beginning, therefore the
lamb was not killed from the begi^ning. Were not this most folish* and
contrary to the plane scriptures? But is not the contrary reason most sure*
most true and strong? God in time has p^onounced, and his sentence being once
pronounced, most co^sta^tly does he execute the same: Therefore it was his
e^ernall and immurable counsel. As our election was purposed and decreed in
gods eternal counsel before the beginning of all times, and yet from aege to
aege was the same reveled to his chosen children. Did therefore the Apost^e or
rather the bo^ie Ghost lie (who does a^^irme, yt we were elected) as before is
proved in Christ Jesus before all time? Even so is it in this matter, the
sentence by the which the battle came forth first to the knowledge of man was
temporal. But the stabilitie and continuance of it plainly proves, that is
was and is the eternal purpose and counsel of God. But yet more depely to
dis^e^de in to the matter. Question
Was it the eternal purpose and counsel of God to create the world and so to
make man to his own image and similitude? I suppose that every reasonable man
will confess that so it was. Then do I ask if God was ignorant what should
become on all mankind before that any creation was? so to affirm is to deny
his eternal knowledge, wisdom, and God head: he did know and forsee his end*
and yet he did creat him, then if it was not his eternal counsel that to his
glory this difference and diversity should be in ma^kynd which then was but
one lompe or mass, why did he not give unto him such strength, as could not be
overcome? It shall nothing releue nor help you, to shift with the Papists,
alleging, that God gave him free will and abounda^t graces by the which he
might have resisted and ganestand all assaults and tentations if he would, that
we deny not But yet we ask why did not God give unto him the will to resist,
or why did he not so bridle satan, that he might not have tempted him? I trust
ye will not with the Manicheis affirm, that there was a power greater then the
power of the good God, and that this wicked power did for a time ouercom the
power and destroy the counsel of the good God who was creator and lover of
mankind. For that were plainly to deny the omnipo^encie of our God. If you
say (as after ye write) that God did one^y permit and suffer his fall, ye have
said nothing to the purpose: for still I demand, whether he did suffer it
willingly or unwillingly. If ye sa^ willing^y, then are ye caugh in the snare
which ye would avoid. If ye say it was against his purpose and will, the^ fall
ye in to that horrible blasphemy of the manicheis, denying gods omnipotent
power, And if yet ye would escape, imagining God to look and behold the end of
the matter, and yet neither willing the one nor the other, then fall ye into the
blasphemy of Epicurus who although in plain words he durst not deny God yet
did he affirm, that he regarded not the works of men, but did idly occupy
the heavens. But how far this repugneth to our faith, who believe God to be
omnipotent, not only because he may do all things, but also because that it is
he that created light and darkness, good and evil, and finally that works all
in all things according to the purpose of his good pleasure: let such as be
but meanly exercised in the scriptures judge, and so (I say) that man's fall and
the difference that came to our knowledge by the same, was no les determined in
the eternal counsel of God then was his creation. And that in this sentence
is yet most evidently to be espied. For if God had not purposed in him self to
establish this battle and so to make a difference perpetual, Gods purpose was
from the beginning to make a difference in mankind.
why did he not holy restore man agane to honor to puretie, and innocence?
Why did he not stay the fountain of sin in our first father? why did he
suffer his first corruption by propagation to come to his posterity? was it
because he lacked power? or was it not rather as the Apostle does teach us,
that he wrapped all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all? tha he
might she ^ mercy to who^ he would, and harden also whom he would? If these
things do displease you, remember first that they are the voices of the holy
Ghost, and secondarely call to your mind the condition of mankind, to wit that
both you and we (compared with that sovereign majesty) be but worms here
creping on the earth, and therefore can we not clim up to the ^e^ue^* and so
reason or ple^d with the almighty. Call to mind I say that question of the
Apostle, calling man to the consideration of him self in the same ma^er, Saing,
O man that art thou that thou maest answer in contrary to God? that is,
contend or plead with him? This sentence I sa^ ought to humble us, and make us
rather to tremble at the remembrance of his judgments then rashly, and with
proud stomockes to damn that, which we are not able to apprehend. But let us
yet prosecute this matter further, to the end that we may se if that this has
been and is the constant will of God, and that plainly declared by his word
that this former difference be kept in all aeges.

No other difference was made then this general, The se^^^^de diff^^e^ce.
till the days of Abraham, and then a more special and expreise difference
was made, for that which before was common to the woman's sede, was then by the
expressed voice of God appoi^ted to Abraham and unto his sede: in these words:
In thy sede shall all the nations of the earth be blessed, I will bless the
and multiply thee, such as bless ye, shall I bless, and such as curse the
shall I curse. In wc words is no les the battle, then the benediction
established. For as al nations were pronounced to be blessed in his sede (which
as the Apostle does interpret was Christ) so is it pronounced, that there
shall be some that shall curse, and therefore shall be accursed of God. Yea it is
plainly spoken that four hundredth years should his sede and posterity be
evil entreated in a strange country, nevertheless the people whom they shall
serve shall I judge (says the lord). So have we agane the difference plainly
confirmed by the voice of God. But yet God proceeds one degree further, and in
Abraham's sede he makes difference. For in Isaac (says he) shall thy sede be
called, by the which voice he did seclude both Ismael, and the rest of his
carnal sons from that honor: affirming that from none of them should the
benediction come, but only from Isaak which was the son of promise (and not
of nature only). But that difference was most evidently declared in Isaakes
two sons, being yet in their mothers boson* before they had done either good
or bad, as the Apostle affirms. It was said by the voice of God, the elder
shall serve the younger. By which voice of God reveled, did Isaak and Rebecca
plainly understand, what was the cause of the battle which the mother felt in
her bosom and womb: to wit, that because from her womb were two peoples and
nations to proceed, which could not be of equal honor and dignity. This is
the cause why all the prophets almost do de clare gods wrath against Esan and
Edome.
For the one had he determined in his eternal counsel to elect for his
peculiar people, the other to reject, and to leave them in the common
corruption as the other nations: as the sequel in process of time did
evidently declare. For the Edomites discending of Esau were cut of from the
body of the church and became manifest enemies to the posterity of Jacob
because that their father was subject to Jacob and pronounced to be his servant,
Such as understand this place of corporal service and worldly riches or
dignity only, do nothing else but show their own ignorance corrupting the
meaning of the holy Ghost. Psea. 137
For saint Paul in the 9. chapter to the Romans after that he has affirmed
that the promise and ^lection of God were sure (albeit that many of the carnal
sede had refused Christ preached, Esaie. 34.
) he brings in this former sentence, Ier. 49.
to remove all scla^der: Saing, Obad. 1.
All are not sons, because they are the sede of Abraham, that is those that
be ye sons of the flesh, are not therefore the sons of God: but those that
be the sons of promise are accounted for sede. And so to prove that which
before he had affirmed, to wit, hat all were not Israelites that came of
Israel, he added these words. Not only this, but also when Rebecca had
conceived of one, our father Isaak, while the children were not borne, while
they had neither done good nor cuill (that the purpose of God should by de
according to election, not of works, but of the caller) it was said to her:
The elder shall serve the younger. Such as be not more then blind, may easily
perceive, that the Apole looks to an other end, then to worldly dignity.
For his purpose was not in that place to dispute and reason who should be rich
in this world and who should be poor, who should be lords temporal, and who
should be servants, but his purpose and m^nd was to declare t^ whom did that
benediction promised unto Abraham appertein, and to whom it did not apperteine.
So that the holy Ghost speaking by saint Paul is a commentary of the words
spoken to Rebecca. And I doubt not, but so she did understand them. Romans 9.
To wit, that yt promise which appeared to have been common with all the sede of
Isaak (of whom it was spoken) In Isaak shall thy sede be called, was now
restreined and made proper to one head, and to the people discending of him,
that is to Jacob, who after obtained the name of Israel. So that both the
peoples neither were reputed, neither yet in very deed were the Church and
chosen people of God, but the one was chosen and the other was refused. The one
by grace, and of the caller was honored with the name and privilege of his
church, The other was cast out as strangers, upon the one remained the
benediction, of the which the other was deprived. In this manner, I say did
both Isaak, Rebecca, yea Jacob, and Esau in process of time understand this
oracle of God. But yet because this former place of the Apostle is by many evil
understand, How S. Paul applies the words of Moises.
and by some maliciously wrested from the simple meaning of the holy Ghost: in
as few and plain words as I can, I purpose to declare how aptly and properly
the Apostle uses the testimony and words of Moises. Christ being preached to
the jews who were reputed the chosen people of God, to whom, Gene. 25.
and for whose comfort and deliverance the Messiah was especially promised: The
most part of the jews remained unfaithful, refused the Savior, who was sent,
blasphemed him, and cruelly did persecute him and his me^bres. This could not
be without a great offe^se and scla^der to many thousands both of the Jews
and gentiles. The Jews puffed up with pride because they were the peculiare
people, because to them were given the law, promesses, and oracles, did brag
and boast, that God could not reject the^, except that he should be found a
lier. For to Abraham and to his sede had he made a promise. And the gentiles
might be troubled with the like cogitations: for they might think, if God shall
refuse his own people which so many years, he tenderly had norished, what
stabilitie can we look for, though we should receive this Christ preached.
Against both these sorts of men most valia^t^y fights the Apostle, and most
aptly alleges the scriptures to the confutatipn of the one and comfort of the
other. First against the Jew he reasons, that albeit they be Israelites after
the flesh, yet it may be, yt they be not the verey israelites of God, neither
yet is God endeb^ed unto the^, though they be descended of Abraham. The reason
is, that God made no promise to the hole sede of Abraham, but to a part of it,
to Isaak. Promise inade to Isaak.
And if they should say: but we are of Isaak, he granting that, does
nevertheless prove, that God does not choose ye hole sede of Isaak, but in the
mothers womb (as said is) by his own decre, he made the difference. And if
further they should reply, o but we are of Jacob, he then comes to the proof
of his first proposition, affirming, that albeit they were of Jacob, yet did it
not thereof follow that they were all the elect people of God. for what
prerogative (would he say) can Jacob, have above his father Isaak, or what can
Isaak have above Abraham? Abraham who many years faithfully obeyed God, could
not obtein that all his posterity (no not Ismael for whom he prayed) should be
reconed to be his sede: Neither could Isaak obtein the same: but God appointed
and did chose whom it pleased him. And shall Jacob have greater prerogative
the^ had they both? shall he that of grace was preferred to his brother, when
neither the one had done good, neither the other had done evil, give that
privilege to all his posterity, that without exception they shall be the chosen
people of God? No (will the Apostle conclude) but God no^ after the revelation
of his dear Son Christ Jesus does make the same difference in the posterity
of ^acob, that somtymes he made in the sede of Abraham and Isaak. That is: he
chooses whom it pleases him, and rejects also such as in whom he has no
pleasure, and that not only amongst the Jews, Vessels of mercy prepared
unto glory.
but also amongst the gentiles and that to make the riches of his glory
known toward ye vessels of mercy which he had prepared unto glory: who^ he
has called, even us not only of the Jews but also of the gentiles (as the
Prophet Osee says) and so to the e^d of ye chapter he establishes the faith
of the gentiles, and comforts them affirming, that their vocation and
election was fore spoken by Moises and the Prophets, and therefore that it was
not a thing that came by chance, but was appoi^ted in the eternal counsel of
God, and therefore in his conclusion, he assures them, that such as believe in
Christ Jesus, shall never be confounded. This simply, but truly (I doubt not)
have I explaned the mind of the Apostie in the former place, which is: Gods
election depends not upon man.
That gods election depends not upon man upon his will, purpose, pleasure, or
^^gnitie, but as it is fre proceeding from grace, so is it stable in god^
immutable counsel, and is reveled to gods elect, at such time as he knows
most expedient. But because that of this we must after speak more, now we
recurne to our former purpose. From the beginning we hear, that God makes a
difference: first by that general division, seperating and setting aparte the
sede of the woman from the serpents sede. After calling Abraham (neglecting as
it were, the rest of the whole world) in Abrahames sede he makes plain
difference, secluding Ismael, that he should not be heir with Isaak: But most
especially in the womb of Rebecca, making the difference betwext the two
children and their posteri^ie. Which difference did continue even to the days
of Christ Jesus, in such ^irmitie, and stablenes, that neither could the
sins of the Pa^riarches, the subtle cruel^ie of Pharao, the inobedie^ce and
grudgeing of the people, their apostasy and defection from God by manifest
idolatry, nor finally their long bondage and captivity, alter or change this
immutable counsel of God: that the elder should serve the younger, that the
Messiah should co^ of the tribe of Judah, and that of the loins of David should
spring forth one to fit upon his seat for ever. And this difference which God
by his own voice did stablish before the coming of his dear Son Christ Jesus
did the same Christ Jesus our master (appering in flesh) ratify and confirm.
For he plainly affirms, that he was not sent but to the lost snepe of Israel
and that it was not good to take the bread of the children and give it to
dogs. By which two sentences he makes an express difference bet^ext the
sheep and ^he goats, and betwext the children and the dogs. He fears not
to say to the faces of those that boasted them selves to be the sons of
Abraham, ye are not of God for, if ye were of God, John. 8.
ye should love me, but ye are of your father the devil and his desires ye
will obey. As this sentence is fearful, so may it appear verey bold. For they
might have obcted as they did: are we not his creatures, created to his own
image, are we not the sede of Abraham? Do we not bear the figure of
circoncision? are we not collected in Jerusalem, and do we not frequent the
temple? yes verily, but none of all these things made them to be of God, in
such sort as Christ denied them to be of him. For all these things may the
reprobat have common with the elect. But Christ denied them to be of God, that
is, to be the sons and wessels of his mercy elected in his eternal counsel,
borne of him by the spirit of regeneration, by the which their stubborn
blindness being removed, and they made obedient, durst be bold to call him
Father. In this sense Christ denies them to be of God. If any think that their
wickedness and wilful refusal of grace offered was the cause that they were
not of God, as I neither excuse their manifest rebellion, neither yet deny it
to be a most just cause of their condemnation, so utterly deny I that their
perse^ sins were the only or the chief cause of their reprobation. For Christ
him self fears not to assign an other cause: Saing, Therefore ye do not
hear, because ye are not of God. Why the Jews believed not in Christ.
If they had heard, that is, received and believed Christ Jesus and his
doctrine, their sins had been purged and their blindness removed. But him could
they not receive. And why because they are not of God. But to the objection,
that the fore knowledge of good works, or of rebellion to come, should be the
cause why God does elect, or reiecte, we shall (God willing) after ans^ere.
Now only I mind to follow that which I have purposed, which is that Christ
Jesus him self makes a plain and manifest difference betwext one sort of men
and an other. How often does he affirm that, his sheep do hear his voice,
that he knows them, and that they know him, yt it has pleased the Father to
give the kingdom to the little flock. That many are called and few chosen. That
some there be whom Christ Jesus never knew, no not enen when they wroght
greatest miracles. In all these and many places mo it is evident, Christ
makes a diff^re^rence of one sort from an other.
that Christ makes difference betwext one and an other. but one place most
notable all others I will shortly touch, and put end to this matter. Christ
Jesus in that his most solemn and most comfortable prayer (after other things)
sa^eth, I have manifested they name to the men whom thou have given to me of
the world. They were thine, and thou have given them unto me, and they have
kept thy word. And shortly after: I pray for them, I pray not for the world,
but for them whom tho^ have given unto me: Because they are thine. John. 17.
If in the hole scriptures there were no mo places to prove that in the
Eternal counsel of God there is a difference of one sort of me^ from an
other, this only one were sufficient. For first he makes mention of men given
unto him by the Father, who were (as he before affirmed) chosen out of the
world, and why were they given unto Christ? he answers, because they were
the fathers. And how they apperteined to God more then others, is before said.
He further declares what he had done vuto them, What Christ did for his.
what they also had done. And what he did and would do to the end for them, he
had opened unto them the name (that is the mercy goodness, constant truth and
perfect justice) of his heavenly father, which doctrine they had received and
kept, as they that were the ground appointed to bring furrh frui^ in
abundance. He did pray for the^, that they should be sanctified and confirmed
in the verity. The virtue of wc prayer is perpetual and at al times obteineth
mercy in the presence of his fathers throne for his elect. And lest that any
doubt should remain as that these graces were common to all the world, in
plain and express words he affirms, Christ prayed not for the world
that he prayed not for the world but for those [saieth he] whom thou have
given unto me. If any deny a plane difference here to be made betwext one sort
of me^ and an other, I will pray to God to open his Eyes, that he (if gods good
pleasure be) may se the light that so brightly shyneth. Other places for this
present I omit: For of these precedents I suppose it be evident, that in the
eternal counsel of God there was a difference of mankind even before the
creation, which by his own voice is most plainly declared to us in time. Now
to that objection which Pighius that pestilent and peruers Papist (and you all
after him) does make. To wit, that God did predestinate according to the
works, and faith which he foresawe to be in man. An answer to the papistical
and pestilent objection of Pighius and others his like.
I might obiecte to the contrary that if Predestination proceeds from gods
purpose and will (as the Apo^^le affirms it does) that the^ the purpose and
will of God being eternal, can not be moved by our works, or faith which be
temporal. And that if the purpose of God be stable and sure, that then can not
our works being unsure, be the cause thereof. But to avoid prolixitie and
tediousnes, I will by plain scriptures prove, that of fre grace did God
elect, that of mere mercy does he call and of his only goodness without all
respect had to our dignity (as to be any cause first moving him) does he
perform the work of our salvation. And for the proof of the same, let us
take Abraham and his posterity for example. Plain it is, that he and his sede
were preferred to all the nations of the earth, the benediction was established
to spring from them, the promise of the land of Canaan was made unto them, and
so were they extolled to the honor and dignity of gods peculiar people. But
let us consider what either faith or obedience God found in them which might
have moved him thus to prefer them to other na^ions. Let us hear Moises. The
Lord they God (says he) has chosen the, Deuteronomy. 7.
that thou shoul dest be a peculiare people to him above all the peoples which
are upon the face of the earth: God has not so vehemently loved you and chosen
you because you are mo in nombre then other nations (seeing ye are fewar then
all other people) but because he has loved you, and would keep the oath which
he made to your fathers. And after it follows: Say not in thy heart, my power,
my strength, and my hand have prepared this abundance to me, and think not in
thy heart, Deuteronomy. 9.
it is for my justice, that the Lord has brought me into this land. Of these
places it is plain, that Moises leaves no cause neither of gods election,
neither yet of perfourmance of his promise in man, but establishes it
altogether upon gods fre love and good pleasure. The same did Joshua in that his
last and most vehement exhortation to his people a little before his death,
Iosue. 24.
in which plainly he affirms, that Abraham and his father were idolaters
before they were called by God, wc place Ezechiel the Prophet most evidently
declares rebuking the unthankful defection of the Jews from God, who of
mercy had given the^ life, honor, and dignity, they of all others being the
most unworthy. For the says: Thus says the Lord God to Jerusalem: Ezec. 16
Thy habitatio^ and they ki^red is of Canaa^ thy father was an amorrhean, and
thy mother an Hittite. and in thy nativity when thou wast born thy nauill was
not cut, thou was no^ washed wi^h water, to soften the, thou was not salted
with salt, neither yet was thou swadled in clowtes. By the which the Prophet
signifies that all was imperfect, all was filthy all was corrupt and stinking
as touching their nature. he proceeds: none ^ie pitied the to do, any of these
unto the, for to have compassion upon the: but thou wast cast out in the open
field to the contempt of thy person in the day that thou wast borne. And when I
passed by the I saw the polluted in thine own blood, and I said unto ye when
thou wast in thy blood (yt is in thy filthy sins you shall live. And this he
repeteth, to the e^d, yt he may beat it more deply in their minds. I says
the Lord) said unto the being in thy blood thou shall live, and so he
proceeds, declaring, how that God did multiply them, did give unto them
beauty strength honor and dignity. These three places do plainly witness what
perfection God did find in this people whom thus he did prefer to all others.
And what obedience did they render unto him after the vocation of Abraham, the
hole Histories do witness. for perfection and obedience was not found in Abraham
him self, yea neither in Moises nor in Aaron, but contrary wise, the
inobedience of all we find noted, to the same end yt Moises has before spoken,
to wit, that none shall boast that either justice proceeding or following was
the cause why God did choose and elect that people. For how shall God choose
for that, which the holy Ghost plainly denies to be in any man discending of
the corrupt sede of Adam. For Isaiah plainly does affirm, that all our
justice, is as a clothe most polluted and spotted: If our justice be polluted
as the Prophet, affirms it to be, and God did predestinate us for our
justice, what follows, God did not for our works predestinate us.
but that God did predestinate us for that, which was filthy and imperfecte:
But God forbid yt such cogitations should take place in our hearts. God did
choose us in his eternal purpose for his own glory, to be manifested in us,
and that he did in Christ Jesus in who^ only is our full perfection (as
before we have said). But let us yet hear some testimonies of the new
testament. saint Paul to his disciple Timothy says. 2. Ti. 1.
Be not ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, neither be thou ashamed of me
who am his prisoner but be thou partaker of the afflictions of the Eua^gile,
according to the power of God, who has made us safe and has called us with an
holy vocation, not according to our works but according to his purpose and
fre grace, which was given to us by Christ Jesus, before all times, but now is
made patent by the appering of our Savior Jesus Christ. Here plain it is,
that neither are we called, neither yet saved by works, much les can we be
predestinate for them, or in respect of them. True it is, that God has
prepared good works tha^ we should walk in them: but like true it is, that
first must the tree be good, before it bring forth good fruit: and good can
never the tree be, except that the hand of the gardener have planted it. To use
herein the plain words of saint Paul, he witnesses that we are elected in
Christ, to the end that we should be holy and without blemishe. Now seeing that
good works spring forth of election how can any man be so foolish as to
affirm, that they are the cause of the same. Can the stream of water flowing
from the fountain, be the cause of the original spring? Question.
I think no man will so hold nor affirm: even so it is in this matter: for
faith, and a godly life that ensues our vocation, are the fruits proceeding
from our election but are not to the causes of the same. And therefore the
Apostle, to beat down all pride, asks what have thou ^ man which thou have
not received? 1. Cor. 4.
And if thou have received it, why gloriest thou, as though thou had not
received it? The Apostle in that place speaks not of one or two graces, but
what so ever is necessary to salvation, that he affirms to be received, and
that of fre grace, as he yet more plainly does witness saying. Of grace are ye
saved, by faith, and that, not of your selves, it is ye gift of God, and not of
works, lest any should glory. Now if man has nothing but that which he
receaueth of grace, of fre gift, of favor, and mercy, what odious pride, and
horrible unthankfulness is this, that man shall imagine, that for his faith and
for his works God did elect and predestinate him to that dignity? even as if
two or three beggars chosen from the number of many were of the liberal mercy
of a Prince promoted to honor, should after brag and boast, that their good
service was the cause that the Prince did choose them, Should not every wise
man mock their vanity, yea might not the Prince justly deprive them for their
arrogant unthankfulness? Might not the Prince have left them in their wretched
estate? And what then should have become of their service? Is it not eue^ so
with man lost in Adam? (whose fall in gods prescience and purpose was before
his creation) of which mass or lompe God of his own fre grace did choose and
predestinate vessels of his mercy prepared unto glory, that they should be
holy (as before is said) shall these the^ that find mercy to work good
words, boast, as though works were the cause thereof? God forbid. For if the
posterity of Abraham did not obtain the inheritance of the land of Canaan for
any justice that was in them? yea if God did not choose them neither to the
temporal nor eternal felicity, but of love and fre grace only, as Moises
does witness, how shall we think, that the Eternal inheritance, or gods
election to the joy and life everlasting, depends upon any qualite within us.
Wonder it is, that the Apostle saint Paul entreating this matter of gods fre
election, was ignorant of this cause, if it be sufficient. For by that means
in few words he might have put silence to many dogs which then(as men do
now) barked against this doctrine. For if he had said: God has chosen before
all times to the participatio^ of life a certain number, because he foresaw
that they should be faithful obedient to his commandments and holy in
conversation: and upon the other part he has rejected and reprobate others,
because he foresaw that they should be unfaithful, disobedient, and unclean of
life, this I say (if those causes had been sufficient) had been a sensible manner
of doctrine: But the Apostle alleges no such reason but first beats down
the pride of man (as before we have touched) and there after brusteth forth in
this exclamation. O the hieght of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of
God, how inco^prehensible are his judgments, and how vnsear cheable are his
ways? This exclamatio^ (I say) had been vain, if either works or faith
foresene had been the cause of gods election. S. Augustine does mock the sharp
sight of me^, that in his days began to se more depely then did ye holy Ghost,
speaking in ye Apostle. And we fear not to affirm, that the men wc this day do
attribute election or predestination to any virtue, or quality within man, do
hold and defend (to their great danger) that which none inducd with the
Spirit of God has left to us written within the holy scriptures, either yet
that any of the chose^ shall co^fes in their greatest gloric. Let the hole
Scriptures be red and diligently marcked, and no sentence (rightly understand)
shall be found, that affirms God to have chosen us in respect of our works,
or because he fore saw, that we should be faithful, holy and just. But to
the contrary many places shall we find (yea eue^ so many as entreat of that
matter) that plainly affirm, that we that we are freely chosen according to the
purpose of his good will, and that in Christ Jesus. And what shall be the
confession of the hole body assembled when they shall receive the promissed
glory, is expressed in these words of the 24 elders, Apoca. 4. and 5.
who casting their crowns before him that sits upon the throne, do say.
Worthy art thou (o Lord and our God) to take honor and glory and power. For
thou have created all things, and by thy will they are and were created. And
after they fall before the lamb and sing a new song saying: Worthy art thou
to take the book, and to open the seals thereof: for thou wast killed, and
have redeemed us to God by thy blood, and have made us to our God kings and
priests and we shall reign upon the earth. No mention is here made of any
worthiness of man: the creation is given to God, and that all things are in
that perfect state which the^ the chosen shall possess, is attributed to his
will. The death of the lamb is assigned to be the cause of the redemption, yea
of that great dignity to which they are promoted. I am fully persuaded, that
if any cause of gods election, and of the fruit proceeding of the same, were or
could be in man, that the holy Ghost, who is author of all justice, would not
have defrauded man of any thing which of right did appertein unto him. But
seeing that in no place the holy Ghost does attribute any part of man's
salvation to his own merits or worthiness, I fear not to affirm, that this
pestilent opinion is the instigation of satan, laboring by all means to
obscure the glory of Christ Jesus and to retein man in bondage, whom he
infected with that first venom which he made hi^ to drink, Saing, ye shall be as
gods. Thus far with such plain simplicite (as it pleased God to minister unto
me for the time) have proved, A brief rehearsal what is before sufficiently
proved.
yt gods election is Eternal, yt it is stable, yt he has made a difference,
betwext one sort of me^, and an other, wc difference although it came to know
ledge of man in time, yet was it in gods purpose and counsel before all time no
les the^ his creation was. And last yt gods election depends neither upon or
works nor upon our faith, but proceeds from his Eternal wisdom, mercy, and
goodness: and therefore is it i^mutable and co^sta^t. Now shortly will I go
through (if God permi me) ye reasons of yor book, Nothing upon ye one part,
ye imperfectio^s of ye same, and upon ye other, yor ignorance, orels malice in
corrupti^g ye scriptures.

THE ADERARIE.
To prove this similitude good and to show how much his love toward his
children excedeth the love of all creatures toward their birt^es he says:
The fyft section.
Can a woman forget the child of her womb, and not pity the same whom she
has borne? And though she do forget it, Isaia. 45.
yet I will not forget the. Here he speaks not only to the elect (as some
say) but also to them which did for sake and dispyse him as there. Isaia. 30.
Alas for these disobedient children (says the Lord) that they will take
counsel without me. Here he calls the wicked which heap sin upon sin*
and were disobedient, his chiidren. Matt. 7.
Christ says, If ye when ye are evil ca^ give your children good gifts, how
mmch more your heavenly father? After the same manner may I reason with you
(careless by necessity) if none of you though ye be evil, would beget a child
to misery how much les would God which is all good beget and creat man his own
image to perpetual pains? Here we may se how much this noghtie opinion is
contrary to nature and to reason. and that it is contrary to the word, God
willing I will prove. If God has ordained the most part of the world to be
damned, then were his wrath greater the^ his mercy. But the scripture
witnesses that his mercy is over all his works, Psalm. 144
and that God is slow unto wrath and ready unto mercy, so that his wrath is
extended only to the third and fourth generation, but his mercy to the
thousand generation wherefor thus (says he): Esaia. 54
A little whil I have forsaken thee, but with great mercifulnes shall I take
thee up unto me. When I was angry I hid my face from the for a little ceason
but through everlasting mercy have I pardoned thee. And David says, Psalm.
29.
his wrath indureth but the twinkling of an, eye and his pleasure is in life.
heuines may well endure for a night, But joy comes in the morning. And so
Moises called him a merciful and gracious God, long suffering, and keeping
mercy in store for thousands. By these scriptures and many mo, it is evident,
that gods mercy is greater then his wrath, contrary to their sainges.

ANSWER.
How blasphemous be your similitudes, your selue may consider, if malice have
not utterly blinded you, for I have all ready proved that God is not bound to
the laws and bounds of nature, and how shamefully ye do abuse the scriptures
which ye allege, few words shall declare. Ye deny, that God does speak
here to his elect in the place of isaiah the Prophet, Isaiah. 49
but to all me^ in general: and even to those that had forsaken him, as ye
would seem to prove by the words of the same Prophet spoken before in his
thirty chapter. Isaiah. 30
First (I say) that those two places do no more agree, then do those words of
Christ spoken after his resurrection: Go to my brethren and tell them: I pass
up to my father, and unto your father, and unto my God and unto your God, and
those which he spoke before his death, against Capernaum, Bethsaida, and
Corosaim, or unto Jerusalem against whom he pronounced woo and malediction,
because they did not know the time of their visitatio^. For in the former place
God speaks to Syon which long had been waist and to his people, which long
had been oppressed. And to the end that the reader may better understand how
deceitfully ye withdraw and steall the words which explain the hole matter, I
will bring forth the words of the Prophet. Is^ia. 49
Reioise (says he) ^ heavens: and reioce thou earth ^ you mountanes breast you
forth in gladness, for the eternal has conforted his people and shall have
mercy upon his poor ones. Syon has said, the Lord has left me and my Lord
has forgotten me, May a woman forgett her child that she shall not have
compassion upon the son of her bosom, but let it be that they forget
(nevertheless I shall not forget the, for lo in these my two hands have I
engrafted the, and thy walls are for ever before me. If these comfortable
words were spoken in general to all men (as ye affirm) let indifferent men
judge: If all men were Sion, that long had lain desolate, if all were his
people that long had been oppressed in the captivity of Babylon: If all did so
complain, that they thought God to have forgotten his league and promise, which
of mercy he made with them: And finally, if all have this promise, that their
deliverance is joined with gods infinite power, the^ is your application, to be
approved, but if God did make a plain difference betwext Israel and all
nations in the earth, if he had chosen his habitation in Syon, and if he will
keep promise with the afflicted for his own names sake, be they never so
unworthy, then are ye to bold to give the honor and prerogative of the
children and heirs, to strangers and bastardes. The words which ye allege of
the thirty chapter make nothing for your purpose: for albeit he speaks to
those that were inobedie^t, yea that were treasonable traitors, yet had they
the name, the title, yea the honor and dignity of gods people, and among
them, were some of gods chosen children: for whose comfort (after long
affliction sustained in Babylon) were those other words spoken And so except
that ye be able to prove that the people of Israel and the city of Jerusalem
had no greater prerogative even in the time of their greatest blindness and
unthankfulness (before the coming of Christ Jesus in the flesh) then had other
nations, ye conclude nothing. But yet wonder it is, that ye can make no
difference betwext the times, in which the one, words and the other were
spoken. The woe was pronounced (you say alas which the text has not) against
them, what time they had declined from God, when they took counsel of them
selves when they could not abide the admonitions of the Prophets: but the
comfortable promise of delyuera^ce was made, after that vengeance was powered
forth upon the proud contemners, and after that the hole body was sore
tormented by great oppression and long impresonement. Do ye not think that
their might be great alteration in that people within the space of an hundredth
years? for so long was it betwext the days of the Prophet and the days of
their last captivity under Nabucadnezer, after which time also did this former
promise of gods remembrance of the^ only take place. Might not the one ^e
spoken of those which should be punished (yea let it be that they were the
reprobate) and the other to the people of God, to whom by his own holiness he
had promised deliverance? Do ye think that because the same Prophet speaks
both^ the sentences, that therefore they do appertein to one estate and
condition of people? I have proved the contrary by Christ's plain words. For
his mouth pronounced destruction against Jerusalem, and yet sends he the
joyful tidings of his resurrection to his disciples with that most singular
comfort that God remained unto them both God, and father: and eue^ so does our
Prophet Isaiah: for in the o^e place he speaks to the obstinate contemners,
but in the other place he speaks to the afflicted children. Wey I beseech you
the scriptures of God with greater reverence. The words of Christ ye likewies
falsify. Matt. 7.
for he speaks not of any common love which he bears to all me^, but
affirms, Luc. 11.
that our heaue^lie Father gives good things, or as Lucas affirms, gives
the holy Ghost to such as ask of him. Ye must prove first, that all ask in
faith, and according to his will (which be the peculiar prerogatives of the
children of God) before that Christ's words can serve for your general
multitude, either yet that you shall thereof be able to prove that God loves
all men a like.

Ye take your pleasure in reasoning with us, whom ye term Careless by
necessity. I will not recompense raling with raling, but I pray God that thou
(the writer of this book) show hereafter greater diligence in godlynes, then of
many days thou have done where so ever thou have hanted. We use not to subject
God to our corrupt affections, but with reverence and fear we leave to his
godly wisdom the ordering of his creatures, neither yet can you be able to
prove, that we either by word or writing have affirmed, that the principal end
of any man's creation was perpetual pain. But we affirm, as before we have
declared, that God for him self and for the manifestation of his own glory
has created all things. But of this we must after more largely speak.

The final conclusion which ye collecte of nature, is that God has created
none to misery nor pain. The blasphemy of Anabaptists.
For that your master Castalio fears not most blasphemously to affirm,
sayi^g, yt if he has so done, he is more crewell the^ any wolf. O heaven and
earth revenge this blasphemy.

That man which here suffers misery and much clamitie, yea and that also
shall be adiuged to the fire inexti^guible, is created of God, or (as you
affirm) is the birth of God: I suppose your selves will not deny. And that he
suffers all miseries; by gods just judgments, and by his will expressed in
his word, the scripture b^areth record. For God says to the woman, in sorrow
and dolor shall thou bear thy children. To the man: In the sweat of thy face
shall thou eat thy bread, and also: cursed is the earth for thy sake. (...) 3.
Which (and many mo places) plainly witness, that God has inflicted pain upon
man whom he has created. You answer: That did God for the sin of man, I
confess: But yet is your foot fast in the snare. For after sin, man ceased not
to be the creature, and (as ye will term him) the birth of God If the^ God; be
subject to the law of nature (as before we have said) and now agane repete,
that your vanity and ignorance may the more appear, so that he is bound to do
the self same thing to his birthes, that nature moves us to doto our children.
I ask first why did God suffer man created to his own image to fall in to sin?
assuredly no natural father will wittingly and willingly suffer his children
to fall into apit or dongeon to destruction. And secondarely I ask, why did
not God (who is omnipotent, having all wisdom and goodness) provide an other
medicine for man, then by death to ouercom so many miseries? Thirdly if God
would that none should be borne to misery, why did he not clearly purge the
nature of Adam? why did he not stay that venom and corruption in our first
father, why did he permit it to infect all his posterity? There is no shift
that here can serve you. For if you say, God was provoked by the sins of the
posterity, which he did forese to be in them, so to do: I answer, that he
foresaw nothing, which his eternal and infinite power might not have removed
and remedied, if so had pleased his godly wisdom: for then as now, was he the
God. who alone may do what so ever he will in heaven and in earth. And further
I say, that the fou^tain being shet up, the flowing of sin by natural
propagation should have ceased. To gods permission we shall after answer. To
put end to his matter, if ye consider nothing else in the great variety of gods
works but the only misery of the sufferer, and sin which (we deny not to be
a cause of the same) ye have no better profit^d in the school of Christ, then
had the disciples, when seeing him that was born blind, they demanded this
question, Master (say they) who has sinned, whether this man or his parents?
that he should be born blind? No other cause did they se of his misery but
sin. And to the^ it was strange that any man could sin so grievously before he
was borne, that for the same he should be punished with perpetual blindness
during his life. And that he should suffer such misery for the offenses of his
Parents, appeared to them to repugne to gods justice, and to that sentence
which before he had pronounced by the Prophet Ezechiel affirming, that the son
should not bear the iniquity of the father. But Christ Jesus in correcting
their error, gives to you a profitable lesson if ye can receive it: affirming,
that neither he, neither yet his Parents had sinned that so he should be borne,
but that the glory of God should be manifested in him. If gods glory be
declared and made manifest even by the miseries which some creatures sustein:
Dare you therefore accuse God of creweltie? Consider your bold foolishnes, and
repent your blasphemies before that vengeance strike.

After that ye have concluded as you think, our opinion to be naughty, by
arguments drawn from nature, you make a bold promise to prove the same by plain
scriptutes: And yet your first entrance is but by a reason not well grounded
upon these scriptures which ye allege. Thus ye write: If God has ordained the
most part of the world to perdition then were his wrath greater then his
mercy, but the scripture witnesses that his mercy is over all his creatures.
Ergo (will ye conclude) He has not created the most part of the world to
perdition. To prove that gods mercy is greater then his wrath, ye bring forth
the words of David. Psalm. 30. and 45. Isaiah. 54. and of God him self
proclaming his own name unto Moises: for these words are not the words of
Moises (as ye allege) but were spoken by God him self in the ears of Moises.

To the Mayor I have answered before, that falsely ye burden us, that we affirm
that God has ordained ye most part of the world to perdition: for we presume
not to define what number God shall save, and how many he shall justly
condemn, but with reverence we do refer judgment to him, who is the
universal creator, whose goodness and wisdom is such that he can do nothing but
wisely, and whose justice is so perfect, that his works are exe^pted from the
judgment of all creatures. But the second part affirmyng that if God condemn
mo then he shall save, that then his wraith is greater then his mercy, is so
irreuere^t, so bold, and blasphemous, yt scarsly could I have thought, yt ye
devil him self could have imagined a more manifest blasphemy. Who has given
the balance into thy hands? (I speak to the most blasphemous writer) to po^der
and wey gods mercy, and wraith after thy corrupt judgment? if thou claimest
the help of these former scriptures they prove no more that which thou
pretendest, then if thou should affirm that God shall save the devil,
because his mercy is above all his creatures. We do not deny but yt ye most
wicked men are participant of gods mercy in temporal felicity (yea and yt
far above his chosen children) that he makes his son to shine upon the good
and bad, that with long suffering he calls them to repentance and delaieth
their most just condemnation. But what wilt thou hereof conclude, that God has
ordained mo to salvation, the^ to perdition? orels is his wraith greater the^
his mercy? Blasphemous mouth, who has taught the to appoint a law to God? The
day shall come (if speedily thou repent not) yt thou shall feel what punishment
is due to such as go about to bring the eternal God and his inco^prehensible
judgments under ye thraldo^ of their corrupt reason. But leaving thee, I
return to those, who^ gladly I would i^struct, and to the^ I say: that the
words of David and of Isaiah do speak of that rich and inestimable mercy,
which God lays up in store for his chosen children: to whom although God
somtymes show him self severe and angry, yet indureth that but for a short,
space, but his mercy is everlasting, and his goodness infinite, by the which he
marieth his chosen children to him self for ever, and whether that these words
be only spoken to the elect, orels that they be generally spoken to all, let
the holy Ghost decyde the controversy. Psalm. 145
After that David has affirmed that God is liberal merciful, patie^t and of
great gentilnes, and also that he is good to all, and that his mercy is over
all his works, that the eyes of all creatures look upon him, and that he is
just in all his works: by which sentences he praises the goodness, the mercy,
and the providence of God in the regiment and government of his universal
creation, which goodness and mercy do so abound, that the innumerable
iniquities of mankind and his detestable ingratitude ca^ not utterly hinder the
same from the creatures. After these common mercies (I say) whereof the
reprobate are often partakers, he opens the treasure of his rich mercies
which are kept in Christ Jesus for his elect: Saing, the Lord is nigh to all
that upon him, to all that call upon him in verity: he does the will of those
that fear him, and he hears their cry, and saves, the^. The Lord keeps all
those that love hi^, but he destroieth all the wicked. Note the plain
difference.
such as willingly delight not in bli^dnes, may clearly se, that the holy Ghost
makes a plain difference betwext the graces and mercies which be common to
all, and that soueraign mercy which is immutably reserved to the chosen
children, and further that the Lord himself shall destroy the wicked, albeit
his mercy be over all his works. And so that mercy by the which God
pronou^ceth to gather his Church is everlasting, and is not co^dmo^ to ye
reprobate, but is only proper to ye flock of Christ Jesus. The words of God
spoken unto Moises do no more serve your purpose then do the other. Exodus 20.
For God in his law expressedly does witness to whom it is that he will show
mercy to thousands, to wit to those that love him, and keep his
commandments, and upon whom will he prosecute the iniquity unto the third and
fourth generation upon those (says he) yt hate me. If here of ye conclude yt
his mercy toward all is greater then his wraith ye conclude amiss. For ye
confound those whom God has separated and divided, he promises mercy to the
thousand generation of those that love him and threatens to punish the
iniquity of the fathers to the third and fourth generation upon those that
hate him. Hereof justly ye can no further conclude, but that the mercy of God
is greater toward those that love him, the^ his wraith against those that
hate him. And so far will we confess with you. but if you abide in your error,
concluding as you plainly do in this your book, that the wrath of God must
be greater then his mercy except that he save mo then shall be condemned (as
some of your sects has lately affirmed) we fear not to affirm that your
blasphemy is intolerable. Or if you think (as some allege upon Origene that)
because gods mercy is infinite and extends unto all his works, that therefore
the reprobate can not but once obtein mercy. The plain scripture co^uicteth
you. For it affirms, that the wraith of God abides upon the unfaithful,
that their fire shall not be quenched, and that their worm shall not die. If
ye shall understand that the elect has nothing which they receive not of
mercy, and that the punishment of the reprobate is most justly deserved,
Howgods mercy is greater then his wrath.
you shall not mesure gods mercy and his wraith by the multitude nor by the
nombre, but ye oght to consider that where none is worthy of gods mercies by
their own merits, yet has it continued from the beginning and shall continue
unto the end, ever extending the self to gods children being in misery. and so
this mercy must far surmount all wraith and judgment: for where the wraith of
God once kindled against sin oght to have consumed and devoured all, mercy
preualeth, and delyuereth those that justly might have been condemned. And in
this sense (say we) that gods mercy far surmounteth his judgments, which
interpretation if you admit not, we will send you to reason with God, and to
impugn the same, if you be able by manifest scriptures. Now to the rest.

THE ADVERSARY.
Of all sorts and Sects of men, The six te sectio^
I have judged them to be most abhorred which are called Athei that is to say,
such as deny that there is any God. But now me think these careless men

ANSWER.
Because that in all this your long discourse, To the 1.
ye more show your malice (which unjustly against us ye have conceived) then yt
either ye oppugn our belief, either yet promote your falls opinion. I will not
spend the time to recompense your dispite. Only this I will offer in the name
of all may brethren, To the 2. 3. 4. and 5.
that if you be able in presence of a lawful judge and magistrate evidently to
co^uict us, yt either we speak evil of God, either yet yt by our writings,
preaching or reasoning, it justly can be proved that our opinion is evil, of
his eternal majesty, power, wisdom, and goodness, that then we refuse not to
suffer the same punishment which you by the authority of Plato judge us worthy
of. Yea we further offer our selves willingly to vnderlie the verey death which
God by his law has appointed to all blasphemers provided that you refuse not
to vnderlie the same penalty, Deuteronomy. 19.
if falsely ye accuse us. What is your studies to win us, To the 6.
and whether our doctrine be horrible error or not, I do not now dispute. Thus
you reason.

THE ADVERSARY.
God created man a verey good thing, The seventh section.
and dare you say that God ordained a verey good thing to destruction? Then God
deliteth in the destruction of that which is very good. Man at his creation
was a just and innocent creature* for before the transgre^sion

ANSWER.
Because that before plainly and simply I have declared our judgment of gods
eternal election, and most just reprobation in all these your dispitefull
arguments, I will only show your malice, To the 1. ^ and 3.
ignorance, and proud vanity. This is your argument, God created man a very
good thing therefore he did not ordein him to destruction. your reason is: for
that is contrary to his justice, to ordein a good thing to destruction. I
answer if ye be able to prove that man stood in the same goodness, perfection
and innoce^tie (he and his posterity whom so hieghly ye praise) in the which
he was first created, then will I confess your argument to be good. But if man
(albeit he was created good) did yet willingly make him self evil how can it
be contrary to the justice of God to appoint punishment for transgression,
which he did not only fore se by an idle speculation, or yet suffer and
permit against his omnipotent, will, but in his eternal counsel for the
manifestatio^ of his own glory had decreed the same. Against which, albeit ye
cry horrible blasphemy till your brains drop out, yet have we Moises Exodus 9.
Isaiah. 6. Solomon and Paul to absolve us from your cruel sentence. For they
do affirm that God has created all things for his own glory, and the wicked
to the day of destruction, that he raised up Pharao that his power might be
shown forth in him: that he blinds the eis and hardens the hearts of
some, so that they can neither hear nor se that they may convert: That God
has prepared both vessels of mercy and vessels of wraith which places albit
some of them seem not to appertein to the creation, yet if they be justly weyed
it shall evidently appear that the hardness of men's hearts, Blindness and
hardness of heart are effects reprobation.
their blindness and stubborn malice are not only punishments of sin, but
also are the effects of reprobation, like as faith, obedience, and other
virtues be the fre gifts of God given in Christ Jesus to those whom he has
elected in him. But yet to your argument, which thus ye amplify: do ye think
that God ordained his just and innocent creatures to damnation? what greater
tyranny and unrighteousness can the most wicked man in the earth, yea the devil
him self do? then to condemn a just and an innocent person.

I answer (as before) that your argument is naught worth. For you conclude
more then ye be able to prove of your two former propositio^s: which be those.
God created man a very good thing. True it is, and God reprobated man and
shall also condemn him who^ he created good, I grant also. Therefore he damned
the good thing which he created, or that thing which is very good, I deny the
conclusion. For before demnation there comes a change in man, so that he of
very good, became extreme evil, and so gods just judgments found nothing but
that which is evil to condemn. You form your reason, as that God had so
created man good, that he by no means after could be made evil, which last
part is false, and so you are deceived. If ye cannot se just causes why God
should make that thing very good which after should become exttreme evil,
accuse your own blindness, and desire of God to repres in you that presumption
and pride, which against the eternal Son of God you have conceived, Why God
treated man good who^ he ordained nevertheless to fall.
and so your eyes shall be illuminated and you shall se first that because the
creator is infinitely good, that therefore it behooves the creatures in their
original creation to be good. And so I doubt not was the devil created good,
but in the verity, he stood not. And seco^darely that because the just
judgments of God were no les to shine in the damnation of the reprobat: then
his infinite mercy was to be praised in the vessels of honor, it behooved the
one and the other to be innocent and good in their creation. For if the
original had been evil, God justly could not have after damned that which he
had made no better. but so we must confess that it was good that (yet
willingly corrupting the self) man made away to the most just execution of gods
eternal counsel. And last that the eternal purpose of God might in time be
notified unto man, wc was that God would bestow greater liberality, show
greater love and mercy in the redemption of man justly damned then that he did
in his creation. Of nothing he did creat him (for his corporal substance was
made of the dust (which somtymes was not) to his own image and similitude, to
him he gave the dominion of all creatures, these were documents of a true love.
But if they be compared with that love, which in Christ Jesus we receive and
that of fre grace, they are no thing. For what is the dominion of earthly
creatures in respect, that we shall reign with Christ Jesus for ever? what
were the pleasures and fruits of Paradise in comparison of those heaue^lie
joys which saint Paul affirms can not enter in to the heart of man? If man
had stand perpetually in Adam, neither had the love of God so wonderously been
notified unto us, neither yet had place ben granted to his fre grace and
mercy, wc we receive in Christ Jesus. For mercy properly has respect to
misery. But ye chief comfort of gods children is, that as they fell in Adam,
so are they new transferred in an other that is in Christ Jesus, to whom they
are given, and who (as before we have proved) has so received them from the
hand of his Father that he shall give lief everlasting to so many as the Father
has given him. If ye (I say) can not admit these reasons, why it behooved man
to be created good, and yet after to fall in to sin and merserie, accuse your
selves, storm not against God. for he will not be subject to your reason and
judgments: your horrible blasphemies against God, and your dispitefull raling
against us at this time I will omit. and how impudently ye leap from the
purpose of gods reprobation to the execution of his judgment, shall be spoken,
in weying this your reason which thus follows.

THE ADVERSARY.
The scripture witnesses that we did fall in Adam. The eight section.
for damnation came of one sin unto condemnation: then did we all stand before
in Adam, for none falls but he that stands. If we did all stand then were
we all predestinate to lief for as our fall here is to damnation and death, so
is our standing unto salvation Ephesians. 1.
God did choose us in Christ before the foundations of the world were laid,
and ordained us before through him to be heirs unto him self, and were
t^erunto predestinat. I pray you show me any testimony of the scripture which
so manifestly proves that God has Psalm. 49.
For he calls the world from the rising up of the son unto the going down of
the same. Job. 34.
he made both small and great and cares for both a like for they be all the
work of his hands. 4. Esdr. 8
And Esdras says, it was not gods will that man should com to naught. but he
prepared lief for them. The holy Sapient. 2
what can be more plainly and more directly spoken against this error? In an
other place says the holy Ghost: God created man to be undestroyed: and agane
God ordained man that he should order the world according to equity and
righteousness, Sapien. 9
and execute judgment with a true heart, does God ordein Matthew. 12
orels the tree evil and his fruit evil. Either grant man at his creation to
be righteous and good, and then I think ye will abhor to say that God before
the foundations of the world did reprobate his good and righteous creature,
orels grant him at his creation to be an evil and unrighteous creature. Could
then righteous judgment com of such an unrighteous tree? further if man at his
creation was an evil things then was he not the creature of God. For God saw
all that he had made, and they were very good, if man at his creation or before
was reprobate, and ordained unto death, then was man guilty before the
transgressio^: for God damned none but such as be gyltie. If he was guilty
before his transgression then was he a sinner being yet innocent and just. before
he ever consents or committed sin. And so consequently of this error, I may
infer many no such absurdities as should offend any faithful man's ears.

ANSWER.
As no man of hole judgment did ever deny that in Adam we did fall, so I
think you and your sect set a part there has been none that ever did affirm
that in Adam we were predestinat to lief everlasting. True it is yt we stood in
Adam, created in his loins, but I suppose that ye will not hold that the
children had greater privilege then had the father. Adam did not so stand, but
that he was subject to the law, the transgression where of made him dettour to
death. To speak the matter more plainly, Adam did so stand that he might (and
did) fall as the event declared. and were his children so elect in him that
they could not fall: so ye appear to conclude. For thus ye reason: if we did
all stand then were we all predestinate to lief, for as our fall here is to
damnation and death, so is our standing unto salvation and lief. Assuredly
these reasons appear marvelous, strange to me, and principally that which ye
bring forth of falling and standing: for it has in the self plain
contradiction. for if we fell in Adam to death, how can we stand in him now
unto lief. If you had said as that our fall was to damnation and death, so
should our standing have been to salvation and lief, ye might have had some
probability. For your error had only stand in this, The ground of the
Anabaptists error.
that ye do not con^ider that Adam was not created to stand for ever in him
self* and much les his posterity in him. But when ye say as our fall is to
death, so is or standing unto lief, you plainly speak, what so ever ye think,
that yet either in Ada^, either in our selves we both fall and stand. But this
do we utterly abhor, for we fear not plainly to confess that we have no
assurance either of standing either yet of lief but in Christ Jesus alone in
who^ we be ingrafted, and with out who^ we ca^ do nothing. An argument (...)
prou^th that in Adam we could not stand
In few words to repete the answer of your former objection, In Ada^ did no
man stand otherwise the^ he did. But he did stand with condition to fall and yt
eue^ to death: Therefore in Ada^ did none stand to lief. The common sense of man
will approve ye first part of this my argument. for who ca^ think that any
disce^ding of Adam by his means could have greater liberty the^ he hi^ self
had? And the eue^t and that which followed declares the verity of the second
part. For not only upon Adam says the Apostle came death. But eue^ from him
descended death unto all. How then could any stand in him to lief? Let
reasonable men consider.

To prove that all were predestinat and chosen in Ada^ before the fou^datio^s
of the world were laid, Answer to the scriptures shamefully abused by the
adversaries.
ye bring forth the testimony of Paul written in the first chap. to the
Ephesians, which we before have entreated, and therefore here I only will open
your falshed. Wonder it is that shame should be so far past you: that where the
holy Ghost plainly affirms, that we were elected and; chosen in

Ye instantly require that we will show any testimony of the scripture that
has reprobate any before the fou^dations of the world. If it be the pleasure
of God to give unto you the spirit of wisdom and of revelation by the
knowledge of hi^ self, that the eyes of your mind may be illuminated that ye
may know what is the hope to the which he has called you, and how rich is the
glory of that inheritance, which he has prepared for his saints, ye shall
require no place more plain, nor more evident then the same, which most
ignorantly, orels most maliciously ye do abuse, for if there be any difference
betwext the saints, the faithful, that be blessed with all spiritual
benedictio^, betwext those (I say) yt were elected in Christ Jesus before all
times, that in time be called, and by the power of the holy spirit do give
obedience to the caller, and so are made citizens with the saints and household
of God, as they that are builded upon the foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles: if any difference (I say) be betwext these former, and these in whom
the prince of this world does work all filthynes and rebellion, whom he
holds captive at his pleasure, who can not repent their detestable lives, and
therefore are reputed strangears from the commonwealth of Israel. And further if
ye will believe Christ Jesus affirming and reioising that it pleased his Father
to hyde the secrets of his kingdom from the prudent and wife, and to reuele
the same to little ones, Matt. 11.
and that because it was his pleasure: I trust ye shall confess that those
scriptures be plain enough to prove that as some were elected before the
fou^datio^ of the world was laid, so likewies were there others reprobated, as
the final end of both does witness: But how ye wrestle against this argument
we shall after hear: and how plainly I have proved so^ to be elected and
others to be reprobated, read before and judge with indiffere^cie. If ye will
conclude that God has you, as against falls witness. for you allege more upon
Elihu the^ in the book of Job The adversary wrasteth the scripture in Job.
he affirms. For he says not that God cares for all a like. But says
that his eyes are upon the ways of man, and that he does se all his goinges.
And that neither you, neither any other shall have occasion to complain of me,
that unjustly I accuse you, of falsifying the plain text, I will recite both
the purpose and the words: Job in veheme^cie of disputation against his three
friends, who constantly did affirm that God provoked, by his sins, had powered
forth those sodane and strange plagues upon him: Job I say in refelling this
their accusation, and in confuting their reasons, did enter into the secrets
of gods inscrutable judgments further the^ it became any creature to do: and
did seem to burden God with injustice in defending his own innoce^tie. At which
reasons Elihu offended after that the other three were put to silence taki^g
upon him to reprove Job affirms that the wisdom, the power, the justice and
the judgments of God were incomprehensible, that God could do nothing
unjustly how that ever it appeared to man's judgment, and amongst other
things he says: will thou say unto a king, Job. 34.
thou art wicked, or unto princes, ye are ungodly. How much les to him that
accepts not the persons of Princes and regards not the rich more then the
poor? For they be all the work of his hands? They shall dye suddenly, and the
people shall be trobled at midnight, and they shall pass forth and take away the
mighty without hand, for his eyes are upon the ways of man and he sees al
his goings. Thus have I noted partly yt none shall think that these words may
seem to favor your error, and partly that your vntruethe in wrasting such
places may more manifestly appear. Ignorance of the tongues may be some cause in
you, but in some of you I can manifestly prove that malice blinds knowledge,
and compels you to speak and write against your understanding. God touch
your hearts with true repentance and give you his holy spirit with greater
reverence to entreat his scriptures. But now to the scriptures that ye allege
(God say you) has no respect of persons. Act. 10.
Ergo will ye conclude, he has no election. Your conclusion is false, and my
reason is, because that gods fre election depends not upon the persons of
men, but upon his own promise and good will* But to make this matter more
sensible: I will make an argument directly against yours. An argument directly
against the adversaries argument.
God respects not the persons of men. But yet amongst men is found great
diversity both in virtue and in vice. Therefore there must be some cause from
whence this diversity proceeds. Of the first part I know ye doubt not, and
the second part is confirmed by common experience and by evident scriptures.
for how diverse be the inclinatio^s of me^, none ca^ be ignorant, except such
as do not observe the same. Such as attribute the cause of such diversity to
the sterres and to the influence Influence of the sterres.
of the Planetes are more then vain: education Educatio^.
and up bringing does somewhat bow nature in that case: but neither of both is
the cause of such diversity: for how many have been norished in virtue
together, and yet have after fallen to most horrible vices, and in the same
perished? And contrary wies how many have been wickedly brought up, and yet by
grace atteined to an holy conversation. If the cause of this diversity (I
say) shall be inquired and soght, it shall not be found in nature. for thereby
were and are we all borne the sons of wraith: if in education and up
bringing, we se how often that fails. The cause thereof the^ must be of
necessity without man. To make the matter yet more plain by an exe^ple, Paul
preached Christ Jesus, to be the only Savior of the world both amongst the
Jews and gentiles, to some his preaching was the savor of lief, and to others
it was the savor of death. from whence comes this diversity? from the
obedience, will, and faith of the one, say you. and from the stubborn
inobedience, and infidelity of the other: you say somewhat, but not all. for
true it is that faith and an obedient will, is that which we call Causam
propinquam, that is the next cause to our apprehension: but what is the cause
that the will of one is obedient, and the will of the other stubborn, that the
one does believe and the other does blaspheme: How so every do shift, The
cause is not in nature of our faethfull obedience.
the holy Ghost in many places plainly affirms the cause not to be in nature
nor yet to proceed of man, nor of his fre will, but to be the fre grace of the
caller, as Christ Jesus does witness: None can com unto me except my Father
draw him: No man can se the kingdom of God except he be borne again, and that
neither of blood neither of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but
of God. who touches and opens the hearts of so many as he has ordained to
lief, to aduerte and believe the things that be truly preached: As those that
be the sheep of Christ Jesus, who hear his voice and know the same. These and
many places mo, do most plainly declare, What is the cause that some believe
and some remayn unfaithful.
what is the cause that some believe and others believe not: to wit, that some
are born of God, and some are left in nature, some are sheep, and some are goats.
the hearts of some are touched and opened by the finger and Spirit of God, as
it was said to Peter: flesh and blood has not reveled this unto the, but my
Father which is in the heaven, and the hearts of others left in their own
blindness and hardness. If ye demand how is it then, that God respects not the
person of man? I answer if ye did understand a right what is me^t by
acceptance of persons, or what it is to respect persons ye should not doubt in
this behalf.

Acceptatio^ of persons is when an unworthy person is preferred to a worthy,
How God respects not persons.
either by corrupt affection of those that do prefer him, either yet for some
quality or external beauty that appears in man. As if to the office of a
king or of a bushope, should one be elected, that neither has godlynes,
knowledge, wisdom, nor yet the spirit of government, because he is rich,
noble of blood, fare and lusty: and the persons having gifts much more
excellent should be contemned: this is called acceptance of persons. 1. Sa. 16.
As Samuel seeing Eliab and considering his beauty, and stature does boldly
pronounce in his own heart, assuredly before the Lord, this is his anoi^ted.
Such acceptance of persons is not with God. for neither looks he to blood,
riches, nobility, virtue, strength nor beauty temporal in his eternal
election, but only to his own good will, and eternal purpose by the which he
has elected us in Christ Jesus. If ye shall consider the same place depely ye
shall find that none within the hole scriptures of God more confuteth your
error then it does. For as God respects not the person That God has not
respect of persons most evidently co^futeth the error of the adversaries of
gods predestination.
of man, so respects he nothing, that is or can be within man, as the chief
cause of his election. For what can God forese, consider or know to be in man
that good is which flows not from his fre mercy and goodness, as it is
written: we are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing that good is
but all our sufficiency is of God, who works in us both to will and
perform. Then if all virtue what so ever be in us, be the work of God, can the
work following, be the cause of gods eternal purpose? If the cause and the
effects The cause and effect are diverse.
proceeding of the same, be things diverse, then are our virtues and fruits not
the cause of gods election, but are the effect and fruit which of the same
proceed, and spring as the Apostle does witness saing: God has chosen us that
we should be holy, and without blame And Christ Jesus: says you have not
chosen me but I have chosen you, and have appointed you to go, and to bring
forth fruit. This I am compelled often to repete, because in it most shamefully
ye err, arrogating to your seluses that which is proper to gods only mercy
and fre grace. If you understand this former place of scripture which affirms
that God has no respect of persons as your book does witness, to wit, that
God cares a like for all, that he no more loves the one, the^ the other,
except that it be for their obedience, the hole scripture of God does witness
against you. Was the love of God no greater to Abraham and to his posterity,
then it was to the rest of the nations? Moises and David do witness the
contrary: Saying: he has not done so to any nation, and his judgments he
has not showed to them, D^ut. 7.
only the, has he chosen of all nations and people, that be upon the face of
the earth, that thou should be unto him a peculiar people. And what was the
cause of this their dignity and prerogative before we have declared, to wit,
no virtue, no obedience, no good quality that was in them, but only his fre
love, fre grace, and undeserved mercy, as he hi^ self does plainly affirm?
Rm. 9.
I will have mercy upon whom I will have mercy, and saint Paul: it is
neither of the willer, neither yet of the runner, but of God that shows
mercy to such as pleases him. And thus I say you can not justly nor rihtly
conclude, that God has neither chosen nor reprobated any man, because he has
no respect of persons. for as before I have said, his eternal election
depends neither upon man, neither yet upon any thing that is within man,
Neither was nor is in us, any thing whereby we should deserve to be elected
but is purposed in him self, and established in Christ Jesus, in whom we are
elected, because that in our selves there neither was neither yet could be any
worthiness, which could merit or deserve such honor and dignity. And so God
respects not the persons of men, their virtues, nor qualities in their
election, but finding them all equal in creation, and corruption makes
difference betwext them, according to his eternal purpose, respecting Christ
Jesus and not their merits. How that ever the proud and ungodly storm at
this, I nothing doubt, but the children of God do thereof receive most
singular consolation as that it is the chefest cause why that without all
trembling and fear, they stoop before his Majesty, and giving thanks for
these inestimable benefits do crave of his mercy such a puretie of lief as
becomes

To your scriptures which ye allege from the book of wisdom and from Esdras
(his fourth book), The books called Apocryphes.
I will shortly answer. That albeit ye will ten thousand times deck and decore
them with the title of the holy Ghost, I will not the more creditt them. Not
that I deny but that in them there be things contained, profitable to
edification, but if that therefore ye will upon any place written within them,
conclude a doctrine contrary to the rest of the canonical scriptures, I will
answer with the ancient writers, that they were not written, that upon them
should our faith be established. Let the^ serve, if so please you to
exhortation, but for confirmation of any doctrine shall they never serve unto
me. Neither yet this do I say, that I do think any of these places (rightly
understand) to make any thing for your purpose, but that I will by gods grace,
give ever that reverence unto the verity of God, Reu^re^ce unto gods holy
word.
that the voices of men shall not with me be co^parable unto it.

It may be greatly suspected what some men now a days do mea^ to ascribe that
to y^ holy Ghost which the authors them selves did only ascribe to their own
diligence and trauelle, and were also compelled to ask perdon of the readers
that they could not atteine, no not even to the propriety of the tongue in the
which they did write. Read the prologue of Ecclesiasticus and the end of the
last chap. of the second book of Machab.
Uses the holy Ghost I pray you whose power lowseth the tongues of the dombe,
in that manner to be supplia^t unto me^, and for his imperfection to beg
pardon at their hands? Consider, and impute nothing upon the holy Ghost, which
becomes not the Majesty of God. but lest that ye should complain that yet
your scriptures are not resolved, I will give you a general answer to all,
which is this. That neither the book of wisdom, neither yet Ecclesiasticus,
neither yet Esdras in these places that be alleged do entreat any thing of
election, or reprobation, but the writers in all those places which ye allege
do study to amend the corrupt manners of their aeges, and to impose silence to
the wicked tongues of many. of whom some accused God as author of sin which
entered in by malice of the devil, who did corrupt the good creature of God
created to his own image to reule in equity and justice. who does not se but
that this writer, who so ever he was, reteineth him self, within the reach of
man's understanding, laboring to convict their conscience which maliciously
imputed unto God, that which he did not work in them? But that they of their
own fre will did follow and obey iniquity, and that therefore they should
suffer their just condemnation. And that this my interpretation of their minds
is true, let their own words witness for thus it is written.

They have said with them selves, Sap. 2.
not righteously iudgei^g our lief is troblesom and short, neither is there any
remedy against the death of man, neither has he been known that has
returned from the helles, we were b^rn without purpose, and we shall be as we
never had been ^or the spirit is but a smoke in our nosethrels etc. in pro^es of
time our name shall com to oblivion, neither yet shall any man remember our
works. Therefore let us use the present prosperity, Let us oppress the poor
man being just, let us not spare the widow, neither yet let us re^erence the
long aeged and white hears of the ancient, but let the strength of our power,
be the law of justice. and so far forth he accuses their open tyranny, and
then concludes these things, they thought and did err, for they were blinded
by their own malice: neither have they known the mysteries of God (I wonder
that ye marked not this place) neither have they hoped for the reward of
holiness. for God created man to immort^litie (here I note your falshode: for ye
write God created man to be undestroyed) and made him to his own similitude.
Now let the indifferent reader judge, whether you or I do nerer attein to the
mind of the writer you (I say) that do affirm, that he denies that God has
either elected or reprobated any man, or I that deny that to be any part of
his mind, but say, he reproves man's malicious blasphemy and manifest
impiety.

deceauable, etc. scarsly by conjecture can we attein, to the things that be in
earth, and with trauale find we those things with be amongst our hands. But who
shall search out those things yt be in the heavens, and who knows they
counsel, except that thou shall give wisdom and from the hiest places shall
send thy holy Spirit: for so the ways of those that dwell upon earth have
been directed, and they have learned those things that have pleased the. Cry
now as pleases you, that because man was made lord over creatures in earth
(for that is the verity of the text) to reule the world in holiness: That
therefore there was no man reprobated, and he writer will answer for him self
and will affirm, that he searches not what God has determined in his
eternal counsel, and what shall become of every man, (for that confesses he
to be incomprehensible), but he declares what God commands in his law, and
what he has expressed by his holy Prophets. To the which if man be found
inobedient rests no excusation (seeing that gods will is manifestly declared)
as Moises says in these words. The secrets appertein to the Eternal our
God but those things that be reveled appertein to us and to our children for
ever, Deuteronomy. 2.
that we may do all the words of this law.

Your arguments which ye think most strong gathered in their fury, and
finally all flesh had corrupted their ways before that gods vengeance and most
just judgment were poured forth and put in execution against the rebellious
and unthankful world. If you be able to prove that the sentence of death was
executed upon Adam before he offended, or that Cayn was accursed by gods mouth
before he had murdered, then has your argument some apperance. but if the just
causes of condemnation be found in man, and so found in man that God in vowies
can thereof be accused: then oght you to be ashamed to burden us with that
which ye your selves most folishly collecte. And further ye shall understand
that as the Apostle puts certain degrees and causes which are sensible unto
us, betwext the eternal election of gods children, and their glorification,
even so put we the contrary degrees and causes betwext the reprobation and the
just condemnation of the wicked. Like as there be degrees betwext election and
glorification: even so there be degrees betwext reprobatio^ and condemnation.
for as those whom God has chosen before all times, in time he calls, and
that of purpose to Christ Jesus his son, and who^ thus he calls he
justifies and that more and more until that flesh and the corrupt affections
thereof being mortified, they attein to their glory. So by the contrary be
the reprobate, either left all together in blindness, never called to the light
and knowledge of gods fre mercy, or if they be called they either do condemn
it, orels sodanly fall from the same, and so abiding in their corruption do
still heap sin upon sin till at the last their measure being full, God
executes this most just judgments against their continual rebellion. Infer
now as many absurdities as please you upon our doctrine. you proceed.

THE ADVERSARY.
You say that God reprobated and ordained man to damnation the most part of
the world before the foundatio^s of the world were laid, The nynte section.
and yet in the creation God made all me^ after his own image good and
righteous, as the scripture witnesses. for as we were all created in one man
that is Adam. So were we all created in one estate that is after the image of
God to lief, then if your opinion be true the ordinance of God in his election
before the world is not conform to his ordinance in the creation. Galat. 2.
And the h^lie Ghost says: If I buyld up agane that which I have cast down
before I declare my self to be a transgressor: if God created man to his own
image unto lief whom before the creation he had reprobat and cast away,
declares he not thereby him self to be inconstant and a tra^sgressour. Ye can
not escaip here with your bare solutio^, where ye say before the world, God has
not ordained all but some unto damnation, for in our creation all were ordained
unto lief, for so much as we were all created after the image of God of the
ordinance of God in our election before the world. The Apostle writes Ephesians. 1.
Here do we learn that gods ordinance in his election before the world, and also
his ordinance in the creation, is always one. For as we are chosen in Christ
Jesus, so we are created in Christ Jesus, and as we are chosen to be holy and
without blame, so are we created unto good works. Wherefor gods ordinance in
his holy election, and his mighty creation, is one, and of like strength and
surenes. further seeing we be (as the Apostle says) both elect and created in
Christ Jesus. and forasmuch as there is no damnation

ANSWER.
Because that as well your forged lies as the vanity of your reasons have been
declared I will not trooble the reader with repetition of the same. And will
also touch the rest of these your arguments so briefly as I can.

Where ye reason that we were all created in one man of mercy and vessels of
wraith. But because ye open yo^ mind, in the contrary part saing: That we
were created in Adam after the image of God to lief, I am compelled utterly to
dissent from you and fear not to affirm that because none did stand to the end
in that image, but all fell eue^ to death in Adam: that therefore neither in
Adam neither yet in that image as Adam had it, was any created unto lief, but
in Christ Jesus were all the chosen predestinate to lief everlasting, Ephesians. 1.
even before that ever Adam was created as the Apostle plainly does witness.
Where ye go about to prove by our opinion the ordinance of God in his election
before the world, To the. 2.
not to be conform to his ordinance in the creation and so consequently God to
be a transgressor and inconstant, ye declare your self not only ignorant,
vain and foolish, but also irreuerent and blasphemous against gods majesty.
for ye (so far as in you lies) spoil him of his Godhead making him to change
his counsel, purpose, and ordinance even so often as the creatures do change:
where we by the contrary labor to explane, and not to escaip any violence of
your darts by a bare solution (as ye allege) but by the plain scriptures
openly we do affirm that as our God is eternal incomprehensible, and
immutable so are his counsels constant, subject to no immutabilitie nor change:
constant I say in God him self, how so ever things change to our apprehensio^.
And therefore we say that neither in his election before the world, neither in
his creation of man to his own image and similitude, was it his eternal
counsel, purpose nor ordinance that all the posterity of Adam should be
saved. And so can ye not prove that God destroyed any thing which he had
builded. Albeit to note one thing by the way: Paul would not have been so bold,
as to have made him self check mate with God, he did not (I say) accuse God of
inconstancy, neither did he appoint him to be a transgressor although he
builded the ceremonies under the Law, and destroyed them again. But to our
purpose. (...) I say destroyed nothing which he had builded. True it is that
man destroyed that image which God had builded, but that building of God was
but temporal, and for a time only, but the perfect building of his church
was in Christ Jesus, builded before the foundations of the world were laid:
which building God never destroyed nor shall destroy, but shall co^summate the
work to the praise of his holy name. To him be glory.

In your hole reasoning of the words of the Apostle All be not Saints nor
blessed with spiritual benediction.
all to be blessed with spiritual benediction, and to have obeyed, and all to
be builded upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles before yt ye be
able to prove that all were elected and predestinate in Christ Jesus before all
times. That we are created in Christ Jesus unto good works, is not to be
referred (as ye think) to the common creation of all men in Adam, but to the
new and spiritual regeneration which gods children have in Christ Jesus: for
the which David did pray, saying: a clea^ heart creat in me (o God) which is no
less called the creation of God, then was the first creation of man. for as
man in his creation, neither wroght, neither yet could deserve to be created so
honorable as he was, but did suffer the power of God to work even as it
pleased his wisdom to perfourm the work. So in our new creation unto good
works the only grace and power of God works not only the beginning, Our
regeneration to good works is by the grace of God.
but also brings to perfection, so that what so ever be good, holy, or just
in us, is gods creation and not our work. God open your eyes that ye may se
that neither in Adam neither yet in our selves, were we created to good works,
but in Christ Jesus alone. And then I think ye will not so much boast of your
fre will.

Your last, as after ye do reason is a plain Paralogisme, neither in the
election nor creation. Here be plainly four terms. for in your Mayor that is
in the first part of your argument ye say not, we were elected and created in
our election, and in our creation, but we were elected and created in Christ
Jesus. The second proposition is most true to wit that there is no
comdemnation to them that be in Christ Jesus, to such as walk not after the
flesh. but what can ye conclude hereof, that no damnation (say you) is in
election nor in creation? I say your conclusion is false and vain for you
change your terms, putting in the last part these two words: Election and
creation, where ye oght to have rehearesed these words: Christ Jesus: for thus
you may well proceed, we be elected and created to good works in Christ Jesus,
but to them (says the Apostle) that be in Christ Jesus there is no
condemnation, Ergo to such as be elected and newly created in Christ Jesus
there is no damnation. This argument is formal and true. but omitting your
foolishnes which oftener I am compelled to show then gladly I would, I go
forward with your words.

THE ADVERSARY.
If God reprobated man before the foundation of the world, The tenth section.
then God reprobated man before he offended. And if God reprobated and damned
man before be offended, then is death, the reward of gods ordinance before the
world, and not the reward of sin. But the Apostle teaches us that by sin
death entered into the world and also that death is the reward of sin. I pray
you does either gods law or man's law condemn any man before he has
offended? I am certain ye are not able to prove it to be sothen oght you to be
ashamed to burden God with such unrighteous judgment. Does not God rather
forgive the offense alredie committed? Let him be your God which condemns the
innocent before he offend. But he shall be my God which perdoneth and forgiueth
the offense already committed which in his very wraithe does think upon
mercy. And so with Job will I conclude, The great God casts away no man.

ANSWER.
How ignorantly and how impudently ye confound the eternal purpose of gods
reprobation with the just execution of his judgments I have before declared
and therefore here only rests to admonish the reader that most unjustly ye
accuse us in that ye say: that we hold and teach that God damned man before he
offended. This you be never able to show in any of our works. for constantly
in word and writing we affirm that man willingly fell from God, and made him
self slave to satan before that death was inflicted upon him. and so neither
make we death the reward of gods ordinance, neither do we burden him with
unrighteous judgment. But say with the Apostle, that death is the reward of
sin, and that our God is righteous in all his works. and therefore be ashamed
and repent your manifest lie. To (...)
That God forgiueth the sin committed, and does remember mercy even when he
appears in his hot displeasure to punish his Church, with thanks giving
and joy we acknowledge. But that thereof ye co^clud* (as ye say with Job) that
the great God casts away no man, we can not cease to admonish both you and
the readers, that either ignorantly, orels maliciously ye corrupt and deprave
the mind of the speaker in that place: Elihu says not as ye allege. Job. 36.
The great God casts away no man, but says: Behold the mighty God casts
away none that is mighty and valiant of courage, He main teneth not the
wicked, but he gives judgment to the afflicted. And in this behalf your
master Castalio (who notwithstanding that he uses to take large liberty in
translation, where any thing may seem to serve his purpose) is more circumspect
and more faithful then you be. for thus he translateth that place. Although
that God be excellent yea excellent and strong of courage, yet is he not so
dissolute, yt either he will keep ye wicked, Castalio is translation.
or deny judgment to the poor. Although I say, yt here is a greater liberty
the^ I would wish a faithful translater to use, yet has he not so corrupted ye
sense as ye have done. Elihu reasoni^g against Job affirms that albeit ye
power of God be infinite, yet ca^ not his works be unjust, but that they are
wroght in all perfection of justice. how beit that often (as we be dull and
blind) we do not understand nor se at the first the causes of the same, yet
God gives daily declaration of his justice, in that the preserves and sometime
exalts the verteouse, that before were afflicted, and deiecteth from honors
the wicked and the cruel oppressors. Be judge your self what this serves for
your purpose.

THE ADVERSARY.
Some other be that grant that sin was a cause why man is reprobate, The
eleue^th section.
and there with they hold that gods absolute ordinance is also the cause, this
saing contains co^tradiction in it self: for if it be gods absolut ordinance.
then is it not in respect of any other thing, but as they say because it has
so pleased him, if they meant that gods ordinance is the cause why sinners
suffer death, or that God ordained that sinners for their sin should suffer
death, I could agree with them. but that were contrary to that which they have
said, that God absolutely ordained any man before he was, yea before the world to
death because so it pleased him. for if death be the reward of sin, and for
offense, and sin we do die, then answer at length to this wicked opinion in
the confutation of the third error, I will speak no more hereof in this place.

ANSWER.
No further answer needs to be given to these your most unjust accusatio^s, To
the 1.
then those which we before have given. for neither do we so irreverently
speak nor write, neither yet do we understand nor affirm, that gods absolute
ordinance is the principal cause of reprobation, of sin, and of damnation:
but simply we do teach, that God in his etternall counsel for the
manifestation of his own glory has of one maste chosen vessels of honor, whom
before all times he has given unto Christ Jesus, that they in him should
receive lief. And of the same mass he has left others in that corruption in
the which they were to fall, and so were they prepared to destruction. The
cause why the one were elected, we confess and knowledge not to be in man, but
to be the fre grace and the fre mercy showed and freely given to us in Christ
Jesus, who only is appoi^ted head to give life to the body. Why the others
were rejected, we affirm the cause to be most just: but yet secret and hid
from us, reserved in his eternal wisdom to be reveled at the glorious
coming of the Lord Jesus. This one thing do we (compelled by your blasphemous
accusations) repete oftener then we would: to the end that indifferent men may
se what doctrine it is, which you so maliciously impugn.

How so ever ye ioyn gods absolute ordinance and sin together, To the 2.
we make so far division betwext the purpose and eternal counsel of God (for
absolute ordinance we use not in that matter) and the sin of man, that we
plainly affirm: that man when he sinned, did neither look to gods will, gods
counsel, nor eternal purpose: but did altogether consent to the will of the
devil, which did manifestly ganesay gods reveled will. And therefore do we
affirm that neither was the purpose nor counsel of God any cause of sin:
but we say with the Apostle that by one man did sin enter into the world. The
cause whereof was the malice of the devil, and that fre consent of man to
rebellion, whose will was neither enforced neither yet by any violence of gods
purpose compelled to consent, but he of fre will and ready mind left God and
joined with the devil. Convict us now (if ye can) that we make gods absolute
ordinance (which manner of speaking I say we abhor) to be the principal cause
of sin.



We say not that gods ordinance is the cause of reprobation, The just causes of
reprobatio^ are hid in gods eternal counsel. but the causes of death and
damnation are evident in the scriptures.
but we affirm that the just causes of reprobation are hid in the eternal
counsel of God, and known to his godly wisdom alone: but the causes of
sin, of death, and damnation are evident and manifestly declared to us in the
scriptures to wit, man's fre will consenting to the deceiuable persuasio^ of
the devil, wilful sin, and volu^tarie rebellion, by which entered death into
this world, the contempt of graces and gods mercies offered with the heaping up
of sin upon sin, till damnation justly came. These causes I say of sin,
death, and damnation, are plainly noted unto us in gods holy scriptures. But
why it pleased God to show merice to some, and deny the same to others, because
the judgments of God are a deuoring depthe, The judgments of God are a
deuoring depth.
we enter not in reasoning with him, but with all humility render thanks to
his Majesty for the grace and mercy which we doubt not but of his fre grace
we have received in Christ Jesus our only head.

When you shall further charge us that we make God author of evil, we have good
hope plainly to convict your vennemous tongues of a most malicious lie. Now to
your words.

THE ADVERSARY.
The Lord reasons with the inobedient Israelites which did forsake him saing:
The twelth section.
O my people what have I done unto the? or wherein have I hurt the, give me
answer? If the Israelites had been so well learned as you, they might have
answered, Lord thou have preordinate us by thy immutable decre to fall away
from the, so that of necessity we must perish, in this have thou hurt us with
an incurable wound.

ANSWER.
How so ever we be learned if ye betimes repent not your vnreuere^t skoffing,
and jesting at gods eternal predestination, ye shall learn in experience, that
the immutable decre of God, is most just by the which ye fire which never shall
be quenched is prepared for the devil and his angels, and for all such as with
trembling do not fear his godly Majesty, and with sobriety do not contemplat
his judgments incomprehensible. And thus I leave your blasphemous boldness to
be repressed by the power of him whose judgments you mock.

THE ADVERSARY.
Now I intend with the help of God to answer to the arguments which they that
be entangled with this error use to allege for the proof thereof, The
thirte^th section.
leaving such as be* but vain, and engender rather contention then edefying,
answering to such as some most weghtie collected of certain places of the
scriptures whereby it may be thought that they may be deceived, beseching the
gentill reader to wey the matter with an indifferent balance, and first hear
before thou refuse, and God willing thou shall not repent the of thy labor. but
forasmuch as the author and mai^teners of this error do often make mention of
election, whereby they would cloak their absurditeis, I will first declare how
election is taken in the scriptures three manner of ways, that is generally,
specially, and most specially of all. first we be all chosen and created in
Christ Jesus as Paul witnesses to the Ephesians in the first and second
chapter, and conform to this election he lightened all Esaia. 50
rich and poor, Jew and ge^til, male and female, of all estates, without
respect of any person. And all that Esaia. 48
I have chosen the in the fire of tribulation. here the seventy disciples
departed, for they can him not, And Thomas could in no wies believe that Christ
was risen, and had obtained victory. yet they which at the voice of their
capteyn rise up, and turn again, and fight laufully, even unto the end, they
are chiefly above all others called elect and chosen because they continuing
unto the end obtein that whereu^to they are chosen, and they follow the lamb
whether so ever he goes: it is a hard thing that any such be deceived, and
fall away, forasmuch as they first are illuminated from ab^ue, and have
forsaken all, yea them selves, and have altogether submitted them selves to the
gou^rnance of their Lord and capite^ Christ. They daily obtein

ANSWER.
Before ye enter to confute our arguments as ye boldly promise, To the 1.
ye affirm that election is taken in the scriptures three manner of ways. That
is (as you say) Generally, specially, and most especially of all, which
division with the probation of the same is so foolish, so falls, and so far
from the purpose, that onles ye should have occasion to calu^niat, that so much
of your book I passed over with out answer, I would not spend the moment of an
hour in answering the same. Ephe. 1.
For how little do the words of Paul serve for your general election in the
confirmation of your eight reason* and after also, I have declared. And I leave
to be proved of your part by the evident testimony of any scripture, that God
so often electeth to lief everlasting as he commands man to refuse him self
orels as he gives his further grace to such as he has called to the knowledge
of him self, and of his only beloved Son Christ Jesus. That there is a
general vocation by the which the world by some manner of means is called to
the knowledge of God and a vocation of purpose which apperte^neth to gods
children only I find in scriptures. To the 2.
But that there is any election to lief everlasting, except that which is and
was in Christ Jesus in the eternal counsel of God before the foundation of
the world I am assured that neither scripture affirms, John. 1.
neither justly can it be gathered upon any sentence of the same. That the true
light (which is Christ Jesus) illuminated all men coming in to this world we
confess: To the 3.
but what will ye thereof conclude. Ergo say ye: all are elected in him to lief
everlasting: I deny your consequence. And say that albeit man be indewed with the
light of reason and understanding which no doubt proceeds from Christ, and is
not of nature only, yet does it not therefore consequently follow that every
man that has reason is elected in Christ to the lief everlasting. if ye ask,
for what purpose then does their lightning and illumination serve the^, Romans 1.
the Apostle does answer you, that they may be inexcusable: wc reason, if it
satisfy not your curiosity, To the 4.
quarrel with the holy Ghost. If you be able to prove that all that be called,
do earnestly repent, and that all be thirsty to whom the waters of lief are
offered, ye have said somewhat to prove a general election. But and if it be
evident that a great nombre do rather repyne against the truth, nor repent
their iniquity, which it reproves, and that mo do either seem to have no
thirst to righteousness, orels do drink of the stinking pudles of man's
doctrine, then that they will receive those wholesome waters of lief wc Christ
Jesus gives to his Church, then have you proved no part of your purpose.
Isaiah. 55.
And wonder it is yt in ye words of ye Prophet and in ye words of our master
Christ Jesus also, ye se not a plain difference made. for ye Prophet calls
not al indifferently to drink of these waters, but such as do thirst. And
Christ restreineth his generality to such as did trauale and were burdened with
sin: such I say he confesses him self to call to repentance. But to such as
were just and hole, he affirms that he was not sent. And so yet once agane I
affirm that the scriptures of God make but mention of one Election to lief
everlasting. I am not ignorant that Saul was elected to be king over Israel
and Judas also to the office of an Apostle: but whether thereof, you be able to
convince that they were both elected to the lief everlasting in Christ Jesus,
before that they did offend (for so you affirm) I remitt you to your proof. I
fear not to prove that by the verity him self, Judas is called the devil,
long before that the holy Ghost makes any mention, John. 6.
that it entered in to his heart to betray his master.

It may appear to some that in heaping of your exemples and histories, To the 5.
which ye adduce for your especial election (as ye term it) ye rather delight
to renew your memoire, then substancially to prove your purpose. For if a man
should thus reason against you. The sheep of Christ which by the eternal
purpose of God, An argument against the adversaries forged division of gods
election.
be especially elected to lief, hear his voice and with reverence do know and
obey the same. But these whom ye rehearse, did hear the voice (as ye allege)
but neither did they know nor obey it, Ergo they were not the sheep elected and
especially chosen. if thus I say any man should reason, prepare for your
answer. And farther how ye be able to prove that Sardanapalus, Croesus and
Tarquinius the proud can be placed in this rank of your especially elected, I
can se no good reason. for except that calamity and gods just vengeance did
follow their insolency, filthy lief, and pride, I find in histories no
special message sent unto them from God. But this ye may understand by some
secret revelation which ye have received of late in your perfection. To the 6.


That ye place us with the hole band of the Stoikes who with their destiny
play fast or loose and that of necessity which as you say passes the conning
of all iuglers. Although we do not greatly fear the force of your sentence,
yet must we appeal to a more righteous and indifferente judge, that is to the
Lord Jesus: to whom all judgment is given. and in ye mea^ time we further must
require such as be indifferent in this matter to judge betwext you and us,
whether yt we or ye be those yt play fast or loose in that which ye skoffingly
call destiny and stoicall necessity, and we call gods eternal election and
purpose immutable. We affirm that gods election in Christ Jesus is so certain
and his eternal purpose to save his church is so constant, Matthew. 16
that against the faith of gods elect shall not the Ports and gates of hell
preuale in the end: that neither can lief nor death, things present nor to com
seperat and disseuer us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus. That
this foundation is stable the Lord knows his own: Romans 8.
and therefore shall every one that incalleth the name of the Lord depart from
iniquirie. for we are not called to uncleanness but unto sanctification and
holiness by the power of that Spirit who raised from death Jesus the great
Pastor of our souls, which holy spirit freely by faith (which also is the gift
of God) does so reule and reign in our hearts, that albeit the flesh lusts
against the spirit yet are we assured of victory by the only power of him,
who has ouercom the world. This is our doctrine, faith and profession. But you
affirm as after plainly ye write, that none is so elected in Christ to lief
everlasting, but that he may fall, become a reprobate and finally be condemned,
and contrary ways, yt none is so reprobate in gods eternal purpose, but that
he may become elect and so be saved. That in God there is neither election nor
reprobation but according to man's disposition: so that when men have good
motions, and be godly disposed God does elect the^, and write their names in
the book of lief, but when they change and turn to iniquity he does
reprobate them and blotteth out their names out of the book of lief. Let now
all creatures judge betwext us and you whether of the two play fast and loose
and surmounte iuglers in cunning. To the 7.
From the third kind of election, which ye call most especial how you be able
to prove that the seventy disciples did so depart from Christ that there was
no difference betwext them and the trudging of Judas (as ye term his horrible
treason) be judges your self. John. 6.
In the sixth of John we read that many of his disciples left him and falli^g
from him did go with him no more. But whether these were the hole seventy whom
he sent to preach or others who for a time did follow him it is not expressed,
neither yet does the text say that all his disciples fell from him, but many
departed. further it appears to me very rash judgment to pronounce that
none that departed from Christ at any time in his lief before his death upon
the cross, The fre will me^ judge rashly.
did at any time after, return unto hi^, but that all such did remain in
damnation with Judas. For I find that all his Apostles did fly and leave him,
and yet we know they were called again. And so also do we find were two of the
disciples to whom Christ appering betwext Jerusalem and Emaus did first
instruct them and after reveled him self unto the^. This I note to give you
occasion to be more circunspect in so weghtie matters.

Toward the end of this part, To the 8.
thus ye write (of those whom you say have subjected them selves altogether to
the government of their Lord and capteyn): they daily obtein such victory of
their ennemies that their war fare is now become easy, and in the hope they
have to subdue by the aid and counsel of their Lord all their ennemies, there
joy and comfort is so great that they esteem all earthly pleasure, which
should draw the^ back, but vain.

These words augment in me that suspicion which before I noted to wit that ye
have a further fetch in this matter then your rude scholars understand at the
first: The perfecdtio^ that the adversaries pretend in this life.
to wit that every one of you shall become Christ's, so perfect and clea^,
that in you even in this lief shall rest no ennemie to be overcome except death
only and that this is the opinion of your greatest Angels I am able to prove
by sufficient testimony, I mean by their own hand writings. But how far S.
Paul was from that perfection, yea even when he was ready to be offerred in
sacrifice for the testimony of Christ Jesus, he eshamed not to confess, thus
writing to the Philippians, after that he had affirmed that all justice which
before he looked for in the law was become to him as damage and doung, to the
end that he might win Christ, and be found in him not having his own justice
which was of the law, but that which was by the faith of Christ Jesus. Philip.
3.
he adds: Not as though I had already atteined to the mark, (understanding to
that justice which he hoped for) either that I am already perfect, but I follow
if I may comprehend that, for whoes sake I am comprehended of Christ Jesus.
Brethren I think not with my self to have atteined to the mark, but one thing I
do forgetting that that is behind I endeuore my self to that which is before.
here the Apostle, who had foghten somewhat longer the^ some who now can brag
of an easy battle, confessed, he was not yet perfect, neither yet that he had
atteined to that estate, that is to the resurrection of the dead to the which
he daily did contend. The other poison which in these your former words I
epsy, and therefore of conscience must admonish my brethren is: That ye be
proud contemners of the fre graces of God offered to man in Christ Jesus. for
with the Pelagians and Papists ye are become teachers of fre will, and
defenders of your own justice. for how coldly ye speak of Christ Jesus and his
power, these your words may witness. How strong the adversaries would seem to
be.
They are in hope (say you) to subdue their ennemies by the aid and counsel of
their Lord, are you become so strong and your warfare so easy that the counsel
of your captein is sufficient for you to conquire your ennemies? you suddenly
did repent that ye had confessed that the aid of your Lord was necessary for
you: and therefore to mitigate and extenuate that, immediately ye add by the
counsel of their Lord. Is this I pray you vnfeanedly to confess that without
Christ ye may do nothing, that of your selves ye be not able to think one good
thought? That it is he that begins and to the end performs the work of our
salvation? God of his great mercy and for Christ Jesus his sons saik,
preserve his Church from your pestilent ve^nom. To the 9.
What ye mean by the history of Gedeo^ in the (which say you) well and duelly
understood be your three kinds of Election plainly set forth, because ye
your self do not express, I will not deuyne. The copy which came to my hands
was in that place imperfecte. for after the former words it had only written
Confyr to the world. And because I will not take upon me to alter any thing in
your words I leave them to be corrected by your selves, and your mind further
to be explaned in that point: if so it shall seem good unto you. Ye proceed
saying.

THE ADVERSARY.
The first argument of them which abuse gods holy predestination is easily
soluted, The fourte^th section.
their argument is this. where so ever there is election, there is also
reprobation of the same sort. But God elected some men before the foundations of
the world. Ergo he reprobated some other men before the world. The first part of
this argument is false, That where so ever there is election, there is also
reprobatio^ of the same sort. for gods election before the world has no
respect unto his contrary reprobation before the world. Yea there is no such
word nor phrase in the hole scripture but gods election before the world, is
general to all men, as his calling is general without respect of persons.
This is all ready sufficiently proved, yet some of you do grant gods calling to
be general, but not his Isaia. 48
whereunto he was chosen, but became a reprobate, abusing the goodness of his
master. God is no hypocrite, which calls men owtwardly, and forgeueth debtes
only with the mowth, but eue^ from the heart, willing to give sal^ation to
all them to whom he offers it. And the cause why such do perish is their
obstinatnes to gods grace: and as the Lord says their stifneck which has an
iron vain and their brows of brass which dispyse the goodness of God, they
became cast awayes, Because (as saint John says) they love darkness better then
light, And as Esdras Esdr. 9.
says they kept not that which was sowe^ in them. whereof we may gather that
they become reprobates, I^rem. 2.
because they rather refuse the grace offered and grafted in them, then that
they are ref^sed. Notwithstanding both may be conveniently spoken: for because
they have forsaken me, I will also forsake them, says the Lord. And agane
says the holy Ghost. Comes not this unto the, because thou have forsaken
Esaia. 42. and 43.
Christ is the elect and chosen of God, As then: Behold this may servant upon
who^ I lean, my elect in whom my soul is pacified. And in an other place. The
scriptures affirm that there be many falls Christ's and falls Prophets But
Jesus Christ is our only Savior: without whom there is no salvation.
Thou art my witness says the lord, and my servant whom I have chosen, and
wile you say therefore that there be mo Christ's which be reprobate. for either
this saying, where so ever there is election, there is also reprobation of the
same kind is false, orels there must be mo Christ's. That were much like to the
saing of a Jew which when he had talked with a faithful man very much
concerning the temporal and worldly dominion and honor of Messiah, the
christian proved by the prophecy of Daniel, and also by the prophecy of
Isaiah that Messiah should be evil entreated even of the Jews, and put to
death as an offender. Here the Jew being driven to a narrow shift rather then
he would apply and confess the truth, he rather confessed that there should
com two Messiah of whom the one should be dispysed, and the other magnified.
And if ye be so minded that rather then ye will depart from your error, ye had
lever confess mo Christ's (of which some be chosen, and the others reprobate)
Surely then I think it is no faithful man's duty to reason with you.

ANSWER.
Easy it is in deed to solute those arguments wc in our names ye falsely forge
either by adding such patches as in our writings ca^ never be found, To the 1.
orels by so perverting our minds, yea and the mind of the holy Ghost that if
possible it were, ye would obscure the brightness of the son, and take from
creatures, the benefitt of the same, to the end that in your darkness ye might
still remain. And therefore ^ can not but complain of your deuilish malice
which causes you to peruerte and writhe words well spoken and reasons godly
and substancially made.

Show if ye can in any of our writings that we affirm that where so ever there
is election there is also reprobation of the same sort. Show that clause I say
of the same sort and I will confess that ye have red more then I have done,
of that matter, which nevertheless I hardly can believe. But to the end that the
simple reader may understand how we do reason of election and reprobation by
the contrary effects I will adduce not our reasons lately invented, but
twenty years ago committed unto writing by that notable instrument of God John
Calvin, Institu. 2. Cap. ^ec. 78.
who thus speaks, wonder it is says he that Chrisostom did not call to mind
that it is the election of God wc makes difference betwext men. We fear not
to grante that which S. Paul in great constancy does affirm. To wit that
all together are wicked and given to malice, but with him we add. That by the
mercy of God it comes to pass tha^ we abide not in wickedness. Therefore sei^g
that naturally we all labor with a like sickness. These only receive health and
amend to whom it has pleased the Lord to put to his curing hand, others whom
by his just judgment he passes by, do languishe in their corruption, till
they be consumed. Neither yet from any where else does it com that some continue
to the end, and others fall in to the curse which was begone. for because that
persuerance it self is the gift of God, which is not commonly given to al: but
he freely gives it to whom it pleases him. If the cause of the difference be
soght, why some constantly continue, and why others fall away by instabilitie,
none other cause may be assigned, but that the eternal God susteineth and
stre^gthneth the one sort, by his own power, that they perish not, and unto
the others he gives not the strength, that they may be docume^tes, and witness
of ma^s inco^sta^cie etc. Thus use we to reason by ye diversity wc we sein me^
yt one sort are elect and others are reprobate and not as ye ymagin us to do.
We say that nature has made us equal as concerning corruption, and yet we se
great diversity amongst men. We ask what is ye cause of this. If ye answer
education wc some Philosophers do, that will be prouen falls, as before I have
declared: if ye say man's fre will, we proceed demanding who gives the good
will, if ye allege man him self, the scripture proves you liers saing it is
God that works the will and the perfourmance. if God be granted (as he can
not be denied) to be the only author of all goodness, then ask we, why gives
he the good will to the one, and not to the other. If ye answer because the one
receaueth grace and the other does refuse it, ye have said nothing to the
purpose. for we still dema^d, if God may not (if so it pleased his eternal
wisdom) frame and form the will of the one to as great obedience as the will
of the other: fret and fume as ye list: this ye ca^ not deny, except that ye
will be blasphemous deniers of his omnipotent power. Now of this manifest
diversity which we se in mankind, we conclude that God has as well his elect
whom of mercy he calls, by faith justifies, and by his holy Spirit
sanctifies, and in knowledge of him self and of his Son Jesus preserves to
the end, and so in the end shall he glorify them: as also that he has his
reprobate, whom for just causes he leaves to them selves to la^gwish in their
corruption, to pass from iniquity to iniquity, till that they com to
perdition, as they that are prepared vessels of wraith. If this ye be not able
to convince, I send you to fight with your own shadow. for our reasons do stand
as I have shortly rehearsed which you be never able to move. De eterna Dei
proedestinatione
True it is that John Calvin thus writes: Inter electos and reprobos mutua est
relatio, That is betwext the elect and the reprobrate (says he) there is a
mutual relation, that is the one has a contrary respect to the other, so
that the election of the which the Apostle speaks, ca^ not stand except we
should grante that God has set apart one sort of men whom it pleased him from
an other sort. You hear no mention in these words of your patch, There is
reprobation of the same sort, which I know either ye, orels your Master
Castalio forged. Because ye would not forgett your merry tale of your Jew, To
the. 2.
ye boldly deny that gods election has respect to his contrary reprobation.
But when ye should come to the plain demo^stration thereof, ye are compelled
to fly to this shift: There is no such word or phrase in the scripture. if
such a reason should be made before a reasonable man, I think it justly might
be rejected. for if this be a good reason: Election has no respect to his
contrary reprobation, because the words nor phrase are not in the scripture,
then is this reason good also: Lot sinned not committing incest with his
daughters: for in the hole scriptures there is neither such word nor phrase,
that in plain words affirms: that Lot sinned commiting incest with his
daughters. Consider the vanity of your reasons and be ashamed. Ye can not
deny, but this word Election is read in the scriptures: And so often I say can
ye not deny except that willingly ye will corrupt the mind of the holy Ghost,
but that it has respect to his contrary reprobation, as by the phrases which
ye impudently deny to be in the scrip^ures is most evident. As when Paul
says: has God then rejected or refused his people? God forbid. Romans (...)
God has not refused his people whom he knew before. And so alledgeing the
like to have been in the days of Helias, he says: even so in this time there
were a residue or a few number left according to the election of grace, that is
according to the fre election, and not according unto works. And after he
says that which Israel seeks, it has not atteined unto: but the election
has atteined unto it: but the rest were blinded, whether that this phrase
does not plainly prove that election in this place has respect to his
contrary, reprobation, let the indifferent reader judge. The election (says
saint Paul) has atteined (understanding the illumination which God did
promise) but the rest were bli^ded. If ye will not suffer that this blinded
rest: whom God justly had rejected, shall be called reprobat, study ye for a
more gentle word. for we must use such as the holy Ghost has taught us. But
yet one phrase or two mo: I shall have mercy, says God to Moses, upon whom I
will have mercy. And Paul fears not to add his contrary saing: and whom he
will he makes hard hearted. And agane what if God willing to show his wrath
and to make his power known has suffered with long patience the vessels of
wrath made ready to damnation: and that he might declare the riches of his
glory on the vessels of mercy which he had prepared unto glory. If mercy,
lief, the vessels of mercy, and glory have contrary, respect to severity,
to destruction, to the vessels of wraith, and of dishonor, then can it not be
denied but that election, (from the which all these former graces flow to the
elect) has contrary respect to reprobation. I omit the rest of the phrases
which be common in scripture and make plain difference betwext the elect and
reprobat, because before I have noted diverse and after must be compelled to
repete the same. How sufficiently ye have proved your general, special, and
most special election, let the readers judge by that which is answered to your
eight unreasonable reason, and to your 13. vanity.

That impudent blasphemy which maliciously ye lay to our charge shall God
(without spedie repentance suddenly revenge upon your own heads) blasphemous
mouth, To the 3.
I write to thee whose corrupt manners, fr^indly and secretly I have rebuked,
but whose malice I now know. Can thou not be unthankful unto man, except
that also thou power forth thy vennom against gods Majesty? Impudent lier
(which of us has promised unto the or unto any of thy pestilent sect, that
which he has not performed? Examine thy conscience, and deny if thou can,
but more has been performed unto the, then ever was promised, yea even when
thou did deserve to have been abhorred of all honest men: and yet without
fear or shame do thou accuse us that we should accuse God of hypocrisy and
that we would make him a dissembler like unto our selves. The Lord for his great
Names saik either purge thy heart, or sodenlie repress that vennome in the and
in that pestile^^ sect, to his own glory, and to the comfort of his Church.
Repent, repent (I say) orels shortly shall thou feel what it is to contristate
and make ^orowfull the Spirit of God, be the instruments, in whom he works
never so weak.

If of every Parable and similitude ye will conclude as largely as ye do here
to wit, To the 4.
yt because in a Parable it is said that a king called many to the marriage,
Ergo God elected all by his general election. Then it shall follow that all
lords and masters shall allow and praise their stewardes and servants, Luke 16
that deceive them. for so is affirmed in a parable, that one lord did to his
steward. If we shall rather believe Christ Jesus then you, then we shall thus
conclude: Many are called, but few chosen. wonder it is that ye can not se the
difference betwext these words: The king called many, and God chose all. I am
ashamed of your ignorance. Of gods constant fidelity, of his promises of the
causes why ye reprobate are more and more blinded, we have before somewhat
spoken and after will have occasion to repete the same.

When ye would be seen most crafty and subtle, To the 5.
then appears most your ignorance and vanity. To prove an absurdity in our
doctrine, thus ye reason: If where so ever election be, there is also
reprobation of the same kind (this last patch, I say, is your malicious
addition, but let it stand for a testimony of your untruth) if then say you
Christ be the elect and chosen of God (as the scriptures affirm him to be)
then must it needs follow, that there be mo Christ's of whom ^ome must be
reprobate: and thereupon ye bring in your foolish tale of your Jew.

First I answer, you according to your merry disposition, which I perceive did
titill you in writing this part: That if ye can make no difference betwext
election, and elect, then I would ye were committed agane to some quick and sharp
Pedagoge who with sharp rods would let you feel what difference there is
betwext Agentem and Patientem. Assuredly your vnreuere^t jesting in these
secret mysteries of our redemption, and these scoffing tantes in malice casten
out against the eternal Son of God, and his undoubted verity, deserve none
other answer. but yet partly to let your ignorance appear, and partly for the
instruction of the simple, I will prepare my self to answer with greater
modesty then your malice deserves. I have said before that this patch, upon
the which ye gather your absurdity is none of our doctrine. for we have
neither written nor yet taught: that where so ever is election, there must also
reprobation be. of the same kind: but simply we say that election has respect
to his contrary reprobation. But to grant you somewhat, and not to hold you so
streit, let it be that so we had written, what should rightly thereof follow?
that there must be mo Christ's, of who^ some must be reprobate, say you, because
that Christ is called the elect of God, I answer in this your argument, ye use
two fallaces, that is false and deceatfull apperances of a truth, which are but
manifest lies. The former, you change the terms, putting elect and reprobate
in the minor and in the conclusion, where we put election and reprobation in
the Mayor, which is not lawful in a good argument. for where we say (as ye
affirm) where so ever is Election, there must also reprobation be ye infer,
Christ is the elect of God, Ergo there must be mo Christ's, of whom some must be
reprobate. Who sees not here the changing of the terms. Let your argument
proceed in order, and conclude what ye list. Where so ever is election there
must also be reprobation. And add if ye list, of the same kind, but Christ is
election (thus must you proceed if that ye keep the form of a good argument).
Prove your Minor and conclude what ye please. Thus does your vain and
foolish sophistry compel me to trouble the simple with the terms of the
arts, which most unwillingly I do.

The second falla^ and deceat, lies in the ambiguitie and doubtful
understanding of this patch (which ye craftelie forge) of the same kind, for if
we had so spoken or written, yet is our understanding far other then you
imagine. That is we apply not these words of the same kind to the
particularitie of persons, and of every especial man that is elect, but to
the hole mass, as by saint Paul we are taught. To make the matter more
sensible I will lay my self for exe^pell, for I will not, nor dare not so
^rreuere^tly jest with the majesty of my God, and of his dear son Christ Jesus
as ye do. You reason against us, as that we did understand your addition of the
same kind of every particulare person a part, as thus: I John knoxe do
constantly believe, that as of mercy and fre grace it has pleased the goodness
of my God, in time to call me to his knowledge, and so to remove my blyndnes
and unbelief that in a part I se his fatherly love toward me in Christ
Jesus his Son, so do I most certenlie believe that in the same Christ Jesus,
of fre grace he did elect and choose me to lief everlasting before the
foundation of the world was laid. Ergo by your understanding I must also believe
that there is another John knoxe of the same kind, having the same substance
with the same qualiteis, proprieties and conditions that I have, that was
reprobated and so must be damned. Who sees not here your vanity, yea your
most malicious cauilation, who labor to impute upon us that which did never
enter into our hearts. We with all reverence and fear believe and teach that
God of one mass that is of Adam, has prepared some vessels of mercy, honor,
and glory, and some he has prepared to wrath and destruction. To the vessels
of his mercy in his eternal counsel before all times, he did appoint a head
to reule, and give lief to his elect, that is Christ Jesus our Lord, whom he
would in time to be made like unto his brethren in all things sin except. Who
in respect of his human nature is called his seruante, the just sede of
David, and the elect in whom his soul is well compleased. Because as I have
said, he is appointed only head to give lief to the body, without whom there
is neither election, salvation, nor lief to man nor to Angel. And so in
respect of his humanity from the wc he in no wies can be separated he is
called ye elect. Conclude now if you ca^. there must be mo Christ's of who^ so^
must be reprobate I will make a more sure and more true conclusion, then you
do, which is this: God of one mass has elected some men to lief in Christ
Jesus, Ergo there was left of the sa^me mass an other sort, under an other
head the devil, who is the father of lies and of all such as continue in
blasphemy against God. Gather now what absurdities ye ca^

THE ADVERSARY.
An other argument gather they forth of gods prescience, The fiftenth section.
but I will first borow an argument of them concerning the prescience of God.
And then God willing I shall answer to theirs. Paul says: Those which God
knew before, he also ordained them before that they should be like fashioned
unto the shape of his Son, that he might be the first begotten Son among
many brethren, The 2. argument.
but God knew all men before, Romans 8.
Ergo be ordained all men before, Read the scriptures better and be ashamed of
your argument.
that they should be Christ's brethren like fashioned vnt^ him. The first part
of my argument is Paul's saing, The second ye can not deny, and the conclusion
is formallie inferred of both the parts. Labor either to solute my argument
without any ambiguitie whereby ye may satisfy others, orels forsaik the error
which it improueth.

ANSWER.
Because ye desire your argument to be soluted at your own request I will take
some pain: God grant it may profit. Your argument contains in it self the
fallax which is called of Equivocation, for this word knowledge or this
sentence: whom God did for know in the words of Paul, which be in your Mayor
or first propositi^on, do not signify the self same thing that these words,
but God knew all men before, which you put in your minor or second proposition.
And so because that there be four terms which in the schools be called
scopae dissolutae, the argument is deceatfull and falls, although the form
appear good. Thus I trust in your own conscience you think your argument fully
and rightly soluted. but yet that neither ve shall have occasion to bark
again, neither yet that the simple reader shall take pain to read these
vain arguments without all fruit, I will add somewhat more, and will plainly
prove my solution to be good. In the first proposition I say, where saint Paul
says, whom God for^ knew, Romans 9.
the same he before ordained: that the holy Ghost means of that fore
knowledge of God which is joy ^ed with his eternal love, which before all
times he did ^ear to his elect, as of the words of Christ Jesus and of the
words of the same Apostle in diverse places before is declared. And with this
fore knowledge which is joined with his love by the which his elect were
appointed to be made like fashioned to their head Christ Jesus, The difference
of good fore knowledge.
did never God fore know nor foresee Cain, Judas, nor none other reprobate to
appertein to him. I do not deny but that as all things ever were present
before the eyes of his Majesty, so did he both foreknow, foresee, and before
ordein the e^d of all creatures: but other wies I say does God fore know his
elect, of who^ S. Paul only speaks. If it does offend you that I affirm
that God did never fore know yc reprobate as he did his elect: I have my
assurance of Christ Jesus, of his own plain words, sayng, to the false
prophets I never knew you, depart from me ye workers of iniquity. Note well
that Christ affirms that he never knew the false prophets, no not even when
they did prophecy, cast out deuilles, and did many wondrous things in the
name of Christ If he had said I know you not, ye might have shifted with this
your accustomed cauillation, that was by reason of their sins, which after
they committed, but he leaving no doubt says I never knew you, and therefore I
fear not to affirm that God did never foreknow Judas, Matthew. 7.
as that he knew Peter. Consider and be sober. Ye go forward to our argument
and say.

THE ADVERSARY.
There argument concerning gods preascience is this. The six tenthe section.
God knows al things before they be done, gods prescie^ce or forknowledge is
infallible, Ergo of necessity all things must com to pass as they do: which
being granted, they which perish, of necessity they do perish. If of
necessity then is it by gods ordinance, because so he wills and so he has
ordained: This argument seems probable at the first blushe. But I pray the
reader to mark first how these men put no difference betwext the foreknowledge
of God and his will. for they suppose, that what so ever God foreseeth he also
wills, but there supposition is untrue. for god foreseeth the death of the
sinner, and yet he will not the death of the sinner, bu^ rather that he repent
and live. Christ did foresee the destruction of Jerusalem, and yet did he not
will it, for he wept and be waled it, God did foresee the fall and final
destruction of the Israelites, and yet would he not it. As he witnesses him
self: saing wherefor willye die, Ezech. 18
O ye house of Israel, seeing I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies.

ANSWER.
What we do teach of gods prescience, of his providence and predestination, and
how that his omnipotent will which we fear not to affirm to be the necessity
of all things does differ from stoicall necessity, with the which ye burden
us, we have before declared, and therefore remitting the reader to the same
place: I say to you. that if ye imagine in God a prescience, Read the first
sectio^.
and foreknowledge, which is idle and separated from his will, that then ye
fall into the blasphemy of Epicurus: and if that you say (as plainly ye do)
that he foreseeth things to com, which he will not, that then ye deny the
omnipotenci^ of his power. Choose which you will, the verity will convince
you. To prove that he foreseeth and knows many things to com, which he will
not, ye adduce the place of Ezechiel, where God affirms, that God will not
the death of a sinner, The weping of Christ upon Jerusalem, and the compleint
of God against the house of Israel. To which I shortly answer at this time
because that after we must have to do with the same matter, that simply (that is
having no further respect but to punishment only) God will neither the death
of the sinner, neither yet the destruction of Jerusalem, nor of the house of
Israel, but in respect of his glory to be showed in their just punishment,
and of his verity and sentence to be approved, always stable and constant,
why that God shall not will both the death, and destruction to com upon the
stubborn inobedient, I se another absurdity to follow neither scripture
repugning: but after in answering to your distinction which ye make the betwext
gods will and his permission I purpose to entreat this matter more largely. You
proceed saying.

THE ADVERSARY.
Secondly these men think that gods foreknowledge causes all things to com to
pass of necessity, The 17. Section
which is also untrue. for knowledge of things past, of things present, and of
things O proud lucifer that dare compare thy knowledledge to the prescie^ce
of God
but Paul was not a persecuter because I knew it, but I knew it because he was
a persecuter: I know that in the month of July shall be harvest, yet shall not
harvest be, because I know so, but I know it because it shall be. Likwese God
did know that I should write this day, but yet did he not compel me to write:
for I had liberty either to write or not to write, not because he knew that I
should write, therefore did I write, but because I was to write, therefore knew he
that I should write. Thus ye may se how they do err which affirm that gods
foreknowledge causes all things to com to pass he might have done it. Ananias
sold his possession, and yet he might have not sold it: he brought a part of
the price thereof to the Apostles, which he might have retained to him. as
Peter witnesses that the price thereof was in his own power, Many such other
exemples may I bring forth whereby it should appear manifest that
notwithstanding the fore knowledge of God, things be done which might not be
done, and things be not done, which might be done.

ANSWER.
Albeit that ye be so blinded that ye can put no difference betwext the
foreknowledge, To the 1.
will, and power of God, which all are perfect in him self, as is his eternal
God head, and the foreknowledge, will, and power of man or creatures which he
imperfect and weak by reason of man's corruption, yet I doubt not but that all
reasonable men shall sodanly epsy your vanity, who dare be so bold as to
affirm that because your knowledge was not the cause that Paul was a
persecutor, that therefore the foreknowledge of God, his eternal purpose
counsel and will wc we, never separate, did no more in that matter, then did
your bare knowledge. by the same reason ye may conclude ^t God wroght no more
with Paul in preaching to the Gentiles, the^ did your knowledge, for ye reason
is a lik strong. But he him self, will not be so vn^hankfull, but will confess
that from his mothers womb he set him a part, Galat. 1.
and called him by his grace to the end that he might reuele his Son Christ
Jesus by him: 1 Timothy 1
for the which he vnfeanedly thanked the goodness of God, who made him strong in
Christ Jesus to be faithful in that office, God works both in his elect, and
in the reprobate but in diu^rse manner.
and ministry, I am not ignorant that other ways does God work in the
hearts of his elect, the work of their salvation, and other ways in the
reproba^e. for in the hearts of his elect effectually and by the power of his
spirit does he so work in them the motions that be aggreable to his holy
commandments, that they strive and contend against their natural corruption:
but justly leaving the reprobate to them selves and to satan their father,
they willingly follow without all violence or compulsion of gods part,
iniquity and sin: and so finally the way of perdition to the which ^hey
naturally are inclyned. But yet if any will affirm that therefore gods fore
knowledge does but Idly behold that they will do, and that in his eternal
purpose, counsel and will, he will one thing, and they will an other, so that
their will preuale against his, he shall not escap the crime of horrible
blasphemy, as before I have said, and here

Your wrestling and wrangling with the words of

In the words of Pilate and in Christ's answer ye show the like ignorance as
before. To the ^.
for there upon ye conclude what Pilate might have done, and yet did not the
same, where as the purpose of Christ Jesus was to reprove the proode
arrogancy of the vain man, who did usurp to him self authority, rendering
unto God neither honor nor glory, but boasting him self of his power, he
thought all things lawful, which it pleased him to do. Against which pride and
unjust unthankfulness, Christ absolutely denies that he should have had any
power over him, except it had been given to him from above. By which words
and sentence he did put him in mind that he should make accomptes, what
judgment he pronounced, not to the Emperor only, but to the sovereign God
who as he has appointed and established autoriteis, so shall he severely
require of their hands an account, if under his name they use tirannie or
pronounce falls judgment. This I doubt not is ye true and simple meani^g of ye
text, and not as ye ignora^tly orels maliciously collect, yt Christ affirmed
that Pilate had power not to adiudge him to be crucified, but to deliver hi^.
Read the prayer of the Apostles. Act. 4.
The holy Ghost affirms ye direct contrary sai^g: of a truth in this city
have co^uened against thy holy Son whom thou have anointed, Herod and
Po^tius Pilate with the gentiles and the people of Israel to do what so ever
thy hand and counsel have before decreed to be done. Now let the indifferent
reader judge which of our collections and conclusions is most strongly proved.
Ye affirm that Pilate had power not to crucify Christ: and I say that he was
appointed in the immutable counsel of God to be one of the wicked
instruments, by whom the Son of God should innocently suffer the death of
the cross. But how little does this releue the wilful sin of Pilate shall
after be declared.

Eue^ such liberty and power, What power Ananias had of his land
as ye had to write these former and subseque^t blasphemies, had Ananias of his
land, and money received for the same. For as you being infected with heresy,
malice, and envy, did willingly write and utter your ve^nom: so he being
auaricious and a dissembling hypocrite did of a fre, consenting heart reserve a
portion to him self, offering a part to the Church of God, with protestation
that it was the hole some, thinking therebie to have obtained the commendation
and praise which hypocrites deserve not. Act. 5.
But what was gods purpose, counsel, and will in that behalf, is evident, to
wit that we shall abhor and avoid hypocrisy, that we shall not abuse the
simplicity of our brethren, neither yet make protestation of that thing before
men, affirming that to be true which our own conscience knows to be falls. But
now to the rest.

THE ADVERSARY.
Here I think it is good to answer to their obiectio^s, The eightene section.
which they collect of Peter's denying of his master. If these things, which
God foreseeth to com to pass, say they, may be left undone. then
notwithstanding that Christ did foresee that Peter should deny him, Peter
might yet have not denied him. I answer that 1. Re. 23.
if Saul would come to Keyla, and the Lord said he will com down: that if David
did not depart from keyla, using such liberty as God had given him, he with
his men should be betrayed into the hands of Saul, Whence have ye your
assurance.
and I pray you might not Peter like wise using his liberty avoid the bushopps
house, and so never been tempted to deny Christ? Yes I am sure as well as
David avoided Keyla.

ANSWER.
If you be able to prove that David stood in also hot a contention against
God, To the 1. 2. and 3.
as Peter did against his master Christ Jesus: that David affirmed the
expressed contrary to that which God had pronounced, and that God had
appointed the certain time as well when Saul should come as when the men of
keyla should betrey him, then might ye have had some coulor to have compared and
matched the denial of Peter with the flie^g of David. But if Peter's denial
was with a dooble affirmation pronounced by the mowth of Christ Jesus: and if
the sentence of God both touching the coming of Saul and touching the
unthankfulness of the men of keyla, was conditional, ye be more the^ bold that
take upon you to ioyn together things so diverse. Christ's words to Peter were
neither spoken nor meant under any condition, but were pronounced as follows.
Matt. 26.
Verelie, verelie I say unto the, that the cock shall not crow till thou shall
deny me thrice. John. 13.
Which words leave neither liberty, fredome nor power to Peter to provide for
him self, that this sentence should not be true, but the words and answers
spoken to David were according to his questions, which were first, if that
brute of Saules coming was true, and if the men of keyla, to whom he had
shown such thankfulness of late before, should become so ingrate that they
should betrey him into the hands of Saule^ And God did answer that Saul
should come down, and that the citezens of keyla should betray him. But I
trust ye will not be so impudent as to deny, but that both these affirmations
were spoken conditionally to assure David of his doub^es, and to give him
aduertisment that neither he should abide the hasard of Saules coming,
neither yet commit him self and his me^ of war to the fidelity of those that
were in keyla. Be judges now your selves how far different be the words spoken
to Peter, and the words spoken to David. Ye proceed.

THE ADVERSARY.
But now to return to our purpose. The nynte^th section.
if I shall grante that all things of mere necessity must come to pass
according to the prescience and fore knowledge of God, then had Adam before the
tra^sg^^ssion no fre will, but of mere necessity did he offend, forasmuch as
God did foresee his fall. Then had Christ no fre will: for God

ANSWER.
Before I answer to the absurdities, To the 1.
which of our doctrine ye collect, I must in few words put you in mind, that
very foolishely ye ioyn the fre will of Adame with the free will of Christ
Jesus, Difference betwext the liberty of Chri^tes will, and the fredo^ of
Adams will.
and with the liberty of God. for Adams will was never so free but that it
might (as that it did) co^ to thraldom, which weakness you be never able to
prove at any time to have been in Christ's will. further the will of Adam was
always under the impire and threatening of a law, to which subjection I think
ye will not bring God. But now to your absurdities.

If (say you) I shall grante that all things of mere necessity must com to
pass according to the prescience and foreknowledge of God, then had Adam before
his transgression no fre will, your illation, or consequence is false. for the
fore knowledge and prescience of God did neither take away fre will from Adam,
neither yet did compel it by any violence, but did use it as an ordinary
mean, by the which his eternal counsel and purpose should take effect. but
for the better understanding hereof, we must aduerte and note that which before
we have towched, and promised after more largely to entreat the same. to wit
that gods prescience and foreknowledge is not to be separated from his will and
decre, Gods prescience is not to be separated from his will.
For none otherwies does God foresee things to com to pass but according as
he him self has in his eternal counsel decreed the^ same^ for as it
apperteineth to his wisdom to foreknow and foresee all things that are to
come, so does it appertein to his power to moderate and reule all things
according to his own will: neither yet herefor does it follow, that his fore
knowledge prescie^ce, will or power, does take away the fre will of his
creatures, but in all wisdom and justice, (how ever the contrary appear to our
corrupted judgments) he uses them, as best it pleases his wisdom to bring to
pass in time, that which before all time he had decreed. To the which purpose
and end, they (I mean the creatures and their wills) what so ever they purpose
to the contrary, or how ignorantly that ever they work it nevertheless do
volontarely, and as it were of a natural motion incline and bow to that end to
the which they are created. To make the matter more plain, let us take the
creation and fall of Adam with the creatures that served in the same, for
example. For what chief end did God create all things (of Solomon and Paul we
have before declared) to wit for his own glory to be showed: the glory I say
of the riches of his mercy toward the vessels of mercy, Romans 9.
and the glory of his justice and most just judgments toward the vessels of
wraith. Prouer. 16.
And that this eternal counsel of God should take effect as he had purposed,
man was created righteous, wise, just and good, having fre will, another subject
to the thraldom of sin, nor of satan at the first creation: but sodanly
comes satan ennemie to God, and to man, his good creature, and first powered
in vennom into the heart of the woman, which afterward she powers into the
heart of Adame: to the which both the one and the other, without all violence
used of gods part, does willingly consent: and so conspiring with the serpent
do accuse God of a lie, do fully consent to vendicat or challenge to them
selves the power of the God head of mind a^nd purpose (so far as in them lay)
to thrust down, and depose him from his eternal throne. Here we se how the
creatures and their wills without compulsion, do serve gods purpose and
counsel. for satan was neither sent nor commanded of God to tempt man: but of
malice and hatred did most willingly and gredely run to the same: the will of
man being fre before, was not by God violently compelled to obey satan: but
man of fre will did consent to satan and conspire against God. And yet was the
fall of man not only foresene and fore known of God, but also before decreed
for the manifestation of his glory. Let us yet take an other exemple that the
matter may be more evident. The death of Christ Jesus for man's redemption, was
decreed in the eternal counsel of God before the foundations of the world
were laid as we were elected in him, and as he was the lamb killed from the
beginning, which death also was decreed in the same counsel of God to be in a
certain time appointed: And that so certainly that neither could the malice of
any creature prevent the hour appointed of God thereto: neither yet could any
policy or chance impede or transfer the same to any other time. For how often
Christ was before assaulted, the Evangelists do witness: But always his answer
was: my hour is not yet come. And what impedimentes did occure immediately
before his death, is also evident. The feast of Easter was instant, the fame of
Christ was great, the favor of the people, with public voices was declared,
and the counsels of the hie priests and seniors had decreed that to avoid
sedition his death should be delayed, till after that feast: But all these were
shortly overthrown, and Christ did suffer in the verey time appointed as he
before had forespoken. But now to the instruments which serve in this matter,
and whether they were compelled by God or not. Judas we know was not one of the
least: and what moved him, the holy Ghost does witness, to wit his
auariciousnes. The scribes, Phariseis, Priests and Seniors and people, led,
some of malice and envy, some to gratify their ruelers, and altogether of set
purpose to crucify Christ, do consent with Judas. Pilate albeit he long
refused and by diverse means studied to deliver Christ, yet in the end for fear
of displeasure, as ^well of the priests and people, as of the Emperor, he
willingly without all compulsion of gods part, pronounced an unjust sentence of
death against Christ Jesus which his soldiers also most willi^gly did
execute. This I say we se that the creatures and their wills without all
compulsion do serve gods counsel and purpose. Here I know that ye think that
either I write against my self orels that I conclude a great absurdity. for if
I say that God did nothing but foresee these things and so permitted them (as
after you speak) to follow their own train, that he works no more, but as a
simple beholder of a tragedy, then do I aggre with you and if I do say (as in
verey deed I do understand and affirm) that the eternal counsel and purpose
of God did so reule in all these things, that rather they did serve to gods
purpose and most just will, then fulfill their most wicked wills: then will
you cry blasphemy, and say that I deliver the devil, Adam, and all the wicked
from sin, of the which I make God to be author. To the first I have answered
before, that as I separate not gods foreknowledge from his counsel, so do I
affirm that he works all in all things according to the purpose of the same
his good will: and yet that he uses no violence, neither in compelling his
creatures, neither constreining their wills by any external force, neither
yet taking their wills from them: but in all wisdom and justice, using them as
he knows most expedient for the manifestation of his glory, without any
violence I say done to their wills. When violence is do^ to the will of a
creature.
For violence is done to the will of a creature, when it wills one thing, and
yet by force, by tyranny or by a greater power it is compelled to do the
things which it would not: as if a pudique and honest matron or chaste virgin
should be deprehended alone by a wicked and filthy man, who with violence and
force (thoghe the will of the woman did plainly repine) did deflowre and
corrupt her. This is violence done to will and she of necessity was compelled
to suffer that ignominy and shame, which nevertheless she most abhorred. Do we
say that God did (or does) any such violence to his creatures? Did he compel
satan to tempt the woman when his will was contrary thereto? Did the will of
Adame resist the temptation of the woman and did he so hate and abhor to eat
of that fruit, that it behooved God to compel his will repugni^g thereto, to
eat of it, and so to break his commandments? or did he not rather willingly
hear and obey the voice of his wife? Consider I beseech you how plainly we put
difference betwext violence, which you call mere necessity, and gods secret
counsel and eternal purpose. But yet ye cry, wherein the^ did man offend?
who can resist the will of God? why does he complein: The grud geing of the
reprobat.
seeing that his counsel and purpose by such means is brought to pass? Do ye
not understand that these were the furious cries of those to whom saint Paul
imposes silence, with this sentence: Romans 9.
O man what art thou that dare reason against God etc. But lest that ye
complein (as your common custom is) of our obscur^tie and dark speaking, I will
eue^ in one or two words declare why the creatures offend even when they serve
most effectually to gods purpose. Why creatures offend when they most serve
gods cou^s^l
To wit because that they neither have the glory of God in their actions
before their eyes, neither yet mind they to serve, nor obey gods purpose and
will. Satan in tempting man studied nothing to promote gods glory: Man in
obeyi^g the te^ptatio^ looked not to ye counsel of God: Judas, Ananias,
Pilate, the soldiers, and the rest had nothing les in mind then man's
redemption to be performed by their cou^sells, and wicked works. And
therefore, of gods justice were they every one reputed sinners, yea and some of
them reprobated for ever. if these reasons do not satisfy you, yet shall they
be a test^monie what is our doctrine: and as I trust shall also be a reasonable
contentation to the godly and simple reader. More would I have spoken in the
same matter, and so to have put end unto it at once: but because that after, by
the reason of your most unjust accusations, I will be compelled to have to do
with you again, I abide opportunity. Now to your reasons: Man's will I say
in the self remained fre, notwithstanding that God in his eternal counsel had
decreed his fall, and that because no violence, as before is declared, was done
unto it. The will of our master and Savior Christ Jesus, notwithstanding the
immutable decre of his death, appointed to be at a certain time, was so fre
that albeit, the power of nature might have given unto him mo years of lief:
and also that the human nature did abhor the cruel and ignominious death,
yet did he subject both his will and the power of nature, unto the will of his
heavenly Father, as he does witness, saing: Not that I will (father) but let
that be done which thou willest. Luke 22.


Wonder it is that ye can not se how gods will can remain in liberty, except
that he abide in suspense or dowte, and so daily and hourly change his purpose
and counsel, Gods will is fre although it change not as occasion is offered by
men's doings.
as occasion is offered unto him, by men and by their actions. If this be to
make God bound and to take from him liberty, to affirm that as he is
infinite in wisdom, infinite in goodness, infinite in justice, and infinite in
power: so does he most constantly, most freely, most justly and most wisly
bring that to pass, which in his eternal counsel he has determined. If this
(I say) be to take from God fredom, wisdom and liberty, as ye do rail, I
must confess my self a transgressor. But if your cogitatio^s and foolish
conclusions of his eternal God head be (as alas to manifestly ye declare your
selves) so profane, so carnal, and so wicked, that long you abiding in the
same, can not escaip gods just vengeance. Repent before that in his anger he
arrest and declare that your justice, ^wher of so much ye brag, is manifest
blasphemy against his dear Son Christ Jesus. God the father of our Lord
Jesus Christ preserve his small flock, from your pestilent vennom, and most
dangerous heresies, and stop your blasphemous mowthes, that thus dare ieaste
upon God, as if he were one of your companio^s saying, Then is he a goodly wise
God, Then is God bound him self etc.

THE ADVERSARY.
The third argument gather they upon that which is written to the Romans the
ninthe chapter before the children were borne that the purpose of God by
election nught (...), The 20 Section
it was said, the elder shall serve the yonger^ as it is written, Romans 9.
Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated for the true understanding of this
scripture, we must know first that these words, The elder shall s^rue Malach. ^
expounds, which we may well understand of the true Church and of the
maligna^t church: if that had been spoken before their birthe, then had the
Lord not said, Jacob I have loved and Esau I have hated in the preterit tence,
but Jacob shall I love and Esau shall I hate, and that Esau is hated, it comes
of his own evil deserving, conform to the saing of the Lord, Thy destruction
O Israel is of thy self, and thy health comes of me.

ANSWER.
Your cold and unsavory exposition which To the 1.
ye (following the profane subtilitie of Castalio) make upon the words of the
Apostle written in the nynth chapter to the Romans is neither able to justify
your error, neither yet to improve the doctrine, which upon the same we collect
and gather, which is this: That as God by his fre benediction separated the
people of Israel from all nations of the earth, so did his fre election make
difference betwext the men of the same people of whom he did freely choose some
to salvation, Themynd of the Apostle in the 9. c^apit. to the Romans
concerning Jacob and Esaw.
and did appoint others, to eternal condemnation. Secondarely, that of this his
fre Election there is none other cause, nor foundation, but his mere goodness,
as also his mercy, which after the fall of Adame does without all respect,
had to their works receive and embrasse whom it pleases him. Thirdly that God
in this his fre election is bound to no necessity to offer the same to all
indifferently, but contrary wies he passed by such as it pleases him, and
who^ it pleases him he receaueth. These propositions (I say) are so evident in
Paul's words that they never can be moved by your malicious and ignorant
wresting of the text: for in every one of Paul's sentences, he strives
directly against your error. for where he says: Rebecca conceived of one,
that is of our father Isaak, he secludeth al cause that might have been by
accidents, which come in time, either in the father or in the mother: and in
these words when the chidlren were not yet born, and had neither done good nor
evil, he secludeth al respects that ca^ be alleged to have been in the
children. But where he says, that the purpose of God might abide according to
election, not of works, but of the caller etc, is plainly denied merits,
dignity, or works to com, to be any cause of gods fre election. For if he would
have persuaded men to have believed that God had elected some in respect of their
good works to com, and had rejected others for their evil works only, which
he foresaw that they should do: Paul had not so vehe^e^tly urged these terms
and sentences: That the purpose of God might abide according to election, not
of works etc. but he should simply have said. God has chosen some in respect
of their good works, which he foresaw they should do, which therefore he would
reward first with his election, and after with his kingdom. But the plain
contrary way to this, we se the Apostle uses, pulling man altogether from
contemplation of him self, to God, to his fre mercy, to his fre grace, and
eternal purpose, and also to his most deep and profounde judgments. Imagine
what shift so ever ye can, ye shall never be able to avoid this plain
simplicity of the Apostle.

With what face can ye deny, To the ^.
that these words, the elder shall serve the younger, are not spoken of Jacob
and Esau, seeing that the Apostle in plain words does affirm that they were
spoken and meant of the two children, before they were born? He says not
before the two nations were born, but before the children were born. Your
reason is because as concerning the flesh Esau did never serve Jacob, I answer
neither yet did God say: the elder shall serve the yonget in the flesh: but
simply did pronounce: The elder shall serve the younger. But well do ye declare
what is your understanding of dominion and servitude, be it in flesh, or be it
in spirit.

Was it no kind of servitude I pray you yea even in the fl^she, Esaw some manner
of way served Jacob in the flesh.
that Esau was compelled to beg po^age at Jacob, and for the same to sell all
title of his birthright? was it no thraldom, that with crying owling, and
furious rores, he was compelled to beg the benediction, which Jacob had
gotten, and yet could not obtein it? Did not his heart feel subjection when he
sees his father so constant in preferring Jacob to him, that by no means he
would retreat or call back one word. We do not deny but the diversity was
also established betwext the two nations: but that the heads should be
secluded, that are ye never able to prove. But rather the battle, which did
begin in the mothers womb, was established, and confirmed by the oracle of
God to continue betwext the posterities of those two heads. Did Rebecca, and
Isaak after he did se gods providence and will to be contrary to that which he
had purposed (which was to give the benediction to Esau) did they, I say,
understand that Jacob had no part in that promise touching his own person? The
words of Isaak do witness the contrary: for he says, Genesis 27.
I have established him lord over the etc. By the same reason which ye make I
may prove that these words were not spoken of their posterities, for during
longer time, then either did Jacob or Esau live, the Edomites did not serve the
Israelites in the flesh: which did only begin in the latter days of David,
and did continue, 2. Reg. 8.
to the days of Ioram (son of losaphat) when they departed from that
obedience: neither yet were they ever after that, brought into subjection
again. but be therefore^ the oracles, and promises of God vain? Yea had they
not their effect, both in the one people, and in the other, even when the one
was in most miserable bondage: first in Egypt, and after in Babylon: and when
the other was in greatest felicity to man's apperance? yet before God, was
that sentence true: The elder shall serve the younger. For he had further
respect, then the present estate, as the Apostle does declare, that all the
faithful Patriarchs had. Jacob would not have interchanged the comfort, which
he received in his first journey, f^o^ his fathers house, for all the worldly
joy, Y^ Esau possessed: for in se^g that scale or ladder, God fitting upon the
head of it, the foot of it touching the earth, upon the which did Angels
asce^d and come down: and in hearing that most joy full and comfortable voice:
I am the God of Abraham thy father and of Isaak: the la^d whereupon thou
slepest, I will give to the, Genesis 28.
and to thy sede etc. and lo I am with the and will keep the whether so ener
thou go, and will bring the again into this land. In seeing and hearing
these things. I say, did Jacob understand, that the benediction of God
extended further then to temporal things, yea that rather it did extend to
that union and conjunction, which was betwext God and man in that blessed sede
promised, then to the possession, of the land of Canaan. for the one did
neither Abraham, Isaak, nor Jacob possess in their lives, neither yet their
posterity many years after: but the joy of the other, did all the elect feel,
and see and did rejoice as Christ Jesus does witness, of our father Abraham.

That these words Jacob have I loved, but Esau have

True it is, these words were spoken by Malachie the Prophet, after the
reduction of the people from the captivity of Babylon. But when we have a
little considered the scope and purpose of the Prophet, then shall we first
consider whether he did vnsterstand the love of God, and his hatered, to
appertein to the two peoples only, and not also to the two original heads.
And after we shall see whether the mind and plain words of Paul will suffer
and bear your interpretation or not.

Shortly after, that the people of Israel, I mean, the tribes of Judah,
Benjamin, The place of the Prophet Malachie
and I ^eui, were by the miraculous work of God, after the bondage of 70. years
set at liberty and brought again to Jerusalem, in which they did reedifie the
temple, repair the walls, and begin to multiply, and so to grow to some
strength within the city, and land: they fall to their old nature, I mean to
be ungrate and unthankful unto God. the people were slothful: and the
priests, who should have provoked the people to the remembrance of those great
benefits, were become even like to the rest. The Lord therefore did raise up
his Prophet Malachie (who was the last before Christ) sharply to rebuke and
plainly to co^uict this horrible ingratitude of that unthankful nation, who
so shamefully had forgotten those so great benefits recently bestowed upon
them. And thus begins he his prophecy: I have loved you (says the Lord)
in which words he speaks not of a common love which in preserving and feding
all creatures, is common to the reprobate. but of that love by the which he had
sanctified and separated them from the rest of nations to have his glory
manifested. But because they (as all ungrate persons do) did not consider wherein
this his love toward them more then toward others did stand: he brings
them to the fountein, demanding this question: was not Esau brother to Jacob
(says the Lord) and nevertheless Jacob have I loved and Esau I have hated, and
this he proves not only by the diversity of the two countries, which were
given to their posterities, but also by that that God continually showed hi^
self loui^g to Jacob and to his posterity, reducing them again after long
captivity, declaring him self as it were ennemy to Edom, whose desolation he
would never restore, but would distroy, that which they should go about to
build. Let now the godly reader judge whether that the mind of the Prophet
was to seclude Jacob, in his person from the love of God, and Esau from his
hatered: or that it was not rather to rebuke the unthankfulness of the people,
who did not consider that undeserved love, which God did show to their first
father, whiles he was yet in his mothers bosom. for where he says, was not
Esau brother to Jacob, he would put them in mind that Jacob had no prerogative
above Esau, yea that the was inferior to him as concerning the law of nature,
and therefore that he oght to have been subject unto him: but God of fre grace
did prefer the younger to the elder, which love and preferment he constantly
did keep to his sede after him.

This I am assured can no godly man deny to be the verey meaning of the
Prophet. True it is that he does include both the peoples, the one loved, and
the other hated. But what reason is it that the heads shall be secluded? seeing
that the begi^ning of the diversity did first appear in them, and the Prophet
plainly says: Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated. Now to the mind of
the Apostle you say that these words: before the children were born, are not to
be referred to the sentence which follows: Jacob have I loved, Esau have I
hated: and the cause ye add as we before have declared. I answer that the most
just judgments of God are fearful, and your blindness oght to admonish all
men to examine them selves with what conscience they go to entreat gods secret
mysteries. If that sentence, before the children were born oght not to be
referred to these words: Jacob have I lo^ued, and Esau have I hated, I pray
you to what words oght they to be referred? Did the Apostle speak the^ at all
adventure, without respect to any thing following? I trust ye will grant as much
as God spak, to wit that before the children were born God said, The elder shall
serve the younger. and then I pray you answer whether ye think, that the
preferment of Jacob to Esau proceeded from love or from hatred? or if the
subjection of Esau to his brother was not a declaration of gods hatred? If you
deny, yet will the Prophet condemn you, as before we have proved, ye can not
escaip with the solution which a writer defending fre will gives, which is
this: That there mention is made only of temporal and carnal benedictio^,
meant under the name of love, and of poverty with barrennes of ground
understand by the name of hatred, which solution is so cold, that it perishes
in the self for I think no man to be so blind, but that he sees the mind of
the Apostle to be bent upon the spiritual benediction, as in his hole
disputation is evident. But let it be that the corporal benediction (which we
utterly exclude not, be there understand and me^t, yet that neither helps him
nor you. for where so ever gods establyshed love is, there is lief, where so
ever his established hatred is, there is death: but upon Jacob and upon his
sede (spiritual I mean) was established the love of God, as the Prophet
affirms, and our Apostle most pro foundely alleges: and upon Esau, and upon
his posterity was established and confirmed the hatred: Ergo^ upon him and
them remained death. Consider now how that the Apostle after these words: The
elder shall serve the younger, joins this sentence: as it is written, Jacob
have I loved, but Esau I have hated. In which words the holy Ghost agrees
together the words of the Prophet, and the words of God spoken to Rebecca,
and makes the one to interpret the other. for where God says, the elder
shall serve, that expo^deth the Prophet, God hated Esau: and where he
pronounces dominion to the younger, that the Prophet explaneth sai^g: Jacob
have I loved. And when did God thus love the one, and hate the other,
pronouncing the one to be Lord and the other to be servant? While they were yet
(says he) in their mothers womb, and before they had either done good or
bad. Deny now if ye can, that the former words oght not to be referred to the
subsequentes. your malicious minds compel me often to repete one thing.

Why the Apostle makes neither mention of Abraham nor of Isaak, but of Jacob,
and of Jacob being in his mothers womb.
as is declared, spoke them after: by the which he sends them to the ancient
love of God. which began before that ever their father could know or serve God.
In which is to be noted, that he makes neither me^tio^ of A^raham nor of
Isaak, but of Jacob, and of Jacob in his mothers womb, to pull down this
pride, which ye with the Pelagians and Papists have conceived of your works,
going before, and foresene by God to follow in you. But the Prophet of God did
so dau^ton the stowt hearts of that his people (were they in other things
never so wicked) that they did not allege, that any cause was either in their
father, or in them, why that they, or he should be preferred to other nations,
and specially to the Edomites, who descended from Esau in all things like to
Jacob, gods only grace excepted.

truth, that it was not for their righteousness, that Israel received the
inheritance, but only because God freely loved their fathers. But why so sodanly
ye slide from the principal purpose, leaving Esau and his posterity, and do
enter to speak, why ye Cananites were cast forth,^ se no just cause. for
neither does Moses, in the first oracle of God, neither the Prophet Malachie,
in explaning the same, neither yet our Apostle in applying boeth those places
to the spiritual benediction, lay the sede of Jacob against the Cananires, but
Jacob is set against Esau, and the people discending from the one, against the
people that descended from the other. The question there might justly have been
demanded: what prerogative has Jacob above Esau? Moises the Prophet and the
Apostle do answer, The grace of God only, made the difference betwext Jacob
and Esau.
assuredly none, except only grace, which made difrence betwext them, whom
nature in all things had made equal. for both were come of Abraham, both of
one father, both of one mother, both conceived at once, both fostered under one
climate, region influence of sterres, and yet it was said. The elder shall
serve the younger.

We know that the Cananites came of a cursed father, whom if Paul should have
compared with the Israelites, they should have complained of injury done unto
them And his reasons had been easily dissolved. for if he had said, ye
election of God is fre, and has respect to no works, and had brought in the
sede of Abraham elected, and the sede of Cham rejected and accursed, for
probation of the same, they sodanly should and justly might have replied, Cham
mocked his father, and therefore was he and his posterity accursed, and so had
God respect to works: But the Apostle looks more circumspectly to so grave a
matter, and therefore did choose such an example, as wherein, the wit nor reason
of man can find no cause of inequality. Of this I thought good to put you and
the readers in mind lest perchance ye should imagine, that as great cause of
reprobation was found in Esau before he was born, as Moses lays to the charge
of the Cananites. And so I perceive in a part ye do. for in the end and after
ye have affirmed that the cananites were cast out of the land by reason of
their wickedness, ye return to Esau (repenting your selves I trust that so
imprudently ye had slipped from one lineage to an other). And these words ye
affirm, That Esau is hated, it comes of his own evil deserving conform to
the saying of the Lord: Thy destruction (^ Israel) is of thy self, and thy
health comes of me.

In which affirmation, An answer.
and pretensed probation of the same I find no les negligence in you, then
before I have shewe^ and proue^: for as most impude^tly before ye confounded ye
sede of Abraham, who by gods own mowth was blessed, with the sede of Cham, who
in expressed words was accursed: so here ye confound Israel elected of God to
be his people in Jacob, with Edom rejected from that honor in their father
Esau, before that either the one did good or the other did evil. The words of
the Prophet which ye bring to prove, The place of Hoseas by the Anabaptists
wrested is restored to the natural meaning.
that Esau was hated for his evil deserving, were neither spoken to him nor to
his posterity, but they were spoken to that people whom God had preferred to
all nations of the earth, to whom he had shown his manifold graces, and to
whom he had been salvation and help, even in their most desperate calamity.
But then fore their defection from him and for their Idolatry committed, were
become most afflicted and miserable, daily te^ding to further destruction. To
these I say, and not to Esau nor yet to his posterity did God say: o Israel
thou have destroyed thy self, or o Israel it has destroyed the, for so is the
hebrew text, for in me is thy health. In wc words he repressed the grudgeing
and ye murmuri^g of the people, who in their misery did rather accuse God of
cruelty the^ repent or acknowledge their sins, and Idolatry to be the cause
of their ruin: as in Ezechiel well may be seen. to such God says, Israel
thou art in most extreme misery, thy honor is decayed, and the glory of thy
former aige is now turned to ignominy and shame. What is the cause? it lies
not in me. for as I am eternal and immutable, so is not my hand shortened this
day, neither yet my power diminished, more then when I did deliver the from
the bondage of Egypt. In me is thy health now, as, it was then, if that thy
sins did not make separation betwext the and me. Plain it is first that here
no mention is made of Esau, nor Edom, but of Israel only, and secondarely that
God speaks nothing in this place, why he did first elect Jacob, and reject
Esau, but why it was that Israel which some times was honorable, and feared of
all nations, was then become most miserable, and afflicted on all sides. Except
that you be able to prove that Esau committed as manifest Idolatry before he
was borne, and before that Jacob was preferred unto him, as Israel did before
they came to destruction, y^ have proved nothing of your affirmation. further I
say that if Esau was hated for his evil deserving, then must it needs follow
that Jacob was loved for his well deserving by the argument following of the
nature of the contraries.

But that directly repugneth to the words of Moises, Qui^ contrariorum eadem
e^^ ratio.
to the interpretation of all the Prophets and to the mind and strong reasons
of the Apostle, who plainly deny works by past or to cum, to be any cause of
gods fre election. True it is we be elected in Christ Jesus to be holy, and to
walk in good works, which God has prepared. But every reasonable man
knows, what difference there is betwext the cause and the effect. Election
(in which I include the fre grace and favor of God) is the fountain from
which springs faith, and faith is the mother of all good works. But what
foolishnes were it therefore to reason: My works are the cause of my faith; and
my faith is the cause of my election. Thus gently I put you in mind with
greater reverence and circu^spection to interpret and apply the sacred word of
God. Thus ye proceed

THE ADVERSARY.
Their fourth argument, The twenty one section.
Has not the potter power over the clay even of the same lompe to make one
vessel unto honor and an other unto di^honor of this they infer that God has
ordained and made some to salvation and some to destruction and damnation But for
the more perfect understanding of this place before thou go any further read
the xviii chapter of leremie, and thows^alt perceive this to be the meani^g. As
the Potter has the clay in his hand, so has God all men in his power: and as
the potter breaks the vessel, wherein is found an incurable fault, so God
destroieth the man in whom there is found obstinate wickedness Romans 9.
how art thou then turned into bitter, unfruitful, and strange grapes? God
would all men were good, and that all men should be saved, forasmuch as he is
good himself, and all that he makes is good, But as the Potter makes of the
same clay, some vessels to serve at the table, some in the kitchen or in the his
power in breaking of it. Ask the husbond man, and he shall answer the that he
planted no fruit tree to be barren, but if it chance to be barren, he cutteth it
down, and pla^teth an other instead of it. Ask the Magistrate, and be shall
answer the, that it is not his will to kill any of his subjects, for he would
that they were all good, but if any become a theif and murderer, he shows his
power eue^ over him in killing him, Even so says God, I will not the death of
the sinner, but rather that he convert and live, I will not that any man be
evil, and therefore I forbid all evil, but

ANSWER.
Why for the more perfect understanding of Paul's mind, any man should rather
read the words of Jeremy writre^ in the xviii. chapter of his prophecy then
the words written in xlviii. chapter of the Prophet Isaiah, I se no just
cause. for plain it is that the Prophet Ieremi^ in that place has no respect
to gods eternal Election. he disputes not why God has appointed in his
eternal counsel ^om to lief, and some to death, but reteineth him self within
the limits and bounds of the matter, The p^^ce of ^^^ren^^.
which the^ he entreated. Which was to assure the Jews that God would eie^^
them from that same land, which to Abraham he had promised and had given to his
posterity, and yet would he preserve the^ to be a people such as he thought
good. This doctrine was strange, and to many incredible. for it appears to
repugne to gods promise, who had pronounced that to Abraham, and his sede he
would give yt la^d for ever. Much trooble ad co^tradiction (as may be seen) did
ye Prophet suffer for the teaching and affirming this former doctrine. And
therefore it pleased the mercy and wisdom of God by diverse means to strengthen
and confirm him in the same. Amongst wc this was one, Vt commanding hi^ to go
down to a potters house, he promised to speak with him there. That is, to give
unto hi^ further knowledge and revelation of his will, who when he came, found
the potter as is written making a clay pott upon his rote^ and turning whele.
which Pot in his presence did break, but the Potter immediately gathering up the
Pot sherdes, did fashion and for me it a new, and made it a another vessel,
even as best pleased him: And the^ came the word of ye Lord upon ye Prophet
saing, may I not do unto you o house of Israel, even as this Potter does.
Behold ye are in my hand, o house of Israel^ even ^as the clay ^is in the hand
of the Potter. By which fact seen, and words after heard, was the Prophet more
confirmed in that, which before he had taught. To wit, that God for just
causes would destroy ad break down the estate and policy of that common
welthe, and yet nevertheless would repair and build it up again to such an
estate, as best pleased his wisdom, as the sequel did declare, for that great
multitude corrupt with sin, he hrak down dispersing and scattering them
amongst diverse nations, and yet after he did collect, and gather them
together, and so made them a people of whom, the head of all justice, Christ
Jesus did spring.

But what has this to do with the eternal election of God by the which he
has elected some to lief everlasting, To prove this may be adduced the 31.
Chap. of Jeremy.
whom our Apostle calls vessels of mercy, and has left others in their own
corruption and perpetual condemnation. And so I say because that Jeremy
entreats one thing, that is a temporal punishment and the mutatio^ which
shortly should follow in Jerusalem, and the Apostle intreath an other as before
is said, the one can be no exposition to the other. but rather the Apostle has
respect, or at least alludeth to the saing of Isaiah, which thus speaks: Woe
to be to him that strives with his maker, the vessel of clay with the Potter
of clay, Isaiah. 45
Shall the clay say to his potter: what make thou: In which words (as before
we have more largely spoken) the Prophet, and the Apostle following his phrase,
represseth the pride of man, who compared to God is much more inferior to his
majesty, the^ clay compared to the Potter. For God has created and made man
when he was not, which thing the Potter did not to the clay, of which he makes
the diversity of pottes. and therefore of right has God more power over man,
then has the potter over clay. This I doubt not to be the mind of the holy
Ghost, in both the places. In which similitude, is further to be considered,
that as the Potter does no injury to the clay, what form soever he gives it
(for the matter and substance of it, God doeth^ Wrong to none of his creatures,
how soever he makes them.
he does not change) so does not God wrong to the verey reprobate, whom he
prepares to be vessels of wrath. for that are they of nature. Where that ye
say, that it is not the meaning of this place, that God without all just causes
does make any man to destruction: none of us does hold the contrary for we
affirm that the causes of reprobation are most just, but yet we say, that they
are incomprehensible to man.

That ye give to God no greater power nor none other

The chief end of man's creation, Answer.
we have before declared to be the glory of God, which if you can not se sh^ne
in the just condemnation of the reprobate, accuse your bli^dnes. That God
created the reprobate, to the day of destruction, Solomon affirms, as often
before is said. But that he was created, to be good, that will not the words
of the Prophet, Another place of Jeremy explained.
wc ye adduce prove. for in yt place, there is no me^tio^ made of creation but
of pla^tatio^, wc is a th^g far different from creation. The substance wc was
before is planted, yt by manuring, and trauale of the pla^ter, it may be
better, but creation imports the being of the substance, wc before was not.
And so the Prophet in this place, wc ye allege to prove that God created all
men to be good, means no such thing, but only rebukes the Israelites, who
long after their creation were planted by the hand of God and were co^tinualy
watered by his Prophets, and yet did they bring forth no better fruit. How
that God would all me^ were good, and also that al me should be saved, we shall
God willi^g after speak. How that God remaining good for ever, ma his creature
fell from his original goodness, I have before spoken, and therefore will not now
trooble the reader with What S. Paul means by vessels of honor and dishonor.
The one he fears not to affirm to be prepared and ordained to destruction,
yt the severe judgment of God against sin may appear in the^: the other to
be prepared to glory, yt the riches of his mercy may be praised for ever.
This plain simplicity will not the Apostle reca^t, neither yet thereof (God
assisting us) will we be ashamed, how so ever ye raige and blaspheme the
verity. And this I say that your difference betwext honest and dishonest
vessels, and betwext those that shall be broken, and not be broken, is altogether
besides the purpose of the Apostle. And so of Conyas son of loaci^ ye ca^ prove
no more but yt God would deprive hi^ from his kingdom, and from yt seat of
David, in wc unworthily he did reign. If he was the reprobate, the^ although
he was king, yet was he the vessel of dishonor for these words, although he
were ye signet in my right hand, are not spoken to declare yt in verey deed he
was the signet in the hand of God, but are spoken against the foolish
presu^ptio^ of hi^, and of the Jews, wc liuig most wickedly, did yet
nevertheless brag, and boast that God could not leave the seat of David void:
but yt one of his sede must for ever sit on it. And this is evident, if the
text be well marked. for where he says although he were the signet, he
sufficietly declares, yt so he was not, and so I say yt those words prove
nothing of yor purpose. for first must ye prove yt because he was a king,
therefore he was a vessel of honor, in such sense, as S. Paul speaks. And
seco^darely, ye must

How that God will not the death of the sinner, but rather that he may convert
and live, we shall shortly God wili^g after speak. And therefore omitting that
which indigestly you heap together, I proceed to that which follows.

THE ADVERSARY.
Where ye reply with that it lies not in man's will or ronning, The 22 section.
but in the mercy of God, I answer, by the same sentence yt we may both will
and ro^ne, which is contrary to your hole purpose and doctrine, Romans 11.
for there we must under stand that when it pleased God to offer us his mercy,
yet without we God continue you i^ this confession.
as the only sufficient, and the efficient cause thereof, whereby we being
unworthy and his ennemies, be reconciled and received unto the feloship of the
saints. Secondly is required that we both will and run not as the cause, but
rather as the effect an^ fruit of our reconcilia^ion, declaring our selves to
be thankful for the benefits which we have freely without our merits received,
otherwies the kingdom shall be taken from us again, and given to such as shall
both will and run, bringing forth the fruts thereof.

ANSWER.
Your ancient father Pelagius, coniured ennemie to the fre grace of God, did
brag and boast, as you do, that in man there was a will, and a ronning. But
the probation of both is one, that is to say, your affirmation must suffice
for authority. You boldly write, that of those words of the Apostle, neither
it is of him that wills, neith^r yet of him that ronneth, but of God having
mercy, it is plain that we both will and run. But how is this proved? your
long discourse (in which it seems that ye have forgotten your self) proves no
part of your purpose. for the question is not, what either the Jew, or ye
ge^till does (Imea^) after they have received the grace of God. For the^ we
confess that they have (yet not of the^ selves) a will and study to walk in
godliness: but the question is whether this will and study which now by grace,
they have received was any cause of their election: the contrary whereof we
have before proved. To the. 2.
We do not imagine the faithful me^bres of Christ's body to be stocks or
stones insensible without will or study of godliness* but we affirm that it is
God that works in us the good will, and the good thought. for of our selves we
are not sufficient to think one good thought. We further affirm, To the. 3*
that except with all humility, the fre grace offered with thanks giving be
received, that they serve nothing to the salvation of the co^temners. But
therewith we add, that it is God only, who takes away the stony and
stubborn heart, Ezec. 11. 4
and gives to us a fleshie heart. In which he by the power of his holy Spirit
writes his law, makes us to walk in his ways, draws us to his Son Christ
Jesus, gives us into his protection. I mean as faith assures us in our
conscience and so we acknowledge God alone by Christ Jesus his son to be the
beginning, To the 5.
the mids, and the end of our sanctification, godly lief, and salvation. I
for my part do yet again praise God that his verity is of that strength, that
somtymes it will compel the very ennemies, to bear testimony to it. And I
pray God to retein you in that mind, that vnfeanedly, you may believe and
co^fes, that what virtues or good motions that ever be in you, be the only
effects or fruits as ye call them of your reconciliation, and neither cause of
your election, nor yet of your justification.

That Jerusalem and the scribes refused grace, and therefore justly were
condemned, we consent with you. but that ever it was the eternal counsel and
will of God to give them life everlasting, that we constantly deny. Our reasons
we have before alleged, and after will have occasion to repete some again. And
therefore we proceed. Thus ye write.

THE ADVERSARY.
Here with great vehemency ye allege these words of Paul, The 23* section.
who has been able to resist his will, of which saying, ye infer words did
Paul write because he did foresee, that of his former sainges some deuelish
disposed persons would take occasion to will of God, and be saved, and so should
there be no reprobate. But when for our disobedience, we be punished, the will
of God is fulfilled, which will is both good and just, and therefore oght no man
to accuse it and say who is able to resist his will. No more the^ clay, when it
framed not to be a good vessel, does accuse the potter of breaking it.

ANSWER.
Ye be not able to prove, that in any vehemency we of our faith do we ground
our doctrine, and not upon that one place, spoken in the rebuke of the stubborn
and rebellious disputers with God. ye burden us that we

Here after I will not greatly labor to confute thy arguments which is a
thing most easy even to any godly man, Answer.
how beit he had never seen art nor studied the same. But seeing that thou and
thy most pestilent sect, be not content maliciously to sclander those that in
such a case be most innocent, but that also with most impudent mowthes ye
vomit forth your horrible blasphemies against gods majesty, I will most
earnestly and most vnfeanedlie require of all reulers, Princes, Magistrates,
and governors who in the fear of God do ruele, above their subjects, that as
they will answer in the presence of the Lord Jesus, for the administration of
justice committed to their charge, that indifferently they judge betwext you
and us. To wit that if we can evidently be co^uicted, of those crimes which ye
most maliciously, and most unjustly lay to our charge, that then judgment
without mercy be executed against us. But and if ye fail in your probation,
and also if ye can not prove cruelty to be in gods works, supposing that our
doctrine remain (as that it is) true and stable, that then such order may be
taken, for repressing of your vennemous tongues, that neither ye be permitted
thus openly to blaspheme gods Majesty, neither thus maliciously to sclander
innocents, and to offend ye ears of all godly hearers. And to the end that
me^ shall not think, that being at this time accused, we begin to devise new
defenses or excuses of our selves, I will faithfully and simply bring forth of
the works (as some what I have done before) of that singular instrument of
Christ Jesus in the glone of his Gospel, John Calvin such sentences as shall
make plain to all men, what our opinion is of God, of the fall of man, of the
wo^derous work of our redemption, and of the most just reiection and damnation
of the reprobat.

Thus says he, depends the perdition of the reprobate, Libr. de aeterna Dei
praede stinatione
upon the predestination of God, that the cause and the matter is altogether
found in them, the first man fell, because the eternal judged it expedient,
why he judged it, we know not, yet certain it is that he so judged it not, but
that he saw the glory of his name thereby, to be illustrate. when that thou
do hear the mention of gods glory, there also remember thou justice to be:
for of necessity it is, that just must yt be, which deserves praise. Man
therefore falls (gods providence so ordeining) but yet he falls by his own
fault. for God of short time before had pronounced that all, which he had made
were verey good. from, whence the^ came such wickedness to man, yt he so
traterously declyned from his God? Lest that it might have been, through that,
that it proceeded from the creation, God approved by his own commendation, wha^
so ever he had made. Therefore did man corrupt by his own malice, that pure and
clean nature, which from God he had received. and by his fall he drew his hole
posterity to perdition. Therefore let us rather behold the evident cause of
damnation in the corrupt nature of mankind: then that we shall pretend to
search it being his and utterly incomprehe^sible in the predestination of God.
neither yet let us be ashamed, so far to subject the capacity of our
understanding to the incomprehensible wisdom of God, that in many of his
mysteries we acknowledge and confess our selves to be ignorant. for learned
and blessed is the ignorante of those things, which to understand and know is
neither lawful neither yet possible in this life. The apperance of knowledge
in such things, is a kind of madness. These be the words of this most godly
writer. from whose judgment none of us does dissent in this matter. For from
him we must confess, except that we would in concealing the truth declare our
selves to be unthankful, that we all have received comfort, light and
erudition, as from gods good instrument. who yet thus further proceeds There
be three things (saeth he) in this matter to be considered, first that the
eternal predestination of God by the which he had decreed what should become of
all ma^kynd, (yea and of every man) even before that Adam fell, was sure and
appointed: Secondly, that Adame for his defection was justly adjudged to death,
and last that in the person of him that then was lost, was damned his hole
posterity. and yet nevertheless God did freely choose of the same such as upon
whom it pleased him to bestow the ^onor of adoption, and yet after in the same
place he says when we speak of predestination, I have constantly taught and
this day do teach, that from thence we oght to begin, that justly are all
reprobat left in death, who were dead and damned in Adame, that justly they
perish who by nature are the sons of wrath. And therefore that none has
cause to complein of gods rigorous severity, seeing that all do bear the cause
of damnation within them selves. for if we shall com to the first man we shall
find that willingly he fell, and so by his one faule, he brought perdition to
all his posterity. And albeit that Adam fell not, but that God both knew and
ordained the same, yet serves that nothing, nether to extenuat and excuse his
crime, nether yet to wrap God in society of the same: for alwaes must we look
to this, that he spoiled him self of the righteousness which he received from
God, that willingly he made him self servant to sin and to satan, that
without compulsion he cast him self headlong in to destruction and death. yet
rests one excuse, to wit that he could not avoid nor fly that which was
decreed by God: but his voluntary transgression is sufficient to his
condemnation, nether yet is the secret counselle of God the proper and
natural cause of sin, but the fre and plain will of man. And there for
seeing that man finds in him self the cause of his misery, what shall it
profitt him to seek it in the heaven. And after albeit that men by long
compassing about, purpose to delude them selves, yet can they never make them
selves so brutishe and dull but they shall feel the sense of sin graven in
their hearts. Therefore in vain is it, that ungodliness goes about to absolve
man, whom his own conscience damneth. In so far as God willing and knowing
permitted man to fall, the* cause may be secret and hid, but unjust it can not
be. And yet he further writes, this says he is to be holden without all
controversy, that sin was ever hateful to God, for most rightely does this
commendation, wherewith of David he is commended aggre to him: that he is a God
that would not iniquity, but rather in ordeining the fall of man, his e^d and
purpose was good and most right, The purpose of god in man's fall.
from the which the name of sin abhors. howbeit I say that so he has
ordained the fall of man that I utterly deny him to be the author of sin.
Let the indifferent reader judge with equity: if justly we be accused of that
blasphemy, which so openly we abhor. but yet in the same book he bringeh
forth a testimony of Augustine who thus writes, These be the great works of
God (says Augustine) brought to pass in all his wills, Enchi. ad Lauren.
cap. 1
and so wisely brought to pass that whill the nature of Angel and man had
sinned, that is, had done not that which he that is God would, but that which
the self (meaning the creature) would: yet not the les by the same will of the
creature, by the which that was done, which the creator would not, did he
fulfill that which he would, he being infinitely good, using well those things
that were evil, to the damnation of them, whom he justly had appointed to
pain, and to the salvation of those whom mercifully he had predestinate to
grace. In so far as to them perteined they did the thing which God wo^d not:
but as apperteining to gods omnipotency they might by no means have done
that, for even in that, that they did against the will of God, the will of God
was done in them, and therefore great are the works of the Lord (brought to
pass in all his wills) that by a wo^derous and unspeakable manner, that thing
should not be done without his will, that yet is don against his will. for it
should not be done if he did not suffer it. And of a truth he suffered it not
vnwilingly, but willingly. And a litil before saint Augustine says, it is not
to be doubted, but that God does well, permitting those things to be done
which are evil. for he suffered not this, but in his just judgment. Albeit
therefore that these things which be evil in so far as they are evil, are not
good, yet nevertheless it is good, that not only good things, but also that
evil things be. for if that this were not good that evil things should be,
by no means should they be permited to be by the omnipote^t good, to whom no
doubt, it is a like easy not to suffer the thing which he will not to be, as
to do that thing which he will: except we believe this, the beginning of our
faith is endangered, by the which we profess our selves to believe in God the
father almighti^ etc.

And in the end to answer to these calumnies which ye have taken forth of
Pighius that papist, John Calvin concludes, if ever I had said that it came to
pass by the instruction or motion of the spirit of God, that the first man did
alienat him self from God, and not that rather I have in all places defended,
that man was pricked thereto by instigation of the devil and by the motion of
his own heart, the^ meritably might Pighius and his co^plices have railed
against me. But seeing that I removing from God the verey cause of the actio^,
do also remove from him all crime, so that man only is subject as well to the
crime as to the punishment: wickedly and maliciously is this laid to my charge
that I should say that man's defection and fall is one of gods works. But yet
lest yt one thing should appear to lack of our full doctrine, I will recite
his words, which he writes against the libertines in the 14 chapter of that
work, we do not deny (says he) but that all things are done by the will of
God. In so much that when we declare wherefor he is called omnipotent, we give
to him an effectual power in all his creatures, and we teach that as once he
created the universal world, so also that he governs the same. And that his
hand is always at the work, that he might keep all things in their estate,
and dispose them after his will. And to the end that I may expre^^e the same
more easily, I say, that God is to be considered three manner of ways to work in
the administration or his creature. Three manner ways does God work in his
creatures.
first there is an universal operation by the which he directs all creatures
according to the condition and propriety which he gave to every one, when he
formed them and this government is nothing else but that which we call the
order of nature. for albeit the unfaithful know nothing in the disposition of
the world, but that which they se with their eyes. And therefore they make
nature as she were a goddess to have impire and dominion over all: yet is this
praise to be given to the will of God^ that it only does moderat and govern
all things. Wherefor when we se the son, the moon, and the sterres fulfill
their course, Let us understand that they obey God, that they execu^e his
commandment, yea and that they are guided by the hand of God. And also when we
se the course of earthly things, all things are to be ascribed to God. The
creatures are to be esteemed but as instruments in his hand which he applies to
the work, even as pleases him. The scripture does often make mention of this
universal providence, that we may learn in all his works to give glory unto
God. But chiefly in us does God comme^d this his power, that we shall know it
in our selves, to the end that we may be purged of arrogancy, which sodanly
uses to arise in us, how son we forgett our selves to be in his hands.
Hereunto apperteineth that, which Paul said to those of Athenes: It is he in
whom we live, are moved, and have our being. By the which he would admonish us,
that except God up hold us by his hand that unable it is for us to stand the
least moment of time. for even as the soul dispersing her stre^gthe through
the hole body, moves the me^bres, so are we qwickened of God, form whom
only we obtein what so ever strength or power we have. But this universal
operation of God impedeth not, but that every ^reature in heaven and in earth
retein their own nature and quality, and also do follow their own inclination.
The second manner by the which God works in his creatures is that he
appoints them in obedience of his goodness, justice, and judgment, somtymes
to help his servants somtymes to punish the wicked, and sometimes to examine
the patience of his servants, or to correct

Thus let us then conclude that prosperity and adversity, rayn, wyndes, hale,
frost, fare wether, abundance, hunger, war, or peace, to be the works of
God, and that the creatures which be the inferior causes, are only
instruments which he has in redines to execute his will, which he so uses at
his pleasure, that he leads and moves them to bring to pass what so ever he
has appointed. Moreover it is to be noted that not only he thus uses his
insensible creatures, that by them he works his will, but also men them
selves, yea and also deuilles, insomuch that satan and wicked men are
executers of gods will: as he used the Egyp^ians, to punish his people, and a
little after, he raised up the Assyrians and other such to revenge the sins of
his people we se that he used the devil in tormenting Saul, and in deceauing
Achab. which things when the libertines doheare, rashely and without judgment
beholding no further they conclude, That now the creatures do no more work, and
so horribly do they confound all things nether do they only mingle and mixed
the heavens with the earth, but also they ioyn God with the devil. and that
chances unto them because they do not observe two most necessary exceptions.
The former is that Satan and the wicked are not so the instruments of God,
but that they also do their own parts. Nether must we imagine that God so
works by wicked men, as by a stock or a stone, but as by a creature
participant of reason, etc. When we say the^ that God works by creatures,
this impedeth not but that the wicked work also upon their part. which thing
the scripture most evidently declares, for as it pronounces that God will
whissill, and blow as it were the trumpet to call and bring forth to battle
the unfaithful, so cease it not to make me^tio^ of their own counsel, and
ascribes to the^ both a will and a work, which they did execute under the
decre of God. The other exception of the which these unhappy libertines take
no head, is, that there is a great difference betwext thework of God, and
thework of the wicked when that God uses him instead of a^ instrument. The
wicked man is provoked to iniquity either by avarice, a^bitio^, envy, or
cruelty nether yet looks he to any other end or purpose, and therefore the
work takes the quality from the root, from the which it springs, that is
from the wicked affection of the mind, and the mischeuous end which he looks
unto: and therefore justly is it judged evil. but God altogether has a
contrary respect: to wit, that he may exercise his justice, to the
conservation of the good to use his favor and gentilnes toward the faithful,
and that he may punish such as have deserved. Consider how we must make
difference betwext God and man, that upon the one part we shall behold his
justice, his goodness, and his judgments: and upon the other part we shall
consider in the self same work the malice and envy of the devil and of the
wicked. Let us take a bright and clear glass in the which we may behold these
things. When the message of the loss of all his goods came to Job, An
example taken by Job.
the sodan death of his sons, and so many calamities, which all at once fell
upon him. He does acknowledge that he was visited by God saing: The Lord gave
all these things, and it is he that has taken them away, and no doubt so it
was. But in the mean time, do we not know, that the devil procured all these
things? and did not he understand by narration of his servants that escaped,
that the chaldeis had driven away his bestiall and flocks? Did he comme^d
those brigandes and spoilers? or oght we to excuse the devil? because that all
these calamities proceeded from God. Not so, for both we and he do, and did
understand that there was a great difference betwext their purposes: And
therefore he (yet damning the evil) said the Name of the Lord be blessed. The
same may we say of David: but at this time it suffices, that God so works by
his creatures, and so does use them to his providence, that the instrument, by
the which he works, cease not to be evil. And albeit that he convert the
malice of the devil and of wicked men to good, yet they therefore are neither
excusable, neither yet clean from sin: and their works are wicked, and to be
damned. for all works take their quality of the purpose and the will of the
author. Who so ever makes no distinction betwext these things, makes an
horrible confusion. And such be the libertines, who as before is said, do not
only ioyn the devil, in society with God, but also, do transform him in to
God: iudgeing his works worthy of praise, under this coulor, that he does
nothing, but that which is appointed by God: But contrary wies we oght to
observe, that the creatures do wo^k their own works in this earth: which
works according as they were directed to this or that end, so are they to be
judged either good or evil: and yet God governs and does moderat all
things, and guides them also to a right end. He turns the evil into good:
or at least God working by the goodness of his nature, draws as it were by
violence some good, forth of that which in the self is evil. So does he use
the devil that he does not mix him self with him, neither to be in felowshipe
with him, neither yet with his wicked fact, neither that his justice shall put
away the nature of the devil. for as the son sending forth his beams, A
similitude of the son.
and heat to the carrion, and so ingendreth in it some corruption, draws to it
self neither corruption neither yet any filthiness: neither yet does the son by
his puretie and birghtnes, so purge the cario^, but that it remains stinking
and corrupt: so does God so work by the wicked, that the justice, which is in
hi^ does not justify the^, neither yet is he defiled by their wickedness and
corruption. The third kind of gods operation consists in the gouerna^ce of
the faithful, in whom he lives 20 Cor. 3* Philip. 2
nor sufficien^ to conceive one good thought (as Paul does witness) but if we be
able to an^ thing of necessity that must proceed from God. It is he therefore
that works in us both to will and to perform: he does illuminate us, and
lead us to the knowledge of him self, he draws us to him self, and by
softening our hearts, he forms new hearts in us. further it is he who
moves in us a desire of prayi^g, he gives power and strength to resist all
the tentations of satan, and makes that we do walk in his commandments. But
yet we must consider, that of nature, we have both will, and election: but
because they are both depraved, by sin, the Lord reformeth the^, and of evil
makes them good. That we therefore be apt to discern, that we have a will,
that we do this or that, this is a natural gift: but that we can chouse,
desire, or do nothing but that which is evil, that comes of the corruption of
sin: that we thirst to do good, that we have some power to execute the same,
this proceeds from the supernatural grace, by the which we are regenerat,
Except we be regenerat by supernatural grace we ca^ neither think will, nor do
any thing that good is.
and newly born to a better and more godly life. Behold then what God works
in his children: first putting away their perverse nature, he co^ducteth and
guy death the^ by his holy spirit, in obedience of his will. But these dronken
or rather furious libertines crying, that al things are wroght by God, do make
him author of evil. And further even as the nature of the evil were changed,
when it is cloked under the couerture of gods name, they affirm it to be good.
in the which they do greater injury, and co^tume lie unto God, The libertines.
then that they should transfer his power and justice to an other. For sei^g
there is nothing more proper unto God, the^ is his goodness: it behooves first
y^ he should utterly deny him self, before that he can work evil: which
thing, these blind libertines attribute unto him. And assuredly the God of
these men is an Idol, which oght to be more execrable, then all the idols of
the Gentiles. And so forth to the end of that chapter he proves that God
commits no sin in none of the wicked of the earth etc. Thus far have I
recited the mind and most part of the words of that godly writer, written by
him now twelve years ago, against the libertines. By the which the indifferent
reader may judge whether that justly you accuse him and us, that we make God
author of sin. In the name of God, and of his dear Son Christ Jesus (whose
glory ye study utterly to suppress) I require as before of all those that be
placed in authority by his word, An earnest request that the magistrate wol
de try the accusation of the adversary.
whose hands he has armed with the sword of justice, that earnestly as they
will answer before his fearful throne of judgment, they take trial in this
matter, that if we be found either in life, either yet in doctrine, as we be
accused, that God may be glorified in our just punishments: but if we can not
be co^uicted (as we fear neither trial nor judgment) that then our accusers
may acknowledge their offense.

The second thing which is laid to our charge, The second accusation.
is that we cause many other to breast out and say. Sith his will and pleasure
no man is able to resist, let him lay it on him self and not upon us, if any
sin be committed.

If the blasphemies of the ungodly should be laid to our charge, Answer (...)
the 2. acc^sation.
because that we teach a doctrine most true, and most comfortable to the children
of God: then can not the Apostle saint Paul be excused, for the same
blasphemies were vomited first against him, What h^rrible bl^sphemies were also
vomited against S. Paul's doctrine.
and the doctrine which he taught: Some crying, let us do evil, that good may
com of it: others, let us abide in sin, that grace may abound: and so^
furiously roaring (as ye do) did dispitefully cry, wherefor does he co^plean,
who ca^ resist his will? But was the doctrine therefore damnable? or was the
Apostle criminal, for teaching the same? I suppose ye will be more favorable in
this cause, then so rashly to condemn him, whom God has absolved. If then our
doctrine can not be impugned by the plain scriptures of God, why should we
sustein the blame of other men's blasphemies? Howbeit in very deed the
blasphemies of none come so plainly to our ears, How impudent bla^ph^mers the
adue^saries be*
as yours do* for the verey Papists, and the insolent of the world are yet
ashamed, so impudentlie to lie upon us. Who although they will not follow the
puretie of the doctrine taught by us, yet either are they put to silence, by
the power of ^he holy Spirit, orels they in^ent some coulorable lies, and do
abstein from such open blasphemies, as you cast out against God, and us.

We lay to your charge (say you) none other thing then ye your selves do
conf^sse, The reply of the Adversary
for ye affirm that God works all things according to his will and pleasure.

We answer that maliciously and deuilishly ye wrest our words contrary to our
mind. Answer to the reply of the adversary.
for always we make a most plain difference betwext the will of God, and the
will of the wicked, and betwext the purpose counsel and end of God and betwext
the purpose and end of man. as in all this hole process before entreated the
indifferent reader may well consider.

If ye continue in your blyndnes and furiously cry: But ye af^irme that without
his will and against it, nothing is done, therefore that men think, that even
when they sin, they obey gods will. I answer by the words of the same writer
who^ before I have alleged: Touching the works which we committ, the will of
God is to be considered, as he him self has declared it: for in vain has he
not given his law, by the which he has discerned good from evil. As for
exemple when he commands no man to be hurt, no man to be iniuried, but that
equity and justice be indifferently kept to all, that no man steal, defraude
his brother, that none committ adultery, fornication or filthynes, but that
every man keep his own vessel in sanctification and honor. Here is the will
of God evident and plain. What further pleases him, in these cases oght no
man to inquire. for we know, that if we do these, and other things that be
commanded, and do abstein from all things that be forbidden, Above that which
we are commanded by God we oght not to inquire.
that then we obey the will of God. And if we do not that, we can not be
acceptable to him. If that any man shall steall, or committ adultery, and
shall say that he has done nothing against the will of God, he lies most
impude^tly. for in so far as he has transgressed the commandment of God, by
the which he was taught what was gods will, he has done against his will. Let
all men now judge, if that we give occasion to man, to flatter him self in
sin, and to think, that when they commit iniquity against the express
commandment of God, that then they obey his holy will. If any demand, whether
that any thing can be done against gods will: that is, if God may not, if he
would stay and impede the sin of man: before I have answered by the mowth of
Augustine, and now again by John Calvin that nothing is, nor can be done,
which he may not impede, if so it please his wisdom, yea utterly we must
eschew, that we inquire not of his providence, When the question is of our
duty no man may be inquisitiue of gods secret providence.
which is hid from us, when that the question is of our duty. His word
declares unto us what he approves, and what he condemns, with that we oght
to stand content, and by the same, oght we to reule our lives, leaving the
secrets to God, as by Moises we are taught. To make the matter more plain, the
case supposed, that I be tempted with concupiscence, and lust a another man's
wife, in the which I long strive, and in the end* fathan obiecteth to me this
cogitation, follow thy purpose, for by that means, thou maest perchance be
further humbled, and after thou maest taste more abundantly the mercy, and
the grace of God. Should I therefore louse the bridle to my wicked affections?
should I declyn from the plain precept, and enter into the secret providence
of God? God forbid. for that besides the violating, or breaking of his
commandment were horrible temptation of his godly majesty, and so in one
fact, were committed dooble impiety. The sins I know of gods derest children
are grievous* and many, and wondrous is the providence of God, working in his
saints, but never, or seldom it is, that such perilouse cogitations preuale
against them: for the spirit of God so rewleth in them, tha^ commonly this
sentence of Salomo^ is before their eyes: such as irreverently search out gods
Majesty, sha^be oppressed by the glory of the same. And so must it needs com
to pass, as John Calvin affirms, that the pride of such must be punis^ed,
and that with an horrible punishment, the pride of those I say, shall
punished, who not content with the will of God reveled (to the which they will
not be obedien^) delight to mount and fly above the skies, there to seek the
secret will of God. With what faces can ye now lay to our charges, that we
give occasion to men to flatter them selves in sin, or yet to think that in
committing iniquity, they obey gods will? Ye allege perchance that the common
people read not our writings, and therefore they can not understand our
judgment in this case. I answer, the more impudent and blasphemous are you,
who so defame us in the ears of the unlearned multitude, that to them ye make
both us and our doctrine odious, before that ever it be known or examined. But
yet for further discharge of our selves against your most unjust accusations,
and for the better instruction of the simple, I will adduce an other testimony
from the writing of the same faithful servant of Christ Jesus, John Calvin,
and so put end to this your second calumny. In his commentary upon the acts
of the Apostles the 2. chap. writing upon these words of Peter, affirming that
by the determinat counsel and prescience o^ God, was Jesus betrayed and
crucified, by the hands of wicked men, because (says he) Peter appears to
mean, that wicked men obeyed God, whereof of two absurdities, one must needs
follow: to wit, that either God is the author of evil, or that men committing
all kind of iniquity do not sin, because they seem to obey God. I a^s^er,
that wicked men do not obey God how so ever it be that they put in execution
those things, which God has with him self appointed. for obedience proceeds
from a voluntary affection, which earnestly thirs^eth to please God, bu^ we
know yt the wicked have a far other purpose. moreover no man obeieth God, but
such as has his will known. Obedience then depends upon the knowledge of
gods will. And so as the will of God is reveled in his law, so likewise it is
evident, that who so ever transgresses against his will reveled, has his
conscience to witness against him, that neither he does the will of God.
neither yet that he obeys him. To the second ^e says, I constantly deny
that God is author of eui^l: for in this word evil there is the notation and
proprie^ie of a wicked affection, which never falls nor can fall in God. The
evil work oght to be judged by the purpose and e^d, to the which every man
te^deth in his actio^. When men committ theft, or murder, therefore they
sin, because they are thieves and murderers. In the theft and murder, there
is wicked counsel, which never tends to please God, but to saciate their
inordinate appetites. But God who uses their malice, is to be placed in glory
above them. for he looks to an other end: for the one he will punish, and the
patience of the other he will exercise. And so he never declineth, nor boweth
from his own nature, yt is from a most perfect righteousness. So that Christ
was betrayed and crucified, by ye hands of ye wicked, it was done by ye
ordinance of God. But the treason and the slaughter, wc by them selves were
most odious and wicked, oght not to be judged nor accounted the work of God.
Let men whose minds, the devil has not inflambed in hatred and malice against
God, against his simple truth, and against the professors of the same, now
judge whether that we affirm God to be author of sin, or if we give any just
occasion that man should glory in wickedness, either yet that they shall burden
God with the same. And I appele to thy own conscience (thou unthankful unto men
and open traitor to the verity, which once thou professed) whether that thou
oftener then once have heard with thine ears, and that in open audience of
many: That if any should take boldness to sin in hope of mercy, that the
cup, which they should drink, should be most bitter.

Now to that which ye affirm, The affirmation of Anabaptists.
and we most consta^tly deny. You affirm that if our sayings be true, that
then are the works of God, full of cruelty, misery, damnation and
destruction.

As before I have noted somewhat, Answer.
which maliciously ye sclander us, so will I plainly and simply in short and
seuera^l propositions, set forth the some of that doctrine, which we teach and
profess, and that you so blasphemously oppugn, to the end, that Ruelers and
godly magistrates, and you your selves also may clearly se, what we believe and
affirm. which being considred and compared with gods scriptures, if your
affirmation be found true, then refuse we not punishment worthy for
blasphemers. But if ye of malice against gods truth spewing forth the
corruption of your stinking stomockes infected with pride, and with contempt of
grace, have affirmed that, which ye be not able to prove: our earnest request
is, as before that your vennom may be repre^sed betymes.

These propositio^s following have I translated forth of the work writ by
that learned and godly man Theodorus Besa. Theodore Eeza is propositio^s
against Castalio.
against the calu^nies of your capteyn Castalio.

The first proposition, God effectually works and brings to pass all
things, according to the counsel of his own will.





This counsel is not put in moderation and in direction



affirm. And if we shall say that any thing is done, which God may notimpede,
the shall he be spo^^ed of his infinite powere. So that the co^clusio^ is
sithec^ that God

That none of these blaspemies necessarely may

God put^eth in execution the counselles of his

Of those instruments there are two principal kinds.

Those that be without lief, and those also that

Those that have lief endued with reason are

Such as in any action are moved by their own inward motion, justly may be said
to work, and therefore in that kind of instruments falls the difference of
good and of evil works, nether yet properly, in that respect may they be
called instruments, but the causes efficie^t.











who is infinitlie good, no evil thing can proceed: but he works a^l things,
therefore all things be good, inso far as they are done by God. And that
difference of good and evil has only place in the instruments, and in those
of whom we have spoken in the 14. proposition.

For if those instruments be good, and if their actions

Evil instruments (evil I say) not by creation but by

And so he works by those instruments that not only

For when the wicked man sins, either against him self

How often that evil men hurt good men, the wicked me^

Yet can it not be said, that those evil instruments work by them, yet they
so far as in them lies, and as concerning their own counsel and will, do not
the work of God, but their own work: for the which meritably they are punished.
Albeit what so ever God works by the wicked is good, yet what so ever the
wicked men work is euel.







Thus have you briefly the some of our doctrine in this matter, which if ye be
able by manifest scriptures, or yet by good arguments from the same deduced,
to improve: the^ ca^ we not refuse to make satisfaction, as the Church of
Christ Jesus shall require of us. But if that unjustly ye have accused us, and
have further imputed cruelty upon God, by reason that his judgments most
just in them selves, are to your senses incomprehe^sible, the^ can we not of
conscience cease to require of you a greater modesty, and also of the lawful
Magistrate an order to be taken that your malice and vennon may be repressed:
assuring them, that if by times your interprises be not impeded that they shall
shortly feel what confusion, ye have of long fostered in your breasts. your
poison is more pestilent, the^ that of the papistrie was in the beginning. God
for his mercies saik preserve his Church, and purge your hearts to his glory.

Towching the secret will of God, Answer to the. 7. and 8.
which so often ye lay to our charge we shall after speak, as also how God will
that all repent, and that all be saved. Before I have declared that this
difference must we make betwext God and man, be he never so pote^t, that God
has such power over his creatures, that he reuleth them at his pleasure: and
is not a simple law giver, which only can devise good laws and give
commandment, that they may be kept, but can not, though he would, frame the
hearts of his subjects to obedience. Such imperfection (I say) can we not
admit in our God, who does and has done what so ever he will in heaven and in
earth. Psalm. 135
And so your similitude of the king comma^ding, and of the poorest sclaue
offending, halteth and is imperfect. for God has greater power over all
creatures, yea even over the king him self, the^ the king has over his sclaue.
for the sclaue, when he has offended, by some means he may escaip the kings
hands, and so the punisheme^t of his laws: But so can not the king, the
hands of God. Consider the inequality betwext God and man, I say, and then I
trust your judgment shall either be reformed, or else ye co^streined to devise
more solid reasons.

I have not learned in the scriptures to call the corruption of our nature, by
the which we rebel against gods commandment power, but rather impotentie, and
thraldom. But ceasing to contend or strive for terms, I wonder, what ye mea^,
by your conditional, which thus ye form: otherwies that is, if we had no power
to offend against gods will we should all observe the will of God, and be
saved: and so do you conclude, there should be no reprobation, I will not
commonly scoff at you (as your foolishnes deserves) but here I must say, that
this your reason is no better then if I should affirm that there is no
difference betwext fowls of the air, and the rest of the creatures of the
earth, because that if all creatures had wings, and like agilitie, that then
all creatures should fly as well as the fowls, and so should there in that case
be no difference. Your reason has no greater strength: for it stands only
upon conditionalles whereof ye justly can conclude nothing. Prove if ye can,
that it was, and is the immutable counsel of God that all should be saved and
the^ ye may prove that there shall be none reprobate. But now we follow, as ye
proceed.

THE ADVERSARY.
As for the sentence of Paul: The twenty and four Section.
God willing to show his wrath, to make his power known suffered with long
patience, the vessels of wrath ordained to damnation, etc. it is direct
contrary to your error not withstanding ye abuse it to maintein the same. For
seeing as Paul says, God suffered them with great patience, he is sorry for
them: if he be sorry, the^ has he no pleasure in their destruction: The
seventh argument.
and that wherein he has no pleasure, he wills it not and that wc he wills
not, he does not ordein it. Wherefor seeing God suffered the^ with great
patience to fall, he has not ordained be hanged, this man was born to be
hanged, not with standing it was not his mothers mind to bear him to be
hanged. Such phrases have we verey many in the scriptures, as Exodus 11 Pharao
harkened not unto you that many wonders may be done in the land of Egypt. Exodus
11.
forasmuch as the wonders done in Egypt were grievous to Pharao, he did not
disobey the intent that mo wonders which were plagues should com upon him, None
of these phrasis be like if they bewayed.
but this was the issue of his obstinat inobedienco. Exodus the XIX who so ever
gives his sede unto Moloch, let him be slain, because he has given of his
sede unto Moloch to defyle my Sanctuary and to pollute my holy Name. The
Israelites did not sacrifice their children to Moloch to defyle the lords
sanctuary and to dishonor the Name of God, but to worship Moloch,
notwithstanding that was the issue and end of their sacrifice unto Moloch, that
the Lords sanctuary was defiled and his Name dishonored. Thereby Jeroboam
made the two golden claues whereby he made Israel sin to anger the Lord God of
Israel. The cause why Jeroboam made the two golden claues and his intention was
not to anger God: but he thought that if the people should go up and do
sacrifice in the house of the Lord at Jerusalem there hearts should return to
Roboam king of Judah wherefor he made two golden calves to make the people
sacrifice at Bethel, Osee. 8
whereupon followed the wrath of God. Of their silver and gold have they made
them images to bring themselves to destruction, The Israelites made them images
thinking thereby to be saved and not destroyed: yet their destruction followed
thereof. Jeremy says Omy mother, alas that ever thou did bear me to be
a brawler, Ierem. 13
and a rebuker of the hole land. Ieremies mother did not bear him to that
intent, but yet this was the end. And in the new Testament, if any man hunger,
let him eat at home, that ye com not together to comdemnation: the Corinthians
came not together to the intent to purchesse thereby condemnation, but of their
abuses in coming together followed their condemnation. By these places and
many others, we may understand the phrase of scriptures: That they be ordained
to damnation whose end is condemnation, which they receive not by the will of
God, which would all men to be saved, but as a just reward for their sins. As
the traitor which suffers oght not to impute his death to the sentence which
the judge justly has given against him, but to his own offense and treason, so
when we for our sins be ordained to punishment, we oght not to impute it to
gods fore ordinance which is both good and full of mercy, Ierem. 15. 9
but to our own offenses. And seeing (as S. Paul says, God suffered them with
great patience, their damnation comes not by the counsel and will of God,
for which he is sorry as he says by the prophet Jeremy. I have been sorry
for the so long that I am werie. will ye say that God werieth him self,
suffering and sorowing for them, whom he had reprobated before the world surely
I think that thoghe ye hitherto have unadvisedly said so ye will from hence
furthe say so no more, which God gra^te in time that ye werie not the lord also
with sorowing for you.

ANSWER.
As your cogitatio^s of God be gross and carnal, so be your judgments in
this place of scripture deceuable and most erroneouse. Esteem it no injury,
that I affirm your cogitations of God to be carnal and gross. For I can
evidently prove, that some of you affirm and maintein, that God has eyes, fete,
hands, arms, and finally all proportion of man: that he slepeth and does
again awake, that he forgets and after does remember, that he is mutable,
and does in very deed repent.

If these cogitations of the e^ernall God be not carnal: yea if they be not
wicked, and deuelish, let the godly indifferent reader judge,

In this your long gradation, Answer (...) the (...).
which ye make upon the words of Paul, ye co^clud contradiction to the holy
Ghost, and to the plain words of the Apostle. For the Apostle means and
plainly speaks: that albeit God does long suffer and delay the judgment of
the reprobate yet cease they not to be vesse^les of wrath, as they that are
ordained to perdi^ion. But you conclude the contrary affirming, that he has
not ordained them to fall. And so because you conclude directly against the
holy Ghost, I can not cease to say, that your collectio^ is erroneouse. But to
give an answer more full and large, in examining the parts of your gradatio^,
I will show your error and the cause thereof. first you say: seeing God suffered
them with great patience, he is sorry for them. here I say in your first
foundation lies your error, and the cause thereof is, that altogether ye are
ignorant of gods nature, in whom nether falls such sufferance, Painful
passions fall not in God.
such patience, nor such sorrow, as you grossly imagine. God is omnipotent, and is
compelled to suffer nothing, which he has not appointed in his eternal
counsel, he is a Spirit, and fre from all such passions, as creatures be
subject unto. for in his eternal Godhead, there is nether patience subject to
pain, nether yet sorrow annexed with angwishe and grief. But when such
passions be attributed unto God, it is for the weakness of our understanding,
that the holy Ghost does subject him self in langage, and tongue to our
capacity.

Ye take liberty to your self in diverse other phrases, to explain them as you
please, yea even against the plain scripture. And why will ye not permit,
that such phrases be so understand, as nothing be judged upon gods Majesty,
which does not aggre, with his godly nature? ye do far abuse the mind of the
Apostle: for he does not infer as you foolishly and wickedly do, that because
God did suffer with great patience, therefore he was sorry, but says, he did
suffer the vessels ordained to destruction, that upon the one sort his wrath
and power, and upon the other (that is, upon the elect) the riches of his
glory might be known. This were sufficient to put silence to your folly. But
yet somewhat to instruct the simple, I will some what trauale to make these
words of the Apostle sensible and plane.

He had before concluded: that God would have mercy upon whom he would have
mercy, and whom it pleased him, those did he harden. As this sentence far
surmounted man's capacity, The place of Paul explaned.
so might it engender some doubts, in the hearts of the verey godly. For they
might have reasoned if that God will finally destroy all the reprobate, to what
purpose are they now permitted to triumph, and to trooble the elect of God? In
answering to which doubt, the Apostle assigns three reasons, why God with
great patience, Three causes why God suffers the wicked reprobate.
suffers the vessels of wrath. To wit that his power, his wrath, and the
riches of the glory of his mercy more evidently may appear and be known. For
if God should sodanly from the bellies of their mothers, take away the
reprobat, or if he should in the beginning of their malice so break down their
pride, that they could not proceed against him, nether should his power appear
so great, nether yet his wrath so just and so holy. But when he does suffer
them, as he did Pharao, from one mischief to proceed to an other, often
removing his plagues, and so declaring him self easy to be entreated, even
unto such time, as their malice and raige do carry them, as it were openly to
dispyse God, and his power, when then, I say, in one moment God potently does
over throw the force and strength of his ennemies, Exodus 14 Isaiah. 37 Daniel.
5.
as yt he did of Pharao, Senacherib, Balsasar, and of others. then is his
godly power, and most just wrath more evidently known, then that he should
either have repressed them in the beginning, either yet have taken them away,
before their malice began to budde. For hereby does he not only admonish
others of the certain destruction of all those that continue in cruelty, but
also gives to his Church most singular comfort, letting them se that his
providence, and power watches for them, even when the raige of the ennemie
appears to deuore al. And so do they se what is gods mercy toward them.
Further when the elect aduisedlye do consider what be gods severe judgments
against the inobedient, and do consider how prone and ready they them selves be
of nature to rebellion against God, except they were co^ducted by his spirit,
they com to a more lively feling of gods fre mercy and grace: by the which
only they are exempte from the rank and society of the reprobate. Albeit
that these ends and causes of gods long suffering, of the vessels of wrath,
do not satisfy you, yet I doubt not but gods afflicted children will, and do
take comfort of the same. you thus proceed in your sophistical Sorites. If he
be sorry (say you) then has he no pleasure in their destruction. And that
where in he has no pleasure he wills it not, and that which he wills not,
he does not ordein it. wherefor seeing God suffers them to fall with great
patience, he has not ordained them to fall.

Your foundation being falls, your hole building falls by ye own weight.
Answer.
Before ye proceed any further, ye must prove, yt God did suffer in the
vessels of wrath, that which he nether could nor might remedy, and therefore
that he fell in grief and sorrow, that his power was no greater and his wisdom
no perfiter. Woe be to your blasphemies, for they compel me to write, that
which I gladly would not.

I have before said that God nether has pleasure in destruction, Answer to the
2. and 3.
nether yet that he will the death of the sinner absolutely, yt is having none
other respect, but to their torment and pain only. But albeit pride and malice
will not suffer you to grante, that God has created all things for his own
glory: yet will not he be suppliante unto you, that ye shall suffer him to use
his creatures, at his own good pleasure.

Where upon these words of the Apostle: do thou dispyse the riches of gods
goodness, not knowing that the kyndnes of God leads the to repentance, ye
infer, that the cause why God suffers with long patience is that we should
repent and amend. If you understand that God suffered his elect, even in the
time of their blyndnes, yea and after their horrible falls and offenses with
great lenity and gentleness, to the end that afterward they may repent, I do
aggre with you. for so he did with David, Manasses, Paul, and many others, who
after their conversion did not dispyse gods lenity, but did magnify and
praise the same, as in all their confessions may be red. But if you understand
Paul's words so, that God has none other end in that his long suffering, but
that the reprobate shall repent and amend their wickedness, because the holy
Ghost assigns other causes (as before we have declared) I must prefer his
judgment and sentence to yours. To your vnreuerent bold and furious question,
in which ye a^k to what purpose did God suffer them with long patience, Answer
to the furious question of the adversary.
whom before he knew should never repent nor amend, I can answer none other
wies, then I have done before, except that this I add: that if ye be not
content that gods just wrath and great power shall as well be manifested, both
in this world, and in the life to com, upon the vessels of wrath, as that his
mercy, and the riches of his glory shall be praised and extolled in the
vessels of mercy, that experience (which the common proverb calls
maistres to fools) shall teach you, that it nothing profited the Gyantes, of
whom the poets do speak, to heap up mountane upon mou^tane, of purpose to
besiege Jupiter in the heavens. To use the words of scripture, if be times ye
cease not, so irreverently to question with God, you shall feel for ever, what
torment is prepared, for such as with humility, can not be subject to his
judgments inco^prehe^sible, for if ye shall constrein his Majesty to give
you a reason, which ye may understand and apprehend, what do you else the^ go
about to spoil him of his Godhead?

We stick none other wies to the literal sense of these former words of the
Apostle then the rest of scriptures permit and do teach us. Answer to the. 4.
But how proper be your phrase and common manner of speaking, by the which ye
labor to obscure the plain words of ye Apostle, we briefly shall examine.
Ordained to damnation (say you) after the common manner of speech, does signify
no more, but whose end is damnation. To grant you some what, I would know of you,
who has ordained damnation, to be the e^d of the reprobat: I perceive by your
exemple, that ye dare not say, God: for thus ye say, we use to say of a man,
that is cast to be hanged, this man was born to be hanged, notwithstanding that
was not his mothers mind to bear him to be hanged.

Besides the foolish rudenes of this exemple, I wonder at your madness, that
you can never make difference betwext God and earthly creatures. Dare you say,
that God has no greater power, nor foreknowledge in directing and appointing
his creatures to their ends, then the mother has to direct, forse, and
appoint the end of her child? after that she has born him, she knows not
what shall be his natural inclination: although she instruct and correct him, yet
can she not bow and expel his crooked nature: when he is absent from her
presence, she sees not his conversation. If he be deprehended in theft or
murder: and so cast to be hanged, she can not (although she would) deliver him
from the hands of the judge. But is there any of these imperfections in God?
Consider yet, and let reason at length put silence unto your foolishenes.

Where of the words of Moises, of Hoseas, Jeremy, and Paul, Answer to the 5.
and 6
and of the fact of Jeroboam, ye go about to prove, that phrase in that sense,
wc ye adduce, to be common in scriptures. I, am in dowt whether that first I
shall lament yor blind ignorance, or abhor and detest yot abominable lies,
and horrible prophanatio^ of gods most holy word.

It is impossible ^t ignorance has so blinded you all, yt none of you ca^ se
ye diversity betwext tho semaner of speeches: God has suffered ye vessels
of wrath ordained to destruction, Ezod. 11 Leuit. 18 and 20
and these, Pharao shall not hear you, yt many wonders may be wroght, etc.
Give not of thy sede to be offered to Moloch, etc. I will set my face against
such a^ man, and I will rout him out, from the midest of his people, because
that he has given of his sede to Moloch, that he might defyle my Sanctuary,
and prophain my holy Name. And so forth of all the rest. for only the place
of the Apostle after the english phrase and speech may be rightly translated,
The anabaptists do plainly corrupt ye scriptures of God.
to condemnation, I appeall to thy conscience thou manifest corruptor of gods
scriptures, if in all the places, by the alleged there be not this particle,
Vt, which is a causal, and not the preposition, In, which is in the words of.
S. Paul. And has malice so bereft the of knowledge that thou can make no
difference, betwext those two dictions or words. The Lord of his mercy
preserve his Church from so bold and so deceatfull teachers. If altogether
thou had been ignorant, with sorrow of heart, I could have lamented thy
foolishenes: but pererauing ye of set purpose and malice, willingly to corrupt
gods plain scriptures, that thou may blind the more easily, the eyes of the
simple, with grief, and dolor, I say, that better it had been for the, never to
have been born, the^ thus obstinatly to fight against gods plain truth. And
that in such fury, that where from the scriptures, thou can have none
assurance for thy error, yet so thou dare wrest them, yt they may seem to
serve thy purpose. Where so ever thou can wrest any place, that it may be
translated by this english, To, there thou ashamest not to affirm, yt it is
the self same phrase, with this of S. Paul, vessels of wrath prepared or
ordained to destruction. This is sufficient to show to the learned, yea even to
such, as do but understand the firstprinciples of their grammar, thy
infidelity and crafty deceat, in this matter. But because such as understand
nothing in the latin tongue, can not hastily epsy thy craft, I will trauale to
make it so sensible as I can.

If I should say, I am appointed to death, to feel the punyshement of sin,
and so to make sin to cease: will thou therefore say, that this particle, To,
in the former place, where I say I am appointed to death, and in the second
place where I say, to sele the punishment of sin, and to make sin to
cease, are all one phrase, and oght a like to be resolved? I suppose thou wilt
not. for in the first place, it ca^ be none other wies resolved but thus, I am
appointed to death that is, I must needs die: but in the second place, two
causes of death be assigned: for where I say, to feel the punishemen^ of sin,
I understand, that one cause of death is, that I and all me^ may feel, how
horrible is sin before God: and in this last I understand that death so
puts an e^d to sin, that after it may not trooble the elect of God. The
phrase of S. Paul is much more different from all that thou adducest, then be
these phrases before alleged, one differen^ from an other. for where he
says, vessels of wrath ordained to destruction, he signifies the final end
of the vessels of wrath, to be ordained, and before determined in gods eternal
counsel. And in all these places: to provoke the Lord, to anger, to defyle my
Sanctuary, to kyndle gods wrath against Israel: to make Israel sin, and such
like, are their actions signified to be the causes of gods anger, Ierem. 15
gods wrath, and why he reputed his Sanctuary polluted. Thus thy frowardnes
causes me to trooble the simple reader. The place of leremie tho v maliciously
do peruerte, for it ca^ be in nowies so translated. But what tongue so ever
thou do follow thou must say woe be to me, O my mother that thus have born
me, a man that am a brawler, and a man of contention in the hole land

The place of Paul, Answert^ the. 6
1. Cor. 11. serves nothing for thy purpose. for albeit there be a
preposition, ad, which truly may be translated, To, yet that speech is far
differente, from the former speech of the Apostle for where he says: Eat at
home that ye come not together to condemnation, he does admonish them of the
danger, which they know not, wc was that such inordinat, and riatouse
banqueting joined with the co^te^pt of the poor, without repentance must bring
condemnation. if thou list reply and allege that thou stickest not so much to
the terms, as to the matter* for in all these former speeches, man pretended
one thing but an other thing ensued. What can thou thereof conclude? but that
gods purpose, sentence, and mind, is not subject to man's purpose and
intention. True it is, that nether Pharao did resist Moises of purpose to be
plagued, nether did Jeroboam erect the calves that Israel should be destroyed,
but yet because God had so before pronounced ineuitably plagues and destruction
did follow their inobedience. If hereof ye will conclude, as ye seem to do,
that those whose end is condemnation, receive not that by ye will of God,
because ye conclude that which neither ye have proved, neither yet go about in
this place to prove, I will not trouble my self, with answering for this
present. But when ye shall go about to prove that God will all men to be saved
(as ye affirm) I hope by gods grace, Answer to the 8.
to answer sufficiently. For as we doubt not but gods judgments are holy,
and most just, so we know that the conscience of the wicked shall feel in them
selves, and no where else, the causes of their condemnation. Neither yet did
any of us ever hold, believe or affirm, that any reprobate, shall have that
liberty in the hell to quarrel with God, of the secret causes of his
condemnation: for the books shall be opened, and the secrets of all hearts
shall be reveled.

To the suffering, To the 9.
patience, and sorowing of God, I have before answered, in the beginning of
this your last confused gradation, and so I will not trouble the reader, with
the repetition of the same. The words of Jeremy which ye allege, can have no
such sentence, as ye do gather. for he does not speak of any passion, that was
in God, as touching his eternal Godhead: but only does appeall to the
conscience of the people, how often God had not only rebuked, but also from time
to time corrected them, ever calling them to repentance, and suspe^ding their
last punishment, The first chap. of Isaiah declares the place of Jeremy
wrested by the adversaries.
how beit that they continually from evil fell backward unto worse. And so at
length was God werie oftener to repent: that is to say, at once he would power
forth his just ve^gea^ce, which before so often he had threatened. Let the first
chapter of Isaiah be commentary to this place, and I trust the sentence shall
be plain. For there he affirms, that in that people there was no hole part,
that is all order and policy was almost confounded, Jerusalem was in a manner
left desolate, by the manifest plagues which had apprehended it. but yet there
was no true conversion unto God. And here he says, thou have left me (says
the Lord) and I have therefore lifted up mine hand upon the, Ierem. 15.
and have scattered the. I am werie in repenting, that is, that I have spared
the so long. I shall scatter them with the fan, even unto the gates of the
earth (that is to the uttermost part) I have made my people desolate, and I
have destroyed them: nevertheless they have not turned from their ways. I trust
yt every reasonable man will consider, yt those words be rather spoken, to
admonish the people, how God by all means had provoked them to repentance,
then to declare unto us, what nature or passions God has in him self, as ye
do. For so appears in this your question. Will ye say, that God werieth him
self suffering and sorowing for them, whom he had reprobated before the world?
Surly I think, that though ye hitherto have unadvisedly said so, ye will from
hence forth say so no more. And so ye end this portion with a prayer. To the
which we answer in few words, that albeit we will not take upon us, to
define, what after this shall your cogitations be, yet will we not cease to pray
to God, that your hearts being humbled with greater reverence, ye may not
only think, but also speak of gods hie Majesty, of his judgments most holy,
most just, and utterly in this life in comprehensible to our dull senses. But
now we go forward to that which follows.

THE ADVERSARY.
Now must we declare the saing of S. Luke so many as were ordained unto life
did believe, The 25. section. The eight argument
where we must understand, that as they that will not obey the truth, are
called in the scriptures ordained to damnation, as is sufficiently proved
before, so they which willingly receive the truth, and coople the word with
faith, working by charity are called, ordained to life. Where ye son which
if he did not, the latter fall should be worse then the first. Predestination
therefore is the mere gift of God, before the Ergo for walking the way of
salvation, we are S. Paul says, I am guilty to my self in nothing, but
therefore I am not justified. If a learned Phisician seeing one in danger of
death, whom he can and may help, offers Physic to the pacient, able to
restore him to his health, and therewith prescribed the pacient a diet, now
that the physician gives physic to the pacient, it comes only of his own
goodness, But if the pacient do not order him self according to the prescript of
the Physician, the physic shall not help him. And thoghe he observe good diet,
yet oght he not to repute the receiving of his health to him self, but to the
Physician. for though it lies in the pacientes power to hinder his health, yet
it is not in his power to give him self health. So Christ our Physician
offers healthful physic to us all, and there with prescribes our diet,
which if we do not observe the Physic shall not auale us. And thoghe we
observe it, yet oght we not to attribute our health to our selves: but to the
liberality of our Physician Christ, which of his mere mercy has made us
hole, wherefor to return to our argument, they are ordained unto life so many
as will gladly walk in the way which leads unto life, that is true obedience,
and they do believe as S. Luke says.

ANSWER.
The place of saint Luke which ye study to corrupt, is written in the 13. The
place of S. Luke in the acts. 13. chap.
chapter of the Acts of the Apostles. The light whereof is so clear, that you
be never able to obscure the same. And therefore I will not spend much time in
co^futation of your vanity. for the simple truth of the history shall
disclose the same. Paul coming to Antioche in Pisidia did upon the Sabbath
e^ter in to the Sinagoge of the Jews, and therein preached a sermon most
profound* most effectual, and most comfortable. In the which by plain
scriptures he proved that the same Jesus which was crucified at Jerusalem, was
the Messiah promised, and the only Savior of the world. At which doctrine many
of the Jews being offended, and yet some embrasing the same, Paul the next
Sabbath preached to the hole multitude of the Jews and Gentiles assembled
together: But when plain contradiction was made by the Jews, who did
blaspheme Christ Jesus, Paul and Barnabas taking boldness said to the Jews:
first it behooved to speak to you the word of God, but because ye reject it, and
judge your selves unworthy of the life everlasting, behold we are turned unto
the Gentiles. for so has the Lord commanded us. At which words the Gentiles
reioysed, and glorified the word of the Lord, and did believe (says the text)
so many as were ordained to the life everlasting. Who is be so blind that does
not se, that in these words the holy Ghost assigns the plain cause, why
some do believe, and others do blaspheme, and remain unfaithful? The cause why
some believe is, because they are ordained to the life everlasting, as they that
are the sheep of Christ Jesus: John. 10.
therefore they hear, and believe his voice, the others as they are left in the
power of the deui^ll (as they that are never given to Christ, to the e^d, that
they may receive life) remain in blyndnes, and so by contradiction and
blasphemies, declare them selves, whose chilren and generation they are. None
of us do, nor yet ever did deny, but that the elect of God do willingly receive
and obey the truth, and that the spirit of God so works in their hearts,
that not only they believe, but that also they are made fruitful, yea and that
from justice, they proceed to justice. But as the hole praise of this we give
to God, arrogati^g no part of it to our selves, so we constantly affirm that
nether faith, neither works, neither yet any quality that is, or that God
forsaw, to be in us, is the cause of our predestination or election to life
everlasting, as before we have sufficiently proved.

Ye are so inconsta^t, To the 2.
now granting predestination to be the fre and mere gift of God, without any
condition of our works: and immediately after ascribing it to our obedience and
walking in the way, that leads to life. In this your inconstancy, say, I can
not tell how to handle you One thing I se, to my great comfort, that the glory
of Christ Jesus, is so manifest, and the power of his truth so invincible,
that he will reign, in the midest of his ennemies. The deuilles them selves
must acknowledge and openly confess, that he is Lord, and the only Son of the
living father: and the adversaries of his truth, even when they fight most
outrageously against the same, are compelled, to give testimony to it, as you
do here in diverse places: as when ye say, it follows not, yt because we must
walk in ye way, that leads to life, that therefore, for walking in the way of
salvation, we are chosen (and as you write) accepted. But because (I say) that
your inconstancy does straight carry you to denial of this, I ca^ the les
credit, that this be a true confession proceeding from an unfeigned heart: but
rather that it is the mighty power of the verity, which (will ye nill ye)
compels your mowthes, to give witnessing upon her part, against your selves.
God grant I may be deceived, in this my judgment. for him I take to record,
that I am no otherwies ennemie to any of you, then in so far, as ye declare
your selves manifest ennemies to ye fre grace of God, and to the glory of ye
eternal Son of ye eternal father of Christ Jesus our Lord and only Savior.
To the 3
Because there is nothing in this your last part, wc I have not before at large
declared in diverse places, I will only note those things in the wc we do not
aggre with you. First we use not to call predestination the fre gift of God,
but we call it the eternal and immutable counsel of God, in which he has
purposed to choose to lief everlasting, such as pleased his wisdom in Christ
Jesus his Son.

Secondly we say, that ye are never able to prove by the parable of the
talentes, that any reprobate was chosen in Christ, to life everlasting.

Thirdly that we find neither contract neither condition betwext the loving
Father, To the 4
and the prodigal son in his admission to his former dignity, neither do we
so understand the parable, as that the said son newly received to mercy, would
after, of stubbornes, vntha^kfully depart from his father. But rather we think,
that as he had felt what misery he sustained, by following his own counselles,
he would in times coming with all diligence attend the counselles of his father.

Your mind is dark to us and your writing obscure,

Last your similitude betwext your Phisitio^ offering in discussing of this
which you thus term.

THE ADVERSARY.
The second error of the careless by necessity.
The elect though they sin grievously* yet are they never out of the fau^r and
election of God, The 26 section.
neither ca^ they by any means finally perish. So that Adam when he
transgressed, and David committing adultery and homicide were favored even
then and beloved of God, Read the answer to the 27. Section.
and never out of election nether could they be. Again the reprobate as Saul
and Judas were never in the favor and election of God, neither could they nor
none other reprobate attein unto salvation.

ANSWER.
The truth of this proposition does nothing excuse your malice, and hatered:
for albeit there be no sentence in it contained, we being rightly understand,
is not aggreable to gods word, yet of what purpose and mind ye have gathered
these sentences, leaving those that should explain the same, it easily may
appear, by that vennom which ye spew forth against us, to make us odious to all
the world as here follows.

THE ADVERSARY.
The confutation of the second error.
Here you se, The 27 section.
how they divide all men into two sorts, one elected or chosen which by no
means can perish, and the other rejected or reprobate before the world, so
that by no means, can they be saved. What can the devil wish his members to
teach more for the advancement of his Kingdom, then this? What can be invented
to provoke men to live a careless, and libertyne life, more sit down to eat and
drink, and then rise up to play, why masters on who^ the blood of Seruetus
cries a ve^gea^ce. so does the blood of others mo whom I could name. but
forasmuch as God has partly alredie revenged their blood and served some of
their persecuters, with the same measure where with they measured to others, I
will make no mention of them at this time. And to declare their wickedness, not
to have proceeded of ignorance and humane infirmity but of endured malice, they
have for a perpetual memory of their cruelty set forth books affirming it
to be lawful to persecute, and put to death such as dissent from them in
controversies of religion, whom they call blasphemers of God. notwithstanding
they, before they came to authority, they were of an other judgment, and did
both say and write, that no man oght to be persecuted for his conscience saik.
but now they are not only become persecuters, but also they have given, as far
as lies in them, the sword into the hands of bloody tyrants. Be these I

ANSWER.
The crimes laid to our charge in this matter be heinous. For first we are
accused that we provoke men to a careless and libertine life. So that by us the
people do nothing, ^uteate and drink and rise up to play.

That we have no conscience, but being led with the spirit of Balaam give
occasion of sin to the people.

That none other fruit does ensue our doctrine, ^ut liberty to sin, for our
disciples are cruel murthe^ers, subject to all iniquity, respecting persons,
and flattering sinners.

And last, yt by our poisoned docttrine, we infect the people, answer to the
first.
and bring the^ to a secure, idle, and careless life.

Because I will omit no notable part of your book to ouerslippe without some
reasonable answer, I will follow your order, although it be confused. If you be
able by plain scriptures, to prove a third sort of me^, which nether be
elect, nether yet reprobat, then shall we learn of you, other wise to divide.
But if God by his first voice pronounced in this matter, made mencio^ but of two
seeds. and if Christ Jesus when he shall come shall set one army on the right
hand, and an other upon the left hand, without mention made of any third sort
of men, we can not repent, nor yet call back the truth of our doctrine, albeit
that ye in despite and fury cry.

what can the devil wish his members to teach more for the advancement of his
kingdom then this? what can be invented more to provoke men to live a careless
and libertine life, more then if they be persuaded that nether well doing
avails or pleases God, nor evil doing hinders unto salvation. and so forth
ye proceed in your first accusacion.

Before I have required, and yet again do require of Gods faithful lieutenants
in earth, I mean of lawful Magistrates, who rule in gods fear, whom ye
utterly study to abolish, and deprive, of them I say, I have required justice
to be ministered betwext us, and you, without respect of persons.

Let the heaven and earth (if men will not) yea let God and his holy Angels,
in whose presence we walk, bear record and witness how unjustly and
maciously ye accuse us, that we provoke the people to a careless and libertine
life. If ever it can be proved, by our doctrine, or writing, that we affirm,
that there is no difference betwext virtue and vice, that the one nether
pleases God, nether yet the other does displease him, let us without mercy
die the death. But and if the hole scope of our doctrine tend to the
contrary, yea if our lives and conversation (how so ever the devil does
blind your eyes) be such, as they only may convict your blasphemy. And last,
if the order of that city where this doctrine is taught, be such in punishment
of iniquity, and that without respect of person, that the like justice has
never been executed against open offe^ders sithence the days of the Apostles,
in any christian commonwealth. Then can we not cease to desire that this your
former blasphemy may be revenged upon your own heads.

We do not deny but this is one part of our doctrine, that as Gods counsel is
immutable, so is his election sure and stable, insomuche that the elect can not
finally be reprobated, nether yet that the reprobat can ever become elect
no more then the wheat can become darnell or darnel become wheat, but do we add
no more then this? The doctrine of th^se that defend Gods ete^nall
Predesti^ation.
do we teach men to set cock on hoope, and so to let the world slide as
scoffingly ye write? or do we not rather continually affirm, that as God of
his great mercy, has called us to the dignity of his children, so has he
sanctified us, and appointed us, to walk in pureness and holiness all the days
of our life, that we shall continually fight against the lusts and inordinat
affections, that remain in this our corrupt nature, that if we find not the
spirit of Christ working in us that then we can never be assured of our
election? for the conscience of all such as with out bridle follow iniquity,
can never be assured of Gods present favor during the time that they delight in
sin, finally none of your anabaptistical sort, require greater obedience to
be given unto God, and unto his law, then we do, except that ye put your
scollers in vain esperance, that by the power of their own free will, they may
at length come to such perfection as no sin shall stire in them. But we by the
contrary attributing all to the free grace of God do affirm that continually
in this life, we must confess, that sin so remains in us, that except that
God, for Christ Jesus saik did pardon the same, his wrath justly should be
kindled against us. Let all our writings and the hole some of our doctrine
bear record whether thus we teach or not. And are not the lives and honest
conversation of many thousands (we praise God of his great mercy) professing
the same doctrine, The god lie life and death of a great number in our days
proves the aduersaeries to be most impudent liers. To the ^
able to convince your malicious impudency. how many have left their countries
possessions and lands, and for liberty of their conscience only, do live a
sober and conte^tible lief? how many have given, and daily do give their lives,
and blood, for the testimony of Christ's truth, and for that they will not
defile them selves with idolatry?

And yet thou ashamest not to ask how many of the^ can we perceive by their
conversation, that they have cast of the old man, and put on the new man
walking sincerely in their vocacion. shall not the great multitude of Christ's
dear martyrs, of late in England (thou will not say, that they were all
anabaptists) the long patience of our brethren in France, The adversaries
make no consci+^ce to be present at the mass
and that cruel persecution of late risen in Italy, Naples, and Spain for
Christ's truth only, put thy venomous tongue to silence?

If I should demand of thee which of the two did most mortify the flesh, he
that for conscience sake leaves country friends, riches and honors, or he
that to gape for worldly promotions, Anabaptist^s would have all things comone.
or yet for any other purpose does cover him self with Esaus clothes (I use
your own terms) and so denying what he is, will swear, if need be, that he is
not Iaakob, which of these two Isay, do thou think to have come nerest to
the forsaking of him self? Or yet another, whither does he walk most sincerely
in his vocacion, that living upon his just labors is ready to communicate,
according to his ability to the necessity of his poor brethren? or he who
loitring in one place or trotting from country to country would have all
things in common contrary to the order of nature and policy? or yet the third,
which of the two, does most crucify the lusts and concupiscences of the
flesh, he that lays down his neck even under the axe of a cruel and unjust
Magistrate, and that also when he suffers unrighteously: or he that would
abolish and destroy the good ordinance of God, all lawful Magistrates and
distinction in policies. That you be the one, and we be the other of these two
sorts of men it is evident enough. And upon whom the crime cleaves and
justly may be laid, further examination shall declare. Now come I to the
order of that City, in the which this doctrine is taught, received, and
maintained. What makes ye poor city of Geneua, poor I say, in man's eyes,
but rich before God, by the plentiful abounda^ce of his heavenly graces,
what makes it, I say, so odious to the carnal me^ of this world? assuredly
not this doctrine, where with ye charge us. for that could well please the
carnal man, What makes the city of Geneua odious to the world.
to let him live at his pleasure, without all punishment. Is it not the just
rigor of justice, and the severity of discipline executed therein, in such
sort, that no manifest offender, where so ever he has committed his offense,
does there escaip punishment? Is not this it, that so does offend, not only
the licencious of the world? but even you dissembling hypocrites, can not
abide, that the sword of Gods vengeance shall strike the murderer, the
blasphemer, and such others, as God by his word commands to die. not so by
yor judgments, he must live, he may repent. And those common welthes, do ye
highly praise, where men may live as they list, be subject to no law nor
order, yea where ye drunkard and such others abominable persons are permitted,
Anabap^istes w^ld han^ (...) punished*
to live quietly and find favor to escape punishment and shame. But because in
ye streets of Geneua dare no notable malefactor more show his face (all praise
and glory be unto God) then dare the owl in the bright sun therefore is it
hated. Therefore it is called blood thirsty, and thus blasphemously traduced,
as after ye write.

Thou say yt amongst us there is respect of persons, To the ^
That we prefer the welthie, which if they be liberal, although they be
drowned in many vices, yet we use to heal up their sores, etc.

I am assured yt thy own conscience does convict thee of a malicious lie, in
thus writing. for thou can not be ignorant, what the city of Geneua has of
late years sustained, for rooting out those pestilent persons, who labored to
destroy the Lords vineyard planted in the same. And what was ye cause yt so
they were coniured against the liberty of Christ's Euangil. The hatered will thou and they say, which they did bear against strangears. I answer, but no
mostrangears were then in Geneua then were before, when ye chief captains of
that faction were most earnest professors of the Euangile (in mouth I mean).
And in very deed, if they would have labored, to have expelled the strangears,
they had been enemies to their own comoditie. for by the multitude of
stra^gears, their common wealth does flourish. and none did receive such benefit
of stra^gears, as those that required Christ's doctrine to be overthrown.

They were papists (thou will say) and therefore hated ye religion. I answer
in their defense, Geneua was sore vexed because they would not suffer sin
unpunished.
yt in mouth and external profession they were not, but always they protested,
yt they would never revolt to papistrie again. But in few wo^ds, I will open the
cause of their conspiracy. They were corrupt in manners, filthy of life,
peruerters of justice, and such finally, as by whom, the blessed word of God,
was sclandered and evil spoken by. The preachers called for reformacio^ of
manners. They boldly and sharply rebuked, even those that were in highest
authority. One of ye chiefest of yt band was excommunicated, and so did
remain mo years then one. The consistoire called for justice to be executed,
and for penalties to be appointed. for the inobedient and open conte^ners. But
no thing could prevail, the multitude of the wicked was so great, yt in votes
and voices they did prevail. And so was ye iniquity of ye wicked mai^teined
for a long ceason. Which being considered, ye godly as well yt were native
borne, as also the strangers, consulted upon the next and surest remedy, and
that after that not only the most part of strangers were determined to
depart, but yt also, yt faithful servant of Christ Jesus, had in public
sermon commended his flock, with the weping eyes of many to the protection, and
providence of God, and had publicly pronounced, yt he would be no minister in
yt church where vice could not be punished, according to gods word, where the
wicked should tryuphe and make laws at their pleasure. After this
consultacion it was concluded, that a reasonable nombre of strangears whose
fidelity and honest conversation had long been tried and well known, should
be made burgesses, and free to have voice in counsel, and in making* civil
statutes. which being understand the wicked began more manifestly to utter
themselves, they opponed the^ selves to the Magistrates, they plainly ^ denied
yt any strangers should be free, they appeled to the greater counsel, wc being
gathered, did justify the decree of the Sindiques (so be the chief magistrates
called). Shortly after did ye hole vennom burst out: for after feasting, and
banqueting of all sorts of villanes, was the conspiracy concluded and put in
execution. for with one consent they invade upon the night one of the chief
Magistrates, they cried victoire, and triumph. but God sodanly repressed that
fury, so assisting with out the arm of man his servant and lieutenant for
that time appointed, in that city, that first he recovered the ensign of his
just and lawful office again, and there after so put to flight, that
rebillious and great multitude, that some being apprehended and committed to
prison, the rest were dispersed by the only power of God. for that is a thing
evident and plain, that the nombre of the one, did in twenty degrees,
surmount the other. This do I write, to let the simple reader understand,
although thou be blinded, what was the original of the trouble, which Geneua did
after suffer. What did the strangears, I pray the gain by their liberty? as
touching the world, I say nothing, for no kind of comoditie they lacked before
which after they did obtain, only this excepted, that in counsel, they
should have voices* and place to speak, which thing also did only offend
those oppressors of justice and mainteiners of iniquity. for thereby did they
perceive, that their interprises should be broken, and that statutes should
be made, to reform their insolency. To proceed justice being executed without
respect of person, upon those that were apprehended the rest who did escape to
great no^bre, were pronounced rebels. Then began skirmyshes upon every side
of Geneua, victualles were commanded to be cut of, great threatenings were
blown in the ears of al ye godly, and when these could not prevail. then
were devised practice after practice, treason was conspired, and the ennemies
hoped for possession of the city. But this being reveled and ye practisers
punished, ^atha^ reaturneth to his own nature again. for after that no
intreatme^t could prevail, open ware was denounced against. them, a day was
set that they should be restored, and that with great sommes of money to be
delivered unto the^, by reason of their former losses and injuries sustained.
and this sentence was pronounced not, by ye rebels only, but by a potent
common wealth, and their ancient friends. Hereupon were made, by the rebels
fyres of joy, Defiance was sent, the day was appointed, that the siege
should begin, and victuales should be cut of, esperance nor comfort rested
none to us, but God and the messingers of his word, which then sounded the
tr^pet most boldly and most clearly, promising eue^ in our greatest
desperation, the same glorious deliverance, which shortly after followed. for
God by his power, did mittigat that rage, and converted the hearts of our
ancient alliance, to remember their duties toward God, and his servants, and
so to enter with the city of Geneua into a new society and league. Now to
return to thee malicious sclanderer, if we were such as thou do accuse us,
to wit, that we put no difference betwext vice and virtue, The adversaries are
malicious scla^derers of the tru^th.
that we suffer the people in a dissolute life, that we respect ye persons of
the rich, and heal their sores, with unprofitable plasters, that we only
desire, that all men frequent our congregation: and that we esteem that to be
the surest sign of their election. If these I say, were true, to what
purpose, did all the preachers endanger their lives (and that continually by
the space of three years) for obteining of discipline? why should many godly
strangears have rather chosen to have left that common wealth in the which they
were, with quietness permitted to live, as best seemed to them, rather then that
they would abide the sight of iniquities yt dail^ did increase? And why did the
godly with in that city so hasard liberty and life, that rather they had
determined to die in defense of a just cause, then that ever any manifest
ennemie to God, and virtue should be admitted to bear rule in that common
welthe? If we had been of that opinion, which most vilanously thou laiest to
our charge, nether virtue pleases God, nether yet yt vice displeaset him, had
we not been most foolish, and most miserabl of all other creatures? Plain it
is yt our power to ma^n^iudgeme^t was nothing co^parable to ye power of or
aduesaries: place of refuge was none left to ye godly their ase^bled. And yet
let ye ennemies the^ selves witness again* us, if in the least one jot, their
request was granted. ye let the place of execution w^tnes, if when we lok^ for
nothing, but for the extremity to be attempted, more favor were showed to the
offenders apprehende^ then if no such trouble had been feared, or apperin. If
thou reply, that greater offenses are over seen such as favor our doctrine.
I answer all those in mouth, did favor ye same Eua^gil, which we profess. The
cause of the strife did only arise, for the purity of life which oght
inseperably to be joined with y^ external proffession. I could recite mo the^
one of those, that seemed to be then pillars in Geneua, as touching riches,
world lie estimation, and liberality toward the poor, being also of ye
no^bre of the stra^gears, who for suspicion of offenses were, and remain to
this day, some exiled some condemned to perpetual preson. for whose
deliverance, and receiving to the Church again, there has been offered
greater sommes, then perchance might intise an anabaptist to go the mass (I
will not say to be a Papist) and yet have they obtained nothing.

Now briefly to recite that which I have laid against thy first accusation, if
you be nether able to prove by or doctrine, nor writings, nether by our own
lives, and co^uersations, nether yet by the lack of justice, in that city in
which this doctrine is taught, received and maintained, with what face can
thou affirm, that we teach the people a careless, and libertine life? Has
ever any man more strongly, and more earnestly confuted those pestilent
opinions of the libertines, then has that man whom most ye accuse for this
doctrine? Let his notable work written against the libertines, twelve years
ago, be a testimony against your man^fest malice.

Thus have I in answering to your first accusation, answered some what to other
crimes contained in all the four. Now in answering to your second, I will labor
to touch, and put end to that which rests in the other

Ye accuse us, that we have no conscience, answer to the ^ accusation.
to deceive the people of God. for thus ye demand, why masters. (I know this
phrase of old) have ye no conscience, thus to cause the people of God to
sin, Se ye not that ye be led with the same spirit, that Balaam was led with
all, how he counseled, to give occasion of sin to the people of God, and so
aftre that ye have taken all excuse, as ye think from us, ye boldly pronounce
your sentence that the blood of such as perish, shall be required of our hands.

I hear the accusation verey vehemently intended* but when I seek for the
probation, of every part, I find none, but accusation follows accusation. for
still ye accuse us, that we are flatterers of sinners, that we take wicked men
by the hand, that we heal them with this saing: there is none during this
world, yt can be known to be in the election, be he never so virtuous, nor
any out of the election, be he never so unrighteous. after this manner (say you)
do we heal them up, so that they need not to endeavor them selves to bring
forth the fruits of lively faith. answer to the 3. 4. 5. and 6
These I say, be your accusations, the probation whereof, ye delay so long,
that after ye never remember it. And so must your auctorite stand in force
both to accuse, and be admitted for witness. But we must except against you,
for two causes most reasonable, first because ye are our accusers, and our
party adversary. Secondarely because ye are venomous liers, persons defamed,
and blasphemers of God. That ye are vennemous and malicious liers, I have in
diverse places before suffice^tly proved, how ye falsify, and peruerte the
plain Scriptures, how ye add to our words, and diminish from them, at your
pleasure: and finally how that ye invent, and lay crimes to our charge, wihich
ye be never able to prove, as here in this place, ye shame not to affirm, that
we heal up the sores of those that be drowned in vices, with such words, as
ye write. We have had offenders in deed amongst us, (I mean in the
co^gregations which ye accuse) of diverse sorts and diverse estates. Let any
co^uict us yt either in exhorting, admonishing, or in executing judgment, we
have used any such persuasion, or words to ye offenders. But if the offender
was to be admonished or exhorted, if we have not in gods name, exhorted the^ to
walk as it became ye sons of light: and if judgment was to be executed
against the^; if we have not used the ruele of gods word, iudgeing of the tree,
not after the secret election of God, but according to the manifest fruits,
pronoucing that membre unworthy to abide in the body, whose corruption was
able to infect the rest of the me^bres, If this order I say, be so streitlie
kept amongst us that never sithe^ce the days of ye Apostles, was it more
uprightly kept in any congregation. with what faces can ye say so that we take
wicked men by the hand? that we teach them, that they need not to bring furthe
the fruit of a lively faith? ye allege that Christ affirmed, that a good man
from the good treasure of his heart brings forth good things. And so do we
and do no less affirm, then ye do, although in an other understanding (as I
before have declared) that we must observe the commandment of Christ, if we
will be known to appertein to him. We think it no assured nor certain sign of
election, to be joined with this, or that congregation. We kuow that satan was
once joined with ye Angels, Judas with Christ Jesus, and many falls brethren,
with the company of the best reformed churches and chiefest Apostles. but
wonder it is, that ye burden us with yt, in this one case, wc is your plain
doctrine, which with toothe and nale ye defend. Do ye not plainly write that
no man is so elected in Christ Jesus, but that he may fall and utterly become a
reprobate? and none is so reprobated, but by repentance he may be elected. The
plain contrary whereof we teach. and maintain. O say you, ye mean of the
signs, that they are never certain. I answer that in very deed somtymes the
elect, as touching man's judgment, is like in estate with the reprobate. And
again that sometimes the reprobate do beautifully shine in the eyes of men for
a space, as exemples be evident. But yet I am sure, that you be never able to
prove that we affirm, that in this life, no difference may be known betwext
the two. The end of our doctrine, te^deth to this but chiefly to prove, yt from
election comes faith, from a lively faith do good works spring, in wc the
elect continuing and going forward, not only make they their own election,
sure, as. S. Peter does teach, but also give a testimony of it to others,
before whom their good works do shine. And so by ye contrary signs and
effects, we affirm that the reprobate do manifest and utter them selves. And
so I say that wonder it is, that ye burden us as that we should affirm,
that no man can be known either to be in the election, or out of the election,
during this life. But more wonder it is that ye affirm us to adduce these
words of S. Paul: The devil does transform him self in to an angel of
light, for probatio^ of our purpose. for I, for my own part do protest before
ye Lord Jesus, that I never did so understand that place of ye Apostle, nether
yet think I that any of you be able to show, in any of our writings, those
words adduced for probation of that purpose.

True it is that I have long understand, and to this hour do understand, that
by those words, would the Apostle admonish the Corinthia^s, and all others
that suddenly they should not receive, and believe every person, and doctrine
that offers it self, under ye cloak of justice, and of truth: but that
diligently we should try the spirits from whence they are and whether they
come, from God, or not. for if the devil the great angel of darkness enemy to
mankind, and father to all falls prophets, can yet so transform him self, that
for a time his purpose and intent are not seen, but that under the cloak of
amity and love, he seeks or destruction as in tempting the woman, does
plainly appear, how much more can his servants and soldiors, being deceitful
workers transform them in to ye Apostles of Christ, pretending at the first
enter, nothing but love and justice, nothing but gods glory, nothing but
mortification of the flesh, and such like, most beautiful pretenses, although
that yet these things be most far from their hearts. Thus I say do I, and
with me, I am assured who so ever depely do wey the purpose of the Apostle, in
that place, understand that sentence, and do not as ye falsely write, allege it
to prove, that no man can be known to be either in the election, or out of the
election during this life. It may be, that we have said and written, (as the
truth is) that no man could have known, by the good works of that happy
thief hanged with Christ, that he had been gods elect, before that in that
anguissie, so insta^tly he began to defend Christ's innocence, so sharply to
rebuke ye other being a blasphemer: and humbly to submit himself, and pray,
that Christ would remember him, Luke 23
when that he came in to his kingdom: And contrary wise that none could have
defined by the evil works of Judas, before his tresonable defection, from
Christ Jesus, which was but few days before his death, that he had been ye
reprobate. And what serves this for your purpose? To the 6
how can ye hereby prove, that we are the sons of darkness, that we take the
most shameful men by the hand, flattering them so, that they can not return
from their wickedness, and so by our doctrine give occasion of sin to ye
people, declaring our selves thereby, not to besent of God, etc.

Are ye able to prove, that we teach the people, not to convert from their
sins, and wicked imaginations, to to ye last hour of their departure? do we
promise to all thieves and murderers the same grace and favor, yt David, Peter,
and this thief found? I trust thy own conscience knows the contrary. To the
7
Permit or suffer we (be they never so hie) manifest offenders to live amongst
us, after their own appetites? And yet ashamest thou not impudently thus to
writ: But such lips such letouse such disciples such masters for your chief
Appollos be persecuters, on whom the blood of Seruetus cries a vengeance, So
does the blood of others mo, whom I could name. But for as much as God has
partly alredie revenged their blood and served some of their persecuters with
the same measure where with they measured to others I will make no mention of
them at this time.

Blessed be God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ who so reueleth the things,
that lie in secret, that hypocrites at length, how soever they dissemble for a
time are compelled to notify, and bewray them selves. Before to some it might
have appeared, that the zeal of gods glory, the love of virtue, the hatered
of vice, and the salvation of the people, whom by us, ye judged to be blinded
and deceived, had carried you hedlonges into such veheme^cie (as ye be me^
zealous and fervent) yt no kind of accusation was thought by you suffice^it, to
make us odious, unto ye people, lies against us imagined, were not only
tolerable, but also laudable and holy, scriptures* by you willingly, and
wittingly corrupted, did serve to defend gods justice, and his glory, with we by
our doctrine oppugn and improve. But these your last words do bewrey the
matter, that in what soever faces you lift tra^sforme your selves, your grief
will appear to proceed from another fountain, This impr^ueth the opinion of
that sect that say that they for their pure life are heard w^^n soever they
pray.
then from any of these which ye pretend, and I before have rehearsed.

O the death of Seruetus your dear brother for whose deliverance your cha^pion
Castalio sole^nely did pray, with whom, if once ye could have spoken, that
kingdom, which ye hope for, had begone to be enlarged, his blood I say, with
the blood of others, I think ye mean of your prophetess Ione of kent, do
cry a vengeance in your ears, and hearts, that none other cause do you se of
ye shedding of ye blood of those most co^sta^t martyrs of Christ Jesus, Thomas
Crammer, Nicholas Redley Hugh latimer, John Hooper, John Rogers, John
Bradfurth, and of others mo, But that God has partly revenged their blood,
The adversary justifies the cruel murdering of Thom. Cra^mer Nicolas
Ridley, etc*
yt is of your great prophet and prophetess, upon their persecuters, and has
served the^ with the same measure, with the which they served others, I appeal
to the judgment, of all those that fear God, what is thy judgment, and the
judgment of thy faction, of that glorious Gospel of Christ Jesus, which of
late, has been suppressed in Englod, what is thy judgment of those most
valiant soldiars and most happy martyrs of Christ Jesus, upon whom, o
blasphemous mouth thou say, God has taken vengeance, which is an horrible
blasphemy in the ears of all the godly, I will not now so much labor to
confute by thy pen, as that my full purpose is to lay the same to thy charge if
I shall apprehend the in any common wealth where justice against blesphemers may
be ministered, as gods word requires. And hereof I give the warning, lest that
after thou shall complein, that under the cloak of friendship, I have deceived
the. Thy manifest defection from God, and this thy open blasphemy, spoken
against his eternal truth and against such as most constantly did suffer, for
testimony of the same, have so broken and desolued all familiarity, which
has been betwext us, that although thou were my natural brother I durst not
conceal thy iniquity, in this case.

But now to the matter. I have before proved you malicious, and vennemous liers,
and therefore unworthy to bear testimony against us. Now rests to be proved,
that ye are blasphemers of God, and persons defamed* Solomon affirms, that,
Pro. 17
he that justifies the wicked and he that condemns the innocent, are alike
abomible before God. Which sentence is not to be understand of judges only,
but is to be referred to every man: for of every one does God require, that
he hate, and in his heart and mouth condemn, that which God him self has
condemned: and also that he allow, and justify, that which God pronou^ceth
just, lawful, and holy. And if the contrary be found even in a multitude,
God does not only punish the chief offenders, but also upon their favorers,
mainteiners, and iustifiers, does he commonly power the same plagues and
vengeance. And hereof is that rare, Number. 16
and fearful punishment taken upon Dathan and Abiram, sufficient proof, for
they joined with Corah, were the authors of the conspiracy raised against
Moises and Aaron. But did they alone sustein the vengeance? No but their
households, children, wives, tents, and substance in the same contained, did
the earth in a moment deuore, and swallow up. And why? because they did
justify the cause of those wicked, and in so far in as in them lay did
maintein the same. No man I trust will deny, but that he who kills an
innocent man, is a murderer, although it be under the cloak of justice. But
that he, who having lawful authority to kill, and yet suffers the murderer
to live, is a murderer, in this perchance some men may doubt. But if the law of
God be diligently searched, this doubt shall easily be resolved. For it will
witness, that no les oght the murderer, the blasphemer, and such other to
suffer the death, then that the meke and the fearer of God should be defended.
And also that such as maintein and defend the one, are no les criminal before
God, then those that oppress the others. One example I will adduce for all,
God gave in to the hands of Achab, 1. King, 23.
Benhadad king of Syria, who was great enemy to Israel, whom he upon certain
conditions of amity sent home to his country. But what sentence was
prononunced aginst Achab? Thus says y^ eternal, because thou have let go out
of thy hands a man, whom I appointed to die, thy soul (that is thy lief,
shall be in the place of his life, and thy people in y^ place of his people. Now
to you iustifiers of Seruetus. Seruetus was an abominable blasphemer against
God, An argument that proves the adversaries to be like blasphemers as was
Seruetus.
and you are iustifiers of Seruetus. Therefore ye are blasphemers before God,
like abominable as he was. The mayor I intend shortly to prove, so far as
shall be sufficient at this time. The minor ye do not deny for some by
appologies, some by books, and all by your tongues, do justify his cause, and
the conclusion is infallibly gathered of the former words of the holy Ghost.

Ye will not easily admit that Seruetus be convicted of blasphemy. for if so
be, ye must be compelled to confess (except that ye will refuse God) that the
sentence of death executed against him, was not cruelty, nether yet that the
judges, who justly pronounced that sentence, were murderers nor persecuters:
but that this death was the execution of gods judgment, and they the true and
faithful servants of God, who when no other remedy was found, did take away
iniquity from amongst them. That God has appointed death by his law without
mercy to be executed upon the blasphemers, is evident, by that which is
written Leuiticus 24. Leu. 24.
But what blasphemy is, may some perchance dout. If righteously we shall
consider and wey the scriptures, we shall find yt to speak basphemie or to
blaspheme God, is not only to deny, that there is a God, but that also it is,
lightly to esteem the power of the eternal God, to have, or to sparse abroad,
of his majesty such opinions as may make his God head to be douted of. To
depart from ye true honoring,

Of the first and second sort, both was Sennacherib, and proud Rabsases, who
comparing God with the Idols of the Gentiles, did not only lightly esteem his
godly power, but also so, far as in the^ was, studied to take out of the
hearts of the Israelites, all right and perfect opinion of God. At whom the
Prophet in the person of God, demands this question, whom have you blasphemed?

Of the third sort were both Israel and Judah, declining to idolatry against
Gods express commandme^t whom the Prophets so often do affirm to blaspheme
the holy one of Israel. Because, says Isaiah they have repudiated, the Law
of the Lord of hosts, and the word of the holy one of Israel, contumeliously
have they blasphemed. And Ezechiel, after that he has most sharply rebuked the
Israelites for their idolatry, he adds: yet in this your fathers have
blasphemed me, though they had before grievously transgressed against me for
when I had brought them into the land, for the which ^ lifted up my hand to give
it the^, they saw every hie hill and all the thick trees, and they offered
there their sacrifices, and there they presented their offering, etc.

Of the fourth sort were Hymeneus, and Alexander, whom Paul gave to the devil,
that they should learn not to blaspheme, (...)


Of the ^ift sort, were the multitude of the Jews, who judged, and to this day
do judge the death of Christ Jesus, his blessed ordinance, the public
preaching of his Euangil, and the administration of his Sacrements, to be
nothing necessary to our salvation.

And of the last, does not Paul deny him self, to have been a blasphemer, 1.
(...)
and a persecuter before his conversion.

Now, if I shall plainly prove the most part, yea all these (except, ye will
say, he shed no man's blood) to have been in your great prophet Seruet ^, yea
yet to be in you all of the Anabaptisticall sort, have I not sufficiently
proved both him, and you blasphemers?

Albeit I be more nere of his, and your counsel, the^ any of you does know or
suspect, yet will I not utter, at this present, all that I can, but will abide
till such opportunity, as God shall offer unto me, to notify his, and your
poison to the Church of God, that of the same, the godly may be ware.

For this present, I say first, that Seruetus, whom you justify, did maintein,
and by word and writing, dispersed, abroad wicked, and most deuilishe opinions
of God, which might not only make his Godhead to be despised, but also called
in doubt, and question. He judged those things nothing necessary to salvation,
wc Christ has commanded and ordained. And last, that impugning the true
religion, The blasphem^us ^rrors of Serve (...).
he did most obstinatly maintein his diabolical erros, and did resist the
plain truth to ye death. His erroneous opinions of God and of his eternal
Godhead were these. Whosoever believes any triniti^ in the essence of God, has
not ye perfect God, but gods imagined, and elusion of devils.

That Christ is the Son of God, only in so far as

That ye word of God descending from the heaven, These be the detestable
errors o^ Ioha^ of Ken^.
is now the flesh of Christ, so yt the flesh of Christ, is from the heaven*
further that y^ body of Christ is the body of the Godhead, the flesh of God,
godly, and heavenly as it that is begotten of the substance of God.

That the soul of Christ is God, and that the flesh

As the word descended into the flesh of Christ, The adu^rs^ri^^ look also ^o
be Christ's at l^^gth.
so did the holy Ghost descend in to the souls of the Apostles.

That Christ so long as he was conversant in the flesh received not the new
spirit, which he was to receive after his resurrection.

That in all men from the beginning, is ingrafted The pr^s^n^ err^r of the
Anabaptists


That the substanciall Godhead is in all creatures. That the soul of man,
although it be not God, it is made God by the spirit, which is God him self.

That the soul is made mortal by sin, even as but these that be regenerated
have another soul, then that they had before: because of the substance which
is renewed, and for the godhead which is joined.





These I have thought sufficient to produce at this present, to let the reader
understand, that it is not without cause, that I say, that Seruetus, whom ye
justify is a blasphemer. I have omitted things more horrible, and grievous, to
avoid the offense of godly readers. which soda^ly, I am not minded to
manifest, except yt I shall understand that your vennemous tongues be not stayed
by these. I appeal to the conscience of Castalio him self, if in every one of
these former propositions, which concern ye Godhead, there be not contained
horrible blasphemy. For what is more blasphemous, then to affirm, that such
as believe in the Godhead, three distinct persons, have no true God, but the
illusion of the deuilles. That Christ Jesus, is not the eternal son, of the
eternal father, that there is no distinction betwext the father and the Son,
but in imagination only. That Christ has no participation of man's nature, but
that his flesh is from heaven, yea that it is the flesh of the Godhead. That in
Stocks, stones and all creatures, is the substantial Godhead. If these (I
sa^e) be not blasphemies worthy of ten thousand deaths, especially being
obstinatly maintained against all holsom admonition? let all those that fear
God judge: yea even you your selves, how furious that ever ye be, judge in the
matter, eue^ as ye will answer before the throne of ye Lord Jesus. That
co^tempteously he spoke of baptising of the children, of ye publyke preaching
of the Euangill, and of the administration of the Lords supper, that have you
common with him. for this is your glory, and persuasion to all your scolers,
that these things be nothing necessary to salvation, yea most streitly ye
inhibit all of your sect to frequent any congregation, but your own. And
whether this be blasphemy of your part, or not, to affirm those things
nothing necessary, which Christ Jesus has established, and commanded to be
used in remembrance of him, to his again coming, I am content that judgment
be referred even to those that be most indifferent betwext us and you.

To supersede the rest of your blasphemies I return to your book, because that
after I purpose to speak of your holy conversation, and of the great
perfection, yt is found in you. To tha^ which rests in the 7


Ye accuse us that we have written books in a perpetual memory, of our
cruelty, affirming it to be lawful to put to death such as dissent from us in
religion. Notwith standing, that some of us were of an other mind before they
came to authority* and further that we have given the sword in to the hands
of bloody tyrannes.

True it is that books are written, both by you and by us. for your master
Bellius affirms, that lawful it is not, to the civil magistrate, to use the
sword against heretics. To whom that godly learned man Theodorus Beza has
answered. In which if you or your master think not your selves fully answered,
ye may put pen to the paper, when you list, looking to receive answer with
convenient expidicion. John Calvin has besides committed to writing, the
examination of Seruetus, and the cause of his miserable death, which books
albeit to you, they be a perpetual memory of cruelty, yet I have good hope,
that to our posterity, they shall be profitable (as now to us, be the godly
labors of those, that before us have foghten the same battle against the
obstinate heretics) And further seeing both you, and we, must abide the
sentence of one judge, we can not greatly fear the prejudice of your faction.

Where ye ask if these be ye sheep, which Christ sent forth in the mids of
wolves. And if the sheep can per secute the wolves, To the 6 question answered
by a question.
and I demand for answer whether Moses was a sheep or a wolf, and wether that
fearful slaughter executed upon idolaters without respect of persons was not
as great a persecution, as the burning of Seruetus, and Joan of kent. To me it
appears greater. for to them was granted no place of repentance, no admonition
was given unto them, but with out further delay or question, Le^. 32
was the brother commanded to kill the brother, yea the father not to spare the
son. I think verily that if judgment should be referred unto you, yt that
then should Moises and the tribe of Leui be judged wolves, sent to d^uore
innocent sheep. But because we know what God has allowed, we ye les fear ye
judgment of man. If ye claim any privilege b^ the coming of the Lord Jesus,
him self will answer that he is not come to break nor destroy the Law of his
heaue^lie father.

Where further ye ask if Abel did kill Cayn or David Saul, or he which is born
of the spirit, did kill him which is borne of the flesh? I answer, if your
question be of Abel, David and Isaak, in their proper persons, that none of
them did kill any of these fore named. But if thereof ye infer no more, is it
law^ul for any of gods elect, How anabaptist ^^sabuse the name of conscience.
to kill any man, for his conscience sake. I answer, that if under the name of
conscience ye include what soever seems good in your own eyes, that then ye
affirm a great absurdity, manifestly repugning as well to gods law, as to the
examples of those, whom God has hieghly praised, in his holy Scriptures. But
because continually ye claim to your conscience, to remove from you that vain
couerture. I ask if the murderer, adulterer, or any other malefactor, should
be exempted from punishment of ye law, although he allege, that he did all
thing of conscience? I trust ye will confess, that he oght to be mocked, yt will
claim the patrocinie of conscience, when that he does plainly offend against
gods will reveled. And why will ye not grant as much in this matter, which now
stands in contrauersie? because (say you) external crimes have no affinity
with matters of religion. for ye conscience of every man is not a like
persuaded in ye service and honoring of God, Shifting of anabaptists.
nether yet in such controversies as gods word has not plainly decided. but
I ask if that be a just excuse, why pernicious errors shall be obstinatly
defended, either yet that gods established religion shall be contempteously
despised? To make ye matter more plain, Israel and Judah were not both of one
mind, in the honoring of God, after yt the ten Tribes departed from the
household of David, yea Judah in the self was often corrupted, with pestilent
idolatry. in so much that the fathers did offer their children to Moloch. which
I am assured they did not without some zeal, wc they thought tobe good
conscience. But not withstanding those controversies, diverse opinions, and
forged consciences at their own appetites, Helias did kill the priests of
Baal. A^swe^ to the shifting
and was^ he borne I pray you of ye flesh? or was he not rather regenerated by
gods holy spirit? Io^ias did kill all ye priests of the hie places, and did
burn men's bones upon their altars, and was he I beseech you brother to Cayn, 2.
King 2^.
or rather fellow heir of the Kingdom promised with Abel. But that he was gods
most faithful King, after David, I trust ye will not deny, except that ye will
say as before, boldly ye have affirmed of other, that God revenged blood with
blood, in that he suffered him to fall in battle. But ye Spirit of God speaking
in the prophet Jeremy, is more mylde of judgment, for he absolueth him, and
does affirm that he was taken away for^ the sins of the people. Consider
these things, and convict us, if ye can by scriptures.

We say the man is not persecuted, for his conscience, that declining from God,
blaspheming his Majesty, and co^temning his religion obstinatly defends
erroneous and falls doctrine. This man I say lawfully ^onuicted, if he suffer
the death, pronounced by a lawful Magistrate, is not persecuted (as in y^ name
of Seruetus ye furiously complein). but he su^^ereth punishment according to
gods commandment pronounced in Deutronomie, the XIII. chapter. D^^. 13.


To put end to these your calumnies for this time, two things I would require
of you. To the. 6
First, that thus foolishly ye abuse not the name of conscience, Consci^^ce
must ^estayed upon god^ word^.
which you say constreineth you to write, to the end that ye might awake us
out of our dreams. Conscience for assurance of the self, in weldoing, must
have a testimony of gods plain will reveled. which ye shall not find to be your
assurance, that so odiously ye may accuse us of those crimes, whereof ye be
never able to convict us.

The second is, that by plain scriptures, and sollid reasons ye study to
confute our doctrine, and not by raging words spoken as it were, by men in a
frennesie. you shall never be able to prove, either that our doctrine is
poisoned, either yet that we draw the people to a secure idle, and careless
lief. Blessed be God ye father of our Lord Jesus Christ who of his mere mercy
has caused our doctrine, somewhat to fructify, our good hope is, that with us,
and his afflicted Church, he will continue his father lie favor, in such sort,
that from time to time, he will leave documentes, to y^ aeges following, yt his
heavenly doctrine is not sent in vain. To him be glory forever. Now to yt
that follows in your book.

THE ADVERSARY*
Now to that which ye say, The 28. section. Malac. 2.
that Adam, and David even in committing of Idolatry, homicide, all kind of
wickedness, they be st^l in gods favor. mark* I pray you how the saying of the
prophet Zachary is verified in you. In this says he, ye gri^^e the Lord that
ye say, They tha^ d^ evil are good in the sight of God, and such please him,
can there be any thing more manifes^ly sp^ken against your error* and truly
it seems to your doctrine, we be taught by the hol^e Ghost in the word that
God hates all works of iniquity, and he that commits sin is o^ the
devil And does God favor them that be members of the devil. Paul saeth no
unclean person has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ Ose ^
so have they broken my covenant and set me at naught. If Adam in breking the
Lords covenant, setting God at naught, was still beloved of God, then may we
say with the wrath of God, Thus we (...), tha^ Adam and David and all other
(...)

ANSWER.
Albeit that I perceive yt either ignorance does so impede you, orels that
malice does so blind you, yt nether ye will nor can understand yt, which in ye
self is most sensible and plain, I will never theles yet once again repete,
that wc before I have said to the e^d, that we may give testimony, asw^ll, to
those yt now live, as unto ye posterity to com, what doctrine it is, wc ye so
furiously impugn. If ignorance be the cause why thus ye rage against us, ye
may be taught, if ye list to bestow your ears to hear, your eyes to read,
and hearts to understand. for o^ doctrine is not as some of you do complein,
dark nor obscure, except yt it be, to those to whom ye Apostle affirmed, yt
his Eua^gill was hid. But if that malice wc ye have conceived against the
eternal truth of God, Answer. to the ^. 2. 3.
does so blind you that ye will not se ye bright son in ye midday, there rests
no more to us, but to desire of God either to remove this your deuelish malice
(I write as knows God even from ye grief of heart): orels so to stay and
bridle it, y^ it trooble not his afflicted Church. Ye accuse us, as yt we made
no difference betwext vice and virtue, sin, and justice, nether yet betwext
Ada^, and David, as they were elected in Christ Jesus before ye fou^dacions of
the world were laid, and betwext Adam transgressing, and David committing
adultery, and murthe^.

Ye further seem to charge us as we should affirm, that God hated not sin,
nether yet that he respected vice. If our short, plain, and unfeigned
confession, be able to satisfy you in these three dowtes I have good hope yt
after this ye shall have no occasion to suspect us in such causes. Our
confession touhing sin.
first before God, before his holy Angels in heaven, and before his
congregation in earth, we protest and acknowledge, yt sin, vice, and all
kind of iniquiti^, is, and ever has been so odious, in ye presence of God, yt
he never suffered ye same unpunished, in any of his elect children. That for ye
same not only death, but also common calamities has apprehended all man kind
eue^ sithe^ce the first trasgression. That virtue, T^^ching v^rtue and justice
^^uil.
justice, and civil honesty (besides the justice of the regenerat children)
has so pleased God* that for love of the same, he has maintained and to this
day does maintein common welthes, albeit that many grievous crimes be committed
in the same. As God (we say and affirm) loves equity, justice, chastity,
truth, mercy, and te^pera^ce, so does he in some sort hieghly reward the same,
and hates unrighteousness, filthy life deceat, excess, cruelty, and ria^ous
living, which often he punishes even in manne^ eyes. And this difference, we
say God makes even amongst those, that be not regenerate, nether were ever
called to ye true knowledge of salvation. And this much briefly for the first
second and 3. This difference we make betwext Adam and David elected, in Christ
Jesus, and Adam and David transgressing gods holy comma^deme^t, and will
reveled* Adam and Dau^d elected, in Christ Jesus before the foundations of the
world were laid, were so loved in the same Lord Jesus their head, that when
they had most horribly fallen and offended, yet did God seek Adam, call upon
him gently reason with him and at length conuicting his conscience of his
offense, did make unto him, that most joyful promise of reco^ciliation: of the
same love (we say it proceeded) that God did send the Prophet Natha^ to David,
the offender, that by the fiction of an other person, he lets him se the
horror of his sin, that he did first terrify, and beat down his
conscience: and after most tenderly did erect, and lift it up from the pit of
desperation. All these graces (say we) proceeded from gods immutable love which
did remain constant, (...) and i^ whom God loves sin^ers eue^ when ^hey have
off^n^ed.
both toward the one and toward the other, even in the time of their
greatest vnthank fulness. And that because they nether were beloved, nor elected
in them selves, but in Christ Jesus their head, who nether did transgress nor
offend in any jot, against the will of his heavenly father.

But Adam and David transgressing and horribly falling from God, were so hated
in them selves, and for their sins, that first behooved the innocent Son of
God, by his death to make a satisfaction* for their sins* as also for the
sins of all gods children. And secondarely we say, preach write, and
maintein, that the sin was so odious before God, that his justice could do
none other, but inflict upon Adam, and his posteritie^ The penalty of death
corporal, How ^dious is sin in g^ds pr^sence.
the punisheme^tes, and plagues, which daily we do se apprehend gods children.
that upon David, he did execute his just judgment, which in these words he
pronounced. Now therefore ye sword shall never depart from thine house,
because, thou have despised me, and taken the wife of vriah the Hittite, to be
thy wife. Thus says the lord: behold I will raise up evil against the out of
thine own house, and I shall take thy wives before thine eyes and give them
unto thy neighbor and he shall lie with thy wives in the sight of sun. for
you did it secretly, but I shall do this thing before all Israel, and before
y^ sun. This sentence, ^. Sam. 12
I say, most justly pronounced, was after most sharply, and yet most justly)
for sin committed) put in* execution. And so do we affirm that none of gods
children be they never so dear, shall escaip punishment, if contempteously
they transgress.

I suppose yt this our confession nothing does offend you, except in this one
thing yt we affirm that God still loved Ada^ and David after their sin,
before yt his holy Sprit wroght in their hearts any true repentance. And yet
I wonder why this should offend you, seeing yt we assign the cause, not to be
them selves, nether any virtue with in them selves, but Christ Jesus, in whom
they were elected and chosen. The signs of gods love, we have evidently
proved, and y^ end and issue did witness yt gods love was not mutable. If you
require scriptures, for the probatio^ of ye same. Behold they are ready. if
when we were enemies we were reconciled unto God, by the death of his sone,
much more we being reconciled shall be saved by his life. Romans 5*
And a little before in the same chapter. When we were sinners Christ died for
us, etc. And ye Apostle John: herein appears the love of God toward us, y^
his only begotten son has he sent in to the world, that we may live by
him: herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us. And has sent
his Son in the mercieseat* for our sins. These are verey plain, and we
think that no reasonable man will deny to Adam and to David, that which the
holy Ghost makes common to all gods elect children, to wit, to be beloved of
God* even when they were ennemies, dead in sin, drowned in idolatry, and
polluted with all filthiness, as witnesses the Apostle in these words: And you
when ye were dead by sin, Ephe. ^
in the which ye somtymes walked, according to this world, according to y^
prince, to whom power is the air, which is the spirit now working in the
rebellious children, The vnspea^kable lo^^ of God toward his elect.
amongst whom we all had somtymes conversation, in the lust^s of our flesh,
doing those things, which pleased the flesh, and the mind, and were of nature
the sons of wrath like as others. But God who is rich in mercy, for his
own great love, by the which he loved us, even when we were dead by sins
(mark, and if ye be offended, complein upon the holy Ghost) has qwickened us
together with Christ (by grace ye are saved) and has raised us up together
with him, and to gither with him, has caused us to sit amongst y^ heavenly,
by Christ Jesus, to show in ye ages to com, his most rich grace in his
liberality, by Christ Jesus. God open your eyes that you may se the light, and
mollify your hearts, that ye may magnify with gods children his
superaboundant love and mercy bestowed even upon the most unworthy.

If ye think yt this love has only place before that man offend, you se the
holy Ghost plainly repugneth to your sentence, for he speaks to them that
had been polluted and defiled with all sins. ^epli^
If yet ye reply, but that was during the time of their ignorance and not
after they were illuminated by grace, ye have said nothing against our
confession. for we affirm that God loves sinners being wrapped in death and
damnation by sin. (...)
and yt we have plainly proved. But yet for your satisfaction, and instruction
(for I take to record the Lord Jesus y^ I would bestow my own life, to join you
fully to Christ Iesue) I will proceed a little further with you* Do ye think
that the sin of David touching the nature and quality of ye sin it self,
was more horrible and odious be fore God, then were all the sins committed in
Ephesus, by those, to whom the Apostle writes? yea then the ^innes which were
done amongst ye hole Gentiles? I trust ye will not think it. and we clearly
see that God loved y^ elect in Ephesus and amongst the Gentiles when they were
drouned in all kind of iniquity. If still ye reply David was unthankful who
after so many benefits received, so traterously declined from God, followi^g
his own appetites, and of purposed counsel, murdering his innocent servant,
and y^ with great ignominy of God. This nether do, nether yet ever did we
deny. but yet as y^ question is other, so is not our co^fe^^ion proved falls,
Albeit David was unthankful (yea and after Ada^ most unthankful, of any of
gods children to his days). for herein stands the doubt, whether y^ the
unthankfulness of gods children, after they have once received mercy, grace,
and large benefits from gods hands, does so alienat the mind of God, from
them, that he bears to them no manner of love, till they turn to him by
repentance The contrary hereof, we hold, and affirm, not fearing to auowe,
that repentance, Faith and repentance are the eff^ct^s of gods love which he
beare^h to his elect in Christ lesus.
as it is joined with faith which is the fre gift of God, so is it the effect
of gods constant love toward them, and no cause of the same. And for the more
ample declaration hereof, let us compare the denial of Peter, and ye defection
of all the Apostles, with the sin of David. Albeit Peter was not called to be
a wordlie prince, as David was, yet I think ye will not deny, but to be called
to the office of an Apostle, to be Christ's scoller the space of three years, to
be so familiare with Christ, yt he alone with other two did se Christ their
master tra^sfigured, did hear y^ joyful voice from heaven* did se Moises and
Helias speak with him, my trust is, I say, David's offense compared with Peter's
d^niall of Christ
yt ye will not deny, but that those were graces no thing inferior to David's
kingdom temporal: and yet how horribly yt Petet did deny Christ Jesus, ye are
not ignorante. Yea but say ye, Peter wept, and soght grace with repentance. But
I ask when? the holy Ghost does answer, y^ it was after the cock had crowen,
and that Christ Jesus had looked unto him. Proceeded yt look I beseech you from
love, or hatered? It should seem in deed, by the effect, that it came from
love. for then it is said that Peter remembered the words of his master and so
went forth and wept bitterly. By all liklihode, then were his masters vordes
before qwyte blotted out of his memory. But God be praised, we need not to
depend upon uncertain conjectures. The fall and denial of Peter (as in an other
place we have declared) came not by chance, as a thing, whereof Christ Jesus
was ignorant. He did forese it, and before speaks it. And what comfort gave
Christ Jesus unto him* before he pronounced that sharp sentence, before ye cock
crow thou shall deny me thries. This comfort I say, which oght of all
faithful most to be ex^olled: Simon, Simo^, behold Satan has desired you,
that he may sift you as wheat, but I have prayed for the, Luk ^2
that thy faith fail not: and thou being converted confirm thy brethren. Did
Christ pray for Peter, knowing that he should deny him? so he affirms. Does
the prayer of Christ Jesus and the effect thereof vanish in a moment? God for
bid, that such impiety take place i^n our hearts. The Apostle does witness
that as his sacrifice is ever recent before God, so is his prayer effectual
ever for his elect. Does God utterly hate detest, and abhor such, as for whom
Christ Jesus prays? yea commends to his mercy, before they fall i^n to
danger? my hope is that the godly will not so judge. The same I might prove by
the stowte denial of Thomas (besides the defection of all the rest) who after
that the glad tidings of Christ's resurrection, God can not hate such as Christ
prays for.
was confirmed by the testimony of many, did obstinatly say, except that I put
my fingers in the holes, etc. I will not believe. Here ye se was no repentance of
his former infidelity, but rather an augmentation, and increase of the same.
And did it proceed from love, or from hatered, that Christ comes unto him,
and does offer to satisfy his curiosity, in all things, willing him to be
faithful and not to remain an infidele?

Consider now how simply and plainly, we have opened our minds unto you, God
grant you his holy Spirit rightly to understand, and charitably to interpret
the things that be spoken, etc.

Now will I briefly go through these scriptures which ye abuse, and violently
wrest against us not making so long discourse to amend your judgment, as I
have done to fore. For if things alredie spoken shall not profit, I must
confess my self destitute of counsel, for this time. The words of the
prophet (where necgligently ye name Zachary for Malachie), Mala. 2.
nether serve your purpose, nether yet are verefied in us. for we be not as the
priests, who in those days permitted plain iniquity, and contempt of God,
and of his statutes, universally to be done by the people, and yet they did not
oppone them selves to the same. Read the Prophet and con^ict us of those
things if ye can.

We are sorry, that ye have no better opinion of us, To the 3
then that our hole study should be to entyse the people to sin. Not that we
do much fear, that by your words, ye can persuade any, except your own
faction* (and hardly those) to credit you in that behalf. for all praise be to
God, our lives, doctryn, and correction of vice, do witness the contrary. but
our greatest sorrow is, for your condemnation, which doubtless must ensue such
wicked judgment, if hastily ye repent not.

As the Sun is not to be blamed, To the 4 The sun is not blamed because the
carrion stinketh
albeit the carrion by the heat thereof, be more and more corrupted: so is not
our doctrine, although that carnal men, thereof take carnal liberty. for that
ye know did ensue the doctrine of S. Paul.

We do no les affirm both in word and writing the^ here you do affirm, to
wit: That he who committeh sin, is of the devil. but herein I suppose
stands the difference, that you and we understand not that phrase alike. we
understand that the man co^mitteh sin, Romans 6 To the 5* ^. I^a. ^ What it is
to committ sin.
whose hole study, mind, and purpose from time, to time, is bent upon
iniquity: and such do we affirm to be of the devil, who sins from the
beginning. If you understand, that every action committed against the law of
God, makes a man the son of the devil, we must liberally speak that so we do
not understand the mind of the Apostle. for plain it is that he means not of
actions particulare, be they never so grievous, whereof a man after repents,
and from the same desisteth: but of a continual exercise, delight, and study,
which man has in sin. And this is plain I say, The meaning of the place
alleged 1. John 3
by the words which immediately proceed and go before, he that exercises
justice (says he) is just eue^ as he is just: he yt commits sin is of
the devil. for from the beginning the devil sins. Here is the exercise of
justice put in contrariety to the committing of sin. An exercise we know
requireh a continual study and practyse. I think ye will not say, that one
just work makes a man just, and so consequently the son of God, except he
proceed from justice to justice. The same say we must be understand of the
committing of sin: for nether Adame, To the. 5.
nor David did any longer committ their former sins, then by grace they began
to repent. And so did they not remain unclean persons, nor in bondage of the
devil. Neither yet can it be proved, that ever they were members of the devil,
nor of his kingdom, albeit willingly they made them selves slaves to him: whom
Christ Jesus notwithstanding did vendicate to him self, To the. 6.
and deliver from that thraldom. Because of the fre gift of God his father,
they did appertein to his kingdom: nether ever be you able to prove by any of
these sentences, that ever they were out of the election, as before is declared.

The place of the prophet Oseas is of you evil understand* Os^ 6.
the lack of the hebrew tongue may be the cause of your error. And albeit your
great, and perfect angel Castalio pretend great knowledge in that tongue, yet
in that, as in many other places a child may epsy his negligence. True it is
that in the hebrew, this word Adam is in that place. But if we shall understand
that word wheresoever it is found in the scripture, for the person of Adam our
first father, we shall make a mad translation, and a sense more mad. Such as
have, but mean understanding in that tongue do know, that that word is often
common for any man, as in the prophets is most evident.

The verity of the text is this, they have transgressed the couenante, How
^his word Ada^ in 6. cha. of ^seas ogh^ to be understand.
as the couenante of a man, they have rebelled against me etc. God compleineth
upon Ephraim and Judah, that they had no further respect, reverence nor regard
to that most excellent couenante and league, which God had made with them, to
wit, that he would be their God, and they should be his people. for God had
preferred them to all nations of the earth, and had set them a part from
others, to serve and honor him in holiness of lief, and to offer unto him rather
spiritual the^ carnal sacrifice. But they served him at their pleasure: yea,
and in that land which they had received of gods most liberal benediction, they
did decline to Idolatry. for that he means, where that he says: there have
they rebelled, that is, where that they most oght to be obedient. This I doubt
not shall every man, who diligently marketh the scope of the prophet perceive
to be his very meaning.

Otherwies, To the^
and more sharply I might have answered your ignorance, who can se no
difference betwext Adam once sinning, and yet shortly after by grace called to
a new, and more sure league with God (which with all gladness and thankfulness
he did receive) and the manifest contemners of God, which do nothing else, but
delight in sin. form the which albeit, that ten thousand times they be
called, yet contemning all society with God, their pleasure is, to remain in
vanity, and so finally in death. This difference, I say ye oght to have
observed, and then I doubt not, but that ye would have exempted Adam, from the
rank of such as contempteously cry, it is but labor lost to serve God. If
diligently ye shall consider what is written in Job, Job 21 Mal^^. 3
and in Malachie the third cha. ye shall easily understand that the prophet
there deuideth ye hole multitude, in these two sorts of men, to wit, in those
that be proud obstinate conte^ners, and in them yt feared the Lord, who^ he
calls his peculiare people, whom he promised to spare, as a man spares his
son that serves him. And one of this last sort understand we Adam to have
been all his days, after his fall, and reco^ciliation by grace. The lord purge
your hearts (if his good pleasure be) from yt venom, which so often moves you
to spew forth your own shame, sometimes crying: that we be led with the spirit
of Balaam: and now affirming* that we be careless libertynes. To wc blasphemies
because I can nether answer without ye sorrow and grief of heart, nether
without some offense of godly ears, I will remit judgment to him, to who^ as
he has from the beginning, opened things that for a time lay hid in darkness,
so I dout not, but that he will, yea and that shortly reuele unto the world
with what spirits both you and we be led. when more occasion shall be offered,
I purpose, if so it please the mercy of my God to assist me, to notify with
what spirits you and your sect have been led here to fore.

What soever ye gather of the words of the Apostle it is altogether out of ye
purpose. for in none of all those places does he define and determine what Adam,
To the 8 9. and ^0
and David were, when they had sinned, but plainly he declares, what trial
oght every man to take of him self* when Christ Jesus is preached unto him,
affirming that if any have not the spirit of Christ Jesus, that he is not of
his. but ye spirit of Christ remains not in unclean and profane persons, say
you. but yet I affirm that Adam and David oght not to be no^bred in that band.
for although they sinned, and that most horribly, yet did they not abide in that
estate. And albeit they were not led with the spirit of Christ, when they
sinned, yet they were both led, drawn, and governed by his omnipotent spirit,
when they repented. And so can ye never be able to prove them to be reprobates,
How Ada^ and David were never repr^bates
no not even when they sinned: except that ye be able to prove, that they
finally perished in sin. for this principal do I still hold, that true faith
and true repentance (which the reprobate ^^uer have) be the fruits of Election.
The place of the Apostle written in the 13. chapter of the second Epistle to
the Corinthians, is neither well marked, nor rightly applied by you, neither
yet will it suffer any such conclusion as ye gather of it. The mind of the
Apostle is this: After the departing of Paul from Corinthus, where after many
storms sustained, he had established the form of a Church, did enter in falls
Prophets, whose chief study was to eleuate the auctorite of Paul and so to
deface his hole labor, affirming that he was not worthy to be called an
Apostle. for he was never in the company of Christ, others were of greater
estimation and faour then he was.

And as a multitude is ever more ready to receive poison the^ holsom medicine,
agreate number began to give ear unto them: and so began little to esteem, what
so ever Paul had labored amongst them. Against which unthankfulness* the
Apostle very sharpley writes, as in both his epistles does appear. And
amongst other his arguments, which he uses to prove that he was an Apostle,
nothing inferior to the greatest, he adduceth the^ selves for a testimony,
saing: Try your selves if ye be in the faith, 2. Cor* 1^
prove your selves. know ye not your selves, that Jesus Christ is in you,
except yt ye be reprobates? By these words most sharp, and most vehement he
laboreth to convict their conscience, that he was an Apostle, and that the
prooffe of his Apostleship (as in an other place he does affirm) was declared
in them, as he should say: your falls Apostles aff^rme, that I am not worthy of
the name of an Apostle. but if the office of an Apostle be to preach Christ
Jesus, and if the true sign, The pl^ce of the 13. chap. 2. Corin. declared
that decerneth the true Apostle from the false be, that Christ so potently
works by his ministry, that Christ Jesus takes possession in the hearts
of the hearers by the true preaching of his word, then be judges your selves
whether I be an Apostle or not. Call your conscience to examination, in what
estate I did find you. were ye not drowned in all sorts of iniquite? did ye
not walk in darkness, without any true light of God? And in what estate did I
leave you? Try and examine your selves in what estate ye do yet stand, you can
not be insensible, you can not be so ignorant, but ye must know, whether that
Christ dwells in you or no. If you will acknowledge, and co^^es that Christ
dwells in you, then must ye needs confess, that I am an Apostle. For by my
labors and preaching did you receive Christ Jesus. And if to deface my labors,
and to defraud me of that honor, which God, of his mercy has given unto me ye
list deny, that either ye received Christ Jesus, either yet that he remains in
you, then do ye confess your selves reprobates.

Paul does not absolutely define that they were reprobates, but puts in to
their choice, whether they would confess, that Christ Jesus did remain in them
by faith, which they had received by the preaching of Paul, and so would admit
him to be an Apostle: or to grante, that they had nothing to do with Christ,
and so to confess them selves reprobates. Now let the indifferent reader judge
whether that either faithfully ye cite the text, either that righteously ye
conclude upon the same. The Apostle says not, except that Christ dwell in
you, you are reprobates, but says, as before I have alleged, do ye not know
your selves that Christ Jesus is in you? except that in some what ye be
reprobates. And albeit that the words were such, as ye recite, how can you
thereof conclude, David, and Adam were reprobates, when they sinned? seeing that
Paul in that place makes mention of no other sin, except of the denial of
Christ, to remain in them, of their ingratitude toward him, whom God had
appointed preacher unto them and of giving ear and credit to falls Apostles,
scla^derers of Christ's true messingers* how justly I might turn Paul's words
upon your heads, you easily may epsy: but all such reasoning I do from my
heart abhor. If ye can be able to prove that Adam refused the grace offered,
or that David did storm against Nathan, either affirming or suspecting him to
be a falls prophet, then had your argument some probability. for only of such,
and to such speaks the Apostle in that place. Thus does ^ther your
ignorance, or malice wresting the scriptures against their native sense,
compel me to trouble the reader much more then I would, if any sincerity were
found in you.

We do constantly affirm, To the 11
that by the sin of one man did death enter in to the world. for Adam did not
only lose him self, but also did with him self wrap all his posterity in sin,
death and damnation, so that Adam and all his sons were in him lost. But
thereof it does not follow (as ye affirm) that therefore they were out of the
election, from the transgression unto the promise. for as before we have
plainly proved, they were elected in Christ Jesus before the foundacio^s of y^
world were laid, in whom they did stand elected, and beloved even when they
fell in Ada^ at which time ye election which from all eternity was kept in the
counsel of God, began to be notified, and manifested to man's knowledge. The
fall and sin of man was the way and means, by the which gods election did
appear, but was not the cause, It beh^ued all men to dye in Adam.
why that it was destroyed. And so if with reverence ye could consider the
mystery of our redemption in Christ Jesus, ye should plainly se, that it
behooved all to die in Adam, that the elect might receive life in Christ Jesus
alone.

The words of Christ Jesus our master, To the 12.
rehearsed by the Evangelist S. John, John:
ye do shamefully abuse for in that place he entreats not, whether a sinner
duri^g the time of his blindness and sin, is appointed to damnation or not,
nether yet whether such as before have had knowledge, as Adam and David had, be
altogether void of faith, by reason of sin after committed. None of these two
poi^tes I say does our Master in that place entreat. But unto Nichodemus he
plainly declares, that the cause of life is faith, and the cause of
condemnation is incredulity and vnbe leif. Not that Christ Jesus affirms,
that every man that is unfaithful at any time is or shall be condemned. for God
has wrapped all under unbelief. yt he may have mercy upon all, as S. Paul
confesses him self to have been a persecuter, and unfaithful. But the true
meaning of Christ is yt such as dispyse ye light offered, and remain
invnbelief to ye e^d, have their condemnation alredie appointed, as contrary
wise who so ever with full obedience do steadfastly believe the same shall have
the life everlasting, not withstanding the manifest tran sgressions of the law.

The rest of this part is be fore answered and therefore I will not with
repeticion trouble the reader. for ye be never able to prove, To the, 13* 14.
15 and. 16.
that Adame and David were so, out of the love of God, that he did not love
them in Christ his Son, in whom they were elected. David was no such
mankiller as was Cayn, of whom, Saint John speaks, who delited in blood to
the end. Nether did Natha^ show, nor David pronounce any such judgment
against him self, as ye imagine, but being convicted in in his own conscience,
how horribly he had offended, he did hear not withstanding that joyful
sentence: The Lord has taken a way thy sin, thou shall not die etc. Which
sentence no doubt proceeded from that immutable love, wc was reserved to him in
Christ Jesus, even when he was fardest declined from God. It will be hard for
you to prove by evident scriptures, that David was altogether void of faith.
but granting, that he, as concerning his own sense, and feling, was utterly
dead, yet does it not thereof follow, that so he displeased God, that he fell
from the love and favor of God, as touching his election. for the Apostle (upon
whose words ye seem to ground your reason) means not, that the lack of
faith, The lack of faith in all persons d^^th not so displease God that he
utterly reie^teth the^
in all persons, at all times, and in all respects, does so displease God,
that he hates them, and rejects them to death everlasting. For children for
a time lack faith, and yet Crist pronounces that their Angels do se the
face of his father, and that the kingdom of heaven apperteineth to such. Thomas
was unfaithful even after Christ's resurrection. And yet did he not so
displease his master, as before we heave touched, but that he did seke^ him,
and did remove his incredulity. And Christ Jesus did rebuke the unbelief of
his disciples, and the hardness of their hearts. but yet did he not utterly
dispyse them. But now to the rest.

ADVERSARY.
But if the scripures will not satis^ie you, then must you be beaten The 29.
section.
That (...) they esteem it a great madness, to say that Christ should suffer
death for the offense committed by Adam, even so may I collect of your
error-for what needs Christ to die for them, whom nether Adams transgression*
nether their own could make them fall from gods election. but now I will more
largely dilate this argument, Election was before the world when there was no
sin, and the promise of Christ, was made sithe^se the world was created,
because of sin for had not sin been we neded no new promise being alredie
just and holy images of God. Now if the elect did not

ANSWER.
In dilating your argument by the which ye go about to prove yt Christ's
preciouse death was surperfluouse and vain, To the 1. and 2
if the elect did not fall from their election, this reason ye use.

Election was before the world when there was no sin, and the promise of Christ
was made sithence the world was created, because of sin for had not sin been
we ned^d no new promise being alredie just and holy ^mages of God. Now if the
elect say you, did not fall out of the election by Adams transgression, then
need they no r^demer, being alredie save by reason of the election in the which
they were before sin and remain still in the same. etc*

In this argument ye commit two foul faults. The first, ye take that for a
thing true, and confessed, which is false. and therefore by us always denied.
for thus ye reason: man was elected before the world was created, but man
sinned aftre the world was created, Ergo man fell from his election. we still
deny the conclusion, and do affirm, that as we were elected in Christ Jesus
before all times, so did the elect ever remain^ in Christ. and therefore after
that they had sinned, it behooved that the promise should be declared, that by
the same the elect might receive comfort, and be assured of their election.

Your second fault, more declares your gross ignorance in the mystery of
our redemption. for from election ye straight ways leap to glorificacion and
salvation, observing nether mids nor means, which gods wisdom has
appointed, and determined to go betwext True it is, God has elected in Christ
to life everlasting his chosen children. But how? Saint Paul yea the hole
scriptures, wheresoever mention is made of our election, joins therewith the
death and blood of Christ. for none otherwies were we elected in him, but that
he should sustein the punishment for our transgression. And that we should
receive life, which we had lost in Adam and in our selves, by the means of his
death and resurrection. therefore where ye reason, if the elect did not fall
out of the Election, by Adams transgressio^, the^ need they no redemer, being
alredie saved, by reason of their election, the conclusion is false, and the
reason vain. for the elect have need of a redemer, Why the elect have need of
a redemer
not because that they did fall out of election but by reason that they did fall
from justice to sin, and from obedience to dissobedie^ce and therefore need
they a redemer, a physician, and one to give the^ life. because yt they being
elect in gods eternal counsel are yet fallen into bondage into mortal sickness,
and death, by their own tra^sgression. If ye can prove yt the elect did not
sin, and that they are no^ sick, then might ye have concluded, that they
neded no redemer nor physician. To the 3
And so ye might have proceeded in your argument upon the words of the Apostle
saing: that if righteousness comes by the law, then Christ died in vain, but
seeing that all gods children are fallen in to sin, the bondage and misery
whereof, they in this lief continually feel, how justly ye may conclude, that
because they remained in gods election, and so consequently in his favor by
Christ, that therefore they neded no redemer, let the indifferent reader judge.

If it seem strange to you, that God loved sinners in Christ besides the places
that are before alleged for probation of that part, hear what the verity it
self pronounces: So God loved the world (says our master) that his only
begotten Son has he given. whom soever ye shall understand under the name of
the world, ye can not s^clude sinners from it. where ye most irreverently ask,
what then need they of Christ to reco^cile them, I answer (with greater fear
and reverence then alas you declare) even such need they have of Christ as the
body has of the soul, or yet the living man of wholesome nuriture, yea much
more. for albeit the body have lief, by the means of meat and drink, yet have
the elect nether lief nor reconciliation, but by Christ Jesus, yea and that by
the means of his death, and passion, by the which, just payment and
satisfaction is made to gods justice, for their sins. And so are they
reconciled, who by nature are the enemies to God.

We do not deny but that Christ's death is sufficient for to redeem the sins
of the hole world. To the 4
but because all do not receive it with faith, which is the fre gift of God
given to the chosen children, therefore abide the unfaithful in just
condemnation. God remitt unto you (if his good pleasure be) as well your
vnreuerent conclusion as your most unjust accusation, in which ye burden us,
that we will infect the Christianity with the chief error, with the which the
Jews are infected, who esteem it a great madness, to say that Christ should
suffer death for the sins and offenses committed by Adam. Assuredly I do more
then wonder that such impiety shall be found in any creature indewed with
reason, but I remitt judgment to God. Thus you proceed.

THE ADVERSARY.
The 30. section.
and that such may fall it appears by tha^ which is written in the Epistle to
the Hebrews, Hebr. 1^
how much more suppose you shall he be punished which treads under fete the
Son of God, and

He^r. 6
it is written to the Hebr. where it is declared, such one as received all these
chief benefits, that any man can receive i^ this world yea no man can be
participa^t of no greater gifts during this lief if ye deny such one I say to
be elect, surely ye are of a perverse repro^ate 2. Cor. 6
of such does also Peter speak* that after they were clean escaped from the
filthy^e^ of the world, 2. Per. 2
through the knoledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ are yet tangled
again therein and overcome whose latter end^ is wors then the beginning. And
such one is compared to a dog which returns S. James if any of you do err
from the truth, Jacob 5
and a another co^uerte him, let the same know that he which conuerteth the
sinner from going astray out of his way shall save asoule from death. what be
they who^ James says, they do err from the truth? If ye say reprobate,
consider how they be converted to the truth, and saved from death. If you say
they be ^. Tim. ^
Paul wills Timothy to inform with all meaknes them which resist the
truth, if God at any time will give them repentace for to know the truth and
that they may com to them selves again out of the snare which are holden
captive of him at his will. If thou say that these be elect for what purpose
should they repent? Then this is no sound doctrine, which ye t^ach. The lord
planted his v^^yard hedged it and walled it and planted it with goodly grapes,
Iesa. 5 lere. ^
If they were goodly grapes and of a good root, as we read in Jeremy, then
were they no repr^ba^es. for there the lord witnesses that there could no more
be done for his vineyarde then he had done, then had he not preordina^e them to
destruction. But (as he says) I made the o^ Israel that thou might serve me
ye^ became they reprobates, and perished by this we se that the elect and
ch^sen become reprobates through their noughtines and wikednes. The lord will
be mer^ifull unto Jacob* Isa. 14
and will yet ch^se Israel again, and set them in their own land, Seeing the
lord does chose them again, then were they fall^n out of their former election
when Israel was young I loved him and called my son out of the land of Egypt,
forasmuch as Israel was the son of God, and that also beloved insomuch that
the lordled them with cords of friendship, and bonds of love they must needs,
be ^he elect of God, yea because they provoked the lord through their
abominations, they are cast away* and the lord rewarde^h them according to
their deserts.

ANSWER.
If I should labor to the end of this your most confused work, to reduce
every scripture by you wrested and abused to the true meaning and
understanding of the holy Ghost as hitherto I have done in the most part of
them, which ye have alleged, my trauale should be great and the work should
excede a just measure. Therefore seeing that sufficiently, by the plain
scriptures of God, I have confirmed the doctrine, which we teach, believe, and
maintein: and by the same truth of gods word I have confuted your error, from
hencefurth I inte^d, only to to^che the proposition, which ye maintein: and by
confuting the same, briefly either by scripture, orels by exemple to show in
what sort ye wrongfully apply the sc^iptures, to maintein your error offering
yet to satisfy, to my power, such as charitably shall ask of me, by word or
writing further explanation of any scripture by you alleged, and by me at this
time not fully resolved.

The chief proposition which ye mai^tein to ye end of this your book, is that
the elect may fall from their election To the which I answer, that if ye
understand, that those whom God the father has elected in his eternal
counsel, to lief everlasting in Christ Jesus, The anabaptists hold that the
elect may fall from their election. John 6 John 10
may so fall from their election, that finally they perish, if this (I say) be
your understanding, then I fear not to affirm, that proposition to be
utterly falls, erroneous, and damnable, as it that does expressedly repugne to
gods plain scriptures. for Christ Jesus does affirm that so many as his
father has given to him, shall come unto him, And to such as do come, he
promises life everlasting which he has in him self, for the salvation of his
flock, whereof none shall perish, for forth of his hands, can none be pulled
away.

But because this before is largely entreated I come shortly to the scriptures
which ye abuse. To the 1 2 and 3


First ye prove, that those which be elected, be sanctified by the spirit, 2.
The 2 He^r. 10.
and through believing of the truth which we confess to be most true.
Thereafter ye allege that such, as be sanctified, may after dishonor the
spirit of grace tredde down the blood of the testament, and so draw to
damnation. I answer, the cause of your error is, that ye make no difference
betwext the sanctification, and lively faith, which is proper only to the
sons of God, which once begone, is perpetual, and that sanctification, and
faith, which is common to the reprobate, and therefore it is but temporal.

If this distinction displeases you, quarrel with ye holy Ghost, and not with
us: for of his plain works, and words evident, have we received it. for all
Israel were sanctified to be ye kingly priesthode, all were circumcised, yea
and did drink of yt spiritual drink: and yet were they not all inwardly
sanctified unto salvation and life everlasting. The hole tribe of Levy were
sanctified to y^ service of ye Lord, in his tabernacle, but how many of the^
did still remain profane persons, y^ scripture co^cealeth not. Eue^ so all yt
great multitude, who^ Christ fed in ye wilderness, yea all those yt adhered for
a time to his doctrine, were after some manner sanctified, that is separated, and
divided from ye rest of ye world. But that sanctification was but temporal,
like as also was their faith. we do not deny but that the reprobate have some
manner of faith, and some sort of sanctification for a time, that is, that they
are compelled eue^ by the impire of the Spirit of God, to confess and
acknowledge that all things spoken in gods sciptures, are true. And yt
therefore their conscience in afeare, and terror do seek some means to please
God for the avoiding of his ve^gea^ce. For as this is another the true faith
justifying neither yet the perfect sanctification of the Spirit of God which
renews ye elect, in the inward man: so does nether of both long co^^inue,
for they returning to their natural profanation and darkness, do leave the way
of light and life and draw them selves to death and damnation. But hereof
without the contumely of the Son of God and without abnegation of his plain
verity, ye can not conclude that the elect members of his body, It is
impossible that christ should lose any of the me^br^^ of his body.
can be rest out of his hands, that those for whom sole^nely he has prayed,
that they should be sanctified in the verity, and that they should be one
with him, as he is one with his father, may come to final profanation, and so
to perdition. we fear not to affirm that to be a thing no les impossible, then
that it is, that Christ Jesus shall cease to be head of his Church, and the
savior of his body.

In the words of the Apostle written in the second chapter to the Ephesians, To
the 4 5 and 6
ye seem not to understand his meaning, where he says: ye were so^times
without Christ, ^for say you) we are sure, that without Christ there is no
election. In which words, thou that writest, plaiest with the simple ignorant
reader, The adversary plai^th the fol^sh ^^^hister.
the vile sophister, confounding by the inglishe word, without, that which in
latin is most evidently distincted. Does Paul say? Eratis aliquando extra
Christu^? or says he not? Eratis sine Christo? To make the matter sensible to
you (my dear brethren) be you never so simple, where he says without Christ,
there is no election, that proposition is ^rue, if it be understand, that man
was never elected to lief everlasting, but in Christ Jesus only. But if he
will affirm that none are elected in Christ Jesus, without Christ, that is to
say, before that they come to the true, and perfect knowledge of gods mercies
in Christ, that proposition is most falls and does repugne (as plainly ye may
se) to the mind and words of the Apostle. for he affirms, that we were
elected in Christ Jesus, before the fundation of ye world was laid, yea when we
were dead by sin, ignorant of him, strangers from the testament of his promise
which S. Paul calls to be without Christ, without God in this world, and
without the league of the testament. And by these words does the Apostle
magnify the superabounda^t mercies of God showed to the world in Christ Jesus.
By the which he received not only the Jews who long had continued in league
with God, but also the Gentiles to the participation of his glory: albeit that
from the days of Abraham, they had lived as despised and rejected of God. Let
the reader now judge how strongly ye conclude. To the place of the A^postle,
touching the illumination of such, as after utterly fall back, I have before
answered, ye unjustly accuse us, yt we seek shifts and narrow bores, to the
end yt we shall not be subject to the truth. For this is our plain
confession, which we simply and boldly do affirm, that this is a stable and
immutable foundation: the Lord knows his own, that no creature is able to
seperat his elect from his love, Romans ^.
which in Christ Jesus, he bears to them.

Where boldly ye affirm us to be of a peruers and reprobat mind, To the 7 8.
9. and 10.
if we deny them to be elect, who have received from God such graces, as man in
this life can receive no greater. It may seem that because ye delight to speak
what ye please, ye take liberty to lay to our charge what soever seems good
to you.

I trust ye be never able to prove that any of us, has affirmed that he who
had received of the fre gift of God a true unfeigned and lively faith, is not
the elect of God, and that faith we know do gods children, which cum to aige
and discretion receive in this life, as Peter did: against the which, did
Christ pronounce, that the gates and ports of hell should not prevail. But it
appears to me that your doubt, is either to wit, whether God bestows his
great and rich talentes upon the reprobate. for if so he should do, ye
asffirme yt he bestows them in vain, meaning, to receive no fruit of them.
That God bestows great talentes upon the very reprobate, the scriptures
manifestly do witness, to speak nothing of lief, reason, corporal health,
richesse, and honors, which the reprobate in greatest abundance do possess,
does not Christ witness; that many shall cry, Lord in thy name we have
prophesied, we have cast out devils, and in thy name have we done many
wondrous works? And yet shall Christ answer I never knew you. Does not Paul
affirm that albeit he knew all mysteries, had all prophecy, and knowledge,
and all faith (such he means, as by the which miracles are wroght) yet
without he had charity he were nothing? But yet I pray you, do prophecy,
knowledge, the gift of tongues and of miracles cease to be the good and rich
tale^tes of God? ye cry yet are they bestowed without hope of fruit to be
received, and in vain, if they be bestowed upon the reprobate. That of you is
boldly and most blasphemously affirmed. for God knows the fruit which his
Church shall receive, not only of those spiritual talentes how wicked that
ever they be (to whose dispensation, they are committed) but also of the
corporal and temporal benefit, yea of very tyranny, does his wisdom and
goodness cause a fruit and commodity com, and spring out to his Church. By the
tyranny of Nabuchadnezer, he punished the proud contemners, and tried, and
partly purged his children, who before were slothful, and negligent. by that
great conquest and victory, which he gave to Cyrus, he procured the
dedeliuera^ce of his people from bondage. By the great abundance of victuales,
given in the days of Pharao, were Jacob and his children sustained. And think
you that with out fruit and all together in vain, were these and the like
benefits bestowed? although that the most part of these were idolatrers, cruel
murderers, and reprobate, to whose custody, these tale^tes were committed. ye
are to bold thus to control God. for his wisdom will not in all things be
subject to your foolishnes. The diversity of creatures here beneth in earth,
may teach you more sobriety. How many cratures I pray you appear to our
judgment to be supernuouse and vainly created, not only because they
profitt not man, but because they are unprofitable to them selves? but shall we
therefore accuse gods wisdom, by whom they are cre^ted? God forbid. for
besides the omnipotency of his power, and wisdom manifested in their creation,
he alone knows their use, profitt and commodity, which every creature
receive of an other, how dull so ever our senses be. And the same oght you to
considre, in all talentes, and gifts committed to m^^, how wicked so ever they
be, to whom they are committed. for not only therein is gods goodness to be
praised wc exte^deth ye self, in some cases eue^ to his enemies, but also some
profitt does ever arise to his Church, by his graces, how so ever they be
abused, by the reprobat. Gods t^lentes in the very repr^bate do profit g^^s
Church.
The pregna^t wit and subtle ingin of Julian the apostatate, served the
Church, instead of aspurre in his time, and caused the godly learned more
diligently to search the scriptures of God, then before they had done. And the
same does your perverse iniquite this day toward us: Where ye say, that it is false, th^^ God did intend to best^w his tale^^es in v^ine* for as much as the
holy G^st wills and exhort^th us not t^ receive the grace of God in vain,
yet not withstanding God wills not us to rec^aue his grace in vain, we may
abusing his grace* receive it in vain other wies in vain did Paul exh^rte
us, not t^ receive his graece in vain. These be yor words and this is your
reason wc I leave to be judged upon, by y^ godly reader for we do not say that
God bestoweh his gifts in vain (albeit the reprobate be participant thereof)
but it is you yt affirm that in vain and without fruit they are bestowed,
except that all be elect to life everlasting yt receive them* which doctrine is
so strange to us, that we doubt not to affirm, with the hasard of our lives,
that by gods scriptures, 2. Cor. 6
it can not be maintained. The words of the Apostle in the place by you
alleged, nether affirms what man may do, nether yet what he may not do: but
he declares how diligently and carefully not only by preaching, but also by
exhortation and prayer he travailed, that his labors might be fruitful
amongst them, and so that they should not receive ye grace of God in vain. But
admitting that he had said, I command you not to receive the grace of God in
vain, could ye thereof conclude any more then ye may do of these words, be
you holy, for I am holy, says the lord? There is a precept given, but in
whom stands power to perform the same? If it stand not in man, say you, in
vain is the precept given. how you be able to prove that, I remitt to your
better aduiseme^t. To me is nothing vain that God speaks or commands. for
I am assured yt either by gods will reveled are the elect instructed, how they
oght to walk, or else are the reprobate in their consciences co^uict, The pla^^
of the 2. chap. of Peter ^
that knowing gods holy will, obstinatly they rebel against the same: and so
are they witnesses to their own just damnation.

The place of Peter does manifestly fight against you: for how soever the dog
has vomited the corruption of his stinking stomocke: and how so ever the sow
has appeared to have been cleansed: yet nether of both change their own
nature. But ye dog remains the dog, and therefore can do none other thing,
but to return to his vomit, and the sow remaining the sow, must needs return
to wallowe in the mire. But (say you) Peter affirms, that they were verily
escaped. I answer, as touching the truth and nature of the doctrine which they
professed, so they were* for it was the very true knowledge of God, which was
offered unto them, and which apperantly they had received. In wc if they had
continued, they should verily have been fre from all bondage, according to
Christ's promise. But because they were none of his chosen sheep, nor peculiar
flock, they did decline from ye holy commandment, and so were their last
wors then their first. because yt the servant knowing the will of the master
and not doing the same is worthy many stripes. All this I know does please
you, except, yt I affirm that they were never of Christ's chosen no^bre, no
not eue^ when they professed most boldly, when they lived most streitly, and
when most they appeared to have been purged. I will not bynd you to believe mine
affirmation, except that I bring ye witnessing of the holy Ghost, 1. I^^n 2.
S. John says, they have passed out from us (he speaks of antichrists) but
they were not of us, for if they had been of us, of a truth they should have
remained with us etc. These words need no co^me^tarie: for says he, they have
passed out from us. And why? because they were not of us, no not eue^ when
they professed most earnestly etc: Shut up your own eyes as ye li^t, this light
shall ye never be able to obscure, much less to extinguish. To the 11. 12. and
13
The place of S. James, and of ye Apostle Paul to Timothe. 2. Timoth. 2. do
teach not only the ministers of ye word, but also every faithful man, how
carefully one should procure the salvation of an other. And to make all me^
more diligent, in doing their duty, he declares in what extreme danger stand
such, as do err from the truth, or that remain in bondage of Satan, as also,
what acceptable service unto God, do such, as by whom God calls others from
the way of damnation.

That this is the simple meaning of both the Apostles, I trust every godly
man, yt diligently will read the text, shall confess with me. your foolish
questions demanding, whether they were elect or reprobate, ofwhom the Apostle
speaks, and your academical reasons grounded upon your own fantasies, I omit
as unworthy to be answered: for ye Apostle speaks to no one particulare
sort, but proposes a common and general doctrine, for the ends which I have
rehearsed before. And albeit ye fear not now to affirm, that the preaching of
repentance is in vain, if our opinion be true, the day shall com, when ye
shall know, that nether was the sharp preaching of John, nether yet the glad
tydinges and amiable voice of Christ Jesus, blown to the world in vain,
albeit that the Scribes and Pharesies remained still the generation of vipers,
and that they could nether fear nor believe the promise of salvation, because
they were not of God, but of the devil, whose children they were.

The places of Isaiah and Jeremy, Isaiah 5
I have before declared, and therefore in few words I will touch ye purpose of
the holy Ghost, which was not to instruct that people whom, when, or how many
God had elected to lief everlasting in Christ Jesus his Son, or whom for just
causes, he had reprobated, but to convict them of their manifest, and most
unthankful defection, and to take from them, all excuses, both the prophets
do declare, how gently God had entreated them, yea how beneficial he had been
to their fathers, whom he called from ignorance, whom he norished in ^is own
knowledge, and at length planted, and hedged them about with all munition and
necessary defense. So that now the children declining to Idolatry could have
no excuse. for their fathers Abraham, Isaak, Jacob, and David, whom he calls
the faithful sede, gave unto them no such example. Ierem. 2
But how says he, art thou now changed, to be unto me a degenerate vineyard?
what makes this, I pray you, for your purpose, or for to prove, that these,
that be elected in Christ Jesus, to lief everlasting, may become reprobates? If
I should answer, that the stock which was planted faithful, remained
faithful, but that it produced many rotten, and unfruitful branches, which
therefore, must needs be cut of, none of your sect were able to confute me. for
I should have the Apostle for my warrant. But I delight in nothing somuche, as
in the simple and native meaning of the scriptures, as they be alleged in
their own places by the holy Ghost. To the 14
The places of the prophets Isaiah, and Hoseas, have not both one end. for
Isaiah in the 14 chapter does promise in the person of God, that he would show
mercy to Jacob, and that he would choose Israel again: yea that he would
destroy Babylon, for their saik, and so would choose his people to him self
again, whom for a time, he appeared to have rejected, so that other lords then
he, did bear rule over them. Hoseas 11
But Hoseas in the contrary sense affirms, that because they had abused the
long patience of God, and had not righteously considered, howtenderly he had
entreated them, that therefore should the sword r^sh^ in into the city, that it
should destroy, and deuore, so that none should be found to releue them. This I
dout not, is the meaning of both the prophets. O but you cry, here is mention
made, that God will choose his people again therefore he had once rejected,
whom before he had chosen. I trust ye ^^ll not, that gods Majesty shall be
subject to perjury, for the establishement of your error. he had before
solemnly sworn not only to Abraham but also to David, that he would for ever,
be the God of that people, and that of the fruit of his loins should one fit
upon his seat, and that for ever* If he had so rejected his people, that no
election had remained, nether yet that he had made any difference betwext them,
and the profane nations, before the coming of Christ Jesus, where was the
stabilitie of this former promise? we know, yt the gifts, and vocation of God,
are without repentance in him self, yt he casts not away such, as he be
foreknew to be his own, but that in ye greatest extremity, his promise abides
stable, as in this people he most evidently declared. for he did not so
disperse them, so reject them, and as it were in his anger cast them of, and
give them over to the appetites of their ennemies, but that still he did
know, and auowe them to be his people, yea even in their greatest calamity.
As in these words he does witness, saying, when they shall be in the land of
their ennemies I will not refuse them, nether yet will I dispyse them, so that
I will utterly destroy them, or make my couenante with them, to be of none
effect, for I am the lord their God. for then I shall remember mine old
covenant, which I made with the^ when I led them forth of the land of Egypt, in
the presence of the Gentiles, that I might be their God, I the eternal. And in
the same prophet, in many places mo, the same is most evident. for thus he
writes foreseing their captivity: Isai. 44
Yet now hear o Jacob my servant and Israel, who^ I have chosen, thus says
the Lord that made the, and formed the, from the womb: he will help thee,
fear not o Jacob my servant (aduerte that yet he does acknowledge Jacob to be
his servant, even in his greatest misery) and thou righteous whom I have
chosen, for I shall power out waters upon the thirsty, and floodes upon the
dry ground: I shall power forth my spirit upon thy sede, and my blessing upon
thy buddes. And in the same Chapter, after that he has reproved the vanity of
idolaters, he says: Remember these (o Jacob and Israel) for thou art my
servant, I have formed thee to this purpose, that thou should be my servant:
Isaiab 48.
o Israel forget me not etc. For my names saike will I differ my wrath, and for
my praise will I refrein it from the, that I cut the not of etc. Lift up your
eyes to the heavens, Isaiab 51.
and behold the earth beneth, for the heavens shall vanish away like smoke,
and the earth shall wax old like a garment, and they that dwell therein shall
perish in like manner, but my salvation shall be for ever (he means the
deliverance, which he had promised to that people) and my righteousness shall not
be abolished etc. Isai. 54.
For a little while have I forsaken thee, but with great compassion shall I
gather thee etc. And the sons of strangers shall buyld up thy walls, Isaia.
60
and their kings shall serve thee. for in my wrath I smote thee, but in my
mercy I had compassion on thee etc. For Zions sake I will not hold my tongue,
Isa. 62
and for Ierusalems sake I will not rest, until the righteousness thereof break
forth, as the light, Isaia. 61
and the salvation thereof, as a burning lamp etc. And their sede shall be known
amongst the Gentiles, and their buddes among the people: All that se them
shall know them, that they are the sede, which the Lord has blessed. These and
many places mo, do manifestly witness, that God did never before the coming
of Christ Jesus in the flesh utterly reject and refuse that people (as that
they did not appertein unto him) but that he did auowe them to be his chosen,
his peculiar people and his inheritance, even when they were in greatest
misery. Yea further God had continually of the sede of Abraham, during the
time of the Law, and the prophets, some nombre openly to glorify his name in
the eyes of the world. And therefore consider with your self, how justly ye
gather upon these words of the prophet, God shall yet again choose Israel,
that therefore God had utterly rejected all Israel, yea even from the life
everlasting. for except that so ye conclude, ye have proved nothing of your
purpose, for the controversy stands not betwext us and you, whether that God
does somtymes choose, and promote a man, or a people to honor and dignity in
this life, and thereafter justly deprive him or them from the same. for this
did we never deny. But the hole controversy consists in this point, whether
that such as God in his eternal counsel, has elected in Christ Jesus to life
everlasting, can after be reprobated, and so finally perish and that shall ye
never be able to prove. That the simple reader may the better understand the
meaning of y^ prophet, this I add The people in the captivity of Babylon
were so oppressed, and so destitute of all hope ever to be restored to any
dignity or liberty again. That to them it appeared a like possible to raise
the dead carkases of such, as were buried in their graves, as to deliver them,
from the hands of the proud, and pu^sant Babylonians. And therefore does not
only Isaiah, who long before saw their bondage, and the redemption from the
same, but also Jeremiah and Ezechiel, who did se it with their eyes, with great
boldness and co^sta^cie affirm, that they should be delivered from that
bondage, yt they should be married with God and so should be chosen again, as
or Prophet here speaks, wc is not to be referred to y^ part of God, How God
di^ choose Israel again.
but to the apprehension of the people who thought them selves utterly forsaken
and rejected of God. Against this temtatio^, ye prophet says: God shall choose
Israel again, that is shall restore them to ye former dignity, yea to a
greater. And yt should he do in such sort, yt they should know yt he was God
merciful constant, and immutable of his promise. And so the renouatio^ of the
league in such sort, that the world might se that God favored Israel, is
called the new election, and new marriage, not that God had ever in him self
decreed and purposed, that the Messiah and blessed sede should descend of any
other nation, but of the sede of Abraham and house of David, but that the
people, in the time of their affliction, had received such a wound, by reason
of their grievous plagues, and former offenses that they thought yt God had
utterly rejected them, let ye prophets be red with indifferent judgment.
And this I dowbte not shall appear most true. Now to the rest of your
scriptures.

ADVERSARY.
Christ commands John to preach unto the seven Congregations Among whom
were both elect and reproba^e to whom he vs^th no such manner of doctrine, The
31 secti^.
as ye teach. ^ha^ the elect could not fall from their election but warns
them to take heed that they lose not that which they had g^ten but labor to
increase threatening them with destruction if ^hey forsake ^he grace, whereof
they were made par^akers nether discouraged be the most wicked of them, as ye
do, saying, Apocal. 2
and without she remembered from^ whence she was fallen, repented, and did her
first works, the Lord would shortly come and remove her candilstick out of her
place. The congregation of Smirna he commands so be faithful unto the death
and so should she receive the crown of life. If Christ had been of your
opinion, he had not used such manner of doctrine. In vain should 2. Pet. 3.
the long suffering of the Lord is salvation, then might she have repented not
withstanding she did not repent, then was she reprobate, likewise unto them
which committed fornication with her, Apo. 3
yet in deed she was dead. And that of her which was yet a live was in danger
of death. wherefore he wills her to call to remembrance, Apoc. 7
what she had heard and what grace she had received and to repent her of her
imperfect works, and watch, lest the Lord should like a thief come upon her
Unawares. If the congregation of Sardis 2. Pet. 3
other men be also plucked away through the err^r of the wicked, and fall from
your own (...) what should they fear vessel of God, fears him self they
should become cast aways and reprobates, and again there be none so
reprobate, but they be here comforted, space of repentance granted the^ to
turn from their wickedness, and live. So would I exhort you to repent, and
turn from your errors, and to seek for this salve of

ANSWER.
When I did first read this your blasphemous railing, I did wonder to what
purpose, ye would rehearse the aduertisementes, admonitions, and exhortations
given to the seven Churches in Asia, and unto all other churches in their names
and conditions, seeing that nothing in the same can serve your purpose, yea
altogether the holy Ghost through yt hole work, does manifestly fight against
your pestilent errors. and therefore I say at the first sight, I did wonder, to
what purpose ye would trauail, where ye were assured tolose your labor. But
when I came to your conclusion, which ye make in manner of exhortation to us, I
did perceive, that easy it is to find a staf (as the proverb says) to beat
the dog, which man would have killed. To the 1.
But to the matter. Ye boldly affirm (how so ever ye be able to prove) that
the Apostle uses no such manner of doctrine, as we teach, etc. If ye
understand, that because he teaches not in those seven epistles, or letters,
in express and plain words, that from the beginning some be elected to life
everlasting, and others be reprobate, that therefore he teaches it in no
place, quid v^ let locus ex part negans.
ye are not ignorant of ye answer, and therefore I omit it. But I ask, if you
do not think that the Apostle does dedicat this his hole work to those seven
congregations, so does him self witness (as in the first chapter is evident)
then what so ever is contained in this hole vision, apperteineth to the
instruction, exhortation, admonition, comfort, and before advertisement of
those co^gregations, no les then that, which is contained in these words by you
rehearsed. Apoc. 7.
Then let us hear what is written and spoken by him in this matter, I saw
(says he) four Angels standing upon the four corners of the earth holding
the four winds of the earth that the winds should not blow upon the earth
etc. And I saw an other angel ascending from the vprising of the son. etc.
And he cried with a loud voice to the four Angels, to whom power was given
to hurt the earth and the sea (saying), hurt not the earth nether the sea,
nether yet the trees, until we have sealled the servants of our God in their
foreheades. I pray you, why were these, who were to be marked in the
foreheades, more called the servants of God, by the voice of the Angel. then
others? I know you will answer, because of their good works, and godly
intentions. But from whence I pray you did it proceed, that ye works, and
intention of the one sort were good, and of the other wicked? If you say, from
their own fre will, and power. the holy Ghost does prove you liers, as before I
have declared, and our Apostle assigns also an other cause, Apocal. 13
saing, And power was given to the beast upon all tribes, tongues and nations,
and all those that dwelt upon the earth, did worship him, whose names are not
written in the book of life, of the lamb, who was killed from the beginning of
the world. Here it is plain that our Apostle against your affirmation,
teaches that some do worship the beast and so do finally perish: and other do
not worship him, and attein to life* and that because the names of the one are
written in the book of life, and the names of the others are not written, and
that more plainly he speaks in these words: Apocal. 14
Then I looked, and lo a lamb standing on the mount Zion, and with him a
hundredth, forty and four thousand having his fathers name written in their
foreheades etc. and they sang as it were a new song, before ye throne, and
before the four beasts and the elders, and none could learn the song except
those hundredth forty and four thousand, which were boght from the earth etc.
and aftre in the 17 chapt. Apocal. 17
is mentioned of these inhabitants of the earth, who shall wonder upon the
beastwhose names are not written in the book of life, from ye creation of the
world. if in these places I say ye Apostle makes no difference betwext one
sort of men and an other, let ye reader judge. if there be difference betwext
boght and not boght, written in ye book of life, and not written, to learn ye
new ^og and not to learn ye same, the^ no dowt or Apostle puts as plain a
difference, as we do, yea ye hole scope of his revelation is to declare, yt
there is a no^bre of y^ elect called ye spouse of ye la^be, who^ it behooves to
be co^plete before y^ co^sumatio^ of all things com, and before yt ye i^noce^t
blood that has been shed, be reue^ged upon those yt dwell upon the earth. and
therefore advise with your selves how ye be able to prove, that S. John taught
no such doctrine as we teach. But admitting that he had never spoken, nether
yet of any nombre chosen, that can not fall utterly from their election, nether
yet of any nombre reprobate, who must needs be apprehended with the beast, and
with him be cast into the lake of fire. Is it therefore a good argument, that
all those that teach such manner of doctrine be falls teachers? or that no such
doctrine is contained in the holy Scriptures? I will make the like reason:
Nether Moises, nether John the Baptist in any expressed words, have left to us
written* that Christ Jesus should be born of a virgin, that he should suffer
in Jerusalem* that his disciples should all be scla^dered, and flee from him,
that he should rise again, and ascending into the heaven, should send the
holy Ghost visibly upon his Apostles. nether Moises I say nether yet John, who
were excellent teachers, have taught in expressed words any such doctrine,
Ergo the teachers of it be falls teachers, and it is not written in gods
scriptures. your argument is no better, admitting that the Apostle had never
made mention of any sort elected.

But now shortly to answer to all which without purpose ye heap to gether in
this place, To the 2. 3. 4. 5 6. 7. 8. 9. 10.
I say first, ye oght to have made a difference betwext those seven
congregations where Christ Jesus had been preached, and received. and the rest
of the world wc the^ remained, or after was to remain in blindenes, how
exhortation threatenings co^solations and the doctrine of r^pentance oght to be
used.
and error. for to those yt have by public profession received Christ Jesus,
be they elect, or be they reprobate do appertein exhortations threatening, ye
doctrine of repe^ta^ce, consolation prophecii^g.and revelation of things to
com, but to those yt yet remain manifest enemies of the truth, apperteine
only ye common calling to e^brace the truth, with the threatni^g of
destruction, if they contiune unfaithful. And therefore because these former
co^gregatio^s (as said is) had professed them selves to be of gods household
they were entreated as his domestical servants.

If any ask the cause why are some so amiably, and others so strangely
entreated, I answer, no other cause can be assigned, but that it pleased gods
infinite wisdom and goodness to make that plain, and evident difference,
betwext those that once be received in his household (be it by external
profession only) and those that remain in blindenes, that the one he commonly
does visit, but the other he does as it were neglect, and destroy. for what
other cause can we assign, that God so lovingly did often call to repentance
the people of Israel so often offending from the days of Moises unto ye
coming of Christ Jesus, that he sent unto them Prophets to exhort, to rebuke,
and to declare the estate of things to come: and in this mean ceason, the space
of two thousand years, permitted the Gentiles to walk in their own ways? And
now after the reiection of the Jews, what cause can we assign, that among us
Gentiles, God uses to stir up, now one country, now an other to receive the
truth, to detest and abhor our former superstition, Idolatry, and
wickedness, and of so long co^tinua^ce, has left both ye Jews, and turks
drowned still in their blindness, and damnable errors? we shall find none other
cause, I suppose, then did the Apostle se when that he said, Act. 15
to God are known all his works, even from the beginning, and that he will
reuele his secrets to such as please him. ye do not hear in all this
revelation of John, that Babylon is exhorted to repentance yt the blasphemous
beast is rebuked, either of his tyranny, either of his blasphemy, with any
promise made to him, that if he will convert, he shall be received to mercy and
favor. No the sentence irreuocable is pronounced by the Angel, that he shall
come to destruction.

But Ephesus, Smyrna, Theatira, and the rest of the congregations, which before
had professed Christ Jesus* and yet were become not manifest ennemies, but were
fallen some in decay of life, some in corruption of manners, and some in
heresies, were exhorted to return to repent, and to be fervent, to continue,
with sharp threatening, if they did the contrary. And why this? because that
God before had planted among them his truth, which yet utterly they had not
refused, and therefore does he honor them as his domestical servants, but in
vain (say you) for if they be of the elect, An objection of the Anabaptiste
they cannot perish: if they be of the reprobate sort, they can not be saved.
This is of you irreverently reasoned, will ye not suffer God to order his
household, as best pleases his wisdom? This order has he appointed that the
trompet of his word to exhort, to rebuke, to encourage, to offer mercy to the
penitent, and to threaten death, to such as do declyne, shall clearly sound in
his Church, so long as he does acknowledge it to be his. Not that by the word
preached, he that was reprobate in gods eternal counsel, may be the elect, and
so changed: but that the word preached, and often repeted, makes a difference
betwext the elect, and the reprobate, even before man.

Albeit to you it appear superfluous, that God shall feed his children by his
own word, which because the reprobate do refuse, therefore do they bear a
testimony of their own just condemnation in their own conscience. Albeit I
say, this appear superfluous, yet God has commanded and established the same,
as a thing most necessary and expedient, for the establishing of his children,
and for the manifestation of his own glory.

I wonder that ye will not affirm that superfluous it is for a man to till and
manure the ground, A^bread is necessary to the body, so is gods word to the
soul.
to prepare for victuales, to eat and drink, and to do such other things as be
necessary for the conservation of the life corporal, seeing that God has
appointed the days of man which he cannot excede, and also that our heavenly
father will provide for his children, seeing he provides far the birds of the
air. Assuredly the one ye may conclude as well as the other. But herein, I say,
appears your foolish blyndnes. first that ye make no difference betwext the
household servants, and those that be without. and secondarely, that ye
understand not the use, the profit, and the effect of gods word preached. Is
not ye kingdom of heaven compared to a nett casten into the sea gathering
together all sorts of fishes? whereof albeit that the separation can not
perfectly be made, till the nett be drawn to the dry la^d upon the last day:
yet daily by the word by exhortacion, by rebuking and threatening, do many
things com to light, which before lay hid. how many do follow Christ, for a
time, and fall back from him, albeit, that to the end he cries, that they
should continue. S. Paul affirms that he did write his sharp epistle to the
Corinthians for a trial of them, 1 Cor. 2.
if they would in all things be obedient. if they as true sheep would hear the
voice of their true pastor, acknowledge, and follow it, which he witnesses
that they did. 2 Cor. 7.
And there for he says, now do I rejoice, not that ye did sorrow, but that ye
did sorrow to repentance. By the which was not only the Apostle comforted as
he him self does confess, but also were they newly confirmed, that the Spirit of
God, was not utterly extinguished before. The elect have great profit by the
preaching of gods word. How the adversaries abuse Gods word in making falls
conclusions upon many places thereof
And so albeit, ye can se no fruit nor necessity of gods word preached,
except that the nature of the reprobate be changed, yet do gods children feel
in experience, how comfortable it is to have their dull spirits stirred up by
frequent exhortacions: yea how necessary it is, that their dulnes and
unthankfulness be sharply rebuked.

The third thing, in which I perceive you horribly to err in all this your
long discourse of the seven Churches, is that where so ever there is precept or
commandment given to repent, and to continue in faith, or to live a godly
life, or where so ever mention is made, that space and time is granted to
repent, there straight ways ye conclude, then may men keep the commandementes:
then may they repent, and so be saved, although before they were reprobate. For
this ye affirm of Iesabel, she might (say you) have repented, and have been
saved, and likewise unto them that committed fornication with her, is repentance
granted. But how vain is this conclusion, God commands that which is
righteous, Ergo man may do all that is commanded. God gives place of
repentance to all men, Ergo all men do, or may repent. How vain I say be these
conclusions, such as be not infected with the pestilent opinion of their own
power, fre will, and justice, may easily epsy. when ye have proved that God
commands nothing, which man may not do by his own power fre, will, and
strength, and that repentance so proceeds from, man that in him self, it lies
either to repent, or not to repent, then may ye sing this song, which so o^t ye
repete: God commands, God gives space of repentance, God offers mercy to
all, Ergo of their own power, they may repent. But and if we be not sufficient
of our own selves to think one good thought, if repentance be the fre gift of
God, and if to receive mercy proceeds of his own fre gift also, then harp so
long as ye list upon that one string, I will answer that except ye make it
better aggre with gods scriptures, I must needs say, that he is worthy to be
mocked that continually harpeth upon a discording string. To the 11. 12. 13 14.
and 15.


As we do not contemn your exhortacion, if we could be persuaded, that it did
proceed from the spirit of lenity, so can we not acknowledge our selves to be
infected with the poisoned error of mere necessiti^, and Stoicall destiny,
nether yet that we teach a careless, and libertine life, nether that we give
occasion of sin to the people. finally that we can not confess that we teach,
and maintain idolatry (as most unjustly ye accuse us) without any further
probation. for that any such crimes reign and are permitted amongst us
without punishment, ye be never able to prove. We do not deny, but that among
us have been men infected with all crimes, which ye lay to our charge. for some
of you were once of our nombre, so far as man could judge: but as you have
made your selves manifest, so have others also. But yet it seems far repugnant
to equity and charity, that the treason of Judas should be laid to the charge
of the faithful Apostles. If I list to take my pleasure in examining your
lives, and applying the offenses of those churches to your faction, I doubt not
to bring better testimony for my affirmations then ye have brought against us.
But that I omit to better opportunity, willing you in the mean ceason to
remember that he which speaks alwaie what he lists, is compelled some times
to hear that which he would not. At one word to answer to your sclanderours,
and malicious accusations, we appele from your sentence unto him, whose truth
we maintein, not that we fear, but that with your confusion we could reject
your vennom, in your own stomockes again, but that we are determined not to
co^te^d with you in dispitesull railing, and unjust accusations, which is your
purpose in this hole book in wc ye thus proceed.

THE ADVERSARY.
Often times ye use this saying, The 32 section.
Gods election was before the funda^cion of the world without any condition:
wherefore they which are elect, they be elect without any condition by the
immutable decree of Gods goodness, so that they can never fall out of the said
election: is gods work by his grace, and is also partly man's work, by
consenting thereto. wherefore Paul calls the righteous joint workers with God,
because they work together with him: now if man for his part according to his
nature be inconstant in his says, then is he out of promise, Joshua and Caleb.
Morouer the same Israelites were in gods holy election and called of God from
their sins, and chosen in Christ to lief and health as Paul witnesses, 1,
^or. 10
saing, our fathers were all under the cloode and all passed through the sea,
and were all baptized under Moises in the cloode, and in the sea, and did all
eat of one spiritual meat and did all drink of one manner of spiritual drink,
and they drank of that spiritual Rock that follwed them, which Rock was
Christ, behold how Paul so the contrary, but through his inobedience to gods
word, whereunto he might have obeyed if he would. Solomon received grace and
wisdom of God above all other, which was a lyuelie figure Christ Jesus, to be
heirs of eternal lief, yet if we refuse him, he will refuse us, and if we
deny him, he will deny us And so as the Prophets says, our own wickedness
shall reprouevs, 2. King. 23
and our turning away shall condemn us: and therefore says the lord by his
prophet Ezechiel, if the righteous turn away from his righteousness, and do
iniquity, all the righteousness that he has done: Ierem. 2 Ezec. 18
shall not be thought upon, but in the faut that he has offended withal, and
in he sin that he has done, he shall die.

ANSWER.
The same proposition which before I have proved most falls and deceauable, To
the 1
ye yet labor by multiplying of examples, nothing apperteining to that purpose,
to defend and maintain.

Your proposition is that albeit the election is sure and made without all
condition in Christ Jesus, yet is there none so elected in him to lief
everlasting, but that he may fall to perdition, and become a reprobate. And for
the probation hereof before ye enter to your exemples, yet use two reasones.
The former, without Christ (say you) there is nether election, nor salvation:
and this we confess and most steadfastly do believe, adding that election and
salvation are so sure in him, that so many as be elected in him to lief
everlasting, shall by grace attein to y^ same. Ye proceed in yor raison, further
man is made sure in the election by the promise of God in Christ Jesus, of which
promise when he is made par^aker, he enters in covenant with God* but when he
breaks the covenant, he forsakes the promise, and when he forsakes the
promise, be refuses Christ, in refusing Christ, he falls out of the election,
notwithstanding the Election abides sure in Christ. This is your first reason.
To the wc I shortly and plainly answer, yt because ye suppose an
impossibility to be possible, therefore ye conclude a great absurdity. for ye
suppose, that the members of Christ's body elected in him to life everlasting,
may so forsake ye promise, so refuse Christ their head, and so break the
covenant, that to ye end of their lives they contemn and despise it, which is
a thing impossible, as before I have proved, and therefore your conclusion
avails nothing. when ye shall prove yt Christ's sheep, committed to his charge
by his heavenly father, can become wolves or dogs to bark against their
pastor, and that so they continue to the end, I will study to answer you other
wise: but unto such time as you learn to prove your purpos more substa^cially,
I must say that because there is no membre of your reason which has a sure
ground, that therefore I will not greatly study to confute the same: for man is
not made sure in the election by any promise of God, but ye election which
before was secret in gods eternal counsel, is by the promise and word of
grace notified unto man, so that tollerably it may be spoken, man is assured of
his election by the promise, which he willingly embraseth, but to be sure in the
election by the promise, is not the phrase of the holy Ghost: further of this we
shall examine in your second reason which is this,

Election has no promise without faith: true faith is gods work by his grace,
To the 2 and 3.
and is also man's work partly by consenting thereto: wherefor Paul calls
the righteous ^oynt workers with god because they work to gether with him. Now
say you, if man for his part, according to his nature, be inconstant in his
faith, then is he out of the promise whereby he was made sure of his election,
yet Gods election remains sure and stable in Christ Jesus.

The first membre of your reason is darcke, and obscure, and the manner of
speaking so strange, that in the scriptures I am assured it is never to be
found. In one of two senses is election taken in the scriptures. Answer.
The former: Election is in one of two sorts taken in the scriptures.
for the elect them selves, as when Paul says the election did obtain it,
that is, the elect of God obtained mercy. And in the same sense is Paul
called the vessel of election, that is, an elect vessel: and if in this sense
ye affirm yt election, that is to say the elect have no promise without faith,
Romans 9.
albeit I will not greatly contend in that behalf, yet by manifest scriptures I
may prove the contrary. for the posterity of Abraham by gods fre election had
this promise, that he should be their God. And saint Paul affirms that the
children of the faithful were holy and yet all could not have faith when the
promise was made, for then had Abraham no sede at all, but of this I say I will
not contend. Otherwies election is taken in the scriptures, for the eternal
counsel of God, by the which he has appointed life everlasting, to such as he
has given to his Son before all worlds, Romans 9. and 11
as Paul says: For yer the children were borne, when they had neither done
good nether bad, that the purpose of God, which is by his election, that is not
by works but by him that calls might stand sure, it was said unto her the
elder shall serve the younger, etc. And after, even so at this time is there a
remnant left through the election of grace and so forth in diverse other places.
and in this sense, if ye understand that election has no promise without faith
I answer, that gods free election in Christ Jesus needs nether promise nor
faith, as touching the part of God. for he in his election respects nether
of both, but his own good pleasure in Christ his son, and so I would have
wished greater plains in the first part of your reason then there is. but I
perceive the ground of your error by that which follows: True faith (say you)
is gods work by grace, and it is also partly man's work by consenting
thereto, faith is altog^ther ^he work of God and no part of man's work 1. Petr.
1.
which second part of this second membre is utterly falls. for faith is no
part of man's work no more then the child begotten of the father and
conceived of the mother is the work of the self. but faith is altogether ye
work of God. for as he begets us by the word of verity, and by the power
of his ^olie spirit makes our hearts to conceive and retein the sede of life:
so by his power are we kept by faith to salvation, wc is prepared to this end,
yt it shall be manifested in ye last time and therefore (says ye Apostle) through
grace are ye saved by faith and yt not of your selves. ye must compel the holy
Ghost to reca^t, wc I think he will not do for your threatening, before ye be
able to prove yt faith is any part of man's work.

The words of the Apostle, 1. cor. 3
you shame fully abuse: for in that place he entreats only, how God uses
the ministers of his word, and blessed Euangil to be helpers with God, in so
far as they are the embassaders of reconciliation, as in an other place he
calls them, he means nothing nether what man does in the work of his own
salvation by his own faith, or by his own works. And therefore although ye (as
a blind man) go forward to your own perdition saying, now if man for his part
according to his nature be inconstant in his faith, then is he out of the
promise etc. yet must we pull you back and say that because faith is no part
of man's work, therefore does nether his faith nor his election depend upon
the inconstancy of his own nature, Nether^^ faith n^ther election grounded
upon man nor upon his consta^cie
but God of his soueraign bounty ouercomming what imperfectio^s soever be in
his chose^ children has grounded their election in him self and in Christ
Jesus his Sone. an other error I se in this your reason, wc because I have
sufficiently confuted, I will here touch it only. Ye make faith the e^brasing
of ye promise, and our obedience, to be causes of gods election, when in very
deed they be but the effects of our election. for nether faith nor obedience
make us to be gods elect, but because we were elected in Christ Jesus,
therefore are we called, made faith full, obedient and sanctified by his fre
grace.

To admonish you yet of one thing and so to put end to yor unreasonable reasons:
Wonder it is yt ye will attribute to election that wc ye deny to ye elect. you
affirm yt election is sure in Christ, but not ye elect say you, be like ye
imagine election to be a certain speculatio^ or imaganation without any certain
substance, to the wc it must be referred. but S. Paul teaches us y^ contrary
saing, he has cho se^vs in Christ, he says not yt election was in Christ, but
we were elected in Christ Jesus before yt fundacio^s of the world were laid.
This ge^tly I put you in mind to ground your reasons more substa^cially, if yt
by them ye ente^d to prove any thing. A short answer I might give you to all
your examples, to wit that, we speak not of election to offi^es, or to
possession temporal, but of election to life everlasting, from the which ye
are never able to prove any to have been finally secluded, that in Christ Jesus
was thereto elected before the fundacion of the world was laid. But yet to
gratify you some what, I will pass through your examples, and co^municat with
you my judgment: God grant you hearts to understand.

It is a thing most certain that albeit Adam and all men in him might and did
fall from God by sin, To ^he 4 Christ's power is of greater virtue to save
his elect then Adams ^mpotencie was to bring damnation upon al^.
yet can not the elect of God who be elected to life everlasting in Christ
Jesus, so fall from their election that finally they perish. the reason is,
that as Christ Jesus, the brightness of the glory of his father, and the
expressed image of his substance, is greater then ever was Adam, so is his
power of greater virtue to save the elect then Adams impotencie was to bring
damnation upon all.

Where ye ask if our election be surer now after the transgression then before
the transgression. I answer the assurance and firmitie of our election was
always, and at all times one. For when we stood in Adam (as ye allege) yet
were we elected in Christ* and when we fell in Adam, then did our election burst
for the and appear.

Ye be never able to prove that Cain was elected to life everlasting in Christ
Jesus: To the 5. and 6
for God looked not to Cain, nor yet to his sacrifice, as that he did to Abel.
And why? The adversary is convicted by his own reasons.
because, as the Apostle affirms, the one offered in faith and the other
without faith. Remember, I pray you, your former reason: there is none (say
you) elected without faith, but Cain was without faith even before he did kill
or hate his brother, therefore by your own reason, he was not in ye election,
no not even before he hated. I do not approve this argument: but yet your
former reason standing true, it is invincible. Moises says not that God
promised dominion to Cain over his lusts, The place of Moises concerning
but says, unto thee shall his appetites or lusts be, and thou shall bear
dominion over him: which is not spoken of sin, but of Abel, who as he was the
yo^ger, so was he appoi^ted to be subject to Cain, Cain.
and to serve him, and therefore most unjustly did he hate him. It is the same
phrase that before was spoken of the woman concerning her subjection to man.
Such as have but mean knowledge in the hebrew text, know well that both these
articles be of the masculin gendre, and the substa^tiue which signifies sin
in that place, is of ye feminin ge^dre and therefore will not yt propriety of
the tongue suffer, yt dominion promised, be referred to sin. where
blasphemously ye ask if god gave Cain no power to subdue his lust, who was
the^ ye author of his sin? I answer Cain him self: for he was not like to a
dead and insensible sword, as ye adduce the similitude, but he was a
reasonable instrument infected by the venom of Satan, from the which he not
being purged could do nothing but serve the devil and his own lusts, against
gods expressed will and commandment. I have before, proved taht God is the
cause of no ma^s damnation but sin in which they are fallen, is the very
cause which all reprobates do find in them selves.

Touching the fidelity of God who suffers none of his to be tempted above
their strength, To the 7
it is only true of Gods elect, 1. Cor. 10
to whom it is plain that Paul there speaks. for albeit that among the
Corinthians there were many reprobates, yet does Paul address his style as it
were to the elect Church of God, calling them his beloved, willing them to fly
from idolatry, and speaking to them, as unto men endued with wisdom etc. And
therefore must ye first prove, that Cain had as great testimony of God that he
was his elect, as the Corinthians had of Paul yt they were beloved and elected
in Christ, before that ye can make this place to serve for him. for albeit he
did advertise him what was his duty to do, yet does it not thereof follow,
that he gave him power to obey his will reveled, nether yet power to resist all
tentation. To Pharao he did no les make manifest his will then that he did to
Cain, and yet of him he did before pronounce that he should not hear nor obey
the voice of Moises, I do not deny but that he stubbornly foresooke the
counsel of God, which mercifully called him. But why did he, and do all
reprobate forsaik it, we have often before declared, to wit: because the sede of
God abides not in them.

What was the benediction given after the floode unto Noah and to his sons,
To the 8 Genese 9
the holy Ghost does not conceal, to wit multiplication, preservation, and
the restitutio^ of all things, as touching the order of nature, like as they
were before that vastation, (by reason of the waters which had so long
continued). In that place is no mention made of election to life everlasting in
Christ Jesus, and therefore your connection, that Ham was not reprobat, when he
was blessed of God, is foolish. for albeit that none can be both blessed and
cursed, loved and hated all at once, in that degree of love or of hatered wc God
freely bears in Christ to his elect, and most justly hates the reprobate,
for the causes known to his visdom, yet in an other sort, it is no repugnancie
to say that God both blesses, and loves in bestowing tempoall benedictions,
upon such as in his eternal counsel he has rejected, and therefore hates. As
it is no repugnancie to say that God both blesses and loves his elect
children, even when most seruerely he does chasten and punish them.

To all yt which ye adduce of the Israelites, To the 9 10 11. 12 and 13.
my former answers may suffice, for you be never able to prove, that any of
the^, which was chosen to lief everlasting did fall into death eternal. It
nothing hurt y^ salvation of Moises albeit his body fell in the wilderness. 1
Cor. 10
That place of Paul proves not that all the Israelites, which was called from
Egypt, were within gods holy election to lief everlasting in Christ Jesus, but
does prove yt they were all externally called and yt they did all co^municat
with those external signs and sacreme^ts, wc did signify, and represent
spiritual things, but he does not affirm yt all did receive ye spiritual and
inward graces of the holy Ghost. The mind of the Apostle is plain enough in yt
place to such as willingly list not blind them selves. For he exhorts the
Corinthians not to think it sufficient that they did commuicat with the
sacraments of Christ Jesus, except that a godly lief and unfeigned obedience
to gods will reveled should be joined with the same: for otherwise the same
should happen unto them, that happened to the Israelites. And therefore he
says let him that stands take heed, lest he fall, which is nothing
contrary to our doctrine nether yet is our doctrine in any jot repugnant to
ye holy Ghost. for we did never deny but yt many who before me^ had a fair
glister of holiness, yea which thought the^ selves sure in their own fantasy
has taken horrible falls, both of one sort and of ye other. And unto all me^
we cry no les then you do, that they te^pt them selves, and yt they take heed
lest by slothfulnes they fall. but yt any yt stands in Christ Jesus, and in
the eternal counsale of God can so fall that finally he perish, that we
constantly deny. Behold how smothly God conducteth our tossed bote through the
raiging waves of your furious arguments. To the 14. 15 and 16.


The fall of the reprobate we remit to gods judgment Albeit that Balaam had
been endued with greater graces, then in scriptures, we read that he had, yet
does it not thereof follow, that he had received ye spirit of sanctification by
true faith, which is given to ye elect only. for we find the power given to
some to expel deuilles, whom Christ affirms, that he never knew. And
therefore wills he his disciples, not to rejoice in that that spirits were
subject unto them, but that their names were written in the book of lief. But
yet I wonder where ye have found that Balaam was so filled with the spirit of
God, the spirit of truth, the spirit of power and the spirit of grace (as ye
write) that whom) soever he blessed, was blessed, and whom he cursed, he was
cursed. I find no such thing witnessed of him by y^ holy Ghost. True it is that
Balack gave unto him that praise and commendation that he was assured, that
who^ he blessed should be happy, and who^ he cursed should be cursed But
whether that it was the purpose of ye holy Ghost to teach and assure us thereby
that in very deed such graces were in him, Nom. 23
I greatly doubt. yea I doubt nothing to affirm the contrary, to wit that he
nether had power spirit, nor grace of God to bless those whom God has
curssed, nerher yet to curse those whom God has blessed. for so does he him
self confess. And for that end is the history written. If ye understand that
the benediction remained upon Jacob because that Balaam did so pronounce and
speak, you are more blind then Balaam was. for he assigns an another cause,
saying, how shall I curse where God has not cursed, or how shall I detest
where the Lord has not detested. God is not as man that he should lie, nether
as the son of man, that he should repent: has he said, and shall he not do
it? and has he spoken, and shall he not accomplish it? Behold, I have
received commandment to bless: for hehath blessed, and I can not alter it. He
sees none iniquity in Jacob, nor sees no transgression in Israel: the Lord
his God, is with him, and the joyful showte of a king is amongst them.

In these words, why Balaam blessed Israel and could not curs them.
I say, Balaam assigns the cause why he was compelled to bless Israel,
because, says he, God has blessed them. And why also he could not change his
blessing, because in God there is no mutabilitie, nor change, like as there is
in man. And therefore as hehad once blessed that people, by his plain word and
promise spoken, and reveled to Abraham, so should he most constantly perform
it. If malice did not blind you, you should clearly se, that the holy Ghost
means nothing les then to teach that Balam was blessed of God, and therefore
was not at that time a reprobate: But that Israel was so elected, sosanctified,
and blessed of God, that their very ennemis, and such as were hired to curse
them, were compelled to give testimony against them selves, that gods people
was blessed. But this does no more make Balaam to be gods elect, then did that
confession, which the wicked spirits gave to Christ, (confessing him to be the
Son of the living God) change their nature.

If you be able to prove that hole Israel so fell from gods favor, that to none
of Abraham's posterity did he perfourm the promise made to him, and to his sede,
then have ye proved somewhat of your purpose, to wit, that God may make a
promise, and that with an oath, and yet perfourm no part of it. But if it be
manifest that notwithstanding their grudging, their rebellion, their carnal
lusts, their idolatry, and abominations, gods promise remained so sure, that
the same was performed (after many temptations) in full perfection: Consider
what may be concluded against you, in applying examples by similitude, and
equality. I would wish in you greater wisdom, then to compare Balaam one
particulare person, a falls prophet accursed of God, and so perishing amongst
the ungodly, and hole israel gods elect and chosen people, so blessed of God,
yt not only they were preserved in all storms, To the 17 and 18.
but also of them, according to the flesh, came that blessed sede, the messiah
promised.

To Saul and to his kingdom I have before answered, to wit, that one thing it
is to be appointed to a temporal office, and an other to be elected in Christ
Jesus to lief everlasting. But yet I will add somewhat more, which is this
Propo^ition directly fighting against yours: A prop^sition
Saul nor his house was never chosen in gods eternal counsel to be kings and
Reulars over Israel for ever. If ye cry, then did the holy Ghost, speaking in
Samuel, lie. for he affirmed, that God had prepared the reign and kingdom of
Saul upon Israel for ever, I answer Samuel speaks not in that place, what God
had determined in his eternal counsel, 1 Samuel 13
but what he him self thought that God had determined and appointed. And
therefore ye may not conclude that the holy Ghost does lie, except the kingdom
of Saul was once appointed to have remained over Israel for ever. Nay, so can
ye not conclude. But ye may say, yt except that so it was, ye prophet was
deceived. And so no doubt he was for a ceason, and did speak those words
according to the apprehension and judgment which he had conceived by reason of
his unction and lawful election to his office. If it appear hard to you, that
ye prophets be deceived in any thing, consider I pray you what chanced unto
him after. did he not at the sight of Eliab pronounce with an affirmation, that
before the eternal, ^. King. 16
he was his anointed? did the holy Ghost lie because that Eliab was refused,
and David chosen, or was not rather Samuel ignorant and in an error? the same
might I prove by Nathan, and others, who being gods true prophets were yet for
a ceason left in error and did both speak and give counsel otherwies than God
had determined in his eternal counsel. But now shortly to prove my
proposition, I say, that gods eternal purpose and counsel concerning the chief
rewler and governor over Israel was long before pronounced, by Jacob in his
last testament, Genesis 49
who did appoint the crown, and Scepter royal to an other tribe then to
Benjamin. for thus he says, Thou Judah thy brethren shall praise thee: thine
hand shall be in the the neck of thine ennemies: thy fathers sons shall bow
down unto thee, etc. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nether the law
giver from betwext his fete until Shiloh come and the people shall be gathered to
him, etc. here I say it is plain that many years before the election of Saul
was the Kingly dignity appointed to Judah, which sentence was never after
retracted. And therefore my proposition affirming yt Saul was never elected in
ye eternal counsel of God to reign for ever over Israel, stands sure and
sufficiently proved. If any ask to what purpose was Saul then elected king? I
answer, because so it pleased gods wisdom to tempt his people, why Saul was
elected^^ the king do^ which was appointed to an ^ther tribs.
to tempt the tribe of Judah, yea and all the faithful, that then were a live,
to tempt them I say, whether they would still depend upon gods promise, and look
for their felicity, even by the same means, that God had foresopken: how so
ever things appeared to the contrary for a ceason. The hole people no doubt,
yea and Samuel him self, were partly criminal in that point, that they looked
for salvation, and for delyuerance from all their ennemies by the hands of any
other, then by one of the tribe of Judah: considering that the former prophecy
was so plain. But yt error he did first correct in his prophet, showing unto
him just causes why Saul was unworthy of that great honor, and after he did
correct the same in the people moving their hearts to elect David, whom the
prophet had before anointed. And so did God retein y^ firmitie of his counsel,
and did perform the same, when all things appeared, Plainly to repugne to
his promise, yea when men had received an other to be their king, then God by
his former promise had appointed. To the 18. 19. and 20.
We nether deny the supernatural wisdom and manifold graces given to Solomon,
nether yet his most horrible fall, to be a document, and a memorial for ever,
of his abominable idolatries, and most unthankful defection from God. which
only one example we affirm oght to admonish every man most carefully to
examine him felf, with what simplicity he walks before gods Majesty. But
whether that Solomon so became the son of ye devil, that after he did never
return to God but yt finally he did perish, we dare not be bold to pronounce
sentence. And yt because to us it appears, yt God did make unto him a promise
of mercy, his grievous offense not withstanding. 2. Sam. 7
for this did God speak by Nathan of him: when thy days shall be fulfilled, thou
shall sleep with thy fathers, and I will set up thy sede after the which shall
proceed out of thy body, and will stablish his kingdom, he shall buyld an house
for my name, and I will stablish the throne of his kingdom for ever: I will be
his father and he shall be my son: and if he sin, I will chasten him with the
rod of men, and with the plagues of the children of men. But my mercy shall
not depart away from him, as I took it from Saul, whom I have put away before
thee, etc. howsoever ye list to understand this fre mercy promised to abide
after in iquitie committed, you cannot deny, but that a plain difference is
made betwext Salomo^, and Saul. And if ye think, that nothing spoken in that
place, did appertein to Salomo^, who was born before that David had finished
his days and did sleep with his fathers, but that all is performed in Christ,
who many years after did spring of him ye do not rightly mark the words of
God nether yet ye mind of the holy Ghost, he says not, that the child who
should build a house to the name of God, and whose kingdom he would
establish, should be borne after his death, but that God should raise one who
should spri^g of his own loins, whom he would so honor after his death, that
he would become his father, whom he would so entreat: that albeit he should
offend, yet should he not be rejected from regiment in Israel, as Saul was,
and so was the kingdom established not only to David, but also to his
posterity after him. The perfection no doubt was reserved to Christ Jesus, but
so was the verity in him, that the figure passed before in Salomo^. Moreover
somewhat is spoken in this promise, which in no wise can be referred to Christ
Jesus. for how shall any be able to prove that ye just sede of David in whose
mouth was no deceat found, did in any sort wickedly in his own person, so
that he had need of mercy, and to be corrected with the rod of the children.
This I note, to give you occasion to take heed what sentence ye pronounce in
things so far removed from the reach of your understanding. To the 21
In the history of Jeroboam, ye do not observe that whatsoever is promised
unto him, except the first (...) of the ten tribes, is co^dicionall. for thus
says the Prophet unto him. 3 K^g, 11
And if thou harken unto all that I command thee, and wilt walk in my ways, and
do right in my sight as did David my servant, then will I be, with thee, and
build thee asure house, as I buylt unto David and will give Israel unto thee,
etc. I pray you what can ye hereof conclude? That Jeroboam say you not
withstanding gods election and fre ordinance did fall from the favor of God.
But how be you able to prove, that he was elected and before ordained to stand
in gods favor for ever? These saings, if thou walk before me in righteousness,
if thou keep my precepts, and such others, will not prove it. I can evidently
prove that Jeroboam, and all the kings in Israel after him were given to the
people in gods anger, and were taken away in his hot displeasure, for so does
the Prophet Oseas witness. Now if you can prove, that such reulers, as be given
in gods wrath, and taken away in his just fury, were elected and before
ordained to stand in his favor for ever, advise with your counselors, and
produce your witness against the next time. To the 22. 23.
That Judas was never elected to life everlasting, I have before declared and
therefore at this present I only say, that no more did Christ mean of Judas
that he should be the salt of the earth, the light of the world, nether that
he should sit upon any seat to judge any tribe in Israel, then that he meant of
Peter, yt he was the devil, that he should betraie him, or that better it it
had been for him never to have been borne. for as Christ in pronou^cing ye
words, you twelve have I chose^ but one of you is the devil, one of you shall
betraie me in express words he did nether appoint ye person of Judas to that
fact, nether yet did exempt and make fre any of the rest, from suspicion of
that crime, in expres words (I say) So like wise in saing, ye are the salt of
ye earth and you shall sit upon twelve seats, etc. he nether meant of the hole
number of the twelve, nether yet of the^ only. for as for Judas, I doubt not
to affirm, but yt according, as it was written in the book of Psalms, That
his habitacion should be desolate, and that an other should receive ye honor
of his bushoprike: yt so eue^ in ye time, when he stood in the ministry most
sure to man's judgment, that yet in gods eternal counsel, he was appointed
to that treason, and most fearful end. and I suppose that none will be so
perverse of judgment, as to deny, that none other was appointed to be the
salt of ye earth, and the light of the world, except those twelve. I verily
believe that Paul is nothing inferior to any of the chiefest Apostles in that
case. And so yet I affirm, that nether were those words spoken of all the
twelve, nether yet of the^ only. If this can not satisfy your curiosity,
labor you to prove that Judas was elected to life everlasting in Christ Jesus
before the fundacions of the world were laid. I have before proved that the
elect can not finally refuse nor deny Christ Jesus their head, and therefore I
will not trouble the reader with the repetition.

The place of Ezechiell Ez^^ 18.
serves nothing your purpose. for there does he only entreat of such
righteous men, as in the beginning of the same chapter used this proverb: The
fathers have eaten sour grapes and the childrens teeth are set on edge,
signifying thereby (as before we have declared) that they were just and
innocent and that yet they did suffer punishment, for the offenses of their
fathers. Against whom ye Prophet speaks most sharply affirming that the
soul which did sin should die: in this praising gods justice, that he would
suffer sin unpunished in none of his creatures, supposing that some for a
time, had a show of righteousness. The prophet does further accuse, and convict
their consciences, for they knew them selves criminal in all crimes, which the
prophet there recited. And therefore to provoke them to repentance with this
exhortacion: Cast away from you (says he) all your transgressio^s whereby ye
have transgressed, and make you a new heart, and a new spirit, for why will you
die o house of Israel, for I desire not the death of him yt dies (says the
Lord God) Cause therefore one another to return, and live ye.

Of this co^clusio^ (I say) it easily may appear of what sort of righteous men
ye Prophet speaks: not of such as being ingrafted in Christ's body, by the
true sanctification of his spirit, do daily study to mortify their
affections: but of such as having an outward appearance or show of holiness, did
notwithstanding lowse ye bridle to all impiety. In very deed God can not
remember ye justice of any such (wc is not) but their sins must crave just
vengeance, and yt the rather because by the^ ye name of God is blasphemed. Now
to ye rest of yt wc follows in yor book.

THE ADVERSARY.
This say you, The 33 sectio
with many other manifest testimonies of the Scriptures, ye ^osse, and turn
vpside doun^ seking shifts to maintein your errors, where by you declare your
self to be of the nombre of them, of whom it is written in the same place,
which do say tush the way of the Lord is not indifferent and the gifts of
prophesying were so bound together, that God could not minister the one
without the other. but this is no new^ thing, for this was laid to Christ, and
his Apostles charge* that they were unlearned* But the holy Ghost wille^ us not
to judge so. mark says Paul, your calling how that not many wise me^ after
the flesh not many migthie not many of hieght degree are called but God ha^h
chosen the weak things of the world the vile things of the world, and
things which are despised, and of (...) reputacio^ to confound the mighty,
and to bring to naught things of reputacio^, how ca^ such great me^ believe,
seeing they seek tobe praised one of an other and to be

ANSWER.
Whether yt you or we pervert the meaning of ye holy Ghost speaking in hisholie
scriptures, To the 1
we chiefly remitte judgment to him, who shall judge the world with equity,
not refusing also in the mean season the judgment of indifferent readers. To
your unjust accusatio^s, cauillations, and malicious reports, I will answer no
thing, till the end of this work. And then I purpose to lay before your eyes
such things, To the 1. 2. 3. 4
as ye can not deny, to the end that the simple may judge, which of us do
worship the Idol of our own fantasies, and have forsaken ye mind of the
truth. To the 5
Albeit that ye, and your capteyn Castalio begin now to dispyse learning, yet
be ye never able to prove that we have despised godliness in the most simple of
our brethren. howbeit we can not conceal the truth, affirming, that he who
has faithfully traualed in the tongues, and in the writings of godly men is,
more able to avoid error, and also more apt to teach the truth and to confute
the adversary, then he which is altogether ignorant, except in his natural
tongue. for we know that miracles, and the visible gifts of the holy Ghost,
given in the days of the Apostles are now ceased. Therefore I say, we are not
so proud, that we dispyse learning, nether yet so malicious, that we contemn
the meanest gift that God has given to any of our brethren. To the ^
If any be that boast or brag of their knowledge in the tongues, or of ye
multitude of ye books, wc they write I will confess them worthy of most
sharp rebuke. But as for such as be principal instruments of Christ Jesus,
how much they have profited the Church of God, and how little praise, or
commendation they have soght or do seek of man, the day when the secrets of
all hearts shall be reveled, will declare and men, who be most familiarly
acquainted with them partly can witness.

As we do not envy ye perfect knowledge in tongues of such as you praise, T^
the 7
so do we unfeignedly desire God, so to govern their hearts, if his good
pleasure be, that rather they study to edify Christ's afflicted Church, the^
to accuse, sclander, and traduce such, as in the vineyard of the Lord, have
labored, and daily do labor much more then they do. To the ^
That ye will us to turn from that we ye call our error promising us (if so we
will do) more perfection shortly, then ever we durst have looked for we must be
first taught that our doctrine is erroneous, and after, for the assurance of
our hope, we must have more then the promise of men. Thus ye proceed

THE ADVERSARY.
To prove that they which be once elect can never, The 2. argument
fall they allege this saying of Christ: There shall arrise falls Christ's and
falls prophets, and shall show great miracles, The 34. section.
and wonders in so much, that if it were possible the very elect should be
deceived* of this they gather, that it is not possible, that the elect should
be deceived, and this co^ditionall, if it were possible, etc. affirms
nothing. But admitting i^ be so, we must understand, that the thing which is
very hard and difficile to be done is called vnp^ssible in the scripture as in
that place, Luc 18.
it is easier for acamele, to go through the eye of an ^ed^e, then for the
rich to enter in to the kingdom of God. This is called impossible* because it
is very hard, and difficile to be d^ne. yet be there rich me^, which inherit
the kingdom of heaven. how can you believe says Christ which, receive honor
one of an other* John. 5.
this seems impossible by Christ's words yet many such were converted to
Christ. And the same spirit of vain glory was among^st the elect Apostles of
Christ, after they had continued a long time with him* Esai. 49
for they contended who should be superior among them selves. can a woman
forget the child of her womb, and not piti^ Iere. 13
no more may ye that be exercised in evil do good. such we be of our selves,
notwithstanding by the power of God we be regenerat, we leave of from our evil
exercises, and do that which is good. Thus we se it is called imposs^ble in the
scriptures, which is contrary to nature which excedeth our strenght and
therefore is difficile and hard to be done, ^ue^ so it is impossible. That it is
a very hard thing that the elect which follow the la^^^ whether so ever he
g^eth, should be deceived, yet not withstanding ^. C^r. 11
as Eua was the elect of God, and not withstanding the Apostle w^^^esseth that
she was begyled and deceived by the Serpent, Therefore warne^ Christ the elect
Apostles saing, take heed that no man deceive you. Mat. 24
If Christ had been of your opinion, that the elect 2, The. 2
Let no man deceive you says Paul to the Thessaloniens, to whom he bare
witness that they were worthy of the kingdom of heaven, yet was he careful,
left they should be deceived and mou^d from their good mind either by spirit, or
by words, or by letter which should some to come from him And to the
Ephesians, Ephesians* 5
Let no man deceive you with vain words for because of such things comes
the wrath of God upon the ch^ldren of desobedience And likewise* warns he the
Romans, to mark and avoid such as with swe^e and flattering words decaued

ANSWER.
If it had pelased you either diligently to have red out writings, either
faithfully to have recited the testimonies, which we use for confirmation of
our doctrine, ye should have found mo, and such as be som^hat more plain then
any of those that ye take upon you to confute. But praised be God who gives
such majesty, even to those places, which ye your self appoint, that when ye
have said all, yet does ye verity remain invincible.

That this condicionall, If, in these words, To the ^, 2 and 3.
if it were possible, the elect should be drawn into error, affirms nothing,
I am content, so that the same reason be a law against you in all other places.
But that this word impossible shall be interpreted in all places of Scripture by
this phrase, a thing hard to be done, I can not admit, without testimonies
more evident, then yet ye have adduced, for the most part of those plainly
deny that interpretation. For as it is impossible for a Camel (or Cable, that
is a great rope of a ship) remaining in the own quantity, to go through an
nedils eye (remaining in the own streitnes) so is it like impossible for a rich
man remaining in his own natural pride, coue^ousnes, and corruption, to enter
in to the kingdom of God. and therefore* when those which heard, were offended,
asking, And who may then attein to salvation? Christ answered, things that be
impossible before man, are possible with God. mark well that Christ called the
humiliation of the rich man, impossible unto man, but possible unto God. And
the same I say is true of those that seek glory and praise of men. for
impossible it is unto such abiding in yt corruption vnfeanedly to believe in
Christ Jesus. for albeit the spirit of vain glory did now and then burst out
and appear among the disciples, yet was it always repressed and corrected by
the severe obiurgation of their master, and in the end, by the power of the
holy spirit, it was removed. God does not affirm that it is impossible to a
woman to forgett the child of her bosom, but laying his perfect love against
her natural love corrupted, he says, if she may, yet, ca^ not I forgett the^
that trust in me: and so he prefers his love toward his children, to the
love of any creature, which they can bear toward others.

The examples of the man of Inde, and of the Cat of the mounteine, can in no
wise receive your interpretation. for the impossibility of the one, and of the
other, experience of long continuance has taught us. for we se that although
the Moorian change the regio^ where he was born, yet keeps he his natural
blacknes: nether yet can any art utterly remove the spots of that beast,
which the Prophet in that place calls the ^^opard. how impossible it is that
they be changed, none can be ignorant, except such as have not seen or do not
know the beast, nor her nature. And therefore upon these two things to nature
impossible did the Prophet conclude, that no more could the citezeins of
Jerusalem, being excercised in all iniquity leave the same, and so was it
impossible, impossible I say to them selves and to their own power. for what
the Spirit of God works in the conversion of sinners, oght not to be
attributed unto man's power.

And thus I say that those things, which the holy Ghost pronounced to be
impossible, remain impossible. And therefore it is not only ahard and a
difficile thing that the elect of God, who follow the lamb where ever he
goes, be so deceived that finally they perish, but also it is impossible: and
that because the true pastor co^ducteth them, leads them forth to the holsom
pastures, and waters of lief, illuminateth the^ by ye presence of his light:
and finally does sanctify and confirm the^ in his eternal verity by ye
power of his holy Spirit

Upon those words of the Apostle I fear lest that your senses be corrupted
from the simplicity, To the 4. and ^.
which is in Christ even as the serpent deceived Eua, ye labor to prove that
the elect shall be deceived for she, say you was the elect of God, and yet she
was deceived. In few words I answer that because she was the ^lect of God, she
remained not in that error. we do not deny, but that the simple sheep do
sometimes err, and go astray from their pastor, that they hear to their great
danger the owling of wolves, and do credit, and receive lies for verity, yea
and further that sometimes with knowledge, they commit iniquity. But that
they are permitted in ye same finally, and without redemption to perish, that
we co^sta^tly deny. for imposible it is that the lively members shall lack
participation with the head. Imposible it is that Christ's death shall lack his
effect, which is the life of those that of his father are committed to his
charge, of who^ impossible it is, that any shall perish. for the nombre of our
brethren must be complete, nether yet does it hereof follow, that exhortacio^s
and admonitions be superfluous, and vain. for they are the means which the
wisdom of God knows to be most necessary to stir up our dull senses, which
always be ready to ly in a certain security, And therefore the words of our
master spoken to his disciples and the admonition of Paul to the Churches in
his days does much profit, comfort, and confirm us: for by the same we are so
armed against offenses and sclanders, which daily do chance, that albeit we se
that from amongst our selves arise such as bring in damnable sects. which
lead many to perdition, yet we do not therefore detest nor ahbore Christ's simple
verity but being provoked by that fall and deiection of others, with great
solicitude and care, we call for the assistance of gods holy spirit en those
most miserable and most wicked days. To the 7
That ye affirm us to be lieng prophets not sent of God but such as run of
our selves, calling to our congregation the people, whom after we provoke to a
careless and libertine life, we answer not to you but to our God. Judge us (o
Lord) in this cause according to our innocence, and according to the puretie,
which thy spirit has formed in our hearts, destroy all lyeng lips, and
confound thou those, that of malice trouble thy afflicted flock.

Let your frie^des, To the 8
enemies to gods eternal truth, proud boasters of their own justice, and
suppressers to their power of Christ's glory, give ear, if they list, to your
admonition, absenting them selves from all well reformed congregations. We will
not cease to exhort all the faithful to frequent and hant the places where
Christ's Euangil is truly and openly preached, his holy sacrementes rightely
ministered according to his own ordinance and institution: And also where
disciplyne is put in practice according to that order which he him self has
commanded. Nether yet will we cease to affirm that your privy assemblies, and
all those that in dispyte of Christ's blessed ordinance, do frequent ye same
are accursed of God.

We do not deny, To the 9
but that Judas, Achitophell, Balaa^, and many mo willingly and of determined
purpose did wickedly and most unthankfully offend, but what is this to your
matter, It rests always, to be proved that they were elected in Christ Jesus
by the eternal counsel of God. To the 10
Your foolish question demanding if Adam or any other man can be saved by
Christ. which does forsaik him, I have before answered, plainly proving, that
the elect children can not finally forsaik and conte^ne the ordinance of their
father. Nether yet can the members, refuse the lief which they receive from
their head. And that because the Spirit of God, drawing them to Christ, makes
them to feel their necessity, which they have of him. The elect of God can not
forsake Christ.
And therefore with all thank fulness and joy do they receive him who is made to
us from God, wisdom, justice, satisfaction, redemption, and lief. To me it
appears a very foolish questi^, if any should demand if a man perfect in wit,
memory and reason, feling him elf so pressed which honger or thirst, that of
necessity he must perish, except nature were supported, to ask, (I say) if
such a man willingly and obstinatly would refuse holsom meat, and drink,
appears foolish, and vain. And such is your question, for the elect children
do feel their own misery, honger thirst and poverty, yea they labor under the
burden of their sins, which they hate, of the which they would be releued. And
therefore they can not refuse the justice, lief and assured redemption, which is
offered to the^ in Christ Jesus. To whom be all praise glory and honor for
ever. The place of the Apostle I have before answered and therefore I shortly
com to that which ye call.

THE ADVERSARY.
The third error of the careless by necessity
God has two manner of wills, The 35. sec^^on.
one reveled will, and a secret will which is only known ^o him self* by g^ds
re^^led will men should not com to naught, but they which por^sh, (...) perish
by his secret will, in respect of gods commandment. It was not gods will,
that Adam should sinn^, but in respect of gods secret will God would Adam to
fall.

ANSWER.
How maliciously ye peruerte our words, and how impudently ye forge upon us a
form of doctrine, which did never enter into our thogthes shall appear God
willing bv answering to that, which ye call the confutacion of our third error,
which thus begins.

THE ADVERSARY.
The authors of this wicked opinion, The 36. section.
when they could not sufficiently confirm their errors, by the auctoiite of
gods word, they invented a new shift to approve it by gods secret will. for
say they: Though God by his reveled will, will all men to be saved, yet by hi^
secret will, he wills many to be damned, by his reveled will, he will no
wick^dnes, but by his secret will he will Pharao to be hard hearted, S^m^^ to
curs David the patriarchs to sell their brother Joseph etc. by his reveled will
he would (...) that, Adam should full, but by his s^cret will be wills Adam to
full I marvel much where ye have found out this manner of doctrine for n^ther,
Moses and the prophets. nether Christ and his Apostles use any such manner of
doctrine. further what profit do yeto the people wi^h this d^^trine? Sure I am
that (...) cause many to conceive an evil opinion of God hereby. But now for
as much, as the secret will of God, ^^k^owe^ to none but ^o him self alone, who
has r^^eled it to you? how can ye s^y this is god^ secret will? ^f it was
gods sec^e^^ will that Ad^ should fall and you (...) it then it is both secret
and (...), both reveled and unreueled, both known, and unknowen. what great
absurdity is this? can a man call that which he knows unknown? or that
which is secret reveled. so may a man say, Eccle. 3*
hearing is not hearing, light ^s no light. By this strange Oh that you could
look upon that always.
that you are become foolish, you can not content your self with such things
as it has pleased God to reuele in his word for our comfort, but will needs
know gods secret will. Search not says Sirach out the ground of things as are
to mighty for the but look what God has commanded the, and look upon that
always, and be not curious in many of his works, for it is not needful for
the to se with thine eyes things that are secret. the meddling with such
things has beguyled many a man and tangled their wits in vanity. Prouer, 28
And in the Prou^rbe^: Eyke as it is not good to eat to much honey, even so he
that will search out hiegh things, it shall be to heavy for him. woe be unto
them (says the Lord) that are wise in their own sight, Esaie 5.
and think them selves to have understanding. for he that presumes to know the
secret will of God, and thereby will confirm his error, he can not be reformed
by gods reveled will, Romans 12
which is the word. Be not wise says Paul, in your own opinions. And the
holy Ghost: be not wise in your own conceat; but f^are the Lord and depart from
evil, Prou. 3
so shall thy nauel be hole and thy bones strong* And I^ but is not we that can
find out the almighty. Job 37
for in power, equity, and righteousness he is hiegher, then can be expressed.
Let men therefore fear him. for there shall no man se him that is wise in his
own conceat, we must not ^eke out the, s^cretes of God, for we shall not
prevail, Sap. 9
But if we prepare our selves with r^uerence to read the word of God to the
intent to understand it to our consolation, and with humility subm^t our
selves to do it, God will open to us so much as is either necessary or
profitable for us.

ANSWER.
What confirmation our doctrine has by the invincible, To the 1. 2. 3. 4
and most evident testimonies of gods holy scriptures, I will not now dispute:
only I must co^pleine, that maliciously, and most impudently ye wrest our
words, and pervert our minds. And for the probatio^ thereof I say that ye are
never able to show in any of our writings the words and sentences, which in
this place ye affirm us to say. ye be never able (I say) to prove that we have
written or taught: that God by his reveled will, will all men to be saved, and
yet by his secret will, he wills many to be damned. That by his reu^led will
he wills no wickedness, but by his secret will, he will Pharao to be hard
hearted, Semei to curse David, the Patriarchs to sell their brother Joseph,
that by his reveled will, he would not that Adam should f^ll, but by his
secret will he wills Adam to fall.

These propositions I say, you be never able to show in our writings, nether
yet to prove that our doctrine did or does tend to that end. for we constantly
affirm that God reveled unto us his most holy and most just will in his plain
and holy scriptures, which do assure us, that a separation shall be made betwext
the goats, and the lambs, that the one shall receive the kingdom propared unto
them before all beginning, and that the other shall be adjudged to the fire which
never shall be quenched. That God stirred and raised up Pharao, that his power
might be declared in him, that these words God plainly spoke to Moises: I
know that Pharao shall not permit the people to depart, therefore have I
hardened his heart, Eu^. 9.
that I may multiply my wonders upon him: that David did repress the fury of
Abisai, and of his servants who would have killed Semei, 2 King. 16.
saying: suffer him to curse, for the Lord has commanded him the Lord
perchance shall behold my affliction, and shall reward me with good for his
cursing this day. That Joseph said to his brethren, Gen^. 45
be you not moved with sorrow, y^ ye have sold me, for the Lord has sent me
for conservation of a great multitude, it is not therefore you that have sent
me hither, but God, who has made me father to Pharao, and Lord over his hole
house. None of all these I say do we cast upon gods secret will, as ye falsely
accuse us: but we do constantly affirm that his will, is so plainly reveled
in these matters that such as shall deny any of them to have been gods will, can
not escape abnegation of his eternal verity. And further we say that the fall
of man, is plainly reveled unto us, not only by experience, but even by that
same law which was imposed to him shortly after his creation, the transgression
whereof made Adam and all his posterity criminal and guilty to gods justice:
and that nether against gods will reveled, nether yet against his secret will.
for by his will reveled can no man further conclude, but this, that in what day
soever Ada^ should eat of the fruit forbidden, that he should die the death.
But Adam against gods command ement did eat: and therefore did he justly underly
the sentence of death. And thus do we refer to gods will manifestly reveled,
what soever ye imagine, that we ascribe to his secret will. Nether yet need you
to marvel, if ye list to take such pains, as to read our writi^ges, where
that we find the doctrine that we teach (your surmised lie, we cast upon your
selves) seeing that Moises, the prophets, Christ Jesus, and his Apostles in all
writings do affirm the same. But yet lest that ye should think that we
attribute nothing to gods secret will, To the 5
I will in few words confess what we teach maintein and believe, in that case.
And that the rather because you gather agreate absurdity, not of our doctrine,
but of that which ye falsely imput upon us, in this manner. for as much (you say)
as the secret will of God is known to none but to him self alone, Who has
reveled it to you? how can you say this is gods secret will? if it was gods
secret will that Adam should fall and you knew it* then it is both secret and
vnsecret, both reveled and vnreueled, both known and unknown. What great
absurdity is this?

To the which I answer according to your impudent foolishnes, that because you
fight with your own shadow, these yor darts do hurt us nothing, for we do
not affirm, that we do know the fall of man by gods secret will, but by his
will manifestly reveled unto us by his holy scriptures. Or more plainly to
answer yor reasons, which you think invincible: we say, that that will which was
secret in God before all time, was reveled to man in time by his own word, and
that from time to to time the same became more manifest, as saint Paul
witnesses in these words: ^phes. 3.
To me the least of all saints is given this favor (or grace) that I should
preach amongst the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ, That I should
bring forth to light before all me^, what is ye communion of the mystery wc
was hid from all ages in God, who has made all things by Christ Jesus, that
the manifest wisdom of God may now be notified to principates, and powers in
heavenly things by the Church, according to the fore appointment of the ages
which he has made in Christ Jesus our lord. so that we are now bold to say,
that albeit no creature did know before all time what order God should keep in
the creation and disposition of all things in time: yet may we now I say be
bold to affirm that the secret was hid in the eternal connsell of God.
That first he would create the heaven the earth, the mass being rude, having
darkness upon the great depthe, thereafter that he would make light putting
division between the light and the darkness, and so forth as Moises has
declared the order observed in the creation. And as those things were sometime
secret, but now are manifest, reveled and known so likewies was the fall of
man, and the redemption which comes by Christ Jesus sometime secret in the
eternal counsel of God, but now is most manifestly preached and declared by
Christ Jesus, and by his holy Apostles. for now we know that God so loved the
world, that his only beloved Son has he given, that so many as do believe
in him, shall have the life everlasting. Which life was even before all times
in Christ Jesus, even as we were elected in him before the foundations of the
world were laid. And therefore I doubt not to affirm, but that the fall of man
and the remedy for ye same, was not only forsene but also before determined,
and the fruit which of the same should ensue concluded and appointed in gods
eternal counsel before that ever Adam was created. the reason and probation
hereof we have before declared to be the issue of all things, as we are taugh
by gods manifest word, yea by most evident experience. for who needs now to
doubt, that it was gods eternal counsel, that man should fall from that
perfect image in which he was created and so become subject to the death, to
the end that the faithful might receive perfection, justice and life in Christ
Jesus alone, seeing that scripture so manifestly affirms that we were elected
in Christ Jesus before the foundations of the world were laid that God has
wrapped all nations in disobedience that he might have mercy upon all, Romans 11
upon all I say which refuse not the remedy, from all beginning prepared, which
is Christ Jesus, as ye Apostle witnesses, saying: in him and by him, areal
things created, and he is before al things, Colo. 1.
and al things consist or abide by him, and he is the head of the body of the
Church, who is the beginning, the first begotten of the dead, that in all
things he may hold the preemine^ce. for it has pleased the father that all
fulness should dwell in him* and to reconcile, by him al things to him self.
This counsel I say was not temporal, as taken and devised after the fall of
man, but it was eternal, as the same Apostle witnesses in these words: Ti^^. 2
God has called us by an holy vocation, not according to our works but
according to his purpose and grace, which was given to us by Jesus Christ
before eternal times, but is now made manifest by the appering of our savior
Jesus Christ. But mark well that the Apostle says that grace was given to the
faithful by Christ Jesus from the eternity of times which thus to Titus he
does confirm saying, Tit. 1.
Paul the servant of God, and an Apostl^ of Jesus Christ according to the
faith of gods elect, and the knowledge of the verity, which is according to
godliness in the hope of eternal life, which he has promised, which is God
that ca^ not lie, before the world began, and has opened his word at ye time
appointed through preaching etc. And the same says Peter speaking of our
redemption by Christ's precious blood, 1. Pet. 1.
who certainly was preordinate, says he, before that ye world was made, but
was manifested in the last times. Having these I say most evident scriptures to
assure our conscience that redemption, remission of our sins, grace, and
reco^ciliation, were appointed for us, yea and were given unto us before all
times, what need we to doubt, what was the counsel of God in man's creation, or
what was his secret will in giving to him the commandment of not eating the
fruit, and therefore you do not only folishly, but also injuriously in thus
raling upon us, what strange and monsterous doctrine is this? to say things be
secret, and vnsecret, known, and vnknowene, reveled and vnreueled, as man
should say hearing? is not hearing and light is not light. No such absurdity
ca^ justly be gathered upon our doctrine, for simply we say yt things sometimes
kept secret in ye counsel of God, and unknown to the sons of me^, were
after disclosed. and made manifest to the world, in so much, that light
expelled darcknes from the hearts of the sons of light, and knowledge
removed ignorance from those, that were appointed to life. If these things do
not satisfy you, yet my good hope is, that ye godly reader shall perceive,
that most unjustly you accuse us, as if in our doctrine were plain
contradiction. And yet as touching the secret will of God we moreover affirm,
that our eternal election, in Christ Jesus, our temporal falling in Adam, our
restitution to life, by the promise made, are not secret, but manifestly
reveled. But why that so it pleased his infinite wisdom, and goodness to
dispose, and before ordeine the mystery of our salvation: that first we should
bear the image of the earthly and carnal Adam, before that we should bear
the image of the heavenly and spiritual: that first we should be all wrapped
in sin, and by reason thereof in misery and death, before that we should be
perfect just, and come to felicity, and life everlasting, and finally why yt
it pleased his Majesty to choose some: and of this same mass to reiecte
others, we say is not reveled, neither yet shall be reveled before yt Christ
Jesus appear in his glory, when the books shall be opened and all secrets
shall be disclosed. To speak the matter so simply as I can, that ye have no
occasion to complein of obscurity, I say that gods will in these subseque^tes
and in many others his wo^derous works is secret. first why did not God more,
suddenly creat ye world? why gave he to Adam no greater strenght? why did he
permit him to fall? why he did not provide man's redemption by some other
means, the^ by the cruel and ignominious death of his own son? why did he
choose the sede of Abraham to be his people, refusing and rejecting as it were
the rest of the world? And finally why that God would that his dear son should
die in Jerusalem, called his own City, by reason of the temple and sacrifices
appointed? why (I say) that God by the figures of the law, and by his Prophets
had before spoken, that the Messiah should suffer in that city, and that the
builders, who then only in earth were reputed and known to be the Church of
God, should reject and refuse the chief corner stone Christ Jesus? In these and
others the wondrous works of God (which so far excede the reach of our
understanding, To the 6. 7. 8.
that more able they are to quench and swallow up all light which remains in
us, then is ye great depth of the sea to devour our frail bodies) do we hold
the secret will of God for a ruele of all equity, perfection and
sufficiency, teaching and affirming that if any man of vain curiosity or of
deuelish pride, presume to define or determine upon these or others his
inscrutable secrets, the causes whereof (other then his secret, but most just
will) is not, neither shall be reveled, till the full glory of the sons of God
be manyfested, when the wisdom, goodness, justice and mercy of God shall so
evidently appear to the full contentation of his elect, and to the most just
conuicting of the consciences of the very reprobate, to whom shall be left no
place of excuse, but in their own consciences they shall receive the just
sentence of their most just condemnation. and so shall they in torments
glorify the most just and most severe judgment of God, and his unspeakable
hatered against sin conceived. We teach and affirm (I say) that if any man
in this life trauale to search out other causes of these foresaid works of God
(then his secret will) that the same man hedlongs casts him self in to
horrible confusion, which he can not eskape without spedie repentance. And
against such men are all the scriptures by you alleged, spoken and written, and
not against us, who as we affirm nothing which gods word does not plainly
teach us, so do we cease curiously to inquire any cause of his works, other
the^ it has pleased his godly wisdom, and mercy to reuele unto us by his
holy spirit plainly speaking in his holy scriptures. And therefore to you it
shall be most profitable to try and examine this matter with greater
indiffere^cie, then hitherto you have done, and to ponder, and wey whether it
be ye or we that be wise in our own conceate, sight or opinion, or that go
about to find out the almighty, Romans 12
that is to subject his Majesty, Job. 37^
and wisdom to the judgment of our corrupt reason, You (I say) who upon his
words plainly spoken by the holy Ghost, and upon his works which he neither
fearerh nor eshameth to attribute and clame to him self, dare make these
blasphemous conclusio^s: Then is he more cruel then a wolf, then is he a
dissembler, The saings of Castalio against John. Cal^in.
then bears he ho^ny in his mouth and gaul in his breast, then is he author
of sin, and him self the^ is he unjust and co^trarious to him self, or we yt
co^mi^g but only to the sight of gods inco^prehensible judgments, with all
tre^bli^g and reverence fall done before his Majesty and with the Apostle do
cry, Oh ye depnes of ye riches and wisdom and knowledge of God, how
inscrutable are his judgments and unsearchable are his ways, who has
known ye mind of the Lord or who has been of his counsel, or who has given
unto him first, that he should recompense him? for of him, and by him and in
him are all things. to him be glory for ever, Amen. Be you your selves judges
I say whether you or we do search out things that be above the reach of our
capacities, and by that means study to bring God as it were in bondage to our
reasons. but now that which follows in these words.

ADVERSARY.
Thy word says David is a lantern to my fete and a light unto my steps.
The 37. section
when thy word goes forth it gives light and understanding even Unto babes:
Psalm 119
all the words of the Lord are pure and clean it is a shilde to them that put
their trust in it. And the Prophet Esaya: if any man lack light ^et him look
upon the law, and the testimony. we must not leave the word and seek to
establish our fantasies, either by reason or gods secret will. for we are
commanded that we turn not from the word nether to the right hand, nor to the
left, that thou may saye^h the holy Ghost have understanding in all that
thou take in hand. This is sufficient for us and this we oght for to do. But
we know say you even by the word, that God has a secret will, whereby he
works all that pleases him very well and can you prove thereby that God
has two wills? Pro. 30.
God has reveled so much of his will as is profitable Esa, 8.
the rest which is nether necessary nor mete for us to know he has not
reveled. Is it therefore an other will? or is Romans 12
he would Adam should fall then did God will two contraries which is impossible.
Job 37
was there ever any such monsterous doctrine taught God abhors a double
heart which speaks one thing and thinks and other. and yet abhor you not
to charge God with that which

ANSWER.
The will of God plainly reveled, in his holy scriptures we do not only
follow as a bright lantern shining before us, To the ^
for the directing of our paths walking in the darkness of this mortality but
also we affirm it to be of such sufficiency, that if an Angel from the
heaven with wonders, signs and miracles would declare to us a will repugning
to that which is alredie reveled persuading us upon that, to ground our faith,
or by that to rule the actions of our lives, we would hold him accursed, and in
no wise to be heard. and therefore yet once again I ca^ not cease to exhort
you, if by late revelations ye (I mean some of your faction) has received any
new knowledge of gods will, by the which you persuade others, that man in this
life shall be pure, and clean, with out sin, that God shall expel it, not
only in the resurrection, but even while we walk compassed with this
corruptible flesh, even as the bright sun chaseth away the darck clouds,
that the children of God shall so bear dominion over the wicked in this earth,
that all the proud tyrannes, and oppressors shall be come slaves to the godly,
and that shall be their hell and punishment, as the earthly reigning of the
others, shall be their heaven and joy promised. Examine I say your selves, if
that any of you be infected with these, and others mo gross and foolish
fantasies, which by gods reveled will, you be never able to prove. But as for
us we have proved and offer to prove at all times by the reveled will of God,
what so ever we teach, affirm or believe, To the 2
of gods eternal election, or of his most just reprobatio^ for we confess even
the self same thing which you allege us to say, which is that by the word of
God we know, that God has a secret, will whereby he works all that pleases
him in heaven and in earth, and that also he has reveled unto us so much as is
profitable for us to know, either yet necessary for our salvation. for the
which we praise his eternal goodness and infinite wisdom and do affirm further
(as before we have said) that such as stand not content with that which is
reveled, but arroga^tly list to mount up to search the secrets of gods
counsel, shall be beaten down again by the brightness of his glory to eternal
confusion, in a just recompense of their presumpteous boldness. And thus much
with you we will willingly confess. but where upon certain questions, you make
such conclusions as pleases you, we cannot but accuse in yon that vnreuerent
yea deuelish boldenes and pride, which in all men we condemn. But let us hear
your own words.

Can you prove thereby that God has two wills, or is that which is not
reveled contrary to that which is reveled then should there be co^trarietie
in God which is false. if God in respect of his reveled will, would not that
Adam should fall but in respect of his secret will he would Adam should fall.
Then did God will two contraries which is impossible.

These be your words and several reasons most blasphemously spoken, To the 3.
4. 5.
not against us but against gods eternal wisdom. against us (I say) ye cannot
speak them for no such doctrine have we ever taught, for we most constantly
affirm that the secret will of God and his will reveled, is always one, which
is the manifestation and declaration of his own glory, although it seem diverse
in ye instruments as before I have most manifestly dec^ared. and thus most
justly might I send you to debate your cause with him whose justice, and wisdom
cannot be subject to the vanity of your reason. But yet because no small part
of this controversy betwext you and us consists in this: that you can admit
no will in God the reason and cause whereof, ye cannot see, perceive nor
understand, and affirming the contrary say, that of gods secret will, can
nether man nor Angel perceive assign, or understand any other reason, or
cause, but his holy will only: and therefore with all reverence do they
stoop, and covering their eyes, cry just and righteous art thou oh, Lord in
all thy works, holy, holy, holy Lord God of armies. The universal earth is
replenished with the glory of his Majesty. Esaias. ^.
Because I say a great part of our controversy stands in this point, I will
go through your questions, and severally answer to every one. first you ask
if God have two wills by reason that he has a secret will and a reveled will.
I answer, that as God in his eternal God head is simple and one, so is his
will in respect of him self from all beginning simple and one, which is the
declaration of his own glory. But because the instruments (in which gods
glory is and must be for ever manifested and known) be diverse, therefore has
gods will wc in him self is one, diverse considerations, effects, and ends,
in respect of the diverse instruments. for example God will the vessels of his
mercies to be extolled to the glory of the kingdom with Christ Jesus, Mat. 25
but he will the vessels of wrath to be adjudged to the fire inquenchable
prepared for the devil and all his Angels. Who does not see, but in respect
of these diverse instruments the will of God has diverse respects, and diverse
ends, and justly may be called two wills or a dooble will? for it is one will
to save, and an other will to condemn, as touching the instruments and
creatures saved or condemned. But in respect of God the will is one and simple,
which is as before is said the manifestation of his glory, which no less
shyneth in the just punishment of the one sort, then in the merciful
deliverance of the other. And this much for the first. Secondly ye ask, if yt
wc is not reveled be contrary to that wc is reveled. To the wc I answer as
before, that in respect of God there is no co^trarietie betwext ye will
reveled and the will vnreueled. But yet may the creatures to whom God, does
notify his will by commandment, rebuke or exhortation, apprehend and
understand one thing, and yet it may be that God in his eternal counsel has
determined the express contrary. if this to you at the first sight seem
strange, yet my good hope is that examples in the scriptures proposed shall
make the matter sensible enough to the godly and sobre reader. To (...)
What do we think that David did apprehend of that most sharp and vehement
rebuke given unto him by Nathan the^ Prophet in the name of God? No dowt that
he was the son of death, that God would break the league and covenant with
him, as he had done to Saul his predicessor. But was it therefore the eternal
purpose of God that so it should be? The end and issue declares the contrary.
Ezechias received the very sentence of present death from the mouth of the
Prophet Isaiah, who no doubt came not with message at all adventure, but at the
express commandment of God, for so he affirms saying: Thus says the lord
put order to thy house for thou shall die and shall not live. Isa. 38.
But was not therefore the contrary (to wit that he should afterward live
fiftene years) determined in the immutable counsel of God. The same might I
declare by many other exhortations etcommandementes, but with one I will stand
contented, which shall add light to the former. Abraham was commanded by God,
to take his son Isaak whom he loved, his only son, in whom the promise
stood, and to go to the mounteine which God would appoint, and there to offer
him in sacrifice. What will of God did Abraham apprehend in this commandment
during the journey of three days? God him self bears record, that Abraham
did so understand gods will, that his own hand was stretched out to kill his
son, yea that in his heart he had killed him. for so says the Angel:
because thou have done this, and have not spared thy only son, I shall
bless the. but whether had God in his eternal counsel de^ermined, that
Abraham should kill his son, as Abraham did understand by his will reveled?
who so ever dare so affirm makes God subject to mutabilitie, and denies him
to be God, whose wisdom, knowledge, purpose and cou^selles be stable and
appointed from all eternity. if with reverence the causes hereof be searched
and inquired, ye holy Ghost will answer yt good it was to David thus to be
humbled. that profitable it was not only to Ezechias, but also to the hole
Church of God after him, to come to the knowledge of his infirmity, and of
the agonye and battle which he sustained, fighting as it were against gods
judge me^tes. That by Abraham's, great obedience, be we all instructed to obey
God in all things which he co^ma^deth, and to subject not only our lusts and
affections to his will reveled, but also our reason (appear it never so
probable.) With the which if we stand not satisfied, but quarreling with God,
will or dare in a blind fury ask, to what purpose commands, and speaks he
one thing, and means the contrary? That deuelishe presumption shall fall down
from the clouds, and break down for ever the frantic heads of such vile
slaves of proud lucifer. And therefore be ye warned, for vengeance is prepared
for all such vnreuerent reasoners in gods perfect (but yet profound)
judgments as ye declare your selves to be, in this which foleweth.

If God (say you) in respect of his reveled will, would not that Adam should
fall, but in respect of his secret will, he would Adam should fall^ then did
God will two contraries, which is impossible.

Answer. Impossible we confess it to be that contrariety should be in that
will, which in it self is simple and one. But how shall you be able to prove
that God in reueling his will to Adam, had none other purpose nor will but
only that Adam, should not fall? (because say you) he said thou shall not
eat, I answer, and so said he to Abraham thou shall take and offer thy son
in sacrifice. And yet we know that the contrary had he determined. O (cry
you) God abhors a double heart which speaks one thing and thinks an
other, To y^ 5
and yet ye abhor nes to charge God with that which he can not abide in his
creatures, that is that he should speak one thing, as that Ada^ should not
offend, and will the contrary, as that Ada^ should offend. Answer, God if his
good pleasure be, towch your hearts with such unfeigned repentance that you may
understand how horrible be these blasphemies, which thus in your furious
blindness you spew forth against gods supreme Majesty, for before I have said
they are not spoken against us. for no such doctrine do we teach nor affirm,
as that of which you gather these blasphemies, and albeit we did, yet it were
as easy for us to dissolve and vnlouse such deuelish knottes, as by
instruction of your father, you knit to trippe ye souls of the simple, and as
it is for ye foot of the valiant and strong man to burst a sondre the spiders
webbes which ye venomous spider makes to catch the impote^t flies and feeble
gnattes. And now left y^ you should glory as though yor reasons yet stood
sure. Let us try and examine every membre aparte. God abhors (say you) a
dooble heart which speaks one thing and thinks an other, I answer: That as
God is a spirit and has neither heart nor body like as man has, so must not
his words, cogitations, and thoghtes be compared to ours: for as we be corrupt
liers and vain, so where we do speak one thing, and think an other, we do
mean deceate, fraud, and destruction to our brother, to whom we promise
truth, fidelity, and conservation to our power. But God according to the
purity and perfection of his godly nature in speaking to his creatures, and
in creating of them must not absolutely have respect to the^, but also to his
own glory. for what reason is it that God of nothing shall make that c^eature
by whom his glory shall not be manyfested? and therefore in speaking to Adam,
and in giving a law to him, God had respect to his eternal counsel and
purpose, as before we have spoken, and hereafter shall rehears. But still cry
you, that yet we burden God with that which he cannot abide in his creatures that
is, that he should speak one thing, as that Adam should not have fallen, and
that he meant the contrary. for answer I ask of you, if ye will bind God to
that law which he has imposed to his creatures? And if ye will leave none
other liberty to God his sovereign majesty, then his law has permitted to
men subject to the same: and if ye dare promise to your selves that authority
over God, girde your loins, and play the strong champions: prepare your
seats, appoint your judges, cite, and adiourne him to appear at a fixed day,
to render a reason, The aduersari^s judge of gods majesty according to their
blind reas^n.
and a make an acco^pte before you of his universal regiment, in which (no
doubt) ye shall find many things more repugnant to your reason then this. You
think I mock you in that I will you to cite and call God to an account, in very
deed I do. for as your blasphemy and pride is utterly to be abhorred, so is
your vanity more worthy to be mocked, then your simplicity in that case to
be instructed. for what was he ever yet amongst the most ignorant ethnicks so
foolish or so presumpteous, but that he did confess that the works and
wonders of the supreme God, were exempted from all law, and censure of man's
judgment. But in your presence, God shall have no liberty to command, or
forbid any thing to any of his creatures, but that he must needs absolutely
will the same, and for no cause or respect may he will the contrary, but that
he shall have a dooble heart, he shall be a disse^bler (cursed be your blasphemy
that causes me thus to write) and in him there shall be co^trarietie. this is
the reverence which ye bear to gods infinite wisdom in all his works, to the
ground whereof ye can not atteine by your corrupt reason, that you burst forth
in scoffing, mocking, and blasphemy. But yet to come more nigh to the matter, I
deny that justly you can conclude any contrariety to be in God, albeit that
to Adam he said thou shall not eat, and yet in his eternal counsel he had
determined that Adam should eat, neither yet (I say) ca^ you be able to
prove, that he spoke one thing and willed the contrary, because he pronounced
this sentence: in what so ever day thou shall eat of this tree, thou shall dye
the death, but rather we may most assuredly conclude, that both the precept,
and the penalty threatened to ensue the violation of it, was a plain and
manifest declaration what before was concluded in gods eternal counsel, as
also that they were the means, by the which the secret will and good purpose
of God took effect amongst men and was notified unto the world. for if God
had not before appointed the fall and the remedy for the same, he had not
imposed upon him a law, the transgression whereof, should bring death, but
should have suffered him to live without such fear and bondage, as we shall do
when victory shall be given over death, which is the sting of sin, and over
sin also which had his power by the law. And therefore I say that gods
commandment forbidding Adam to eat, and the punishment of death denounced, if
he did eat, were nothing contrary to his secret will: but were the very ways
appointed by his infinite wisdom, by the which he had determined that his
secret will concerning the mystery of ma^s redemption should be notified and
put in execution. And albeit that such as in gods eternal election find no
swetenes nor comfort, fret, fume, storm, and rage at the only mention of it:
yet neither dare we nor can we co^ceale and suppres gods eternal truth,
infinite love, and incomprehensible liberality toward us: neither eshame we
to confess our own wretched poverty, and just condemnation, into the which
our father Adam willingly wrapped him self and us. And therefore we constantly
affirm that as we were elected in Christ Jesus before all times, so it behooved
us in time to fall in Adam, to the end that the bright glory of God, might
after shine and appear before men and Angels. Prove now if you can
contrariety betwext gods will reveled, and his secret will. How vain is the
difference, which you put between his will and his permissio^ we shall shortly
examine in this which follows.

THE ADVERSARY.
The reason where with you go about to persuade this to be of truth is very
mean, The 1* argument.
if a man (say you) could do any thing contrary to gods will, then were not God
omnipotent, 38. Section.
wherefor what so ever (...) do^ne, it must needs be done by the will of God,
whose will no man ca^ resist. I answer that God is goodness it self, his will
is always good, yet man apt to obey the will of God, yet was God omnipotent,
for if God had list he might have destroyed Phara^ at the first, and the
arroga^t tyra^n^ was well worthy to be destroyed, yet God used toward him, by
littel and litell Iere. 17.
until they be mollified by the grace of God, as I^remie witnesses saying:
Amongst al things liu^^^ not, man has the most deceafull and stubborn heart
and the lord says that he will take the stony heart from the^, Eze. 36.
and gi^^ the^ a heart of flesh* without they had a sto^e heart, he could not
take it (...) the^ If Phara^ had a stonye heart, as it does well appear, Job
^9.
that is suffer us not to be led into re^ptacion. So Job says* God has
take^^ wis^dim from the Estriche, that is as it (...) there God has wi^hholden
their hearts from understanding that is thou have not given the^ understanding:
I^b 17.
And thus ma^^er of speaking is common in the scriptures not only of God, but
also of man as these, I^sue, 22
now you have ^idd the children of Israel out of the hand of the Lord, that
is you have not caused the to (...) in^^ the hand of the lord. The phrase of
the scripture being this truly understood* Esa. 5.
So Job was plagued of God only by suffering him to be plagued notwithstanding
Job say^th,

ANSWER.
How mean that ever our reasons be, yet great cause we have to give thanks
unto God, that ye in laboring with all your wits to oppugn and obscure them,
are yet compelled by the invincible grace of gods mercy to justify and
illustrate the same. which shall plainly appear by this your first answer,
which you make concerning the omnipotency of God. forasmuch (say you) as God
is goodness it self, his will is alawayes good, yet man is apt to do, and may do
evil, contrary to gods will, notwithstanding God remains omnipotent
suffering man to do evil, whom he might destroy before he did evil, if so
pleased him: and so ye bring forth ye example of Pharao. I will not take in all
points that advantage of you wc I think you would take of us most gladly, if you
had us in such a streit as you have here concluded your selves. for if man may
do evil contrary to gods will: so that God for no respect, for no end nor
purpose would that such wickedness should be done (for thus you must apply your
words, orels ye say nothing against us) and yet that it pleases God not to
destroy the wicked doer, but to suffer him to do evil, whom he might have
destroyed before the iniquity committed. What shall, I pray you ensue? but
that either there shall be in God two contrary wills, one that wills no
wickedness in no wyes to be done, and an other that suffers wickedness, yea
and that is pleased to suffer and not to destroy the wicked ma^^ orels that
there is a power above gods will, which compels him to suffer that which he
would not: one of these two can you not avoid. But I will dealle more favorably
with you. Ye grant that God suffers the evil, To ye 1. and 2.
and that he might destroy the wicked man before iniquity be committed, if so
pleased his godly majesty and wisdom. Do ye not consider that in this your
confession, is no les ^onteined then any of us has either written or spoken in
this matter. for if gods omnipotency remains as no doubt it does, so perfect
and hole that he may not impede only wicked men of their interprises, but also
yt he may destroy eue^ Satan him self, if so pleased his eternal wisedo^, what
can be concluded, but yt God willingly for causes known to his wisdom alone,
permits and suffers things to be do^ne wc after he will most justly
punish? And thus (I say) does you own answer and confession justify or
doctrine. for we do not teach yt wickedness pleases God, in so far as it is
wickedness: neither yet that God will sinful acts to be done, in so far as
they are sinful, without any other further respect. But we say that as the
actions and cogitatio^s of the godly please God in Christ Jesus, because they
are wroght and inspired by ye power of his holy spirit: so yt the good works,
as patience, justice, chastity, and such lik, God will to be do^ne, eue^
because the works be good and agreeable to his own nature: so say we that God
will, yea and has determined the works that be most wicked to be done for y^
purposes and causes concluded in his eternal counsel. Which thing if we be able
to prove by the evident scriptures of God the^ oght you not to be offended
although we prefer God to man, and his plain truth, to your sophistical
euasio^s and cold interpretations of such places. for the avoiding the
prolixitie of many, I will choose but two at y^ most, plain and most evident.
Is it not a great and horrible sin that a falls prophet shall come and
deceause the people? Yea is it not likwyes sin, to deceive ye Prophet? and yet
God fears not to attrib^t to him self both the one and the other. for no
falls prophet does arrise, who^ God for one of two purposes does not stir
up, to wit, either to try and examine the constancy and fidelity of his
servants, orels, to execute and blind those, who delight not in the verity.
For Moises witnesses in these words, if in the midst of the, there arrise a
Prophet, and he shall give unto the a sign, and yet should say let us go and
serve strange gods hear him not, for ye Lord your God tempts you, whether
that ye will love your Lord, your God with all your heart, and in all your
foul. if it be the propre office of God to try, tempt and examine ye hearts
of his people and of his chosen children as the holy Ghost affirms it to be.
Then must you confess that the false prophets be gods instruments appointed for
that purpose. And that God deceaueth the false Prophet, Ezechiel in plain
words does witness saying, and if the Prophet deceived speak the word, I the
Lord have deceived that Prophet, Eze. 14
and I will extend my hand against him and I will root him out from the midest
of my people Israel. And the same does yet God hi^ self more plainly vendicate
to him self in that solemned proclamation made in the ears of the prophet
Micheas and boldly by him pronounced in audience of two kings Achas and
Iosaphat, 3. Reg. 22.
as follows: who shall deceive Achas to us? or who shall persuade him that he
may pass up, and fall in Ramath galaad, and there passed out a certain spirit
and standing before ye lord he said I shall deceive or persuade him. And the
lord said whereunto? and he said I shall pass out and be alieng Prophet in the
mouths of all his Prophets: he said therefore thou shall deceive him and thou
shall br^g it to pass: goo forth therefore and do eue^ so. And lo God has given
a lie^g spirit in the mouths of al these Prophets and the lord has spoken
evil upon the. If to make a public proclamation to call for one to deceive,
to send him forth and to give him power to do the same. be only a simple
permission, and a thing which God suffers against his will, let the
indifferent man judge. I think that no man will deny the incest of Absalome
openly committed, not only to be sin, but also to be so execrable and
detestable a fact that nature it self (be it never so corrupt) must needs
abhor it and yet I pray you what says God that he will do in that be half,
let the Prophet witness. Thus says the Lord God (says Natha^) behold I shall
raise evil against the, forth of thine own house, and I shall take thy wives
and give the^ to thy neighbor, who shall sleep with them in the sun. Thou did
est yt fact secretly but I shall do this thing openly before all Israel, let
ye veheme^cie of ye words wc here be spoken, be noted and be judges your selves
whether your interpretation be tolerable, he says not I shall suffer evil to
come upon the, but plainly he says I shall raise up evil against the. And
therewith not content, he says I shall take thy wives, and to put the matter
out of all controversy he adds, and I shall give the^ to thy neighbor yea
and that will I do openly. If to raise up, to give, and to do, be to permit
only the thing which he will not, we must confess our selves ignorant of the
phrases of the holy Ghost. this same might I prove by Job, by Nabuchadnezer, by
Salmanasar, by Syrus and diverse others which for breuities saik I pass over.
one I will recite wc I trust shall be so plain that the devil him self by no
subtilitie shall be able to obscure the light of ye truth. Was there ever any
fact since the beginning more wicked, if the instruments shall be considered, as
was the cruel and ignominiouse death of the Son of God? And yet what does
the holy Ghost attribut to God in that case? him says Peter (being crucified)
did you kill after that you had taken him by the hands of ye wicked men being
given by the appointed counsel and fore knowledge of God. Act. 2.
And after, Act. 4.
they have verily co^uened against thy holy Son Jesus, who^, thou have
anointed, Herod together and Po^tius Pilate, with ye Gentiles together and ye
people of Israel to do what so ever thy hand and thy counsel have decreed to
be do^ne. Advise well what ye will answer, ye words are plain, and so plain
yt you ca^ not avoid the. for he that says the wicked me^ did what so ever
God did foresee and before dotermined, yea what his hand* yt is his power, and
counsel, yt he had before decreed to be done, means a thing of more greater
importance the^ he yt says they did what God permitted and suffered to be
done. Consider forther yt you have not to do with men, as with Augustine, Calvin
and us whom you call careless libertines, but with the holy Ghost speaking in
Peter and in the hole Church of Jerusalem, yea speaking in the hole
scripptures. for if not to spare his Son, but to give him to ye death for
us, to cause our sins to make war against him, to punish hi^ for ye same,
in such sort yt of al men he was most contemptible for a season. if I say to
give to death to strike, to wound and punish, be actions, then did not God
only suffer his Son to die to be wounded to be smytten and to be punished
without any will, that any such thing should come to pass, but he in his
eternal counsel appointed the time, the place and the persons, when, where,
and by whom he should suffer ye same. for of love he gave him to suffer the
true death: that we by him might receive life. the time could not be changed
and the cup which the father had given him he must needs drinck, as in the
figures was foreshad owed and by his own people, and gentiles, as the
Prophets, and David, had before spoken. If in gods counsel gods gift, gods
hand, and eternal purpose, before decreinge all things to come to pass, in
the death of his Son, ye can se nothing, but a bare and simple permission, I
can not cease to affirm, that as by falsifying such plain scriptures, you
labor to take from the Church of God their most singular comfort left to us in
Christ's death, so do you walk in darkness, and in y^ same ye shall perish
except spedely you repent. How one, and the same work, in so far as it
proceeds from God, is most just, most profitable and most merciful: and yet
as it proceeds from ye instruments most profane most wicked, damnable to the^
selves, and most cruel, I have abou^dantly declared, and after as occasion
shall be offered, shall touch by gods grace, so much as may instruct the sobre
mind, if it be ignorant: and also to put silence to your venomous mouths, be
they never so impudent. Because the scriptures which you heap together be
either plainly repugning to your error, orels make nothing for probation of
the same, I will so shortly as I ca^ go through them, only noting wherein you
abuse the words and mind of the holy Ghost. To the ^
The words of our master spoken in the 24, chapter of Mathewes Gospel serve
nothing for your purpose. for in that place our Savior Christ Jesus speaks
as he that is the messinger of his heaue^lie father, and declares that the
Jews obstinatly even from their original had resisted God speaki^g by his
patriarks, prophets of old, and now last by his Son. he neither speaks nor
means what will, God had to save his elect, neither yet yt will wc he had to
gather and separate the^ from v^ world, but only (as Moises and Elias had
before spoke) declares what fidelity and diligence God had used in the
general election and vocation of that people, from time to time: and yet what
had been their obstinate rebellion and unthankful defection from him: by the
which they killed the Prophets, and should kill his Son sent of God to call
them from iniquity. What has this to do I say with that will, by the which
God, in his eternal counsel has made division, betwext the elect and the
reprobate? If ye dare say that Christ in that place means, in that he would
have gathered those murderers, and sons of murderers as he does witness, he
does gather his chosen flock, him self will co^uicte you of a lie. for he
affirms the same to the scribes and pharisees, to whom principally he spoke,
in that place that they were not of his sheep and that therefore they could not
be gathered to his fold, that they were not of God, and therefore that they
could not hear his voice, yt he did not pray for y^ world, and therefore they
could never be united to God. You must declare how yt God would yt those
Israelites whose carcases fell in ye wilderness should enter into ye land
promised. If you say by any other will the^ by his general precepte given, yt
they should go and possess it, ^e shall lack the testimony of the holy Ghost.
I have decl^red causes most just and most sufficient why God shall command,
that which is just right and laudable, albeit that man neither can perform
his commandementes: neither yet that it was gods eternal will and counsel
that all men should so do. And forther I have declared just causes, why God
does call many to repentance and felicity, and yet that he choseth a certain to
attein thereto and enter the same. And so I say ye must prove yt God did other
ways will, them to enter into the la^d, the^ by his general commandment,
before you be able to prove that any thing is done against the eternal and
immutable will of God. I can prove that gods will was so plain reveled that
none of them should enter into the la^d promised, yt it behooved ye hole army
to be received from place to place til they were al consumed. Yea further I
ca^ prove yt Moises him self could not obtain yt privilege to enter in nor
the people, albeit that in prayer most earnestly he required the same* prove
if you can, that ever God reveled his will to any particulare persons (Joshua
and Caleb only excepted) yt they should enter in it. And the^ may you say that
either God did change his will and purpose, orels that some thing was do^ne
against his will, To the 4. 5. 6 and 7.
which he did permit, but not will. I will answer there is no better argument
to prove that God hardened the heart of Pharao, then that same wc you adduce to
prove that Pharao did harden his own heart, and yt God does suffer it to be
hardened, but does not will it. This ye write. All the children of Adam have a
hard and wicked hear^^ until they be mollified by the grace of God as leremis
witnesses saying. Iere* 47.
Amongst all things living man has the most deceatfull and stubb^rne heart^*
your liberty or ignorance in citing the Prophets words pass measure, Eze^.
36
And the Lord says that he will take away the stony heart from them, and
give them a heart of flesh. no stronger argument nor reason I require to
confute your error then the same, which you allege for the establishment
thereof for if by nature all be equal, and that only grace makes the
difference, then we dema^d and ask whether that grace be given to some, and
denied to others and yt by permission and sufferance, as you speak, or if it be
the determined will of God that his grace and mercy by Christ Jesus shall be
frelie communicated with some, and that the same shall most justly be denied
to others, albeit the causes to us do not appear, during the time of this our
martalitie. If you dare say that gods will in taking away the stony heart and
in giving the fleshie heart, be nothing else but only a permission and
sufferance without the operation and will of his Spirit, then may you reason
that in the hardening of Pharao and of the rest of the reprobat there is
nothing else but a bare permission without any efficacy of gods spirit. But
if it be God that works in us the good will and perfourmance of the same, and
that he has mercy upon whom he lists. the^ is it likwies, that God
hardens whom he will. Mark and note y^ words of the Apostle: He says not,
he hardens whom he permits and does suffer to be hardened, but palinely
he says yt he hardens whom he will. The Apostle saw none other cause why
mercy was showed to some and others were left in induratio^s, but gods will.
True it is yt the reprobat of nature have and from their mothers womb does
tarry with them, the matter of their induration. But the question is. What is the
cause, that yt pestilent matter is removed from some, and why? does it remain
with others? If you answer because some receive grace offered, and some refuse
it. Ye have said nothing, as more plainly I have before declared* for always
we ask the cause why is the will of the one obedient to God, and why is the
will of the other rebellious, considering that all by nature are equal.
Although that you travel to confound the heaven and the earth yet shall ye be
brought to this principal: that God has mercy upon whom he will, and whom
he will he makes hard hearted. And therefore as of his mercy and free grace,
God works willingly in the one with his Spirit, softnes, and y^ feling of
mercy, so does his just judgments, and just wrath against sin couceaued by
the spirit of satan, work in the others hardness obstinacy, and ye sense of
his wrath. You reason affirming that Pharao had a stony heart before that
Moises spoke unto him, the^ could not it be heardened more the^ a stone a fore
yt it was mollified* this yor reason I say is more then foolish* for I suppose
yt you be not so brutishe, yt you will affirm yt the heart of any tyra^ne at
any time, in natural hardness I mean to grope and feel, is co^perable to ye
hardness of a stone, but yt is a figurative speech by ye with is declared ye
unchangeable hardness of man's heart as touching ye natural power of the same.
for as the stone by it self can never com to any softnes of flesh, so can never
man by any gift, which nature has of it self, come to that humility and
obedience, wc is acceptable before God. But does it thereof ensue that one man
is not, nor can not be more cruel then an other, yea that one and the same may
not proceed from evil to wors, and by contempt of grace, make him self more
hard and more hard: although his heart was never fully mollified. I think you
will not affirm the contrary. for the holy Ghost giving this exhortation:
This day if you hear his voice harden not your hearts, Psalm. 95
does confirm my affirmacion, which is, that men proceed from hardness to
hardness, yea from one sin to an other, till their sins be becomme
inexcusable, and so finally irremissible, because that obstinately they refuse
grace offer^d. as Christ does wittnes in these words, if I had not com, and
spoken unto them, they should not have sin, but now have they nothing to
cloak their sin, for they have seen, and hated not only me, but also my
father. No man will be so fond, as to affirm, that the Jews before Christ's
preaching and miracles, were clean without sin: but the contempt of grace
did so augment and increase their sin, that it became inexcusable. even so
say I that Pharao did harden his own heart from time to time becoming more
unthankful unto God and more cruel to his people. And ye fou^teine of this
induration and hardness I confess to have been borne with him, and that to
raige against gods people he neded no impulsion of gods part, but rather a
bridle to impede his fury. But yet the question is not resolved as before I
have noted. for still we ask why was not that fountein shut up? why was not
the natural venim purged and his heart mollified? search where you list, ye
shall find none other reason nor cause, for the which the subsequent induration
of Pharao did principally proceed but yt God in his eternal counsel for
causes known to his wisdom alone had most justly denied to communicate his
graces effectually with him, but had raised him up to have his power showed
forth in him. And so God did harde^ Pharaos heart, not by permission only but
willingly withdrew his Spirit from him as before is said. To the 8. 9 10
Wonder it is that amongst the ancient doctors ye will seek patrocinie or
defense in this matter: seeing it is a statute amongst you, that ye will believe
nor admit the words nor authority of no writer, in any matter of con
trouersie, but all things you will have decided by the plain scripture. And
truly I am not contrary to your mind in that case, so that you understand, that
ye will not admit the authority of man against gods plain truth, nether yet
that you will believe man any furtherthen that he prouethe his sentence by gods
evident scriptures. If you had produced any doctor who had confirmed his
interpretation by the plain word of God, of reason, I oght to have answered,
either by the same, or by some other doctor of equal authority, orels to have
improued his interpretation by the plain scriptures. but seeing that ye produce
none, ye leave me at greater liberty. and yet I will show you the mind of one
doctor co^parable to any that ever wrote before him, either in the latin or in
the greek Church, I mean of Augustine, Lib. 3. contra lul. ca. 5
who writing against Julian the appostate, and against Manacheus who did
affirm the self same thing that you do, to wit that God was a passive God,
that is, he did suffer all evil, and that against his will, but he did work
none. Against him (I say) he thus writes: will thou say (says Augustine to
Julian) that the wicked that be given over to their own desires, are to be
understand only left by gods suffering, but not compelled to sins by power,
as though that the Apostle had not joined the suffering and power of God to
gether, where that he says: if God willing to show wrath, and to declare his
power, fuffered in great patience the vessels of wrath prepared to
destruction, with of these two say thou, is written? And also, if the prophet
do err and shall speak, I the lord have deceived him, is this suffering or is
it power? And after adducing the same wc we before have alleged of Achas he
adds, did God these things ignorantly, or does he any thing, iudgeing or
doing rashly or unjustly? God forbid. it is not without cause that it is said:
Thy judgments are a great deapth it is not vain that the Apostle cries out:
Oh the hieght and depenes of gods judgments. And after in the same place
expounding these words: and lead us not into temptation, after that he has
affirmed that God gives over some for just causes to their own lusts and
blyndnes as he gave over Roboam to believe, the false and foolish counsel of
the young men (he says) all these things does God work by wondrous and
unspeakable means, who knows how to work his just judgments, not only
in the bodies, but also in the hearts of men, he who makes not the wills
evil, but yet he uses them as he will, seeing that he can will nothing
unjustly. Thus far have I alleged unto you the m^nd of one doctor in this our
controversy* when ^e shall bring forth the mind of any so well grounded upon
scriptures as he does this his sentence* I promise to answer if I can. I am
not ignorant that diverse of the doctors (yea and Augustine him self) in some
places may seem to favor your opinion at the first sight. But if their words
in one place be compared with their plain mind and with the scope of their
disputation in other places, it shall plainly appear that none that live this
day do more plainly speak against your error, then some of them have written.
The places of Job manifestly and in plain words, I^b 39
fight against you. I^b 17
for it is said in the one place thou have excluded their heart from wisdom,
and therefore this matter shall not be to their praise. and in the other: God
has taken wisdom from the Estrich, and has not given understanding unto her,
dare you affirm that in these words, there is nothing but a bare permission
of gods part? is there no difference betwext away taking and suffering to be
taken away. if any difference be betwext these two manner of speakings, God
gives wisdom and God takes away wisdom, then is your interpretation
foolish and absurd, nether yet is there any phrase of scripture, understand it
as you please, that can make God to call back that sentence which he has
pronounced, To the 10
to wit that he has raised up Pharao to be an example to all generations
following, what shall be the end of those that obstinatly resist God. Who
albeit he tempt no man to sin by the power of his spirit yet as before I have
proved, he justly gives them over to the inordinat lusts of their own
corruption yea he gives them over into the hands and power of satan to be
pricked and stirred forward to all iniquity that their damnation may be just,
and also that his vengeance justly deserved may the more suddenly fall upon
them. The mind of saint James is only to bring men to the right examination
and trial of them selves lest that by flattery they begin to seek ye
original cause of their sin in an other, then in them selves. And yet does
that nothing impede, but that God in his manner (which always is just) does
harde^ the hearts of those whom before he had reprobated. To the 11. 12. 13
14. 15
We confess that no greater plague can chance unto man* then that he be left
to his own lewd mind* for the^ of him can proceed no good nor permanent fruit.
But as the earth lacking rain dew and moisture must needs be barren, and so
at length subject to malediction, so must men destitute of gods grace, with
Saul, Achab, and others proceed from evil to wors, till finalie they come to
confusion. But were it not yt it is your co^mone custom to belie y^ holy Ghost,
I would wonder how yt you could be so impudent, as to affirm, that ye lord
does punish his vineyarde, not waisting it him self, but takes the hedge and
rain from it and suffers it to be wasted and trodden of others. And that Job
was plagued of God only in suffering him to be plagued. Assuredly this your
affirmation declares in you either a most brutall ignorance orels an impudency
more then manifest. Ye will not deny that Israel and Judah were ye pleasant
vineyard somtymes planted by gods own hand: So does he him self affirm, Isa. 5
and does God no more in their destruction but only look upon the^ as an idle
and unwilling sufferer upon the tragedy and miserable calamity? he him self
does witness ye contrary. for he says I will plainly declare unto you what I
will do to my vineyard, I shall take away ye hedge of it. I shall break down
the wall that it may be trodden upon, I shall make it waste and shall also so
forbid the clouds yt they shall nether send down rayn nor moistur upon it.
Note and mark well I beseech you, god here speaks nothing of permission, but
all together of working, to wit of taking away and of breaking down. And how
I pray you came yt fearful destruction to pass? the lord God of hosts
(says the Prophet Isaiah) will take away from Jerusalem and from Iudath the
stay and the strength, Isa. 3
even all the stay of bread, and all the stay of water, the strong man and the
man of war the judge and the Prophet, the prudent and the aged, the captain
of fifty and the honorable and the counselor, and the conning artificer, and
the eloquent man, and I will appoint children (note well what God speaks) to
be their pinces and babes shall rule over them etc. And after the Lord shall
bring upon the, upon thy people and upon thy fathers house the days that have
not com from the day that Ephraim departed from Judah, even the king of Asshur
etc. Isa. 7
In that day shall the Lord shave the with a rafer that is hired etc. The Lord
him self does further co^fe^^e, Isa. 10
that the king of Asshur is the rodd of his fury and the axe in his hand, he
says to an hypocritical nation will he send him: and I give him
commandemente against that people which has, deserved my indignation I will
give him charge to take away, to riue and to part the spoil. And further in
the same place God does acknowleged the grievous punishment and miserable
destruction of Jerusalem to be his own work. for thus speaks the Prophet:
But when the Lord has accomplished all his work upon mount Zion and Jerusalem,
I will visit the fruit of the proud heart of the king of Asshur, and his
glorious and proud looks etc.

If these words may be attributed to him, who only suffers and does not him
self effectualy work, let indifferent m^n judge. And yet speaking more plainly
he says: I am the lord and there is none other, Isa. 45
I form the light and creat darkness: I make peace and creat evil (that is
punishment and plagues for sin) I the eternal do all these things* Am os
to whom the Prophet Amos does aggre using these same words: or shall there
be evil in a city (says he) and the lord has not done it? The lord
speaking by his Prophets Jeremy and Ezechiel says: I shall send, and take
all the nations of the north, and Nabuchadnezer my servant the king of Babylon,
Iere. 25
and I shall bring them upon this land: I shall kindle the fire, augment and
multiply the flame, Ezec. ^4
and I shall profane (that is I shall make commone) my Sanctuary. If he that
gathers his warryers, that leads, and conducteth them, yea that gives them
strength agilitie and good succes, that puts the sweard of his vengeance
into their hand, that commands them to strike, and to spare none, does
nothing else but suffer, I must confess my self nether to know nor to
understand what it is to do, or what it is to work. Your bold impudency
affirming, that Job was plagued of God, only by suffering him to be plagued,
is intolerable. Does not God provoke as it were satan to try his servant
Job? saying have thou not considered my servant Job, Job 1
how none is like unto him in the earth, an upright and just man, one that
fears God and escheweth evil. And after that satan, upon that occasion had
defaced the integrity and iusticie of Job, affirming* that easy it was to
fear and serve God, seeing that all things were prosperous and fortunate in
his house and family. God first by express words gives to him power over
all yt perteined unto him: and thereafter he gives over the body of Job to the
tyranny of satan, his life only being reserved. Was this I pray you only,
to plague Job, by suffering him to be plagued? Does the father which comma^deth
his child to be beaten in his presence, and comma^deth how many stripes he
shall receive, nothing else but suffer his child to be beaten? or is he not
rather the chief cause, as that he is the chief commander why his child is
punished? O say you but God did not take his goods, To the 13
but only suffered the devil to take them, and so God did not punish his
people. for he touched them not, but hid his face from them, to see their end.
Albeit your vanity trouble me a littell, yet must it needs return upon your
own heads to your shame. This is a good reasonly, God by him self took not
Jobs goods from him, therefore he did nothing but suffer them to be taken: and
gods own hand did not touch Israel nor Judah, therefore was he but only a
sufferer, and no worker of their punishment. I will make the like reason and
argument. God by him self gave no goods to Job, therefore did he nothing but
suffer Job to be enriched. An other, no visible hand was seen to touch Elimas
the sorcerer, Act. 13
therefore did God only suffer him to be blinded. If ye will affirm the
former, to wit, that God did nothing but suffer Job to be enriched: not only
shall Job him self testify against you, but even satan, although he be a lier,
and the father of lies: yet in that case shall he convince you of a most
impudent lie. for he says: Have thou not made an hedge about him, and about
his house and a boute all that he has on every side? thou have blessed the
work of his hands, and his substance is increased in the land. But stretche
out now thy hand and touch all that he has to see if he will not blaspheme
the to thy face. And if ye will say that God did only suffer Elimas to be
blinded: then shall the holy Ghost speaking in saint Paul convict you. for he
says behold the hand of the Lord is upon the and thou shall be blind and
shall not see the Sun for a time. And thus shall you have God, man, and the
devil to rebuke your vanity. Be ashamed, repent, and give glory unto God, who
fears not to confess that all instruments in heaven earth or in hell, be
his rods, his sword, and his hand, by the which he corrects, he punishes,
he triethe, delivers, and saves according to his eternal counsel and
purpose. To the 16
To prove absurdities and inconveniences (as ye term them) to follow our
doctrine: thus you reason: If I should grant that it was gods will that he
should refuse, to let the people goo, then did he submit him self to the will
of the Lord. then, should God and he have been both of one mind. and the will
of God is always good and just. then Pharao refusing to let the people go, did
well and justly, forasmuch as it was gods will that he should so do. wherefore
Pharao oght not to have been punished for this good and just deed. And thus in
conclusion, ye affirm that these inconveniences we can not eskape. I have
before sufficiently declared how that no wicked man committing iniquity has
any respect or mind to obey gods holy will, either secret, either yet reveled,
but following their own rage and inordinate, lusts does make as it were plain
resis^ance to God. and, therefore, how so ever they be compelled to to serve
gods eternal purpose: yet do they never obey him in their own hearts: but
obstinatly they do rebel against his blessed will reveled. And therefore, as
there is no conformity nor aggreme^t betwext the holy will of God, and their
peruers and malicious will, so are they subject to just damnation, for their
rebellion and disobedience. And thus taking from you the ground and foundation
where upon you think your selves most assuredly to stand, I might suffer your
vain building to fall into confusion But partly for the instruction of the
simple reader, and partly to wo^ne some of you (if so please God) from these
horrible blasphemies, I purpose in this place to declare the difference betwext
the holy will of God, and the wicked will of men, and why it is, that the
work of God is most just, and the work of the instruments, unjust, and
evil, reserving the rest to better opportunity.

The will of God must not be restreined to those things which externally we
see done or hear to have been do^ne. The cause and ends of things that be
wroght.
But gods will must be extended to to those ends, for the which God works,
and causes to be wroght, all things from the beginning to wit, for the
manifestacion of his own glory, for the profit and salvation of his elect
children, and for the execution of his just judgments, either for a time to
correct his chosen, orels for ever to punish the stubborn and disobedient, of
the reprohate sort. Because yt I suspect no man so foolish as that he will deny
the will of God working to these ends to be most just most holy, and most
perfect in it self: I will labor for no probation of that part. But because
the instruments by whom God works, Who obey God, who obey not God.
be diverse, we must first inquire and know what instruments they be that obey
gods will, and therefore by him are reputed just workers, and what they are that
obey not his will, and so what so ever they do, are reputed inobediente. Only
those instruments do obey gods will, who having his will clearly reveled unto
them, do study and indeuer them selves to obey, accomplish, and fulfill the
same, and that of very love, fre mind, and zeal to obey his godly Majesty.
the fruits and works of these instruments, how soever man does judge of
them, does God approve, yea even albeit they appear to repugne to mercy, or to
his law written. for the Israelites were delivered from theft by gods will
reveled: albeit they spoiled and robbed (under the cloak of borowing) the
Egyptiens of their substance. The maryners and the shipmasters being with
Jonas, in that soden storm and tempest raised by God, were fre from murder
and sheding of innocent blood by gods will plainly reveled by ye mouth of the
Prophet. Iehu was not only justified from all the suspicion of treason, which
men might have gathered of his fact, but also from cruelty, in killing those
idolaters, who manifestly declared them selves friends to Baal: by that, that
God did first reuele his will unto him, sending his Prophet to anoynte him, and
after approved his zeal, which he rewarded with temporal promise of the kingdom
to continue in his posterity to the fourth of his sede. Thus I say does God
justify the works of these instruments which obey his will reveled. And so I
say yt they only obey God that knowing his will do study to obey the same.
But contrary wyes, who soever does any thing, ignorant of gods will not knowing
the will of God reveled, repugneth or does contrary to the same (howsoever he
serves gods eternal purpose) does nether obey God, nether ca^ he be excusable
before gods justice. And that because in his work and fact he looks nothing
to gods will, nether yet to the end and purpose which God respects. And
hereof springs and artiseth the difference betwext the works of God, and the
works of man, yea betwext the works of the godly, and the works of the
ungodly. God works all his works, to manifest his glory, his wisdom, his
power, his mercy, goodness and justice. The godly moved by the holy Spirit,
work their works to give obedience unto God, to support their brethere^ in
their necessities at his commandment, and to punish vice according to his
law. But the ungodly carried hedlonges by their own lusts, and by the fury of
satan, to whose power they are committed, work all their works to revenge
them selves, to destroy such as they hate, and to promote their own
entreprises without any respect had to God, to his will, ordinance or counsel.

One or two examples shall make this matter more sensible. The will purpose and
counsel of God in punishing Job was to try his patience, and of the same to
leave an example to all them that truly fear God to the end. And who dare
deny this to be most reasonable, and most just, that God examining sharply one
of his children shall make him a scolmaster to all the rest? But what was ye
will and purpose of satan, and of the Caldea^s, by whom Job was punished? The
will and purpose of satan is plainly reveled to have been, that by those
afflictions he fully purposed to withdraw Job from gods fear, and to cause
him curse God to his face. The will of the Caldea^s against Job.
The will of the Chaldeans is evident enough, by the manifest malice of all
such oppressers, who look to nothing but to satisfy their own covetous minds
by the possessions of others, wc tyrannously and unjustly they by violence
spoil. And thus does ye diversity of the minds of the workers, make ye
plain difference betwext their vorkes. An other: God in expelling David from
his kingdom, in giving his wives with great ignominy to be defiled by his own
son Absalom, and in commanding Semei to curse him, had respect to his own
justice, which can not suffer sin unpunished. even in his derest children,
thereby leaving example to all ages following, yt such as willingly would not
suffer gods grievous plagues, shall avoid manifest contempt of his holy
commandementes. And this I think will all men confess to be a work (in so
far as it is wroght by God) most just, Of David's trooble Absal^^ Semei and
Achitophel
and most equal. for as God does honor the^ who do honor him, so must they be
contemned, who contemn him. But what was the mind of Achitophell counselor,
of Absalom the incestuous adulterer, and of Semei the blasphemous curser? The
one studied to make such hatred betwext the father and the son, as after
should never be reconciled.

The unnatural and monsterous son declaring him self mortal ennemie to his
father according to the wicked counsel, thought to bind unto him the hearts of
the people. And Semei willing to make David odious to all me^, Of the
diversity inthe work of the death of Christ.
and to have brought him, if possible had been to uttermost desperation, powered
forth ye vennym which before lurked in his hid corrupt and stinking stomock.
The same might I show in the precious death of the innocent Son of God. in
which the great and unsearchable love of God toward us does shine, so that
Christ's death in so far as it was the work of God, proceeded from love, from
mercy and justice. but touching the instruments, whom God used in execution
of the same, as in an other place I have said, they looked nothing to gods
counsel, but were altogether carried to iniquity: some by avarice, some by
pride, and by ambition, some, by malice hatered and envy. so that amongst
them all, none was found that studied to obey God, nor his holy will reveled.
And thus it is evident* why the work of God in such cases, is just and good, as
it that is wroght in wisdom mercy and justice: and that for most just cau^es,
purpose and end. And why the works of wicked men (supposing yt God in some
respect will the^) are yet unjust and repugning to his will, never do^ne to
obey him, and therefore are they and their workers subject to malediction,
vengeance and damnation, pronounced by God in his law against the workers of
iniquity. Now let us examine your reasons. If it was gods will (say you that
phara^ should refuse to let the people go, then did he submit him self to the
word of the lord, I deny ye co^sequent. for neither did Pharao know ye
holiewil of God, neither did he submit him self to yt wc was commanded and
reveled unto him. The will of God was, in yt people to give an example and
testimony to ye world, yt ye only benedictio^ of God, was sufficient to give
multiplication and increase to his Church, even against the determined fury of
satan, and of all wicked, that he would give unto his Church being afflicted
most joyful, and most wondrous deliverance: and finally that no obstinate
enemy of gods people (how so ever they seem to rage and triumph) shall in the
end esca^p judgment and vengeance justly deserved. Do you think that Pharao
either knew this will of God either yet that he retained ye people in bondage
for any of these ends? I think not. then did he not submitt him self to gods
will* but obstinatly did resist, so far of gods will, as was reveled unto
him. And therefore I say, that God and Pharao were of most contrary wills, and
most contrary minds. God willi^g his Name, his power and his wisdom, to be
preached and praised to the e^d, for the deliverance of his afflicted people.
But Pharao willing to retain in perpetual bondage the people, (whom God
commanded him to set at fredome and liberty) to serve him, as he should
command. And therefore albeit that wicked Pharao was an instrument, by whom
those things were brought to pass, yet were his works neither well nor justly
done, but tyrannously: and most obstinatly did he fight against God. And
therefore in the end, most justly was he punished. Behold your spyder webbes
with les labor dissolved and burst (then I am assured) you and your great
captain Castalio did spinne knit and veaue the same to your great shame and
perpetual condemnation, except that spedely you repent. Now to the rest, which
follows in these words.

ADVERSARY,
As for the sentence which ye allege God makes hard hearted, whom he will,
and of whom he will he has mercy, The 3. Argument.
this place has been very vnresonably wrested of some of you, The 39 section.
so that thereby you have burdened God to be the cause of condemnation, who at
his pleasure receaueth or resiseth such as have either of pain or pleasure
deserved nothing at all. he will, have mercy, on whom he will, and that
besides his covenant.

ANSWER.
Because that nothing rests to the end of this y or book (your blasphemies
and raling excepted) which is not sufficiently before answered, I inte^d only
to touch those things which you unjustly lay to our charges, To ye 1
and fra^kly confess in what points you and we do manifestly dissent in
opinion, and doctrine. and first I say that most unjustly you accuse us, laying
to our charge that we burden God, to be the cause of condemnation, the which we
all with one consent impute to man, to sin, and to ye devil the first
soliciter to sin. And therefore, except that ye can note, and evidently convict
some one (or mo) of us, that so has written or affirmed of God, ye can not be
purged from the horrible crime of unjust accusation, and detestable scla^der.
We utterly dissent from you that God lighteneth every man, that comes into
this world, in such sort as you affirm, that is, hat he calls all to
repentance and offers light of salvation to all, so that God refuses none,
except such as utterly refuse light, or such as have been partakers of gods
grace, and do forsaik the covenant of the Lord. for besides the evident
testimonies of the scriptures, the common experience from the begi^ning does
witness, that God in that manner has not illuminated every man. for how many do
perish in their mothers bellies? how many suddenly die before their reason can
judge of good and evil? how many are deprived of natural reason and
understanding? Yea how many remain wild and brutishe, liui^g like beasts and
eating one another? how many do continewe all their life without any other
knowledge of God, the^ the visible creatures of God do teach them? which I
think ye will not affirm to be sufficient illuminatio^ to provoke them to
repentance or to atteine to life. I pray you what light had Esau refused when
God pronounced this sentence: the elder shall serve the younger. upon the which
the Apostle as before we have declared does conclude that yer the children had
done either good or badde, the one was loved, and the other was hated.

That God does nothing without a just cause, To ye 3
most willingly we confess. But that there is no justice in God, to the ground
whereof, your blind reason does not pearse, we constantly deny. And therefore we
must needs affirm, that to seek an other cause of gods works, then his holy
will, is more the^ impiety. for the causes be known to his wisdom alone, why
some he has chosen to life everlasting in Christ Jesus his Son. and why
that others are left in perdition the cause may be secret (as Augustine
speaks) but unjust can it not be. because it proceeds from gods will, which
is the perfect rule of al justice and equity. If that ye cry till that the
mountains resound again: the obstinat iniquity of the reprobate will not be
reformed, and that is he cause of their induration: in few and sobre words we
a^swere: That in man there is no wickedness which God may not reform, if so be
his godly will and good pleasure. TO the 4.
Albeit of these your words: God may have mercy when he will, on whom he
will, and that besides his couenante. some suspicion may arise, that greatly
you do not esteem that inestimable benefit granted unto us in Christ Jesus
his only Son. yet will I so favorably interpret your words as I can. If ye
understand that such as this day be ignorant of God, ennemies to his truth,
and persecuters of his saints, may suddenly or after this, be called to the
true knowledge of yt communion which is betwext God and man, by Christ Jesus, I
do fully agree with you. for so was Abraham, so was Paul, and so were the
Gentiles: who long did live without true, knowledge of God, and without (as
touching their own apprehension) the assurance of his covenant and league. But
if you understand that God can or will receive to mercy at any time such as he
has not elected to life everlasting in Christ Jesus his Son before all
times, we utterly abhor that error, as a pestilence most perniciouse. Now to
that which follows.

ADVERSARY.
That place of the book of ^he kings. The ^. argu^ent.
The Lord commands Semei to curse David, I understand so forasmuch as God is
the author of all goodness* and of no evil, he gave not a wicked mind to Semei.
But willing to exercis^ his servant David, under the cr^sse, The 40. section.
and fin^ing Semei a naughty and evil minded man specially toward David, he
gave him the bridell, which being left of God, he by the intisement of the
devil, which was alredie in his heart, did curse David* and David being
governed by the spirit Job. 17
his sone Solomon to punish Semei for this just act, they which fear ^hey
hoar frost, saie^h Job, the snow shall fall upon them, likwies so long as you
stick to your error, when you think to avoid one danger, you shall fall into a
greater.

ANSWER.
You do ever decline from the principal scope and so make ye a falls conclusion,
To the 1. and 2
for we do not deny but God finding in Semei at that time a wicked mind
toward David did lowse the bridle to his corrupted affections. but in two
things do you and we differ. The first is that whether he found any wickedness
in him which his godly power might not have removed, if so he had determined to
have done from the beginning? And secondarily if so he gave him the bridle,
that he might not have impeded the some, if such had been his godly will: and
therefore where you affirm that God did effectually move Semei to that wicked
deed. if you understand that in so far as the deed was wicked, the Spirit of
God, I mean the holy Ghost did not move him thereunto, I subscribe with you. for
so outrageously to curse David, in the day of his great calamity, he was moved
by that venime which long had lurked in his breast, and by the instigatio^ of
the devil. But if thereupon you conclude, as that you seem to do by your
manifest words, that God did nothing else but only suffer him. Because I say
that such idle permissio^ can neither agree with gods power, nor with his
justice, we must needs affirm, that when God gives over the wicked into a
lewd, and reprobate mind, that the^ as justly he punishes sin by sin, so
does he more the^ only suffer. To ye 3. and 4.
There is more required that a fact be just and justly and obediently done,
the^ a just commandment. to wit: That he doer have gods express commandment
for his assurance. And secondarely that he look, and have respect to the same
ends, which God has uttered in his word. and last that he do it only to obey
God. Now prove any of these to have been in Semei, and I will confess that ye
have once triumphed. I find that David did acknowledge gods commandment and
counsel, and therefore at that time would he not arm him self nor his servants
to take vengeance. But what commandment of God I pray you did Semei either
acknowledge or confess. I find no mention that he excuses him self, no not
by any commandment that he had received of God, when after he submits him
self to David in the day when he returned and came over Iordane. But I find
him plainly to confess his offense saying: Let not my Lord impute wickedness
unto me, 2. Re. ^.
nor remember the thing that thy servant did wickedly, when my Lord the king
departed out of Jerusalem, that the king should take it to his heart. for thy
servant does know that I have done amiss. If Semei had either known any
commandment of God, or if he had looked to the same end to the which God
looked, he might have had plausible reasons to have persuaded David, to have
showed favor and mercy unto him. first he might have said, Oh David although
thou was king, and that I did curse the, thou oghtest no more to be offended
against me, then thou wast against the Prophet Nathan. for as he had gods
commandment plainly to reuele thy sin, and sharply to rebuke the same, to
the e^d that thou might be more effectually moved to repentance, so had I
gods commandment bitterly to curse thee, to the end that thou might humble
thy self before thy God, whom so highly thou have offended.

These I say I had been plausible reasons to have moved David to mercy. But
the canckered conscience of Semei did witness against him, self yt he to his
knowledge had neither commandment of God, neither yet that he looked to any
purpose or counsel of God: but only to David's, utter confusion and
destruction, which he maliciously soght. And so I say albeit that gods
commandment in the self was just. for the purpose and end which he had
appointed, yet was this commandment hid to Semei, and gods purpose also
unknown to him: and therefore was his fact neither justly nor obediently done.
for a just fact (as I have before said) requires a good will to obey a just
commandment: and obedience requires knowledge of the will, which neither of
both was in Semei. Now prove if you ca^ either injustice in God who thus
does use this wicked instrument, or yet in David his sernant, who in his
testament commanded the dissembled hypocrisy to be punished. The rest of your
vain sophisterie, which of Castalio you have begged, does nothing profit you.
for albeit we should confess that it was the will of God in some respect,
that Semei should have an evil and inobedient mind: how shall you be able to
prove, that therefore he did obey God? Is it not the will of God, that satan,
and the wicked world, of a wicked and malicious mind, trooble and tempt his
children in this earth? Does it therefore follow that Satan and the wicked
obey God? or does it not most justly follow, that because God will that our
patience should be known, and that the wicked from time to time proceed in
their impiety till the measure be full, that therefore they ca^ never obey God.
And in this our affirmation we fear not so much the frost nor snow, as that
we lament your uncomely jesting in gods scriptures. Thus you proceed.

THE ADVERSARY.
An argument you make in that place of Genesis where I^seph says unto his
brethren, The 5 argument.
God sent me hither, for your lives saik, and thereafter, it was not you that
sent me hither, but God which has made me a father unto Pharao: of this do you
gather, that the wicked deed which Iosephes brethern did in selling him, The
(...) section.
was the Lords deed, and secret will: But for so much as the patriarckes here
committed double sin, first, grieved their father, and secondly, they did
commit the greatest kind of these, that is, to sell a man's child from him,
which by the law ^ght to be punished say, that they came from God, then may we
call God the f^ther ^f dar^knes: because from him came evil thoghts which are
darkness. And where you say^, that God does hose things for his own glory I
answer that saying Roma. 1
and according to your knowledge you have not glorified God, neither have you
been thankful, but wax^d full of vanities in your owned imaginations. wherefore
my counsel is that you ^urn^ again^ from that infi^^^^tie wherein you have
drowned your selves, believe ^he word and s^k^ no forther for it is the power
of God to salutation to every one that beleu^^h.

ANSWERER.
As your most pestilent sect, To ye 1. and 2.
even from the first original of it, has with all malicious craft labored to
subvert and confound gods most perfect ordinance, so do you in this matter
confound those things, which we most plainly and most destinctly set a part,
and divide them the one from the other. for first you are never able to prove
that any of us has alleged, or yet does allege the word or fact of Joseph
and his brethren, for any proof of gods eternal election, or most just
reprobation. but to declare that such is gods providence toward his chosen
children, and toward their salvation, and preservation of his church, that
what so ever satan and wicked men imagine to the destruction of gods elect,
that same does his infinite goodness convert to their profit, comfort and joy.
And so this is the first, that impude^tly ye confound, to wit his providence
which exte^deth to all his creatures, with his election which pertains only
to his children. The second is, no man has ever put more plain difference
betwext the wicked will of Satan, the corrupt and malicious will of man, and
the holy and most just will of God, the^ we do in all or doctrine and
writings. And yet ye accuse us, that we attribut to God that which is propre to
the devil, that is to move the thought of men to do evil. How far that
impiety is from all our cogitations, as God one day shall manifestly reuele to
your eternal confusion (except that spedely you repent) so may all godly men
who either have heard our voices or read our writings, bear record how justly
you accuse us. we constantly affirm that God neither moved by his holy
spirit, the hearts of the patriarchs to envy and hatred, neither vet of
Pharao to cruelty, neither yet to iniquity. for that is naturally borne with
all men, and needs the power of the potent Spirit of God to extinguish and
quench it, but not to infla^be and kindle it. But yet we say that God who out
of darkness produced or brought forth light, had in yt most detestable fact of
the patriarckes, both his will and his counsel, far contrary to their
minds and purpose: even as h^ had in the cruel and most unjust death (as
concerning the instruments that were the executers) of his dear son Christ
Jesus. nether yet does it there of follow, yt evil thoghtes, whereunto we are
commanded to resist, are moved by him, or yet come from him. for the fountain
thereof does every wicked man so find within him self that his own conscience
shall convict him that no where else is the cause of his iniquity (and of the
severe punishment, which for the same he shall sustain) to be soght but only
within him self, and as proceeding of him self by instigation of the devil:
into whose power he is delivered (as was Saul and others) by the inscrutable
and incomprehe^sible (but yet most just) judgments of God. If in you were
either modesty or discretion, To the 6. 7. 8. 9. 10
to judge of those things yt be well, and godly spoken, or yet docilitie to be
taught in those things where of vterly ye declare your selves ignorant, ye
could not thus as in a furious rage spewe forth your venim against gods
supreme Majesty. for your horrible blasphemies are not so much spoken against
us, as against God. As for us, they do no more obscure the manifest light of
our doctrine, then if in your despyte, ye should spitt against the bright sun
to impede the brightness thereof. for in none of our writings be you able to
show any of these sentences, which maliciously and without shame you lay to
our charge:

Evil thoghtes come* from God. God punishes man for the offenses whereof he is
author, and where unto he provoke him. God moved and forced Phara^ to pnuishe
the people.

These I say and others your horrible blasphemies (which we so detest, that we
affirm, the first authors of them to be worthy of most sharp punishment) you
be never albe to show in any of our writings. And this might serve for a
sufficient answered to all your dispitefull raling. But lest you should still
glory in your iniquite and gross ignorance, I will discover the same following
your answer, in the words of S. James saying God te^pteth no man. if ye
affirm yt God nether te^pteth ye obeidie^ce of his servants, nether yet
sends false prophets to tempt his people, his plain scriptures will rebuke
your vanity. for God tempted Abraham, he tempted his people forty years in
the wilderness, he tempts also by sending falls prophets, as Moises does
witness. And therefore ye must be compelled to grant, that this word tempting or
to tempt is diversely taken in the scriptures: sometimes to try and examyn,
sometimes to bring to light and knowledge things that be secret in man's heart,
sometimes to seek by experience a certentie of things spoken, pronounced, or
affirmed, and somtymes move, or to provoke to iniquity: and in this last
signification we confess that God tempteh no man. for as the matter of all
iniquity lies within man, so is he provoked, moved, and stirred thereunto by
his own lusts, and instigation of the devil only. And thus albeit we grant
that to move evil thoghtes, is to tempt, yet we deny ye conversion. which is
this, Ergo to te^pt is to move evil thoghtes. But let us hear forther of your
profound vanity: all is good say you that comes from the father of light
(God grant that in your hearts ye were assuredly so persuaded) if evil
thoghtes come from him they must be good. and so you conclude, that then was
Iosephes words falls, and that God may be called the father of darkness (O
execrable is your blasphemy) because from him come evil thoghtes which are
darkness. Answer. If any of us have so written or spoken, let us be stoned to
death as execrable blasphemers. And if that ye in your blind fury do therewith
unjustly burden us, although ye may eskape the hands of man, yet shall you not
esskape gods severe and soden vengeance. It is malice that will not suffer you
to understand how that these euilles which men willingly comitt; in so far
as they com from God are just, profitable and good. for we most constantly
affirm that the damnation of the devil, the induration of Pharao, the
deceauing of Achab, and other such, in so far as they proceeded from God, are
his just and good works, because they are the punishment of sin, the
excecution of his just judgments, and a declaration of his justice. which
justly is armed against the obstinate rebellion of Angels, and men. but
thereof to conclude, ergo their evil thoghtes, their malicious minds, their
hatered and cruelty came immediately from God, is more then a blasphemy. for
all these be, and are found within the offenders, which God does use not by an
idle permission (for that is a thing most contrarious to his justice) but
effectually as his wisdom best knows, they shall serve to his glory, and yt
for utility of his chosen children. I say it is a thing most contrarious to
gods justice and power, ydly to suffer iniquititie to be done, if he had no
further respect then to the fact, as it is committed. for as a man can not be
excused, who may impede murder and does it not, so can not gods justice be
excused by your idle permission, if he had no further respect, but to things
as they be do^ne by man. And so is gods justice rather accused then maintained
by the foolishness of your curious brains, saying God permits many things
which he would not. what vanity is this? Is it not a thing confessed amongst
all, that gods power is omnipotent? who then ca^ compelle him to suffer, that
which he would not? And why does he willingly suffer things, which in his law,
he has forbidden? I answer, for the manifestation of his own glory which is
more precious then the heaven and ye earth, and all the creatures in ye same
contained. And thus does vanity cause you to fear that gods justice shall fall
into decay, except it be vndersett and vpholde^ with your foolish distinction,
betwext his will and his permission. but we fear not to affirm yt he
permits nothing, which in some respect he will not. for as he is omnipote^t
and a most loving father so should he suffer no calamity to come nor cruelty
to be used against his children* except he did before see, yea and before
determyn their comfort and his glory to arrise of the same. And will you say yt
gods glory the comfort and y^ preservation of his Church is an evil work?
because that wicked men are instruments, by whom gods eternal counsel is
brought to pass. Was the exaltatio^ of Iosephe to honor, the preservation of
Egypt, and of other nations from famine, yea and the feding of Jacob and his
family, an evil work? because that, Iosephes brethren of malice and envy did
sell him to the Ismaelites, and they for lucre did seli him again to
Putiphare, whose wife of malice did most unjustly accuse him, and so being in
prison at length he was brought to the knowledge of Phirao, and so was promoted
for his revelation, and wisdom to honor and dignity. O say you it is not
this that we do lay to your charge, but you affirm that God was author of the
malice, and of the wicked thoghtes of Iosephes brethren. You do belie us most
maliciously. for we constantly deny that God either powered in them any malice,
o^ did move by his holy Spirit any wicked thought into them. for those we say
they had of nature, in so far as it is corru^ted. But we say that God used
their wicked thoghtes and malice to his glory, and to the full comfort of him
whose destruction they soght, and that he did not ydly permitting them, but
effectually working by such instruments and means as his wisdom had before
appoi^ted. Rage now as you list. for albeit to you this saing is vain yt God
works all things for his own glory, yet will not God have his glory
measured by ye vanity of your brain. We gl^rifie God say you, when we judge
him w^rthie to be glori^ied. Answer if you understand that then only, and at
none other time else do me^ glorify God, but when they confess him worthy of
glory, you are ignorant, foolish, and manifest liers. for your argument is no
better, then if I should say: man slepeth in the night season, therefore no man
may or can sleep at any other time. If your master Castalio had considered that
an argument made, a specie ad genus, negative is vain and foolish, he had not
heaped to gether so many sophistical reasons: by the which you and others are
abused. To make this matter some what more plain: If ye glory of God consist
in the manifestation of his mercy, of his truth, of his power, of his
wisdom and of his most just judgments, then do all creatures glorify,
God, whether they judge him worthy or unworthy of the same. for David
affirms that the heavens declare the glory of God, and yet have they nether
judgment nor understanding: the heaven and the earth says Isaiah are
replenished with his glory. Isa. 6
And in an other place the beasts of the field shall preach my glory the
dragons and the birds of eastriches, and Achan also was comanded to give
glory unto God. The earth, shall be compelled says Habacuc to knowledge the
glory of God. Zachary also the Prophet says for his glory has he sent unto
the nations which have spoiled you. finally shall not satan and the reprobate
in their just condemnation give glory unto God? and do ye think that all these
creatures, judge God to be worthy of glory in such sort as they acknowledge
his power, his wisdom his justice, and from their hole heart submit them
selves to his holy will? I trust you do not. for we know that satan is a
spirit confirmed in malice, and rebellious against God, and yet is he compelled
even in torments to give glory unto God, in so far, as in his just damnation
he declares gods power and just judgments. And therefore I say that you
restreine the glory of God with in to streit and narrow limits, when yt you
will that it shall extend no forther, then to such as from their heart judge
God worthy of glory, ye wc pertains to his chosen children only and can
never be given by the reprobate. for such glory must proceed from faith, wc is
not co^mone unto all, but is the special gift given to gods elect: and yet
nevertheless by other means God declares his glory, even in the vessels of
his wrath, as is before declared.

Of the example of Nabuchadnezer ye can make but a particular conclusion in
this for me, Nabuchadnezer after he had felt the just punishment of his pride
and arroga^cie, gave glory unto God: Ergo some man after punishment gives
glory unto God. If you make your conclusion extend any further, it is false. for
if you say that all men after punishment give glory unto God, with the same
confession that he gave, many examples may be showen to the co^tary. if you
say that none other gives glory unto God, except such as so be punished: that
will be proved likewies falls. And if you say yt gods glory does shine in none,
except in those that acknowledge and confess God to be merciful and just,
that is most vain of all, and thus I say your conclusion must be but
particulare.

The reasons and the conclusion, which you make upon these words of David:
Praise God all you nations, are so foolish, on the one parre, and so filthy
and execrablevpon the other, that amongst all nations ye oght not only to he
mocked, but also to be had in horror and detestation. first you say. If God
must be praised amongst all nations, then must gods works be such as all
nations may know them and prais^ them. I answer, even so they are, and such
amongst all nations as have ye eyes of their minds illuminated by gods holy
spirit, do see just cause why yt they oght to praise gods wisdom, even in all
his works. But you proceed saying there is no nation which at any time shall
acknowledge God to be just, for that be punishe^^ man, for that whereunto he him
self did provoke him, and so after the example of the priests of the
Philistines, ye ask this question: If God should punish man because he has a
beard, should any glory redound (...) God there of, seeing he has given us
beardes his self, And so you skoffe and jest at us, saying yt we be very
religiouse: because we say that none oght to speak so irreverently of gods
works. God is witness that I write notwithou^ some grief of heart, nether yet
yt I affirm this, which I am to speak. for privy hatered, wc I bear against
the person of any man. But in gods presence I say, that rather then such
horrible blasphemies should have been fostered in my heart, devised in my
brain, written by my pen, and pronounced by my mouth and tongue, that rather I
would my carcass should have suffered most cruel and vile death. yea and
further I say, that better it had been, for you never to have been borne, then
thus blasphemously to expose gods great Majesty to opprobrie and mockage. for
I appele to the judgment of the heaven and the earth, and of all creatures in
the same contained, if ever that Julian the appostate spoke more disdainfully
of God, then here you write. But for the instruction of the simple reader, to
answer you more reasonably, the^ your vnreuerent skoffing deserves, I say
first, that the mind of David was not to teach us what every nation and every
particulare man amongst the Gentiles shall do, The place of David.
but what was the duty of every nation, every people and every man to do,
when gods mercies should be offered unto them. And therefore if you conclude all
nations do praise God, in such sort as David means, because that the holy
Ghost by his mouth comma^deth all nations to praife God, you make no better an
argument, then if ye should affirm, that every man loves God with all his
heart, with all his mind, and with all his strength, because that God so
commands. This is one portion of your ignorance. The second follows, gods
works, say you, must be such as all nations may know them and praise them. I
answer, if you understand that all that praise God unfeignedly from their hearts
must have some knowledge of his mercies, goodness, just judgments and
wo^derous works we distent not from you. But if you say (as by your process is
evident, that you do), that except all nations perceive and understand the very
ground of gods justice, that God amongst them shall have no glory. then as we
lament your foolishnes, so we detest your error* for albeit that the ^aturall
man can never atteine to the knowledge of those things which God purposes, yet
shall not God be defrauded of his golry, no not in the most carnal and wretched
man. Christ Jesus was sent into the world, and came to that people which was
called his own: and his glory did so shine to the eyes of some, Job. 1.
that they did acknowledge it to be the glory of the only Son of God* But
did the princes of the priests and the hole nation of the Jews see the same
glory, and so confess him as did the elect? Saint Paul witnesses the
contrary. saying, if they had known, they had not crucified the king of
glory. Paul was appointed a preacher to the Gentiles, amongst whom he most
faithfully and most boldly did open the treasures of gods great mercies, and
of the glory of his Son Christ Jesus: but did every city, realm, nation or
man, to whom these treasures were opened so receive, understand and embrace
them, that for the same they glorified God? the contrary is evident. But was
God therefore defrauded of his glory, even in ye midest of a wicked generation?
God forbid. for as the eyes of some were lightened, and so did glorify the word
of the Lord, so such as remained obstinate did (and shall) glorify God, in so
far as his just judgments were, and shall be executed against the^. If you
fear no punisheme^t rage as you list. To your blasphemies I have before
answered. for none of us does impute upon God that he punishes any man, for
thing that he provoke him to do. for iniquity comes not of gods
provocation, motion, nor holy Spirit, as that before we have declared. and
therefore as God has reveled to us a more assured knowledge in his holy
scriptures, then the Philistians priests had, so are we bold to affirm that
which was hid from the^, and which also you can not abide, to wit, that al
creatures are compelled to serve to gods glory in such sort as his wisdom
has appointetd them: and yet that the wills of men are neither violently
moved nor enforced by God to commit iniquity, to the which all your captain
Castalio uses for probation of his purposes (for in such does stand the chief
ground of his divinity) none ca^ be more foolish, nor further repugni^g to
that which he and you would prove, then is this. If God should punish a man:
because he has a beard, should any glory redound to God there of* seeing he
has given us beards him seis: Here of you will infer, that if God punish
sin which he has willed or appointed to be, then can he not be just. But let
us examine, if your Simile does agree even in the chief points, in the which
if it prove any thing it must agree. first we know that the beard of man was
created by God. But who amongst us did yet ever affirm that sin and
iniquity was made or created by God? Sin we confess was forsene, yea and
ordained in the incomprehensible counsel of God, and that for the most just
and the most righteous end and purpose. But that it was made or created by God,
that are ye not able to prove by our doctrine. Thus does your similitiude halt
in the chief membre. for they must be both a like gods creatures and creation,
if God shall be bound no more to punish man, for having of the one, then for
having of the other. moreover the beard of man so springs grows, and
abides of a mere natural motion, yt albeit men sleep, eat, drink, do or what
so ever actions pleases them, (not taking care or solicitude of their beard)
it comes nevertheless to that state and perfection that nature will suffer. But
has man sin none otherwise then thus? Does ma sin I say, having neither
will, mind, nor appetite to sin? or does not sin proceed from so volu^tary
and corrupt motion, that the will, the judgment, the understanding, and
appetites, yea the hole man, and all his cogitations are subject to sin, and
bent upon in iquitie at all times* Be judges your selves how well do ye parts
of your similitudes agree. Thus with greater modesty have I answered your
foolishnes, the^ your scoffing scurrilitie deserves.

Where you affirmethat albeit there be some secrets of God unknown to us, To
ye 11. 12 13
yet is the judgment of God known, and made manifest to us in the word, I
would ask of you, if ye ca^ by ye plain word assign causes of all gods
judgments from the beginning, and of those judgments which that day shall be
put in execution when ye secrets of al hearts shall be reveled. And if you be
able so to do, yeshould be profitably occupied (as I think) if by your plain
and simple writing, ye would study to put end to this controversy. the chief
point where of stands in this, that we affirm, that causes able to satisfy
the curiosity of man, ca^ not be assigned from gods plain scriptures, why God
permitted a great nombr^ of his Angels to fall, of whom he has redeemed none,
but reseru^th them to judgment? why God did suffer man to fall, Judgments of
God in which ma^s reason can not be satisfied.
and yet of one mass, elected some vesseles of mercy to honor, and appointed
others for sin to damnation? And finally as before I have said, why God
deferred the sending of his Son so long, and why also that his again coming
is so long delayed? If ye will answer yt these two last, are resolved by the
scriptures, the one to be as the Apostle writes, Heb. 11.
lest that the fathers should have been made perfect with out us, and the other
that the number of gods elect children might be fully complete* which we
confess to be a reasone most strong, and sufficient for all gods children:
neither yet do we require any other. but yet the curious brain will not so be
quieted, but it will still dema^d, may not God in one moment if so it please
him, fulfill the no^bre of his chosen children, as well as he of nothing did
creat the heaven and the earth, and shortly in the space of six natural days
set all things in perfect order. Consider with your selves what you do take in
hand, if ye will affirm that all gods judgments be so known, that a
sufficient reason of every one may be assigned from the word. and if you say
there be some things secret. The consider, I beseech you that the holy Ghost
has never made mention of any greater secret, then that which lies hid in
gods most just judgments, which Paul affirms to be inco^prehensible, and
David says they are deep and so profou^d, that neither can the understanding
of man, nor of Angel reach to the bottom of the same.

Why ye should accuse us that we should affirm, To ye 12.
that God shall judge the world, not according to Christ's Euangell plainly
reveled, but according to some other secret will, I see neither cause, nor
reason. for no men do more constantly abide by that which is written and
reveled, no men do less care, to seek for new revelations or uncertain
authorities, then we do. Our continual doctrine is, that God shall absolve
from damnation such as by true faith embrase his dear Son Christ Jesus, and
shall condemn to fire inextinguible all infideles, and such as delight in
manifest impiety and wickedness: and this judgment do we believe that God shall
pronounce by his Son Christ Jesus to whom all judgment is given. And for
none other secret will in that matter do we search. But if I lust, I could lay
to some of your charges, that which none of you can be able to deny, to wit
that some of you have written (besides your privy informations) that there is
a doctrine more perfect then ever Saint Paul committed to writing, yea and
further that some of you have called the hole scriptures of God in doubt: and
some do affirm that none is able by the word written to decide the
controversies that this day be in religion. And therefore that we must have new
Prophets, and new revelations from heaven, before that any public and
general reformation shall be made if any of you think that these things are but
imagined by me, let him under his o^ne name impugn them, and I shall show
witnesses which at this time, for diverse causes I omit. Your jesting at us,
your bold judgment and condemnation by you pronounced against us, we remitt to
him who shortly shall declare which of the two sorts be drowned in
infidelity, and leaving gods plain scriptures, have followed the vanities of
their own imaginations. Now shortly to that wc follows in these words.

THE ADVERSARIES.
An other proofbring you of that which is written. 2. Reg. 24. God moved David
to nombre Israel and Judah. To which I answer, The 6. Argument.
that which is write 1. Parali xi. Satan stood up against Israel and provoked
David to nombre the people, The 42 section.
I am certain that if it were not for this manifest scripture you would
attribute, the wicked prouocatio^ of the devil to God. but here that so was his
fathers will, Luk ^ 15.
i^ should be a great absurdity, wherefore it must needs follow that the father
suffered that which he willed not. The father willed both his sons to go and,
labor in his vineyarde ye^ not both but one of them did his fathers will, so
the father sufferred the other which went not, against his will. Thus we may
see a great difference between the will and the permission of God. a notable
saying we have in the prophecy of Ieremi^ Iere, 32.
high places for Baal to vow their sons and daughters unto Molo^h which I
never commanded them, neither came it ever in my ^hoght to make Judah sin with
such abomination. Here we se that Judah committed that which was contrary to
gods reveled will. for I never commanded the^ (says he) and against his
secret w^ll for i^ came never in my thought (saiteh h^). The^ did they sin by
the permissio^ of God against his will. Thy ways and thy, thoghtes brought the
to ^his says the Lord. If it was the lord^s secret will that the Israelites
should sin. and it was also the Israelites thoghtes and will to sin, the^
were they both of one mind. And as he (...) out wardly by the word wills
the^ not to do evil, so they out wardl^e did promise to keep gods law and
wourshipped him with their lips. By (...) (...) seemed that both in wardlie
and out wardly they were conform to God after your opino^. wherefore he oght not
to hau^ been offended with the^. I am ashamed Iere. 51.
And yet is the Lord called the doer thereof. And ^here for it is written. Let
one decea^full offender com against another, and one destr^yer (...) Esai. 21,
but is always with him te^pting him with evil thoghtes, and promoking him to
perfourm his w^ck^d imaginations.

ANSWER.
The more nie ye draw to the end, the less ye prove your purpose, but the more
ye utter your malice and venim. No just cause se we, To the 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
why that ye place of the books of the kings shall be explained by that which
is written in the chronicles in such sort as you require, 2. Reg. 24.
to wit, that nothing be left to God in that grievous offense of David except an
idle and only permission. for the holy Ghost fears not to say: 2. pa. 21
The wrath of the Lord God was yet moved against Israel, and stirred up David
against them, that he said go and nombre Israel and Judah. Here plain it is
that the eternal God who was angry against Israel dad stir or move David
to nombre them, not by an idle permission, as you allege, but by such motion,
as nothing repugneth to his justice. Where ye say, the other place explaineth
this: for it affirms that the devil stood up against Israel, and provoked
David to number Israel, I answer as the one place repugneth nothing to the
other, so does it not explain the other in such sense, as ye adduce for it
repugneth not to say, that God, man, and the devil work in one fact and actio^,
as in the histories of Job, Achab, Semei, and Pharao is manifest. God for just
causes gives his commandment and power to satan (as to his instrument) be he
never so wicked, to do what in his eternal counsel, was before decreed, Satan
of a wicked and rebellious mind chooses such instruments, and uses such
means as God likwies has appointed. Men in all wicked actions, of their fre
and voluntary. motion, do follow their corrupt, and wicked affections in
declaring their pride, vanity, malice, or cruelty, which wicked affections in
so far as they are wicked, we confess that God will not: for he can will no
iniquity. but yet that his eternal, and almighty power shall be judged so
idle, that it does nothing in such actions but only suffer, we can not
admit for such reasons as we have before alleged, where that we did examine
the difference betwext gods will, and his permission.

You retein your old nature (and justly I might say the nature of the devil)
most maliciously affirming us, To the 4.
to say that what so ever God permits he wills it absolute^^, and so that
absolutely he wills all wickd^^ces. Which saying as ye be never able to prove
upon us, so do we confess, it not only erroneous, but also so blasphemous,
that who so ever dare pronounce or affirm the same, deserves death. for we
most constantly in word and writing affirm, absolutley God wills no
iniquity. for all his works in so far as they proceed from his wisdom: and
infinite goodness are holy and just, and therefore do we make God author of no
sin, which only proceeds from the fountains that be corrupted, that is,
from the devil and from man, as in diverse places, most evidently we have
declared.

Because I do perceive that greatly ye delight in your prigna^t wits (I will
not say foolish vanity) To ye 5
I will recicite your hole words by the which ye would seem to prove
contrariety in God, except that we would grante a difference betwext gods will
and his permission. I say says the author of your book to us, that ye are the
Prophets if the devil, which teach such fil^hie doctrine and ye say, be the
Prophets of God. Now of necessity one of us lies. for if ye be the Prophe^es
of God I lie. And if ye be the Prophets of the devil ye lie. And if God will
us to say the truth he will not that we lie, for then he should will two
contraries which is impossible, yet one of us lie, which must be by permission
and suffering of God and not by his will. whereof it folowe^h that there is
difference betwext the suffering and the will of God.

It appears that in this description of persons in which ye oppose your selves
to us, answer.
ye would more declare what is your judgment and opinion of us, and what ye
would that we should be esteemed of others, then that ye greatly do trauale to
prove any contrariety in gods will by the same. for his eternal wisdom sees
the means how that his commandment, and his will are not contrarious the one
to the other: albeit that he command one thing, and yet for just causes, will
wicked men to do the contrary. which kind of co^trarietie, and repugnance
does so blind your eyes, that you can not se how God ca^ command all men to
speak truth, and yet for just causes before seen and determined in his
counsel, that he will ye devil, and his slaves to delight in lies. Albeit I say
that the apperance of this contrariety blind you, yet will not gods truth
cease of be truth, neither will the liberty of his eternal Godhead, be
brought into bondage to your corrupt judgment. His commandment, and his will,
do nether debate, nether fight betwext them selves: but do agree in all
things, even as do his mercy his justice, his wisdom, and his power, albeit
oftener it is, that his justice does punish such, as upon whom he has
determined to have mercy. Even so he commands men to obey his
commandementes, whom he not only foresaw, to be disobedient, but for most just
causes wills his glory to appear even in their unrighteousness, and lies. And
this he does without all contrariety in his godly will, to the full knowledge
whereof albeit ye can not atteine, yet more profitable it were for you to be
ignorant of such things, as God reserueth to be reveled in the time appointed
in his eternal counsel, then thus without all reverence, and fear to trouble
your foolish brains, in devising such absurdities, as may seem to oppugn gods
eternal verity, which in the end w^l triumph to your destruction* shame,
and confusion, if obstinatly you proceed as you have begone. For albeit that
he loves truth, and hates lies, and albeit that he commands man to speak
the truth, and forbids man to bear falls witness, yet fears he not to give
a commandment to that wicked spirit, to go forth and to be a lieng spiritte,
in the mouths of all Achabes falls prophets. Yea forther he gave him power to
work that in the false prophets, which he forbids all men to do. For he
commands that no man shall deceive an other, and yet gives he power to the
devil to be a lieng spiritte in the mouths of the false prophets, and to them
he gives power to deceive Achab. If ye list to lay contraritie to the charge
of God, prepare your wings, and with Nabuchadnezer of Babylon, Isa. 14
say, we will pass up to the heavens, and shall establish our seats above
the sterres of God, we shall pass up upon the hight of the clouds, and we
shall be like to the most highest, yea if thus ye will call his secret
counsels to examination, and trial, ye must be judges and superiors to him.
Thus justly I might illude and skoffe y or reasons, as vanities most unworthy
to be answered. But yet having respect to the simple, I will gather your
argument, and form it as strongly as your selves can, and I will answer so
much of the same, as ye think nable to be answered, your argument is this.

God can not will two contraries, but to speak the (...), The adversaries
argument. Answer.
and to lie are contraries. Therefore he can not will them both. But he
permits men to lie, and wills them to speak the truth. There is therefore
a difference between the will, and the permission.

God can not will two co^traries, True it is in him self, in one respect, and
for one purpose, he who is author of concord, can not will contrariety: but in
consideration of his creatures, for diverse respects, and sundry purposes,
things be not co^traries, the one to ye other, which to our judgments, have
apperance of contrariety. If you be so well seen in your arts, as some of you
pretend ye ca^ not but understand this answer to be sufficient, to dissolve
what so ever ye have irreverently collected. But yet to make it more se^sible
to the simple, I say yt in this proposition, God can not will two contraries,
and in the conclusion which you make upon the same, you oght to have made a
distinction between those things wc God simply (or as ye spoke before,
absolutely) will, and between those things, which he will for a certain end
and purpose, which does not appear in the external actions. For certain things
there be (as in an other place I have entreated) which God will, even for them
selves, such as be mercy, justice, temperance chastity, and all other
virtues, which he will, have to shine in his elect and please him in Christ
Jesus his Son. And yet nevertheless he also will cruelty, injustice, excess,
filthy life, blindness, and induration to be in others, as just punishme^tes of
their sins, and causes of their comdemnation. The last (I say) will God to be
in the reprobate, not for the wicked acts sake, which do ever displease his
Majesty, but for such ends as his wisdom has appointed. Let this be
explained by examples, some natural, and some taken from gods scriptures. There
is no man (except he be of a most cruel nature) that considering the
inco^modities of war, and of battle, does will it, for the self. And yet a
godly prince persewed by external ennemies, does not only will his soldiers
to fight, and to maintain the war, but also he provoke, he encourages,
and exhorts his subjects to the same. And why is it? because yt war or
battle pleases him in the self, or for the self? No, but because with out
such trauaill, such danger, and hasard, his subjects can not live in quietness,
and the estate of his common wealth can not be preserved. The same may I say of
godly magistrates punishing murderers, adulterers, and blasphemers with death,
and yet nether willing the death of any man, neither yet deliting in the
sheding of their blood. In these similitudes I grant somewhat to be unlike: for
gods power is not subject to such inco^modities unwillingly, as be the powers
of men. But yet these similitudes suffice to explain the chief purpose, wc is
yt man may will two contraries, for diverse respects, without any contrariety
in him self. For peace, and war are co^traries, to kill, and to save the
life, are likewise co^traries, and yet one man, even at one time may will both
the one, and the other, for diverse respects, and diverse ends. He may will
peace, for the comfortable quietness, and felicity yt there of springs, and at
the same instant without all co^trarietie in him self, he may will war, to
withstand the fury of the ennemie, yt would oppress his subjects. And may not
these things, wc we perceive to be in creatures, be in God in greater
perfection, although we perceive not the causes? Let us try the answer, both
by the examples of gods servants, and last by the example of God him self:
Lot, no doubt did agree with gods will in that he loved chastity, sobriety
and tempera^ce, and hated filthy life riotous chere, and excess. For the holy
Ghost boareth him this record, that he was pure, and clean both in ears, and
eyes. But what will had he when he did offer his two daughters to be defloured,
and abused by those vilanous persons? was it contrary to his formar will? Did
he now begin to delight in that execrable filthiness? assured I am he did not.
But being oppressed with the present necessity, reteining the same love, will,
and mind to chastity, and honest conversation, soght ye next remedy that to
him appeared able to have stayed the rage of that furious multitude (upon God I
grant falls no such necessity). But let the chief scope be observed, and we
shall understand (that for diverse respects) to will two things, whereof the
one, is contrary to the other, is not to will contrariety. But let us come to
God him self. God wills mercy, justice, and all other virtues as before we
have said, and these, he will at all times, and before all times. But is it not
possible therefore, that he can will cruelty oppression, blood sheding, murder,
and death? Who then sent Nabuchadnezer, to destroy not only the Jews, but
also the Moabites, and other nations? Who pronounced this sentence: Cursed be
he that does the Lords work negligently, and he that withdraws his swerd
from blood? Zae. ^^
Who did create the smithes, with their hammers to break down the horns which
had dispersed Israel? And finally, who gave his own son to the cruel death?
Who has subjected the dear spouse of Christ Jesus to afflictions, and
temporal calamities? Dare you deny, but that it was and is, the eternal God,
by whose good will all these things were appointed: and decreed, or were any
of them, done against his almighty will? I think you will not so affirm. For
the scripture witnesses, that God gave his Son to the world, eue^ of
determined purpose, that he should dye, orels who could have compelled his
Majesty thereunto, if his will had been repugnant? Peter affirms that blessed
are we that suffer for ye name of Christ, adding this comfortable sentence: By
them (yt is by the persecuters) is ye name of God blasphemed, but by you it is
glorified. 1. Pet. 1.
And therefore, let such says he, as be afflicted by ye will of God, lay down
their souls in well doi^g, as in the hands of a faithful keeper. Romans 8.
Paul witnesses yt those whom God has elected in Christ Jesus, he has also
predestinate, and before appointed, to be like fashioned to the image of his
own Son. Of which testimonies, it is plain that the grievous destruction,
the abundance of the bloodshed among diverse nations, the cruel death of
Christ Jesus, and the most fearful afflictions of his dearly beloved Church,
did proceed from gods will, in so much as he did not only suffer them, but
also, for most just causes, respects, and ends, which often before I have
recited, he did will and appoint them: and yet in God was there no
contrariety. For in the destruction of Jerusalem, and of others, he had not
respect simply to the ruin, and vastatio^ of those places, but to his just
judgments, which were provoked to take vengeance upon the multitude of their
sins, which long he had suffered. When our Master Christ Jesus did suffer,
he had no delight in the cruelty of those enraged dogs, who did crucify him,
which as he hated, so after he did most severely punish: but his pleasure and
delight was in the redemption of man, which by none other sacrifice could have
been perfited. And this day, and from the beginning he has had no pleasure in
the blood which is shed, neither in the tyra^nie which is used against his
simple, and small flock, but because he will have the members like ye head he
does a strange work, that he may do his own work, that is: he tries and
purges by fire our faith from all dross, and corruption of earthly
affections. But in none of all these is there any contrariety, neither in God,
neither in his will, neither in his counsel. for all things be disposed in
such order, such consent and so conveniently, that his glory, and the
perpetual comfort of his elect, does finally, and assuredly follow. And eue^
so it is in the apperant contrariety between you, and us, God, no doubt, will
the one of us to affirm lies, to rail to blaspheme, and most unjustly to
accuse ye other: he will ye other to sustain ye cause of the truth pacie^tly,
to bear opprobrious words, and scla^derous reports, referri^g judgment unto
him, who righteously, and in equity shall judge. Is there therefore any
co^trarietie in gods will? none at al. For the diverse respects, and ends being
considered, the same consent shall now be found in this apperant contrariety,
which has remained from the increase of gods Church. For in all ages has God
willed his true Prophets with all boldness, and constancy, to sustain the
cause of his simple verity, how odious that ever it was unto the world. And in
their contrary, he has raised falls prophets to whom he has given the
efficacy of errors (for contrary purposes I grant) to wit that his people
may be tried, his faithful servants exercised, and humbled, and finally that
such as delight not in verity, may be given over to believe lies. Go to now and
prove contrarieties.

In the words of Zachary you show your ignorance, and in collecting the mind
of Oded, To Ye 6.
you plainly declare your accustomed falshode in farther stretching the mind
of the Prophet, the^ his words will bear. Which thing I will first show by
reciting the plain words, and so return to the Prophet Zachary. There was
in Samaria a Prophet of the Lords (says the history) whose name was Oded,
and he went out before the host that came to Samaria, and said unto them: 2.
Pe^. 2^
Behold because the Lord God of your fathers is wroth with Judah, he has
delivered them into your hands, and ye have slain the^ in a rage that
reaches up to heaven. And now ye purpose to keep under the children of Judah
and Jerusalem, as servants and had maids unto you: But are not you such that
sins are with you before ye Lord your God? These be his words in that matter,
by the which if you be able to prove, that the Israelites did more, then God in
his eternal counsel had appointed yt they should do against Judah, and
Ierusalam, we will patiently hear your probatio^, and reasons. If you say the
Prophet reproved them of their cruelty, therefore they did more then God would:
y^ does not follow, for the just will of God must not be measured, by the
cruelty of their fact, but by his own word, which does affirm, that God
gave over Judah into, the hands of the king of Syria, and into the hands of
the king of Israel, who did strike them with a great slaughter, and that for
the sins, and abominable idolatry, which they, and Achas their king, had
committed. We hear, and see affirmed by the holy Ghost, that God gave them over
into the hands of their ennemies, which thing he did willingly, and not by
permission as you writ. Now to the place of Zachariah in which I say, you
show gross, and wicked ignorance. For if your interpretation should be
received, the^ of necessity it should follow, yt in God their lacked power to
impede, and stay the fury of those cruel me^, who in their victory did so
insole^tly rage. For if God would only have had ye Jews gently corrected, and
not to have been so severely, and rigorously destroyed: and yet, yt against al
manner, and sort of his will, they were so cruelly entreated, it can not be
denied, but yt the cruelty, and rage of the Babylonia^s was greater, then God
could impede or stay, how blasphemous, and falls this is, the godly does
understand. O (say you) but so do the words of the text sound, for they say: I
am greatly angry against the careless heathen. For I was but a little angry
against Sion, but they have helped forward the affliction. I answer, yt if ye
were not more malicious then ignorant, ye might easily perceive, yt those
words were spoken, not to prove yt any thing was do^ne against Israel, and
Judah, wc God had not appoi^ted, and commanded, but to instruct the Prophet,
yt the will, and counsel of God, in punishing of his people, was far other,
then was the will, and connsell of those yt did destroy them: and yt their long
bondage should have an other end then either they the^ selves, or their
ennemies did understand. That nothing was do^ne against yt people, wc the Lord
had not appointed, yea and commanded, the same Prophet does affirm, saying:
my words and my statutes (he means the threatenings, and punishments) wc I
have commanded my servants the Prophets, have they not, apprehended y or
fathers: in so much that they have converted, and said: Even as the Lord of
Hosts has determined, and appointed to do unto us, according to or ways, and
accordig to or imaginatio^s, so has he done to us. Except yt you will belie
the holy Ghost, you must confess, yt God had comanded, God had appointed, and
determined so to punish his people. Yea Amos the Prophet fears not to say:
Shall there be evil in a city (that is any punishment or plague) and the Lord
has not do^ne it? Why is he the^ offended (say you) against the proud, and
careless heathen? I answer. Because they neither had respect to gods will,
counsel; nor commandment, but to their own private commodity, and to the
satisfying of their cruel appetites. For they did not destroy Jerusalem,
willing, or minding to punish the offe^ses of the people committed against God:
Neither yet did they carry the^ to Babylon of purpose yt God might be glorified
in their deliverance. No, they had determined the plain contrary. To wit, yt
Jerusalem should remain desolate for ever: That Judah should be y^ inheritance
of strange nations, and so should gods promise be falls, and vain. And in very
deed the Jews them selves, in the extremity of their trouble, yea, and when
the temple began to be reedified, were not free from these te^ptatios, and
therefore does God assure his Prophets, yt his love was great towares Sio^:
That he would destroy, that nation, wc intended their destruction: that he would
deliver his people: that the warfare of Jerusalem was at an end, yt her
iniquity was remitted: Isa. 40.
that she had received double punishment for all her sins, from the hand of
the Lord, and yt therefore he would take the dolourous cup of anguish, and
sorrow out of her hand, and would give it into the hands of those, that did
trouble her. By which (and many mo promises, and threatninges, God does not
mean that any thing was done in Jerusalem, which he had not appointed. But by
the one he did somewhat comfort the troubled hearts of his afflicted people:
and by the other, he did show the cause, why he would punish those cruel
murderers, whose service before he did use in punishing his people. Isa. 47.
And this does God most plainly witness in these words: I was wrath (says ye
Lord) with my people I have polluted mine inheritance, and given them into thy
hand (he speaks unto Babylon) thou did show the^ no mercy, but did
lay thy very heavy yoke upon the ancient: and thou saidest, I shall be a Lady
for ever, so yt thou did not set thy mind to these things neither did
thou remember the latter end thereof. Therefore now hear thou that art given to
pleasures and dwell careless, She says in her heart* I am and none else: I
shall not sit as a widow neither shall know the loss of children. Here of I
say it is plain, yt the punishment of gods people (as before I have proved) is
his own appointement, and will. But because the punishers look to another end,
therefore are they criminal before gods justice. In adducing both these
examples, that is, of Israel punishing Judah, and of the Babylonians destroying
Jerusalem, I find you in another most gross error, besides this wc I have
confuted. For you seem to affirm, that if y^ Israelites, and Babylonia^s had
kept a measure, and had not exceded the bounds, wc God had appointed, and
commanded, they had not sinned. For (say you) he willed the one, but permitted
the other. The^ in so far as they did his will they sinned not, but in so far
as they exceded his will, and did more wc he would not, but only did suffer it,
they sinned. This is your profound divinity, and godly meditatio^s of God, of
his justice, judgments, and works incomprehensible to ma^s reason. Are you
able to prove that Nabuchadnezer came to Jerusalem, or that therein he spilt, or
his captains, and cruel souldioures, one drop of blood which God (in his
eternal counsel) had not appointed, and willed. The testimonies of all
Prophets rebuke your vanity. ^lle. ^1.
Ezechiel says: Thus says the Lord. Behold I come against thee and will
draw my swerd out of his sheath, and cut of from thee both the righteous, and
the wicked. Seeing then yt I will cut of from y^ both ye righteous and wicked,
therefore shall my swerd go out of his sheath against all flesh from the South
(meaning throw all the la^d) to ye north, that al slesh may know, that I the
Lord have drawn my swerd out of his sheath, and it shall not return any
more. Mark and consider how God attributes all to him self, as after yet the
Prophet more plainly speaks sayi^g: And he has given it to be fourbished
that he may handle it: this sword is sharp, and is fourbished yt he may give
it into ye hand of the slayer etc. And I will power out mine indignation upon
the in the fire of my wrath, and deliver ye into the hand of beastly me^, and
skilful to destroy. Thou shall be in ye fire to be devoured thy blood shall be in
ye mids of the la^d, and thou shall be no more remembered, for I the Lord
have spoken it. If these be the words of him yt only suffers, and wills
not things to be done, let ye indifferent reader judge. Why they did sin
notwithstanding yt God in his counsel had willed, and appointed this severe
punishment against his people, I have before declared. To wit, because yt
neither knew they gods will, counsel, nor commandment, neither yet had they
any respect to obey God, or to fulfill his will. That Nabuchadnezar was
ignorant of gods will, and counsel, is evident by yt wc is written in ye same
Prophet, in ye place above expressed. For after he was come forth of his
country, and was with his army far proceeded in his journey, he was uncertain
whether he should go against Rabbath, y^ strong City of ye sons of Ammon, or
against Jerusalem, and so committing the matter to his sorcerers, and divines
(ye lottes being cast) he takes his iourneye, against Judah, and Jerusalem.
Whereof it is plain yt he neither knew, nor understood by ye motion of gods
holy spirit, his holy will, neither yet commandment. And in destroieng the
City, and punishing the people, who will say yt he or his servants hated
sin, Pride, Cruelty, Idololatrie and abommations with ye wc he, and his hole
realms were replenished? And ye same do I say of ye Israelites, who did not
only sin, because they exceded measure in punishing Judah, but because yt
against gods law, and express commandment, they made unjust war against
their brethern. They nether looked, neither yet oght they to have looked to gods
secret counsel, but to his plain law, wc commanded the^ to love their
brethern, not to murder, not to spoil, not to covet etc. Against the wc
because they did offend, eue^ in ye first motion, and purpose of their warr^ in
gods presence they were murderers, thieves oppressors, and covetous persons,
before yt ever they set their foot forth of their houses. And so even yt wc he
in his eternal counsel willed the^ to do, did no les displease hi^, as
touchi^g their wicked minds, the^ did yt, wc you affirm he suffered. For
every transgression of his law, is before his justice odious, and sinful. If
this can not correct your judgment, yet I am assured yt it shall declare your
vanity, who dare conclude yt if the Israelites, and Babylonia^s had kept
measure in punishi^g Judah, yt the^ they had not sinned. But the contrary I
affirm^ and say, yt the first thought, and purpose moui^g the^ to make war,
was sin before God. Touching ye permission of the father toward his
prodigal son, and touchi^g ye^ son, wc promised to go, and to labor in his
fathers vineyarde, and went not, I have before answered, yt similitudes oght
not further to be stretched, the^ ye mind of the holy Ghost is to teach in the
same. And in these places it is evident, yt Christ teaches not, how God is
compelled to suffer many things wc he will not, nether yet was it his mi^de in
those similitudes, to teach us what difference there is between gods will, and
his permissio^, but in y^ one he teaches, yt in God there is mercy toward
the sinner, yea and toward such a sinner, as vntha^ckfully, and inobedie^tly
has departed from God, and yt there be some proud children, who by reason of
their co^tinua^ce in their fathers house, become disdan^ful yt others should
de be preferred, or compared unto them. And therefore they grudge, they murmurre,
and they envy the liberality of their father and his mercy showed to the
son, yt before appeared l^st. To whom this might be applied, besides the
Jews, and the Gentiles, ye are not ignorant. The other similitude does teach
us, that many in mouth say Lord, Lord, I go, I go, whose heart did never feel
what is the reverence, and true obedience due to gods Majesty.

We confess no les then Jeremy does write: To the 7. 8. 9
for we say, that God nether commanded such abominations, as his people
committed, nether yet yt ever they did enter in to his heart, that is they did
never delight, nor please him nether yet did he ever will them for the actions
them selves. But when you shall be able to prove that it did not apperteine to
his just judgments to punish those idolaters with such blindness, that they
became more cruel then brute beasts: then shall ye be more able to prove, that
in no wise did God will that cruelty. God willed not those abominations for
the murder committed and blood that was shed, for that he hated: and did
punish: But he willed yt a testimony should be left to the world in what
blindness man falls, when he declineth from God, and from his true honor, of
which fearful example, you, and your sect oght to take heed.

The Israelites in killing their children, Ironia^
no doubt did even agree with gods will and were of one mind with his just
judgments, as you declare your selves to be, in spewing forth these horrible
blasphemies, against his supreme Majesty. For as they leaving the plain will
of God, declared in his law concerning their oblations, and making of
sacrifice, in a blind zeal to honor God as they pretended with sacrifices
more precious, and acceptable, (because their children to them were more dear
the^ oxen, or bullockes) as they, I say in so doing leave to us a fearful
example of gods judgments. So do you by these your horrible blasphemies, wc
in fury jesting, and skoffing ye vomit forth against God, his eternal truth,
and against, the true professors of the same, and thus far I confess was
gods most just will fulfilled in the^, as also it is (and here after shall be)
fulfilled in you. That because they in ye vanity of their imaginatio^s,
d^clined from gods will reveled, God of his justice would make the^ spectacles
to all ages following, what were his^iudgementes (as I have said) against
idolaters. Eue^ so ye neither content yt God shall use his creatures, as best
serves for his glory, nether yet that any justice be in his eternal God head
to the which your reason can not atteine, are given over by gods will into
reprobate minds, thus horribly to blaspheme his Majesty: to admonish the
generation present, and to come, that with greater sobriety, more fear, and
reverence they speak, and think of those mysteries, that be inco^prehensible
unto man.

I have before declared that no man leaving the will of God reveled in his
word, does either obey him, either yet please him, and so can he never be of one
mind with God that commits things forbiden by his word. But why that God
forbids iniquity to all (which also in all men he hates) and yet that
betwext his vessels of mercy, and the vessels of wrath he makes such
difference, that to the one he gives medicine and purgation against the
natural venom, so effectually that it works their salvation in the end: and
to the other he denies that grace, Romans 9
he will not make you, nor any of your faction, further of counsel, then he
has expressed in these words: He has mercy on whom he will have mecie, and
whom he will, him he makes hard hearted.

That satan has so enraged you that upon that doctrine which the holy Ghost
most evidently does teach, To the 9
ye dare gather this abominable absurdity, that God and whicked idolaters are
both of one mind, that they both inwardly and owtwardly do obey him, ye have
just cause not only to be ashamed, but also to quake, tremble, and fear, for
that horrible blindness wherinto you are fallen, and for those just ve^geances,
which your pride does crave of gods justice. Just art thou o^ Lord in all thy
works. To the IO Isa. 45
To your question, asking by what means should the Lord stir up the mind of
the king of the Medes to destroy Babylon, who had before a desire ready bent to
do the same, but by suffering, and permitting him. To this question (I say)
does ^sai the Prophet answer. Is^. 47
saying: Thus says the Lord unto Cyrus his anointed, whose right hand I have
holden, to subdue nations before him: therefore will I weaken the loins of
kings, and open the doors before him, and the gates shall not be shut. I will
go before thee and make the crooked straight, I will break the brazen doors,
and burst ye y^one bars. And I will give ye treasures of darkness, and the
things hid in secret places etc. If there be in you either modesty or
aptnes to learn, this is sufficient to instruct you, how God raised up his
spirit, which before was ready bent to destroy Babylon, to wit, in giving
unto him so prosperous succes, that no impediment was able to resist, or
withstand him. which thing God did not by and idle permission, or sufferance as
ye imagine, but by his power which did effectually work in all that his
journey, as the Prophet here, and in many other places does witness. Which thing
does Cyrus him self also confess, Ezra. 1
in these words. The Lord God of heaven, has given me all the kingdoms of
the earth, and he has commanded me to build him an house in Jerusalem, which
is in Judah. And the holy Ghost affirms, that ye Lord did stir up ye spirit
of Cyrus king of Persia to cause this proclamation to be made. Dare you say
that to give all the kindomes of ye earth to one man, is nothing else but to
suffer him to ryue, and posses them at his appetites? Dan. 2
Daniel affirms the contrary saying: The name of God be praised for ever and
^uer: for wisdom and strength are his. And he changes the times and seasons:
he takes away kings: he sets up kings: he gives wisdom to the wise, and
understanding to those that understand etc. And David also says. he that
raises the nedie out of the dust and lifts up ye poor out of the dung,
that he may set him with the princes, even with the princes of his people.
And therefore, because the holy Ghost gives to gods prudence, and working
power, that which you most wickedly attribute to his permission, or idle
sufferance, I fear not to say, that as God stirred up Cyrus spirit effectualy
moving it to give liberty, and commandment to his people to return to
Jerusalem, and to restore the temple, so did he also stir up his spirit in
enterprising his first journey against Babylon, in taking from him all fear
indewing him with an heroical, Isa. 45
and bold spirit, (as God him self says: I girded the though thou have not
known me) and giving to him so fortunate succes, that all was subject to his
empire. And therefore albeit, ten thousand times ye will ask: What needs God
to mou^ the wicked to do wickedly, which, being given over of God, imagines
nothing but wickedness, and his master the devil sl^peth never? Yet will I
answer, that as to destroy Babylon, in so far as it was gods work, it was
no wicked deed, but his most just judgment. So albeit Cyrus had never been so
much enraged against Chaldea, either by his own pride, either yet by satan,
that nether of both could have brought any thing to pass, except that the Lord
had decreed to perform his work in Babylon, I^r. 51
as he him self did threaten, saying: Behold, I come unto the o^ thou
destroying mountain, says the Lord, which destroyest all the earth, I will
stretche out mine hand upon thee and roll the down from the rocks, and will
make the a burnt mountain. They shall not take of the a stone for a corner,
nor a stone for fundations, but thou shall be destroyed for ever, says the
Lord etc. If you see nothing in these and other such threateninges of God, but
a permission only, I can not cease to say that you are more then blind. But
now to that which folo weth in these words.

THE ADVERSARY.
To that which ye allege of the Prophet Isai: The^^ argumen^^*
harden the hearts of this people etc. The 43. section.
for the better understanding of tha^ place. we must note that which is written
in the chapter going before: how the Lord had chosen this people and planted
them as a vineyarde and called all Israel to be judge betwext him and his
v^neyard, what more could have been done for it, then he had done, and yet
when he looked, for fruit of equity and right^ousnes, to there was wrong, and
mys^rie, where upon followed their indura^s^, for they were hardened of the
lord, that is, as afo^ is sade, God gave them over, to their own hearts
lust^s. Further where he says to the Prophet, hard^ their hearts, we must
always consider that their hearts were alredye hardened. which their
wickedness did plainly declare. yet has he commanded the Prophet to do his
office, not to make their hearts hard. for that belongs ^nelie to God^ who
giving Leui. 13
The like phrase of spea^che have we in Le^it. 13. If the priest see that the
scab is grown abr^de in the ski^me, the priest shall make him unclean. how
should the priest make him unclean, who is alredye unclean, and whose flesh
he durst not touch, but by declaring him to be unclean. So how Iere. 15
to show that for their wickedness, they should be driven away some to death,
some to the swerd, some to hunger and some to captivity. So Jeremy took the
no man is able to c^prehe^d the pr^funditie and depth thereof, therefore oght no
man to go about to prove or improve any thing by that which is unknown to him,
wherefor they which affirm, and teach that ^od ha^h

ANSWER.
What soever shall be read in the hole scriptures, To the ^
you shall never be able to prove that in these words of Isaie, (Go, and
harden the hearts of this people) is nothing else meant, but that the Prophet
was only commanded to declare unto them their blindness, and hardness of heart.
for where soever mention is made of the difference betwext the elect, and the
reprobate, this virtue is attributed to the word, that it does illuminate the
eyes, and mollify the hearts of the one, by the power of the holy Ghost: and
by the contrary that it does excecate, and more harden the other by reason of
their corrupt nature, to the which they are justly left. The Evangelist saint
John making mention, that the Jews did not believe in Christ Jesus, albeit that
they had seen his wondrous works, adds this cause: therefore (saith^ he)
they could not believe, John 12
because Isaiah had said: He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their
hearts, that they should not see with their eyes, nor understand in their
hearts, and be converted, that I may heal them. Here does the Evangelist
attribute to the Prophet, not only that he declared their blindness, but that
God by him did in verydede justly blind their eyes, and harden their hearts.
But this shall more plainly appear in examining the reasons, and scriptures
which ye allege for proof of your interpretation.

First say you, their hearts ^ere already hardened which their wickedness did
plainly declare, yet has he commanded the Prophet to do his office not to
make their hearts hard, for that bel^ngeth only to God who giving them over
to their hearts lusts he already hardened them. And so ye conclude that the
Prophet did only declare unto them the hardenes of their hearts. Answer
We do not deny but that their hearts were hardened before, and that justly
for their iniquities sake they were given over to their hearts lusts. But
whether they were so hardened before the preaching of the Prophet, that after
they could be not harder, I greatly doubt. Yea I nothing doubt to affirm,
but that even as the claye by the heat of the Sun, becomes more hard, and
more hard, or as the branch cut of the natural stock does more and more
wither, until that no kind of sap, nor moisture does remain, even so I say
do the reprobate from time, to time become more obstinate, more blind, more
hard, and more cruel, and that by the word, wc does plainly rebuke their
iniquity, and euidenly declare whose children their are. Examples in scripture
hereof are manifest: Some lenity, and ge^tlenes appeared in Pharao, toward the
people of Israel before that Moses, at gods commandment required their
liberty. But that will, and word of God commanding him to let his people go
and serve God in the wilderness, did so quicklye work in the heart of that
reprobate, Exo. 5. ^
that the greater hardness of his heart, was suddenly felt by the Israelites, to
their great grief and grudging disconfort.

In the people of Israel, in their elders, Priests, and counsel, appeared some
face of justice, when Stephan was accused, before that he pronounced these
words: ye stiffenecked, and uncircumcised in heart, and ears, you have ever
resisted, the holy Ghost, eue^ as your fathers have resisted, Act. 7
so do you: whom of the Prophets have not your fathers persecuted? and they
have slain them, which showed before of the coming of yt just, whom ye have
now betrayed, and murdered. Before this sentence (I say) there appeared some
face of justice, but what ensued the holy Ghost does witness, saying: when they
heard these things their hearts brast for anger and they gnashed at him with
their tethe. And after also that he gave a more plain confession of Christ
Jesus, of his exaltation, glory, power, and Majesty, they cried out with a great
voice, they stopped their ears, they as wolves enraged russhed upon him, with
one consent, and so without all order of justice, did stone him to death. If ye
confess not yt the word of God, proceeding from the mouth of Stephen, did not
more harden them, who no doubt were hardened before, you deny a truth that is
more then evident. Diverse places more I might adduce for the same purpose, but
(having respect to brevity) I stand content with th^se two, which I doubt
nothing, are sufficient to prove, that men, that be already hardened, yet by the
coming of the plain word, which rebukes their iniquity, they become more
hard. As the owl being blind, even when she appears to see best in the night
season, but yet in ye day time, she is more blinded, bacause that the weakness
of her eyes, can not abide the bright beams of the sun. And eue^ so it is with
the reprobate, they are always blind, and hard heared, but when the light of
God does most plainly shine before the^ or when they are called from
iniquititie to virtue, then becomes the word of glad tidinges to the^, a very
savor of death, by the wc, they are both more blinded, and more hardened. And
so in your first reason we dissent from you in yt, that you seem to affirm,
that because ye reprobate are once hardened, therefore they ca^ be no more
hardened. Your second reason is, that because it belongs to God only to make
hard their hearts, that therefore there rests nothing to the Prophets, but
to show unto them the hardness of their hearts. I am glad that once ye will
confess yt it is nothing repugning to gods good nature, Answer
for just causes, to harden the heart, and to make blind ye eyes of the
reprobate. But yt therefore nothing rests to ye Prophets or Apostles, but
only to declare unto me^ their hardness I ca^ not admit. For we do find yt
God does so communicate his power with his true messingers, and ambassadors,
that what soever they lowse in earth, he does lowse in ye heaven, and what
soever they bynd in earth, he binds in heaven, whose sins they remitte,
they are remitted, and whose sins they retain, they are retained. The Lord
him self says unto Jeremy: I^re. ^
Behold I have put my words in thy mouth, and I have ordained thee above
nations, and kindomes, that thou may root out, destroy, and scatter, and
that you may also build up, and plant. And unto Paul it was said: And now I
shall deliver the from the nations, to ye which I send thee that thou may
open the eyes of those that be blind, that they may convert from darkness unto
light, and from the power of fathan unto God. These words do witness that the
effectual power of God does work with the word, which he puts in the
mouths of his true messingers, in so much that either it does edify, lighten,
or mollify to salvation, or else it does destroy, darken, and harde^. For the
word of God is of ye nature of Christ Jesus, and he is not only come to
illuminate, and to raise up, but also to make blind, and to beat down, as he
him self does witness, saying, I am come to judgment into this world, yt those
that see not shall see and that those that see shall be blind. And Simeon says:
Luke. Man. 21
Behold this is he yt is put in resurrection, and in ruin of many in Israel.
In so much, that upon who^ that stone of offense falls, it shall burste him
to powder. And therefore we can not admit that the ministry of his blessed
word preached, or published by his faithful messingers, be nothing else but a
simple declaration what men be. No, we know that it is the power of God to
salvation of all those y^ believe, that the message of reconciliation is put in
their mouths, that the word wc they preach, has such efficacy, and strength
that it deuideth asunder y^ joints, and sinews, ye bones from the marye, that
ye weapons of their warrefare are not carnal, 1. Co. 1^.
but are power in God to the beating down of all strong holds, by the which,
the true messingers beat down all counselles, and all height which is raised up
against the knowledge of God, by the which also they lead into bondage all
cogitatio^s to obey Christ. we know further that they have ve^gea^ce in
readynes against all inobedience. Apo. 10
That fire passes forth of their mouths which deuoureth their enemies, that
they have power to shut the heaven that rain descend not in the days of
their prophecy. That gods power both in the one sort, and in the other, is
contained with his word even preached, pronounced, and fore spoken by his
messingers, do all examples in gods scriptures witness. At the prayer, 3. King.
18
and prophecy of Elias was the heeauen both shut, and opened: fire descended
from heaven, and consumed those ungodly soldiers with their captains.

At the curse of Eliseus did bears devour (...) children that mocked him. 4.
Kin. 1
The words of Isai, Jeremy, and Ezechiel, albeit (for the time that they
spoke) they were contemned, yet had they such force, and effect, yt no strength
was able to gainesta^d that, which they had pronounced. At Peter's word,
Ananias, and Saphira did sodainlye dye. Paul by his sentence made Elimas the
sorcerer blind, and so forth, the examples be almost without no^bre, that
declare yt gods power is joined with his word, not only in saving (wc I thinck
you will admit) but also in punishing and destroying. If you think it
fearful yt gods holy word shall have this power, and effect, to kill, to
blind, and to harden. Remember first, the severe judgments of God against
sin, and often call to mind that the fault, nor chief cause is not in the
word, but in the subject, and person, in whom it falls. The word falling in
to ye heart of the elect, does mollify, and illuminate, as before is said, but
falling in to the heart of the reprobate, it does harden and more excecate the
same, by reason of the quality, and incurable corruption of the person

And thus in your second reason, we do utterly dissent from you^ and fear not
to affirm, yt gods true Prophets, and messingets, do not only declare what
me^ be^ but yt by the word, which is committed to their charge, effectually
they work either light, To the 2. 3. 4.
or darkness, life, or death, yea salvation, or damnation. The text of Leuiticus
serves you nothing, and ye text of Jeremy is expressly against you. For the
hiegh Priest is not commaded to go to a man, in whom no leprosy appeared, and
to pronounce, what after shall become of him: but the man in whom there is
apperant signs of lepro^ie, is commanded to be led to the Priests, who are
commanded to pronounce according to the signs wc they see. Consider I beseech
you, the difference between the office of the one, and the office of y^ other^
the sentence of the one, and the sentence of the other, the one (yt is the
Priests) go not, nether are they sent, to seek those yt have apperance, or
suspicion of leprosy. But the Prophet is sent by God, to the^ that then was
called the people of God, in who^ no man could have suspected such blindness,
such hardness of heart, and such rebellion as the Prophet is comanded to
threate^. The Priests did not nor might not pronounce sentence against a man,
in whom manifest signs of leprosy appeared not, yea trial must be taken,
whether it be leprosy, or not: But the Prophet is commanded to go to that
people, who held them selves clean, and before all trial, to pronounce that
sharp sentence, you shall hear with your ears, and shall not understand, you
shall plainly see, and yet shall not perceive, the heart of this people is
hardened. Was there anysuch commandment or charge given to ye priests? Might
any of them have said, to any man yt appeared to be clean, etc whole, thou
shall be leprous, I pronounce the sentence which thou shall not escape? I trust
not. Then for the diversity as well of their offices, as of the sentences
which they pronounced the phrases must be diverse.

Where ye affirm that ye Prophet could not touch their hearts, but by
declaring the^ to be hard hearted, ye seem phete pronounces, and speaks, how
vnappera^t that ever it be to man's reason, or how stowtly and stubburnly that
ever the wicked resist. Did not the words of Elias spoken unto Achab aftre ye
murtheri^g of Naboth, touch his heart? yes, the very hypocrite him self had
some sense and feling of gods just wrath. And both he and his posterity, for
all his princely pomp, did after feel the verity of them. To wit dogs did
lick his blood, the flesh of Iesabell was eaten by dogs, his children, and
hole posterity were rooted out of Israel. And thus did the words of the
Prophet touch his heart (in the time when they were spoken) with a certain
fear, stupiditie, and trembling. which words were after of such power,
strength, and verity, that no male children were left alive to Achab in
Israel. And the same is true of Ieremies wordes^ and sentence spoken against
diverse nations, whose faces albeit he never saw, yet did he so potently touch
their hearts, that how soever they despised his threateninges, yet was no word
vainly spoken, but in effect was every thing complete, as he pronounced. And
wonder it is that ye are ignorant in this virtue of gods word, seeing that ye
confess that Jeremy took the cup from the Lords hand, lere. 25
which he was commanded to give to all nations, yt they might drink the cup
of the Lords wrath, saing unto them: Drink, and be drucken, and spew, and
fall, and rise no more, because of the swerd wc I will send among you. Was this
I pray you a simple declaration^ or was it not rather a sentence and decree so
effectual, that albeit nether Babylon, nether any other proud and whicked
nation would for that time believe it, yet came it most effectually to pass? And
I say yt these words of Jeremy do manifestly repugne to your interpretation,
and do sufficiently prove yt those words spoken to Isai, are otherwise to be
understand, then yt he was commanded only to declare what the people were. For
as the words of Jeremy had this effect, yt according as he spoke, so came ye
destruction upon those proud nations, so likewise had the words of God spoken
to Isai, the same effect, which he pronounced. To the one he said, thou shall
give unto them the cup of my wrath, that they may drink it. The Prophet
without fear did obey his commandment, and God did faithfully perform, what
so ever his messinger had pronounced. Even so did God command Isai to blind,
and harden, that stubborn, and rebellious generation of the Jews, by the
preaching of his Law, and by rebuking of their manifest impiety. And so he
did, God working all to his glory, according to his eternal purpose. And this
because your To ye ^ 6. 7. 8.
we can not admit it. Against your complexion or Epilogue, which is nothing
but a superfluous repetition of those things, which sufficiently ye have not
proved (although you so brag) we say, that as God by his eternal word, and
power infinite, has created al things, so has he by his wisdom
incomprehensible so disposed all thinges^, yt as nothing was created for the
self, so was nothing the appointer of the self to serve God, as his glory
required. But he in his eternal counsel appointed the end to every creature, to
the which they shall once atteine, by such means, as he most justly has
appointed. And therefore seeing his glory does no less require his just
judgments, then his superabou^dant mercy to be known, he has in his
eternal counsel elected, some, and rejected others, eue^ before ye foundatio^s
of ye world. And albeit he created man after his own image, yet did God never
determine yt mankind should stand in Adam, but his just counsel and purpose
was that all men should fall in Adam, that the elect might know the price of
their salvation Christ Jesus, in who^ they were elected, before yt in Adam
actualy they did fall, or were created. And so God willing to make his glory
to shine in all, has prepared some vessels of mercy, and some of wrath. to ye
one he has freely given life everlasting in Christ Jesus his son. The other
he has for just causes so rejected, that albeit with long patience, he
suffers their manifest rebellion, yet in the final judgment he shall
command them to go to the fire that never shall be quenched. And this will and
counsel of God is neither secret, nor hid from his Church, but is in his word
most manifestly reveled: and therefore of it we fear not to affirm, that even
in the first promise, and ever since has God made a plain distinction betwext
the elect, and the reprobate, so that the purpose and counsel, which before
was hid in God, was in time manifested unto man. Which will and counsel of
God (because it is constant and immutable, like as God him self is) must of
necessity take effect, and therefore I boldly affirm, that neither can any whom
God in his eternal purpose has reprobated, become the elect, and so be saved,
neither yet can any of Christ's elect nombre to life everlasting, be
reprobated, and so come to final perdition. We further say, that albeit gods
will in the self, be one, to wit, the manifestation of his own glory, yet
as touching his creatures it has diverse respects, for God will the salvation
of some, and he also will the just ^ondemnation of others. And the contrary of
this does God never declare in his word, but rather does most plainly reuele
it. And therefore this his godly will is not called secret, as that it is not
expressed in his word: but because that in his word there is no cause assigned
(gods good will only excepted) why he has chosen some, and rejected others.
And this knowledge is so necessary to a Christian, that without the same, ca
the heart of man never be sufficiently subjected unto God, nether can he render
unto him due praise and honor, except that he acknowledge, and confess. yt God
him self has made difference, betwext him, and others. To your odious terms,
and dispitefull railing, I briefly say at this time: To the 8.
THE LORD shall judge. To my knowledge there rests no notable scripture,
which ye have alleged (or rather abused) for confirmation of your error which
is not sufficiently answered, two places excepted. The one is of Ezechiel,
affirmig that God will not the death of a sinner, the other contains the
words of Paul saying: God will all men to be saved, which places because you
recite them here in the description of him, whom you call the true God I thought
it expedient to delay til this opportunity, to ye end that h^uing to fight (as
it were face, to face) with the devil him self, I might have some comfort of my
God in entreating some place of his holy scriptures. Thus you proceed with a
mouth most execrable, and blasphemous.

THE ADVERSARY,
The properties of the God of the careless by necessity. The 44. section
Their gods wrath exced^th all his works for he has reprobate the most part
of the world, before the foundation of the world. be is slow unto mercy and
ready to wr^the, for he will not be entreated to save any of them whom he bath
reprobate before, but of necessity do, what they can, they must be damned,

ANSWER.
Because that now I have to do not only with a blasphemer, but eue^ (as it
were) with a devil incarnate, my first and chief defense, is to say, the Lord
put silence to the ^ Satan. The Lord confound thy dispiteful counselles by
the which thou studiest to pervert the righteous way of the eternal God.

But now of thee, To ye 1
o blasphemous mouth, I ask, if thou be able to forge to the, and to thy
pestilent facti^, an other God, then that God who most justly did drown, and
destroy by water, all living creatures in earth, except so many, as were
preserved in the arc with Noah who also did destroy by fire from heaven
Sodom, and Gomorra, with the cities ^diacent, and the hole inhabitants of the
same (Lot and his two daughters only reserued^) who further by the space of
four thousand years, did suffer all nations to walk in their own ways,
reueling only his good will, and the light of his word, to the sede of Abraham
(to those that descended of Jacob I mean) Can thou I say forge to thy self
another God, then this eternal majesty of our God whom we do reverence, in
whom we trust, and most steadfastly believe, whose Son Christ Jesus we preach
to be the only savior of his Church, and whose eternal verity we maintain,
not only against Jew, Turk, and Papist, but also against you enraged
anabaptists, who can admit in God no justice, which is not subject to the
reach of your reason? Dare thou, and thy conspiracy stand up, and accuse God
of cruelty, because that in these his works, thou can not deny, but that mo
were punished, then were preserved, mo were left in darkness, then were called
to the true light? Shall not his mercy excede all his works, except that he
save the Devil, and those that justly be reprobated as he is? Stoop Satan
under the empire of our Sovereign God, To ye 2.
whose will is so free, that nothing is able to constreigne, or bind it. For
that is only liberty, that is not subject to mutabilitie, to the inconstancy
or appetites of others, What is (...).
as most blasphemously you would imagine God to be in his election and most just
reprobation: by the which in despite of Satan, To ye 3
of thee his slave, and son, and of all thy sect, he will declare his glory,
as well in punishing with torments for ever such blasphemers, as you be, as in
showing the riches of his glory to the members of his dear Son, who only
depend upon Christ Jesus, and upon his justice.

To purge my God from that injustice, To ye 4. 5.
or from those absurdities, which thou would impute upon his eternal
majesty, I will ^ot labor, lest that either I should seem to doubt of our own
cause, either yet to be solicit, for the defense of our eternal God. And
therefore seeing that ye declare your selves not men ignorant, willing to Iearne,
but deuilles enraged against God, against his eternal, and infinite justice,
as I began, so do I finish. The Lord confound thee Satan. The Lord confound
you enraged dogs, which so impudently dare barcke, against the most just
judgments of God. And thus leaving you to the hands of him, who sodanely
shall revenge his justice from your blasphemies. For the cause of the Simple I
say, First, that most maliciously ye accuse us, as that we should affirm God
to be slow to mercy, and ready to wrath, which blasphemy we protest before
God, before his holy Angels in heaven; and before his Church here in earth,
did never enter into our heart. For the contrary thereof we daily see, and
perceive, not only in our selves, to whom most mercifully he remitteth the
multitude of our sins, but also in the most cruel ennemies of his Church.

We do not define, what nombre God has elected to life, nether yet what nombre
presently God has reprobated. Only we stand content, with that, which the
holy Ghost has reveled openly, to wit that their be both elect, and reprobate.

That the elect can not finally perish, nether yet that the reprobate can ever
be saved, we constantly affirm. But we add the causes, to wit that because
the one sort is given to Christ Jesus by ye free gift of God his father, before
all times: therefore in time they come unto hi^, by power of whose spirit, they
are regenerate, their darkness is expelled, and from virtue, they proceed to
virtue, till finally they attein to the glory promised. As ye other sort is
left in their own corruption, so can they do nothing but obey their father ye
devil, in whose bondage they justly are left. And so where ye burden us, that
we say, let the reprobate do what they can, yet they must be damned, ye do most
shamefully belie us. For we say, and teach, that who so ever declineth from
evil, and constantly to the end does good, shall most certainly be saved. But
our doctrine is thi^, that because the reprobate have not the spirit of
regeneration, therefore they can not do those works that be acceptable before
God.

How God is almighty, and omnipote^t, we have before confessed, to wit, that
as he in his eternal wisdom foreseeth, and appoints all things, so does
his power put all things in execution, how, and when it best pleases him.
Neither can his wisdom, will, nor counsels be subject to any mutabilitie,
unstableness, or change. For if it so were then his godly will and counsels, did
not depend upon him self, but upon his creatures, which is more then absurd.

Nether to Pharao, neither to Semei, neither yet to any other reprobate, did,
or does God give, either wicked commandment or evil thought. But those wicked
thoghtes, and evil motions, which be in them of their evil nature, and are
stirred up by the instigation of the devil, as he does, not purge them, so
does his wisdom use them well to his own glory, to the exercise of his
children, and to the comfort of his Church. In so much that the very tyranny
of Pharao, the cursing of Semei, and the incest of Absalom in so far as they
were gods works, they were just, and holy, because they were just punishments
of their sins, an exercise for his children, and some part also of his
fatherly correction for their offenses. To the rest of your vanity, I will not
answer, not because I fear your sophistical subtilitie, but because I will
not (except that yet I be further provoked) nether by tongue, nether yet by
pen once name or express your horrible blasphe mies. Which manifestly do
witness and declare, that you (as dogs enraged) without all reverence, do
bark against God, because his works do surmount your capacity. The Lord
speadely call you to repentance, or else so bridle your venomous tongues, that
they be not able further to infect. Now to the rest.

THE ADVERSARY.
The properties of the true God, The 45. section.
God his mercy exceadeth all his works he has made man like to h^^ own image
in Christ Jesus, in whom is no dam^ation, he is sl^we unto wrath and ready
to foregiue, he will be entreated of all so that ^e bids all men every where
to rep^nt, and ^ffereth faith to all men he is omnipotent and may do, and leave
undone, what

ANSWER.
In this description of your God (whom you do term the true God) I do wonder
of three things. First that in this your description ye dissent from your
great angel Castalio. Secondely how it is that ye have forgotten your selves:
And last why ye omit these properties, which the scriptures do no less
attribute to God, then any that you allege. Your master, and chief champion
Castalio (now left for your comfort) in the description of his God thus
writes. But that God whom both nature, and reason, and the scriptures do
teach, is ready to mercy, and slow to wrath, who has created man, of whom all
men are borne, to his own image, like to him self, that he should place him
in Paradise, and give to him the blessed life. This God will that all men be
saved, and that none perish, and therefore he has sent his Son into the
earth, that justice might superabound, where so ever sin has abounded, the
light of whose justice, does illuminate every man, that comes in to this
world. Wonder it is I say that ye who so^co^stantly have followed your master
in all this your work, have dissented from him, or at least omitted his
words, in these two poi^tes, wc in this case be pri^cipall. For, first by his
description he will that nature, and reason, shall no les teach you and your
faction, God, then shall the scriptures. So yt he, whose works you be not able
to comprehend by nature, and reason, shall not be to you the true God. And
secondarily, that except he will all to be saved: and yt the light of his sons
justice do so illuminate all men coming into this world, that where so ever
sin has abounded, there must justice superabound, yt to you likewise he be
no God. These be two chief points in this controversy.

For we constantly affirm, that ye brightness of our God does so blind nature,
and reason (as now they be corrupted) that the natural man ca^ never atteine
to those things, wc apperteine to God, to the knowledge of his will, nether
yet to his true honor. For we know that ye world has not known God, by
wisdom, but thinking themselves most wise, have becomen most vain, in so much
that they have worshipped the creatures, more then the Creator. And thus believe
we that nature, and reason, are not only unable to lead us to the true
knowledge of God, by the which we may atteine to life everlasting, but also we
affirm, that they have been maistresses of all errors, and idolatry. And
therefore say we that nature, and reason, do lead men from ye true God, but are
never able to teach us, nether to express to us the eternal, the true, and
everliving God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Further we doubt not to
embrase, to believe, to reverence and to honor ye majesty of our God, who has
made division, betwext one sort of men, and an other, as plainly before we
have proved. These being two chief points, in this controversy, great wonder
it is, yt of the^ ye make no express mention (as Castalio does) in this your
description. Is it because you are ashamed that such darkness, and such gross
ignorance should be in your great angel of light? Just cause no doubt have
both you, and he to be ashamed of your foolish imaginatio^s. But yet I fear an
other thing more, which is this. That suddenly you will not commit the great,
and secret mysteries of your profession to your rude scholars. For it might
perchance offend them, if at the first ye should affirm (as in your writings
I can show) that saint Paul taught a more perfect way to his scholars in
secret, The secret doctrine of An^baptistes
the^ that wc he committed to writing, that Christ is not the eternal Son of
the eternal God, that the Godhead of the holy Ghost is but man's imaginations,
that Christ's kingdom shall so flourish, that wicked men shall utterly be
suppressed even in this life, that Christ's justice aualeth nothing* except man
have a personal, and perfect justice within him self, that man may fulfill and
obey gods holy Law, and that Christ has no prerogative above his brethern,
except this, that he is called the first begotten: I omit things much more
absurd, because I will not offend the ears of the godly. These things I say
you do not sode^l^ open to your scholars, but in the beginning with pleasant
persuasio^s of good life, of mortification, of ye power of the spirit (wc
rightly placed is a doctrine most necessary) ye infla^be their hearts with a
a vain confidence, of their own power, strength, and justice. And thereafter
ye dissuade them from all exercises, wc may put them in mind of sin, and
imperfection, which remains in man. For nether will ye yt they frequent the
public preaching of ye word, neither yet ye administration of Christ's
sacraments. For such things to yor perfect me^ are nothing necessary. But to
be short, in the end ye bring the^ to ye plain contempt of gods free graces
offered, and given to his elect in Christ Jesus. For in ye end these be yor
blasphemous voices openly affirmed, in your privy asse^blies: what is our
joy? but yt we feel no sin abidi^g in us: what is our comfort, but that we
be able to fulfill the law? and what is our reioising? but that we have a
justice perfect in our selves. And thus seking to establish your own justice,
nether ca^ you, nor your scholars be subject to ye justice of God. But (omittig
this) I return to your deceitful craft, ye dare not in expres words affirm
the vain description of your masters God, but yet covertly ye say as much (as
after shall appear): in which thing, as ye declare your selves ingrate and
vntha^ckfull, that will not support your reverend master in this his battle,
with your open patrocini^ and plain defense, so do ye show yor selves most
unworthy of credit amongst gods children. For who can credit those teachers,
that in ye beginning and for their foundation, and principalles join together
darkness, and light, lies, and verity, yea that begin with a manifest untruth
(as does your Master Castalio) affirming, that nature, and reason, do teach ye
true God unto us, wc is a manifest lie, as before we have proved. If ye say, he
adds also that the scriptures do teach God unto us: I answer that the more is
his impudency, and more dangerous is his venom. For what impudency is it, to
prefer corrupt nature, and blind reason to gods scriptures, in such
manifestation of God, as our salvation requires? Did Moses, Isai, or Christ
Jesus will the ignorant to search nature, or to consult with reason who should
be the Messiah promised? or did they not always send such as lacked light to
the word which was reveled, to the law, and to the Prophets, and to the
scriptures, which did bear record of Christ Jesus, who is the only way, by
the which men come to the true knowledge of the Father? True it is that the
Gentiles by contemplation of the creatures, atteined to that knowledge, that
there was a God: but how little this knowledge served for their salvation the
Apostle does witness. And therefore I say that your Master is more then impudent,
vt dare prefer nature, and reason, to gods scriptures. And further his venom
(in so saing) is more dangerous, then if plainly he had affirmed, that nature,
and reasone alone had been sufficient to have instructed man in all things
apperteining to salvation. For so declaring him self the simple should have
avoided that error, as a pestilence most pernicious. But now in ioining
together those things which God has so manifestly divided, as he has divided
light from darcknes, he does nothing else, but as a traitorous murderer mix,
and mingle poison, with sweet lyquore. For in ioining nature, and reason, with
gods scriptures, in the manifestatio^ of God to man's salvation, he does
plainly witness, that the natural man may boldly pronounce that those works
be none of gods, whereof reason can not see a just cause, why so they should be
wroght. For the fall of Adam say you, and, the induration of Pharao, the
deceauing of Achab, and such others, were none of gods works. But they came by
his permission and why so? Because the natural man can not see how such works
can agree, with gods goodness, and justice. And thus ye deny him to be the true
God, who does not lay before the blindness of yor reason all his works, that
they by her judgment, may be justified, or condemned. O blasphemous mouths,
dare ye deny him to be the true God, of whom Moses, Job, David and Paul
affirm: that his secrets do apperteine to him self? that he will not make
account to man of all his works. That his counsels are incomprehensible, his
judgments a great depth, and his ways unsearchable. Thus much for that
which ye omit of yor masters words in his description, which I now admonish,
lest after ye should trouble the simple, with these your vanities, which from
time, to time, ye foster, and spread abroad. Now to the second, which I will but
only touch, to put you in mind, that in doctrine, ye are not constant: for
before ye have affirmed, In the ^. sectio^, 1. argument.
that we did all stand in Adam, before that we did fall. For none (say you)
falls, but he that stands: If we did all stand, then were we all
predestinate to life. And after: As we were all created in one man, that is in
Adam, In the 9 sectio^ 1. argument.
so were we all created in one estate, that is after the image of God. Of which
places it is plain, that ye understand, that in Adam we were created to gods
image, in Adam we were elected, and in Adam we were placed in paradise, which
you call the blessed life. But here you change your tune, and say: He has made
man like to his own image in Christ Jesus, in whom is no damnation. What
should be the cause of this your sodein recantation, and alteration of your
sentence, I can not well conjecture, except it be this: That because experience
does convict you, that by Adam we are all wounded to death, that therefore you
would al should receive life by Christ Jesus. And that does your master
affirm in bold, and evident words, saing: This God will all men to be saved,
and that none shall perish: and therefore has he sent his Son, into the earth
whose justice should superabound, where so ever sin has abounded. This does
your master boldly affirm (because he wrote to his practiced soldiers) yt
which ye do in darcke words persuade. But how vain be both your persuasions,
shall shortly appear, by examining the scriptures by you both alleged. He
groundeth his error upon the words of Paul plainly falsified, and of John
the Evangelist, whom he applies not rightly. If you think me bold that thus
do accuse your master, and great angel, of falsifying gods scriptures, hear
my proof, and then judge. He says whersoeuer sin has abounded there has
grace super abounded. Which words the Apostle does not speak, but says:
where sin has abounded: there has grace more abounded, which proposition is
most true, as it is most comfortable. For in Adam, David, Peter, and in all
other gods elect children did, and does sin abound, as the Apostle proves
all to have sinned, and to have need of gods glory. But in them did grace more
abound, by the which they were delivered from the multitude of sins. But as
your proposition is not expressed by the Apostle, so it is most falls, which is
most easy to be proved. For in Cain, Pharao, Judas, Pilate, Annas, Caiphas,
Herod, and many other did sin abound, but in them did grace never so abound,
that they were absolved from that damnation, which is pronounced against all
unfaithful, in these words: Who so ever shall not believe, shall be condemned.
And therefore I say, that your masters universal proposition is most falls, and
he not only a falsisier of the plain scriptures, but also a mainteiner of all
impiety, of all idolatry, and wicked religion. For if it shall be admitted that
where so ever sin has abounded there shall grace more abound: then shall
there be no difference between the condition of those that believe in Christ,
and those that be despisers of his Euangile offered. Let the indifferent reader
judge, whether that you, or we do now more smell of a careless, and a libertines
life. But this after.

The words of the Evangelist are plainly wrested. For he affirms not, that
every man is illuminated to salvation, nether yet that Christ is offered (as
ye would shift) to every man. But speaking of the excellency of Christ Jesus,
in whom was life, and by whom all things were created, he says: this was the
true light, which does illuminate all men, that come into this world. In which
words he speaks nothing of man's redemption nether yet of any light, which
man receaueth necessary for the same: But only of that light which was gi^e^
to man in his creation, a part whereof (how small so ever it be) does yet
remain in man* and that not by his own power, but by the free gift of God, in
whom we live, are moved, and have our being. And that the Euange list speaks
nothing of the light of our redemption, is evident by his own words. For,
before, and after he does witness, that the light did shine in darckenes, but
darckenes did not apprehe^d it, that is receive, and aknowledge it: That he
came amongst his own, but his own did not receive him, that such as did
receive him were nether borne of blood, of the will of the flesh, nether yet of
the will of man, but of God. By which words it is manifest, that the
Evangelist most evidently declares, that the light of salvation is not common
unto all, but yt it is propre to those only, yt are borne of God. He does
further teach, that all reason, and natural understanding which man has by
his first birth, is so choked, so blinded, and extinguished, that man must
needs be borne again, before he can see the kingdom of God, that Christ Jesus
must needs illuminate those, that be borne blind, orels (without remedy) they
shall perish in their blindness. And thus I say the one text your master does
falsely, and the other most violently wrest. But now to yor words. God is
slow, (say you) to wrath, and ready to forgive. He will be entreated of all,
Answer
so that he bids all me^ every where to repent, and offers faith unto all
men. To ye 2
I will not question with you at this time, why in this description of your
true God, ye make no mention of the Son, which is the eternal word, and
wisdom, of the eternal father, nether of the holy Ghost, who proceeding from
the father, is equal with the eternal Son. But this is the one thing of
which I did wonder in reading this your description, yt ye omit these
properties, which God attributes to himself. You do continually repete that
God is slow to wrath, ready to forgive, that he wills all me^ to be saved,
that he will be entreated of all men, that he wills the death of no creature.
Which properties in God we confess, and wc sentences we acknowledge to be most
true, if they be rightely understand. But why do ye not likewise teach your
scholars, that God is zealous, that he is a consuming fire, that he punishes
the iniquity of the fathers, upon the sons, unto the third, and fourth
generation: and that his justice can not suffer sin to eskape punishment, no
not even in his most derest children. Ye have accused us, that we deceive the
people, teaching them a careless, and libertine life. And therefore here again,
I require the indifferent reader, to consider which of our doctrines gives
most liberty: whether you that affirm, that your true God will be entreated of
all, or we that constantly maintain, that God hears no sinners, or that such
as delight in iniquity, are so odious in his presence, that although they cry,
and howl in their calamities, yet will he not hear the^. But now let us
examine your scriptures apart. God is slow to wrath (say you) true it is, but
yet he recompe^seth the flownes of punishment, with the severity of his
judgments, which has been, and shall be executed against such as heap to them
selves gods wrath, by abusing his long sufferinges. He is ready to forgive: we
acknowledge this to be the voice of our God. But we fear not to affirm, that
the remissi^n of sins, is the free gift of God, given to his Church by
Christ Jesus, like as are faith, and life ever lasting which are not common to
al men in general, but particularly do apperteine to gods children. He will be
entreated of all (say you) so that he bids all men every where repent, and
offers faith to all men.

Your first proposition is utterly falls, Answer
neither yet is there any such sentence contained in the hole scriptures. Psalm.
17.
True it is that God is merciful gentle liberal, protector, Psalm. 5.
He hates all that work iniquity: nether will he show him self merciful to
such as maliciously do offend. Psalm. 75.
But all the sinners of ye earth shall drinck the dregs of that cup which
the eternal holds in his hand. For he will destroy all those that
traitorously decline from him. Psalm. 18.
They shall cry, but he will not hear He shall answer unto the^, let your
lovers, whom ye have preferred to me^ deliver you. Such as withdraw their ears
from ye cry of the poor, shall cry, but shall not be heard, yea albeit the
blood thirst^e will multiply prayers and streatch forth their hands, yet will
not God hear the^. For his countenance is bent against all yt commit
wickedness. And thus I say you^ shall never be able to prove yt God will be
entreated of al, except you can confute the holy Ghost, and make him, to reca^t
these, and innumerable other places. As mercy is promised to his children (for
they only call in verity, they only hate sin, and follow virtue) So is
severe judgment pronounced against the wicked of ye world. None of these
sentences: God bids all men every where to repent, and offers faith to all
men, are found in that sense, and meaning that ye do understand the^, in the
hole scriptures. True it is that Isai the Prophet, and Christ Jesus him self
with his Apostles do call upon all to come to repentance: But that generality,
is restrained by their own words, to those that thirst, that hunger, that
mourn, that are laden with sin, as before we have taught. That place of the
Acts ye either understand not, Act. 17.
or else willingly ye abuse it. For Paul says not that God offers faith to
al, but says: that he has performed to al, yt promise wc he made to man, wc
was to send a Savior for ma^s redemption, by whom also he will judge the
world. Consider the text, and you shall understand the meaning of the Apostle
to be such. you proceed.

He is omnip^tent, and may do, and leave undone, What so ever shall be his good
pleasure.

The omnipote^cie of God, Answer
and fredo^ of his will we most constantly maintain, but we ca^ not admit yt
our God be variable, unconstant, subject to ignorance: nether yet yt his godly
will depend upon ye will, and disposition of man. For that were not to leave gods
will at fredome but to bring it under ye bondage of his creatures. Further,
these words, God may do, and leave undone, what so ever shall be his pleasure,
do smell somewhat of one of your articles offered unto us in this church,
wherein some of your sect do affirm, yt God may be fully purposed this day to
do one thing, and yt to morrow he may repent, and be purposed to do the
contrary. Which cogitations of of God are most blasphemous, and wicked. For if
his counsels be mutable, and inconstant, then cease he to be ye God, who
nether is, nor can be changed. If you had said because yt God is omnipote^t,
therefore he may do, and leave undone, what so ever his good pleasure is, you had
said well, understanding, yt the purpose of God is infinite, yt therefore of his
good will, he so mollifieth ye hearts of some men, yt of most cruel, and
enraged ennemies, against his truth, and poor servants, he makes them and
yt sodeinly preachers of his Gospel, and protectors to his Church. But when ye
say, he may do what so ever is his good pleasure, ye offer occasion to the
captious to suspecte yt you would affirm, yt gods good will, and pleasure may
change, and yt is to deny his Godhead. But I will burden you no further, then
ye shall plainly confess, I only put you in mind, To the 3
that ye holy Ghost uses no such phrase. You proceed saing. Answer
Nether is it his pleasure, and will, that either phara^, Semei, or any other
should sin, and come to destruction.

Before we have confessed yt iniquity, and sin is so odious before God, yt
in it can his goodness never delight, nether yet can he have pleasure in the
destruction of any creature, having respect to ye punishment only. But seeing
yt gods glory must needs shine in all his creatures, yea even in ye perpetual
damnation of satan, and torment of the reprobate, why shall not he will, and
take pleasure, yt so it come to pass. Albeit your phrenetique brains can not
comprehend ye brightness thereof, yet will he one day declare yt al his works are
wroght in justice, wisdom, and equity. I think you will not deny, but that
pharao, Semei, Judas and others, came to destruction, like as in the end shall
all reprobate do. Then do I ask, if God at no time, for no purpose, respect,
nor end did so will, how then came their destruction to pass? By sin, say
you, that we deny not. but yet the question is not answered. For continually
we demand, if in God there was not power, either to have impeded their sin, or
yet after their sin to have called them to repentance, if it had so pleased
his eternal wisdom, and goodness Consider your folly, and give glory to God,
who does what so ever he will in heaven and in earth. But now to that which
follows.

For he will the death of no creature but will all men to be saved, and to come
to the knowledge of the truth.

How violently you wrest the words of the Prophet, Answer
and of the Apostle shall shortly appear, after I have reasoned a little with
you, how these your propositions do agree with that which goes before. Ye have
affirmed that God is ready to mercy, and slow to wrath, in which words you
show: and confess, that in the God head there is readiness to show mercy, and
also that there is a justice, wc must execute wrath upon the disobedient. And
so in the nature of ye God head ye confess mercy ad justice. But here you say
that God will the death of no creature, but that he will all men to be saved.
which last words being understand as ye do urge them, must destroy the former
nature of God, and take away his justice. For if he absolutely will the death
of no creature, then will he no punishment to follow sin. And if he will no
punishment, then wills he his justice to cease, and so consequently must one
of the properties of his godly nature cease. Study for an answer, to make
your former words, and latter words better agree, orels ye will be compelled to
confess, that God for some respect wills both death and damnation to come
upon some creatures. Further if God wills all men to be saved, and to come to
the knowledge of the truth, and yet many do per^sh in ignorance, and shall be
condemned as Christ Jesus does pronounce: then must it either follow that gods
will is mutable, and so he unconstant, and not at all times like to him self,
or else that he is not omnipotent. For if God at the first creation of man, would
all men to be saved (as ye allege) then would I know, when this will was
changed. After that man had offended, say you. Then yet have I obtained, that
in gods will there was mutabilitie. For after sin he would, and by his
sentence pronounced, that Adam, and his posterity should suffer the corporal
death, yea and that the sede of the serpent should have the head broken down,
by the which is meant the spiritual death, which nether of both (as you
affirm) did God will before. If you reply gods will toward the salvation of
all mankind, did remain the same after sin, which was before: for a general
promise of deliverance was made, by the woman's sede that was promised.

I have before plainly proved, Answer
that difference most manifest betwext y^ two seeds was made in that promise.
But admitting that the promise had been general, and so that the will of God
this day remains the same which ye allege it to be: to wit, that he wills
ye death of no sinner, but that he wills al men to be saved. Can you deny,
but that a separation, and division of the sheep, from the goats, of the elect
from the reprobate, shall be made at the glorious commi^g of ye Lord Jesus? Shall
not these most joyful words be said unto the^ yt shall stand upon the right
hand: Come ye the blessed of my father, possess the kingdom which was
prepared for you from the beginning? And shall not this most fearful sentence
be pronounced, and executed against the other? Depart ye cursed, go to the fire
prepared for the devil, and for his angels? Shall the Son of God in
pronouncing sentence, do any thing that day repugning to the will of his
heavenly Father? I think you will not so affirm. Then if gods will in the day
of judgment shall be that many shall be adjudged to torment perpetual, and his
will in the creation of man was, and this day yet remains, that all men
shall be saved, then of necessity it does follow that gods will shall change. If
you say that death, and damnation comes not by gods will, but by the sin,
and unbelief of man, you have releued your self nothing. for if death be one
thing, and life be an other, damnation one thing, and salvation an other. The^
if God this day will all men to be saved, and so to have life, and yet that day
he shall will many to be damned to torment perpetual (what causes so ever you
allege) I shall obtain one of two, to wit, that either gods will is, and may
be mutable, orels that there is a power superior to his majesty, and godly
will. For if willingly he shall damn those, whom before he would, and had
determined to save, then is his will, and determination changed. And if he
shall damn those unwillingly, who^ willingly he would have saved, then is he
not omnipotent. Consider now upon whom falls the snow, and who do cast them
selves in greatest absurdities. Now it rests to declare how violently ye
wrest the words of the Prophet, and of the Apostle. The Prophet speaking in
the person of God, says, I will not the death of a sinner, but rather that
he convert, and live. And the Apostle affirms that God will all men to be
saved and to come to the knowledge of the truth. Hereupon ye conclude, God
will the death of no creature, this is your first violence, which you do to the
text. For the Prophet says not: I will the death of no creature, but says* I
will not the death of a sinner. Ye are not ignorant^ suppose, what difference
there is betwext an vniuer sa^^ negative, and an indefinite, or particulare.
Where ye say God wills the death of no creature, ye speak generally, and
universally excepting none. But so does not the Prophet, for he says not, I
will the death of no creature, nether yet I will the death of no sinner, but
simply says: I will not the death of a sinner. I wonder that ye consider not,
that as there is difference betwext creatures, and creature, so that also there
is difference betwe^^ sinners, and sinner. Some creatures are appointed (...)
death, for the use, and sustentation of man. And dare yo^ say, that this is
done against gods will? we be taught the contrary by his own mouth. If you
correcting your generality shall say, that you mean only that God will the
death of no man. And I fear not yet to join with you, and against you to
affirm: that God has willed, does will, and shall will the death of some men.
The holy Ghost speaking of the sons of Heli the high Priest, 1. Reg. 2
says: But they did not hear the voice of their Father, because the Lord would
kill them. And Moises says, Sihon king of Hesbon would not suffer us to pass
through his cuntrie, Deu. 2
for the Lord thy God did harden his mind, and strengthen his heart, yt he
shoule give him into thy hands. How often does Moses, and Joshua declare unto
the people, that God would kill, root out and destroy those wicked nations
from besore the face of his people? And were all those kings, whom Joshua did
kill, killed against gods will? The holy Ghost affirms the contrary: For it
is written, the Lord did trouble them before Israel, and he did strike them
with a great slaughter. And while that they did flee before the Israelites, and
were in the descense of Bethoron, the Lord cast down upon them from heaven
great stones, and many more perished by the hail stones, the^ were slain
with the swerd of the children of Israel. If the destruction, slaughter, and
death of these wicked men, and of the great host of Senacherib was not the
will of God, I can not tell how man shall be assured of his will. For the plain
word did before promise, that the Lord should destroy them, and the fact does
witness the consta^cie, and perfourmance of his will. and the same thing does
God this day, and shall do to the end of the world, when he shall adiudge the
reprobate, (as before is said) to the death perpetual: and that not against
his will, but willingly, for the manifestation of his just judgments, and
declaration of his own glory. And therefore I say that your prosition
(saying, God wills the death of no creature) is manifestly falls, as it that
repugneth to gods justice, ^^e. 18
and to his evident scriptures. The mind of the Prophets was to stir such
as had declined from God, to return unto him by true repentance. And because
their iniquities were so many, and offenses so great, that justly they might
have despaired of remission, mercy, and grace: therefore does the Prophet for
the better assurance of those that should repent, affirm, that God deliteth
not, nether wills the death of the wicked. But of which wicked? of him no
doub^e that truly should repent, in his death did not, nor never shall God
delight. But he deliteth to be known a God, that shows mercy grace, and
favor to such, as unfeignedly call for the same, how grievous so ever their
former offenses have been. But such as continue obstinate in their impiety,
have no portion of these promises. For them will God kill, them will he
destroy, and them will he thrust by ye power of his word in to the firewhich
never shall be quenched. The Apostle in these words: God wills all me^ to be
saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth speaks not of every man,
and of every particulare person. But of all men in general, that is to say,
of men of all estates, all conditions, all realms, and all ages. For as in
Christ Jesus there is nether Jew, nor Gentile, nether man, nor woman, free
man^ nor servant, but all are one in him, so can no estate, no condition of
man, no realm, nor no age be proved so wicked, and so corrupt, but out of the
like has God called some to the participation of his light, and to salvation,
and life by Christ Jesus. and that this is the very natural meaning of the
holy Ghost, the tex^e it self does witness. For the Apostle immediately before
wills prayers, and supplications to be made for all men, for Kings, and for
all that were placed in authority. And because that the Church was chiefly
oppressed by such, this doubt might have risen: Are we then bound to pray for
those that are express, and coniured ennemies against God? You are, says the
Apostle: for that is good, and acceptable before God our Savior, who will all
men to be saved. That is, God wills you to pray for your persecuters, that
their eyes may be opened, and they converted to the living God: who no doubt
will save some of all estates, of all conditions and vocatio^s of men. For the
nations are given to Christ Jesus by inheritance: Kings shall be the feders of
the Church: Queen's shall be nurses: And in his holy temple, shall all sing
praise. If this interpretation (which we doubt not to be the very meaning of
the holy Ghost, ca^ not satisfy you. Then will I ask of you. If God will men
otherwise to be saved then by Christ Jesus? or as the Apostle speaks, by
coming to the knowledge of the verity? Plain it is, that by the words of
the Apostle ye ca^ conclude none otherwise. For as he says God will all men to
be saved, so does he add, and wills all men to come to the knowledge of the
verity. Which word (wills) albeit it be not expressedly repeted in the
second member, yet of necessity, it must be understand, as those that be but
meanly seen in the greek, or latin tongue do evidently see. Then if I shall
sufficiently prove, that God wills not all men, to come to the knowledge of
the verity, in such sort, as the Apostle means, shall it not infallablye
follow, that God will not all men to be saved, in such sense as you understand.
That God wills not all men to come to the knowledge of that verity, by the
which man is verily made free from the bondage of satan, is evident, not only
by those whom we do see walk in darkness, and ignorance, but also by the
manifest srriptures of God. who called Abraham, making to him, and to his sede
the promise, of salvation, saying: I will be thy God, and the God of thy sede
after thee which promise he kept secret many ages from the rest of the world.
When he did notify his law unto Israel, and when Moses did repete the same, he
said: Behold I have laid before you this day life, Deu. 30
and death, benediction, and execration, chose therefore life, that thou, and
thy sede may live. If God would that all men, and all nations indifferently
should come to the same knowledge, why were not the laws, statutes, and
judgments of God made manifest to others, as they were to Israel? And if you
answer that so they were. the holy Ghost shall co^uict you of a li^. For he
affirms, that God had not done so to all nations, and that his judgments he
had not reveled, nor made known unto them. But if that plain division made by
God him self betwext Jew, and Ge^tile, during the time of the law, does not
fully satisfy you. Hear yet the sentence of our Master Christ Jesus, who
says to his disciples: To you it is given to understand the secrets of the
kingdom, but unto others in parables, that having eyes they should not see. And
yt most plainly in that his solemned th^^ckes giving, he says: I praise the o
father for you have hid these things from the prudent, and from the wise, but
you have reveled them to little ones. If God would have had the true knowledge of
him self, and of his Son Christ Jesus common to all, why should Christ him
self affirm yt to some it was given, and to others it was not given? to some
it was reue^ed, and from others it was hid? And therefore seeing it is plain
yt God will not give his true knowledge to all (yea to some he does never offer
it) ye shall never be able to prove that God will all men to be saved. For the
only means to atteine to salvation, and to life, is to know, and embrace God
to be our mer^ifull father in Christ Jesus, to wc knowledge who so ever does
not atteine (I mean of those yt come to ye years and age of discretion) can
have no assurance to be saved. This were sufficient to co^uict you, even in
your own conscience. For albeit malice will not suffer you to give place to ye
plain verity, yet shall the weight thereof so oppress your pride that when
you do open your mouth against it, ye^ shall ye be witnesses even against yor
selves. But yet for the cause of my simple brethere^ I will add two things
first, how all such places, as either make a general promise of salvation to all,
or yet that do pronounce gods wrath against all, must be understand.
Secondarely, what sinners they are, wose death God will not. For the first I
say, that who so ever does deny that from the beginning there has been, this
day are, and to ye end^ shall remain two armies, bands, or companies of men,
whom God in his eternal counsel has so divided, that betwext the^ there
continues a batt^ll, wc never shall be reconciled, until the Lord Jesus put a
final end to the miseries of his Church: who does not understand the truth
of this (I say) does nether know God, nether his Son Christ Jesus: nether yet
do such, believe his word, in wc, both ye one sort, and ye other, are most
manifestly expressed. The one of these Armies, is called the Church of God the
elect Spouse of Christ Jesus, ye sheep appointed to slaughter, the kingly
priesthode, the sons of God, and the people redeemed. by ancient writtets it
is termed the city of God. The other is called the sinagoge of satan, the
church malignant, cruel, deceat full, and bloodthirstie wolves, Progeny of
vipers, sons of the devil, workers of iniquity, and such as worship the
beast, and his image. And according to the diverse natures, conditions, and
ends of these two companies, does the scripture pronounce general sentences,
and universal propositions, which not withstanding must be restreined to those
of whom the holy Ghost means. For nether justly may those sentences spoken of
gods elect, be referred to the reprobate, nether yet such as be spoken of the
reprobate sort, be rightly applied to the elect, except it be for terrifying
of their conscience, and that only for a ceason. as Christ Jesus called Peter
sathanas: and Nathan called David the Son of death, I will adduce examples of
the one sort, and of the other^ that the matter may be more evident. The Prophet
Isai (which place also our Master alleges) speaking of gods elect children,
Esa. 54
says: John 6
They shall all be taught of God, and they shall know me from the least to the
greatest. Iocl.
I shall power forth of my spirit, Act.
on all flesh. All flesh shall see the salvation of God. The Lord raises up
all that fall. All the inhabitants of the earth shall learn justice. Psalm.
All men shall come out of Saba. Isa. ^6
All thy people shable just. I shall comfort all that mourn. Isa. 6^
You be all the Sons of God ye be all the Sons of light. These, and many mo
places, Gala. 3
which be universally spoken, must be restreyned to gods children only, who be
elected in Christ Jesus. 1. These. 5^
For those that be with out his body, are nether taught of God, nether yet know
they God, in such sort as the Prophet there means. Into them is never powered
the spirit of sanctification: They give never unto God true honor, and glory:
They nether learn justice, nether yet are they just: They are not the sonnnes
of God by adoption, nether yet the sons of light, whose works shine before
men to the praise of our heavenly father. But remain ignorant, profane,
idolaters, filthy persons, replenished with darckenes, as the sons of the
devil. And therefore can not these former sentences, which apperteine to gods
children only, be rightly spoken, or pronounced of the reprobate. Psalm. 21
Of the other sort, it is said: All that see me have mocked me, they put forth
their tongues, they shake their heads. These words spoke David in the person
of Christ, and yet God forbid, that we should think that all (without
exception) did so mock, and jest at Christ, no, not even in his greatest
extremity. For some, we read, stood beside his cross with sorrowful hearts.
Some returned, giving open confession that he was the Son of God. And the
thief began to be a preacher, eue^ when others did most dispitefully rail. And
therefore where it is said: all that saw me, did mock me, that generality
must be restreined to those enraged dogs, the Priests, Scribes, wicked
soldiers, and most unthankful people, who of very malice did deny, and
crucify their Lord, and Messiah, that was promised* Isai, and Jeremy,
speaking of the destruction of Jerusalem, and of the causes of the same, Isa: 31
say: I shall consume you all at once, and ye shall all be ashamed, by a people
that shall not profit you, Isa. 56
They have all followed their own ways. Every man gapeth for bribes. Why will
ye contend with me, ye have all declined from me. Iere. 1
From the least to the most, Iere. 6
every one is bent upon avarice they are all traitors, they are all (I say)
traitors, every brother deceaueth another. All men contemn me, all men hold
me in execration. Iere. 15
If these, and other like places shall be understand so universally, as they
appear to be spoken, then must we be compelled to say, that no true fearer of
God remained in Jerusalem, when the Prophets did preach, but that all were
blood thirsty, all auaricious, all idolaters, and all dumme dogs: the
contrary whereof is evidently declared. For Isai had the children whom the Lord
had given unto him, who albeit they were holden as monsters among men yet, did
they patientlye abide the Lord. Jeremy had Baruch his faithful, scribe not
withstanding his weakness, and infirmity. Abedmelech feared the Lord, was
favorable to the Prophet, and therefore saved he his soul for a pray, and
was delivered from that day of vengeance. And therefore these universal
sentences must also be restreyned, and kept within their own bounds, 2. Ti. 4
like as these: All have left me, all seek the things, that apperteine unto
them selves, and not those things that be of God. Which sentences (except they
be restreined) we shall condemn the dearest children of God, who in Paul's
days did valia^tly fight against the prince of this world. These examples of
the one sort, and of the other I have adduced, to let the simple understand,
that such general sentences of necessity, must be so restreined, that
difference may be kept betwext the elect, and the reprobate. For else we shall
do nothing in explaning scriptures, but confound light, with darcknes. For if
the words of our Master Christ Jesus saying: The wicked be not taught of God.
All shall be taught of God, shall be so generally understand, that no exception be
admitted, then of necessity it is, that all men, and every person shall come
to the true knowledge of Christ Jesus* for of that knowledge does he speak in
that place. But the contrary thereof is most evident, even by Christ Jesus
his own words, God will not the death of a sinner explaned,
who puts a plain difference betwext them, that be given to him by his
father, and betwext them, that be not given. But now let us briefly consider,
what sinners, they are whose death God will not, but rather hat they convert
and live. Saint Ihon in his Epistle says: If we say, 1. John. 1
we have no sin we deceive our selves, and the verity is not in us. If we
confess our sins, 1. John 3
he is faithful and just, to remitte to us our sins, and to cleanse us from
all unrighteousness etc. And after: Who soever commiteth sin transgresses
also y^ law, for sin is the transgression of the law. And ye know yt he is
reveled to take away our sins, and in him is no sin. As many as bide in him
(yt is in Chriiste Jesus) sin not: who soever sins has not seen him nether
has known him etc. He yt commits sin is of the devil, for the devil
sins from ye beginning etc. who soever is borne of God committeh not sin,
for his sede abides in him nether can he sin, because he is borne of God. Of
wc words it is evident, yt there be two sorts of sinners, the one be they who
mourn, lament, and bewail their own wretchedness, and misery unfeignedly
before God, confessing not only that their hole nature is sinful, and
corrupt, but also yt daily they so offend ye Majesty of their God, yt most
justly they deserve the torments of hell, if Christ's justice, and Christ's
mediation (wc by faith they embrase) should not deliver them from the wrath to
come. To these is not sin imputed. for ye blood of Christ purges them from
all sin, his aduocation, and intercession, makes to the^ an entrance to the
throne of their fathers grace. To the^ is given the spirit of sanctification,
wc from time, to time, as it reueleth their sins so does it mortify, and
purge the same. Not that ever in this life gods elect has been, are, or shall be
so clean purged from sin, yt the flesh lusts not against the spirit, as
some times affirmed the Pellagians, and those that then were called Cathari,
that is clean purged, and now also do the Anabaptists renew the same most
pestilent error: by the which Christ Jesus his justice, his office, and
perpetual mediation, is utterly destroyed: in such sort I say are not gods
children purged in this life, that nether they feel sin, nether yet the
motions, and entiseme^tes of the same. But they are so purged y^ sin reigns
not in their mortal bodies. for the sede of God, which is the virtue power,
efficacy, and operation of his holy spirit suffers them not to delight in
sin: but as they are first called from darcknes to light and from the bondage
of satan, to the liberty of gods children, so when they sin (as there is
none that sins not) they are called again by true repentance to their
former society and fellowship with Christ Jesus. The death of such sinners did
God never will, nether yet can he will. for from all eternity they were his
elect children, whom he gave to his dear Son, to be his enherita^ce, whom
the Son received into his protection, and sauegard, to whom he has
manifested, and to the end, shall manifest him self, and the loving kinds of
his heavenly father: In whose hearts he writes the law of God, and makes
them to walk in his commandementes, ^uer thirsting to a further, and more
perfect justice then they find within them selves by reason of their
corruption. The death I say of those sinners God will not, but he will that
they repent, and live. The Apostle saint Peter says: 2. Pet. 3
The Lord that has promised, is not slow, but he is long suffering toward us,
while that he will none to perish, but will receive all to repentance. The
Apostle here means not, yt al, without exception, shall be received to life by
true repentance, but yt the cause why God so long deferreth (as it were) ye
extreme judgment, is, y^ the electnomber of gods children may be complete, (as
answer was given to those y^ cried under the altar to be revenged upon the
tyrannes that dwell on the earth) of these his elect children, God will none to
perish, as before is said. But there is an another sort of sinners far
different from these. For nether are they displeased with the^ selves, nether yet
hate they iniquity, but against gods express co^mandementes furiously they
run with Cain to murder the innocent, with Pharao to oppress the people of
God, with Judas to betray the known, and professed verity: and finally so
delight they in all filthiness, and impiety, that they can not repent. The eyes
of such be blinded, their hearts are hardened, they are given over in to a
reprobate mind. And for the^ does not Christ Jesus pray, and therefore they
can do nothing but headlonges run from evil to worse, as the devil (to
whose tyranny they are committed) does drive them, till finally they come to
perdition: which end was appointed unto them not against gods will, but by his
will ^mmutable in his eternal counsel. For no less will he, that the
severity of his judgments be seen in the vessels of wrath, the^ that the
riches of his grace be praised in the vessels of mercy. Storm, and rage, spew
forth your venom, and blaspheme till ye provoke gods vengeance at once to be
powered forth upon your own heads, this sentence will he never retracte: He
will have mercy, upon whom he will have mercy, and whom he will, To the. 6
he makes hard hearted. That God in him self has but one will, which is
holy, just, and permanent, that in him there is no contraritie: that he is
faithful; and does perform what soever he does promise. What we understand
by gods secret will, and how he tempteh no man, I have before sufficiently
declared. And therefore, I will not truble the reader with the repetitio^ of
the same. Now let us hear what is your judgment of us, and how ye extolle
your selves.

THE ADVERSARY.
As these gods be of contrary nature so do they begette children of a
contrary nature, The 46. section.
the false God begetteh unmerciful proud ambicrouse, and enuifull children,
bloody persecutors of others for their conscience saik, evil speakers
^mpacient, contenciouse and seditious children. And they

The true God begets merciful, humble, lowlye, and loving children,

ANSWER.
It may seem by the description of these your two gods (for nether of both,
as ye describe them, is the true living, and eternal God) that ye study to
renew the damnable error of the Manichies, who imagined two beginners, the one
of all goodness, and of all good creatures, the other of all iniquity, and of
wicked creatures: affirming further that the good, and the merciful God was
overcome for a time, by him that was wicked, and evil. And because that the
plain scriptures did confute these blasphem^es, therefore did they deny the
authority of Moises, and the certentie of all other scriptures that made any
thing against their error. If manifestly ye did take upon you the defense of
those your fathers, as that ye do of Pellagius, of Donatus, and of the Papists
(for of all these adulterous fathers, ye be adulterous children) then would I
from Augustine (whom God stirred up no doubt in the days of darckenes most
learnedly, and most plainly by infallible scriptures to cofute those heresies)
from him, I say I might take artilerie all ready prepared, able enough to
overthrow your buildinges, and munitions, appear they never so strong. But
because (as before I have said) my purpose is not to burden you further, then
you do confess: I only admonish the reader to be ware of such pestilences, as
begin to call the truth of God reveled in his holy word, in doubt, and do
persuade men to credit dreams, and revelations, how soever they appear to
repugne to that which is reveled in the word. Of such men I say* oght Christ's
flock to take heed, as also of those who make of eguall authority such books,
as yet the holy Ghost has never commended to the Church of Christ, with these
that are written by Moises, the Prophets, the Evangelists, and Apostles, and
that by inspiration of the holy Ghost. That some of you be infected with this
most pestilent poison, I am able to prove by mo arguments then one. Being at
London the the winter before the death of king Edward, one* of your faction
required secret communication of me, in which after that earnestly he had
required of me closenes, and fidelity, because that the matters that he had to
communicate with me, were so weighty, and of such importance, as sythence the
days of the Apostles, the like was never opened unto man. In the end, after
many words (which I nether gladly heard, nether yet will now write) he gave me
a book, written (as he said) by God, even as well as was any of the
Eua^gelistes. This his book he adjured me (as it were) to read, and required
to have my judgment of it. My answer was, that at his request I would read it,
so that he would be content to reason with me of the chief points in the same
contained, but to pronounce sentence, or judgment, that could I not usurp,
being but one man far inferior to many of my brethern, ye preachers of gods
word in that realm. Always he urged me to read his book. And I wo^dering
what mysteries it should co^teine, called to me a faithful brother, who then
(as pleased God) was present with me, named Henry Farrour marcha^t, to whom I
opened the matter by whose counsel, and in whose presence I began to read
his book. The first proposition whereof was: God made not the world, nether yet
the wicked creatures, in the same contained, but they had their beginning from
a another, that is from the devil, who is called the Prince of the world. which
proposition plainly repugning, to gods word, I did impugn, and began to
declare unto him, for what cause Satan had that title, to be called the Prince
of ye world. But he utterly denying either to reason, and dispute, either yet to
be reformed in any point that there was written, comma^nded me to read
forward, and to believe, howbeit I did not understand. To whom, when I had
gentilly said: Can any reasonable man will me to believe things directly
fighting against gods verity, and plain word reveled? Tusch said he, for your
written word, we have as good, and as sure a word, and verity, that teaches
us this doctrine, as ye have for you, and your opinion. And the^ I did more
sharply answer saing: ye deserve the death, as a blasphemous person, and
denier of God, if ye prefer any word to that which the holy Ghost has uttered
in his plain scriptures. At which words he took pepper in nose, and snatching
his book forth of my hand departed after he had thus spoken: I will goo to the
end of the world, but I will have my book confirmed, and subscribed with
better learned men then you be. In me I confess there was great negligence,
that nether did retain his book, nether yet did present him to the Magistrate.
But yet this argument I have, that your faction is not altogether clean from
the heresy of the Manichies. I could name, and point forth others, who labor
in the same disease: but so long as their venom does remain secret, within
them selves, I am purposed to spare the^. But now yt you accuse us to be
unmerciful, proud, ambicious, and envious children, bloody persecuters of
others for their conscience sake, evil speakers, impatie^t, contentious, and
seditious children, that we speak one thing with our mouths, and think
another in our ^eartes. And that ye extolle your selves, that ye are merciful,
humble, and loving children, abhorring from blood, persecuting noman, good
speakers, pacient, and detesting all contention: That you be all ways moved
with good thoghtes, and godly reuelatio^s, for such grace receive you
plenteonsly of your father. To the which I briefly answer, that because we
have a just judge, who shall reuele the secrets of all hearts, we will rather
sustain to be of you, unjustly accused, then become proud braggers of our own
justice, as you be, wc sin is so odious in gods presence yt he has never
suffered it unpunished, eue^ before men. Forty years and more has ye Eua^gile
of Christ Jesus been preached in Germany, in Heluetia, and now of latter
years in Geneua. and so long has this doctrine been taught of some, and has
been believed of many, but what cruelty, what murder or what sedition, can
justly be laid to the charge of those, that most constantly have taught and
maintained ye same? let the world convict them. And how far their life
abhors from pride, ambition, and filthiness has God witnessed, and to this
day does witness, how so ever Satan does blind your eyes. But sone after that
God had sown his good sede, began the devil to sow the cockell, and darnell,
I mean the pestilent sect of anabaptists, whose fruits did sodeinly appear
to the great slander of Christ's Euangill, and to the grief of many godly
hearts. Brag what ye list of your justice, of yor mercy, of your godly
revelations, and other such, ye are the brethern, mainteiners, and children of
those in whom the contrary was plainly found: your doctrine and theirs, are
both one. and therefore of you can we look for none other fruit (unless that God
restrein your fury) the^ your fathers have once produced before you. And that
the readers shall not be ignorant, what it was, I have added this History,
written by that most faithful, and notable witness of things done in matters of
religion, sithence the beginning of the Empire of Charles the fifte until the
year of 1556, which History I add (as God, I take to record) of no private
malice, which I bear against any person, but only that the world may see,
what was your original, how unjustly ye accuse us of such crimes, as
impudently you lay to our charge, and how justly all men oght to fear that
confusion which ye intend, if God be times overthrow not your enterprises. The
History Historia Sle^dani libro 5.
and your original is this.

There is a town named Alstet, in the borders of Turingia, under the dominion
of the Duke of Saxo^ Elector, to the which town came one Thomas Muncer, who
began first to teach not only against the Pope, but also against Luther,
affirming both their doctrines to be corrupted, and vnpure: that the Pope bound
men's consciences with to streit laws, and bands: again, that Luther lowsed
those bands, but yet finned on the contrary part, in giui^g to much
liberty, and in preaching those things, that were not of the spirit. He
taught also that it was lawful to despise the popes decrees, because they were
of no force to bring us to salvation, which to atteine unto (said he) most
chiefly yt we should avoid all manifest iniquities, as murder, adultery, and
blaspheming of the name of God, that the body should be chastised and brought
low with fasting, and simple clothing, that men oght to fashion their
countenance to look sadly, The hypocrisi^ of the Anabaptistas.
and gravely, that they should speak but seldom, and that they oght to norish
their beardes. These things and such like, he called the cross, the
mortification of the flesh, and discipline. After they are thus furnished, and
prepared (said he) they oght to haunt solitary places, out of men's
compagnie, and often to think of God, what manner a one he is, whether he have
any care of us or no, If Christ suffered for us, If our religion were not to
be preferred to the Turks religion. And that we should ask a sign of God to
assure us that he takes care for us, and that we stand in the true religion.
If he show not some sign immediately, yt we should nevertheless go forward,
praying insta^tly, yea and vehemently quarreling with God, as if he did us not
right. That seeing it is his will, as the scripture teaches us, to give to
those that ask, he does injury in not giving a sign to him that desires the
true knowledge of him. This kind of ^^iding, and anger he said, to be very
acceptable unto God. because that by it he might perceive the fervent
inclination of our minds. And that he would undoubtedly (if in this m^ner we
did solicit him) declare him self by some manifest sign, that he would quench
the thirst of our mi^des. And deal with us, as he did in times past, with our
fathers. This also he taught, yt God reveled his will by dreams, and that he
laid in them the foundation of his purpose. And if it chanced that any man's
dream might be interpreted, him he highly extolled openly before the
assembly. And when by this means he had gotten many on his side, by little,
and little, he came to the same, which he went about alitle before: and in the
forenamed town he began to regester their names which (being of his
co^fideracie) were sworn to aid him, in slaying the wicked Princes, and
magistrates, and in placing new in their rowmes. For he said that he had
received that commandment of God, to take them away and to constitute new. So
long as he spoke but of dreams, and such other like things, Friderike duke of
Saxo^ did bear with him, especially because Luther by leters required him so
to do. but when he began to preach sediciously, he was banished, who (after he
had lurked in corners certain months) came to Noriberge, and being also thrust
from thence, alitle after he came to Milhusium a town of Turingia. For when he
was at Alstet he had entised to him some of the citizens by whose help he
obtained the office of teaching. And because the magistrates lyked him not, he
raised a tumult amongst the people, whereby new magistrates were created. This
was ye beginning of trouble. after these things the townsmen cast out the
monks, and invaded their houses, whereof the chiefest and richest fell to
Muncers lotte, who now played both the preacher, and the magistrate. For
judgment (said he) should be give by the revelation of God, and of the
scripture. And o^ all other things he gave sentence, as it pleased him: for
whatsoever he said, it seemed to them most holy. That their goods should be in
common, he said, was most agreeable to humanity. That all oght to be equal in
dignity, all men should be free, and that all their goods should be used
indifferently, as well of one, as of an other. Whereby the common people began
to leave of labor, and to be idle, and what thing soever any lacked, that yt
they took by violence from other yt abou^ded. These manners he used for a space
and when the common people, and husband men were in armor through Sueuia, and
Franconia to the number of forty thousand, and had destroyed the greatest part
of their nobility, and had pulled down, and burned many Castles, and towers:
the^ put he to his hand also thinking that ye most convenient time to bring
his purpose to pass. And making inginnes of war in the gray friars church,
the greater part of the people he brought forth of ye cu^trie, in hope of a
pray, and of more wealth. He had a companion of marvelous audacitie who was of
all his counsel, whose name was Phifer. this man attributed much to dreams,
and visions of the night: and amongst other things he chanced to boast, that
he saw in his sleep in a certain stable a marvelous great multitude of mise and
that he did drive them all away. By which dream he understood, that God
commanded him to take his armor, and go forth with an army to destroy all the
nobility. But Muncer althugh he preached vehemently to the people, yet was he
some what colder, nether listed he to adventure the prosperous estate, that he
was in already, before al they that were about him were in armor. And to bring
the matter more easily to pass, he sent leters to the workeme that dug for
metalles in the cu^trie of Mansfeld, earnestly admonishing them to fall upon
the Princes, without doubting of the matter, for it should come to pass that
they which were in a readiness in Franconia shall come nerer to Turingia. In the
mean time Phifer that loved not to linger long in any matter, went out with his
men, and destroyed the cuntrie of Isfeld adjacent unto them, he spoiled the
Castles and temples, destroyed many of the nobles, and took certain of them
prisoners, whom he bound in chains. After he returned home with a great
pray. Whose prosperous success encouraged greatly the hearts of the common
people, especially because the countries also about them were up, and had
invaded the cuntrie of Mansfeld. So Muncer (thinking now that all men's hearts
had failed them on (...)) came with 300. men to Mulhusium, and joined him self
to the Fra^cusians. At that same time died Friderike Duke of Saxon without
issue (for he lived a sole life) whose successor was Ihon his brother germane.
While these things were in doing, Albert the county of Mansfeld gathered
(with all expedition) a company of horsemen, and violently coming upon them,
he slew 300, wherewith they being feared, durst proceed no further, but fled to
Francusium, where they tarried waiting for a greater army. whereby only their
assaute was deferred. In the time of this delay the Princes that were there
about, gathered horsemen, to the number of a fiftene hundred, but no great
multitude of footmen. These were the Princes of Saxon, Ihon Elector, George
his cousin germane, Philippe Lantgraue of Hesse, and Henri Duke of Brunswicke.
The bowres (that is husband men) remained upon a hill not far from
Francusium, who had gathered their carts, and set them so nigh together, to
fence them withal, that with much difficulty, could they be come unto. But
they were nether well furnished with harnes, nether yet with ordinance, and
they were all for the most part inexpert in the feats of war, wherewith the
Princes were so moved to compassion, that they sent messingers to exhort them
to deliver the authors of the sedition, to lay away their weapons, and to
depart home without hurt. But Muncer, Mu^cers fa^s and ora^tie ^ration.
considering his own danger, came forth into the assembly, and with grave
coutenance, said: Ye brethern, and fellow soldiers do see tyra^nes not far
from you, who although they have conspired against us to take away our lives,
yet are they of so small a courage, that they dare entreprise nothing against
us. They offer foolish, and fond conditions to the intent to spoil you of yor
armor. And now, it is manifest to you all, that I began this deed, but not of
any private authority of my own (nether did I ever go about such a thing) but
by the commandment of God, which thing being so, it becomes both me, and you
to obey, and not once to move out of this place, wherein God himself has set
us, who in times past commanded Abraham to offer his son, whose precept
without resistance Abraham obeyed, albeit he was ignorant what should come of
it. And therefore did God both preserve his son, and also highly rewarded his
faith. in like manner oght we (which are in the same state) to persevere,
committi^g the issue unto God. for without doubt, all things shall be even as
we would have it. Ye your selves shall behold the manifest help of God, and who
so ever is our ennemie, him shall we suppress on every side. Nether is it in
one place of the scripture only, where God promises succor to the afflicted,
and to destroy the wicked. This promise most assuredly apperteineth unto us.
for we are poor, and in misery, and because we desire to retain and publish
the knowledge of God, there is no doubt, but that we shall overcome, and be
conquerors. On the other side let us consider the condition of our ennemies,
I confess they are called Princes, but in deed they be tyra^nes, nether have
they any care of you at all, but devour all men's goods, and spend them most
wickedly. In that people which sometime God chose peculiarly unto him self, he
ordained that kings should not spend any time in waste, yea he commanded that
they should look diligently in the book of the laws, which he had given them.
But what do our tyrannes? or how are they occupied? They think the commonwealth
is no part of their charge: they know nothing of poor men's causes, they care
not for justice, they suffer the ways to be besette with thieves, they punish
not robbers, nether any other vice, they help not the widow, nether yet the
fatherles. They look not to the good education of youth. As for the honoring of
gods Name, they do not only the^ selves neglect it, but also they hinder it
Thus only they apply to draw all men's goods to them selves: and therefore do
they every day devise new ways to get money by extortio^. Nether set they
their minds upon defending or mainteining of peace, but that (being enriched
above measure) they may abound in all kind of riotte, and pride. It is to
manifest how great tumultes, and wars they raise for very light, and foolish
causes: whereby all that remains to the poor people is lost, and destroyed.
Behold these are the excellent virtues, and policies of your noble princes,
wherein they exercise them selves. Therefore let none think, that God will suffer
those things any longer, but rather persuade him self assuredly, that as God
did once destroy the Cananites, so will he now also these. For though all these
things, which I have recited before, were tolerable, thinck you that they
shall escape unpunished for defending, and mainteining that most execrable
impiety of the popish preachers? Who is ignorant how great iniquity is in
the bying, and selling of Masses? I will say nothing of the rest. Surely as
Christ drove out the buyers, and sellers, out of the church, so shall he now
also root out the priests, with their patrones, and companions: be strong
therefore, and to grati^ie God, slay all this unprofitable multitude. To make
peace with them I can see no way honest, safe or sure enough: for they will
nether leave of their purpose, nether restore us to liberty, nether permit
the true worshipping of God. and it were better for us to die* then to allow
their iniquity, and to suffer our selves to be spoiled of the doctrine of ye
Gospel. I promise you assuredly that God shall prosper us* and that the
victory shall be ours. For he him self promised me to my face, even he I say
that can not deceive, nor lie, commanded me to begin this work on this
manner, by punishing the Magistrates, and in ded^ the power of God, herein
appears most excellent, when a great multitude of ennemies is slain by a
small hand. To let many other things pass, ye know what Gedeon brought to
pass with a f^aw: what Ionathas did accompanied with one poor servant only:
what David did when he fought alone against that monster Golias of huge
stature, who for his height was even terrible to look on. There is no doubt,
but this day in like manner shall be notable, and had in remembrance of all
posterities for the like spectacle. For although we seem not to be well
fournished with weapons, nor fensed as it apperteineth, yet shall we have the
victory. And this workmanship of heaven, and earth shall rather be changed,
then that we shall be forsaken of God. for so in times past was the nature of the
sea changed, that the Israelites might escape danger, when of Pharao they were
pursewed: let not the judgment of your own reason move you, nether let any
apperance of shadow of danger trouble you, but valiantly invade the wicked, and
ungodly ennemie, never let their eng^^es of w^rre make you afraid, for I will
receive in the l^ppe of my garment al ye gunstones. Behold se you not h^w
merciful God is unto us* Look up I beseech you, and mark well the sign, and
testimony of his perpetual love toward us: Lift up your eyes, and see me the
bow of heaven, by the which image showed us from above, God signifies to us
most manifestly, that he will assist us in this battle: for as much as we have
the same bow painted in our enseigne, and he shows also by the very same,
death, and destruction to our tyrannes. Therefore fall upon your ennemies with a
lusty courage, having an assured hope that God will help you. For God will
not that ye should make peace with the wicked adversaries. When he had made an
e^d of exhorting his soldiers, who nevertheless (for the most part) trembled
for the greatenes of the present danger. But all things were done in a hurley
burley, without any certain rule, or order. Moreover there were some of a
desperate audacitie, ready to put to their hands to every mischeuous act:
these of their own nature enclining to work meschief, were the^ more set on
fire by his oration. but chieflly they were moved by the rainebow, which stood
in the element (as it is said before) and that took they for a most sure sign
of victory, And this also helped them, that they were a great number, about
eight thousand men, and that the place was fit for to defend them. So these
men that were so boldened, with a loud voice admonished all men to take their
weapons, and to go forth against the ennemie with a good courage: and they had
also a song wherein they asked the assistance of gods holy spiritte. But before
this a certain young man of noble birth was sent unto them whom Muncer (contrary
to the law of arms, and to the custom of any nation) slew: wherewith the
Princes were so provoked, The An^b^ptis^s great ^ercie.
that they blew their trompettes to batell, and set their men in array. At
that time, there was there Philippe Prince of Hesse, who although he was the
youngest of all, yet rode he to, and fro, exhorting the soldiers to be strong.
which exhortation being ended, they invaded their enemies, beginning first to
shote of their ordinance. And then the miserable men (as all amassed, or*
besides them selves) nether defended the^ selves, nor yet fled to save their
lives, but song still that song to the holy Ghost to help them. And the most
part of them put such confidence in M^cers fair promises, that they looked for
help from heaven. When they had shot of their ordinance, and began to assaute
their holds, and that many of them were on every side slain, then were they
put to flight, and went to Francusium, but some of them went to the other side
of the hill, where they kept out for a while a few horsemen, and slew one, or
two of them. But when they were al for the most part fled, the horsemen
(scattered, and dispersed) wandered to, and fro, without order, so that whither
so ever boures fled they were pursewed. But some of their me^ (as I said before
being slain, the residue all kindled with fury and desire of revenge, were
more violent, and were slain to the number of 5000* straight way Francusiu^
was taken ^y batell, and 300 in it, which were beheaded. Muncer fled into the
town, and hid him self in a house not far from the gate. Into the which it
happened that a certain ge^til man entered, whose servant going up into the
upper part of the house, of purpose to vewe the dwelling. he found a certain
man lying upon a bed, of whom he demanded, what he was, and, whether he were
one of the rebels, which fled out of the tumult: That he denied, saing: That
even then he was sick of an agew. Here (...) the tr^wt^ of Anabaptist^s
It happened that besides the bed there lay a purse, which the other
snatched up, hoping to get ^ome pray in it. After he had opened it, he found
therein a letter, wherein Albert Mansfeld admonished Muncer, to leave of his
entreprise and not to stir the people to sedition. when he had read these
leters, he asked if they were written to him, but when he denied it, he forced
him so that he confessed him self to be Muncer, and entreated him. Then (being
taken) he was brought to George ye Duke of Saxon, How G^d re^eieth things.
and to the Lantgraue, who asked him, why he had so deceived poor men. he
answered, that he had done nothing but his duty: and that the Magistrates,
who would not abid^ ye doctrine of the Gosp^ll, oght on that manner to be
handeled. But after that by ye Princes he was put to silence, he cried out for
very anguish. The^ said George the Duke of Saxo^ unto him: Now art thou vexed
Muncer, but think also in thy self, of the death of those miserable men, which
(being wickedly deceived, by this thy craft) have this day perished. The he (with
great laughter) answered, so would they. After he was brought to Helderung a
town of Mansfeld, where he was streitly examined what he purposed to do, and
who were of his conspiracy, he told them all. Then came the Princes of
Mulhusium to Helderung, and beheaded some of the rebels, among whom Phipher
(of whom I spoke before) was one. The comfort of the Anaba ^n adversity.
Thither also shortly after was Muncer brought, who in those troubles was
excedingly vexed, and troubled in him self. Nether was he able to render an
account of his faith, as the manner was then. So that (to help him with) Henry
Duke of Bru^ swick said it before him. And when he was at the point to die, he
acknowledged his fault, and error, and that he confessed it openly. And being
compassed about wi^h soldiers, he exhorted the Princes to have more pity on
poor men, and so, they should not need to fear the like danger after. He
exhorted them also to read diligently the books of the kings in the
scriptures. when he had spoken these things, he was stricken with a swerd, and
for an example, his head was fastened upon aspeare, and set up in y^ field.
And thus did he e^d, and suffer for his offense which (as said is) he did
openly confess. But yet alas his error, Historia Sleidan^ libro deci^^.
and pestilent doctrine did not end. For from him came forth a kind of men
which for their doing, and doctrine, are called Anabaptists. for they forbid
ye baptising of children, and are them selves rebaptised, and so affirm they,
that all others oght to be, and they take away all the virtue of ye first
baptism. The doctrine of Anabaptists.
They show forth a certain kind of holiness. They teach that it is not lawful
for Christen men to go to law together. Not to requier or take an oath, although
by the magistrate it were required. Not to have any thing in propre, but all
things to be common unto all. These be their first principles. But
furthermore, they add yet much more grievous errors, as afterward I shall
declare. And when they increased through all Germany, both far, and wide.
Luther and many other learned men, earnestly with stood them, the magistrates
also did so punish them that they could hardely increase to any greater number.
At the last in the chief town of Westphalie, named Monasterium, or Monster
(which is well fensed, they placed them selves, which happened after this
manner: There is not far from the town of Monster a temple of Saint Maurice,
in the which, one named Bernard Rotman did preach the Gospel in the year of
our salvation. 1532. to a great audience of the Citizens: And when they were
purposed to bring him into the town, the prelates (purposing to let their
devise) gave him a little sum of money, that he might go exercise him self in
some other place. and so he did. But after he had been in diverse places where
he thought to do some good, and profi^e his spirit, he returned after certain
months. But they (to whom his return was grievous) determined to let his
preaching, but it was in vain, the people bare him such favor. Shortly after
it came to pass, that certain of the chief citezens received him into the
town, and when the church doors were shut against him, they made him a
pulpet in the church porch. And because the number of the citizens, and other
hearers increased daily, they desired of the Papists* that one of the temples
might be opened unto him, which if they would not grant, they would make away in
by violence. Not long after (by the counsel of the chiefest of the people, he
sent letters to the cuntrie of Hesse, which was joining by, and under the
government of the Lantgraue, desiring that certain good, and learned men,
might be sent unto him, which might with him preach the Gospel. And when
there were six of them, whereof two were sent from Marpurge, they devised
among them selves, how they might first overcome the clergy, by the which
means the Gospel might with more fruit be taught. And to bring this to pass,
this way was thought most convenient. They wrote out the errors of the Papists
in thirty articles, and delivered them to the counsel, offering them selves
to suffer any kind of punishment, if they were not able to prove by the holy
sc^iptures, that they were all contrary to the word of God. The Magistrates
sent for the Papists to come before them, and they showed unto them, those
chief points of their errors. And when continually they alleged for them
selves their doctrine to be pure, and agreeable to the word of God, and the
preachers denied the same, and that they would prove, under the pain of losing
their heads: It was asked of them, whether that they would by the word of God,
confute those articles that were put forth against them: when after this manner
it was asked of them, they seeing also that the rulers were earnest in the
matter, in fea^ words they answered: That they had nothing to defend them
selves with all: and where as until that time, they had said that their
ordinances, and manners were good, and lawful, they confessed their so saing to
be but by by opinion and ignorance. The^ the Senate seeing them to be convict,
of falls doctrine, and errors, having nothing to allege for them selves, and
confessing their naughtines, they commanded them, that from thence forward they
should abstain from ye office of teachi^g, and that they should give place in
all their temples, to those new teachers, which had disclosed their trumperie,
and de^cate. Afterward by the consent of the senate, and the people, there was
appointed to every one of the preachers a several temple, to preach in. The
Papists were grieved therewith, but specially the canons of the Cathedral
church, which for the most part, were gentile men borne: they when they saw
that they could not remedy the matter, they departed in a fume, and went to the
bishop of that City. And after that they had counseled with him, they
determined to stop all the ways, and passages, that there should no
victualles be carried to the town. Shortly after they had thus stopped ye
ways, the Bishope with the canons before named, came to Telget, to counsel
more fully of the matter, for that was ^ little town but a mile from the City.
From thence the^ sent a messinger with leters to the counsel in these words:
That they should give over their enterprise and restore all things to their
formare state: if not tha^ they would take them from thence forth as ennemie^.
The Bishop was a county, and called Francis valdock* and his predecessor was
named Friderick, brother to the Arch bishop of Collen. This Bishop (either
because he could not have his health in those places, or that he smelled some
what in the matter) departed thence a little before of his own accord, and being
content with a private life, he went into his own country. The people of
Monster coun^eling upon this matter, kept the messinger. And upon Christimas
even in the night, they went forth, to the number of 900, and coming upon them
unawares they took the town, and setting kepers at the gates (lest any should
escape) they apprehended all. The b^shope (as it happened) was gone from thence
the day before. They brought all the captives into the City, amongst whom were
the chief prelates, and diverse of ye nobility. Of these the Magistrates asked,
what their intent was, and whither they were minded to hinder the preaching of
the Gospel any more: They freely answered, that they would do their diligence,
that the Gospel might flourish. And by the occasion of this answer there was a
pactio^ made between them. The copy whereof, the magistrates sent to the
Lantgraue, desiring him, that he would assist them, in the maintenance of the
Gospel, and their commonwealth, Then sent he unto them, certain of his
servants, through whose coming unto them* y^ peace was made, and being
reconciled, and the grief trodden under foot, they lived in peace togethers:
That the Gopsell might be preached in six churches, and that y^ impieties, and
superstitions, wc were in religion might be taken away: That in the cathedral
church, nothing should be changed, and that the citizens should not think that
to apperteine any thing at all unto them. This form of peace in writing was
signed by the La^tgraue, by the Bishop, and his adherentes, with the noble men,
and all the people the 14. of February the year of our salvation. 1533. After
this manner, things being appeased there came unto Monster a botcher of
garments, named John Leiden borne in Holland, which was a vehement anabaptist.
This man after he was entered into familiarity with y^ preachers, he privily
asked of them, whether they thought, that it were mete to baptize children or
no: and when they answered yea, he as one utterly of the contrary judgment,
began to laugh, and despise their judgment, wc thing, when ^^^nard Rotma^ of
whom we spoke before perceived, he exhorted ye people in his preaching to call
upon God that he would give them grace to stand, and continue in the truth, and
that he would keep them from being corrupt with heresies, and chiefly from the
opinion of the Anabaptists, which now privily do crepe in among them, and
gather them selves together. For (said he) if their opinion get the upper
hand, the state, not only of the commonwealth, but also of religion will be very
miserable, and poor. At the same time came to the town one Herma^ Stapred,
which being made companion with Rotman did publicly inuey against the baptism
of infantes. He was scolar unto one Henry of Roll, (...) Anabatistes ^rept in
who a little before was put to death at Traiectine, for anabaptistry. And this
was as it were an other step forward in this new kind of doctrine. This came
to pas that the Anabaptists taught through all the City, although it were in
private houses, and secretly, and none was received of them, except they, that
were of their sect. Further more there was none y^ made them selves known to
be the authors of this opinion, nor they did not teach but by night, and when
others were at their rest: which time they wroght their mysteries but the thing
being known, and diverse of the citizens being grieved at it, saying that it was
a great shame that such new doctrine should be sowe^ in secret, and by night.
It came to pass that by the commandment of the rulers the captains of them
were commanded to avoid the City, which going out at one gate, they came in
again at an other, saying, that they had a commandment from God, that they
should remain there, and apply their matters. This thing moved the rulers not
a little, and caused no small wonder in the town. Therefore for the avoiding of
greater tumult, and danger, the magistrates gave in commandment, as well to
the anabaptists, as to the preachers of the Gospel, that they should appear
before them in the counsel house, with certain other learned me^. Then Rotman
bewrayed his judgment, which until that time he had concealed, and condemned
the baptism of infantes, as a thing wicked, and abominable. But one named
Herman Bushe (chiefly) so defended the contrary part, that the Anabaptists
were commanded to depart out of the City, out of hand. And when they did all
edge for them selves that they should not quietly pass through the Bishops
land, the Senate obtained for them a safe conduite, and gave them wherewith all
to bear their charges. But they having long before determined not to depart
from thence, to any other place (secretly returning to their companions) kept
them selves closely for a time. The magistrates in the mean ceason, before
that they came forth of their corners again, caused all the church doors to
be shut, one only excepted. For it was to be feared, lest that the
Anabaptists, (who daily increased accompanied with their teachers) should
drive the preachers of the Gospel out of their temples. After this in the
month of November the Lantgraue at the request of the Rulers of the City sent
two preachers unto them, Theoderik Fabritius, and John Melsinger^ but Melsinger
seeing the trouble, and fearing the danger, returned home again. The other with
great diligence, exhorted the citizens, that they should beware of the doctrine
of the Anabaptists, in this wise he ceased not to do his endeavor, until that
the Anabaptists, getting the vpperhand, did drive the other out of the City,
as afterward shall be declared. And to make all sure, he wrote in a brief sum
the effect of the true doctrine, and ecclesiastical administration, the
counsel and people appointing the same. Then by the counsel of the magistrates
one Peter wirta^ began again to preach, but he had not preached long, yer the
Anabaptists stirred up by Rotman, drove him away. who being more fierce then
before, provoked Fabritius, and others to disputation, the senate agreing
thereunto, but under this condition that the disputation should be grounded
upon the word of God, and other writings agreeable unto the same. in the
presence of some godly learned men, which should be as it were arbitrers, who
hearing, and trying the sentences, and arguments indifferently on both sides,
might give judgment: and look what judgment they should give. yt it should
be agreed unto of all. By which means discord being taken away, the peace of
the Church might be restored. This Codition Rotman, and his companio^s did
refuse. when they craftily avoided to be bewrayed, they began openly to be
contemned of the common people. But to wipe away this foul blotte, they find
out an other way, much more compendious. One of them (as if he were inspired
with the holy Ghost) ^anne through the streets of the city, crieng, ^epent you,
and be b^ptised again, orels the wrath of God shall consume you. By this
means there was a common tumult, and as many, as were rebaptised, cried after
the same manner, as did the first: many fearing the wrath of God, which they so
threatened to fall upon them (deceived of very simplicity, which otherwise
were good men) obeyed them, and others did the same for saving of their goods.
For after that the Anabaptists had gotten the upper had of their adversaries,
they dispossessed the of their go^des. This was about the end of december, and
now came they again forth of their secret corners, of which we spoke before.
And being gathered to gether in the market place, they made a great shout,
commanding all yt were not rebaptised to be (...), as paganes, and wicked
persons After this they took the artilerie, and munition of the city, and
also the town house, not without doing violence unto many. The others on the
other part, for s^uing of them, and theirs from injuries, got them selu^s unto
a another certain place of the city, that ever was well fensed, and took many of
y^ Anabaptists. This conflict against the Anabaptists, which enjoyed ye
market place, and ^ad fortified it round, about continued so long, while
pledges being delivered on both parties, This was a (...)
they came to a composition, wherein was agreed, that every one should hold
his religion to him self as him lyked* and return to his house in peace. In
the mean ceaso^ Rotma, and Bernard Knipperdoling, which was the chief author
of this faction, although they seemed to have allowed this composition, yet
notwithstanding they privily sent leters to villages about, willing all those
that were of the^^ sect, yt leaving their goods behind them they should with
all speed repair to the city to them, promising yt what soever they should
lose, should be restored unto the^ te^ne fold again many entised through these
great, and plentiful promises, came unto Monster, both men, and women with an
assured hope to obtain no small benefit, but chiefly they of small substance,
which were not ^ble to keep their houses. The citizens, and chiefly those that
were of some reputation, when they saw that the city began to be filled with
strangers they with drew them selves as well as they could, leaving behind them
the Anabaptists with the mingled people. This was in february about shroftide
1534. Thus one party growing weak by their departing, the Anabaptists chose
new Magistrates, such as were of their own opinion: They made counselers
also, among whom was Knipperdoling. Not long after they invaded the temple of
saint Maurice in the suburbs, and they burnt it withal the houses about it
they spoiled all the temples about it also, and defaced the great church
within. This done, they began to run on heaps about the city, in the
streets, crying, first: Repent: and immediately after they cried, Hie you hence,
ye wicked persons, except ye list to adventure your lives. At the same time
they ran about the City in harnes, and chased out of the City all such as
were not of their sect, without any regard of age, or kind, after such a
sort that in this turmoil, and hasty flight, many women were delivered before
their time, and immediately they took the goods of those whom they had chased
out. And although that this chanced the day before the bishope laid siege to
the City, yet notwithstanding when certain of the company of those that
fled, fell into the hands of the bishop, they were taken as ennemies, of which
company some were put to death, among whom were taken one or two preachers of
the Gospel. And when Peter wirtam, of whom we spoke before, was in danger of
his life, he was saved through the suit of the Lantgraue. Now the residue of
the towns men moved thereby, which were good men, beholding present da^nger to
fall upon them, though they would forsake the City, full fore against their wills
(and as it were constrained) they tarried still. At yt time their chief Prophet
(for that name they usurped) named John Matthew commanded, that every one which
had any gold, silver, or mouable goods, they should bring it forth to be in
common, under pain of heading. And to this use there was a public house
ordained. The people was greatly astonished with this sharp commandment yet
notwitsta^ding they obeid it. And it was not best for any to use deceat in
this thing, or to keep any part back for they had two prophesying maide^s, wc
declared, if any deceat was used. And they were not only content thus to do
with their own goods, but also they used the gods of others whom they had
driven out, after the like manner. After this the same Prophet gave in
commandment, that none should have, or keep to him self any book, saving the
Bible, and that all other should be brought forth, to be rased, and destro^ed:
This commandment, he said, was given him from above upon this a great number
of books were brought forth, and burned. It chanced, in that time, that a
handye crafts man named H^bart Turteline, had spoken in mockage against those
that called them selves prophets. This being known, they called the multitude
together, and commanded them to come in harnes and straight way they accused
the man, and condemned him to death. With this the people was grievously moved,
and stricken with fear. The chief prophet (a fore named) took the poor man,
which being down on the ground, he stroke him with a spear, without giving
him his deaths wound, although he ran upon him with a great violence. Then
he commanded him to be carried into an other place, and taking a young man's half
hake that stood by him, he shot him through, lying on the ground. And because
that yet he died not out of hand, he said, that it was showed to him from
heaven, that the time of his death was not yet come, and that God would pardon
him of his offense. But the poor man within feaw days after dyed. When the
prophet heard of his death, he took a long spear, and ran with it about the
City, crying that God the father had commanded him to drive the enemy out of
the City. And when he came near unto the camp, a certain soldiour slew him*
And notwithstanding that this was the second time of bewraying of their
falshode, yet the residue of his fellow prophets had so bewitched the people,
and they so set out the matter unto them, that the common people took the matter
very heavily, and said, that surely some great plague should fall upon them,
for the taking away of so notable a man. But the next prophe^e after him, named
John Leyden, willed them al^ to be of a good courage: for (said he) it was long
before showed me that he should dye after that manner, and that I should take
his wife in marriage. Two days before Ester they ran into the temples, and
rang all the belles at once. Within few days after Knipperdoling prophesied,
yt those which were set aloft should be brought down, and the other should be
exalted, from a vile, and base estate. After that he commanded that all the
temples should be cast down, affirming with much gravity, that commandment
to have come from God. Immediately the thing was obeyed, and that commandment
celestial (as he termed it) with all diligence put in execution. About the same
time, the fore named John Leiden took the sword that served for the heading of
the offenders, and gave it to Knipperdoling, and made him hangman, for so (said
he) it was determined of God, that he which was one of the chief Ruelars
before, and of the counsel should now be in the lowest place, and be made
hangman. Knipperdoling was nothing offended with the matter, but took the office
thankfully upon him. Now when the bishop had certain months borne all ye
charge of the siege him self alone, Hermannus the Archbishop of Collen, and
John Duke of Cleue sent him for aid, money, and gunnes with a certain
company of horsemen, and footmen. The Archbishop of Collen him self came
also to the camp, to sit in counsel with them, and not long after, the city
was besieged, in sondrie places. And when there was no hope to win it by
force, they made 7. rampers about the city, to keep it from victuales,
furnishing them with footmen, and horsemen, which should remain there all
winter. The bishop of Monster (for the maintenannce of the siege, and war
against the town) required aid of the Princes about the Rhine, as the next
neighbors, and to whom the matter also did be long: for which cause they
gathered them selves together at a city Called Confluence, the 13 of December.
1534. After this unprofitable beseging of the city: John Leiden fell into a
sleep, and dreamed the space of three days, and when he awaked, he spoke never
a word, but only required, paper to be brought unto him, in which he wrote
12. men's names, among whom were certain of noble birth, which 12 should
rule as chief heads, as it was among the Israelites: this he said, was the
will of the heanenlie father. When as by these twelve there was a way made for
him to be king, he put forth certain articles unto the preachers, and will led
them, that if they could, they should confute them by Gods word, or else he
would publish them unto the multitude, and so of them they shoudle be allowed,
and established. The sum of them was this, that a man was not bound to one
wife only, and it was lawful for any man to have as many wives as he would.
But when the preachers withstode this sentence, he called the^ into the co^sell
house, and with the^ the 12 reulers. And when they were all come thither, he
put of his cloak, and threw it on the ground, and with it the new testament: by
those (as it were) signs, he testified, and swear, that article which he had
put forth was reveled to him from heanen, and therefore with terrible words he
threatened them as that God would not be merciful unto them, A sufficient
assuran^e for anabab.
unless they would allow them. At the length, they agreed, and the preachers for
three days togethers, preached only of matrimony: Straight way John Leiden
married. 3. wives, whereof one was she of whom we spoke before, the wife of the
great prophet John Matthew. With this example, others did follow, so that it was
counted laudable to marie often. But diverse of the citizens, that liked not
their doings (asigne being given through the City) they called all the lovers
of the Gospel into the market place. Then took they the prophet, and
Knipperdoling, with all the preachers. which thing when the commonn people
heard of, they armed them selves, and reskewed those, that were taken, killing
with great torment, to the number of fifty persons: for they tied them to
trees, and posts, and so shot them through. For the great prophet cried, that
all those that would do acceptable service to God: should throw the first dart
others were killed after another manner. The 24. of June there arose a new
prophet, which by his occupation wa^ a goldsmith. This prophet called the
people into the market place, and there he said unto them, that it was the
commandment, and will of the heavenly father that John Leide should be the
Emperor of the whole earth, and that he going forth with a mighty army,
should kill all the Princes, and kings of the earth, showing mercy only to
the common people (that is to say, all those that love righteousness) and that
he should posses the seat of his father David, until the father should require
the kingdom of him. For, said he, the wicked being put down, the godly shall
here reign in this life. And when he had published these things openly, by and
by, John Leiden fell upon his knees, and holding up his hands unto heaven,
said, It was many days ago (my brethern) that I did know of this, but I would
not declare it, and now God has uttered it unto an other, that ye might the
better credit it. This man obteining the kingdom by this craft, immediately he
put out of office the forenamed 12. And after the manner of kings, he chose unto
him noble men, and commanded that there should be 2. crow^es of fine gold made
for him, a scepter, a skabbard, and chain of gold with other such like
orname^tes. Furthermore he appointed certain days, in the which he would
openly hear all men's matters, that had any thing to put forth unto him. So
often as he came abroad, he was accompanied with his officers, and noblemen of
his court, next unto him followed 2. young me^ on horse back, and he on the
right hand bare a crown, and the bible, the other on the left hand, a drawn
sword. The pomp of his chief wife (for he had mo at that time) was after the
same manner. In the market place there was an high throne made for him, covered
with cloth of gold. The actions and complaints that were brought before him,
for the most part were of marriages, and diuorcementes, which then were most
frequent, and after such, a manner, that not a few which had before lived
togethers a long time, were then divorced. It came to pass, that on a certain
day as the people were in the market place very thick, and thronging together
to hear, Behold, Knipperdoling, leaped up, and creping upon the heads of the
people with his hands, and fete (for they stood so thick) he breathed in the
mouth of every one of the^, saying to one, after another, The father has
sanctified thee, receive the holy spirit. An other day he leading the dance
before the king, said, thus was I wont to do with my harlot, but now the father
has commanded that I should do the same before the king. But because he did
it so often, and never ended, the king being offended went his way. Then
hastily he went into the throne, and behaved him self like a king. But the
king coming in the mean while, thrust him out, and caused him to be kept in
priso^ne three days. During the siege they set out a book, naming it ye
restitutio^, in which book besides other things, they say: The kingdom of
Christ to be such before the judgment day, that the elect, and godly shall
reign, but the wicked, that they should be destroyed every where. Also that
it is lawful for the people, to put down the civil powers: and that although
the Apostles had no commandment to take jurisdiction upon them, yet notwith
standing, the ministers of the church now, oght to take the sword into their
hands, and by violence to set up a new common wealth. Also that none oght to
be suffered in the common wealth, that is not a true Christian: that none can
be saved, unless he put all his goods in common, without possessing any thing
proper unto him self: that Luther, and the Pope be false prophets, and of the
two Luther to be the worse: and that the marriage of those which are not
illuminated by the true faith, is polluted, and impure, and oght to be taken
for adultery, and for nicatio^ rather the^ marriage. Among other me^ Melancto^,
Iustus Jonas, and Vrbanus Rhegius, withstode their doctrine, as it appeared by
their ple^tiful, and excellent writings Within feaw wekes after the new
prophet, of whom w^ spoke before, blew a trompet in all the streets and
commanded yt all the people should come in to the church yard of the great
temple all harnesed: for the wicked were to be drive forth of the city. When
they were come thither, they fon^d a supper prepared, and by commandment they
sat down at the table to the number of 4000. After they had supped those yt
kept the watch about 1000. supped also. The king, and the Queen, with their
household served, the supper being almost ^nded, the king gave bread to every
one, saying: Take, and eat, show forth the death of the Lord. And the Queen
giving them the cup, said: Drink, and show forth the death of the Lord. This
being done, the new prophet (of whom we spoke before) went up into the pulpet,
and asked of them all, whether they would obey the word of God or no. Whereunto
when they had all said, yea, he said: The commandment of the father is, that
there be sent forth 28. preachers which shall go into the four quarters of the
world, and preach the doctrine that is published in this city. And then by
order he named the^, and the places, to which they should every one go, Six
were sent to Osembirge: as many to warendorfe: eight to Sufat, as many to
Cos^eld. The king, and the Queen supped afterward with the seruitours, that
had served at the table, and with them that were ordained to go forth. When
supper was in doing, the king rose, saying, that he had a business to do,
commannded him of the father, and by chance there was a souldioure taken whom
the king accused to be a traitoure as Judas was, and with his owhe hand he
stroke of his head. This done, he retur^ed to supper, and told merely of his
goodly act that he had done. After supper, those 28. preachers were sent
forth alitle before night. And besides for the finding of them, there was
given to each of them a piece of gold, with a charge, that wheresoever their
doctrine was not received, they should leave those pieces, in a witness against
the^ of their destruction, and everlasting damnation, because they had refused
peace, and a doctrine so wholesome. When they came to the places appointed unto
them, they cried in the towns that men should repent, orels they should perish
out of hand. They spread their garments upon the ground, before, the Rulers,
and cast upon them their pieces of gold, which they had received, affirming,
that they were sent of the father to bring them peace, which if they would
receive, then they willed them to put all their goods in common: and if they
refused, then, by this sign, and (as it were) a mark, they would witness their
evil deed, and unthankfulness. For behold the time (said they) spoken of before
by the prophets, in the which God will that righteousness shall reign upon the
whole earth, is come. And when the king shall have fulfilled his office, that
justice does rule in every place, then shall it come to pass, that Christ
shall give up the kingdom to the father. They speaking after this manner, were
taken, and (in ye beginning by gentlnes, and afterwith torments) they being
asked of their doctrine, and life, and of ye strength of ye city, answered,
that they only had the true doctrine, which they would maintain with the
peril of their lives. For (said they) from the time of the Apostles, the
truth has not been truly preached, nor any justice used: also that there
were 4. prophets, two just, David, and John Leiden, and two unjust, the Bishop
of Rome, and Luther, who was the worst of both. They being asked, why
contrary to their promise they had driven ye innocents out of their City,
occupying their goods wives and children, and by what place of the scripture
they would prove that their fact to be well, and justly done? they answered,
that the time was come, which Christ spoke of, Anabaptists are as make as
waspes
that the meke should posses the earth, and that in like case God did give the
goods of the Egyptians to the Israelites. Afterward they told of the
munition, and victualles, that were in the city, and the multitude: and also
that many in it had above five wives a piece, adding this, that they looked for
armies of me^ out of Friseland and Holand, which when they were once come, the
king would set forth with all his host, to bring the whole world under his
power, and subjection, after that he had killed all the kings thereof, for not
ministering justice. When they had been reasoned withal after this manner, The
^bstinacie of Anabaptists
and they continued in their purpose, and would acknowledge none other
magistrate, then their king, they were all put to death, saving one that
escaped. The City was so hardly, and so straightly beseged that none could either
go in, or out. Wherefore the citizens fearing famishment, and seeing the danger
that they were in, they thought to have taken the king, and to deliver him to
the Bishop bound, but he getting knowledge, thereof, chose 12. out of all the
multitude, such as he thought to be most faithful unto him, and called them
captains, and to each of them he appointed certain quarters of the City to
defend, and garrisons of men to keep the people from rising. More over he
promised to all the multitude, that by Ester the siege should be removed, and
that they should be delivered from the necessity that they were in. But unto
them which he had chosen to be captains, he promised much more largely, that
they should be lords, and governors over many things, naming the Towers and
land that he would give to each of them. Also he said, that only the Lantgraue
should be pardoned, because he hoped that he would take his part. We spoke
before of the Conuention (appointed at Confluence) of the noble men, in the
province of the Rhine, in the month of Dece^ber. Unto which company (of his
own good will) the Duke of Saxon Elector John Frederick joined him self. In
this Session, it was concluded, that for the present ayding of the Bishop,
there should be appointed forth 300. horsemen, and 3000. foot men, for six
months. The Cou^tie of Oberste^ named Vlrik was made general captain over
this army* and of the whole wars. It was also there ordained, that the whole
estates of the Empire should be desired to aid in this matter* and because the
Emperor was in Spain, that Ferdina^dus the king should be desired, for this
matter to appoint a co^uention in ye month of Aprile. And also they sent leters
unto the City besieged, willing them to give oner their entreprise, being so
dishonest, and wicked, as nothing could be more: which thing if they would not,
nether submit them selves again under their lawful magistrates, they should
be sure that the Bishop which now kept the siege, should have the whole help
of the Empire against them. This was about the end of December. They gave
answer the 13. of January, in the year of our Lord 1535. with many words,
but nothing to the purpose, yet so, that they praised, and defended their
entreprise: and as touching, that which was laid to cheir charge, for their
creating of a king, they made no answer at all, but in private leters written
to the Lantgraue they labored to excuse them selves, speaking many words of
the slawghter, and destruction of the wicked, and of the deliverance and reign
of the godly in this life: with these letters they sent also unto him the book,
whereof we spoke before, called the restitution, and advertised him to repent,
and not to make war (as did the other wicked Princes) against them, which
were innocent men, and the people of God. The Lantgraue when he had red their
leters, and their book, he noted those points that were not alowable in the
same, and gave charge to certain of his learned men, that they should answer
them. And because they (in feaw words, and very darkely) affirmed their king
to be more chosen of God, then by them, he asked them, why they showed not ye
places of scripture, wc made the^ think it lawfully done, and why they
confirmed it not before by some miracles, and signs above nature. For said he,
God showed by all the prophets long before, of the coming of Christ, so that
it was not only evident, of what house, and lineage he should come, but also in
what time, and where he should be borne. They did also desire that their cause
might come in question. Unto ye which the Lantgraue answered, that it was to
late, seeing yt they had taken the power of the sword into their hands, and
had been the authors of so great calamity. For, said he, all men may plainly
see, what is their meaning, to wit, the ruin of all laws, and common
wealths: and as their beginning is wicked, and cursed, so also is the desiring
of their matter to come in question, nothing but feined, and dissembled: also
that he had sent unto them faithful Ministres, by whom they were well, and
godly instructed. but seeing they had refused their doctrine, giving over
obedience to Magistrates, possessing other men's goods, having many wives,
chosing unto them a new king, denying Christ to have taken the nature of man
of the virgin Marie, affirming man to have fre will, forcing men to put their
goods in common, denying pardon to those hat sin: all these opinions to be
utterly repugnant both to the law of God, and of man. After they had received
this answer, they answered again in writing, and withal they sent a book,
set forth in the dutch tongue, of the mysteries of the scripture. In their
Epistle they published their cause again anew, and defended their doctrine to
be good in their forsaid hoke. They divided the whole course, and ages of the
world into 3. parts, and the first age, as from Adam, until Noach to have
perished with the flood, the second, in which now we be, to perish with fire:
the third they say shall be new, in the which righteousness shall reign. But
before that the last age shall be reveled, this that now is, must be purged with
fire. But that (say they) shall not come to pass before Antichrist be
disclosed, and his power be utterly put down: Then shall the ruined seat of
David be erec^ed again, and Christ shall reign upon the earth and all the
writings of the Prophets, shall be fulfilled: And as touching this present age,
it is like to the time of the which Isai speaks. For justice is put to
silence in it, and the godly are afflicted. But now the time of liberty, and
deliverance from so many, and great calamities is come, as it came unto the
Israelites, being in the captivity of Babylon, and the wicked shall receive the
full reward of their wickedness, as it is prophesied in the Apocalypse: but this
restitution to go be fore the world to come, to the end that all the wicked
being oppressed, the seat of justice might be prepared. When the Lantgraue had
read over their book, hegaue charge to certain Ministers, of his Church to
answer unto it.

In February the famine was so great in ye City, that diverse perished with
hunger. One of the kings wives, being stricken with pity toward the people,
spoke by chance unto the other women, and said, that she thought it was not the
will of God, that the people should so dye for lack of sustenance, The king,
which had good provision in the house, not only, to serve his necessity, but
also to waste superfluously, knowing of this, he brought her into the market
place, with all the residue of his wives, and there commanded her to knele
down upon her knees, and then he cut of her head from her shoulders: and yet
not so content, after her death he defamed her with whoredom. This being done,
his other wives began to sing, and to give praises to the heavenly father.
Then dansed they, and the king led the dance, and he exhorted the people also
(which had no other victualles left, save only bread, and salt, that they
should dance, and be of good chere. Now when the day of Ester was come, and
that there appeared no sign of deliverance, the king, which had made them so
many goodly, and large promises, that he might find some means to excuse him
self with all, he feined him self to be sick, six days togethers* which
days being ended, he came forth unto the market place, and said unto the
people that he had ridden upon a blind ass, and that the father had put upon
him the sins of all the multitude, The simplicity of the Anabaptists.
so that they were all made clean, and purged from their sins, and that this
was the deliverance promised by him, with the which they oght to be content.
Among other things that Luthere caused to be printed, in that time speaking of
those that were besieged in Monstere he said thus: Oh what shall I say, or how
shall I bewail this unhappy people: ye thing it self does declare, that they
be possessed with many deuilles, but we oght to give praise to the merciful
goodness of God for although, that Germany has deserved for the contemning of
the Gospel, hatred of Gods Name, and shedding of innocent blood, to be
grievously punished by the hand of God, yet notwithstanding he has brideled ye
force and violence of Satan hither to, not suffering him to rage at his
pleasure: but has mercifully warned us: and by this foolish tragidie of
Mo^stere called us to amendment of life. for except that God did bridle him
and draw him back, I dout not, but that most subtle and crafty spirit would
have ha^deled this matter far otherwise. But now when as God has thus
restreyned him he is not able to do so much as he would and as he desires,
but so far as God permits him, he fretteth and rages. For the devil which
desires to destroy the Christian faith, goes not this way to work to give
liberty, for men to have many wives at once. for he knows well that men do
abhor it, it is so open, detestable, and filthy a thing in all men's eyes,
The Politic and civil government may this way be troubled: but to invade the
kingdom of Christ withal, there must be other manner of weapons and enginnes
used. for he that will go about to flatter ye people by fraud and deceat, he
must not be desirous to reign, not to declare him self a tyra^ne (for all ye
world reproves that, and sees to what end such enterprises do tend) but he
must come by some privy means: as by holy speakings, his garments homely,
and not like unto others, a grave countenance his head hanging toward the
ground, in abstine^ce not touching money, not eating flesh, refusing marriage,
esteming civil government, and bearing of authority to be a profane thing, to
refuse to bear rule, and to profess him self to be of a singular and lowly
spirit: this (I say) is ye ready way or means which may deceive even the
very wise, and all by simulation and subtilitie to aspire to the highest
reign upon earth. But to usurp authority with unshamefast extremity, and for
filthy desire to take as many wives as he list, this is not the craft of any
practiced devil, but of some rude and late sprung up spirit, or at least if he
be of any experience, yet God has now so tied him in chains that he can no
more subtely deceive: which thing the Lord does to the end that we should
reverence his Majesty, and that we should be first stirred up to repentance,
be fore he let lose the bridle of some more expert devil, Let Germany adue^^
for their Pr^ph^^ speaks
which surely shall assault and besiege us much more sharply and with greater
fury. For if this little master devil can stir up such a troulbe, what shall
ye great doctor devil of both ye laws dowhen he shall come and practice all
his power against us? Wherefore this homely devil that is of so small
experience, is not of us greatly to be feared. And I do also think, that all
the inhabitants of Monster do not allow their toying folly, but that diverse
of them do greatly sorrow, wihch (not without many sighs and tears) do look
for deliverance at gods hand, as it has been seen before in the seditions of
the bowres. And I would to God there were no devil in the world of geater
craft then this devil of Monstere is, provided that God take not his word from
us.

For I suppose there be but very few, that will give credence to this so gross
and unlearned a master.

But in deed when God is angry or displeased, there is no error so folish,
unlikely or out of order which Satan shall not persuade some to believe, as we se
to be brought to pass in ye doctrine of Mahomet. For though all their teaching
is fond, yet not withstanding the light of Gods word being quenched, it took
strength, and has spread forth it self so large and mighty, as we se it this
day, and the like had come to pass in Germany, if God had not put down the
enterprise and counsel of Muncere. For with the least spark that is, Satan can
make a great flamb (if God do suffer him) and a better way to quench it withal
there is not, then with the word of God. for when the weapons of the ennemie
are all together spiritual, he can not be overcome with a multitude of horses,
or any enginnes of war. But our Princes and Bishops work otherwise. for
they hinder the doctrine of the Gospel, which is the only way, whereby ye
minds and hearts of men may be healed. And in the mean time they violently
torment them to pluck the body from the devil, leaving to him the principal
part of man, wc is his heart and soul, using the matter as the Jews did, which
thought to extinguish and put down Christ by the punishment of the cross. But
now as touching the common brute and writings that go of Monster, I have no
doubt, but that it is so as it is reported: and that which they them selves
have written of late, makes me fully to believe it, in which they paint out
lively their own fury and madness. first of al they teach of the faith very
foolish and absurd things, and of Christ as though he took not flesh of the
virgin Marie and yet they confess him to be of the sede of David. But they
utter not their minds fully: and without doubt Satan does nourish some
monstre which may easily be perceived by this which they say, the sede or the
flesh of Marie can not deliver us. But in vain is their travail, for the
Scripture witnesses Christ to be borne of ye virgin Marie. Which saying in
all langages is referred to the fruit, which being conceived and fashioned of
the flesh and blood of his mother, is borne into the world. Also they show
forth their ignorance, in that they condemn the first baptism, as a profane
thing, esteming it not as the institution of God, but of man. But if it be so
that all manner of things oght to be condemned and put away, that either the
wicked have or do give, then do I meruell that they cast not away the gold and
the silver with the other goods, that they took from the wicked, and devise
some other means to live by. for as these things be the creatures, and work
of God, so is Baptism also. when the wicked man swears he abuses the true
name of God: and if the name of God be not true to him, then he offends not,
he that kills, robs or spoileth, he trasgresseth the commandment of God,
but if the commandment of God be not true unto him, he sins not. Even so if
the first baptism be nothing, then the receauers of it have not offended.
Wherefor then do they so much detest the first baptism, as a wicked thing,
where as notwithstanding they affirm it to be nothing? Also if the marriages in
times past oght to be taken as whoredom and adultery, as they say, because
they were contracted of them that wanted faith, I pray you, do they not
confess, them selves to be the children of harlottes? Now if they be bastardes
and unlawfully begotten, how comes it to pass that they inioye their City
and the possession of their fore fathers? It were mete therefore* sei^g they be
such that, they should have no enteres into y^ heritages of their ancesters,
but that in this new ki^de of marriage, that they are entered into, they should
get unto them selves new goods and richesse, which might bear a more honest
title. for it is uncomely for these holy and religious men that they should
live with the goods of harlottes, and miscreantes, or that they should win
them to them selves from others by violence, and robbery. And as touching
their kingdom, wc is to be laughed at, there is so much wickedness in it, and
so manifest, that we shall not need to make many words of it. And truly for
those things, whereof we have spoken, as we have treated more then enough, so
also more then need, considering that it has been so plentifully and largely
set forth by others. Now when they in the City were come into this case, that
diverse of the^ daily died for hunger, and that many also departed from thence,
and came out so weak and feeble that the ennemies had pity upon them, the
captain sent word to ye towns me^ that if they would deliver to them the
king and certain others, they them selves should be perdoned. The citezins,
although they had good will so to do, yet durst they not go about it, the
cruelty of the king was so great, and the watch was kept so streitly: for the
king was so obstinate, that as long as there remained any thing for him to eat
and a few others, he was fully bent not to yield. for which cause the captains
sent word again and commanded them that from thence forth, they should not
send any furthe of their city, not so much as children or women. This was in
the cale^des of June, the day following they made unjust compleining that their
cause might not lawfully be heard, and that they were wrongfully afflicted
above measure, also profering them selves to submission, if any could show them
wherein they offended: fu^ther more they expounded a certain place of Daniel, as
of the fourth beast much more cruel then the others, the conclusion of their
leters was this: That God aiding them they would stand to the truth which they
had confessed, but all this was written at the kings commandment. Now when all
things were come to the extremity in ye City, there were two that fled from
thence, of which one was taken of the soldiers, the other came to the Bishope
under safe conducte, both these showed, how the City might be taken. The
Bishope and the general captain hearing the words of these two fugitives, and
weying the matter, the xxii of June they talked with them of the City,
aduertising them to yield them selves into their hands, and to save the
multitude, which perished with hunger. Answer was made in the presence of the
king, by Roteman, that in no wise, they would give over from that wc they had
begone. Two days after about the^ xi hour in the night the army came nere
to the City without making any noise: by the advice of the two fugitives,
certain chosen soldiers passed the di^ch, and came to the trench, killing the
watcheme^: other followed after these, which found a little gate open through
which they entered into the City to the no^bre of five hundredth with certain
capteines and standerds. The^ they of the City came running unto that place,
and with great pain kept they ye residue of the army out which would have
entered, and shutting the gate, they fell upon them that were come in with a great
rage, and killed many of the^. And when the conflict between them had endured
two hours, very sharp and furious, the soldiers that were enclosed, did
bur^t open the next gate which was not kept with any great strength* and so
made they an entres in for their fellows, which straight way entered in by a
great company. The citizens resisted them a little at the first brunt, but they
gathered the^ selves together in ye market place: and being in despair of any
victory (many of them being slain at ye first bursting in) they desired and
entreated for mercy, wc was granted unto the^. The king and knipperdolin were
taken the same time: Roteman disparing of his life, ran among ye heap of ye
ennemies, and was so thrust through, rather the^ he would fall a live into
their hands. When ye City was taken, ye Bishope took to hi^ self half ye
spoil and ye ordinance: afterward he discharged ye armies, reserving only to
hi^ self two ensigns for defense The^ was there an other co^ue^tion of the
Empire at Worms y^ fiftenth of Iulie, wherein king Ferdina^dus by his
ambassador proposed and demanded, whether any thing else were to be done
concerning y^ rooting out of y^ Anabaptists, seeing ye town was already
taken: he also advertised them that the Princes oght to ask counsel of the
Bishope of Rome: whereunto they answered that it was alredie provided by certain
edictes, what was best to be done to the Anabaptists, and that the Emperor
had asked counsel of the Bishop ofter then once, nether could he do any more
in the matter. In the same conuention the Bishop of Monstere desired his charges
and losses to be recompe^sed, compleining that the money promised was not paid.
but when no thing else could be determined, few of the nobles being present, an
other conuention was called in the same place, the first of Nouembre, wherein
the things concerning the war and the charges thereof might be known,
wherein also it might be decreed what form of commonwealth were after to be
established at Monstere. When the day was come, the Ambassador of king
Ferdina^dus briefly repeted the causes of that present conuention, to wit,
that among other things it might also be deliberated, how ye City newly
conquered, might from thence forth continue in the old religion. After these
things the Bishops legate shows what great charges he was at, all the war
time, how greatly he was indebted, and how it was necessary (ye City being
now taken) for the avoiding of tumultes and other dangers, to build two Castles
in the City, with strong holds* al which things he desired to be considered.
To these things answer was made, yt ye Bishop had taken the greater part of
the spoil with all the ordinance and goods of the citizens which wholly
apparteined to the common welthe of the Empire, therefore that it was reason,
the value should be counted and communicated with the charges, and what other
things were necessary besides, should also be considered. After it was
determined, that the Bishoprike of Monstere should be under the Empire, after
the ancient custom, and that all the nobility should be restored, and the
citizens also which had departed to other places, so they were not
Anabaptists: that the Bishop should set forth the religion according to the
decre of the Empire: that in the beginning of the next spring the ambassadors
of the Princes should go to Monstere to know the state of the citizens and to
keep them in sauegard, to pull down all the forteresses, which the
Anabaptists had erected, and and that the Bishop also should pull down the
Castles which he had builded in the city, and that he should without delay put
to death the king with knipperdoling, and Crechting, ye prisoners without
reteining them any longer. As for that which we said was determined of
religion, the duke of Saxone, the La^tegraue, Wirtemberg and Anhold, testified
openly that they would not consent, to it: the citezins also professed the same,
nether would they have the old forteresses of the town distroied, but they
consented to the pulling down of the new. The king and his two fellow captives
were carried hither and thither to the Princes to be gased and laughed at, by
which occasion the preachers of the Lantgraue talked and disputed with the
king, chiefly of these points, of the the kingdom of Christ, of Magistrates,
of justification, of Baptism, of ye supper of the Lord, of the incarnation of
Christ, and of Marriage, and they prevailed so much by the testimony of the
Scriptures, that although they did not altogether convert him, yet they so bowed
and confounded him (notwithstanding his repugnance, and defending his opinions)
that at the last he granted to the most part of al: which nevertheless, is
thought that he did but to save his life. for when they came to him the second
time, he promised, so he might be pardoned to bring to pass that all the
Anabaptists which were in great nombre through all Holand Braband, England,
and Friseland, should keep silence, and in all things obey the Magistrates.
Those same men also disputed with the kings fellows both by communication and
writing, of mortificatio^, of the Baptism of infantes, of the communion of
their goods, and of the kingdom of Christ. When they were come to Telgate,
the Bishop asked the king by what authority he arrogated to him self such
liberty over his City and people? who asked him again, An equal vocation of
the*
who gave hi^ authority and power in yt City and when the Bishopp answered
that he obtained that jurisdiction by the consent of the congregation and
people, even so, A^abaptist and Papist.
says he, was I called thereunto of God. The^ were they carried back again to
Monstere the twenty of January, where each of them were put in a several
prison. The same day came the Bishop thither with the archbishop of Colle^, and
the ambassadors of the Duke of Cleave with him, two days after they were
exhorted by godly admonitions to convert from their errors. And in deed the
king aknowledged his sin, and made his recourse to Christ by prayer, the
other two would not confess that they had offended at all, but obstinatly
defended their falls opinions: the next day after, the king was brought forth
into an high place, and bound to a post, where were present two executioners
with fyrie tongues to torment them with all, the king at the three first
pyntches of the tongues held his peace, afterward crying to God incessantly for
mercy. When he had been torn on this manner for the space of an hour and
more, he was thrust through the breast with a sharp sword and died. The same
punishment also had his fellows, which being all dead, they were each of them
bound in iron cofers, and ho^g up in the top of the tower of the City, the
king in the midst higher then his fellowe^ by the stature of a man. This
fearful tragedy, in which gods most just judgments are declared does teach
unto us two things. The former, what may the innocent, and the godly look
for, if ye may bring your enterprises to pass: and secondarely what does the
world and the rulers now in earth for the most part deserve. As touching you,
how so ever for a time ye cloak your cruelty, what simplicity so ever ye
declare in your external gesture, what so ever ye speak of charity and love,
and how so ever ye seem to be zealous over the truth, yet shall you in the end
produce no other fruit then these yours fathers have done before you. If yt I
list to note particular examples, I might show in your sect and amongst you
to have been so horrible enormities as more horrible were never from the
beginning: but lest I might seem to take any pleasure in accusing particular
persons, I will not at this present write all that I know. Only (I say) that the
Church of God may look for no other thing at your hand, but for confusion of
all gods ordinances, and for more cruel persecution then ever yet it did
sustain since the days of the Apostles. for what your fathers began in
Monster in their purpose, you do perform and finish: and to that end do you
write your books, some calling all the Scriptures of God in doubt, some
affirming that there is a more perfect knowledge, then that which is contained,
or expressed in the word, some plainly denying the God head of Christ Jesus,
and of the holy Ghost, some claiming liberbertie, that no man should be troubled
for his conscience, cloking under that title all blasphemy, and diabolical
doctrine. And you now last in accusing us of these most odious crimes, whereof
we be most innocent, ye, and your brethern, I say, in teaching this your
pestilent doctrine, and accusing us who gainstand your deuilish errors, do
plainly declare, what ye have already intended, if God by his great power
bridle not your fury. And assuredly the world and the Rulers of the earth (for
the most part) most justly deserve so to be entreated. As for ye Church of God,
it must be subject to the cross, even until the coming of the Lord Jesus
from the heavens. But the world I say, and the Princes of the earth (which is
the^ second point, which we have to mark in this former history) most justly
deserve to be punished with such confusion as ye intend. For the one, and the
other (I mean the Princes, and the people, co^spired to this day against God,
against his son Christ Jesus, and against his eternal verity. They
maintain impiety, superstition, and idololatrie, they cruelly murder the
Saints of God, and so do they rejoice in all kind of tyranny, yt Gods just
judgments can not long delay punishment. And therefore leaving you
Anabaptists into the hands of him whose power ye can not escape, I am
compelled in feaw words to admonish you as well the people, as the princes, yt
spedely ye return to the living God, whose verity so long ye have oppugned,
whose religion ye gainstand, and true messingers, ye persecute, or else persuade
your selves that vengeance is prepared. He will not entreat you, as he has
done his afflicted Church, and dear children: that is, he will not call you to
repentance by a fatherlye correction, the end whereof shall turn to your
comfort. Not so, not so, but as ye have still rebelled, and dishonored him, so
will he power forth contempt upon you, in the which ye shall perish both
t^mporally, and for ever. And by whom does it most appear, that temporally ye
shall be punished, of us, whom ye banish, whom ye spoil, and rob, whom
cruelly* ye persecute, and whose blood ye daily shed? There is no dout, but as
the victory wc ouercometh the world is our faith, so it behooves us to posses
our souls in our patience: we nether privily, nor openly deny the power of
the civil magistrate: we do not claim the co^munaltie of all things in this
life: the plurality of wives we do abhor: we would not destroy gods
ordinances, and Policy, by him established, in common welthes, but we hate,
and detest all such confusion. Only we desire the people, and the Rulers to be
subject unto God, and unto his holy will plainly reveled in his most sacred
word. And therefore of us, I say, ye are and may be without all fear. But
what ye may look for, if the Anabaptists shall atteine to their purpose: the
confusion, and tyranny used by those of whom we have spoken, is* and may be a
glass, wherein ye may se your judgment, and end most fearful, unless that
unfeignedly ye repent. Flatter not your selves, that ye be able at all times to
prevail in battle by strength, because that in number ye be many, or because
those Prices of Germany prevailed against that most miserable, and most wicked
sort of enraged Anabaptists. Consider, consider depely in your hearts, that
when God will punish, no multitude can resist. At that time God gave victory
to the Princes, and did suppres the fury of those wicked men, not because the
Princes were just, and had deserved such a benefit at gods hand, No, the most
part were wicked, as their factes since have plainly declared. But God had
respect to his own glory, and honor. He did admonish his elect by their
examples to beware of such poison, and did also by such confusion, call you to
repentance. Of late years before was the Eua^gile of Christ Jesus revived in
Germany, the harvest of the Lord was not come to ripenes, and therefore for his
own names sake he would not suffer that pestilence so suddenly to prevail. But
now seeing that of so long continuance from wickedness ye proceed to open
contempt of God, and of his true religion, shall he suffer you to rage without
punishment? No, his justice can not. And what instruments can God, (I say)
find in this life, more apt to punish you, then those that hate, and detest
all lawful powers, and do thirst nothing more, then such confusion as before
ye have heard? God will not use his saints, and chosen children to punish you.
For with them is alawaies mercy, yea, eue^ although God have pronounced a
curse, and maledictio^, as in the History of Joshua is plain But as ye have
pronounced wrong and cruel judgment without mercy, so will he punish you by
such as in whom there is no mercy. Tremble therefore, and convert unto God, if
that ye think to escape v^ngeance, confusion, and shame, both temporal, and
for ever. Now to the conclusion of your book. Thus ye finish.

THE ADVERSARY*
Judge now gentill reader uprightly, The 47. section.
and here I commit thee to God, beseching him to open the eyes of thy mind,
that thou may know the truth, in this, and in all other matters neces^arie
to thy salvation.

ANSWER.
As you will all men to read, and to judge with indifferency, even so do we,
requiring of God not only yt so the eyes of me^ may be lightened that
clearly they may se things apperteining to salvation, but also that by the
mighty operation of gods holy spirit they may be confirmed, and so sanctified
in his eternal verity, that to the end they may continue in the simplicity
of his holy word and further, that all men may se to what confusion your
doctrine te^deth, the ground whereof is your own vain imagination, and the end
(as before we have said) not only the destruction of all gods ordinances,
necessary for this present life, but also the treading under foot of the
bright glory of Christ Jesus. For the more that ye extol fre will, and the
virtues of man, the more do ye obscure the justice of faith, which only is
acceptable in the presence of God, and the less do ye attribute to Christ
Jesus his death and passion. Yea, some of you are not ashamed in your enuenomed
doc^rine, wherein secretly ye train your scholars, to affirm: That we that
now live after Christ's death, have no other benefit, either by him, or by his
death, but only an example to suffer as he did, O sede of the serpent thy
father Pelagius was never so impudent, nether yet did ever the devil find any
of his instruments (before thee) so bold, as that against the holy scriptures
of God he durst affirm that horrible blasphemy. Dare thou deny, but that
the death of Christ Jesus shall to the consumation of all things have the
same efficacy, that it has had from the beginning? Did not Christ suffer
for our sins, not for our ex^ple onely^ but because we were not able to
satisfy the justice of God which we had al offended, that therefore the
punishment of our offenses was laid upon him? Have we any more power now, then
had his disciples to whom he said, without me ye can do nothing? Does not he
remain a sovereign Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedech? Is it
not he, who by one sacrifice made perfect for ever, such as either have been,
are, or shall be sanctified of that polluted sede, of Adam? Finally is it not he
alone, who gives liberty, salvation, and life to his body which is the
Church, not in one age, but from the beginning to the end? Satan him self is
compelled thus far to confess, and therefore be thou shamed (o thou
blasphemous mouth). What other monsters ye norish, and feed in the stinking
den of your enuenomed hearts, time will reuele. And if it shall please God to
assist my weakness, I will not spare labors to communicate with my brethern,
what pestilence lurketh in your enuenomed doctrine, to the end that all the
faithful may avoid the same. You fearing to forget any thing of your master
Castalios ^currilitie, do thus conclude.

THE ADVERSARY
And as for you (Careless m^n) you oght to take it in good worth, The 48.
section.
what so ever I have said* first because it is truth. Secondly because, ye
hold that all things, ^e do^e of mere necessi^ie, then have I written this of
necessity.

ANSWER.
To the which I answer, that if the devil were not a lier, and the father,
not of lies only, but also of all deceatful liars, it were not possible, that
you who in so many things have declared your selves horrible liars should
vainly brag that ye have written the truth. For besides those odious crimes,
which most impudently, and most falsely you lay to our charge, amongst all the
scriptures by you alleged, their are not three which ye do not abuse, yea and
in some ye do so openly belie the holy Ghost that you conclude contrary to his
expressed words. But when I consider, that your Master and father Satan him
self, eshamed not in the presence of Christ Jesus, to boast, and to brag,
that all the power, and glory of the earth was given unto him, and that he
gave it to such as best pleased him, when yet in very deed he had no power to
give to his fellow angels, and companions of darkness license to enter into
the bellies of swine, till that he, and they were feign to beg that pleasant
palace, of him, to whom all power is given in heaven, and in earth. When this I
say, I do considre, I do more lament your miserable blindness, then that I can
stomach against your vanity, except in so far, as to the end, I must say,
that such as obstinatelye deny the plain truth of God, are liars, and the
sons of that lier, who first deceived man, and powered into his heart the same
venom, and error which this day ye teach, and maintain. For he was bold to
affirm that wisdom and life was to be found by other means then God had
determined, yea where God had pronounced death, and damnation, he promised
salvation, and life, and so do you. For God has appointed life to none of his
elect, but in Christ Jesus only, and that by such means, as in his holy word
expressed, which are true faith, continual repentance, abnegation of our
selves, of owr own justice, and wisdom, and finally by receiving (of free
grace) in Christ Jesus, whatsoever we have lost in Adam. But ye ashame not to
affirm, that the justice of Christ suffices us not, except that we have a
personal justice of our own. How coldely ye speak, or write of his death, of
his resurrection of his mediation, and perpetual intercession, is evident.
Your bragging and proud boasting of your own justice, and of your great
perfection, are evident tokens how you do agree with Christ Jesus the truth,
and verity it self, who commands us to say (not for the fashion, but from
unfeigned hearts) we are unprofitable servants. But some of you in your
jesting eshame not to say* that ye are not two thousand passes, distant from
the fulness of perfection.

But this your vanity (your blasphemies excepted) does not greatly offend us.
For a small prick of of a pin, or of a nelde shall be sufficient to declare
that bladders (be they never so streitly blown) contain in them selves
nothing but wind. That by necessity you have written your railing blasphemies,
and most impudent lies we easily confess. For seeing that ye are the sede of
the serpent (I mean such as in your error shall continue to the end) what
thing can you else do, but of necessity spew forth ve^nom, when the weight of
gods eternal verity begins a little to press down your head (for so does
the serpent whenever she is touched) But why do ye not considre (seeing ye be
reasonable serpents) that like as prowdly ye lift your selves against the
glory of the eternal Son of God, and as ye cease not maliciousely to
slander such instruments as in his Church be most profitable, and most wort
hie of praise in the eyes of all godly, that likewise of necessity it is, that
ye come to ruin, that your pride be repressed, and your blasphemous tongues be
confounded for ever? seeing that God, who hatch all iniquity, must needs resist
the proud, destroy the lying lips, and remove from his society such as
declare them selves enemies to his eternal verity, the knowledge whereof we
confess with Job comes only by inspiration of the holy Ghost, and does not
proceed from flesh, or blood, from study, care, or wordly wisdom, but is the
free gift of God reveled to the little ones, and commonly hid from the wisest of
the world. Which sentence would God that depely ye could wey: for then I doubt
not, but y^ ye should clearly se, that to come to Christ Jesus, is nether of
the runner* nether yet of the (...), but of God, who shows mercy to such as
pleas^^^ him, whose counselles eternal, and judgments, m^st profound, can no
creature apprehend and compass, and therefore oght all the true servants of
God with reverence, and with trembling say, O how incomprehensible are thy
judgments o Lord, and how unsearchable are thy ways: for of thee, by thee,
and for thee are all things. To thee be glory for ever, and ever. So be it.

Isaiah. 54. EVERY TONGVE THAT SHALL CONTEND WITH THEE IN IVDGEMENT, THE SAME
SHALL THOU MOST RIGHTLY CONDEMN.


Fautes escaped in the printing.
In the 24. page the 19. line not for nor. In the 33. page, the 4. line Curthe
for Church. In the 95. page. the 17. line displease for displeasure. In the
117. page, in the margent good for gods. In the 153. page the 21. line through
for thought. In the 193. page, the 32. line maciously for maliciously. In the
165. page, the 6. line yea for yet. In ye 204. page, the 3. line thy pen for
my pen. In the 263. page line 3. A scaoth for Asteroth. In the same page, the
16. line, yet the became, for yet he became. In the 199. page, the 24. line,
and affirming for and we affirming. In the 312. page, the 34. line 24. for 23.
In the 321, page, the last line, defaced^ for defaced to his uttermost. In the
322. page, the 18. line good reasonly, for goodly reason. In the 435. page, the
18 line cheir for their.


