THE CONSTITVTIONS OF THE MVSAEVM MINERVAE.

LONDON, Printed by T. P. for Thomas Spencer.

1636.

NIHIL INVITA MINERVA
blazon or coat of arms

TO THE NOBLE, AND GENEROUS WELL-WISHERS TO VIRTUOUS ACTIONS, AND LEARNING: The
Regent and Professors of the Musaeum Minervae, wish all honor and happiness.
HOwbeit public actions and undertakings do usually receive no Preface, it
being needless to divulge that, which of it self will be exposed to all men's
Censures: nevertheless new enterprises (how good, or just soever they be) are
commonly subject at least to suspicion, if not unto oblique interpretation;
which frequent experience, as well as in other things has manifested in this
our new institution of an Academy here in England: Which though already it has
been justified, and approved by the wisdoms of the Kings most sacred Majesty,
and many of the Lords of his Majesty, most Honorable privy Council, and
confirmed by his Majesty's Letters patents: and these the following
Constitutions and Discipline thereof ratified under the hands and seals of the
right Honorable, the Lord Keeper of the great seal of England, and the two
Lord-Chief Justices. Yet for a further and more full satisfaction of all men,
as well ignorant detractours, as virtuous Favorers of this Design, some
remonstrance may not seem impertinent, but rather necessary to be printed, and
published for the better understanding of what has been undertaken.

Therefore for as much as we conceive, that it is not generally nor clearly
understood, what the nature of an Academy is: nor wherefore the institution of
such a College is here necessary, as well as in other great transmarine
Cities: we have thought it requisite, for the bringing of virtue into action,
and the Theorie of liberal Arts into more frequent practice to show that such
an institution is fit to be established here according to the laudable custom
of other Nations: who even in the middle of their Universities have their
Academies, as Rome, Bononia, Padua, Paris, Wittenberge, and other places:
wherein our Aims are directed to this end, that England may he as well
furnished for the virtuous education, and discipline of her own Natives, as any
other Nation of Europe.

It is sufficiently known, that the subjects of his Majesty's dominions, have
naturally as noble minds, and as able bodies as any Nation of the earth: and
therefore deserve all accommodations for the advancing of them, either in
speculation, or action. Nevertheless such has been the neglect, or
undervalueing of our selves, and our own abilities, and overvalueing of
foreign teachers, that hitherto no such places for the education, and
trayning up of our own young Nobility, and Gentry, in the practice of arms,
and arts have been instituted here in England, as are in Italy, France, and
Germany but that by a chargeable and sometimes an unfortunate experience, we to
our own loss, and disgrace do find the noble and generous youth of this
kingdom is sent beyond the seas, to learn such things at excessiverates, from
strangers abroad, wherein they might be as well, and with less expense, and
danger, instructed here at home.

The experience not only of the honor, but the gain which other Nations
reap by the confluence of our Nobility and Gentry to them, for instruction
might be a sufficient au^horitie, and warrant for the erection of such
Academies, in the chiefest Cities of this kingdom, as are beyond the seas:
were it not for some iealousies, and suspicions which the novelty of every
public action does bring with it, as indi^iduall concomitants: and therefore
in the particu^^r of this first institution of that nature, some short answers
are requisite to be given to some places, whose foundations have so long and so
honorably been confirmed.

And for as much as we are to give reasons that the institution of an Academy
is necessary amongst other noble qualities, and arts, (if taught, yet not
practiced in the Universities nor Innes of Court:) the sciences of Navigation,
Riding, Fortification, Architecture, Painting, and such like being most useful
accomplishments of a gentleman do require a peculiar place and institution for
them. And albeit many of them are taught in London, in dispersed places; yet it
cannot but be judged more convenient to reduce, and unite them in one certain
place: likewise whereas many men teach them perfunctorily rather for gain then
any other respect: it was held necessary to select certain men who upon oath
should undertake to see them learnedly and sufficiently taught: and in brief,
whereas in the City of London diverse strangers profess to teach sundry, or
rather all the liberal arts and sciences of which many have been found to be
upon examination, and trial egregiously ignorant, whereby our youth loose both
their time, an^ m^ney: it could not but be thought most necessary for the
benefit, and conv^niencie of all such virtuous disposed youths, as live about
the City, as also for the honor of our nation: that such a house should be
er^cted in which they might be regularly taught to practice the aforesaid
sciences and qualities: and in a virtuous society, have such generous, and
fitting recreations, as might divert them from the too much frequenting of
places of expense, and of greater inconveniences.

Now to let all men know that the intention of the erection of this Academy is
as well for the prevention of inconveniences, and dangers; as for the positive
benefit of our Gentry: there is no understanding man, but may resent how many
of our Noble men, and young gentlemen travel into foreign countries before
they have any language, or knowledge to make profit of their time abroad; they,
not being any way able to get knowledge for want of language, nor language for
want of time: since going over so young, their years of license commonly
expire before they can obtain to sufficient ripeness of understanding; which
no nation is known to do but the English: for what children of other nations
come over to us before they are of able age, and ripeness? To prevent which
inconvenience we by this public Act, give notice unto all men, that one great
end of our institution is, to give language and instruction with other
ornaments of travel unto our Gentlemen (if they shall stay some time in this
Academy) before their undertaking any long iourneys into foreign parts.

Moreover whereas it is found by lamentable experience that Noblemen, and
Gentlemen for want of an Academy here, are as it were necessitated, to send
their sons beyond the seas for education: where through change of Climat, and
diet, and for want of years of discretion, they become more subject to
sicknesses and immature death, then otherwise they might have been: we leave it
to careful prudent parents to consider how necessary the institution of an
Academy here in London is, in which especial order may be taken for the
bringing up of young Gentlemen, until both for years, and learning they may
be fit as well to travel and make benefit of their time abroad, as to gain
some knowledge how to prevent the dangers both of foreign air, and diet.

Now in the last place we humbly desire that it may not be imputed an
affectation of singularity, or of vain glory, that we publish these our
Constitutions: for that diverse have been desirous to see them, and more are
ignorant whether we have any settled discipline or not: which because the
institution is the first of this nature in this kingdom, it may seem more
excusable to be done, in this particular, rather then by any other College in
the Universities, whose forms of discipline are sufficiently known: And if
this Design, and the subsequent Constitutions may be so fortunate, as being
seen and published to receive a condign approbation (albeit we the present
members thereof being all of us far stricken in years are likely to receive
little benefit to our selves, for all our great labors other then the reward
of a good conscience) we cannot but hope since our institution, and college is
already made capable by his Majesty's gracious favor, and letters patents of
donation in land, as well as goods: that if not the present age, yet posterity
will afford some noble benefactours who by their bounty to this foundation in
upholding and continuing of what we have begun, will perpetuate their own ever
honored memory. And thus having upon the aforesaid reasons been induced to
manifest our actions, and future intentions in this plain, and sincere manner,
unto the view of the world: we hope that our endeavors herein, will by all as
favorably be interpreted, as they are by us truly and sincerely meant; and
intended to the glory of God, the honor of his Majesty, and the public good
of the common wealth. *

THE CONSTITVTIONS OF THE MVSAEVM MINERVAE.
INPRIMIS, It is agreed, and constituted by the Regent and Professors of the
Musaeum Minervae, that every man that shall be admitted into the said Musaeum
shall bring a testimonial of his Arms and Gentry, and his Coat Armor tricked
on a table to be conserved in the Musaeum. Provided, that the sons of
benefactours such whom the Regent and Professors shall judge worthy to be
admitted, be not excluded.

Item, Every man to be admitted into the Musaeum shall be approved by the
Regent and Major part of the Professors for the time being, for his civil
conversation: yet after admittance if any behave themselves to the disturbance
or evil example of the rest, and will not in convenient time be reclaimed, by
the same power that admitted them, they are to be dismissed.

Item, the Regent and Professors shall be accomptable for the proficiencie of
the Gentlemen admitted (according to their capacities, diligence and time) to
those parents, or friends that have recommended them to their care.

Item, The Regent and Professors shall be tied in honor without respect of
persons or partiality, to instruct the Gentlemen admitted with all convenient
celeritie according to their several capacities.

Item, the Gentlemen admitted that by their diligence and continuance have
fulfilled the term of three years and an half, if afterward they chance to
discontinue, shall notwithstanding have privilege of access to the Musaeum
without any further charge to benefit themselves by any convenient conference
with their former Professors, and these shall have the title of Triennalls.

Item, the Gentlemen who shall have the aforesaid privileges of Triennalls
shall be such as have studied or practiced three several sciences, Arts or
Qualities, at least for the space of the said three years and an half under
three several Professors or their Assistants.

Item, the Gentlemen that by their diligence and continuance have fulfilled the
term of seven years, if afterward they chance to discontinue, shall have
notwithstanding privileges of access to the house, without any further charge
to benefit themselves by any convenient conference, and to study and practice
what they please: and shall have liberty and license to benefit themselves at
times appointed, by any books Charts, Experiments, Secrets, or Demonstrations
that shall be conserved in the Musaeum, and found out while they live fit for
them: according to the judgment of the Regent and Professors.

Item, of such whose title is Septennalls and the major part of Professors,
the Regent shall be chosen in vacancy of a Regent.

Item, by the Major part of Prof^ssours and the Septennalls (as many of them)
as shall be found resident about the City the Professors hereafter (when any
of their places are vacant) shall be chosen.

Item, the Gentlemen who intend to be Triennalls or Septennalls, shall stay the
first four vacations after their first years admittance to learn or practice
constantly in the Musaeum: but in case they shall have urgent avocation, they
shall stay other four vacations, when their business will permit them.

Item, no Gentlemen admitted shall suddenly leave one Science Art or Quality
which he has undertaken to learn or practice, and go to another Professor
before the Regent be made acquainted with it, who shall make judgment of his
proficiencie in the former, because the end of the Musaeum, is to have all that
are admitted (if possible) more then vulgarly instructed.

Item, no Gentleman admitted, till the afternoon shall speak to the Regent
except it be about necessary business.

Item, noe Gentleman shall speak in the forenoon to the Regent about any
business, but either in Italian, French or Latin: but if any Gentleman be
deficient in all these Languages, then shall he deal with some Professor or
other to speak unto the Regent for him in the morning, but in the afternoon
free access shall be granted to all that have any occasions to confer with
him.

Item, no Gentleman admitted shall exercise himself at onc^ about more then two
particular Sciences Arts or Qualities whereof one shall be Intellectual, the
other Corporal, to avoi^ confusion: yet if the capacity of the scholar be
extraodinary, this may be dispensed withal, according to the di^cretion of the
Regent and mayor part of Professors.

Item, no visits are to be made of any person whatsoeve^ either to the Regent
or any of the Professors, or any scholar in the forenoon at the Musaeum.

Item, no Professor nor Gentleman nor any other admitted, or belonging to the
Musaeum Minervae shall make any comparisons amongst themselves, but shall
strive to excel in humanity, and in giving every one his due for the
continuance of concord and amity.

Item, it is agreed and constituted by the Regent and Professors of the
Musaeum Minervae, that these things following shall be read and taught there
severally by the Regent, and Professors and their Assistants.

The Regent shall see these performed.
Heraldrye. Blazon of Coats and Arms Practical knowledge of Deeds and
Evidences. Principles and Processes of common Law. Knowledge of Antiquities*
Coins, Medalls, Husbandry, etc.
The Doctor of Philosophy and Physic shall read and profess these.
Physiologie. Anatomy, or any other parts of Physic.
The Professor of Astronomy shall teach these.
Astronomy. Optics. Navigation. Cosmographie.
The Professor of Geometry shall teach these.
Arithmetique. Analyticall Algebra. Geometry. Fortification. Architecture.
The Professor of Music shall teach these.
Skill in singing and Music to play upon Organ. Lute. Violl, etc.

The Professor of Languages shall teach these.
Hebrew. Greek. Latin. Italian. French. Spanish. High Dutch.
The Professor of Defense shall teach these.
Skill at all weapons and wrestling.
Also Riding shall be taught, Dancing and behavior, Painting, Sculpture,
Writing. Lastly there shall be annexed a School for the young Gentlemen, whose
Parents are desirous to have them brought up in the Musaeum from their first
years

Item, these Arts Sciences or Qualities rehearsed, the Professors and their
Assistants, shall teach by Demonstration and Experiment as much as the nature
of the Art and Science requires, and as much as in them lies.

Item, the present Professors and successors of every of them, forever shall
leave in writing some memorial of the most selected Points, Secrets,
Experiments, and Demonstrations which do belong to every of their Arts or
Sciences for the greater advancement of learning and knowledge unto the worlds
end. And this shall be done at their deaths, when they dispose their estates,
if they shall be then of ability.

Item, because learned men are many times anticipated by death, and their
excellencies die with them, Every Professor shall also every new years day
every year, or within the twelve days of Christmas give some Raritie in
writing or otherwise, to the Library of the house concerning their own
Professions, And the Regent shall see them have rewards out of the Treasury
according to their several deserts.

Item, the Assistants to the Regent and Professors, or to any of them shall be
the most able in their several professions that may be had or chosen.

Item, at time of sickness, great employment, or for any reasonable cause it
shall be permitted to the R^gent or any Professor to substitute a^ d^putie for
some days at his own procurement. P^ovided always, that the Deputy work
according to the Regent and Professors information and appointment, And that
his directions be according to the Constitutions of the Musaeum.

Item, the Professor of Philosophy and Physic and his Assistant or
Assistants shall from time to time according to their abilities and
opportunities make experiments of natural things, chiefly for medicinal use,
and what they find certain shall be recorded, and what they find otherwise
shall in a book by it self be noted, how and in what manner experiment was
made, and how it failed, that men may not afterward spend their precious time
and means in vain, and that the licentious abuses of Impostors hereafter may
be detected.

Item, it is agreed and constituted by the Regent and Professors of the
Musaeum Minervae: that there shall be always a Regent and six other
Professors in the said Musaeum, according as is granted and expressed in the
Letters patents belonging unto the said Musaeum, confirmed by his Majesty's
great Seal.

Item, in vacancie of the Regent or any of the Professors, another shall be
chosen within six weeks or sooner.

Item, the Regents after the death of Sir Francis Kinaston the first Regent
shall be chosen out of the Septennalls, if there shall be found sufficient
choice, and the most worthy shall be chosen by the Professors and Septennalls,
who shall be found resident about the City, otherwise by the mayor part of
Professors only.

Item, the Professors in vacancie are to be chosen by the Regent and mayor
part of Professors, but when there shall be Septennalls, the voices of these
also shall be required as many as shall be found resident about the City, and
the most worthy shall be chosen.

Item, the Regent and Professors shall be chosen by (...) balletting box.

Item, no forreigner or aliene born out of his Majesty's dominions shall at any
time for ever hereafter be elected or admitted to be either Regent or
Professor of any of the aforesaid Sciences, Arts or Qualities, except he be
only admitted as an Assistant by the approbation of the Regent and mayor part
of Professors. And in case by any oversight or deceit any such forreigner
shall be admitted either Regent or Professor, upon better knowledge of him, he
is to be dismissed immediately ipso facto, and another to be chosen according
to the true intents of these Constitutions.

Item, in elections and other matters where voices are necessary, the Regent
shall have two voices, and the rest of the Professors each of them one a piece.

Item, the Assistants shall be chosen by the Regent and mayor part of
Professors.

Item, the Receiver shall be chosen by the Regent and mayor part of Professors.

Item, all officers shall be chosen by the Regent and mayor part of Professors.

Item, if any man make any suit by power and authority for the Regents place,
or for any place of the Professors, or for any place of Assistants, it shall
be denied him for ever.

Item, the admittance money which Gentlemen are to pay, is five pound at the
least.

Item, the said admittance money is to be paid when the said Gentlemen are
admitted.

Item, The Professors are to have a monthly Salary, as they use ordinarily to
have in other places.

Item, if any complaint be made of any Professor for asking too much: the
Regent and mayor part of Professors shall regulate the matter.

Item, what Professor soever shall be desired to teach out of the Musaeum,
shall not go to teach any not admitted of the Musaeum, except he first
acquaint the Regent or his deputy with it, and have leave of one of them.

Item, if any Professor find any agreevance any way, either in his place, or
maintenance: he shall propound it to the Regent and rest of the Professors,
and they shall redress it as brotherly and charitably, as if themselves were
agreeved according as the nature of the matter shall permit, being collated
with the state of the Musaeum.

Item, no Professor nor Assistant shall teach any man within the Musaeum not
admitted, except he shall have leave of the Regent, or of his deputy in his
absence.

Item, the Regent and Professors or mayor part of them shall dispose and
employ for the good of the Musaeu^ Minervae all benefits, moneys, lands, or
whatsoever shall be given or received by such Agreements, Orders or Rule^ as
they shall see reason to make for the said end, from time to time, as occasion
shall be offered.

Item, all admittance moneys, benevolences of money or lands, or what gifts
soever shall be paid and delivered into the hands of the Receiver, to the use
of the Musaeum Minervae.

Item, twice a year all receipts and expenses shall be cast up and examined by
the Regent and major part of the Professors, after a months warning given
unto the Receiver.

Item, what lands soever are bestowed upon the Musaeum Minervae, shall
revertunto the Donours or their Heirs, if the Musaeum Mineruae shall wholly
cease, and finally be dissolved.

Item, the Regent and Professors shall make covenants with all Assistants or
Deputies of the said Musaeum from time to time, as they shall judge it best,
for the well governing, and upholding of the said Musaeum.

Item, it is agreed and constituted by the Regent and Professors of the
Musaeum Minervae, that every Professor shall hold his place during his life,
doing the duties of it by himself, while he may without damage or hurt to
himself, and by deputy at such times as he is reasonably hindered.

Item, no Regent or Professor shall relinquish his place upon any reason, or
for any benefit, except he first give security to the Regent and the rest of
the Professors according to their reasons and desires.

Item, no Regent or Professor shall be displaced for any cause, except for
some enormous act against the state and discipline of the Musaeum, such as
shall tend to the destruction thereof, or has brought some notorious infamy
upon it, which shall be judged so (according to right judgment) by the Regent
and Professors, or by the mayor part of them.

Item, for the better continuance: the Regent and Professors shall by all
possible means preserve the bond of peace among themselves, and without all
emulation or detraction ^very one of them shall do his best endeavor to
advance the estimation and credit of every one of his fellow Professors for
the public good of the Musaeum.

Item, that the bond of peace may be more firm, no man shall pertinaciously
dispute at meetings of Professors, but only decently and temperately propound
what he judges best, and shall no way for any end of his own raise
disturbance, or be troublesome in over many words, or in words uttered in any
choleric manner, especially if the scope of the speech shall make against the
benefit, honor, or end of the Musaeum, which rules if any Professor shall
break, he shall be sentenced at twenty shillings, which shall be bestowed upon
the Assistants of Music, or other Officers of the Musaeum.

Item, the Receiver shall hold his place during his life, except there be found
some great cause to dismiss him, as fraud or the like.

Item, the Schoolmaster is to hold his place during his life except for some
insufferable neglects of his duty in his place or some enormous act against
the good of the Musaeum, (...) for some enormous scandal he deserve to be
displaced.

Item, it is agreed and constituted by the Regent and Professors of the
Musaeum Minervae, That every Professor shall keep such hours for the
instruction of Scholars (as shall be set down by the Regent and mayor part of
Professors) as much as conveniently he may.

Item, the Astronomicall Professor shall keep an exact Diary of every of the
Celestial Apparances and of the weather, that at last we may find the causes
of our insularie varieties. And every months observations shall be fairly
written out, and given up to the Library.

Item, the Regent and Professors shall have power to order and regulate all
other matters which pertain to the discipline of the house for the greater help
of Gentlemen, and better ornament of the Musaeum, always from time to time, as
occasion or necessity shall require.

Item, the days and hours of all Lectures and Exercise^ shall be set down in
a Table to be seen by all the Gentlemen.

Item, the day of public Music is Tuesday, beginning at two of the clock in
the afternoon.

Item, to Public shows, Presentations, and Music meetings, none shall be
admitted but such as shall bring with them that character which shall be given
forth by the Regent for that time.

Item, Private Lectures, Instructions or Exercises shall be every day read and
taught, the days of Dispensation excepted, which the Regent and mayor part of
Professors shall set down, by the Professors of Astronomy, Geometry,
Music, Languages and Defense, in any or all their several Arts or Sciences
undertaken, if their scholars come unto them.

Item, Private instructions of scholars by all the Assistants of the Musaeum
shall be given every day to the Gentlemen their scholars, the days of
Dispensation before mentioned excepted in all the several Arts and Qualities
undertaken by them.

Item, Public Lectures which are to be read by the Regent and Professors of
Philosophy and Physic, Astronomy, Geometry, Music, and Languages, shall be
made in days of full term only, except for some reasons the Regent and
Professors shall willingly at other times read publicly.

Item, the Qualities of Riding, Dancing, Painting, Sculpture, Writing, and the
rest shall be taught every day in like manner as before.

Item, although there be public Lectures as aforesaid: yet that only shall be
accounted and received for the doctrine and learning of the Musaeum Minervae,
which shall be found true, after sufficient experiment, or demonstration, and
no other.

Item, it is agreed and constituted by the Regent and Professors of the said
Musaeum Minervae, that no Constitution Order or Rule made by any man shall be
valid for the government of the said Musaeum, or any particular man,
Professor, Officer or office of it, except it be first confirmed by the Regent
and Professors.

Item, the orders and Constitutions of the Musaeum, sha^^ at any time receive,
increase, diminution, or alteration, sufficient cause be found by the Regent
and Professors, before the death of Sir Francis Kinnaston. Provided that no
new Change or addition, hurt, but rather help the Continuance of all things at
first established, As also the honor and Estimation of the Musaeum, and such
things which are for the bettering of such as shall be admitted.

Item, after the death of Sir Francis Kinnaston, the Fundamental orders and
Constitutions agreed upon by him the first Regent and Professors shall never
after be abolished or changed.

Item, the Regent is to remember as he shall see opportunity from time to time
both publicly and privately, to excite the Noblemen and Gentlemen to virtuous
and heroic minds by the example of the most renowned, but especially to set
before their eyes, the Images of the Worthies of our own Nation, and of their
own Ancestors, in their several families: so that having taken impression in
the Musaeum from the best Id'as, the whole kingdom of inferior people, in
those several Counties, where they shall be distributed to live, and shine,
may find example, help, reason, and happiness in and being under them.

Item, the Noblemen and Gentlemen at their first admittance shall have this
Constitution immediately going before, read unto them after their admittance,
that themselves may know, that one of the principallends of their admittance
into the Society of the Musaeum, is the happiness of his Majesty's kingdoms,
as well as their own good.

Item, neither the Regent nor any Professor shall do any Act or Acts of
consequence, which shall concern the state of the Musaeum, of himself, without
first acquainting all the rest of the Professors with it, and shall have it
assented unto by all, or the mayor part of them, except he be both cl^er in his
judgment that he shall do a good benefit for the Musaeum, and also that the
omission of it till the Regent and Professors be acquainted with it, may prove
a prejudice to the Musaeum.

Item, the Regent and Professors shall keep secret whatsoever they agree upon
to be kept secret, and that without general leave, and consent of the Regent
and mayor part of Professors, it shall not any way be divulged: Provided their
Consultations be only for the good of the Musaeum.

Item, all the Consultations of the Regent and Professors shall be in private.

Item, at times of Consultations of the Regent and Professors, the Regent is
first to speak or propound, Then secondly the Professor of Philosophy and
Physic, and so every one in that order and rank as they are set down and named
in the former Constitutions.

Item, if any two or more differ in their Consultations, they are to be heard
by the rest to dispute it briefly and temperately, and one after another in
order: and then the Regent and mayor part of Professors agreeing, shall make
decision.

Item, no man shall interrupt the Regent in his discourses, nor any of the
Professors one another, but they shall have liberty to speak what they please
for the good of the Mus^^um, or themselves, Provided they be not over tedious
(...) their discourses, which thing the Regent shall moderate.

Item, all matters taken in Consultation shall not be affectionately, nor
hastily decreed, but seriously weighed and if more matters are propounded, that
shall first be decreed, which is of most and present necessity: otherwise what
is first propounded, shall be concluded before other matters come into
deliberation.

Item, once every week shall be a meeting of the Regent and Professors to
consult for the good of the Musaeum, which shall be on Saturday in the
afternoon, between two or three of the clock, under a pen^ltie of ten
shillings, to the stock of the house, except it be dispensed withal upon
notice given before hand, or afterward sufficiently proved, that notice could
not be given in time.

Item, the Regent in his absence from the Musaeum, shall appoint one of the
Professors to supply his place, whom he shall judge most able to discharge it,
who shall do generally and in particulars, as may be according to the Regents
directions.

Item, it is agreed and constituted by the Regent and Professors of the
Musaeum Minervae, that all sums of money shall be taken by the Receiver, and
delivered unto him.

Item, the Receiver shall give sufficient security to the Regent and
Professors.

Item, the Receiver shall distribute all such sums of money as he receives,
according to the appointment of the Regent and mayor part of Professors for
the occasions of the Musaeum, and not otherwise.

Item, the Receiver shall keep a book of all admittances which shall be very
fairly written.

Item, the Receiver shall keep a book of all Receipts and disbursements.

Item, the Regent and Professors shall from time to time and at all times use
and employ the best of their endeavors to the ^nlargement and building or
adorning of the Musaeum, or to any other thing which shall by the Regent and
mayor part of Professors be judged to conduce to the honor and advancement of
the same, out of such moneys and revenues of lands as shall come to their
Receivers hands by the bounty or benevolence of Benefactours or friends given
to the said Musaeum Minervae, the Pensions of Regent, Professors,
Schoolmasters, Assistants and Officers being first paid.

Item, it is agreed and Constituted by the Regent and Professors of the
Musaeum Minervae, That the Books of Secrets, Experiments, and Demonstrations
shall be communicated to none but to the Professors, Septennalls and Receiver,
or such other, as the Regent and Professors shall upon a very great reason see
cause to yield unto.

Item, if any Gentleman shall have any natural Experiment or Secret, and shall
communicate it to the Musaeum, and upon trial it be found true and good, his
name and Experiment shall be recorded in Libro Nobilium, for a perpetual
honor unto him.

Item, if any Gentleman shall be come any ways a Benefactour to the Musaeum,
he shall ever be honorably remembered in Libro Nobilium.

Item, there shall be Liber Nobilium always kept, in which Benefactours and
their benefits are to be recorded, beginning with King Charles our first and
royal Benefactour.

Item, if any accidental masters in any faculty, shall come to confer with
any Professor of the Musaeum, and shall impart any singular demonstration in
Science, or Secret in nature profitable, they shall receive an Honorarium of
the Musaeum, and be also honored in Libro Nobilium totie^ quoties, but the
quantity and quality of the Honorarium shall be agreed upon by the Regent and
mayor part of the Professors.

Item, no book shall be noted or blotted with ink, lead, or other matter.

Item, no book shall be lent out of the Musaeum but to the Professors only,
and no Professor shall take any book out of the Library, or ordinary place
where it stands, except he leave in a paper book there being for the purpose,
his name, and the name of the book, and the time when he took it, and also
except he acquaint the Library keeper with it.

Item, every book lent, when it is to be restored to the Library again, is to
be viewed by the Library keeper or some of the Professors which are most
likely to know it best.

Item, in the minor Libraries every Professor shall be ^^^rged with the books
of his own Library, and no Profes^^r shall take out any book out of one
another Library with (...) the knowledge of the Professor of that Art or
Science.

Item, no Book, Charte, Instrument or Raritie whatsoever be^^^ging to the
Musaeum, shall be any ways alienated, altered (...) changed, except for the
greater good and benefit of the ^usaeum, neither shall any alienation,
alteration or change (...) made of any Book, Charte, or Instrument, or any
other ^^^ng belonging to the Musaeum, but by consent of the Re^^nt and mayor
part of the Professors of the Musaeum.

Item, if any Regent or Professor hereafter of the Musae^^ shall make away, or
endeavor to destroy, or open his ^outh to destroy any books of what Art or
Science soever, (...) any Antiquity or other matter which has been once
re^^ved into the Musaeum by the Regent and Professors, ^^d laid up there for
the benefit of the Noblemen and Gen^^^men, or for their delight, or for any
other reason, for which it was by the Regent and Professors at the first
re^^ived, and there conserved: He shall ipso facto be dismis^^d, without any
after restitution to his place again, or any other office in the Musaeum
Mineruae for ever.

Item, the Regent and Professors from time to time shall take care that such
of themselves as do survive, shall honorably interre and solempnize the
Funerals of the Regent (...) any of the Professors deceased according to
their places, ^^d as they have deserved in the Musaeum or otherwise, for ^^e
good of the kingdom: and also that there be Funeral ^^ations made, such as
may be to the honor of the deceased, for the reasons before mentioned, and for
incitement of the living unto the best deserts.

The Oath to be administered to the REGENT and PROFESSOVRS OF THE MVSAEVM
MINERVAE, Within three days after their Election.
I. A. B. do promise and swear to yield and perform from ti^^ to time and at
all times all fidelity and allegiance unto our Sovraigne Lord King Charles, and
do swear and promise to execu^^ and discharge from time to time with all
fidelity my place and off^^^ of Regentship Professourship
in the Musaeum Minervae.

And also to perform and keep to the utmost of my power and sk^^^ as long as I
live, all and singular such Constitutions of the s^^^ Musaeum Minervae, which
do and may concern my said pl^^^ and office according to the true intent and
meaning of the said Co^stitutions.

And also I swear and promise always to advance the hono^^ benefit and good
estate of the said Musaeum Minervae to the ^^most of my power.

And to preserve and augment as much as in me lies, the es^mation and credit
of the Regent and Professors of the said Musaeum Minervae.

And lastly, never to dispense with my fidelity, honesty or conscience in the
Election of any Regent, Professor, Deputie^ Assistant, or in doing any Act
wittingly cont^^^^ to the ^^^stitutions and Orders of the said Musaeum
Minervae, or prej^diciall to the same Musaeum, for any temporal respects
whatsoever.

So help me God.
FINIS.

