A Copye of a Letter containing certain news, and the Articles or requests
of the Deuonshyre and Cornyshe rebels.

() M.D.XLIX.



DIEV ET MON DROIT royal blazon or coat of arms

A copye of a letter containing certain news, and the Articles or requests of
the Deuonshyre and Cornyshe rebels.
SInce my last letters set unto you; of the news in these parties (Because I
will keep my first promise, for enterchau^ge of lettres) I have chau^sed of
matter worthy aduertisment and some leisure to aduertyse the same, so that I
could not with honestye, but satisfye your desire, to know our news, as I my
self am very desirouse of yours. By my former letters you understood the
dysordre and dystoyall, vprores of the Deuonshyremen, which at the beginning
semyng to me, to have proceeded but of some wyldenes of their brains, or of
some ignocance lacking teaching, I thought would sone have bynne tamed with
authoryte, and reformed with instruction, as I understand the like end has
well happened of all the disquiet assemblyes, in the other parts of the Realm.
But the matters of Deuonshyre now shows furthe the rotes of treason, the
buddes of rebellion, and the fructe of filthy poperye, leauyng now pretenses
of treason, and auowynge high treason, leaving now color of Relygion, and
reiectyng all true religion, now come to very madness, which before were but
droncke, and cared not, for the name of rebels, which before were angry to be
called trespassers, this craft has the devil to increase his swarm. He
taught the Priests and their Captains to call the people together to defend
their old faith, and therein used the name and aucthoryte of the kings
mayestye, having no way so ready, to assemble them to gether, which vsuallye
is the trompet, that good subjects follows, two good begynninges, Ye see the
devil vsedthe name of God, and of the King, and in deed, dyrectlye against God
and the King. Well, now was it time for him to work, he saw the assemblye
daily increase. One part was assured his own, the Romysh priests and the
sturdy vacabundes. With them he neded not use craft, but rather taught them
how to use it with others. The other part were simple ignorant people,
easelye disceyued, and quicklye made the partakers of evil. Thus the devil
having made his bands (part of his own old servants, part of a new
retynewe) began to send forth his embassages (the same being certain
requests, as he termed them) to remedy the grieffes of the Deuonshirmen, to
the which the Kings majesty, made a very princely and reasonable answer. Of
the which I received six Copies in printe from you, by M. Mohan, at his last
coming from the Court to my Lord pryuey seal. And for the same I thank you,
prayng you, if any such like things come fourth in printe, I may have some
sent me with the first, and if you will speak to the Kings Prynter in my
name, I dare say, he will not deny you. But now to my matter. By these
embassages of his he thought to have increased his power, thynkyng in deed yt
all they (which gathered them selves together in other parts of the Realm,
for pluekynge down enclosures, and enlargyng of comme^s) would have entered in
to his service and taken his quarrel: but after his articles were confounded by
the king, and certain knoweledge came in to Deuonshyre, by their currours
abroad, that the Kentysh Essex, Suffolk, and specially Hampshire, having
byene within the iurisdiccyon of the stout Prelate of Wynchester, utterly
dyffyed and abhorred the Deuonshyreme^, protestyng even in their most
disorder, that they would spend their lives against all such rank rebels
traitors and papists. It was marvel to se the new deuyses and inuencyons of
the pryestes and vagabunde Captains, for the furtheraunce of their first
purposes. Then began they to per swade their people, that they had all gone
to far to shrink, and that nothing now should help them, but stoutnes and
courage, either would they now be Lords, or else have nothing, either rule, or
else not live, either make a King, or have no King, no mean thing might
content them. Their first botye (they thought) should be the city of
Excetter, the next, ye spoil of their own countreye, and so consequently all
other parts of the Realm, for Excetter they gape, but they catch nothing
saving gonne shot, whereof God geues them ple^tye. Their own country they have
so spoiled, and so disordered, that it is miserable to hear. The son robs
the father, the daughter is ravished before the mother, he has nothing at
night, that had most in ye morninge, and he has most, which ought to have
nothing. And how long he shall have it, there is no warrant. Two manner of men
go to wrack amongst the^. Good true subjects, and well thie. And other two, be
daile promoted, traitors, and vile vaga bounds. The viler man, of more
aucthorite, the honester of more scruitude. Byeng and selling sea seth among
them, in place whereof is come Robbynge, and reauynge, If hell be in earth, it
is among them. And the pristes there, be the devils. And the traitors be the
torme^tours, and the rest of the people forgetting of their King, be as it
were souls tormented. Alas how shall I be wayle them? shall I pray to God
that they may perish? or that they may amend? The one they have deserved, the
other me thinks I dare not ask of god. For settig a side their robberies,
their murders, their raueshynges, their spoil of the country, and the loss
of it for many years, how have they offended their King and sovereign Lord?
How have they dispysed his name and aucthorite. And (as much as lies in the^)
deminyshed his credit and renoume. Shall I say merely? Every honest man among
them, may repent him self of his good living. And every evil man (I think) is
sorry: he was no more wretched, and yet no euilnes nor wretchedness, allows any
man (if he will not be a rank traitor) only that profession makes rulers.
And because they understand that serving men be comenly brought up in such
ciuylite that hardely they be made traitors, Yt is a common Proverb, that
trust serving man, trust gentle man, (...) now no place is left but for
traitors, all other sciences goes (...) beggynge with them, and yet I doubt
not, but their facultye will have the price of the market which is a halter
and a tree. Thus far after my accustomed manner I have entreated generallytees,
and yet such as my heart is full of, and where might I better discharge my
sorrow then with one, which will take part thereof, I could not tell? But you
will say, ye can lamente the things as much as I, but for the matter of my
Letter, you would desire some particular news, or at the least my Judgment,
what I thought would follow. For news, as I ^^omysed you in my former letters
to send you their Articles, (...) I do now here include them, ^he which I
could not well perform before, because they ^aunged them so often, and
de^^ysed so many, sometime having ^ome reasonable, an other time. ^ot one
tolerable, such diuer^^tees of heads there was among them, that for every
^ynde of brain there was one ^aner of Article, the priests, ^^ey harped all
upon a plain ^^nge of Rome, certain traitors ^oulde halow home Cardinal ^^le,
a nombre of vagabon^es would have no Justice, a ^^nde of thieves, would have
(...) State of any Gentlemen and yet to put al in one bag, (...) sort of
traitors would have another king nor good subjects. And so every varlet
(abounded in his own sense) At the last, they concluded upon these Articles,
and set to their names as ye shall see in the copy thereof. As for other news
(until my Lord Priuey seal shall have ye power come to him, which he daily
looks for) I ca^ not have to write. For my Lord lies with the kings power,
here at a place called Honnyton. Who (I assure you) has so governed these
parties here, by his contynuall labor, and wisdom, that hither to, the
enemies dare not come forth out of their dens (for so would ye call them) if
ye saw the lanes, the hills, the woods and straight passages, betwyxt us and
them, They lie still nere Exceter as I wrote in my last Letters. And not
wtstandynge, the twyse burhyng of the gates, yet hither to can they not
preuayll. A great part of the^ continues with their first Captain called
vndethyl, a taylour of Sa^pforde courtney. I think they keep him still, because
they can not find his match, a Captain well chosen by the devil at the first.
This is for the news. For my opinion, I dare be bold with you and yet therein
I will use few words, because if I err, I will not err to long a time, I
assure you, nothing more encouraged them, then that they looked all other people
being sturred up in other parties for enclosures and such like grieffe would
have taken their quarrel in hand, so now nothing has so much decayed their
courage as that they hear and know the contrary. Their boldenes being now
of their own stoore, without hope of partakynge, more desperate then mighty
and less for their purpose, then for their nombre, very many being there
assembled with them, by force against their will, and many dayle by
repentance, reacknoweledgi^ge their duties and Subieccyon. And in deed, the
very order and manner of quyetynge of all other countries puts them clerelye
from hope to stir again, for they be not ignorant that the more part of
the requests of them were such, as because they could not reasonable be
rejected, being for reformacion of diverse abuses in the comu^e wealth (not for
the bri^ging in of the Romish aucthoryte against the King, and his Royal
Croune) they be for the most part granted, in such sort as the people have
received mercy, and be departed home with good contentacyon, like good
Subjects. The Kings Majesty sustained no dishonor, having ruled, his
people, both with Justice and mercy, proporcyonallye, and finally the things
which were evil used in the common wealth, very like to be reformed, part,
presently by Commission, part, by Parliament, to the comen profit of the
whole Realm, of so good an end our rebels here have be^ most sorye
wisshing that the other people had leaped from hedge breakinge, to house
robbing, from dear huntyng, to horse hunting, from wantonness, to stark madness,
as they have here from robberies to rape, from rape to murder, from murder to
treason and popery, and so to the devil, whereas I fear they will continue. And
in deed if I may presume (as I dare do much with you my friend) to allow the
Cousels deed, me thinks, y^ matters have byne very well ordered (as it is
reported here among us) for although by Justice every man deserves death,
which ryseth against his prince, yea though he have much grief, and that the
kings Majesty might of Justice make slaughter of his people, yet if there be
any place for mercy, it was in this case for the King to show it, upon his
own people, upon people forget full, not obstynate, traitors by construccyon
of Law, not by offense of heart, where the fault of the most part of them
was in deed unlawful Assemblyes, but without open robberyes, inurder or
spoils, referrynge their grieffes as Sutours, not Orderars, cryeng for mercy
as offenders; not Challengers. And on the other side, the Justice showed, was
right ne^^ssa^^e, being exte^ded, upon such as ^^ther lacked cause to
compain, (...) lacked grace to seek for ye kin^s mercy, and to say my mind
^s one nether of Court nor Cou^ple, if the Kings sword ^^ghte short upon
any, it was upon two kind of people, ta^ke Popish priests, repynynge against
the kings wholesome doctrine, or upon the common runnegates, seedme^ of
sedicion, of the which we have plentye here, against whom. If the martial
law were executed, and were currante quoyne in every shyre, as I here say,
there is a Proclamation for the same (which I have not yet seen, but by your
next letters trust to receive) I think there would be as few runners abroad,
as now there be many. You must give me leave to talk a little more after my
wounted manner, which is to sai my mind fra^kly unto you without offense. Now
me thinks the end is such of your matters there, as every state of people
will be content therewith, and so the most trouble will rest with these
traitors. For with you, the kings people which deserved death, be by mercy
preserved, and the things evil used (as in deed disceases there be in the
commonwealth) shall be now well ordered by Parliament. And if the common people
shall be eased of their griefs, the gentelmen shall also be relieved of them,
for se how much the fermour cries out of his rent, so may the gentelman well
cry out of the market, the one as much grieved as the other, and one remedy I
trust shall serve both. For me thinks it is no more difference for me, to
have. xx. pound, spe^dyng. xx. pound, then to have xx. mark, spendinge. xx.
mark, so that my estate be kept like we both, you will think I write now at
my will, because if ye remember the last y^re in the park at Wynsour when the
Court was there, this question made great argument betwyxre you and me, whether
for the amendment of things in the common wealth the fermour should first
abate his price, and then the Landed man his rent, or in contrary order, at
which time, I remember you stood upon one point, which I could not d^nye,
that the Gentylman by dear byeng, was dryu on to let dear, and I upon an
other point (not al untrue) that the dear hyrynge made dear fellynge, But
where the fault first began, neither of us would grant to the other, never
thelesse, so wayghty a matter it is, as no ways to be diseussed but by
Parliament. Where when the argument is at an end, it may be citablyshed by a
law, whereof there was never more wkelyhood, because the ameudement thereof, will
help so many as well Lords and Gentilme, as al other Commoners, no man having
eause to repyne against it, but such as gather, not to spend and improve
their lyuinges not For their charges, as many Geutilmen have done, but for
their coffers, So that to conclude, improuemet alone makes no man rich, but
improuement and sparynge. But what ^edle I with this matter and yet what dare I
net to you my fryende, by Sayncte G^orge I say to you merely out of bourde, no
one thing makes me more angry with these rebels then one article, which
touches me on the quick, and I believe, there be few in the realm, but it
will make them smart, to forgo his Abbey and Chauntrye lands wherein I for my
part am so heated, that if I should fight with those traitors, I would for
every two strokes to be stricken for treason strike on to keep my land, the
which I bought to suerlye, to deliver it at a papists appoyntement. Thus I
have exceded in words, and yet you shall count it littel, because the matter
is large, and thereby you must measure me, and not by my lines, One thing I will
ye shall mark and then I end, the matter of Cardynal Pole (as in this case) of
great importance, like as I am sure my Lord Protector is advertised, for
emonges these rebels, the chief Captain of all, sauinge one, was the
Marquis of Excetters man, and sets forth the matter of the Cardinal so
much, as in deed, he makes no other matter. His name is Berry, one of them
which sub scrybed the Articles. If ye can conuenientlye send me a Dagg when
the Kings Maiestyes ordynance comes down. Ye shall receive money for the
same of my Brother Henry. Ye shall take pain to do my humble commendacyons to
mine old Master (good Sir Anthonye Dennye knight) and especyally to my Coosyn
Master John Peers of the Guard, who I would were here with one or two
hu^oreth of ye Guard, to knecke these knaves with their Halo^r^^s. Thus f^re ye
mo^^e h^r^elye well, and pr^^^ you, as I do, that (...) may mete merclye.

The Articles of us the Commoners of Deuonshyre and Lornewall in diverse Lamps
up East and West of Excertor.
First we will have all the general counsel and holy decrees of our for
fathers observed, kept and performed, and who so ever shall again say them, we
hold them as Heretics.

Ite^ we will have the Laws of our Sovereign Lord king Henry the. vin,
concerning the six articles, to be in use again, as in his time they were.

Item we will have the make in Latten, as was before, and celebrated by the
Pryest without any man or woman co^munycaryng with him.

Item we will have the Sacrament hang over the hyeghe altar, and there to be
worshypped as it was wount to be, and they which will not thereto consent, we
will have them dye like heretykes against the holy Catholyque faith.

Item we will have the Sacrament of ye altar but at Easter delivered to the
lay people, and then but in one kind.

Item we will that our Curattes shall minister the Sacrament of Baptisine at all
times as well in the weke day as on the holy day.

Ite^ we will have holy bread and holy water made every sunday, Palms and
ashes at the times accustomed, Images to be set up again in every church, and
all other ancient old Ceremonies used heretofore, by our mother the holy
Church.

Item we will not receive the new service because it is but like a Christmas
ga^me, but we will have our old service of Mattens, mass, Euensong and
procession in Latten as it was before. And so we the Cornyshe men (whereof
certain of us under sta^deno Englysh) utterly refuse this new Englysh.

Item we will have every preacher in his sermon, and every Pryest at his
mass, pray specially by name for the souls in purgatory, as our forefathers
did.

Item we will have the Bible and al books of scripture in Englysh to be called
in again, for we be informed that otherwise the Clergy, shall not of long time
confound the heretykes.

Item we will have Doctor Moreman and Doctor Crispin which hold our opinions
to be sauely sent unto us and to them we require the Kings majesty, to give
some certain liuinges, to preach amenges us our Catholycke faith.

Item we think it very mete because the lord Cardinal Pole is of the kings
blood, should not only have his pardon, but also sent for to Rome, and
promoted to be of the kings cou^sayl.

Item we will that no Gentylman shall have any more servants then one to
wait upon him except he may dispende one hundredth mark land and for every
hundredth mark we think it reasonable he should have a man.

Item we will that the half part of the Abbey lands and Chauntrye lands, in
every man's possessions, how so ever he came by them, be given again to two
places, where two of the chief Abbeis was with in every Countye, where such
half part shall be taken out, and there to be establyshed a place for devout
persons, which shall pray for the King and the common wealth, and to the same
we will have all the alms of the Church box given for these seven years.

Ite^ for the particular grieffes of our Countreye. We will have them so
ordered, as Humfrey Arundell, and Henry Braye the Kings Mayor of Bodma^, shall
inform the Kings Majesty, if they may have salueco^duet under the Kings
great Seal, to pass and repasse, with an Heroalde at Arms.

By us Humfrey Arundell. Berry Thomas Vnderhyll. John Sloeman. Wyllyam Segar.
Chief Capytaynes. John Tompson Pryeste. Henry Bray Mayor of Bodma^ Henry Lee
Mayor of Tortiton Roger Barret Priest. The four Governors of the Camps.



