TEN SERMONS UPON SEVERAL OCCASIONS, Preached at Saint Paul's Cross, and
Elsewhere.

BY The Right Reverend Father in GOD ARTHVR LAKE Late LORD Bishop of BATH and
WELLS.

HEBR. 11.4. Being dead, he yet speaks.





LONDON, Printed by Thomas Badger, for Humphrey Mosley, and are to be sold at
his Shop at the PRINCES Arms in Saint Paul's Churchyard. 1640.

A short PREFACE of the Publisher to the Reader.
IT was my purpose to let these Sermons pass into the world without a Preface;
But that casting my thoughts at once on the quality of the Author, and the
Malady of this present Age, I remembered withal that of Aristotle, Aristot.
Rhet. 3. c. 36.
in his Rhetoricks, -- (...) -- Proems are many times in effect Medicines, they
serve to cure and heal the indisposition of the sick Auditour. J could wish
this short one might prove Medicinal against the disease of these times;
broken out into such an heat of distemper and malignity against those sacred
Magistrates of the Church, of which Number this Reverend Father Our Author was
one. Bishops in the Primitive Church were anciently called (...) (as Saint
Nazianzen insinuates) heavenly, S. Naz. or. 1.
as in regard of their original and institution, derived most undoubtedly from
Christ and his Apostles, so likewise heavenly also, for their most Christian,
exemplary, and godly lives; who though they lived on earth, yet had their
conversation in heaven, Phi. 3.20
Philip. 3.20. And such a one (indeed) was this Bishop, whose memory is yet
bleeding and precious to all that knew him. How ever some may stand affected to
that venerable Hierarchy, yet it shall always be my prayer to God, that
first the line of Episcopal and Apostolical succession may never be
interrupted or fail in the Church of Christ. And secondly, that she may
continue still to flourish under a happy and gracious supply of many Religious
and able Bishops like to this Author. Of whose Grave Judgment, renowned Piety
and learning, J desire thee (Christian Reader) to take a better Character from
his own mouth and pen in the Sermons ensuing.

Farewell.
A SERMON PREACHED AT SAINT PAVLS CROSS, In the first Session of Parliament of
King JAMES.
PSALM. 160. VER. 29, 30. Thus they provoked God to anger with their own
inventions, and the Plague brake in upon them: But Phinees stood up, and
prayed, and the Plague was stayed.


THis Psalm, in the name of the Jews distressed (whether under Antiochus, or
in Babylon, or before both, in the days of King David, it much skilleth not,
because the Scripture necessarily proves it not: but whenever,
questionless, in the name of the distressed Jews) declares four principal
points: first, the peoples Sin; secondly, Gods Judgment; thirdly, their
Repentance, usual in affliction; fourthly, Gods readiness to Commiseration:
leading us to consider herein a double correspondencie; one, of Gods judgments
to man's sin; the other, of Gods mercy to man's penitencie. If man sin, God
strikes; if man repent of his sin, God relenteth from his wrath. This is
manifested by diverse stories of the Jews, here for this purpose only touched;
but in Moses, and the Books historical, they are with their circumstances
farther enlarged. Amongst the rest, the Psalmist points at the story which
is recorded, Number. 25. Whereupon he observes, first, the Jews sin, and that
in special, Ver. 28. They joined unto Baal Peor, and eat the offerings of the
dead; and in general, Ver. 29. They provoked God to anger with their own
inventions: secondly, Gods judgment; The Plague broke in upon them: thirdly,
The means used to pacify God; Phinees stood up and prayed: fourthly, the
effect that this means took with God; The Plague ceased: fifthly, The
blessing conferred upon Phinees, who used the means; It was imputed to him for
righteousness, throughout all generations. All which points are in themselves
fruitful, and for us behoofefull: but considering mine own strength, your
patience, and the time allotted to us both, I shall forbear the specialties of
the Jews sin, and the reward of Phinees zeal, and speak to the rest
briefly, and in their order.

The Jews sin, as it is here opened in general, offers to our
consideration two marks, common to all sins: first, they are our own
inventions; secondly, they provoke God to anger. First, Their own inventions:
The Hebrew word was so anciently, and is now ordinarily translated and fitted
unto sin. Wicked works are justly termed (ours) not as if they were not
common to the Devil with us, yea, and at first learned of the Devil by us; but
the exclusion is, of Gods will revealed in his Word, to be obeyed by the grace
of his Spirit; both which are appointed, the one outwardly, the other inwardly,
to instruct and conduct us in those things, which are meet to be observed by
us. There is no rule of true wisdom, which is not a Lesson of Gods Word; no
true virtue, which is not an effect of Gods Spirit. The first Moses teaches:
Dent. 4.1, 5, 6.
Behold (says he to the Jews) I have taught you Ordinances and Laws, keep
them therefore, and do them; for that is your wisdom and understanding in the
sight of the people, which shall hear all these Ordinances, and shall say,
only this people is wise, and of understanding, and a great Nation. The second
we learn of Esaias; who prophesying of Christ, out of whose fulness we all
receive Grace for Grace, says: Esa. 11.2:
The Spirit of God shall rest upon him; the effects of which Spirit, are after
specified to be Wisdom, Counsel, and Fortitude, the fear of the Lord,
Righteousness, and other Virtues, which make a perfectly good both Man and
Governor. And the same Prophet speaking of the Covenant of Grace, conjoyneth
these our two Guides as Gifts, which God will impart to those that shall
partake his Covenant of Grace: Esa. 59.21.
My Spirit, that is upon thee, and my Word which I shall put into thy mouth,
shall not depart from thee nor from thy Seeds Seed from henceforth, even for
ever. Psalm. 119. v. 105.
David confesses of Gods Word, that it was a Light unto his feet, and a
Lantern unto his steps; and prays, Psalm. 143. v. 10.
that Gods Spirit may lead him into the Land of Righteousness. But the Jews
would not sail by this either Card or Compass of Gods Word, and Spirit; the
Wisdom of the flesh was their Load-starre, and the Lust of the flesh did
steer their Helm. Esaias confesses it humbly; Esaias 53.6.
All we as Sheep have gone astray from Gods ways, we have turned every one
his own way. Stephen rebukes them for it sharply, Acts 7.51.
calling them men of uncircumcised ears and hearts; they always resisted the
Holy Ghost in their hearts, and the Prophots in their ears. Ier. 6. v. 16, 17.
Jeremy of all the Prophets, sets it out most plentifully: Thus says the
Lord, stand in the ways, behold and ask for the old way, which is the good
way, walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls; but they said, We
will not walk therein. Also I set Watchmen over you, which said, Take heed to
the sound of the Trumpet; but they said, We will not take heed. At another time
being recalled, they answered desperately: Jer. 18.12.
Surely, we will walk after our own imaginations, and do every man after the
stubbornness of his wicked heart: The Word that thou have spoken to us in the
Name of the Lord, Jer. 44.16.
we will not hear it of thee, but we will do whatsoever thing goes out of
our own mouths. The Prophets every where challenge them for choosing their
own way, following their own counsel, and fulfilling their own lusts. Such
works were their own. And if we will make their case ours, we may easily
judge which of our works God will reckon for our own; even all those, in
doing whereof we wittingly and willingly withdraw our obedience from Gods Word
and Spirit.

But before I leave this point; the Texts opportunity, and some men's
importunity occasioning me, I must more fully open the difference betwixt Gods
works and ours, and remove that false imputation of humane invention, that is
laid upon many a public one of ours. We must then further observe, that of our
two Guides, the Word and the Spirit, the Spirit is not severed from the Word;
it is received by the Word, and being received, it inlightens us to understand,
and inables us to obey Gods Word. That the Spirit is received by the Word, the
Apostle teaches, 2 Cor. 3^.
calling the preaching of the Gospel the ministration of the Spirit: and to the
Galathians he writes, that by the preaching of the Gospel, Gal. 3.2.
they received the Spirit. Again, that being received, it inlightens us to
understand, and inables us to obey the Word, our Savior Christ teaches us:
who speaking of the coming of the Spirit, says, Joh. 14.26.
He shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance which
I have told you: And again, He shall lead you into all Truth; Ioh. 16.13. Ioh.
17.17.
which Truth, is Gods Word, as he elsewhere expounds it. In this sense, must be
understood the Spirits Unction, it anointeth us to understand the Word; the
Spirits obsignation, it seals unto us an assurance of the Word; the Spirits
sanctification, it purifieth us to obey the Word. Saint Chrysostomes rule is
true, Siquis eorum qui dicuntur habere Spiritum Sanctum, dicit aliquid de
seipso, and non ex Euangeliis, non creditur; siquis dicta Christi sequitur,
Spiritum Sanctum habet, etc. This must be observed against old and new
Enthusiasts; who think they can see into the secrets of Heaven, without the
Looking-glass of Heaven; That they can sound the Mind of Christ, without
hearing the Voice of Christ; That they can confer with the Spirit, without
the Language of the Spirit: But we must resolve, That no man is (...), except
he be (...); no man is taught of God, but by the Word of God. I hope this place
has not any, nor this Land many, that have as yet received that evil Seed: if
it be rooted in any, their case is to be pitied; and those that are too
forward, by their fall must timely be admonished.

Our second Guide, is Gods Word: wherein many things are necessarily concluded,
which are not therein literally expressed. In matters of Faith and Manners, we
are not tied to the strictness of the Letter, but the fulness of the Sense.
Our Savior Christ is our Master in this course: He proves the Resurrection of
the Dead, Mat. 22.32.
being an Article of our Faith, against the Sadduces; and the use of the
Sabbath, being a rule of life, Mat. 12.7.
against the Pharisees, by an inference made upon the Scripture, not by any
evidence of the Letter of the Scripture. Christ is herein followed, by the
Apostles, by Councels, and Fathers. Nazianzene has comprehended the Doctrine
in this rule: Quaedam in Scripturis and sunt, and dicuntur; quaedam insunt,
etiamsi non dicantur: and he adds, That the sticking to the Letter, is
oftentimes but a pretext of impiety. And indeed, this pretext is used by the
Church of Rome: who excludes that from the Scripture, which is apparently
concluded within the sense of the Scripture, in the Doctrine of the Trinity,
the Sacraments, and some other points of moment: and having raised this mist,
closely conveyes Articles of Faith, and Rules of Life, into the Doctrine of the
Church, not only besides, but contrary to the Scripture: and yet in their late
many and wordie Pamphlets, would persuade men, that our Doctrine is our own,
and not Gods; that theirs is not their own, but Gods. Let the true Christian
confer the proofs, and for his own eternal comfort judge, whether they
deserve not the censure of Christ, Math. 15.9.
In vain do they worship me, teaching the Doctrines of Men.

Another work there is which must be examined, because the World is therewith
much perplexed; I mean the Ceremonies and Discipline: it must be inquired,
Whether the observance of them be a work of Gods, or ours. And here these
three Rules are of all hands acknowledged. First, No Discipline or Ceremony
must be contrary to the Word of God. Secondly, None must be equalled thereto.
Thirdly, Both must edify us therein. These three Rules being observed, I say,
First, whatsoever thing is in its own nature indifferent may by lawful power
be limited. Secondly, Being lawfully so enjoined, it must be obediently used.
Thirdly, No Man with a good Conscience may forgo his Vocation for this cause
only, because he cannot be released from the use of such a thing. The reason
of all is plain, for the denial of the first takes away the Magistrates
lawful power; the denial of the second argues ignorance of Christian
obedience; and the third proves that such men's credit is the measure of their
care; and they are more wedded to their fancy, then truly zealous of Gods
glory. These points have been largely amplified and Fatherly recommended; but
as yet the world will not be satisfied; the Church cannot entreat so much of
her Children, as to be dutifully obeyed. It is thought by too many a meet
deliberation, who should yield, whether the Fathers which stand for that which
is well grounded and lawfully authorized: or the Children which stand against
the Fathers of their Country, and Fathers of the Church. It were meet the
foundations were razed before the buildings be ruined, and the Reasons answered
before the Church be altered. But they have found at least a Simile to make
good their cause. The Church is like man's body. Our Sovereigns new entry may
be compared to the Spring. Saint Paul's comparison is acknowledged; and for our
Spring the Lord be blessed. But what then? As man's body, so the Church this
Spring time must be purged. An old Simile new furbished. For indeed our Church
evidences do tell us of two such Springs within these Sixty years, besides a
dangerous Autumn that went not long before, in which three seasons the Church
has been so purged, that her loss is never like to be recovered: Yet those
Physicians were so well rewarded, that we do not wonder if they have left us a
seed, that would gladly do us the like service. But we shall do well to
know, that there are many bodies that take least Physic, and yet are most in
health; and some humors though peccant sleep without distemper of the body,
which being stirred by Physic cast down and endanger many a strong body. He
spoke wisely though homely, that compared a Physician to a Laundresse: She
that washes whitest wears soonest; and I am sure it were better for the
Church to be still crasie, then so often cured. But one Rule of Physic they
observe well: for the Diet is not safely Ministered except the body be first
purged; and being so earnestly disposed to Diet us, I cannot but commend their
skill, if beforehand they would purge us. But they shall deserve better
thanks, if they spare their pains in both: the Church needs Restoratives,
rather then Purgations. He (says Plato) that will heal running eyes, must
first cure the brain; and the brain is not recovered except the stomach be
amended; for these have a dependence one upon the other, and a consent each
with the other. The Churches looseness is her sore eyes, or rather a sore in
men's eyes; the Churches ignorance is a defect in her brain, and many
complain, that diverse of her sons have too dull and flegmaticke a brain:
The Churches maintenance, is her Stomach; but the World will not understand,
that she has too cold a Stomach, that the Source and Spring of her other
Diseases arises from the coldness of that. Where the Authority of the Church
is so many ways curbed, and the Portion so curtailed, what wonder if the
unlearned are tolerated, and many lewd ones escape unpunished? But let the
Arms of the Church be unpinnacled, let the Heart of the Church be refreshed,
then the complaint will be more just: if her Eyes continue sore, if her Brain
continue cold, then mortify that Brain, pluck out those Eyes: but if you take
a contrary course, believe it, howsoever you seem to restore for the present,
you prevent not a worse disease. That Chimicall Oil, though never so curiously
extracted, and in never so small quantity ministered, is not without reason
suspected; upon the receipt whereof, many men have perished: Blame us not, if
our Neighbors harms do make us to beware. Or if our Humors do abound, and
the world will not believe the contrary, but that the Churches Authority is
too great, her Livings be too many; the one gives liberty to Sin, the other
breeds neglect of many Souls; deal with us as with Scholars; if we must dye,
let us dye by the Book. Ask counsel of Antiquity, and let our Fathers
teach: Learn of them what Physicians they used, when as they cured the
Physicians of their Souls. Moses commends the charge of the whole Law unto the
King: both first and second Table, concerning the Parsons, Priests, and People,
were disposed and ordered by the appointment of the King: But the King did not
proceed herein, without counsel. Read the story of Jehosaphat, Joash, and
Ezechias, (all good Kings) and there you shall find who in these cases, were
the Kings directors: The advice and execution was the Priests, the command and
power was the Kings. Descend to the days of Christianity, peruse the Laws of
Christian Emperors, see when they assembled, whom they used in Councels. Come
to the days of Charlemaine, the first German and worthiest Emperor, ^et the
History inform you, who made up his reforming Chapter. Our History may give
some light unto us, and our ancient Laws may not be over-slipped by us: if we
couple these together, the uniformitie we sinde in them, so ancient, so
general, deserves to be a pattern to us. And indeed, if it please us to
observe it, there are three things necessarily required in them that shall
discreetly undertake so great a work, Science, Conscience, and Experience. In
S^ience, I speak of things of this nature: we presume so far of men's
modesty, that they will not compare with us; if any man think otherwise, his
pride is rather to be chastised, then his opinion refuted. And for Experience,
our Neighbor-countries may teach us, how little good newfound courses have
or will perform, promise they never so much good unto us: Variety of
Heresies, and inconvenient Policies do now afflict them, and I pray God they
may be far from us. There remains only Conscience, which we do not deny
to others, and others must yield it unto us. In these things we should not
prejudice one the other, but reserre our selves both to God, who is the
unpartiall Judge of both. Saint Paul is my Author. Judge nothing (says he)
before the time, 1 Cor. 4.5.
until the Lord come, who will lighten things that are hid in darkness, and
make the counsels of the heart manifest; then shall every man have praise of
God. But this Rule is transgressed, and the Church, contrary to this Rule,
grievously wounded. Are there no Drunkards, Adulterers, common Barreters, but
of the Church? Or is their excess in these sins grown so extraordinary,
that they cannot be repressed by the Censures of their Ordinary? Is
Suspension, Deprivation, Degradation, no pain? But the Minister must be tried
by God and his Country? Or will the diligence of the Civil Sword make amends
for the negligence of the Ecclesiastical Censure? I will not particularize
such crying sins as reign amongst us: and yet the Civil Sword authorized
thereunto, is slow enough to root them out; nay, it is, if not the breeder, yet
the a better of some of them: a thing not observed, and therefore not much
remedied. Therefore, let us both remember the Apostles Rule, 1 Timothy 1.8.
We know the Law is good, if a man use it lawfully, Your Law is good, and ours
is good; but we are both sick of one disease, we have not so much grace as we
should have, to use it lawfully: We should therefore pray one for another,
amend one the other, and bear one with the other. A popular seditious Roman
was wont in their Parliaments, to advise the Commons to mark well the first
words of the Bill: If it began with, Siquis Dictator, Consul, Praetor, etc. If
such or such a Magistrate shall do thus or thus hereafter, his pain shall be
such and such; they should pass the Bill, and not weigh it, were there never
so much rigorousnesse in it: his reason was, Sciant ad se nihil pertinere; What
need they stick at it, when others must smart for it? But if the Bill began, Si
Pop. Romanus, aut si Quirites, aut Plebs, That if the Commons did thus, or
thus, such should be their punishment; then they must heed it, sift it, and
cross it, lest their liberty be impeached, their state impaired, and their
bodies violated. This was a popular, but a pestilent counsel; far be it from
all Christians either to approve or practice it. Let us not bind heavy
burdens, to lay on Ministers shoulders, which the better sort of Commons will
be loath to lift with the least of their fingers: distinguish our persons from
our Vocations; and let the meanest of our persons sare the better, for the
greatness of our Vocations. The time was, when the lower Clergy was reckoned
in place next to the Peers; let it not down so many degrees, as to range it
with the meanest of the Commons. Remember you have your Spiritual Birth from
us, and your Spiritual Life is maintained by us: Our hands wash you from your
sins, our mouths instill into you Gods grace: you owe more unto us, then to
all Professions besides ours. Why should there then be such Fetters clapped on
our Legs? Such mean Portions be thought enough for us? In the Life of
Charlemaine it is reported, That warring against the Sarazins in Spain, he so
far ^ressed them, that their King was content to become a Christian, so that
Peace might be granted them. During the Treaty, Charlemaine feasted Aigoland,
the Sarazin King. As they sat at meat, the Sarazin perceived a company of men
in the same Room meanly attended, and thinly dieted; and asked Charlemaine,
what they were? Charlemaine and his Nobles answered; Oh, these be the Ministers
of God: The Sarazin replied; In sooth, yours is a petty God, that has such
miserable and contemptible servants: And thereupon, as the Story adds, brake
off the Treaty, and would not become a Christian. You are wise enough to
understand it, I will not apply it; you shall do well, to make use of it. The
contempt of the Minister, is the reproach of God; and therefore, in all your
deliberations, think of us, speak to us, and deal with us, as the
Ambassadors of God, and procurers of your greatest good. If any man will be
obstinate in another course, shall I say with Michael, Jude 9.
The Lord rebuke him? Nay, rather I will pray with Christ, Father, Luc. 23.34.
forgive them, they know not what they do: Their Posterity will rue their
oversight; all such works will prove their own. And thus much of the first
mark of sin, it is our own invention.

The second follows, It provokes Gods wrath. Esa. 27.4.
Wrath is not in me, says God: Wisd. 1.13.
God made not death: Eze. 18.32
He delights not in the death of a sinner: Exo. 34.6.
(...) long suffering, slow to anger; and when he punishes, he Lam. 3.33.
does it not ex animo. This appears by that passionate speech of his: Hos.
11.8.
How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee up, O Israel? How
shall I make thee as Admah? How shall I set thee as Zeboim? My heart is turned
within me, my repentings are rolled together. Whereupon we may thus reason: Is
God displeased? Then Man has offended: For God begins with no man. Esa. 50.1.
Where (says God) is the Bill of your Mothers Divorcement, whom I have cast
off? Or who is the Creditor to whom I have sold you? Behold for your iniquities
are you sold, and because of your transgressions is your Mother cast off. This
rule God observed with Joshua in the case Jos. 7.11.
of Achan. Saul acknowledged it, when Sam. 14 38.
God did not answer him: The Heathen Ion. 1.7.
confessed it, when the storm pursued them, and no mervaile: For God
delights in the prosperity of his servants. Deuteronomy. 5.29
Oh, says he that there were in them such a heart to fear me, and keep my
commandments, that it might go well with them and their posterity for ever. No
better experiment then this present History. In the Israelites journey to
Canaan God sent his terror before them; The Midianites were disheartened with
the sight of them: Balaam being sent for to Balac, instead of a Curse, though
unwillingly of himself, and unacceptably to the King, was on every quarter
compelled of God to bless them. Behold Gods love toward them, how desirous he
is, that no Protection due on his part should be wanting to them. But, when God
would not forsake them, their Enemies could not match them: The Witches
sorcerie could not prevail upon them; Their own wits and lusts did serve them
to forsake God, to betray themselves; and by Luxury, Incontinence, and
Idolatry, to strip themselves both of favor and mercy. Let us heed to our
selves in this Example; God has dealt with us, as he did with Israel. The
Moabite is disheartened; Balaams tongue is tied; In stead of a Curse and a
Sword, they send us a Blessing, and desire Peace. The work must be ascribed to
God; and for the work we must give glory to him only. But let us not loose our
peace with God, while we like the peace of Man: Do I dissuade Peace? God
forbid. A Minister is a messenger of Peace; and the Apostles rule is, That Romans
12.18.
with all men, as far as it is possible, we should entertain Peace: But in
the Name of God I must remember unto you a piece of Christ's Epistle to the
Church of Pergamus. (...) 2.24.
I have a few things against thee, because thou have there them that maintain
the doctrine of Balaam, which taught Balak to put a stumbling block before the
children of Israel, that they should eat things sacrificed to Idols, and comm^t
Fornication. I do not entermeddle with the affairs of Princes: I speak of
private Men; the ordinary repair of unnecessary persons to the Moabites Tents,
not only to feast with them, but also to commit Fornication, assuredly
spiritual, it may be corporal too: may breed us war with God, while we
treat of Peace with Men. My desire is, that all avoid this; and that those who
are in Authority provide against it. God is not moved, unless he be provoked.

The word (provoked) is applied indifferently both to God, and Man; but the
thing must be conceived to be otherwise in God then in Man, whether we
respect the cause, the nature, or the manner of it. 1 The cause moving anger in
Man is not always sin, but sometimes virtue; and that not only in wicked
Men, but also in the best. Moses was angry with the Commandment of God, Jonas
with the mercy of God, Job with the trial of God; but nothing can stir anger
in God, but only sin. Psalm. 75.8
In the hand of God (says David) there is a Cup, and the Wine is Red, it is
full mixed, and he pours out of the same. Surely all the wicked of the Earth
shall wring out, and drink the dregs thereof. Speaking of that Wine that is
mentioned, Revel. 14. And there called verse 10.
the Wine of the wrath of God. Saint Paul speaking of Fornication,
Covetousness, and foolish talking, adds, that for Ephesians. 5.6
such things comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. 2
Anger in man is a passion and causes alteration, it is though a short, yet a
sharp madness: But Gods nature being without composition, admits no mutation;
as Exo. 3.14
He is that which he is: so with him there is Iam. 1.17
no variableness, nor shadow of change. 3 Man's anger keeps no measure. Saint
James observes it saying, Jam. 1.19.20.
Be slow to anger. For the wrath of Man fulfilleth not the righteousness of
God. But the wise man speaking of Gods judgments, says, That Wisd. 11.20.
he orders them in number, weight, and measure. And the same phrase is used in
the Story of Belshazzar, where the handwriting has, Dan. 5 25.
Mean, Mean, Tekel, Vpharsin: that is, Thou art numbered, and weighed, and thy
Kingdom is divided. So that by the anger of man, we cannot learn what is the
anger of God, except we will fasten on God the imperfections of man. What then
is anger in God? We must thus conceive it. As sin is contrary to Gods
holiness, so is it proceeded against, by Gods justice. The dislike that Gods
holiness takes against sin, is called his hatred; and the process of his
justice, is called his wrath: And that process may be considered, either as by
Gods Ministers it is threatened, and so Saint Paul calls it, Romans 1.18.
Gods revealed Wrath: or, as by Gods powerful hand it is executed; in which
sense, the Scripture remembers us of a Romans 2.5.
Day of Wrath. When men are said to provoke Gods wrath, the meaning is, that
what Gods Ministers in his Name have threatened, that same punishment by Gods
power is inflicted upon irrepentant godless men. And in this sense must we
take the phrase in this place, and learn there-out to imitate God: not to be
offended, but with evil; not to be offended, before we be provoked with evil;
not to pass a mean, when we have a just cause to be offended with those that
are evil: an imitation fit for the best men, seeing the defect thereof has
been an imperfection even in the worthiest men. And thus much of the second
mark of sin.

Now couple these two together, and observe in a word the viperousnesse of
sin; so natural, so unnatural unto us. It is unto us both our brood, and
bane: like the Devil himself, who is a Serpent, and a Satan; cunning to seduce
us, malicious to accuse us. Our own sins ensnare us, our own sins
separate between God and us, our own sins testify against us, our own
sins are a destruction unto us. And therefore, we have good reason to hearken
to Saint Peter: 1 Pet. 2.11.
I beseech you, brethren, as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly
lusts, which fight against the foul: and to the son of Sirach, saying; Eccl.
21.2.
Fly from sin, as from a Serpent; for if thou come too near, it will
bite thee; the teeth thereof are as it were the teeth of a Lion, slaying the
souls of men. Our own works provoke Gods wrath against us. And thus much of
the first point, which is the peoples sin, described by two marks; the one,
it is our own invention; the other, it provokes Gods wrath.

I come to the second point, which is Gods judgment, contained in these words,
The Plague brake out upon them. The word Plague, is streitned, in our English
Tongue, and commonly referred only to the Pestilence: but in other Languages
it reaches farther, and notes any extraordinary stroke that comes from God.
The Prophets under that word, contain these four, Famine, Pestilence, wild
Beasts, and the Sword; which by an excellency, are called the four Plagues of
God: Not that God does not create all, both Esa. 45.7.
Light and Darkness, Good and Evil, as the Prophet speaks; but because
strokes, if they be private, particular, or ordinary, do not move us; their
second causes, not the first, are observed by us: Gods Justice in them is not
reverenced, his Hand is not discerned, his Power is not feared: men do not
reason, Hodie mihi, cras tibi; Luc. 13.3.
Except we repent, we shall likewise perish: Therefore, as men have crying
sins, that pierce the Heavens, and ascend unto the very Throne of God, and call
for Vengeance at the hand of God; so God has crying Justice, that pierces the
Heavens, descends unto man, rowzeth the guilty Conscience, and importuneth
man's repentance. This Voice is the Voice of Sinai, so terrible, that Moses
himself will Heb. 12.21
quake and fear: such strokes fall not, but from most men they wrest the
confession of Pharaohs Enchanters, Exo. 8.19.
This is the finger of God. In our Language, we call the Pestilence the
Visitation of God, and the Tokens thereof, Gods marks: and the inscription of
our doors is, Lord have mercy upon us; which testifies our confession;
whilst that punishing Angel stirs, we stand all at the mercy of God. Some
learned men are of opinion, that a Pestilence wasting many of the Jews, was a
part of that Plague, wherewith God is said here to have stricken them; but
because the proof is not pregnant, we will not further pursue it: Of this we
are sure, that, that which is evident, is equivalent; for in one day, how many
ways soever they died 24000. were destroyed. But come we to the second part of
this note, wherein it is said, This Plague brake out upon them; Only remember
that the heavier Gods judgment lights upon us, the louder he calls for
repentance unto us.

The Plague brake out upon them.] The word has many significations, which has
caused many interpretations. It signifies to break out, and it signifies to
multiply: the word bearing both, we may make good use of both. If we translate
(it brake out) then it notes first, that Gods mercy is as it were a wall
betwixt us and his justice. Psa. 103.3
If thou Lord (says David) should be extreme to mark what is done amiss,
O Lord who can abide it? But there is mercy with thee, that thou may be
feared. And in another place, Psa. 116.5
The Lord is merciful and righteous, and our God is full of compassion: Where
it is to be observed, that the placing of the words imports, that Gods Mercy is
double to his Justice; and that his Mercy compasses on every side, and senceth
us against his Justice. Yet the son of Sirach observes well, that there is
Eccl. 16.11.
with God not only Mercy; but also Wrath: he is mighty to for give, and to
pour out displeasure. If men elevate Gods power, blemish his Holiness, or
defer Repentance: they shall find, that as his Mercy is great; so is his
punishment also. Wisd. 12.17.
When men think thee not to be of a perfect power, thou declarest thy power,
and reprovest the boldness of the wise. Psalm. 50.21.
These sins have thou committed (says God unto the wicked) and I held my
tongue; therefore thou thoughtest, that I was like unto thee; but I will
reprove thee, and set thy sins in order before thee. Romans 2.4.5.
He that despises the riches of Gods patience, not knowing that his goodness
should lead men to repentance, does but treasure up unto himself wrath:
against the day of wrath, when God shall reward every man according to his
works. God can be Ier. 15.6.
weary of repenting, as he tells Jeremy; namely, when he is Anos 2.13.
pressed under our sins, as a Cart is pressed that is full of sheaves. When
the Joel 3.13.
harvest of our sin is ripe, God will put in his sickle. Then will the Lord
God say, even the mighty One of Israel: Esa. 1.24.
Oh, I will ease me of mine adversaries, I will avenge me of mine enemies.

Again, in this breaking out of the Plague, we may observe, not only that
Mercy sometimes gives place to Justice, but also the unresistablenesse of
Justice, when it comes, it bears down all before it. Wherefore, Gods wrath
seizing upon sinners, is compared to a whirlewind Psalm. 1.4.
scattering chafe, to a devouring fire Mal. 4.1.
consuming stubble, to a violent Nahum. 1.8.
flood, bearing down cum stabulis armenta, all that stands against it.

Lastly, here we may observe the correspondence of Gods justice to man's sin:
the same word is applied to both; to man sinning, to God striking; both of them
(...) Hos. 4.2.
do break forth: first, man breaks through Gods Law, no tie being of force
to hold him; and then man breaks through Gods defense, his mercy not
restraining him, nor man's power being able to resist him. Therefore, if we will
that God set bounds to his wrath, we must keep within the bounds of our own
duty.

Some respect not so much the violence, as the variety of the Plague, and
translate it, The Plague was multiplied. First, as the Sin, so the Plague was
manifold. They fell spiritually, and corporally; by Idolatry, and
Incontinencie: therefore, their Plague was not of one sort; some were hanged,
some were stabbed, and some consumed with Pestilence. Man cannot be so witty,
in varying of Sins; but God will be as witty, in varying of Plagues.
Secondly, the Plague was multiplied, not only in kind, but in degree. The
Jews in the Wilderness, sustained many Plagues: Of those that perished in
many of them the number is not specified; but of those that are specified, this
is the greatest: At first, there dyed but Exodus 32.28.
3000; at the second, Number. 16.49.
14000; at this, which is the third, Number. 25.9.
24000: To teach us, that though the judgment we have felt be terrible, yet
God has in store more intolerable; and the deeper we sink in sin, the
lower we shall descend in Hell. All Histories are records of it, all
Countr^yes do preach it: but we shall do best, if we read it in our
selves; and escape best, if we apply it to our selves.

I hasten to the third point, which contains the means to pacify God;
Phinees stood up and prayed: Phinees, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron,
a Priest by birth and function; the nearer he was to God, the more zealous he
was for the glory of God. Levi had this testimony of Moses: Deuteronomy. 33.9.
He said to his Father and Mother, I regard you not; to his Brethren, I
acknowledge you not; and to his Children, I know you not, that he might observe
the Law of God, and keep his Covenant. Here, a son of Levi has this
testimony from God, that he was zealous for his glory, and pacified his wrath:
for both he is commended, and plentifully rewarded. A good example for such as
have the like charge, to stir them up to the like zeal. And God grant we may
do so with God, that God may deal so with us, and with our seed for ever.

But the fact of Phinehas has something extraordinary. [He stood up.] Being a
private man, and a Priest, he used the Sword: so some observe; but that he was
a private man, is not so true. Besides the High Priest, there were other chief
Priests, which had charge of many both persons and things; the Books of
Numbers, Chronicles, and the Gospel, clear this point: And that Gods pleasure
was, that the Priests should sometimes use the Sword, it is plain, by the
examples of Eli, Samuel, and the Maccabees, Judges and reformers of the
Commonwealth o^ Israel: the two first, expressly thereunto called of God; and
the thirds lawful power may be argued, by the manifold blessings it was
accompanied with from God. But this was in defect of Civil Power, which
ordinarily by Gods appointment bears the Sword; and we must be well warranted,
before such examples be imitated: when there is a Civil Governor, the Priest
can have no pretext to usurp the Authority of the Governor. The greater is
the sin of the B. of Rome, who has combined so great a Sword with so great a
Key, and executes ungodly zeal with unjust power. But Phinees his case is not
such. God bears witness to his zeal, and approves his fact: his zeal was
discernable only of God; but the fact excusable in the judgment of men, not
only commendable by the witness of God. For against the sin, God had
pronounced death, Moses had specified the kind of death; they were backward,
that should have executed the Sentence: but rather then God should be openly
dishonored, the Magistrates charge not obeyed, up stood Phinees, and by him
the parties were executed. So that Phinees did debase himself to be an
Executioner, rather then exalt himself as an Usurper; he leveld his action, by
Gods and Moses his former direction: which I observe the rather, because some
too far amplify the irregularitie of Phinees his fact; and some are too
forward, upon warrant of this Example, to usurp the Magistrates Sword: but
neither find good ground to build upon, in this History.

I go on: Phinehas stood up and prayed. The word has diverse significations,
and they have bred diverse interpretations among both ancient and later Divines.
The Translations are three: The Septuagint, (...), He did propitiate or pacify
GOD: the Chalde, (...) He prayed unto God. And some are persuaded, that (...)
was then written (...) neither is it improbable: for it is no Article of our
Creed, that the Masoreth contains all various Lections; yea, there are strong
presumptions to the contrary. Those that are later then either the Septuagint
or Chalde, and whose Masters I suppose were worse, translate it (He executed
judgment,) whose ground is the Conjugation of the Verb, enforcing, as they
think, this for the fittest signification. But it cannot be justified, that
this is the only signification of that Conjugation; and the places alleged,
may make it to be doubted, whether at all this be the signification. But that
which I note, is this; That all three Translations do but fully express the
fact, and every one of them contains some principal circumstance of the
fact. Why then do we wrangle about words? That Phinees executed judgment, we
will not deny; That he pacified God, and used prayer to sanctify his work
unto God, they may not deny; That the Word may bear all, there is no
judicious Divine can deny: and yet lo, this is one of the blemishes of our
Liturgy; this seems a just cause, why many men's Consciences will not suffer
them to subscribe to our Liturgy. He that knows the difference between the
Hebrew and the Septuagint, and observes, that both the Apostles and
Evangelists, notwithstanding that difference, used it, and edified many
thousands by it: He that knows, that the great Lights of the Primitive Church
were for the most part ignorant of the original Hebrew, and yet brought many
Hebrews unto God: He that knows Saint Hieromes Translation was by Saint
Austin and others impugned, who thought the peace of the Church, and practice
of Religion, of greater price then phrases and properties of words: He, I say,
that knows these things, will judge our Church, treading their steps, worthy
of better entertainment, then the reproach of spightfull tongues. Brethren, 1
Cor. 8.^.
we know that we all have knowledge, but knowledge puffs up, and it is
charity that edifieth. Wherefore we conclude with the Apostle, and persuade
our opposites, (...). Romans 12.3.
Let your zeal be grounded upon knowledge, your knowledge ripened with
experience, and both seasoned with charity.

Notwithstanding, let us take it as they would have it, (He executed judgment)
and make some good use of it. Number. 25.6.
They were at prayers, so the story reports; and this sight was presented, in
the midst of their tears. A sight on the one side abominable, on the other
honorable. First, it was abominable, that in time of public calamity any man
should be so brutish, as to intend this luxury: yet some such there were.
Behold here one, and that a great one, Zimri the son of Salu, a Prince of the
Tribe of Simeon. When in a like case, Jeremy had preached in vain, he turns
to God with this speech: O Lord, Jer. 5. v. 3, 4, 5.
are not thine eyes upon the Truth; thou have smitten them, but they have not
sorrowed; thou have consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction;
they have made their faces harder then a stone, and have refused to return.
Therefore I said, Surely, those to whom I have hitherto preached, are but poor
men, and simple ones, which know not the way of the Lord, nor the judgment of
their God. I will get me to the great men, and speak to them; they are learned
in the way of the Lord, and in the judgment of their God. But what he found,
he reports: Those great men are become the sons of Belial; they have broken
the yoke, and burst Gods bands. Amos 6. v. 4, 5, 6.
They were great men in the days of Amos, that lay upon Beds of Ivorie, eat
the Lambs of the Flock, and Calves out of the Stall: They sung unto the sound
of the Violl, and invented to themselves Instruments of Music, like David:
They drunk Wine in Bowls, and anointed themselves with sweetest Ointments in
the midst; and yet without all touch of sorrow for the affliction of Joseph. I
would this were not a disease of ours. Sure I am, mortification in the days of
mortality, is in no such request, as Reason, much more Religion, requires it
to be. We have too many Zimri's; we lack a Phinees, to stand up and execute
judgment. Secondly, his fact was as honorable, as Zimri's was detestable.
That which I will observe, is, That he left his prayers, and interrupted his
tears, hardening that heart against a sinner, which melted at the wrath of
God; erecting that Body, yea, and soul too, against a sinner, which lay humble
and prostrate before God; sanctifying those hands, to sacrifice to the wrath of
God, provoked by a sinner, which before were lift up in innocence to God. As
God will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice, so will he have Judgment too.
Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, Mich. 6.6, 7, 8
and how my self before the high God? Shall I come before him with
burntofferings, and Calves of a year old? Will the Lord be pleased with
thousands of Rams, or with ten thousand Rivers of Oil? Shall I give my
firstborn for my transgression? Even the fruit of my body, for the sin of
my soul? He has showed thee, O man, what the Lord requires of thee; surely
to do justly, Esa. 1. v. 11. etc.
etc. And the very same Lesson is in the first of Esaias. Open and notorious
Malefactors are truly called (...), because the taking away of them is a
purging of the State. Better that one dye by the hand of the Magistrate, then a
thousand perish by the hand of God. If Atheists, Blasphemers, Adulterers, and
Oppressors, were now justly punished, our whole Land should not be so often
plagued. And Magistrates must think, that they are not innocent of their
brothers blood, whom God does visit through their default. I might add too,
that the sins of Malefactors are encouraged, whilst too much connivencie is
used. But to close up this point, this is a Rule for us all: We must not be
wanting to our selves, though Magistrates be defective in their charge; they
stand or fall to their Lord, and we to our common Lord: We are nothing the more
innocent, because they are negligent. Therefore it behooves us all, in time to
judge our selves, lest in due time we be judged; taking this for our comfort,
That he shall never find God a severe Judge, that will be his own sincere
Judge: And this will appear in the last point, to which I come.

The Plague ceased.] When judgment was executed upon one, the Plague ceased
from them all. Behold here a merciful Judge. Modicum supplicii satis est
Patri. If we respect the measure, it is little. Esa. 27. v. 7, 8.
Has he smote Judah (says Esaias) as he smote those that smote Judah? Or is the
laughter of Judah like to the slaughter of them that were slain by Judah? In
measure, and in the branches thereof, will thou contend with Judah? If we
respect the time also, it is little: Esa. 54.7, 8.
For a little while (says he) have I forsaken thee, but with great compassion
will I gather thee: For a moment, in mine anger, I hid my face from thee, but
with everlasting mercy have I had compassion on thee. Gods passion is not like
men's, that it must have its forth; or, that it must calm with time: God is not
like a Prince, that conquers Kingdoms, and is a slave to himself: God, who
can command all, commands Himself most of all. And this absolute freedom of
God, is one of his incommunicable properties; his strokes laid on his
children, being ad correctionem, but not ad destructionem, may be stayed when
and where it pleases him. David no sooner confesses, 2 Samuel 12.13.
I have sinned, but Nathan is furnished with his Message; and God has removed
the punishment of thy sin. So soon as 2 King. 19.
Ezechias is humbled, God is entreated. If the Luke 15.
Prodigal Son do but penitently look toward his Father, he shall be
lovingly received and cherished. Ezekiel. 18.21, 22.
At what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sin from the bottom of
his heart, I will put all his wickedness out of my remembrance, says the
Lord. But we must note, that if God be entreated, and not pacified, it is
because some sin is smothered, because men are not unfainedly mortified. If
we sorrow for sin feelingly, if we crucify the Iusts of the flesh
unpartially, if we purpose to cleave unto God steadfastly; God will release our
Debt, remove our Plague, and establish our Prosperity, mercifully, speedily,
and irrepentantly. Let us use this method in our return to God, and we shall
find this measure at the hand of God. The sum of all which has been said, is
this: God breaks not with man, except man break first with God; and if God be
rightly pacified, he will easily be reconciled.

O Lord, infuse goodness into our Nature, that we may enjoy the graciousnesse
of thy Nature. Bridle us so with thy Spirit, that we pass not those bounds
which thou have set us, lest thy wrath break out upon us: Or if we sin (as
Lord who sins not?) let us sorrow for our sin; let us not both displease
and despise thee. Raise many Phinehasses, in the days of so many Zimries. Yea,
Lord, let every man be a Phinehas unto himself. Finally, in our true
humility, and unfeigned zeal for thy glory, good Lord accept us, good Lord
bless us, and our seed for ever.

Amen.
A SERMON PREACHED AT SAINT PAVLS CROSS, on TRINITY SUNDAY.
JUDE 5.20, 21. But ye beloved, edify your selves in your most holy faith,
praying in the Holy Ghost.

And keep your selves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord
Jesus Christ unto eternal life.


BY the Ordinance of the Church, we solemnize this day to one God in three
Persons, whom we cannot behold clearly, till we enjoy him fully. In both
stands our perfect blessedness in heaven. Seeing then we are now not in
Patria, but in via, in the state not of glory, but of grace, we must not pass
our bounds, nor pass nearer then we are called. Many that have been over-bold
have lost themselves; many that have waded too far have been swallowed up in
this deep, Pro. 25.27.
and the rule continues still, Qui scrutator est majestatis, opprimetur a
gloria: he that pries too near into this glorious Majesty, shall find to his
ruin that it is an incomprehensible mystery. I have therefore chosen this
Scripture, which respects the season, and yet exceeds not our strength, in
the meditation whereof we need not hazard our weak sight, to behold the body of
the Sun shining in his strength above in the firmament, but may refresh it in
the beams thereof sweetly tempered to our use on the face of this earth. Here
we may see, that there are three persons in God; and also that which we should
most desire to see, how all three concur to do us good. The Holy Spirit
teaches us to pray to God the Father, who embraces us with love manifested in
that eternal life, which we shall enjoy at the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Now although we must stay by the possession of this eternal life, till
the day of Christ, yet must we secure our title thereunto in the days of our
flesh. And how must we secure that? Surely by those virtues, wherewith God
does fence his Church against the deluge of those vices that overflow the
world. The Church and the world are distinct societies, and therefore should be
of different qualities. Upon this ground, the maine drift of this Epistle is to
teach us that we may not conform our selves to them, from whom we are severed
by Christ. Yea in particular my text persuades, that considering the continual
and woeful revolting of counterfeit believers and corrupt livers, as many as
are true members of Christ, and ordained to continue the succession of the
Church, ought the more to proceed in grace, and more and more apply themselves
to the fountain of grace. 1. They must proceed in grace. Edify (says Saint
Jude) your selves in your most holy says. 2. They must daily reside by the
fountain of grace. Keep your selves in the love of God. But because it is a
hard matter to go on, and he that is constant must endure many a conflict, we
are advised to seek help, and to be of good hope to find help. 1. To seek
help, praying in the Holy Ghost. 2. To be of good hope to find it, looking
for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life. You see then that
the argument of this Scripture is a Christian care, whereof there are two
endeavors: to profit, and persevere, in grace and in the love of God, and in
these we are sustained by two blessed means, help and hope; Help from the
holy spirit, and hope in Jesus Christ. Let us resume these points, and consider
them briefly in order.

Edify.] The whole Church and every member thereof is compared to an house;
but such a house as is a Temple, destined to be a place, where God will put his
name and vouchsafe his presence, where we must present our sacrifices, and do
him reverence. To note this, the measure of the Arc of Noah, and of the Temple
of Solomon were proportioned to the body of a man in the old Testament; and in
the new the resemblance is unfolded by Christ. Thou art Peter, and upon this
rock will J build my Church. Mat. 16.18
Which words Saint Peter has so expounded to this purpose, that he checks his
gloss which pretends to be successor to Saint Peter. 1 Pet 2. v. 3, 4, 5.
You have tasted (says he) that the Lord is bountiful, to whom coming as to
a living stone, disallowed of men, but chosen of God, and precious, ye also as
living stones are made a spiritual house, an holy Priesthood to offer up
spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God through Jesus Christ. We are called
then to be Gods house, GODS Temple, not made with hands or material, but
framed by grace, and spiritual, in respect whereof we are exhorted to build.

But Saint Paul gives us a good caution, 1 Cor. 3.10.
Let every man take heed what he builds; and by his distinguishing gold,
silver, precious stones, from timber, hay, and stubble, things combustible from
incombustible, we learn that all materials are not fit for this building. And
indeed special choice was made toward the fabric of Moses his Tabernacle,
and of Solomon's Temple; which did but figure corporally what is to be
understood spiritually; even those virtues that are requisite for the building
up of us; and those virtues are expressed in my Text, Faith, Charity, and Hope.
Saint Jude has so distinguished, and digested them.

We must begin at faith, Domus Dei credendo fundatur, says Saint Austin. The
first stone that must be laid in this pile is faith. Heb. 11.6.
Saint Paul's rule is peremptory, Oporter credere. He that will make his first
approach to God, Romans 8.7.
must believe, and without faith it is impossible to please God. We are by
nature refractary, The wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God. It is not
subject to the law, nay it cannot be subject until says come, whose property
it is to cast down our imaginations, 2 Cor. 10.5.
and every proud thought that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and to
bring into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. Hereupon is that
saying grounded: Ante fidem nulla praecedunt dona, and ex ea omnia procedunt.
Faith is the first grace of adoption, that we receive from God: which makes us
capable of all other graces peculiar to the children of God. Our lesson is, we
can never begin so much as to affect Heaven, much less resolutely forsake the
world to gain Heaven, except our souls be enlightened and established by true
faith.

But it is not every faith will serve the turn, it must be a most holy faith.
(...), say the Etymologists. Holy, is as much as, Not earthly, and that is most
holy, which is least earthly. To discern by this rule a most holy faith, we
must further observe that a divine faith comprehends two things. The Word of
God; and our belief therein: which you may easily perceive by the description
of Saint Paul. Heb. 11.1.
Faith is the ground of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen.
Where, (...), and (...) note our belief and the strength thereof; like as
(...), and (...), are the conditions of the Word of GOD; which is the matter
and measure of our belief. Now our Faith is said to be most holy in respect of
both these; of Gods Word, and of our belief.

First, of Gods word, and that whether we respect the matter which is the word,
or the author, which is God. 1. The matter is most holy, nothing earthly, for
it comprehends such things as neither 1 Cor. 2.9
eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor could enter by these senses into the
heart of man. Ioh. 6.63.
The flesh (says our Savior) profits nothing, because the words that God
speaks are spirit and life. They are celestial and heavenly words, they are
Mat. 13.11.
the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, yea the Matt. 13.31.
Kingdom of heaven it self; And to speak to the phrase of building. Exodus
25.40.
See (says God to Moses) that thou make all things according to the pattern
showed thee in the Mount: There was no plot to be found below for the
Tabernacle, no nor of the Temple, the fashion whereof King David received from
Heaven, which by the way may make us doubt, Vitruvius and other Architects
Mathematical principles, Villalpandus, and Dradus have lately made, be as
true, as it is learned, as judicious as it is painful. But to the purpose.
The ignorance of this absolute holiness of the matter of GODS word made the
Jews to conceive carnally of the worship of God, and of the kingdom of
Christ, dreaming that the first had no more in it, then the ceremony, and that
the second consisted in worldly pomp and glory. And the now Church of Rome
has slipped into both these errors. Their superfluous, and superstitious rites
have, at least in practice, not only darkened, but even abolished many in
heavenly truth; and instead of an ecclesiastical hierarchy provided for the
quiet and decent ordering of the Church, they have forged a terrestrial
monarchy to the bane of both Church and Commonwealth. Our lesson therefore
must be, that howsoever the things of God are expressed in phrases fitting the
capacity of men; yet we give them no earthly tincture; for so they will cease
to be fit matter of the most holy faith of a Christian man.

2. As the matter is most holy, so is the Author too; for he is God, and not
man. Between God and man, there is this difference; Romans 34.
that God is truth, and every man a liar. Every man, if but a mere man, may
deceive, or be deceived; but neither of these are incident to God, neque; actu
neque; potentia. God does not, he cannot lie; God is not, he cannot be
deceived. Therefore the highest commendation of a good man is, that he speaks
in veritate mentis, without simulation, or dissimulation; without equivocation
or mental reservation; the praise due to God is, that he speaks in
certitudine veritatis: his word must stand, Psalm. 12.7.
it is tried to the uttermost, it is as silver tried seven times in the fire.
There is no terrestreitie in him; we may securely trust him, Upon this ground
it is agreed between us and the Church of Rome.

First, That, that whereon our faith must finally resolve, is Gods Word.
Secondly, That, what this word is, we must receive from the Church. Thirdly,
That the Church has no power introductory, but declaratory. Fourthly, That, in
this declaratory power the Church proceeds not by immediate revelation, but by
ratiocination, if it expound verbum scriptum (and for verbum non scriptum which
they obtrude to be a successive tradition even from the Apostles, it is a
forgery of their own brain.) Fifthly, That in the ratiocination we must
proceed by two means, Analogy, and Antiquity. Sixthly, That, Analogy is,
either of the faith, comprehended in the ancient Catechism ever taught in the
Church, and gathered out of evident places of Scripture, and it comprehends the
first and undeniable principles of faith; or of the Text, by the coherence of
antecedentia and consequentia, by the propriety of the phrase, and Seventhly,
That antiquity is, the decision of counsels, or commentaries of Fathers
agreeing between themselves and delivering the doctrine of the Church in their
times. Eighthly, That in the using of these means, the Church has a promise,
that Gods spirit will direct it, not simply, but if it be assembled in the
fear of God, without prejudice, or partiality of faction; Mat. 18.20.
Where two or three be gathered together, in my Name, (says Christ) I am in
the midst of them: so that they cannot err damnably, or misleade the people.
This we say; and yet they say we build on private spirits. We deny not private
spirits discretion, but these are the grounds of our definition. And here we
begin to differ. First, That the blessing in using of these means we say is
common to every particular Church; they restrain it to the Church of Rome;
calling that the Catholic Church which we deny. Secondly, They take away
infallibility from the body of their Church, yea of the whole Church; and give
it to the Pope, contrary to their own councels before Luther; that of
Constance, and that of Basil, which placed it in the Catholic Church. Thirdly,
They hold it not impossible even for this head of their Church, to be an
Heretic; but that he should teach Heresy, they say it is impossible: As if
Ne fides tua deficiat in the Gospel, had that sense; to say nothing of his
common impiety, impurity, and iniquity which they confess also. Fourthly, They
say he may teach Heresy, but not in Cathedra. Extra he may do it, so he do it
as a private Doctor; yea and print it too, at least write it. Fifthly, In
Cathedra the Antecedents or premises he may mistake, though he take them out
of the Scripture, but the conclusion is cocksure. Sixthly, The very conclusion,
if he do not determine it as a matter of faith but probability, may be
erroneous too. Behold how certain they are, and how uncertain we of our
faith: and how we build upon private spirits, but they upon a rock; Surely
howsoever we escape, too many of them make shipwreck. I press this the
rather, because there is not any thing wherein the advocates of that Sea do
more now a days insult then this. But to leave them to their failing and
wounding reed of Egypt, let us build upon GODS Word, whose sense we may search
out by such means as have been always showed.

Secondly, As our Faith is most holy in regard of Gods Word, so is it no less
in regard of our belief therein. For as the object descends from heaven; so
must we ascend unto heaven. But we must distinguish two faculties in our soul,
answerable to the two points of the object. There is in the object the matter
of Gods Word, and the Author: in regard of the matter it is bonum; in regard of
the Author, Verum. Now our faith must answerably believe it, first as verum,
which is, assensus mentis, and then as bonum which is assensus cordis. Our
wit, and ^our will; our understanding and our affection, must both be holy,
that is, lifted up above the earth.

First, Our understanding must be holy: for we must believe God absolutely; and
it is the first Article of our Creed, I believe in God the Father Almighty;
which clause goes through all the Articles of Creed. God is Almighty to
create, to redeem, to judge, to forgive, to give both grace and glory. Luke
1.37.
Non est impossible apud Deum omne verbum, says the Angel. So then we must
not be Jam. 1.8.
(...) checking the spirit by the flesh, nor Luke 12.29.
(...), hanging between heaven and earth, but resolute, that whatsoever God
says is true. Yet we must note, that the immediate object of our faith is not
Gods power, but his revealed will, though we rely upon his revealed will, as
it is secured by his Almighty power. So that all the arguments for
Transubstantiation, that reason from Gods power, touch us not, who deny it
because there is no evidence for it in Gods revealed will. Constet de
voluntate; let it appear that God would have it so; and let us go for
infidels if we deny it to be so. But finding nothing for it in Gods revealed
will, we argue against it as impossible, not simpliciter, but exhypothesi. And
so affirmatively we give reasons of that which is revealed; as, of the
Incarnation, Ascension, etc. In the revealed will of God there are two things.
Verbumrei, the word; and res verbi, the mystery. Our faith builds it self
immediately upon the former, not upon the latter; See then the Sophistry of the
Church of Rome, that withdraw the Scriptures from the people, because they are
hard. They say true, if you look to rem verbi, the mystery; but if you look
to verbum rei, the word; it is not so. As for example, the Scripture teaches
that there is one God in three persons; the words are plain and easy, every
man hears, and understands them; but the mystery contained in these words does
pass the reach of a man: and in this respect it is true, that sides melius
definitur per ignorantiam, quam per notitiam; and Saint Austin observes it to
have been the common saying of his time, accepto baptismo, dicimus fidelis
factus sum, credo quod nescio: and finally S. Hilaries rule is true. Habet non
tam veniam, quam praemium ignorare quod credas. So then the hardness of the
matter is no just reason to debar the people from reading the words;
especially if they be kept from giving them any other sense then may stand
with the elements of Religion delivered in the Catechisine; for then though
they may in reading mistake the true sense, or analogy of the place, yet they
cannot damnably err against the Creed, or analogy of faith. But it is too
true, that many take too great liberty against those sober bounds which are set
them by our Church; every Parish Church almost having their private Catechism
of private draught, not of ecclesiastical prescript; which fills the ignorant
with more resolutions then are sound, and gives occasion to force many passages
of Scripture to that sense. It were to be wished, that to avoid scandal, and
to prevent further danger, at least publicly, no other principles might be
taught or tolerated, then the Church has allowed, and are without exception;
that the whole Church sustain not the just blame, that is occasioned by some
irregular members thereof. And let this serve for the lifting up of our
understandings above the earth.

Secondly, Our will also must be lift up; it must not be earthly, but holy. For
the object is not only Verum, true; but also bonum good. And bonum is the
proper object of the will, as Verum is of the understanding. It is much
disputed and not yet agreed, whether faith be seated in the understanding or in
the will: the opinion most consonant to the Scripture is that which places it
in both: and it is grounded upon this evidence, that in Gods word (as even now
I observed) there is verbum rei, and res verbi. The understanding begins, and
lays hold upon verbum rei, assenting to it; but the heart opens it self,
and desires rem verbi, to be partaker of it; for we do not only assent unto
the word that it is true, but long after it, as a Sovereign good. This you may
perceive by Saint Paul's description of faith, Heb. 11.1
wherein there is (...) and (...): Some refer the word (...) to things not
seen, and (...) to things hoped for: but the words rather respect the several
faculties of our soul, then the quality of those things that are the object of
these faculties: and so you may learn by the words of Gods covenant. ^^r.
31.33.
This shall be the covenant, that I will make with the house of Israel; I will
put my Law in their inward parts. So he says in general, and then descends to
particulars: I will write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they
shall be my people: this respects the will and the affection, embracing it as
good: and they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his
brother, saying, Know the Lord; for they shall all know me from the least to
the greatest; this agrees to the understanding, resting on it as true. And
agreeable hereunto is that of Saint Paul: Ephesians. 3.14.
For this cause J bow my knees unto the Father of our LORD Jesus Christ -- that
he would grant you according to the riches of his glory, Romans 1.17.
to be strengthened with his might, that Christ may dwell in your hearts by
faith, etc. He says, in the heart and will, not in the understanding only. For
indeed this is the faith whereby the just man does live, therefore the seat of
it must be in the heart. And this faith is distinguished from the faith of
those impure persons of whom Saint Jude speaks in this Epistle, that they
turn the grace of God into wantonness; verse 4. Romans 1.^8. 1 Pet. 2.16.
and Saint Paul, that they detain the truth of God in unrighteousness; and
Saint Peter, that they abuse their Christian liberty as a cloak of
maliciousness. But our Faith lodges Christ in the Sanctum Sanctorum, the most
holy Person in the most holy place; yea, and there does Faith conceive and
bring forth Charity, which sanctifies every Moral Virtue unto an heavenly
end. And finally, by Faith it comes to pass, that Gods Commandments are not
grievous unto us: We are not like that man that went away heavy, Matthew. 19.21.
when he was willed to forsake all and follow Christ; but like Abraham, Genes.
4.
ready at the call of God to forsake our Country and our Fathers House,
though we know not whither we shall go; Matthew. 26.39. Heb. 10.7.
and with our Savior Christ we say, Not my will, but thy will be done, I am
ready to do thy will, O Lord.

By this qualifying of our Understanding and Will, we perceive the reason, why
Atheists and Epicures believe and regard so little Heaven and heavenly things:
Their Understanding and Will are earthly, they make Reason the Judge of the
Articles of their Faith, and Concupiscence makes the choice of their
happiness. But I hope none of us have, I could wish none of us had so learned
Christ; though it is true, that the life of very many of us savoureth little of
a most holy Faith.

Most holy Faith.] There are three degrees of Faith; Holy, more holy, most
holy. First, That Faith, that can remove Mountains, cast out Devils, foretell
Secrets, etc. is an holy Faith, for it is inspired by the Holy Ghost; 1 Cor.
13.2.
but it is only in regard of the Graces of Edification: notwithstanding which,
Christ will say to such, Matthew. 7.23
I know you not, depart from me ye workers of iniquity. Secondly, There is a
second Faith, more holy; Heb. 6.4, 5.
by which men being enlightened, and partakers of the heavenly gift, are made
partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted of the good Word of God, and of
the powers of the World to come, and yet fall away again. Their Graces indeed
are in nature the same with the Graces of Adoption; but they never entertained
them absolutely, but conditionally, so far as they might enjoy them with the
profits and pleasures of this life; being ready to forgo them, rather then to
hazard Earth to gain Heaven. 2 Pet. 2.21.
It had been better for them never to have known the way of Righteousness,
then after they know it, to turn from the holy Commandment given unto them,
and like a Dog to return to their own Vomit, or like a Swine to their
wallowing in the Mire. Thirdly, finally, the last degree of Faith, is that
which is the most holy Faith; which is not only a Grace of Adoption, but also
free from all condition: we captivate thereby our wit simply to Gods Word, and
yield our will without exception, to Gods pleasure. This is a saving Faith; and
of this, that of the Prophet is true, A^ak. 2.4.
The just shall live by his Faith.

His Faith: So it must be, says Saint Jude; Ed fie your selves in your most
holy Faith. I need not say much of this, having already proved unto you, that
Faith belongs as well to the Will, as the Understanding: for, nothing is more
ours, then that which has gotten possession of our Will; the Will being that
which commands all that is within us, and seasoneth whatsoever proceeds from
us. The general Promises of God work not that Peace, which passes all
understanding, which must keep our hearts and minds in Christ Jesus; Phil 4.7.
but it is the appropriating of them to our selves, when the faculties of our
soul can say, Christ died for our sin, Gal 3.13. 1 John 1 7.
Christ was made a Curse for us, The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from
all our sins. Let the Church of Rome rest in her Catholic Faith, and proceed
no further; our comfort and confidence is the same that was Saint Paul's: Gal.
2.19, 20.
I through the Law am dead to the Law, that I might live to God; I am crucified
with Christ, but I live; yet not I, but Christ that lives in me: and in that I
now live in the flesh, I live by the Faith in the Son of God, who has loved
me, and given himself for me. And indeed, if we should only assent unto Gods
Truth, wherein should our Faith differ from the Faith of the Devils in Hell?
who do also believe and assent unto the object ratione essentiae, and
benevolentiae divine, but without any application; and so the more knowledge,
the more pain. But we must observe, that it is one thing to hold, that ^here
is such a special Faith; another thing, that every ^an which conceits it, has
such a special Faith. We do ^ot patronize the erroneous conceits of men, but
main^aine the Truth of God; in whom we find that Maxim ^ncontrollable, That
because we are Sons, Gal. 4.6.
God has sent into our hearts the Spirit of his Son, that cries Abba Father.
They that are Sons, have the Spirit; but we presume not to determine who are
Sons: Let every man examine himself, as Saint Paul's directs, 2 Cor. 13. and
so let him judge whether his be a most holy Faith: for, by this we know (says
Saint John) that Christ abides in us, 1 John 3.24.
even by the holy Spirit which he has given to us.

You see the Grace is most heavenly, and our propriety therein most
comfortable; but we have it not all at once, we rise by many degrees: therefore
we are willed not only to build, but (...) to build upon. The phrase does
contain a double sense; either that we must rest our selves upon our Faith, or
that we must go on in Faith. The first implies a comparison betwixt Faith and
other Virtues, whereon we cannot so securely build, as we may on Faith: for,
Faith correlatively understood, as in this argument it is, does comprehend
Christ; in which sense, we say we are saved by Faith, that is, by Christ, laid
hold on by Faith; and so to build on Faith, is to build on Christ: and Christ
is the Rock, whereon is built the Church; 1 Pet. 2.4: Matthew. 16.18.
as the Fathers out of Saint Peter expound that of Saint Matthew: Yea, Saint
Paul calls him the Foundation, and the Chief Corner Stone. Ephesians. 2.20.
So that though Grace inherent fail us, yet Christ imputed will ever support
us, so that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against us. And unto this, the
Church of Rome does yield: For, Bellarmine teaching that we have a double Title
to Heaven; one by Adoption, in Baptism; the other by Merit, by fulfilling the
Law of God; resolves finally, Bellar. de Iustif. l. 5. c. 7.
That to avoid Vainglory, and for the uncertaintie of our Merit, it is the
safest course to rest our selves upon the first Title; which is nothing else,
but to build on Faith.

But the words also bear a second sense, and that most proper in this place:
which is, that we must go on in Faith; for no man's Faith is perfect at the
first: there is duplex perfectio; essentiae, and molis: vir enim non est magis
homo quam puer, licet sit mayor. In Baptism, when we receive the Grace of
Adoption, our Faith has perfectionem essentiae, but not molis; we are truly
fideles, faithful members, though but modicae fidei, of weak Faith: and
therefore Saint Peter wills us, 1 P^t. 2.2.
as newborn Babes to desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that we may grow
up thereby. Our Lesson then is, that we must be like Saint Paul: Phil. 3.13.
Brethren, I count not my self that I have attained: but one thing I do; I
forget that which is behind, and endeavor my self unto that which is before.
Our Faith must daily 2 Thessalonians. 1.3.
(...), till it become such as Saint Peter describes, 1 Pet. 1.7.
much more precious then Gold tried in the fire, like a Ephesians. 6.16.
shiel^ of proof, that can quench all the fiery darts of the Devil till we
are so Iam. 2.5.
rich in Faith, as Saint James speaks, that we thereby can 1 Ioh. 5.4.
overcome the World, and become 2 Timothy 2.21.
vessels of honor fit for the Palace of God.

I say, that our selves may be such Vessels; for Saint Jude bids us to build up
our selves. Matter Ecclesia, etc. (says Saint Austine) Our Mother the Church,
in Baptism does lend us, when we are infants, other men's feet to come, other
men's mouths to speak, yea, and other men's hearts, to believe; but when we are
come to age, we must use our own, and that not for others only, but for out
selves. It is true, that no man can procreate himself, or quicken himself,
being dead; but being procreated and quickened, he can feed and increase
himself. As it is in Nature, so in Grace: no man can give himself a spiritual
being, or repair it, if it be lost; but having received it, he is to cherish
it, and to proceed therein. Yea, although God have appointed Pastors, 1 Cor.
3.9, 10.
whose Title is to be Architech and Builders of his Church, yet is every
Christian man to be a Labourer in this Building: A Labourer, I say, but no^ an
Architect; he must take his directions from them, how to work himself fit to
sort with the other parts of the Church. I say again, to work himself, not
others: for that is the charge of the Pastor and Magistrate, the Pastor by
spiritual means, the Magistrate by corporal, both prescribing to all others
that are but laborers in their several places, every one to attend his own
work in the Church. Or if they will cast their eye on others, it must be like
the Wiseman in the Proverbs, Pro. 24.30.31, 32.
I passed by the field of the sloathfull, and by the Vineyard of the man
destitute of understanding; and lo, it was all grown over with thorns; and
nettles had covered the face thereof: and the stone wall thereof was broken
down. Then I beheld, and considered it well; I looked upon it, and received
instruction. Cant. 1.6.
The Spouse in the Canticles complains. The sons of my Mother were angry
with me; they made me keeper of the vines, but I kept not mine own Vine. The
world is very busy; and this age finds many faults: and indeed there are very
many to be found; but few there are that see their own. We can say, Brother
let me pluck out the mote that is in thine eye, when we deserve to hear,
Thou hypocrite, pluck out first the beam that is in thine own eye, Mat. 7 4,
5. Romans 2.1. Luke 19.22.
for thou that judge another, condemnest thy self, and Ex ore tuo judicabo
te serve nequam, etc. With God there is no respect of persons, nor no exception
of sins. Consider what I say, and the Lord give you understanding in all
things.

Keep your selves in the love of God.] From profiting come we to persevering;
for according to that of Cyprian, fides non accepta, sed custodita vivificat.
And indeed he has profited well, that will persevere. For perseverance imports
that we have cast our accounts and set up our rest; it argues that we are
resolved de fine, though we have not passed so sarre as we should in medijs
ducentibus ad finem. And indeed the greatest cause of inconstancy, is an
irresolutenesse about the end, which makes men pass (as Solomon did, Eccl. 2.
he reports it himself in the book of the Preacher) from knowledge to
pleasure, from pleasure to wealth, etc. till at the last he found it true, that
the end of all is, Eccl. 12.13.
fear God, and keep his Commandments; for this is the whole duty of man.
Such a resolution of the end does hearten us to persevere in persecution of the
means, till we have attained the end. And therefore when Christ asked his
D^sciples upon occasion that many revolted from him, Will ye also go away?
Saint Peter answered, Master, Job. 6.68, 69.
to wh^m shall we go? thou have the words of eternal life; And we believe
and know, that thou art Christ the Son of the living God.

In the love of God.] Note that where the three persons are distinctly expressed,
the name of God is put for the Father, as, God has not given the Spirit to
Christ by measure, John 3 34. and, Because ye are sons, God has sent forth
the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father, Gal. 4.6. Yet
though our love be terminative in God the Father, it belongs to all the rest:
opera ab extra, as well as, adextra, are indivisa. I will not farther amplify
it; only take notice, that all three persons are remembered in my Text, and in
this place God does signify the Father.

But I descend more particularly to the love of God. Love is either active, or
passive. Passive is that whereunto we are brought by faith; Active is that
wherein we are exercised by our most holy faith: The Passive Love is that
wherewith God loves us, the Active is that wherewith we love GOD: The Passive
makes us children of GOD, the Active does manifest us to be such: the Passive
is first in nature; and the Active follows long after: for the Passive is
eternal, the Active in time: the Passive is infinite, as is God; the Active
finite, as is man; the Passive most perfect according to the perfection of GOD;
but the Active defective according to those defects which accompany this
mortal condition, even of a regenerate man. Both these loves are here meant,
we must labor to keep our selves in both.

First, In the Passive love. Deus non deserit, nisi deseratur. The style of God
is often repeated by Moses and the Prophets: A Deuteronomy. 7 9.
God that keeps his Covenant; and the Apostle says, (...), 1. Cor. 10.13.
God is faithful. The matter of this Covenant, are the Esai. 55.3.
faithful mercies of David; and our Savior says, Ioh. 13.1.
Whom he loves, he loves to the end. Therefore God says unto the Jews,
Esai. 50.1.
Where is your Mothers Divorcement, whom I have cast off? Or who is the
Creditor, to whom I sold you? Alluding to two Causes of the Wives misery by
the Husbands default, Want of Love, or Want of Ability; now he answers, that
both these Causes are in us: For your iniquities are you sold, and because of
your transgression is your Mother forsaken. If our God dislike us, or reject
us, we must seek the Cause in our selves; it is our fault, if we abide not in
the Passive Love.

Secondly, Yea, and in the Active too. We must love God Appreciative and
Intensive, Affectu and Effectu. First, Appreciative: Love God above all things,
and in all: Matthew. 10 37.
He that loves Father or Mother more then me, is not worthy of me. Psalm.
73.24.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon Earth that I desiro, in
comparison of thee. Psalm. 45.11
Hearken, O Daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear; forget also thine
own People, and thy Fathers House; so shall the King have pleasure in thy
beauty. Secondly, Intensive, with all thy might and strength, Affectu and
Effectu: Psalm 103.1
Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me praise his holy Name:
And, Psalm. 27.4
One thing have I desired of the Lord, which I will require, even that I may
dwell in the House of the Lord, etc. But God may renew the Complaint of the
Prophet, Esai. 1.21.
Civitas sancta facta est Meretrix, Hos. 7.16.
Ephraim is like a broken Bow, etc. and that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 78.9.
Their heart was not upright within them; and that in Hose, Hos. 11.12
Ephraim compasses me with Lies, etc.

But how shall we keep our selves in this Love of God? There are two means:
first, by not committing what we should not do; secondly, nor omitting what we
should do. You may perceive by the Mat. 12.43 etc.
Parable of the unclean Spirit, how he kept possession of the man, while he
was in the state of sin; and also how he returned, when being freed from
sin, he did not furnish himself with Grace. Rom 13.10.
Love is the keeping of the Commandment: and every Commandment has an
affirmative part, and a negative part; the one against omission, and the other
against commission: and the rule of the Apostle is, Rom 13.12.
We must cast away the works of Darkness, and put on the Armor of Light.

This Talking Age is much troubled with an inquisition, Whether a justified man
may fall wholly from Grace, and whether he may fall finally: I will not dispute
either; my Text leads me, to warn you not to fall: only these two points let
me observe. First, The least shrinking from God, should be very grievous to a
true Child of God. David bemoaned his absence from the visible Arc; but mark
upon what grounds: O Lord of Hosts, Psalm. 84.1.
how amiable are thy Tabernacles! my soul longs, yea, and faints, etc. You
see, that the sense he had of the sweetness of the favor of God, made him
bemoane himself, that was banished from the Tabernacle of God: how much more
should he have bemoaned himself, if God had forsaken his person, that it
should no longer be the House of God? Secondly, Nemo repent fuit turpissimus,
God departs from this our Temple, or us rather, his Temple, as he departed
from the Temple of Jerusalem; Ezechiel shows how: First, he rose, and went
from between the Cherubins, and from the Mercie-Seat, that is, out of the most
Holy Place; then rested a while in the second Room, which was the Holy Place;
then came he nearer Altar Holocausti, and then took his flight. The parts of
man most aptly resemble these parts of the Temple of God: Our Heart is Sanctum
Sanctorum, where Christ dwells as in his proper place; and the first Grace that
fails us, is a good Conscience: Yet men may retain the knowledge of God, and
be able to retain good from evil, as she did -- Video meliora proboque,
Deteriora sequor -- But continuance in sin, will even darken the Principles
of Truth; and men may be so obdurate, as to oppose themselves against Gods
Precepts: Then is God driven into the Court, the open Court, where men in
policy, and for worldly respects, conform themselves to that which they
neither love nor believe. I will be no man's judge, but I would to God we would
every man judge himself, and consider how far he is gone from God. I doubt,
he will be found in more men's heads, then in their hearts; and yet more in men's
faces, then in their heads. I would to God, there were not infinite, that have
set their faces against Heaven, etc. I conclude this point with that of Saint
Paul: Heb. 3.6.
Christ is as the Son over his own House, whose Household we are, if we hold
fast that confidence, and that rejoicing of hope to the end. Take heed
therefore, Brethren, 12.13.14.
lest at any time there be in any of you an evil heart, and unfaithful, to
depart away from the living God. Exhort one another daily, while it is called
to day, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin: For we
are made partakers of Christ, if we keep sure unto the end the beginning
wherewith we are upholden.

We have heard, that we must profit and persevere: but it is hard to go on;
and he that is constant, must endure many a conflict: therefore Saint Jude
advises us to seek help, and to be of good hope.

First, To seek help, Praying in the Holy-Ghrst.] God, says Saint Austin,
does not command impossible things; but bids us facere quod possumus, and
petere quod non possumus: So that, if we want, Jam. 4.2.3
we have it not (says Saint James) because we ask not; or if we ask and have
it not, it is because we ask amiss. Saint Jude therefore directs us to ask,
and not to ask amiss, for we must pray in the Holy Ghost. Saint Chrysostom
excellently comparing man's Spiritual Birth with his Natural, observes, That
in his Natural Birth, he comes into the World naked indeed; but with Hands,
that are apt in time to make Clothes to cover him, Armor to defend him, Food
to sustain him, and whatsoever else is requisite. Even so, says he, the
ability of a man received in his Spiritual Birth, is very small; but he is
endued with the Grace of Prayer; and that is, Organum Organorum: By it, a man
obtaines from God whatsoever is desirable by a Child of God. Psalm. 127.1.
It is true, that except the Lord build the house, he labors but in vain
that builds; and except the Lord keep the City, he waketh but in vain that
watches, Mat. 7.7.
but Petite et dabitur. Ask and have: seek and find: knock, and it shall be
opened unto you. It is the saying of Gregory the great. Precibus insistendu^,
non tantum ut just vivamus, sed dum just vivimus. Our progress and our
perseverance must be the one furthered, the other supported by prayer; for, as
Solomon speaks, The way of a righteous man is like the light which shines
more and more until the perfect day, Prove. 4.18
but there must be a perpetual influence into the air from the Sun to cause
and continue the light thereof, otherwise both would fail. So except the grace
of God be with us, and abide in us, we cannot proceed, we cannot persevere.
Now this grace is had by prayer, James. 1.5.
Jf any man want wisdom (says Saint James) let him ask it of God. Which
Christ taught us, as Saint Cyprian well observes, Cyprian. in Orat. Dom.
when he willed us to pray: Hallowed be thy Name, thy kingdom come, thy will
be done. His verbis says he, quid aliud petimus, nisi ut in eo quod esse
coepimus p^rseveremus? but few make that use of it, the reason follows,
because they pray not in the holy Ghost.

In the holy Ghost] Intellige locutionem, and evitabis blasphemiam, says Saint
Austin. Mistake not, that thou blaspheme not. Gal. 4.6. Romans 8.15.
He that said, the spirit cries Abba, father, says in another place, The
Spirit is he by whom we cry Abba, Father: so that Clamans is as much as
Clamare faciens. This praying in the holy Ghost, must be expounded by that Romans
8.26. The Spirit helps our infirmities. But observe further, that to pray in
the holy Ghost, is to pray by his direction, in his word; and by his
inspiration in our heart. 1. By his direction for we must pray according to his
will, which is expressed in his word. The sweet odours of incense were Gods
own prescript, 1. Cor. 2.1 1.
and nothing sacrificed but what God commanded: and quis novit mentem Dei,
nisi spiritus Dei? Therefore has Christ himself given us a form of prayer,
wherein all our requests are comprehended. 2. By his inspiration, Interpellator
pro me tuus (says Saint Hillary) inenarrabilia a me tibi loquitur, it makes
intercession for us, says Saint Paul, Romans 8.26.
with sighs and groans that cannot be expressed. Not our words, but our sighs
are audible in the sacred ears of God; for Words are for men, but thoughts
are for God: and how can we lift up pure hands, if the holy Ghost do not
season them from our hearts. The Spirit therefore (...) helps our infirmities,
2. Tim. 2.8.
when he powers into us the spirit of grace and prayer. Our lesson is, that we
remember the old verse.

non vox, sed votum; non chordula Musica, Sed Cor;
Non clamans, sed amans, pollet in aure Dei.
The true worshippers do worship God in spirit, Ioh. 4.24.
and in truth: and if we draw near God with our lips, and are far from him
in our hearts, our prayer will as little mov him, as we are moved with it. To
conclude, I wish, that we may so pray, that we may say with David, Psalm. 66.18
Blessed be God that has not put back my prayer, nor hid his mercy from me.
And surely, if God has not removed our prayer, he will not remove his mercy,
for we shall look for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life.

Looking for the mercy. etc.] We have hitherto been kept to our work, but now
are we come to our wages, great wages for so little work; for doing our duty,
eternal felicity. The comparison is very uneven. I am persuaded says Saint
Paul, that the afflictions of this life, Romans 8.18.
are not worthy of the glory that shall be reveiled. And our light afflictions
which are but for a moment, 2. Cor. 4.17.
work for us a far more excellent and eternal weight of glory. But God
knows we have an envious eye, when we see the prosperity of wicked men in this
world, Psalm. 37. and 73.
we think much of it. Therefore he bids us to look off from the world, and
to look to him, to compare that temporal life which men live here, with that
eternal which we expect herafter, the longitude of the one with the brevitie
of the other, the latitude of the one with the beggerie of the other, the depth
of the one with the superficiallnesse of the other; and then we shall see the
difference betwixt them, which may move us with Saint Paul to count all things
loss and dung for Christ's sake, with Moses to prefer the afflictions of Gods
people before the pleasures of Pharaohs Court, Phil. 3.8. Heb. 11.25 Hebr.
11.8. Hebr. 12.2.
with Abraham to forsake our own Country in hope of a better, and finally with
Christ himself to endure any cross in this world for the joy that is set
before us. So then our hope is of eternal life.

But that life is to be obtained of mercy, looking for the mercy of our Lord.
etc. Eternal life, if ye look to the person of Christ obtaining it of God, is
the reward of his merit; for he satisfied Gods wrath and fulfilled Gods law:
so that he deserved both discharge from Hell, and the joys of heaven: but if
we look to the same as it is imparted to us, so it is a gift of free mercy
bestowed upon us. Two things then we must heed; that we set not our eyes upon
the dignity of our own person, or merit of our own work; but cloth our
selves with Christ's person, that we may have an interest in his meritorious
work. Let us set Christ always before us, and his spirit shall be at our
right hand so that we shall not slide; so that our heart may be glad, and our
tongue rejoice, our flesh also may rest in hope; for in due time he will show
us the paths of life, in whose presence is fullness of joy, and at his right
hand pleasures for evermore.

We see three persons in God, and three virtues of a man. Man is as it were the
center of all blessings that come from every of the three persons in God; and
God must be the center wherein must end all the three virtues of man. As the
holy Ghost helps us to pray, the Father his affected to us in love, Jesus
Christ vouch safeth us his mercy: so must our faith be in God; our love toward
God, and our hope for the mercy of God. These be the uttermost of our
revelations of God; this is the scope of our contemplation of God; and this
contemplation must suffice us; yea this reflexed sight will enable us to a
direct sight: If we inure our selves to behold Gods veiled face of grace,
during our mortality; we shall against the day of our immortality sharpen our
sight to endure his revealed face of glory. And herein we have King David to
resolve us: I will behold (says he) thy presence in righteousness, and when I
awake after thy likeness; I shall be satisfied with it.

O Incomprehensible Trinity, and indivisible Unity, that have revealed thy
self to us in these graces, whereby thou make a spiritual house of us;
vouchsafe that by help from thee and hope in thee, we may so profit and
persevere in our most holy faith which shines in that interchangeable love that
is between our God and us, that in due time, and in thy kingdom, we may see
thee face to face, and with thy blessed Angels and Saints for ever sing Holy,
holy, holy, Lord God of hoasts. And that from our mouth as this earth is now,
so heaven hereafter may be full of thy glory. To him that is able to keep you
that you fall not, and to present you fault less before the presence of his
glory with joy, to God only wise our Savior, be glory, majesty, dominion and
power both now and for ever.

Amen.
A SERMON PREACHED AT SAINT CROSS, NEAR WINCHESTER.
MATTHEW. 15.21, 22, 23. And Jesus went thence and departed into the Coasts of
Tire and Sidon.

And behold a Woman of Canaan came out of the same Coasts, and cried unto Him,
saying, Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou Son of David, my Daughter is grie
vously vexed with a Devil.

But He answered her not a word. And His Disciples came, and besought Him,
saying, send her away, for she cries after us.


THat the Kingdom of God should be taken away from the Jews, and given unto
the Gentiles, our Savior Christ while He was on the Earth, taught often times
both in word and deed. Of such deeds this History is one, which is the Argument
of my Text. Of which there is to be considered the occasion, and the matter:
the occasion is double; given by the Jews, taken by Christ. The matter
represents two excellent virtues, the one in Christ, the other in a Woman of
Canaan. Of which virtues we are to consider the conflict and the success. The
conflict shows how both Christ and the Woman did by degrees arise: the Woman
in her importunate faith in Christ, Christ in his profitable delay to help
her; and the success shows how both virtues proved to Christ's great glory,
and the Woman's great comfort. The Woman's faith would not be said nay, and at
last it sped well; not only to her Daughters recovery, but also to the high
commendations of her faith. Christ shows, that what He deferres He does not
deny, but then yields when it is most fit, both for Him, and also for us. This
is the substance of the History. Let us resume the parts, and first the
Occasion: the occasion which (I told you) is first given, then taken. Given by
the jews. Christ had Preached long amongst them, and wrought many Miracles;
but they were little the better, either in their Faith, or in their Life:
though they were His own, yet His own received Him not. Christ therefore went
thence; to teach us, that though Christ be a constant observer of His promise,
yet is He a free Disposer of His Grace: He breaks with none, and He is bound
to none: if we set light by His gifts, we shall be quickly rid of Him. The
Scripture has diverse examples and Similies to this purpose. The example of
Israel, when God left Shiloh, where God had planted His Arc, which Jeremy
observes, Ier. 17.3.
Chap. 17. The example of Judah, where God built His Temple, Rev. 2. and 3.
chapters.
which Ezechiel observes. The example of the Church in Asia, of which Saint
John in the second and third of the Revelation. The similitude of the Vine,
Esaias 5.4.
Esaias 5. What could J have done, says God, for it, that I have not done? but
seeing that which I planted, a generous Vine, brings forth no better then wild
Grapes, I will break down the wall, and leave it to the wild Beasts, etc. The
similitude of the Fig Tree in the Gospel, which after three years husbandry
continuing barren, the Owner thereof commanded to be cut down. The similitude
of the Shepherd, who when He could do no good with His Flock, brake both His
Staves; the Staff of Beauty, and the Staff of Bands; He left them to stray
and to be slain. The Apostles Rule is short, qui stat, videat ne cadat. If we
presume upon Templum Domini, Templum Domini, as did the Jews; we shall find,
that God will not stick to profane His Temple by forsaking it, if we do not
stick to profane that Temple by defiling it. We have no privilege to break
with God, and yet to be bold, that God will not break with us. He will not
begin to forsake us; but if we go from Him, He will not much desire to continue
with us. Christ went thence, but whither did He go? unto the parts of Tire and
Sidon. The jews gave the occasion; Christ takes it, to go from the Jews to
the Gentiles; to relate the infidelity of the Jew by the faith of the Gentile.
For what He said elsewhere, woe be to thee Chorazin, woe be to thee Bethsaida;
for if the miracles that have been done in thee had been done in Tire and
Sidon, they would have long since repented in sackcloth and ashes: Of the truth
thereof Christ gives them a taste in this History. And this has been an
ancient practice of God, when the means of grace has profited little within
the Church, to confound His people by their readiness to believe, that were
without the Church. So did He in the days of Eliah confound Israel by the
Widow of Sarepta, a Woman of Sidon who entertained the Prophet, when the
Israelites persecuted him. And in the days of Elizeus, by Naaman the Assyrian,
who upon a little taste of Gods mercy in curing his Leprosy, vowed to serve no
other God, but the God of Elizeus, whereas greater Miracles, and sundry Sermons
wrought and spoken by Elizeus, could not obtain so much Piety of the
Jsraelites. The very like is to be observed in the story of Ninivy, the great
City. Ninivy (as the Prophet calls it) was in three days Preaching reclaimed
by Jonah, which labored many years with the Israelites, and labored in
vain. God in the second of Ezechiel sets down for a Rule in General, Eze.
2.3.
Son of man, I do not send thee to a Nation that understands not thy
language; but if I did, they would hear: whereas this people understands, but
will not be reformed. Wherefore God (as He threatened in the 32. of
Deuteronomy,) Deu. 32.21.
did provoke His people justly by them that are no people, a foolish nation; as
His people provoked their God by them that were no gods, but the work of their
own hands. Christ is found of them that sought Him not, and made manifest unto
them that enquired not after Him. Acts 13.46
Acts 13.46. This was the Jews case. Saint Paul to the Romans says, that we
must every one of us make it our case: for as God left the Jews to go to the
Gentiles, so may He go from us to the Indies; for spiritus spirat ubi vult, and
there is nothing (as it was showed unto Saint Peter in the Vision) that is
unclean, when God is pleased to sanctify it. Christ went out of the Coasts of
Tire and Sidon. Thus much of the occasion. Come to the History, which
represents two eminent virtues, of which virtues we are to consider, first the
conflict, the conflict between two persons, which adds some right unto the
virtues: for what are the virtues? the one is an importunate Faith, and in whom
is that? in a Canaanitish woman, an Heathen woman, but (which is more) sprang
from cursed Cham, and (which is yet further to be observed) being of that Line
which was specially to be odious to the Jews, whom they were to root out
without all mercy: that such a woman should believe in Christ, who was no Jew,
by birth, this makes her Fact more memorable. But what is the other virtue? It
is delay, though it proved profitable delay: and in whom was this? It was in
our Savior Christ; who if He had been only God, it had been no wonder, if
He did put off sinners in the holiness of a Lord; or if it had been at his
second coming in glory, it would not have been strange, if he had rejected
the woman in the austerity of a Judge; but to do it in the nature of man,
which he undertook (as Saint Paul speaks) that he might be tender hearted
toward man; to do it when he came not to judge, but save: for such a person,
at such a time, to use such delay, so to reject a poor woman, makes the
virtue of Christ the more remarkable, the more admirable. But let us come to
the conslict of these virtues. The woman begins and sets upon Christ: She cried
and said, Have mercy on me o Lord, thou Son of David, my daughter is
miserably vexed with a Devil: her case was bad, and therefore needs the less
wonder, if in her suit she were so earnest: she spoke for her child; her child
was now left to the malice of the Devil: nothing in nature could be nearer
then her child; no corporeal evil could befall it worse, than to be within
the power of the devil: such a case would melt a stony heart; what wonder if
it work so upon the tender heart of a mother? But the meaning of the Holy
Ghost is, that we should be earnest in our prayers, according to the danger of
our estate: the more our danger, the more our earnestness; and we should
press the more upon God, the more we are occasioned by calamities that are
laid upon us by him: for therefore does he humble us, to warm our cold
devotion. It is so in distresses corporal; but much more in our distresses
spiritual: we must learn the one by this woman, and the other by expressing
the sense that we have of the want of grace; far more painful then the
other sense is, of the want of health. But let us hear the woman's first onset.
She makes a short petition; but it contains a most excellent confession, if
you look to the matter; yea and a most confident profession, if you look to
the manner of those words wherein she speaks to Christ. The matter is a short,
but a full description of the person and office of Christ. His person, he was
God and man; she acknowledges both: God, in calling Him Lord; for that word
must not be understood but according to the style of the Scripture, which in
stead of Jehovah in the Hebrew, and in the Greek, signifies not a bare Lord,
but the absolute Lord both of Heaven and Earth: She could not conceave less
of Christ, when she desired he would show His power over the Devil; for how
could he have power over the Devil, that was not Lord Paramount over all the
world? She acknowledges him then to be God. And to be man also, for she
calls him the son of David. Which implies not only that he was a man, but
also the Messiah, eodem ipso Christum Domini: for as David was the Annoninted
King of the Lord, so was he the type of Christ, that was to be anointed with
the Holy Chost. He was then a man, and (which is more) he was that man, even
the man whom the Jews looked for, to have for their Messiah. A fair
description of Christ's person, which further intimates his office too: for he
that was Christ, was also to be Jesus, He was to save, and so to show mercy:
his office was to be the Mercy-seat of God; the reliever of the distresses of
wretched man. Thus much she confesses of Christ's person, of his office. Yea
she professes it also. For whereas many Jews believed in Christ, but durst
not say so much openly of him, because they loved the praise of men more than
of God, and feared more to be cast out of the Synagogue of the Jews, then to
be shut out of the kingdom of Heaven; this poor woman is not ashamed of her
Faith, she publishes her belief, she publishes it in her prayer unto
Christ, which she utters with a loud voice, that all standers-by might
witness, how highly she conceived of him. A good pattern for us, to lay such
good ground of our faith in our prayer as this poor woman does, and what our
hearts believe, never to be afraid to suffer our tongues to utter.

But as this is imitable of us, so would a man think it should have been
availeable with Christ; but it works never a whit, he answers never a word.
Of God Saint Paul says, He cannot deny himself: but Christ seems here by
his silence, not to acknowledge that he is the man, that such a work can be
done by him: he takes no notice of her speech, he seems nothing moved with
her words: Flesh and blood would not have rejected so honorable a title, and
set light by such a testimony as was given unto Christ by this woman. But
Christ was not so ambitious. Nay rather, flesh and blood would have pitied and
relieved, being sought unto, and sought unto in such sort as Christ was by the
woman. But Christ seems not so courteous, he answers not a word: though her
petition were never so powerful, yet it sinkes not into him, not into Christ;
but into the Disciples of Christ it does. But better never a whit, then never a
whit the better for the woman. They are moved, and speak to Christ; but it is
to rid away the woman, but not to rid away the Devil out of her child: they
will not be troubled with her cry; but they have no pity on her case. Christ's
silence was uncomfortable, but the Apostles speech much more: for better they
had held their peace then showed themselves such Churles. They should have made
the woman's case their own and mediated for her unto Christ: but it is worth
the marking, that before they were thoroughly schooled by the example of Christ,
and new formed by the Spirit of Christ: they are proposed as patterns of
natural men, and express the infirmities of weak men: seldom shall ye find
that they entreated Christ to do good unto any, but they oftentimes move him
for to hold his hands from doing good. James and John are hasty to have fire
from heaven to consume the Samaritans; but they could not endure, that one that
was not of their rank, should cast out devils in the name of Christ. The
Disciples forbad them that would bring children unto Christ: they will not have
CHRIST to feed them that followed him. Saint Peter dislwadeth Christ from his
Passion: they were but little better than ordinary men in the graces of
Sanctification, though they had received many other excellent gifts at the hand
of Christ.

But our Instruction is that we must observe their infirmity, that we do not
imitate it, and rather join our prayers with them that in their distress
seek unto God, then to be any hinderance unto them of speeding with God. Yea
and Christ Himself though he do little comfort the woman, yet does he give a
secret check unto his Disciples: for giving them an answer, he shows, that he
was not weary of the woman's cries.

But there was a better reason why he did not satisfy her request, I am not
sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. So that had she been a
sheep, though a lost sheep of Israel, Christ would have endured her cry, and
done as much as she desired.

But you must mark, that whereas Christ's silence might seem to have imported
that he did not acknowledge those titles, that office which the woman ascribed
unto him; in his answer, he confesses that he is such a one, and sent for
such work as the woman's prayer does express: but for all that she cannot
speed, because she has no part in him. So that Christ's silence was more
hopeful then is his answer. In his silence there was neither word nor deed for
her; here are words, though no deeds; but words that make against her: so that
better no answer then such an answer, so uncomfortable an answer.

Which imports, though Christ can, yet he may not relieve her. To be near a
helper, and to be denied help, hope of help detained makes misery to be a
double misery: for we are the better resolved unto patience, when we see there
is nothing that can succor us. Here then is the woman's blow given to her
faith, able to quell it. The first seemed to be only contempt, but this goes
farther, it cuts off all hope, and why? because the woman is not a lost sheep
of Israel. Christ is sent only unto them. So that whereas she might have been
bold upon the matter, and the manner of her prayer; this shuttes her out for
her particular, though it grant the truth of the matter, and the zeal of the
woman in general.

But let us look to the particulars of CHRIST'S answer.

The Jews are compared unto Sheep, and sheep were clean beasts, such as
might be offered in Sacrifice, and be presented in the Temple of God, and did
yield a smell of sweet favor and of rest, as the Scripture speaks. This is
the prerogative of the Church, and this is the hope of them that are within the
Church, that they are called into the fold of God, that they may come so near
him, that they may speed in their prayers to him. This is not a favor
vouchsafed unto all, no more then all beasts be sheep: the more should the
prerogative be esteemed, and Gods mercy tendered. But we see sheep will leese
themselves. The Israelites were sheep, but lost sheep, two ways lost sheep:
first by nature in Adam, so all men were lost; secondly by breach of Covenant,
whereinto God entered with the Israelites, and so they were in an especial sort
lost: for whereas God was to be their God no otherwise then if they had
continued his people, when they transgressed his law, either by seeking to
other Gods, or using the ceremonial Law amiss; they brake their covenant, and
so lost themselves: notwithstanding, as God promises, Jeremy 31. God was
contented to seek them again, to enter into a new covenant with them, and to
return to the great shepherd of their souls. In this sense does Christ say,
that he was sent only to Israel; and Saint Paul, that he was a Minister of the
Circumcision; so that pressing this second Covenant which respects lost sheep
of the better sort, he seems to exclude the first sort, those that were lost
in Adam. So that he concludes mainly against the woman, that although she were
a sheep, a lost sheep of Adam, yet if she be not a lost sheep of Israel, he can
do nothing for her.

You would think the woman would be answered, and give over upon this speech of
Christ: but the more she is repulsed, the more she presses on him; and whereas
her first prayer was repelled with Christ's silent contempt and hopeless
answer, she presses on him upon her knees, and with her words, opposing
gesture to gesture; the gesture of humility to the gesture of contempt; words
to words, words of earnest importunity to Christ's words of a hopeless answer:
she kneeles to him, she speaks to him, she fawned upon him like a dog, she
was instant with him to help her at a dead lift. So that if ye did before
wonder at her cry so constantly professing Christ, and her prayer so plainly
expressing what inducement she had to seek to Christ; now wonder much more at
her gesture so humble, her words so importunate: she does more lively express
her faith in Christ when she worships him, then when she did describe him: and
her cry is of greater force; when she does intimate that Christ does use to
help; but it is when he is importuned with a cry, for so signifies the Greek
word, which is as much as to run at a cry. So that this second cry is
equivalent to the former, though it does add unto it: for she does really
confess him to be a Savior, whom she does worship, for worship belongs only
to a Savior: and in that she did worship him, she implies notwithstanding
CHRIST'S answer, that he was her Savior; and He was to save her, because she
called upon him.

The lesson that belongs to us is, that a true fear of God is not only
verbal, but real; and that he proceeds in this fear that adds deeds to his
words, and yields unto CHRIST in deeds what he confessed to be his due in
words.

Secondly, That CHRIST will not help except we cry: for the proper word that
signifies help implies that Gods mercy is to be obtained by our performance of
our duty.

You have seen this woman's faith, her redoubted faith, still the same, but not
in the same degree; she began well, she goes on better, hoping that though
Christ put her off with silence and with words; the first showing contempt, the
second cutting off all hope; yet he would be entreated, seeing that his denial
left still some advantage unto her to reply unto him, and to gather that she
might yet well hope to speed well with him. But poor woman! she has not yet
heard the worst, her faith has not had yet a full proof: it was bad before,
the next words will make her case worse: the higher she rises in faith, the
less Christ is seen to be moved with pity; for what faith he? It is not good
to take the childrens bread, and to cast it unto Whelps.

Contempt is grievous unto flesh and blood, but yet if there be hope, it is
better borne; but if no hope, and yet contempt, durus est hic sermo, who can
endure it? If you add reproach to both, you must needs break the I eart, a
natural man cannot but sink under it. Christ's last speech then is a most
bitter speech. It was enough not to reckon her for a sheep; not so much a lost
sheep, but to count her and call her a Whelp, this seems more than enough: and
a Whelp being in opposition to children, the comparison increases the
reproach, when others were so near Christ, and she so far off from him. The
phrase alludes to unclean beasts: such as had no access unto the Temple might
not be offered in sacrifice. So that Christ now does express plainly and
fully, not only that he was not sent unto her, but that she was not in any sort
worthy to be respected by him. For as it is in Jerusalem above, the mother of
us all, so it is likewise in Icrusalem, below; extra canes, there is no place
for dogs within it. So then, the woman may be gone, when her answer is so
plain, that whatsoever goodness is in Christ, it nothing concerns her,
because there is so little worth in her. But she will not yet be gone, she
presses yet nearer Christ, and is more vile (as David speaks) in her own
eyes: she does not stomach the reproach, she acknowledges her small worth,
she confesses that Christ's words though they be bitter, are true, and that she
is no better than a Whelp: but yet though she be of so mean worth, yet is she
not without hope, for she has one advantage left, that she has some
likelihood to speed: for though she be not a Child, but a dog, yet may she be
fed with crummes; if not given unto her, yet falling from her masters Table.
The humility was great in the prodigal child that said, Father, I have sinned
against heaven, and against thee: I am no more worthy to be called thy Son:
make me but as one of thy hired servants. Greater in King David, who was not
only contented to be a servant, so he might be a servant of God, but a servant
in a mean place. I had rather be a door keeper in the house of the Lord,
then to dwell in (as Lord of) the tents of the ungodly. But this woman goes
beyond them: both she is contented to be a Whelp, so she may be Christ's Whelp;
and to gather crumbs, so it be from the Table of such a Master; and the crumbs of
that bread wherewith he feeds his children, though it fall from that Table
whereat the Children sit. It is no wonder, though Saint Paul counted all
worldly things but dung in comparison of that excellent knowledge which is in
Christ; when this woman make^h so great account of the crumbs, that fall from
that Table.

What blame then do we deserve, that being accepted for children, and admitted
to Christ's own Table, set so little by the childrens bread, when every crumme
thereof is of so great worth? They that loathed Manna were sharply punished:
how much more do we deserve it, that make so little account of Gods mercy in
Jesus Christ? This woman's faith will one day rise in judgment, and condemn us;
that in esteeming the gifts of God did go so far beyond us, even so far,
that Christ may wonder at our unbelief, as he did at the Jews, no less then
he did wonder at this woman's faith, which was but a Gentile; wondered at it, and
was conquered by it.

Joseph made himself strange to his brethren, that so he might breed in them a
sense of their sin, and so in the end make himself known with greater
comfort; stood out long, but in the end could forbear no longer, but shed
tears and discovered himself, that he was not (what he seemed) an enemy,
but indeed (as it proved) a kind brother to them: Even so our Savior made
semblance as if he had no compassion for this woman, when ^s indeed he meant
both to make her renowned for her ^aith, and to yield her a good proof, that
such a faith is ^ot in vain. Therefore I call this delay a profitable de^ay:
it was delay, in that he would be so often importu^ed, that was otherwise so
tender hearted a Savior, but ^t was profitable, both for her, whose faith was
hereby commended, and her daughter relieved; and for Christ, that the world
might see what that is which is due unto him, and when it is fit to relieve us.
We must come unto him in a true sense of our unworthiness, reputing our selves
no better then Whelps, in comparison of the free mercy of God; and if in the
sense hereof we persevere constant, we shall find seasonable relief at the
hands of Christ. For it is not unknown (what Saint Ambrose said unto Monicha,
Saint Augustines Mother, with tears beseeching him, to use his help for the
reclaiming of her son, (whose soul the Devil had possessed, for he was an
obstinate Manichee) filius tantarum lachrymarum perire non potest; And unto
this woman Christ said, great is thy faith, or as S. Mark has it, be it as
thou desire. So shall it fare with us; if we have the like faith, we shall
have the like success. If we do imitate this woman's importunate faith, though
Christ do defer us, he will not deny us: nay this delay will prove no less
profitable unto us.

A SERMON PREACHED AT SAINT CROSS, NEAR WINCHESTER.
LUKE 7.1. When he had ended all these sayings in the Audience of the people,
he entered into Capernaum.

LUKE 7.2. And a certain Centurions servant was sick, and ready to die, which
was dear unto him.
BY the mouth of two or three Witnesses (says Gods Law) shall every word be
established. Our Savior Christ therefore having by one proof foretold, that
the kingdom of God should be translated from the Jews unto the Gentiles,
whereof you heard the last Sabbath; does in this Chapter add a second, whereof
ye shall hear this day, according to the fitting of the day. In the first
proof you heard the faith of a woman, a heathen woman: this day shall you
hear the faith of a man, a heathen man, both agreeing in this, that they serve
to confound the infidelity of the Jew: and they serve fitly to make good that
speech of our Savior in the eleventh of Matthew, Mat. 11.21
upbraiding Chorazin and Bethseda with the tractablenesse of Tire and Sidon,
and upbra^ding Capernaum with the tractablenesse of Sodom, not understood
literally, for that lay drowned in mare mortuum, but spiritually, Rev. 11.8.
as Rome is called in the eleaventh of the Revelations; for this was a Captain
of a guarrison of Rome. The History has two special points; the place and the
matter; the place, Capernaum; the matter containe^ the Centurions confession of
Christ, and the testimony that Christ's gives unto the Centurion. The confession
set^ forth the eminency of Christ's person, and the efficacy of his power. The
testimony witnesses that the confession was strange and true; strange,
considering the man; and true, as it appears in the Event.

To begin with the place. The place is Capernaum, and Capernaum in the ninth of
Matthew is called the City of Christ: Mat. 9.1.
the reason whereof is set down in the fourth of Matthew, Mat 4.13.
for that whereas Christ in his younger years when he lived under his Parents,
dwelt at Nazareth; yet when time came that he should show himself unto the
world; to fulfill that which was foretold by the Prophet, he removed to
Capernaum. Capernaum was the place where he preached many Sermons, and wrought
many miracles, Mat. 11.23.
in which respect himself bears witness, Matthew. 11. that Capernaum had
been lifted up (...) high as Heaven: but yet this Capernaum so little
regarded, so little believed Christ's words in his works, that they deserved
(as Christ adds) to be cast down as low as hell; to make them see both whom
and what they did neglect, and so despise, Christ raises up in the midst of
the City this heathen man, to testify of what regard Christ's person was, and
what wonderful power did work in him; so that their contempt was the less
excuseable, by how much his faith more admirable: and this History is more to
be marked then that other of the woman; because though the faith of both were
great, of that woman and this man, yet the difference of the place makes this
the greater: for that as the faith of that woman had little help to persuade
it, so had it nothing to hinder it: but this man dwelt in the midst of them,
that the more helps they had, they showed the less grace, and were so far
from winning any unto Christ, that they might rather have alienated him from
Christ. But here hence we learn two excellent lessons, the one from Capernaum,
that howsoever Paul plant and Apollos water, all outward means are nothing
without Gods inward grace, except God give increase: and from the Centurion,
that water will stream them even from a Rock, and that in the wilderness, if
so it be commanded by the Word of God. They that are most unlikely, oftentimes
prove most forward in the fear and service of God. The cause whereof is nothing
else but the unresistable operation of the Spirit of God, which of stones can
raise children unto Abraham, when Abraham's childrens hearts are grown obdurate
as stones.

But let us come to the confession of the Centurion; wherein you must mark who
it is that speaks, and what he speaks. First who; it is a man of place, and
of desert: of place, for he is a Centurion; of desert, the Jews witness it,
and prove it.

First for his place, he was a Centurion, a Captain of an hundred Soldiers,
had a charge, and a charge in that place: the Town was held by a guarrison, as
most part of the Holy land was; being now in the power of the Romans, though
under them it was governed by a petty King. The note that we must gather is;
that being of such a nation, and put in trust with a band of men in that City,
his Country and his charge do much augment the greatness of his person,
especially in that place.

He was then a great man and a good man too: the Jews do witness it, and
they do seldom commend Gentiles; whom as they did usually abhor, as figured
by unclean beasts, so did they usually reproach by the name of sinners: which
you may perceive by the distinction of Saint Paul; are by nature Jews, not
sinners of the Gentiles. This commendation then given by the Jews of a
Gentile, makes it probable that he was no bad man, though he were a Gentile.

But the Jews do not only witness it, but prove it; and prove it first in
that he loved their nation: secondly, in that he favored their Religion. For
the first, it is worth the noting, in a Captain, and that a Roman Captain,
that he was but civilly just, and did not oppress them; whereas if ye look
but into the Acts of the Apostles, ye shall see what manner of men they were,
by Felix and by Festus. To say nothing of the Histories of Josephus, who notes
how usually they did prey upon the people, so that it was but a flattering
speech of Tertullus the Orator, when he so highly commended the Roman Deputy.
This man then is proved by the Jews to be good, in that he was not like to
others in his rank, in bribery and oppression; but his goodness reached
further, he favored their Religion, and had built them a Synagogue. A
Synagogue was a place answerable to our Parish Churches, which after the
captivity of Babylon (for before there is no mention of them) seemed to have
been built in all Towns and Cities of the holy land, and else wheresoever the
Jews had their abode, as you may perceive in the Acts; whither they repaired
both to hear the Law read every Sabbath day, and to power forth their prayers:
so they looked toward the Temple, wherein, and wherein only Sacrifices were
daily offered, which were inhibited in any other place, which notwithstanding
were allowed for other parts of the worship of God. Now that this man should
build them a Synagogue, as it argues that he was a wealthy man, so is it
strange that he should do it being a Roman: for although from the time of the
Babylonian captivity, the Jews had been under foreign Kings, yet none of
them favored so little their Religion, as did the Romans. The Kings of Persia
(as you may perceive by the book of Ezra and Nehemias, and also the prophecy
of Daniel) sent presents unto the Temple of Jerusalem, and made edicts for the
honor of the God of the Jews. But as for the Romans, their Poets scoft at
their Religion, their Histories speak reproachfully of it, their Emperors did
vilify it. Insomuch as Augustus Caesar commends his nephew Caius, for that
passing into Syria, he did not put in by the way, and sacrifice at Jerusalem.
Their Soldiers stuck not to profane the Temple with their presence, and
sacrilegiously to rifle those things that were dedicated unto God. Hereby you
perceive, that it is a greater praise for this Centurion being a Roman, to
favor the Jewish Religion.

He was then a great man, and he was a good man: and what would you now expect,
but that he should stand upon his greatness and his goodness, and in
confidence thereof, rather require then beseech Christ? Naaman the Assyrian,
when he came to be cured by Elizeus was highly displeased, for that the Prophet
sent him a message, and came not himself: I thought (says he) he would have
come down to me, he would have stood before me, prayed unto his God, and laid
his hands upon me: but because he did not, the Captain was departing in wrath.
Lo here is the spirit of a Soldier, the spirit of a great man. Will you hear
the spirit of a good man of Ahabs Court? desirous to speed of his request to
Elias, he petitioneth him with a repetition of his good deeds. Has not my Lord
heard what thy servant has done, when Iezabel slew the Prophets? how I hid an
hundred of them in one Cave, and fifty in another Cave, and fed them with bread
and water: behold the spirit of a good man. But our great man, our good man
savoureth of neither of their spirits. You may perceave it by that confession
which he makes of Christ: first of the eminency of his person, which he sets
forth partly by a comparison of Christ and himself, and partly by the
Embassadge he sent unto Christ.

But before we enter this first branch of his confession; you must mark how he
does correct himself, as if he had been over bold with Christ. The first
motion was, that Christ would come and cure his servant: but the second is,
that Christ should not trouble himself to come, because it was not fit he
should take so much pains, for so mean a man. So that howsoever at the first
he had some touch of his own worth, yet his second thoughts were more sober,
which brought forth this confession of Christ; teaching us, that it is no shame
to unsay what at any time we say amiss; and that we must lay aside all
conceit of known greatness and goodness, when we have a suite unto Christ,
for he resists the proud, and will give his grace unto the humble and meek.
And of this Centurion we may learn so to be humbled. But let us hear how he
esteems the person of Christ, first comparing him to himself, and comparing
him in regard of entertainment into his house, and speech from his mouth. I am
not worthy (says he) thou should come under the roose of my house. And
Christ reports of himself, that whereas the birds of the air had nests, and
foxes had holes; the Son of man had not an house to hide his head in: a mean
house then in probability would not be refused by him, how much less a
Centurions house, the house of a man so wealthy, and of such authority in that
place? But yet whatsoever appearance there were in the outward shape of Christ,
he apprehended some greater personage that dwelt in him: Even as Elizabeth
saluted the Virgin Mary, How comes it about that the Mother of my Lord
comes unto me? Here was the Lord Himself; and He might have Salomons
conceit, The Heaven of heavens cannot contain him, and how homely a place
then is this Temple, though a stately Temple, to receave him? And if the Temple
were so unfit, much more must the Centurions house be, were it the best in all
Capernaum. We must wonder at Gods goodness that will stoop so low, as to
accept of any place for his presence here on earth, whose Majesty is much
impaired even in that revelation of himself, which is in the most glorious
heavens: he cannot be discerned by the Creature, but in a degree far
inferior to the infiniteness of a Creator.

That then which we must mark in this speech of the Centurion, contains two
profitable lessons: the first is, that in that Christ took upon him the form
of a servant, we must not here hence grow to contempt of his person, but rather
adore the goodness of God; descending so low that he may do good unto men,
and in the depth of his Humility confess the height of his glory. Secondly,
although with Christ's presence salvation will come to our house, as he told
Zacheus, whereat we may well rejoice, and which we ought much to desire; yet is
it meet also, that we have a sense and conscience of our own unworthiness,
and cry out with Saint Peter, Go from me Lord, for I am a sinful man. So
shall we give Christ his due, and confess our own desert, and we shall be
nothing farther from Christ's mercy, though we be cast down before him in such
humility. This is the Centurions humility, who thought himself unworthy that
Christ should come under the roof of his house.

But he is not content so to vilify his house, he does much more vilify
himself; for so he goes on, I thought not my self worthy to speak unto thee.
A strange speech of one of his place, of his worth! whose voice was a
commanding voice in that Town, and Christ one of the meanest inhabitants of
the Town: a voice that commanded Soldiers and Senators too, as you perceive
by the Embassage: that such a voice, so commanding a voice should not presume,
should not be worthy to speak unto, nay to petition so mean a man, and a man
of so mean place within his charge! Ye would think these should be the words
of Abraham talking with God, and checking himself as being but dust and ashes,
when he had a glimpse of Gods presence with him: but the Centurion confesses
him no better before Christ comes near him. Job laid his hand on his mouth
after he had spoken, the Centurion before he spoke. There was more appearance
of Majesty in Gods presence to Abraham, but specially to Job, then could any
way be gathered by the outward state of Christ.

So that the Humility of the Centurion, in not thinking himself worthy to
speak unto Christ, does import an excellent lesson of reverence which is due
unto God, and how great an impression should Christ's Majesty (as he now
sits at the right hand of God) work in us, when we pray unto him; when his
state in Humility was so apprehended by this Centurion, that neither his
greatness nor his goodness could imbolden him to adventure immediately by
himself to petition him. Our best devotion comes short of this preparation:
yet should we rather exceed it, then any way be inferior to it. The more we
know Christ's glory, the more humble we should be in doing our duty. This is the
first part of his confession touching the eminency of CHRIST'S person, so far as
is expressed in the comparison of CHRIST and himself.

But it must be gathered also by the Embassage he sends to Christ; an Embassage
of the greatest in the Town, and the dearest to himself: he sent the Elders
of the Jews at the first, and seconded them with the dearest of his friends:
Jews he sent, and so declined that which the woman incurred, I am not sent,
but to the lost sheep of Israel. He supposed Christ would gratify the Jews,
though he had no respect to him being a Gentile.

But God had a further reach, to let these Jews be witnesses to the faith of
the Gentile, and the relating of his words unto Christ, to give judgment
against themselves for their contempt of Christ; for seeing they were means (in
the judgment of a heathen) meetest to prevail with Christ, it was a shame for
them not to acknowledge how much they were bound to Christ, that was not only
good unto them, but also would be good unto the very heathen, to pleasure them.
Abraham and Job have it attributed as an honor done by God unto them, for that
God would hear Abraham for Abimelech, and cure his family; and Job for his
friends, and forgive their sin. But these graceless Jews do not esteem
the favors of Christ, but rather seal their own condemnation by the manifold
proof of his goodness toward them. God does this honor to all Christians,
to be their God, and the God of their seed, to bless the children for the
Parents. The more GODS mercy, the more our debt; and our judgment the greater,
if our neglect do rise with Gods mercy.

But the Embassage as it was of the Jews, so it was of the Elders of the
Jews: had there been any greater, he would have made them his means: being
for to send, he would send the best, because he conceaved that the best were
but too mean to be sent unto Christ. It is the curse that GOD pronounces in
Malachy against them that vowed unto God, and having a Male in the flock would
offer a Female, or some contemptible thing; he gives the reason, because I am a
great God: and has God a care of Sheep? or rather speaks be it not for men,
that we must use the best of all sorts, when we have to do with God? And what
wonder, when God sent his own Son unto man? Is there any person so great,
that man should think too great to send to God? there is none too great, none
too dear. Christ as he is the only begotten Son of God, so is he the
dearly beloved Son of his Father; and this Christ was sent unto men.

Answerably hereunto, does this Centurion frame his Embassage unto CHRIST: he
sends the greatest and the dearest he has, he sends the Elders of the Jews,
and he sends also his friends, that he might seem not only to honor Christ in
them that are great, but also to affect CHRIST in them that are dear: and
indeed it is a complete present for Christ, when we serve him with the best,
and our best affection too; and our devotion both mature and also hearty, when
both outward and inward man are devoted unto him. And thus much of the
Centurions confession of the eminency of CHRIST'S person.

I come now to the second part of the confession, which expresses the efficacy
of Christ's power, wherein there are three things to be noted. First, that he
will not have Christ to trouble himself, he means unnecessarily, as if his
corporeal presence were superfluous; and in desiring that, he should wrong
Christ, and not to the full express the strength of his own faith. So that
this word is a retractation of his first desire, which was, come and cure: but
now he confesses that the first is too much. Come is not requisite to the
cure. Behold the modesty of the man that was little ambitious to have his house
made a theater of a miracle wrought with pomp and state, which Christ
presents, and in a great assembly. Such thoughts were fit for Herod, who when
Christ was sent by Pilate to him, was glad, because of long time he had desired
to see him; because he hoped to satisfy his curious desire, by seeing some
strange work done by him. This Centurion apprehends better, that Christ is
far from yielding unto such vanity: therefore that he may not seem to affect
it, he begins with, Lord trouble not thy self, and give us this good Item, that
we must not intermingle the idle desires of flesh and blood, by desiring any
thing that is unnecessary at the hands of God. Come is unnecessary, we must be
contented with the Cure, and the Cure may be wrought with only, Speak the word.

Here is the very object of his faith, even this word of Christ: or if you
will, Christ the word: for the curing word is the word of the word, even the
Word of God, which word is God, the word that in the beginning made all, and
when it was lost restored all. This word is that of which David speaks in the
107 Psalm, Ps. 107.10. Wisd. 16.7.
Misit Verbum, et sanavit eos: and the book of wisdom in the 16 Chapter, It
was neither her be nor pasture that healed them, speaking of those that were
stung of the fiery Serpent, but only the word that heals all things: in
respect of which virtue in Christ, Saint Matthew observes out of the Prophet,
that Christ took upon him all our infirmities, which by Saint Matthew
appears, when he cured all kind of diseases; This word the Centurion would
shape Christ to speak, which S. Paul to the Hebrews calls the word of Gods
power, a word mighty in operation: and as it bears up all things, so can it
work his pleasure upon all things: it is a commanding word, and it commands
effectually, dixit and factum est, has an eternal truth. It is observed of
Caesar, that when he had driven Pompey out of Italy, and seized upon the City
of Rome, when he would have entered into the Treasury, a favorite of Pompey
would have hindered him: at whom Caes^r shook his sword, speaking these words,
It is an easier matter for me to do it, then to speak it, he meant to kill
him: he spoke in the boldness of a Soldier, forgetting the Proverb, Multa
cadunt inter calicem supremaque la^^a. Which holds in these that are but mere
men, whose attempts may be frustrated, when they seem to be consummated. But
it is not so with God, for nothing can resist his will, nor interrupt his
work: his word and his work, they are concurrent the one with the other, not
consequent the one upon the other, when we speak of Christ; if only of God,
they differ not one from the other, Dei dicere est facere: and Christ's word is
never an empty word, which is the ground of our faith both in heating the
Scripture and receaving the Sacraments. That di^ere est facere, in hearing the
Scriptures, Saint Paul makes it plain, when he teaches, that in the Gospel
beholding the glory of God, we are changed into the same Image; and of the
Sacraments Saint Augustines rule is true; qui fit ut aqua corpus tangat and
animam abluat? quia accedi^ verbum ad elementum. Therefore is Baptism called
the fountain of Regeneration, and the Eucharist does ^ourish us unto eternal
life. No marvel then if the C^^turion desire CHRIST only to speak the word,
and doubts not but the third point will follow, my servant shall be whole.

His servant (as it was said before) was at the point of death: his case was
desperate in the judgment of man: Sed non est impossible apud Deum omne verbum,
he did not doubt, but believing he should see the glory of God: he doubted not,
but that Christ could both raise from the dead, and preserve also from death:
and indeed had he not so thought, that he could help where Physic did
fail, he would never have sent unto him; he might otherwise have been of
Naamans mind, who thought the waters of Damascus better than the water of
Jordan, till he found that the virtue was in Gods word, and not in the water.

But was all this for a servant? the meaner the person, the greater his
humility. You wondered at that woman, but you have much more reason to wonder at
this man: you have heard two special reasons.

There is nothing reported of the woman's either greatness or goodness, of
this man's there is: she confessed Christ, but it was in the out parts of Sidon;
this man in the midst of Capernaum: and whereas this woman did it, presuming to
come immediately to Christ her self; this man adventureth not so far, but
he both uses the greatest and the dearest means he has. But now behold,
whereas she did both for her daughter, and her possessed with a Devil, a party
so near her, in a case so pitiful: this man humbles himself, and humbles
himself so low, having no other suit then for his servant, though a dear
servant, yet but a servant, whom the Scripture calls in Greek, as if he
observed the Son of Syrachs rule: and a good servant was as dear unto him as
his child: this somewhat amplifieth his virtue; and it amplifieth it the more,
because his servant was not possessed with a Devil, but almost exanimated with
the Palsy, a dangerous, but yet an ordinary disease; that could not in
probability move a double, but a single compassion, the Devil possesses not
but with a double mischief; the less cause then there was why he should be so
humble, the greater is his virtue that he is so humble: but he teaches us to
measure our humility not by the greatness of our suit, but by his greatness
to whom we make our suit, who is always the same, though our wants may be of
diverse degrees. You have the Centurions confession: hear now Christ's
testimony.

Christ confesses it strange, if you look to the man, therefore Christ
Himself does wonder at it. Christ's wondering does not suppose that beforehand
he was ignorant of it; but implies, that of this effect there appeared small
outward cause. In which sense he wondreth at the infidelity of the Jews
unbelief, on whom so many outward means wrought so little inward effect; for
he could not match this faith, no not in all Israel, yet were there many worthy
believers. But Chrysostom observes well; it is lesser wonder to hear a wise
man speak wisely, then to hear a plow man speak but probably; for the less
is expected, the more is admired, if there come that from any man, which his
means seem not to promise, nor can enable him to perform. Howsoever therefore
there might be found a match in regard of the effect; yet if you look to the
cause, there was none such to be found, no not in Israel. Yea and the effect
too went beyond the worthies that are recorded to have believed in Israel.
Martha's faith was but this, Lord, if thou had been here, my brother had not
dyed. She tied Christ's power to his corporal presence. Saint Peter, at Christ's
word ventured to walk upon the waters, but he thought he should sink, if he
had not Christ by the hand. Yea, the Virgin Mary had her, Quomodo hoc fiet? and
until the Angel told her, Non est impossible apud Deum omne verbum, she made
not that blessed Confession, Behold the servant of the Lord, be it unto me
according to thy word. This man prevents all, he expects no promise, he doubts
no distance of place, he desires no touch of Christ's hand, Trouble not thy
self, Lord, says he, with any of these things, only speak the word, and my
servant shall be whole. Does not Christ justly wonder at it in an heathen, when
he could find no example for to match it in those that were his chosen? A
plain prognostication, that the Church of the Gentiles should be more
renowned for faith than ever was the Church of the Jews; and that the seed of
Abraham according to the faith, should far excel his seed according to the
flesh, his faith was strange, if you look to the man, but if you look to the
matter, it was very true: the event did prove it; Christ spoke the word, and
his servant was made whole. Saint Ambrose. Christ takes no time, neither
desires opportunity of place; virtue goes from him more than can be discerned
in him. Even when a cloud does intercept the brightness of the Sun, a
quickening influence insensibly proceeds from him, which vegetateth the earth.
Even a beam passed from Christ which cured that servant. Even Christ was not
seen, and might seem not to work. Christ now sits at the right hand of
God, and yet we must not doubt but he is effectual in his Church, as much to
cure our souls, yea more than he was in curing that servants body; and this he
does only by his word; of which Saint Paul says well out of Moses, Say not in
thine heart, who shall ascend into Heaven, that is, to bring Christ from above?
or who shall descend into the dust, that is, to bring Christ again from the
dead? But what says it? the word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thine
heart. This is the word of faith which we preach, whose effectual power we
shall feel, as many as do believe.

The upshot of all is: Christ in this History taxes the Jews for being so
backward in comparison of the Gentiles; in both esteeming the person of
Christ, and depending upon the power of Christ.

Their defect must be our admonition. King David, when Absolon was overthrown,
and Israel offered their service, to bring their King home to Jerusalem,
striving who should be forwardest, and condemning them that were slow, sent
this message to Zadoc and Abiathar the Priests, saying; speak unto the Elders
of Judah, and say, why are ye behind to bring the King again to his house? for
the saying of Israel is come unto the King, even to his house. Ye are my
brethren, my bones and my flesh: Wherefore are ye then the last that bring the
King again? We are the peoples Abiathar and Zadoc: we in Gods name must blame
the peoples coldness, by the forwardness of the Gentiles. And I pray God we
may have as good success with you as these Priests had with Judah; for they
bowed the hearts of all the men of Judah, as of one man, even with emulation
against Israel, for to show their forwardness to return their King. I pray
God we may so surpass these Gentiles in honoring Christ: so may we speed in
all our petitions, that in imitation of them, we shall so humbly, so faithfully
present our selves unto CHRIST, etc.

A SERMON PREACHED INTRINITIE CHVRCHIN WINCHESTER.
IEREM. 14.7. O Lord although our sins witness against us, yet deal with us
according to thy Name.


THe Prophets and Apostles so served God, that they ceased not to be men; they
could not put off their natural affection, though they were most careful to
discharge their supernatural Vocation: they were not without sense, when they
were messengers of Gods vengeance. Therefore bringing fire from heaven, they
would quench it with their own tears; denouncing wrath from God, they would
appease it with their own prayers: they will put their own shoulders under
the burden of the people: they were contented themselves to be a curse, for to
discharge the people: in a word, they would then sacrifice a contrite spirit of
a repenting soul unto a merciful God, when they were sent with woes and
lamentations unto graceless sinners from an irefull Judge. Thus Moses, Samuel,
David, Esaias, Paul and others prophesied and prayed: and no marvel; for Christ
wept over Jerusalem, when he foreshewed her imminent misery. God himself
seems to be tormented in himself, when for sin he must correct his people
with the Babylonian Captivity. So that men do but imitate that gracious
conflict of mercy and justice observed in Christ and God, when they intermingle
their humble prayers with these heavy doomes which they pronounce against the
world in the name of God: this fellow-feeling, these bowels of compassion, the
sweet composition of prophesies and prayers was in Jeremy, so much the more
frequent, by how much that anciently threatened Judgment in his days more
nearly approached, and the evils thereof were more clearly revealed; a taste
whereof we have in the first part of this Chapter, wherein he foretells and
describes such a famine as should afflict beasts and men; poor and rich; not
some, but all; as well in Country as in Town: insomuch that general and loud
complaints and groans should be doubled from the dejected souls of that
distressed people. This judgment as his tongue denounced it dreadfully, so his
own soul apprehended it feelingly, and therefore without delay he stood up in
the gap between God and his people, he laid hold upon that hand wherewith
God was striking his people, and with spiritual incense labored an atonement
between God and his people, as appears in these words that now I have read
unto you. Wherein we may observe these two points: first Jeremy his confession,
secondly Ieremies supplication: the confession, O Lord, our sins testify
against us, the supplication, yet deal thou with us according to thy Name.

First, of the Confession. Our sins. The word used by the Prophet does
signify not barely sin, but perverseness coupled with sin, which much
increases the heynousnesse of sin. There are many sorts of sin. Sin of
ignorance, and that is zeal without knowledge; when we intend good, but err
in our choice of that which is good. In the heart of every man there are
naturally principles of Religion and honest conversation: but the conclusions
which we frame of those principles do make us many times to err in Religion
and swerve in conversation. The reason is, the blindness of our understanding,
whereby (as Saint Paul teaches Romans 1.) Romans 1.22.
when we labor to be most wise, we become the greater fools: fools in
making of false rules, and fools in being misguided by them. The Jews zealous
for Moses persecuted Christ: but they neither drew true rules out of the Law of
Moses, as Christ teaches Matt. 5. Mat. 5.17, 21.
neither did they discern the Person of Christ, they were fools in both. The
same may be observed in Saint Paul before his conversion. 1 Timothy 1. there are
two sorts of sin, which is, 1 Timothy 1.13.
sin of infirmity, when a man delights in the Law of God in the inner man,
but he sees a Law in his members rebelling against the law of his mind and
carrying him captive unto sin; so that the good which he would he cannot do,
but the evil that he would not, that he does, Romans 7. Romans 7.15.
thus no man sins but he sorroweth, he labors under the burden of sin,
and receaveth no comfort until he be released of the guilt of sin. So Peter
denied Christ, but he wept bitterly. David committed murder and adultery, but
he repented heartily. Solomon fell into manifold vanities, but he confessed it
all humbly. Besides these two sorts of sin there is a third, called sin of
perverseness, when men not of ignorance or infirmity, but wittingly and willingly
desplease and despise God. The branches whereof are three, all by Jeremy noted
in the Jews: by consideration whereof we must understand the sin which was
committed by the Jews. The first branch is a rejection of Gods word; the
second, an abusing of Gods gifts; the third, a senselesnes under Gods plagues.
They rejected Gods word, for when God commanded one thing, they would do
another: thus said the Lord, stand in the way, behold and ask for the old way,
which is the good way, and walk therein, and so shall ye find rest unto your
souls: but they answered, we will not walk therein. Also God set over them
watchmen which said, take heed to the sound of the Trumpet; Jer. 6.17.
but they answered, we will not take heed. Ier. 6. Nay they said desperately,
Surely we will walk after our imaginations, and do every man after the
stubbornness of our own wicked heart. Jer. 18.12.
Ier. 18. The Prophet shows three notable experiences of this branch of
stubbornness. First God said, the Chaldeans should come against them, they
said, they would not come. Secondly, when they were come, GOD said, they must
yield; they said, they would not yield. Thirdly, when they were conquered, God
commanded the remnant not to go down into Egypt; but in contempt of God they
would, and did go down to Egypt. Thus they took occasion from the messages
of God, to show their overthwart dealing with God.

A second breach of their perverseness was the abusing of Gods gifts; which
being bestowed to work and increase a knowledge of God, to manifest and
confirm the love of God, were used by them to obscure his glory and impair
his fear; for they turned the truth of God into a lie, and served the
creature, sorsaking the Creator. Have I been as a wilderness unto Jsrael, or
a land of darkness, says God? wherefore says my people, we now are Lords,
we have enough, we will come no more at God. Can a maid forget her ornament,
or a Bride her attire? yet my people have forgotten me, which am their ornament
and attire. O ye heavens, be astonished at this, be afraid and utterly
confounded: for my people have committed two evils; they have forsaken me the
fountain of living waters, to dig them pits, even broken pits, which can hold
no water. Ier. 2. Ezechiel Chap. 16. Showed how they wasted Gods gifts, Jer.
2.13. Ezec. 16.17
in service of their Idols: and Osee Chap. 2. Teaches that they acknowledged
for author of their prosperity, O^ce 2.5. Deuteronomy. 32.15
not God, but their Idols. But Moses long before foretold it, Deuteronomy. 32. Iesurun
when he waxed fat, spurned with his heel; being laden with fatness, he
forsook God that made him, and regarded not the mighty God of his salvation.

The third branch of their perverseness, is an unrepentant sencelesnesse under
Gods plague: they were stricken, but they sorrowed not; they were nigh
consumed, but they refused to receave correction: they made their faces harder
then a stone, and refused to return, Ier. 5. Ier. 5.3.
more senseless then unreasonable creatures. The Storke in the air knows
their appointed times, so do the Turtle, the Crane, and the Swallow, says
God, Jeremy 8. Ier. 8.7. Ier. 6.28.
but my people knows not the judgment of the Lord, Chap. 6. he compares
them to brass and iron, whose dross cannot be separated; the bellows (says
he) are burnt, the lead is consumed in the fire, the founder melts in vain,
for the wicked are not taken away; David compares them to deaf Adders, which
stop their ears, that their poison might not be charmed, Psalm. 58. Psalm. 58.5.
Solomon compares them to a drunken man, that can sleep in the midst of the
Sea, and that upon the top of the mast, and say, they have stricken me, but I
was not sick; they have beaten me, but I perceived it not; therefore will I
return to my wine again. An experiment we have, Amos the fourth, Amos 4.9.
I have stricken you (says God) with famine, yet have you not returned; with
pestilence, yet have you not returned: read Psalm 78. Psalm. 78.17. Esaias 1.5.
Insomuch that God ( Esaias 1.) weary of repenting breaks forth and says,
Wherefore should you be smitten any more? for ye fall away more and more. And
this is a branch of their perverseness. Conjoyning all these you may perceave
their sin, which was a contempt of Gods word and abuse of Gods gifts, and a
senselesnes under Gods plagues. This is the sin Jeremy confesses.

A second note is gathered from Ieremy's coupling himself with the people and
acknowledging his own sin with the peoples, him from the Publican, both in
place and in prayer: in place, for he would not come near him, as thinking
himself more holy; nor pray like unto him, as feeling no burden of sin. But
it is not so with the Saints of God: they confess as well their own sins as
the peoples unto God; even when they come short of that perverseness wherewith
the people provoked God. Read the prayer of Daniel, of Nehemias and others.
Jeremy therefore confesses not the peoples sin, but his own. The reason is
threefold. First, because in this life, the holiest men are sinful men, and
therefore should be humble men, and have a feeling of that body of sin
whereunto they are subject, so long as they are mortal men. Secondly, Jeremy
was a Priest, and therefore was to pray both for himself and for the people,
as Saint Paul teaches out of this Law in the Epistle to the Hebrews. Thirdly,
being a member of the same body both civil and Ecclesiastical, he could not
be without a fellow feeling of their imminent dangers. For as in our body
natural, though a wound be but in one part, the smart is in every part; and
the danger that should perish one part is avoided by the endeavor of every
part: so is it in the body civil of the common weal, and Ecclesiastical of
the Church: which note we must rather observe in Jeremy; because he was
warranted that he should be secure, though the people perished; even as Moses
had an offer, that of him God would make a mighty people, if he could be
contented that God for sin should destroy his people: But neither would
endure it, and both prayed against it.

A third note that is the property of sin; and that is the testifying of
sin. Men are willing to commit sin, and ready also to confess their sin,
like the Harlot in the Proverbs, which committed adultery, wipes her mouth, and
asks what evil has she done: but it is in vain. For God has given a voice
to sin, and the evidence that shall be brought against us, and cannot be
excepted against by us, is the evidence of sin in sin, besides the act of sin,
which quickly passes. There are two evils, either of which afterward
continues, the stain of sin and the guilt: the stain which cleaves partly
to the person committing sin, and partly to the creature abused in sin: to
the person, for so the Scripture teaches, Esaias 1. Esa. 1.15.
Where God refuses the Jews sacrifice, because their hands were full of
blood, not that they did shed, but before they had shed blood, and in their
hands God saw stains of blood. So Peter speaks of eyes full of adultery, that
is, which are not only windows to let in lust, but also against GODS judgment
day are the Registers of Lust. In this sense Saint Paul speaks of throats
which are open Sepulchers, and tongues that are tipped with poison of Aspes. In a
word, no part of our body or soul, which records not the sin that is committed
either by our body, or our soul.

Secondly, the stain of sin cleaves to the creature abused in sin: for
Ier. 17. Ier. 17.1. Ier. 2.2, 7, 18.
the Idolatry of Israel is laid on the horns of the Altars: and Ier. 2. God
teaches the peoples sin by the places where they committed sin. Moses
speaks of graves of lust, and waters of strife, James of witnessing, Rust of
gold and silver and moths fretting our garments; which speeches mean nothing
else, but the stain of sin abiding on the creature abused by sin. And in
this sense sin is said to have a voice, the voice of sin being the measure of
sin: small sins often have soft voices; the greater the sin, the louder it
cries. Murder is a great sin, therefore a loud sin; luxury a great sin,
and therefore a loud sin; oppression a great sin, and therefore a loud sin:
not but that the ear of jealou^e hears all things, but he is not alike moved
with all things, neither will he take vengeance upon all sins: therefore sin is
not only said to have a voice, but also a testifying voice, for so the word
here signifies; and that sin is said to give evidence, on which God is
purposed to take vengeance; and such is the sin of perverseness. And thus much
of the first part, wherein you have heard the nature, the community and the
property of the Jews sin: all which are contained in Ieremies confession.

The supplication follows, O Lord yet deal with (...) according to thy Name.
Names serve to express natures: if the nature may not be conceaved, the name
can not be truly fitted. God is infinite, we cannot comprehend him, therefore
have we no name whereby fully to express him Notwithstanding, that we may not
be altogether ignorant of God; the Scripture gives diverse names to God: I will
touch only three, which respect the Church, an^ are usually remembered in the
prayers of the Church When Moses was sent to Pharaoh, he asked God wh^ was his
Name? God answered, I am that I am; in the next verse he adds, J am the God of
your fathers, the G^ of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: this is my Name, and this
(...) memorial for ever. When Moses would see the glory (...) God, he had
poclaimed this Name of God the Lord; To Lord strong and merciful and gracious,
slow to anger, (...) abundant in goodness and truth, reserving mercy for
thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin, not mak^^ the wicked
innocent, visiting the iniquity of the Fathers up^ the Children, and the
Childrens children, unto the fourth ^^neration. The Coherence of the three
names is this. T^^ first does show the Truth of God, by which he perform his
promises; the second Covenant of God, from when^ do flow his blessings; a
third, the excess of his Me^^ above his judgment, when he is to power forth
curses (...) blessings; the practice of the first name we have. I appeared unto
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob by the name (...) Almighty, by my Name Jehovah I was
not known un^ them; the practice of the second name. Because the Lo^^ would
keep the Oath which he had sworn to your F^thers, the Lord has brought you
out with a mighty ha^^ and delivered you out of the house of bondage, and fr^^
the hand of Pharaoh King of Egypt: on this Name Da^Daniel, Esaias and Moses
ground many prayers. The prectise of the three Names we have.

When God would plague the Jews for murmuring, when they should have entered
the holy land; I beseech ^hee, says Moses, let the power of the Lord be great,
ac^ording as thou have spoken, when thou shewedst me thy ^ame, saying, The Lord
is slow to anger and of great mercy, ^^rgiving iniquities: and in this place
Jeremy appealing (...) the name of God, does mean either the first, which in
this verse is expressed in these words, O Lord; or else the other two jointly
with the first, because they have the ^ne a dependence of the other. So that
the effect of his prayer is this: Although our own consciences do ac^use us,
and our sins witness against us, cleaving both to us and the creatures that
have been abused by us, calling for vengeance against us, and inevitably
convicting us, that we have contemned thy word, abused thy gifts, and not
relented at thy plagues; yet performing those ^romises which are contained in
thy own Covenant, the ^lory whereof must be given to thy Name, which con^ines
more mercy then judgment; otherwise we must ^eeds perish in our sins, if thy
mercy did not rejoice against thy Judgment. Last of all, mark how he prefixeth
an humble confession before his earnest supplication; to teach us that we must
cast down our selves and confess our own deserts unto God, if we mean to
taste of the sweet mercies of God, which mercies are most sweet.

A SERMON PREACHED IN TRINITY CHVRCH IN WINCHESTER.
PSALM. 62. ver. 11.12. God spoke once, or twice have I heard it, that power
belongs unto God.

And that to thee O Lord, is mercy, for thou rewardest every man according to
his works.


THe argument of this Psalm is King David's exemplary experience for the worlds
malice, and Gods deliverance. The world does envy them whom God does honor, it
persecuteth them that rely upon him; but this is the comfort, that the event
does not answer, nay crosses their designs: their design is deadly, but the
event happy: Or if deadly, it is so to the wicked, not to the godly. In the
godly it increases their confidence, dependancy upon God, which is never
destitute of a seaosnable deliverance from him. This King David affirms upon
his own experience, in the first part of this Psalm, and in the second
desires that it might be drawn into an example by others. He would have us in
the like case to take the like course; to repair to God, to trust in him, not
in any worldly person or thing; for all persons, even the chief of all yield
less then no help, and great wealth, especially if it be ill gotten wealth, is
but a treasure of naught; both persons and things will fail, will hurt us. If
any man, notwithstanding K. David's example and counsel, doubt whom to trust,
God or the world, how to live, righteously or unrighteously; he may be, if he
be not wilful, resolved thoroughly by the close of this Psalm, by those words
of my Text; he may be resolved from an Author undeceaveable, by a witness
unchangeable, from God by King David, God spoke once or twice, and King David
heard him; from and by these, he may be resolved what God is, and none but God;
how he deals, and deals with all. God, and only God is powerful, and which
is strange, the same God is merciful: power belongs unto God, and to thee o
Lord, mercy. The blessed combination of which Attributes in God is easily
perceaved, if we consider his government of the world, for he rewards every
man according to his works. Lo then in a word, what is the substance of this
text: it is true, it is clear, God can, he will reckon with us all, and deal
partially with none. The paraphrase of the Text, to judge what is in God, by
that which proceeds from him. We have warrant from Gods own mouth, under the
Test of K. David; witnessing, that the Indifferency of Gods judgments is the
evidence of his nature. The points to be considered are two; the persons from
whom we take this resolution, and the resolution that we take from the persons:
the persons two; the author, and the witness: and the resolution consists of two
parts, first what God is, secondly, how he deals with man. First, Of the
persons, the first whereof is the Author: the Author is undeniable, for it is
God. God spoke.

Between God and man the Apostle puts this difference, Let God be true, and
every man a liar: for man is but a mere man; man may deceave or be deceaved;
but neither of these are incident unto God, nec actu, nec potentia, God does
not, he cannot lie; God is not, he cannot be deceaved. And no wonder, seeing
he is not only the original of all truth, but also truth it self by nature.
So that it is no more possible for falsehood to be at one with God, then for
darkness to consort with light: both import a real contradiction. Whereas the
greatest commendation of the best man is but this. They speak in veritate
mentis, without simulation, without equivocation or mental reservation. The
praise due to God is, that he speaks in certitudine veritatis: no mist, or
fraud, or error can overcast his wisdom or his holiness: his word is tried
to the uttermost, like silver, (as the Psalmist speaks) seven times tried in
the fire. What then is our lesson? Surely this: we must not be ashamed of
Iulians scoff; he derided the Christian belief, because it had no other
proof, then, Thus says the Lord. But Nazianzen replies well: they which
allowed and captivated their judgment to a man, have no reason to accept
against that which relyeth upon the authority of God, especially seeing they
received principles of Philosophy which were examinable by reason. But we
credit only mysteries of Religion, whereto no approches can be made by the
natural wit of man. Finally, they build on a professed scholar of the father
of lies: and we on him whose style is, The Lord God of Truth.

The Conclusion that arises here-hence, is; God spoke, or the Lord has said,
must go current with us, as an indemonstrable Principle of our faith, and an
incontrollable precept for our life: it must go current, if God speak it, if
he speak but once; how much more, if (as it follows in my Text) he speak
once or twice?

I will not trouble you with diverse readings of these words, I take them as our
Church does read them, and read them as may be borne well by the original. But
touching the meaning of these words, there are diverse observations. For some
take the words definitely, as if David meant precisely twice: some
indefinitely, as if by twice he meant often. And they that take them
definitely, have not all the same conceit. Refer them to the Creation and
Redemption of man, in both which God really spoke: that he was powerful and
merciful to reckon with and to reward man. Psalm. 49.8, 15.
And indeed as much may be gathered out of the forty ninth Psalm: and Saine
Peter and Saint Jude argue from Gods proceeding with the world, upon the
Creation, to that which we must respect in the state of Redemption. Othersome
apprehend this voice in Gods works and in his words. Ps. 19.2, 3
In the nineteenth Psalm King David observes this twofold voice, and not
amiss; for what are Gods works but visible words, and his words, but audible
works? the Hebrew word Dabar comprehends both. God preaches the same power
and mercy in both, we may know that they are in him, by that which proceeds
from him. A third sort understand only the words of Moses, and of the Prophets.
Abraham remembers these two voices to Dives in hell; they have Moses and the
Prophets, let them hear them. There are two voices of God, the voice of his
Precepts, and the voice of examples: for what is contained in the Law, is
applied in the Prophets, and both say nothing, but that of his power and mercy
we have as many monuments as there be laws of God, and lives of men. Some are
satisfied with none of these, but report an outward and inward voice, that
sounds the one in the ear, the other in the Conscience. Saint Paul has
specified this double voice: the Conscience shall bear witness; accusing or
excusing it that day, when God shall judge the Consciences of men by Jesus
Christ according to my Gospel, Romans 2. There shall be then as there should be
now, a concent between Gods voice speaking within us and without us; the
effect whereof is, The judgment of men according to the Gosspel: and what is
the Gospel, but a blessed mixture of the power and mercy of God.

There remains yet an exposition more, and that is not an idle one. God
speaks ordinarily and extraordinarily; ordinarily in the Canon of the
Scripture, by the Pastors of his Church; extraordinarily, when in the
distresses of his children he vouchsafes to be an immediate remembrancer unto
them of those comforts, which are notwithstanding in general contained in the
Covenant between them and him; not speaking any new matter unknown to them,
but by speaking immediately himself, making the greater impression in them.
And this was usual until the death of the Apostles. We have instances in the
old and new Testament, of the extraordinary voice: it is needless to speak of
the ordinary, my self am now an instance unto you: Genesis 15.1. Genesis 16 3, 24.
Genesis 28.4.
but of the extraordinary is that, Genesis. 15. Fear not Abraham, I am thy
buckler, and thy exceeding great reward. The like has had Isaac, Genesis 26. and
Jacob. 28. In the new Testament, how many times did God appear to Saint Paul
in the Acts? and memorable to this purpose is the answer, My grace is
sufficient for thee: my strength is made perfect in weakness. King David, dear
unto God, and exercised under the cross might (nay it is plain in the books
of Samuel that he sundry times did) hear this extraordinary voice. And though
all other expositions in themselves are true; yet unto this place I take this
last to be most apt. But howsoever in understanding these words you have heard
great variety, and yet no contrariety, only by laying them together, this we
learn, that they which understand them definitely by differing each from the
other, and yet not thwarting one the other, teach us that the words are to be
understood indefinitely, and once or twice is often, very often, many ways and
many times, if he might work us any ways or at any time; the doubling of a
speech representing us the same lesson, as it does testify Gods constancy, so
it does intimate our infirmity. GOD does not alter, and he can hardly alter
us. We have watery memories and stony hearts. Gods word leaves little
impression in us in the one, and makes as little in the other. Esaias compares us
unto weanelings, whom he makes to understand the things that he speaks to
them that are weaned and drawn from the breasts. Secondly, Saint Paul
compares us unto babes in capacity, when we should be men in time. So that we
must be fed with milk, when we should be fit for stronger meats. And thirdly
he tells the Galathians that they will go back again into the womb of the
Church: that which Nicodemus wondered at, Can a man enter into his mothers
belly, and be borne again? Little children says he, of whom I am in travail
again, till Christ Jesus be formed in you. What wonder then, if Precept must
be upon Precept, and line upon line, here a little and there a little? And
Saint Peter wrote a second Epistle, to stir us up to call to remembrance the
words which were told us before, even twice before, by the prophets, and also
by the Apostles. Neither does it grieve Saint Paul to write the same things to
the Philippians, and he assures them, that for them it is a safe thing; for
during this life God cannot speak unto us as altogether spiritual. We will be
very much corporal men; our wits will not be exercised sufficiently to
discern good and evil, much less our hearts established so with grace, as
we shall not be seduced by the will. The people therefore are too dainty when
they conceit of spiritual food, as they do of corporal, Occidit miser^s
crambe repetita magistros, and are weary of the same dish the second time. The
loathing of Manna cost the Israelites dear: God satisfied the lusts of their
bodies, and sent leanenesse withal into their souls: and many starved
themselves ghostly, while they much longed after variety. How often in the same
Epistle does Saint Paul urge righteousness by faith, and Saint John in his, the
love of God and of our brother? Saint Chrysostom reiterated his sermon against
swearing, Nazianzene his Oration of Peace, others of other matters: the
minister must not spare speaking, because we are not quick of hearing; and it
is well, of we can say truly, as King David here does, The Lord spoke once or
twice, and I heard. And so I come from the undeniable Author to the
unchalengeable witness.

It is a grounded truth; the report caryeth weight according to the Worthiness
of the Reporter. This report then must be of greater weight, because the
reporter is of so great worthiness; A man of God, yea a man after Gods own
heart: A man of God, it is more than like that God would speak with him; a man
after Gods own heart, it is very unlikely that he would report what he heard
not from God: the sacredness and sanctity of his person, makes his witness
without exception, and worthy our imitation. Add hereunto, that he was now a
King, at least anointed to be a King, a renowned Warrior, yea a Conqueror of
great possibilities, if not possessions: yet does such a person so noble, so
mighty, learn to deny to the world what is due to God; he rests upon no power
or mercy but his, he esteems himself an accomptant to God, and so he might
expect his doom: and who of us may stop his ears, when King David opens
his? for rather does not the same duty taught so many ways, so many times,
require that duty of us, whereof King David here is a pattern unto us? And I
heard it.

God speaks, that we may hear: hear my people, and I will speak. And the
Lord challenges the Iowes, wherefore came I, and there was no man? I called,
and no man answered. Quid juvat ad surdas si cantet Phemius aures? We have
grace and Apostle-ship, that obedience might be given to the faith. Yea the
Word of God is called in the Hebrew, Shemina. But our Savior Christ has a
caution, Videte quomodo audiatis, so that we are farther to enquire how King
David did hear: surely himself was not ignorant how to hear, for he
delivered that admonition, to day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your
hearts. Saint Paul by way of exposition of that Text says, that hearing must
be tempered with faith. The case of the ear is fitly by Elihu in Job paralysed
to the taste 34. (...). 3^.3.
The ear tries the words, as the palate tastes meat. Now the taste does
relish to swallow that which is wholesome, and to refuse the contrary that
should be the practice of the ear; for we eat spiritual food by the ear, as
we do corporal by the mouth: man lives not by bre^^ only, but by every word
that goes out of the mouth of God. We hear then as David did, when like Saint
Paul, we are obedient to the heavenly Vision, when we consult not against our
instruction with flesh and blood, and the proverb is, Sapiens audiens
sapientior fit. And this kind of hearing is commended in both Testaments, Thou
must diligently hearken, o Jsrael, unto the voice of the Lord thy God, and do
that which is right in his sight, give ear unt^ his Commandments, and keep
all his Ordinances. And so in the new. You have not learned to live like the
Gentiles, says Saint Paul, if so be you have heard him, and have been taught
by him, as the truth is in Jesus, that you must cast off the old man. Finally,
this is the ear which the Spouse the Church does lend unto the bridegroom, to
Christ: and it is described by King David. Hearken^ daughter and consider,
incline thine ears. He which has a^ ear to hear, let him hear, for every
one has not such a^ ear: it is not an ear of nature, but of grace. God mu^^
prepare this ear, of which Esaias thus speaks, The Lord in the morning will
waken mine ear to hear, as the learned; the Lord has opened mine ear, and I
was not rebellious, neither turned I back. And agreeable hereunto is that o^
Nazianzene, Can Gods word be conceaved of the Pasto^ expounded to the people,
and heard to our comfort, bu^ by the gift of the Holy Ghost? This is the cause
why Elihu says, God speaks once or twice, and one sees it not. And Moses to
Israel, You have seen all that the Lord did before your eyes in the land of
Egypt to Pharaoh, and (...) all his servants: and yet has not the Lord given
you a^ heart to perceive, nor eyes to see, and ears to hear unto the day.
Christ. To you is given to know the secrets of the ^ingdome of heaven, but to
them it is not given. But I de^and, have we not heard? Yes verily: for the
sound of GODS Word is gone throughout all the earth, and their words to the end
of the world. All the day long (says God) have I stretched out mine hand unto
a disobedient and ^ainsaying Nation. We have two ears, an outward, and ^n
inward. We must bring the first with reverence to God, and by that ear God
will open the other. The ap^arent reason why we hear so little inwardly, is
because we hear so little outwardly. Yea men are like deaf Adders that stop
their ears, charm the Charmer never so ^isely. Hereby the peoples hearts wax
fatt, and their ^ares are dull of hearing, and with their eyes they wink, east
they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ^ares, and understand
with their hearts, and should re^urne, that God might heal them. Finally, They
become ^ike Idols that have ears and hear not, eyes and see not, as ^eremy
speaks. And to conclude with our selves, I night exclame with the ancient
Prophets and Apostles, Quis credidit, Who has believed our report; or as the
^onne of Syrach, The Pastors of our land are like as men that speak to them
that are in a sound sleep, when he has ^ld his tale, they say, what is the
matter, Read, Zach. 7.11.
Zach. 7. ^any Epicures, what would this babbler? many proud Pharaohs, who is
the Lord, that we should obey him? but I will not complain of them: I will
rather admonish with Saint Paul. We ought diligently to take heed to the
things which we have heard, lest at any time we run out: for ^f the word
spoken, etc. That we may then be in the number of those, of whom Christ says,
Blessed are your eyes, ^r they see; and your ears, for they hear: let us now
and ^ver imitate Samuel, and say, Speak Lord, for thy servant ^eareth. But
what shall he hear? that which Moses ^id, Exodus 33. Gods glory, goodness and
face; Exo. 33.11, 14, 18, 19.
for that ^lace is a Commentary upon this. And so from the per^ns let us come
to the lesson.

The Lesson consists of two parts, 1. What God is, Secondly, How he deals
with us. GOD is both powerful and also merciful. To thee o LORD, power and
mercy. The words are to be understood exclusively: for what King David denied
to all creatures, he ascribes to the Creator: and so are the attributes often
limited to God only; as none good but God. Noah will easily acknowledge this
truth. If we distinctly consider of these attributes; first the power; and then
the mercy: all that I will observe concerning the power may be reduced to these
two branches; God is mighty of himself, and Almighty: Mighty of himself, for
power is essential unto God, it is but by gift in the creatures: therefore
Gods power is absolute and independent, the power of all creatures is limited
and dependant. I will make it plain by resemblances. The sun is the
fountain of light; the Moon has light, but it is borrowed of the Sun:
there is water in the spring, and in the stream; but the spring has it of
himself, the stream borrowes it of the spring: so is the juice in the
branches, and in the root; but for this juice, the branches are beholden to the
root, not the root to the branches. Hereupon it comes to pass, that the
Moon does wexe and wane, as it has more or less influence from the Sun: so
is the stream greater or lesser, as it draws more or less water from the
spring, and the branches fade or bud, as they are moistened from the root. But
this difference we must take, that these resemblances fit our purpose but in
part, for God is Agens liberrimum: God can at his pleasure increase or
diminish, and withhold all power from his creatures: but so cannot the Sun
his light; the spring his water; the root his juice: therefore that power the
creature has, yet is not the creatures, but it is Gods: in him all things live
and move and have their being, Genesis 3.6.
and they are but his army; Our souls are not masters of our own power: when
God will, our eyes fail us, as they did the Syrian Army; 1 Kin. 13.4.
our ears will fail us, as they did the Aramites; our hands will fail us, as
they did Jeroboam, 1 King 13. Our feet will fail us, as they did those bands
that came to Christ; Our tongue will fail us, as Balaam blessed, when he
should have cursed; our hearts will fail us, Deu. 28.28
Our wisdom will fail us, for God takes the wise in their own craftiness;
even the Devil himself, as in the death of Christ.

Finally, our consciences through fear will betray all the powers of our
soul: every thing militat Deo: that is the ground of the speech of Joshua; The
Canaanites, though Giants and Inhabitants of high walled Cities, they are but
bread; for we shall conquer them as easily as we digest our meats: he adds
the reason; their shield is departed from them, the Lord is with us. You see
then how true it is, that God is mighty of himself; and every creature of it
self has no might, but a Tenant at will unto God, for so much, and so long as
it pleases him. But God as he is mighty, he is of himself: and he is
Almighty; nothing is impossible to God: he does whatsoever he will, both in
heaven and earth: who has resisted his will?

But here we must note, that power notes perfection, and imperfection no
power, but want of power, and therefore we must exclude imperfections;
otherwise there be many things impossible for God. Imperfections are of two
sorts: only miserable, or blameable; and blameable, are the ignorance and
sinfulness of men. God cannot be deceaved, nor can God sin: both are
imperfect. Miserable are all the punishments of sin; as sickness and death:
these are as far from God, as sin. But whatsoever things are of perfection,
those can be done of God: only in the perfections that are common to God with
us, we must observe a great difference between God and us: for besides that he
is Almighty, he has all his perfections of himself, and we ours from him: he
has them immutably, he has them eminently: he that planted our ear can
hear, and he that made our eye can see. But he sees and hears without an
eye and ear of flesh: he is all eye, all ear: he sees all, hears all. Enter,
praesenter Deus est, and ubique; potenter. His Majesty fills Heaven and Earth.
All things are naked before him; yea, there is nothing that is not sustained by
him. Though all imperfections be far from God, yet are they not without the
compass of the providence of God, he permits them, he orders them, yea
he draws his glory and his Churches good out of them. The same God that
could command light to shine out of darkness, can out of evil bring forth
good. Yea Saint Augustine has a good rule; God would never suffer evil,
except he could make this use of evil.

The last thing that we must note of this part is, that we must not limit Gods
power, within the compass of that which has been, is or shall be: it has a
further extent, even to that also that may be. It was the error of Origin
challenged by Theophilus, so to straiten the power of God: he exemplifieth it
by the author of an house and a banquet, not according to the uttermost of his
skill or ability, but according to the use whereunto He will put the house, and
the number of the guests that shall be feasted at his Table. The end prescribes
the measure and means in every work of man, much more of God. But to collect
all that has been said of this first Attribute; whether we respect what God
can do, or what he does; with perfection, or upon imperfections; without means
or by means; of himself, independent, having all things attending at his beck
readily: we may conclude, that power belongs unto the Lord; such power only
unto God. So that we may all set up the Ensign of the Macchabees, and bear in
our banners, MICHAEL, who is like unto thee, o strong Lord! In the fear of the
Lord must be the confidence of our strength, for his name is a strong Tower,
the righteous will fly unto it; yea, sinners too may be bold to sly unto it;
because of that other Attribute which God has coupled with it, His mercy. ^or
as he reaches from one end to another mightily, so does he order all things
seemly or sweetly. Thou Lord (says the same Author) have ever had great
strength, and who can withstand the power of thy arm? There dare neither King
nor tyrant in thy sight require an account of thee, whom thou have punished.
But thou have mercy on all: thou love all things that are, o thou that art
the Lover of souls.

That then is verified in God, de forte dulc^do: for as it is in the Psalm, God
is a righteous God, strong and patient, and he is provoked every day. In this
sense is the Ark the propitiatory, the throne of grace called the Arc of his
strength, and Christ is said to sit at the right hand of God, yea to be the
man of Gods right hand. It is a great part of Gods strength, that he can
conquer himself, that his mercy can triumph over his judgment. This Moses
expresses in his prayer, when he makes intercession for Israel. And now J
beseech thee, let the power of my Lord be great, according as thou have spoken,
saying, The Lord is slow to anger, and forgiveth imquity: though God be
powerful, yet is he merciful. Pudorem potius mittere vult quam timorem: he is
not hasty to punish sin, but heaps his blessings upon us; that we may be
ashamed that we have offended so good a God with our sin. God is the God of
mercy, rich in mercy; he gives to all, he upbraids none: he will not quench
the smoking flax. He is merciful donando, condonando, he remembers we are but
dust. When God might have used his power, he showed his mercy; not so men. The
combination of these two Attributes must remember us of that exhortation of
King David, Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice before him with trembling. If
God show himself merciful, say not, I have sinned, and what evil is come
unto me? Remember that God is also Almighty; though he be patient, yet is he a
rewarder; he will reward every man according to his works, every man.
Irenaeus notes; Gloria hommis Deus, operationis vero Dei neceptaculum homo: as
God is the glory of man, so man is principal subject of the virtues of God.
Intelligat homo reliquas virtutes Dei in semetipso contentas, per quas sentiat
de Deo quantus Deus sit. God would have us not so much in other creatures, as
in our selves to behold the evidence of these Attributes of God. Ps 8.3, 4, 5.
Read Psalm. 8. and behold it in their reward. The works of man have a double
respect; to God, and our neighbor; and so these words will bear a double
sense; according as we carry our selves unto God and our neighbor: and in the
Scripture we have both Interpretations. The first sense is that, Rom 1.7.
Romans 2. they that with patience, etc. And Saint Paul, Be not deceived, God is
not mocked: as a man sows, so shall be reap: for every man shall receave
according to that he has done in his body, be it good or evil. Behold J set
before you life and death; the broad and the narrow way and gate: Vt bonis sit
been, sit malis male: finis responsurus medijs. With the froward thou will show
thy self froward, Psalm. 18.26. Psa. 18.26.
The second sense is, what measure you mete to others, it shall be measured
again to you. This is noted by Abraham and Dives. And Saint Paul, 2 These. it
is a righteous thing with God. 2 These. 1 6. Jer. 25.11, 12.
An example we have the Babylonians, Ierem. 25. And in the Revelation: if any
lead into captivity, he shall be lead into Captivity; if any kill with the
sword, he shall be killed with the sword. This confession did Adonibezek make
when the Children of Israel cut off the thumbes of his hands and his feet.
Seventy Kings (says he) having their thumbs of their hands and feet cut off,
gathered crumbs under my Table: as J have done, so God has dealt with me, has
rewarded me. He that stops his ear at the Cry of the poor, himself shall cry
and not be heard, Pro. 21.13. 1 Samuel 26.23.
Proverbs 21. Quodcunque vultis ut hemines vobis faciant, faciatis illis. And
David grounds his speech u upon this, 1 Samuel 26.23.

The lesson is, we must forbear from wrong, and do good unto our neighbor,
that God may spare us, and do good unto us according to our works. But works
are considered not so much according to the substance of the thing done, as the
circumstance wherewith it is done: for aliud est mandati executio, aliud
virtus. Executio mandati dicitur id quod ipso opere in mandato faciendum
ordinatum st^ virtus autem in hoc sita est, ut placeat veritati id quod actum
est. For God sees not as man sees: he looks not upon the outward, but the
inward man. A good man out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth
good things; And an evil, etc. Read the excellent exposition of the Laborers
in the Vineyard. God is a searcher of the heart and reins. Yet how says the
Scripture? that to whom much is given, of him much shall be required; and
potentes potenter punientur. God loves not only bonum, but been; otherwise
pretium moretricis might be accepted, and their works, Esaias 1. and 66. Esa
1.11, 12, 13. Esa. 66.3.
What say we to that of the Papists commendations of Infidels works? Surely,
the work is good, according to the judgment of man, and so has the rewards
that are so deemed of natural men. So was Nebuchadnezzar, Iehu and others
rewarded. But out of this Observation, that the mind, and not the action is
rewarded, here arise two excellent points. The one is, that we must take the
definition of a good work from the Scripture. The end of the Commandment is
Charity out of a pure heart and a good conscience, and faith unfeigned. For God
respects not so much opus operatum, as opus operantis: and when it is said,
secundum opus, it is taken with all his circumstances: for ordinata and
subordinata though they be not expressed, they are understood; otherwise we
shall commit many absurdities in expounding the Scriptures. When the effects of
Faith are given to Charity, to the fear of the Lord, to Repentance, etc. Faith
must work by Charity: and a work tantum habet virtutis quantum fidei and
charitatis. It is Saint Augustines rule; Bonum opus, intentionem fides
distinguit. Aug. praefat. sp. 31. And this overthrows all the works, that
are about merit, for the foundation of the reward is faith, which bears out
all the defects of our conscience and of Charity. The second thing that this
does yield is, that all men herein are equalled, because a man is accepted
according to that which he has, not according to that which he has not.

According to works. We must look immediately to our selves, and foresee our
conditions of reward or punishment: But we must not lay our foundation there,
but go higher, remembering that of God in Moses, Secreta mea mihi, my laws are
for you. And seeing the other virtues are in the sight only of God, and the
works before the world: God that will judge in the sight of the world, will
judge according to works.

Reward. Hoc ipsum laborare mercedis loco habendum: it is an honor to do so
here by grace; for it is the uttermost we shall attain unto in the state of
glory. For what is the greatest reward of glory, but to stand by the throne and
praise God? and it is our duty: yet no man shutts the doors of God in vain.
The servant must come with his talent, and enter into his masters joy, or into
utter darkness. Behold I come, and my reward is with me. Reward, Isay 40.10, 62,
11. Esa. 40.10, 62, 11.
But where does God reward? in this life, or in the next? Ordinarily God does
it in both: he suffers not the sins of his own children unpunished, nor
the rightnesse of the heathen temporally unrewarded: he keeps eternal
rewards of mercy for his children, and of plagues for his enemies. That God
punishes his children, read the stories of Moses, David, Aaron: that he
rewards see supra.

But he punishes his children, not taking his mercy from them, but virga
viri, which at the most can but kill the body; but not Dei, that casts both
body and soul into hell fire. Yea it is Enos, of a weak feeble man. They
drink of the Red Wine, but the wicked have the dregs. The strokes of God upon
his enemies are described, Esaias 30, 32.27, 7. Esa. 30, 32.27.1, 7, 12.
He will not strike twice.

It is good we consider every man his ways, and turn his feet unto GODS
Commandments: for GOD will enter into judgment even with those that strive to
be most in favor.

The sum of all is this.

What we have done, and how we have lived toward God, yea and toward men.

O Lord God of Truth, that in witness of thy constancy, and for relief of our
infirmity, have many times and ways informed us of thy power and mercy: grant
that what thou speak, we may hear attentively and obediently, and thereby
be so qualified through thy grace, to use those holy means which lead to a
happy end. That when thou take account of our lives, and tryest our works
what we have bin toward thee, toward our neighbor; that we may be such as
may partake thy glory, and be crowned of thy mercy, per Dominum nostrum Iesum.
*

A SERMON PREACHED AT SAINT CROSS WINCHESTER.
PSALM. 82. ver. 5. They understand not, they consider not, they walk on in
darkness. All the foundations of the land are moved.


THe Original of Magistrates, the duty answerable thereto required in
Magistrates, the danger of the defects, and who must remedy what is amiss by
the default, there are four points contained in this Psalm. Magistrates are
from God, and he resides among them, Magistrates must proceed like God,
partiality must be far from them, Magistrates defects are dangerous both to
the state and to themselves: finally God can and will redress the evils that
spring from them, because he is Sovereign in and over those places and
persons which are misgoverned by them. Of those four points I have chosen the
third, and thereof but one part; even so much as is contained in this fifth
verse, whereon for my better direction, and your fuller satisfaction, it may
please you to observe with me these three points.

First, The defects in the Magistrates, They understand not, they consider not,
they walk on in darkness.

Secondly, The danger of the state, All the foundations of the land are moved.

3. The Collection of both, which may be framed two ways; either thus, They
understand not, and therefore all the foundations are moved; or thus, They
understand not, and yet behold, all the foundations, etc. Of these two senses,
the first makes the danger of a state, the fruit of a bad Magistrate; the
second taxes in Magistrates stupidity, if they be not moved with the
Commonwealths calamities. To these three points, by Gods assistance and your
Christian patience, I will speak briefly and in their order. They understand
not. The mother of imperfections and root of all defects markable in
Magistrates, may be reduced to three, all mentioned in the first part of the
verse: for either they understand not, and that is Ignorance; or they consider
not, and that is Negligence; or they walk on in darkness, and that is want
of conscience.

Touching ignorance, the Son of Syrach reckoning diverse trades, some
manuary, some employed in husbandry, concludes in effect thus. Although
without these a City cannot be maintained, yet by these a City must not be
governed: these sit not upon the seat of Judgment, these cannot declare the
form of the Law, they are not meet to discern hard matters: such things must
be left unto the learned, Pro. 8.15.
which must with much pain attain great wisdom, Prove. 8. By me Kings Reign,
and Princes decree Justice: by me Nobles bear rule, and all the Judges of the
earth. And the Author of the book of Wisdom. If your delight be in Thrones
and Scepters, then honor Wisdom. When Moses tired with the government of all
Israel, would unburthen part of his charge upon other men's shoulders; bring
(says he) unto me men of understanding and wisdom, known men among your
Tribes, and I will appoint them R^ulers over you. And David exhorts thus,
Psalm. 2. Be wise o ye Kings; be learned, Ps. 2.10.
ye that are Judges of the earth. It was a special Caveat in Artaxerves
Letters Patents granted to Ezra, Chapter 7. Thou o Ezra, according to the
wisdom of thy God, Ez^. 7.25.
which is in thine hand, appoint Judges and Arbiters over the people; even such
Judges and Arbiters which know the law of thy God, and teach thou them that
know it not. The reason of this rule and practice is delivered by the Son of
Syrach, a wise Judge nourte^eth the people with discretion, and the government
of a prudent man is well ordered; but it is a heavy judgment, when fools do
sit upon the seat of God. Eccl. 10.1, Esa. 3.4.
God himself has spoken it, Esa. 3. I will appoint children to be their
Princes, and Babes, shall rule over them; Children and babes, not in years,
but in discretion: and mark the reason, that they may oppress one the other,
every man his neighbor; the young shall presume against the old, and the vile
against the Noble. Esa. 10.1, 2.
is not then without cause, that the Preacher recounteth it for one of the
evils which he has seen under the Sun, namely, that folly is set in great
dignity, and they that are rich in understanding, (for so he means, as it
appears by the Antithesis) do sit in low or base place: for as snow in
Summer, and rain in harvest, so (says Solomon, Pro. 26.1.
Prove. 26.) is honor unseemly for a fool.

A Governor then must be wise; and his means of wisdom are two; the one from
earth, the other from heaven: from earth, for by his own Industry he must
conceave the grounds and rules of Law, he must consider the Judgments of
former men, he must compare the events of sundry times, and his understanding
must be, multorum men's in unum collecta, as Nazianzene speaks of a History;
that is, his understanding must be compounded of the discretion of many men.
Besides this, from heaven he must receave the Spirit of God, that Heroical
spirit, which is vouchsafed them that sit upon the seat of God. Men's causes are
mutable, as are men, and receave manifold Sophistications by the cunning of
men: therefore resolution of them and judgment upon them, must proceed from men
which can thoroughly sound the nature of them; which is very hard for a mean
natural man: therefore does God grant an extraordinary spirit of wisdom to
Moses, and also to the seventie Assistants of Moses; to Princes, and to such as
are joined in Commission with Princes. It is true, that the less the Jews had
of means natural, the more they had of supernatural: but no nation was ever
so furnished with the natural, but it had need of the supernatural: and God
never denies it, if men have grace to pray for it, if when they are called
upon earth to supply the place of God, they become humble petitioners with
Solomon for wisdom unto God. But of that which has been spoken, the nature
and parts of the first defect, may be easily conceaved; Ignorance is opposite
to government, and that Magistrate is ignorant which wants those means,
which he must have either from earth, or else from heaven.

The second defect is Negligence, they consider not. Heb. 4.13.
Although all things be naked (as Saint Paul speaks Heb. 4.) before the eyes
of God, yet is there a solemn inquisition and process annexed commonly to the
eminent Judgments of God. Read it of Adam, of Cain, of Babel, and of Sodom.
Yea to this purpose God is said to proceed sometimes with scales or weights,
sometimes with line and level, and sometimes with a touchstone. With scales
and weights. All the ways of man are before the eyes of God (says Solomon)
and he pondereth all his ways with line and level. Pro. 5.21. 2 King. 21.13.
Prove. 5. I will (says God) 2. Kings, stretch forth the line of Samaria upon
Jerusalem, and the plummet of the house of Ahab, that is, I will measure unto
them the same Judgment. Sometimes with the touchstone. So God is said not
only to search the hearts, but also to try the reins. In a word, the author
of the book of wisdom gives this rule of Gods proceeding; he disposes all
things in number, weight and measure. God needs no such circumspection, but
his actions are men's directions. Gods wariness does condemn man's rashness; he
teaches us, that it is hard for man not to swerve from equity, except he
pronounce with great maturity. Job searches the cause he knew not, diligently.
29.16. Judges make too much speed. Lawyers take too many causes, and are
careless of them and of the Evidences. Jurors respect more the persons then the
Law. vid Act. 14 19.
The Emperors Tiberius in Dion, and Theodosius in Theodoret, are commended for
deferring execution upon judgment, the one ten days, the other thirty; that
deliberation might correct what is done in passion. And indeed right judgment
given without circumspection required in judgment, does make that decision to
be a sin to the Judge, which is just in regard of the cause; for God loves not
Adjectives, but Adverbs; that is, considers not so much what we do, as how.
The parts of a Magistrates negligence are three: either because he takes not
sufficient time, or because his industry is wan^ing to his time, or finally
looking through the spectacles of his bribes: two blind affections, prejudice
and partiality, suffer him not to see the truth, although he take never so
much time. I need not amplify; being but briefly uttered, they may be fully
conceaved. The sum of the second defect is, that a sentence of a Magistrate,
which cannot be easily recalled, must not be rashly pronounced: as God, so the
Magistrate must pronounce leisurely, carefully, unaffectionately, Otherwise he
is ignorant of the cause, and that willingly; and he cannot excuse himself
before God, if he judge unjustly.

The third defect is want of conscience, they walk on in darkness. Darkness
and light, as naturally, so spiritually are opposed one to the other, and may
be conceaved the one by the other. Light naturally has three properties; it
is clear, pure and pleasant: therefore it notes spiritually clearenes of
understanding, pureness of conversation, and blessedness of condition: so
contrariwise darkness has three properties; naturally it is obscure, impure
and unpleasant, and notes spiritually obscurenes of understanding, impurenesse
of conversation and cursednes of condition. Not to touch the other branches,
unto this place I fit the second, by darkness understanding sinfulnes, for
that ignorance was taxed in the first note, they understand not; and cursednes
is an effect of all three defects. The middle sense then agrees best to the
place; for wicked men are called Children of darkness, their state is a
subjection to the prince of darkness, and their deeds are called works of
darkness. To walk is to proceed, not with feet, but with affections: for as
the earth is the middle place, so our birth is the middle way between hell and
heaven; and because our soul is an active substance, it never makes a stand;
we ever move on, either in the broad way to hell, or the narrow way to heaven,
Solomon teaches it by a resemblance; the way of righteous men is like the
morning light, which shines more and more until the perfect day: but the way
of the wicked is darkness, like the evening twilight, that thickeneth more and
more until the midnight, that is, they go on in darkness, until they come
to utter darkness. To walk on then in darkness is to proceed in wickedness.
But because Magistrates do sustain a double person; one as they are men, the
other as they govern men; we must consider what is their especial
wickedness, not as they are men, but as they govern men. Governors, as the
Scripture speaks, must be light of the eyes, breath of the nostrills, and
confidence of the hearts of the people. A good Magistrate must be a refuge
against the wind, and as the shadow of a mighty rock in a weary land, that is,
the good of the land must be procured, and the evil removed by them. But had
Magistrates are compared to nets and snares, which serve to ensnare and take
the people; to briars and thorns, which serve to spoil and fleece the people;
to wolves and to lions, which murder and devour the people. In a word, the
three maine sins, which the Scripture does condemn in Magistrates be, First
their wiliness, Secondly their covetousnes, Thirdly their blood thirstines.
The sum then of the third defect is, that bad Magistrates, whose care should
be to provide for the commonweals happiness, are commonly ringleaders unto
the greatest wickedness, purposely, gladly and obstinately, given over unto
sinfulness. And this of the three defects, the Magistrates ignorance,
negligence, and want of conscience. I come to the second point.

in him we live, move and have our being. Act. 17.28. Exo. 3.14. Romans 11.36.
God is called JEHOVAH, because he is of himself, and every other thing is of
him, by him, and for him; so if there be no God, there can be no world. It is
then the foolish Atheist that says, there is no God; Psalm 14.1. Mal 4.1, 2. 2.
Pet. 3 9, 10.
that neither good nor evil proceed from God; that if any of the wicked are
preferred of God, there is no reason why we should look for a Judgment day
of God. The second foundation is Christ, who of God is made unto us wisdom,
righteousness, 1. Co. 1 30.
sanctification and redemption. And it is the voice of the superstitious
Papist, that perverteth this wisdom of God, by coupling traditions with the
word of God; this righteousness, by sorting their merits with the precious blood
of the Son of God; this sanctification, by presuming of their perfections
greater then they can be attained unto by the law of God; this redemption by
their purgatory, Esaias. 28.16. 1. Cor. 3.11. Ephesians. 2.5, 18 1. Pet 2.4, 5
a place wherein themselves do shut, and from which they do loose men without
warrant of the word, or concurrency of the work of Christ, First the only
Redeemer granted to the Church of God, and secondly the only foundation of
those living stones, whereof consists the spiritual house of God: we must be
founded not on this, but on the former faith.

The third foundation is the Spirit, Col. 1.8
which they have of God, which are called to be sons of God, by this Spirit
they live, by this Spirit they are led, by this Spirit they bring forth fruits,
and are employed in works: such fruits and such works as God has commanded,
and by which the Church may be benefitted. Ephesians. 3.16, 17. 1. Tim 6.18, 19.
Saint Paul tells the Ephesians (Chap. 3.) that they must be founded in love,
and wishes Timothy, that he exhort men, that they be ready to distribute and
communicate, laying up for themselves in store a good foundation against the
time to come. These three foundations of the Church have a mutual collection:
for the second cannot be without the first, nor the third without the second.
For God was in Christ redeeming us, and from Christ we receave that Spirit
which sanctifies us; we must hold them jointly as one, because we raze all, if
we deny one.

The second foundation is of the common weal, Jeremy (Chap. 30.) promising to
return the captivity of Jacobs tents, Ie^. 30.18.
and to have compassion of his dwelling places, adds, that the City shall be
founded upon her own heap, that the place shall remain as aforetime, the
people shall be founded as before time, for their noble ruler shall be of
themselves, Deu. 17.15.
and their Governor proceed from amidst them. In the Law God commanded the
Israelites, If they choose a King, they shall choose one of their own brethren.
The reason why the Israelites resolved jointly to take David for their king, 2 Samuel 5.1.
is because they were his bones and flesh: there must be a natural
conjunction, where we look for a natural affection. Grafts do alter their
stocks in nature; for sweet fruit graft into a sour stock, does not yield
fruit answerable to the sour juice which is natural to the stock. But it is
not so in Policy: the Prince which is the stock, will communicate the nature
of his own juice unto his people, which are to him as grafts. Our Chronicles
(to seek no further) record woeful experience hereof in the sundry alterations
in this state by Picts, and the Danes, the Saxons, and the French: yea although
by counterfeit pedegrees they do pretend themselves to be natural, yet when
occasion serves, they will betray themselves to be unnatural. Herod burnt all
the genealogies, thereby to recommend himself for a natural Jew. But Flavius
Josephus history is proof enough, that he is but at unnatural Jew.
Physicians teach that herbs and plants though they be wild, yet if they be
natural, are more wholesome and Soverain then herbs and plants set by the
Gardener, which are caused by art, and therefore are unnatural. Men must
therefore take heed, least with the foolish Jews they be come of the stock
of the Herodians, or cry out against themselves, they will have no King but
Caesar.

The second foundation of a Commonwealth is execution of judgment. God by
Esaias promising manifold blessings to the Jews remembers this for one, that
they shall be founded in righteousness, and be far from oppression. Chap.
54. Solomon says, that righteousness is an everlasting foundation. Although
the soul be in the body, yet is the soul the foundation of the body; for the
members of our body are knit together by sinews and by ligaments, they are
imbroydered with veins and with arteries, and they are covered with skin: but
if the soul with natural heat do not foster these united parts of the body,
if with spirits I do not stir and move the body; corruption will quickly
deface the goodly sabricke of the body. Laws are so many ligaments of the
societies of men, and good orders are as the veins and Arteries of the
society. The society is as the skin that covers the goodly politic body
of men: but if the executing Magistrate be wanting to this body, there cannot
be long continuance of body. Never any commonweal perished for want of
laws, their bane have been the cold execution of their Laws.

The third foundation is the care of the common good. The Plow (says Solomon)
maintains the Scepter; and where there is a continual expense, there must be
a careful supply. All rivers run into the Sea, but all rivers must be
nourished by waters which do through the pores of the earth flow from the Sea.
The husbandman neglects not to take care for his seed Corn, because by means
thereof he reapes a plentiful harvest of Corn. In the book of Judges in a
parable of Trees, good Magistrates are compared unto fig Trees, to Vines and to
Olives; because as these Trees are painfully dressed, so by these trees the
husbandman is plentifully refreshed. But bad Magistrates are resembled unto
brambles, because how much juice soever by them is sucked, yet no fruit from
them is gathered, yea they look still as though they were starved.

The application is easy. God in the commonweal of the Jews ordained the
Sabbath and the year of Iubilee, to continue a proportion between his people,
in regard of their liberty and wealth. The meaning of those years is not only
ceremonial, but also Moral; as in the body of a man, if any part exceed his
due proportionable measure, it is monstrous in it self, and dangerous to the
whele; so it is in the Commonwealth. Cities must be maintained, the people
must be employed, a summary of wealth must be provided, if we desire that the
society of the people, and Majesty of the Prince be long continued. And thus
much of the double foundation of a Christian Commonweal.

A second note to be observed in this second maine point is gathered out of
this word All, for it imports the communication of the several parts of this
double foundation. For as Cicero writes of the sour Cardinal virtues,
Prudence, Fortitude, Justice, and temperance, that they are so knit together,
that he which has one has all, and he which wants one wants all; Or as in
the Vital parts of the body, Liver, Lungs, the heart and the brains, he that
enjoys one enjoys all; and he that perishes one, perishes all: so fares
it with the foundations of a Christian Commonweal; they are chained so
together, that they stand and fall together.

A third note is gathered from the word moved, which argues a great force in
sin, when it prevails against them, which are of greatest judgment to
discover sin, and greatest power to repress sin: sin begins commonly
with the weakest: so it began not with Adam, but with Eve: but where it can be
least resisted, it may soonest be corrected. If a private man be given to sin,
the Magistrate can easily bridle him from sin; but Magistrates sins are most
conspicuous and dangerous, like diseases, sharp and venomous, by which the
whole body is speedily infected and desperately destroyed. When the weather or
wind beats upon an house or a tree, well may it untile the house or overshrowd
the tree; but if the tree be well rooted, and the house well founded, the
danger is easily recovered, both of the house, and of the Tree; it is not so,
that either the root be loosed, or the foundation moved: the moving then of the
foundations does imply a desperate state of the whole building. The sum of
the second point is this: the Commonweal, that it may be continued, it must
be established, established spiritually, and spiritually on GOD, CHRIST, and
the HOLY GHOST; civilly, upon the person of a natural Prince, the execution of
wholesome Law, and the care of common good: All which must be conjoined, for
that by the ruin of one, the rest are endangered; and if all faulter, the
Commonwealth is desperately hazarded. And thus much of the second point.

The last note is the connection of the first point with the second, which
connection may be made two ways: the first makes the dangers of the State to be
the fruit of a bad Magistrate, and is framed thus. They understand not, they
consider not, they walk on in darkness, and therefore all the foundations of
the land are moved: for a proper cause cannot be without his effect. And it is
Iehosaphats speech, as we read in the second book of the Chronicles, and the
nine and twentieth Chapter, answerable to the seed will the harvest be. You
cannot overthrow a foundation, but by violence; and there can be no stability
of the foundation if it be forced by violence. Magistrates virtues and vices
keep no mean; their excellency breeds a public either bliss or curse: for
the eyes of all are upon them, the lives of all are conformed to them, and the
state of all depends on them. This is the reason, when virtues are so
earnestly commended in them, and honored in them, why they are so commonly
dehorted from vice, and censured for vice.

The second Collection must be framed thus, They consider not, etc. and yet
behold, all the foundations of the land are moved, Psa. 8^.5. Es. 59.4, 9.
Psalm: The Commonweal is like unto: ship, the people are passengers, the
Magistrates, Officers, Adversity, like unto Shipwreck, evil Magistrates are
like to foolish Ship-governours, who in a storm labor not to save the ship,
but rob the passengers in the Ship, as if together they should not sink with
the Ship. Good Magistrates should execute judgment, and prevent Gods
judgment; so did Phinees, David, Moses. They may not palliate diseases, lest
they fester more. It is the phrase of the Law commanding Judgment, Thou shall
put away evil. Misera respub. quae neque vitia, Job 29: 12.
neque remedia far. *

A SERMON PREACHED AT FARNHAM NEAR WINCHESTER.
PSALM. 132.11, 12. The Lord has sworn to David, and he will not shrink from
it: of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy Throne.

If thy sons keep my Covenant and my Testimonies that I shall teach them,
their sennes also shall sit upon thy throne for ever.


THis Psalm is one of those fifteen which are called Psalms of degrees: of
which title whatsoever reason can be given sitting the rest; surely if we
consider the argument of this, it may well import the excellency thereof, and
why? It is nothing else but a sacred emulation, wherein God and a King contend;
the King in piety, God in bounty. The King declares himself to be a most
eminent pattern of zeal, and God himself to be a most magnificent rewarder of
his servants. The King debarreth himself of all worldly contents, while he is
busily providing to entertain God: and GOD who fills heaven and earth
vouchsafes to lodge in that place which was provided by the King. The King
presents his supplication not only for himself, but also for his charge, the
Priests, the people: and God restrains not his blessing to the King, but also
at his suit enlarges it to Church and Common weal: finally, the King binds
himself to make good his duty with a Votive Oath, and God restipulateth with
an Oath that which he promises both to King and kingdom: to the kingdom in
the words that follow; but to the King in those that now I have read unto you.

This speech then is directed unto the King, unto David; but it contains a
blessing which redounds unto his issue, The fruit of his body. This blessing is
no less, then a royal succession in the Throne of David; David's sons shall
inherit it, but it is God that states them in it. They shall sit, but I will
set them, yea so set them that they shall never fall; they shall sit for ever:
the succession shall be perpetual. And hitherto the prom^se runs absolute:
it is qualified in that which follows. Least David's sons, if they be left
without Law, should live without care, they must know that the succession shall
be perpetual: but the promise is conditional, if David's sons conform
themselves to God, if they keep my covenant, whereof they cannot pretend
ignorance. And they have an authentical record: the record, My testimonies;
authentical, I my self will teach them. You see the Kings blessing, it is
very great: but least the promise thereof be thought too good to be true, God
secures the King with a most unchangeable warrant: the warrant is his Oath, The
Lord swear, and this warrant is unchangeable, because sincere, he swore in
truth. 2. Stable, he will not shrink from it. And what could King David desire
more for his own house, then a promise of such a blessing, of such a warrant
of that promise? Yes he might, and no doubt he did desire; and God also intend
to him more than the letter of this promise does express, even the
accomplishment of the truth, whereof this was but a type. And what is that? The
establishment of the kingdom of Jesus Christ.

So then this Scripture contains Gods promissory Oath, for continuing the
crown of Jsrael in the lineage of King David. The points therein to be
considered are two; the promise, and the warrant thereof: the warrant is Gods
oath, a sufficient Oath, neither false, nor fickle. In the promise we have,
first the Person to whom, King David; and they for whom it is made, David's
sons. Secondly the matter whereof it does consist, a succession in King David's
throne; and that perpetual, yet conditional. But whereas the Consideration of
the warrant is single in the promise, all things are double to be considered,
in the tipe, and in the truth. I begin with the Warrant, and therein with the
Oath.

The Lord swear. That God made this Oath, Psa. 89.3.
we are taught also Psalm. 89. but when, it is not agreed. Some think that
Gods Word signed with any of his Titles, Thus says the Lord, The Lord of
Hosts, etc. is equipollent to an oath, and thereupon conclude, that this Text
referres to that messagesent by Nathan: 2 Samuel 7.8.
although the correspondency between the two places savoureth their
conjecture, yet it is more likely, that as the last words of David registered, 2 Samuel c. 23, intimate, 2 Samuel 23.2, 3.
God reitera ted the promise immediately to the King, and then bound it
expressly with this Oath: questionless in Abraham's case Saint Paul saying, that
by two immutable things, Heb. 6.18.
his word and Oath, wherein it was impossible for him to lie, God showed the
stablenesse of his counsel, manifests a difference between, By my self have
I sworn, which is an Oath, and thus says the Lord, which is only a
signification, that the word spoken is Gods. A difference certainly there is
between these two speeches: but this difference must not be mistaken; it is
quoad nos, not quoad Deum: the one does oblige God no more then the other.
Perfection can as little be added to his bare word, as to his nature. But God
condescends lower to our infirmity when he makes an oath, then when he
only speaks the word. Therefore the Apostle says, that if we lift up our
eyes to God in swearing, he did (...), use a superfluous confirmation. But if
we cast down our eyes upon our selves, it was necessary he should swear,
(...), to settle our distrustful hearts. A timorous man that passes over a
broad stream upon a narrow plank, if he see the same thorough a Cristall
glass, will be more hardy in venturing, not for that his bridge is bigger,
but because it seems to be: so fares it with us that pass the troublesome
sea of this world by that narrow way that leads unto life: we fear drowning
every step, we dare not be bold. If God only say, I will not fail thee, I
will not forsake thee; we will have better hold on God. See then the mercy of
our graciou^; Father, strengthening the feeble knees of men by a multiplied
heavenly light; he is content, as if his bare promise were questionable in the
word of God, to make oath, as a man, that so man may not doubt to trust God.

But what is Gods oath? Saint Paul tells us in general, that God having no
greater, swore by himself: but elsewhere the prophets set down diverse forms
in particular, By my holiness, by my right hand, by my life. Join Saint Paul to
the prophets, and you may see that these diverse forms have but one substance;
for God is but one, yea oneness, yet self, seeing all in God is God: only
because the riches of the nature of God cannot be conceaved by men at once,
what one form cannot express to our capacity in full, that many do, but
every one in part, and yet so, that the mentioning of one form of God
excludes not the rest, but teaches us rather, that God will manifest that
attribute specially which then he names. Even ^s in a consort, though many
sing, the rest favor their voices, that some one which may best affect, ^may
most be heard: so from God some one Attribute, ^ut in concent with the rest,
sounds out his glory, to make the deeper impression thereof in our hearts. Of
all these forms here is none mentioned, but Psalm. Psalm. 89.35.
89. there is: there we read, I have sworn by mine holiness; with that oath
is this very promise in that place confirmed. Now holiness when it is ascribed
unto God, is nothing but an exclusion of all gross conceit of him, of his
being, of his life. As we may not represent his being by any creature, so may
we not dream that in his life he resembles any sinful creature. They are
branded for ungodly, Psalm. 50 21.
Psalm 50. that thought God like themselves, like in sin. The contrary
should be true; man should bear the image of God, the image of his goodness.
Be ye holy, for I am holy. But not to range; so much as suffices our purpose,
of the holiness of God, is set down by Balaam, Balaam inspired by the Holy
Ghost. Number. 23. God is not as man, that he should lie, Number. 23.19
nor as the son of man, that he should repent.

Behold the parts of that holiness which God points at, where he swears it
stands in veritate mentis: and in certitud^ne veritatis: he swears what he
means, and means no more then he can do: This harmony of Gods will and
power are the substance of those two Characters which here are stamped upon his
bath, Sincerity and Stability. Wheref^re forbearing to speak more of this form
of Gods Oath in general, I proceed to the particular parts thereof. The first
is truth. God swear in truth.

^etweene God and man the Apostle puts this difference; Let God be true, and
every man a liar: for man if but a mere man, maydeceive, or be deceived: but
neither of these are incident to God, neque actu, neque potentia He is (...)
(as says the Apostle) he does not, he cannot lie; he is not, he cannot be
deceaved. And therefore he speaks (...) (as NAZIANZENE) without any slip of
tongue. And no mervaile, seeing he is not only the Original of all truth,
but also Truth it self by nature: so that it is no more possible for
falsehood to be at one with God, then for darkness to consort with light; both
import a real contradiction.

But what is truth? I mean not real, but verbal truth. Words by their
instruction should be as a glass, wherein the hearer should behold the
speakers mind; and they should receave no other impression from the swearer,
then they reflect upon him unto whom we swear: so that one truth there
should be in our words, but it should have a double respect; one to our
meaning which it must represent, another to his understanding whom we do
inform. The Father of lies has taught men how to divorce these two respects;
and double dealing has bred a double truth, in stead of the double respect of
one truth; so that now we are driven to a distinction; of veritas loquentis,
and loquelae, jurantis, et juramenti. The first is very ancient. The Devil
that can transform himself into an angel of light, taught his instruments
the Old Heretics, ^. 3. c. 5.
with his false light to cover their works of darkness. Saint Irene reports
that Valentini^^ did simulare Ecclesiasticum tractatum, use phrases of the true
Church, Ture^urrect. carnis. c. 6.
but in their heretical sense. Tertullian observes, that the Mareionites did
carnis resurrectione^ imaginaria significatione distorquere, corrupt the
Article of the Resurrection by a smothered sense, which could not be suspected
in their words. The equivocation of A^^ is too well known to be repeated.
Saint Irenaeus rule^ enough: R^pert l. 10. c 1 ad O^^an^^n.
Sic verba temperant, ut aliter haereticus, aliter Catholicus audiat. The same
words receave a different Comment, according to the difference of the hearers.
The practicke doctrine of too many Romanists is no le^^^ wickedly ingenious in
abusing the understanding both ^f Magistrates and Ministers: for they can not
only ^eake, but swear too; truly, as they say, secundum ^eri atem jurantis,
according to their own meaning; and yet inform the Magistrate falsely,
secundum veritatem ^uramenti, if you look to his meaning that does minister
^he Oath.

But what is this? (to say nothing of their subtle ta^ing of Gods name in
vain) what is this, I say, but the ^erverting of that end, for which God
ordained an Oath? God ordained it for the satisfaction, not of the swearer, ^ut
of him to whom we swear. The words of the Apo^tle are plain, It must be
(...). The end is double, to determine any further inquisition, ^f the Oath be
assertory, for that is (...), to ^ettle all wavering, if it be promissory, for
that is (...). But let them be sure, they shall, except they repent, Wis. c.
14. v. 28, 29.
be ^ustly punished, as the Wiseman speaks, that swear ^^justly to deceive.
He adds the reason; because they ^espise holiness, the first Character of the
holy Oath of God, and that is truth; for whatsoever cunning is used ^y men,
Gods Oath has this double truth, and jurantis and ^ramenti: he swears not in
any reserved sense of his own, ^ut to the intendment of them to whom he makes
his ^ath: so that his Herald the Minister may well take up hose solemn words,
which were used in the Romans ^ague. Illa palam prima postrema ex tabulis
cerave reci^ta sunt sine dolo malo, utique ea hic ho^ie certissime intel^cta
sunt. In Gods Oath there is neither equivocation, ^or mental reservation; he
swears in truth. And thus much of the first property of GODS Oath; he is not
^ke man, that he should lie: and this property is to be ^itated by man.

The second is more peculiar to God, The stablenesse of ^e Oath. For though all
men should swear in veritate ^entis, yet only God can swear in certitudine
^eritatis; (...) is only for him to say, I will not shrink from it. And ^hy?
only Gods free will is reciprocal with his executive power, so that he cannot
will more then he can do, neither can do less then he can will: but the
creature will is of larger extent then his power; which is the cause why even
in those things whereunto our willi^clines aright, we presume too much, as
Saint James h^^ taught: if we promise our selves the doing of the without this
clause, ^f God will, If we live.

But to return to God; to make him change, the must be some cause, either from
without, or from within from without it cannot be, for all other things live
a^^ moove, and have their being in God: so that he can remit and intend his
creatures forces, as seems good^ him; he proportionateth all sorts of means
to compa^ his end, where^n all things serve him, and who ha^ resisted his
will? From without then there can been cause, much less from within; for his
word, before (...) was spoken, was tried to the utttermost, as the Psimist
speaks, as silver tried seven times in the fire: the^ is no error to be
corrected in it; seeing as in wisdom God made all his works, so has he
spoken all h^ words: and what he has wisely resolved, he wi^ not
unconstantly alter. (...) (says Na^ anzene) (...). O^at 53.
It is the fool that chan^eth like the Moon: but Gods word is as the dir^^
beams of the Sun, which pass through the air (...) moved of the winds;
and though reflected of the eart^ yet grow they more bright, more hot: even so
God tu^neth the rage of man to his praise, Psalm. 76.10.
he restrains his ^riousnes; for with him there is no variablenes nor sha^^
of change. True it is, that God is said to repent; but (...) Fathers jointly
agree, that his repentance is mutati^^ not affectus, but effectus: he changes
his creatures, (...) changeable in himself; even as a surgeon, who (...)
gins with one kind of plaster, when that has wrou^ his force, lays another
kind, does not alter, but p^^sue his former resolution, which was, by those
dive plasters to cure the sore: even so, whatsoever alterati^^ befalls us, God
did eternally decree it, an decree it as it befalls. So then we must
acknowledge that his word, much more his Oath, is a standing word, Psa. 33.4, 9
Zach. 1.6. Psa. 119.89 1. Pet. 1.25.
as the Scripture calls it, a prevayling Word, an enduring word. All flesh is
grass, and the glory thereof but as the flower of the field: the grass
withers, the flower fades, but the word of the Lord abides for ever, says
Saint Peter. Christ goes further: heaven and earth shall perish; Mat. 5.18.
one jote or one title of the Law shall not escape, till all things be
fulfilled. Particularly in one case; thus says the Lord; If you can break my
Covenant of the day, and my Covenant of the night, that there should not be
day, and night in their season; then may my Covenant be broken with David my
servant, Ier. 33.20.
that he should not have a son to reign upon his throne.

And what is our lesson? Truly first, (...), as Nazianzene advises, as near
as we can, though we cannot as constantly as God, not to have a heart and a
heart, Ps. 119.106
but to say with King David, I havesworne and am steadfastly purposed. It were
to be wished there were such constancy in our Oaths; so many would not retract
the Oath of that Allegiance which they owe without an Oath. The more is the
envious man to be looked unto, that works into simple consciences such
erroneous conceits. Psa. 58 9.
Priusquam sentiantur spinae, tam redivivam quam adustam procellat quamque
Deus. Good husbands suffer tares to grow till harvest, but they weed thistles
before the corn be ripe. I leave the cutting of these thistles and thorns
(for they are to us as the Canaanites were to Israel;) I leave them I say, to
the temporal sword, whom it concerns nearly that their field be not
overgrowen with them; even as much as the loss of their harvest, in stead
whereof they may else one day scarce find a gleaning. But because their field
is also Gods; it were to be wished, that whatsoever is done to the seducers,
the seduced might be better and oftener informed. There is no doubt, but if a
wise and constant course were taken, Gods blessing would be as great in
preserving truth, and bringing to the truth, as the Devils malice in corrupting
so many silly unstable souls. This care sleeps in the Letters of Laws and
Canons; it would be awakened, to do as much as Church and Commonweal have
thought meet. But to leave them, and conclude with our selves. Of the
Patriarchs, Wisd. c. 18. v 6.
the Wiseman says, that knowing to what Oaths they had given credit, they were
of good cheer. In imitation of whom Saint Paul said, J know whom I have
trusted, and that he is able to keep that which I have committed to him,
until that day. Wherefore let us listen to Saint Peter, and commit our selves
unto God, as unto a faithful Creator: for as King David says, No man ever
trusted in him, and was confounded: and David was the person, to whom God swear
in that truth, from which he would not shrink.

Let us come then from the warrant to the promise, and therein consider the
persons of whom it stands. First, to whom the promise was made. This person was
David. God swear to David. Though no man's worth is such, as to deserve ought at
Gods hands, for every man's worth is Gods gift, Quid habes, quod non accepisti?
and no man must boast, as if he had not received it; yet God never entered into
Covenant with any that was not of extraordinary worth. You may perceive it in
the story of Noah, Abraham, Phinees. But we have now to do with David: of him
God himself does witness, that he was a man after his own heart; Hom. de
David and Saul.
that is, as St. Chrysostom. expounds it, there was between God and that King,
Individuus amor, and conjuncta Charitas, idem velle, and idem nolle. Which
agrees with that addition St. Paul puts to Gods Word, he will do omnes
voluntates meas, all my wills; for he was eminent in more than one virtue. Eccl.
47.3. ut supra.
Look on him as a private man, how valiant! he played with Lions as with
Kids, and with Bears as with Lambs. And yet how patient! millies meruit
martyrij coronam, says Chrysostom, he was a thousand fold Martyr. Look on
him as a King caring for the Church; he spoke truly of himself, the zeal of
thine house has consumed me. Which the Son of Syrach excellently resembles.
As the fat separated from the peace offering, so was David chosen ont of the
Children of Israel.

Now the fat was only Gods part; the rest of the sacrifice was divided between
the Priests and the offerer: so David dedicated it wholly unto God, as if none
else had any interest in him; and yet behold when he comes to deal with the
commonwealth, what says he? the earth and all the Inhabitants thereof are out
of joint; I bear up the pillars thereof. Saint Chrysostom did not lavish when
he said, In natura humana vitam praestitit angelicam: for do not the Angels
also behold the face of God? and yet are they ministering spirits for their
sakes that shall be heirs of salvation. So David was indeed the anointed
Cherub that covers, and God set him in honor upon the holy mountain. You
have not heard all: he committed sundry enormous sins: yet such was his
Repentance (the Psalms are monuments of it) that Theodoret sticks not to say,
Regis admirabilem gloriam effecit splendidiorem; he was a King admirable for
his virtues, but more admirable for his repentance: as it was a stranger sight
to see a King of Ninive come down from his Throne clothed in sackcloth and sit
in ashes, then King Solomon sitting upon his Throne and speaking parables unto
the Queen of Saba. Behold then whom God chose to be a Patriarch, to whom he
gave a name like one of the great ones, like that of Abraham: he entered into a
Covenant with Abraham, and he entered into a covenant with David; he swear to
Abraham, and he swear to David; and he swear unto David, as unto Abraham,
concerning his issue, The fruit of his body.

Children are called fruit of their Parents body, to note, that they are only
fathers of their flesh: they have another, namely God, which is father of their
spirits. Saint Paul teaches it, and the use of it, Heb. 12. Heb. 12.9.
And this checkes their opinion, that will have souls propagated, no less
than bodies. I will not trouble you with such an unnecessary dispute. Rather
this I note, that whereas every man's first desire is immortality; because he
cannot in this world attain it, he offers supply thereof by his posterity.
This phrase then promises solatium immortalitatis, a kind of immortality. Our
mortal part the Son of Syrach does excellently set forth, Chr. 30.4.
A man that has issue, though he die, yet he is as though he were not dead;
for he has left one behind him, that is like him. Jn his life he saw him, and
had joy in him, and he was not sorry in his death, neither was he ashamed
before his enemies. And why? he left behind him an avenger against his enemies,
and one that should show favor to his friends. Good cause therefore why
another Psalm of degrees tells us, that Children are an inheritance of the
Lord, and the fruit of the womb is his reward. As are the arrows in the hand
of the strong man, so are the children of the youth. Blessed is the man that
has his quiver full of them. Surely, for a King to have his quiver empty is no
small curse. God himself has spoken it. Ier. 22.30
O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord. Thus says the Lord: write
this man, (and that man was Iechonias the King, write him I say) destitute of
Children, a man that shall not prosper in his days, and what is that, but that
he shall be cursed? he adds the reason; for there shall be no man of his seed
that shall sit upon the Throne of David, or bear rule any more in Judah. Esa.
38.14.
King Ezekiah, when he was but threatened it, confesses thus, he chattered like
a swallow, mourned like a Dove. And what said Abraham? O Lord God, what will thou give me, seeing I go childlesse? and lo the servant of mine house shall
be mine heir. Happy then was David, and so every one of David's rank is
happy, that has a fruitful Vine, and Olive branches round about his Table. Of
whom we may truly say, -- Vno avulso non deficit alter
Aureus, et simili frondescit virga metallo.


But mark: the King was busy to build Gods house: and see how God answers
him, promising the building of ^^e Kings house. God requites a building with a
buil^ing. There is a very apt allusion in the word, upon which the son of
Syrach also plays, when he says, that ^hildren and the building of a City
make a perpetual ^^me; how much more, if they be a royal offspring, that ^e
destined to sit upon a Throne? And God promises ^avid sons for this honorable
end, To sit upon his Throne.

It appears among the buildings of Solomon, and in the Chronicles of other
Monarchs, that the King had a seciall public seat wherein he was placed, when
he possessed himself of his kingdom, and afterward sat as in his proper
seat: the Scripture calls it solium Regni, as if a kingdom and the Throne were
inseparable. So that this phrase does signify insigne Regni, an essential, an
incommunicable rite of a Kingdom. This seat is incommunicable: the Altar and
the Throne (says one) are ^^th proper: the Altar to God, the Throne to the
King. The pride of usurping the Throne will as hardly be broo^ed by a
Sovereign on earth, as the usurping of the Altar will be borne by the Lord of
heaven. Therefore Pharaoh, though he did highly advance Joseph, added, Only in
the Kings Throne will I be above thee. As it is incommunicable to others, so
is it essential to a King. In regard whereof Saint Peter calls Kings (...)
supereminent, supereminent in the Throne. But wherein stands this
supereminency? surely in state and power. In regard of the state it is called
solium gloriae, 1 Samuel 2.8. Pro. 20.8.
and in regard of the power, solum judicij. These two must not be severed. A
King must in state ascend above all, that he may be the more respected when he
does command. God himself, that did often show himself as a King, did show
himself in that Majesty that he allows unto Kings. The places be known in
Ezechiel, Daniel, Revelation. I need not quote them. But solium is therefore
gloriae, because judicij. The state is to countenance the power: it must not be
only a Throne of glory, but of judgment too. Nazianzene has an apt description
of Kings, they are persons (says he) (...). They are not be without a pair
of scales in their hands, in imitation of God, of whom the Psalmist says, Thou
sit i^ the Throne, that judge righteously. And such a Throne indeed was
King David's. At Jerusalem are Thrones for Judgment, even the Throne of the
house of David. In such a Throne should the sons of David sit; they were to
(...) but God would set them there.

It is superfluous for me to remember you, that Promotion comes neither from
the East, nor from the West, (...) from the North, nor from the South. It is
God, that take down one, and sets up another. Which is evident by the
Prophesies of alterations in the most eminent Monarchi^ of the world. As for
the Anabaptists that admit no Sovereign title in a Christian Commonweal upon
a fal^ ground, that it is a fruit of Adams fall, which ceased us on the
Redemption by Christ; it is enough to tou^ their ignorance, not distinguishing
between Direct^^^ and Coercive power. The later is made necessary by sin the
former is as natural, as sociablenesse is to man. T^^ Romanists detest
Anabaptisme; but they cherish a m^sterie of iniquity, that may not be endured
by this peculiar of God, I will set them. For in their Pontificale Remanum they
insert such clauses, as have within late year given occasion of Rebellion in
this land, Rebellion justified at the Bar upon this ground, that the King is
(...) King till he be anointed. In that book, as it is reform^ by the Council
of Trent, in the Tract De benediction^ (...) coronatione Regis, to the Bishop
that performs that Ceremony, the Presentee speaks thus. Reverendissime ^^ter,
postulat sancta matter Ecclesia, ut praesentem egregi^ militem ad dignitatem
regiam sublevetis. And after, (...) King begins his Oath thus. Ego, Deo
annuente, fut^^ Rex. And what is this but a devise whereby the P^^ usurped upon
the Emperor, and encroacheth by Metropolitans upon other Kings, feigning an
interreg^^ which in an he editary kingdom is (questionless) re^ugnant to the
fundamental laws of all Nations. Ther^^re against them and all others, Psa.
89.18.
we hold that of the (...) line; Our shield belongs unto the Lord; Our King
(...) the holy one of Israel: he holds of him and none ^ther: the King does
sit, but God does set him.

And sets him for ever. The succession is perpetual. ^ome restrain this
until Christ's coming, according to that speech of Jacob, The Scepter shall
not depart from Iu^ah, nor the Lawgiver from between his feet, until Shi^ah
come. Some continue it unto the end of the World, according to these words of
the Psalm, so long as the Sun and Moon endures. They are easily
recon^iled. Distinguish the Prophecy from the Promise: the Promise speaks of
that which might be, the prophecy ^f that which would be. If JERUSALEM had
^nowne those things that belonged to her Peace, the enemies ^ad not cast a
bank about her, the Romans had not destroy^d her, that Throne should have
continued as the days of ^eaven.

But Jacobs prophecy means, that for want of per^rmance of the Covenant,
Jerusalem should fail, when Philoh came; yea and before that, the tabernacle
of Da^id should be ruinous. The ground of that prophecy is ^t down, Psalm. 49.
Psa. 40.11.
Many think that their houses shall con^^nue for ever, from generation to
generation, and call their ^ands after their names. But when man is in honor,
he ^oth not understand, and so becomes as the beasts that perish: ^nnes
interrupt their continuance for ever. Wherefore according to that in
Deuteronomy, Deuteronomy. c. 29. v. 19.
If any when he hears ^he words of this curse, bless himself in his heart,
saying, (...) shall have peace, although J walk according to the stub^ornnesse
of mine heart, thus adding drunkenness unto thirst; ^e Lord will not be
merciful unto that man; but the wrath (...) the Lord and his Jealousy shall
smoke against him, and every curse that is written in this book shall light
upon him: ^^d the Lord shall put out his name from under heaven.

The succession then is perpetual; but the promise the of is conditional; the
Condition is the keeping of Gods Covenant. And so we come from the absolute
part of the promise to the qualified; which must not be several. It was the
error of the Kings and Priests of Judah and Israel excepting against the
prophesies, and persecuting the prophets, which foretold the ruin of those
kingdoms for the sins thereof: they dreamt that the promise was only
absolute; and so howsoever they live^ their state should endure for ever; not
remembering the God exacted their duty as well as he promised his mercy, yea
and limited the performance of his mercy, according to the continuance of
their duty.

Although then Kings be Lords over their people, (...) are they subjects unto
God: They can be no great^ then Adam, of whom Saint Augustine, Quamvis in m^^
do dominus positus est Adam, etc. though Adam were created Lord of the visible
world, yet by subjection unto a (...) he was to recognize that he held of a
more sovereign (...) It is a fundamental rule of reason; that from whom (...)
have our being, from him we must receave a Law preportionable to our
dependence on him, be he God^ man; Kings from God, and other men from Kings.

They that have been of Phaeraohs mind and have sai^^ who is the Lord, that I
should hear him? have tried Sai^^ Bernards rule to be true, Posse eos
summovere se felicit^^ but not subducere se Potestati; they may deprive
themsel^^ of the glory of God, their throne in heaven, but they can^^^ exempt
themselves from the sovereignty of God: he will (...) his pleasure dispose
their thrones here on earth.

There is a covenant then between God and the Kin^ and it is twofold: I will
be his Father, and he shall be (...) son: 2. Sam. 7.14, 15, 16.
he shall build an house for my name, and J will sta^^ the throne of his
kingdom. So it is set down, 2. Sam. (...) The Covenant respects David as a
private person and as King: as a private person, he is to be the son of God
(for David's Covenant does presuppose Abraham's; b^ adds a regality unto it. As
a King he is to build an house for God, He must be custodious, et Custos
utriusque tabulae: it was so in the Old Testament, Psalm. 2.6.
it must be so in the New. It is prophesied in the second psalm; we are
taught to petitionate by Saint Paul; 1. Tim. 2.2.
and Saint Augustine does excellently express it. Aliter servit Rex Deo, quia
homo; aliter, quia Rex. As a man, he must conform himself to the laws of
God; as a King, he makes laws for the service of God. It is not enough for
the King to obey it, as the child of God; as a King anointed of God, he must
command it; like to primum mobile, which moves it self, and all inferior
orbs with it. So did the religious Kings of the Jews, and so did the
religious Emperors of the Christians. But where shall the King find whereunto
he is tied by Covenant? he has an authentical Record; the Record is Gods
Testimonies, they are tabulae foederis. God testifies his will in his word.
This appears by Moses in Deuteronomy, where the King is enjoined to describe
the law, Deu. 17.18.
when he sits upon his throne: and the same charge is reiterated unto
Joshua. Samuel gives the like to Saul, Josh. 17.
and David to Solomon. Whereupon the book of the Law was to be delivered the
King at his Coronation. You may see it in the Story of Ioash. Psa. 45.^.
The Chaldee paraphase expounding those words of the Psalm, the Qucene stood
at the Kings right hand, gives it this sense, Stabit liber legis in latere
dextrae tuae, et exaraebitur in exemplare splendour tuus, velut obrizo
ophiritico. It is memorable that is reported of Alphonsus King of Arragon, that
he read over the Bible with the gloss fourteen times. But this I moreover
mark in the word Testimony, that God speaks like a King, signifies his
pleasure, without Rhetorical persuasions or philosophical demonstrations.
There are lumina Orationis in the sermons of the prophets, which surpass the
Eloquence of all heathen men: but the style of the Law runs only with a
Test. Yea and simply Gods word requires faith, which is the Correlative of a
Testimony; Quare et Quomodo: Jewish words, as the Fathers call them: our age
may call them Atheistical, which also must be banished far from the Articles
of our Faith, and notwithstanding all unbelieving scoffers, the bare Testimony
of God must go current with us as an indemonstrable principle of our Faith, and
uncontrollable precept of our life. It must go current with all, but specially
with Kings, who must yield unto God what themselve; expect from their
su^jects: this let them not discredit: Test meipso; for God himself does
teach it them.

You have heard what is the Record. Now hear, that it is authentical. God
himself will teach them. The businesses of the Kings of Judah were either
Juris or facti. In matters of Fact which were doubtful, either in peace or
war, they had immediate resolution from God, either by Prophets that attended
them, or by Vrim and Thummim before the Arc. But if it were Quaestio Iuris,
then they were still referred to the Law, the sense whereof they were to
require of the Priests, which (as it appears in Nehemiah and elsewhere) did
dare sensum, and in their sitting in Moses chair (so long as they sat in the
chair) God did teach by them: so that Qui vos audit, me audit. But it is no
longer then they sit in the chair; for (...), as Basil well observes. The
Minister is but as the gnomon of a dyall, that only points out the motion of
the heavens. It is as lawful for the Prince to prove the spirits of the
Prophets as to try his Dyall, whether it go right or wrong. But the Bishop of
Rome conceits so much of his Infallibility, that he resembles him in Pliny,
who finding a disproportion between the Dial and the Suns motion, thought
surely the earth was moved from his center, or the Sun had taken a new
course, but suspected not that the Dyall had been shaken with an earthquake:
even so they will permit Princes to meddle with matters in the Church, but
directed by the supreme pastor; on whose information they must build so
securely, that they must rather think that God has altered his mind, or
Princes passed their bounds, then the Priest can be deceaved.

But this place may intimate an extraordinary Spirit of Wisdom which God
vouchsafes Kings; whereunto the phrase respects, My Lord the King is as an
Angel of God, knowing good and evil: Which Solomon prays for. Send me that
wisdom which is (...), as if there were a special wisdom that does assist
the thrones of Princes. And in regard hereof it was, that Solomon elsewhere
desires a docile heart, and says, that the Kings heart is in the hands of God,
as the River of waters; he turns them wheresoever it pleases him. Which one
wittily expounds. All the fruitfulness of a land, as also the barrenness
depends upon those streams of wisdom; which God either sends abroad, or
withholdeth, by the heart of the King.

The Conclusion of this point is. If ye delight in thrones and Scepters, o
Kings of the people, Wis. 6.21.
honor wisdom, that you may reign for ever.

You have heard the promise that GOD makes the King; but ye have heard it only
in the type. I should (if the time would serve) speak something of the truth,
seeing the truth concerns that King, and all Kings as well as the type. The
Truth is Christ, whom the Scripture calls David, and the Son of David. God
swore to him, and for him: to him as the head; for him, as that head is
mystically joined to the body of his Church. He was born to be a King, and to
make all his, Kings unto God: but not Kings, except they were Priests, and did
sacrifice themselves unto God. If they were a Royal Priesthood, then were they
to sit upon the Throne of the mystical David. To him that overcommeth (says
Christ) will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, as I overcame, and sit with
my Father in his Throne.

But the time will not give me leave to wade further in that mystery. Only this
I add: that if you separate the Ceremonial from the Moral, what was spoken
to David concerns every Christian King: they have the same charge of keeping
Gods Covenant: and they have no less the same hope of succession in their
Crowns. For as the Gentiles which tread the steps of Abraham, are in the
Gospel said to be the sons of Abraham, the Father of faithful men; even so
Kings which do the works of David, are the Royal offspring of David, David
the father of faithful Kings: which is the cause why our Church on those days
which we solemnize in remembrance of the favors vouchsafed unto our Kings,
does use the Psalms that were penned for David and his seed.

The sum of all is. God promises, he warranteth sincerely and constantly
unto Kings in a King, for their seed; Not only for themselves: that if they
forsake not him, he will never destitute them, but continue their Royal line,
Monarchs in earth, and Saints in Heaven.

Give then thy judgments to our King, o God, and thy Righteousness to the
Kings Son; That keeping thy Testimonies, they may abide in thy Covenant. So
shall thou make good unto them the holy things of David, and other Princes that
are faithful; A perpetual succession of this Crown on earth, and a blessed
joint possession of a better Crown in heaven. *

A SERMON PREACHED AT SAINT CROSS NEAR WINCHESTER.
1 COR. 10.12. Let him that thinks he stands, take heed least he fall.


ALL men are forbidden to sin, by the Law of the Creation: but they which in
the Church are by Sacraments consecrated unto God, have moreover bound
themselves from sin by a religious stipulation. For a Sacrament consists of a
visible sign, and an invisible grace. Of which the sign represents not only
what God offers, but also what man vows: and the grace works no less a
conscience of man's duty, then it does a sense of Gods mercy. Add hereunto,
that by Christ's Institution these two are subordinate, and the outward sign
seems to make the way more passable for the inward grace. Strange then it is
that any should affect the sign, and neglect the grace; yea boast of Gods
seal and neglect his spirit. Not only so, but even presume to sin upon
warrant of that which contains so manifold a prohibition of sin; yet some
such Corinthians there were. Saint Paul in this Chapter taxes them and makes
good this point of Divinity against them. Sacraments are no privileges, either
for sin, or from plagues. And because in Morals, Examples are most working
proofs; he tries the Corinthians case by the Histories of the Jews. The
effect of this Argument is this, God is no accepter of persons; no more of the
Gentiles, then he was of the Jews: And why? these two particular Churches are
similary parts of that whole one; which is Catholic both in time and place.
Though in some other things they differ, yet in substance they agree. God in
his mercy is equally near to both, and in his Justice will deal indifferently
with both. Therefore the Jews stories are the Gentiles types, types not of
Ceremonial presignificancie, but of moral correspondency: by them they may
judge in what terms their persons stand with God, and what their deeds may
expect at the hands of God. The Iewer were as the Gentiles are, Sacramentally
sanctified, yet they sinned and were plagued. Alterius casus, alterius cautela,
says Gregory the Great, lib 4. Epist. 56. The Jews harms must make the
Gentiles beware. Therefore whatsoever he be, Jew or Gentile, that thinks he
stands, let him take heed least he fall, as the Apostle concludes in these
words that now I have read unto you.

These words then are a conclusion springing from that proof, which the
Apostle grounded upon the example of the Jews Wherein it is clear, that
Sacramental sanctification does neither exclude sin, nor exempt from wrath.
For the better unfolding of which words, we may observe in them these two
points; a mutability whereunto we are subject, and a Vigilance whereof we must
take care. The former requires the later. We must be vigilant, because we
are mutable. Mutable we are, for he that thinks he stands, may fall: Vigilant
^herfore we must be, lest he that thinks he stands, do ^all. I^t him that
thinks, etc.

To begin with our mutability: Pst. 1.5.
Our condition is according to our place: this three fold, so is that. The
first ^lace is ^eaven: this, as the Apostle calls it, Heb 12.28.
is a kingdom that cannot be shaken, therefore they that are standing ^illars
there (so Christ calls the Saints consummated) ^e free from falling. Apcc.
3.12. Zach. 12.8.
Jn that day (says the prophet ^achary) shall the Lord defend the Inhabitants
of Jerusalem; and he that is feeble, (the word is, a stumbler) among you, ^all
be l^ke unto David, and the house of David as the An^ells: as the Angel of God
before them. Now the An^ells cannot fall. The second place is Hell; and that is
a ^^oale wherein sinners lie bound hand and foot in chains ^f darkness, and
that without delivery: they cannot be ^osed, they cannot be raised: their
sentence is irrecoverable, and their state unrecoverable. Luke 16 26.
So Abraham tells ^ives, Lu. 16. The third place is the earth, the midway to
the other two, which partaketh of them both: here ^^en both stand and fall. And
no marveile: for the best ^^e sons of Adam, as well as of God; partly flesh,
and partly spirit: not only Saints, but also sinners, living in the Church, not
triumphant, but militant. And this Church is in the Canticles aptly resembled
by the moon; for she has her wexings and her wainings: she comes ^eerer,
and goes further from the sun, the sun of righteousness, as Malachi calls
Christ, Mal 4.2.
in the fourth of his prophecy. So then this admonition is directed to (...)
that are pilgrims, not to them that are at home: to wayfaring men, not to them
that are at their journeys and: and it is directed to us all: Whosoever thinks
he stands. I said in my prosperity, I shall never be removed, thou Lord of thy
goodness had made my hill to stand so strong, Psa. 30 6.
says ^^ing David. Though all men be offended, Mat. 26.33.
(...) (said Saint Peter unto Christ) yet will I never be offended. Behold
great security in King David, and no less in Saint Peter; yet when God hid his
face, the King confessed that he was troubled: Psa. 30 3.
and his trouble was a fall, a great downe-fall, as it appears, verse. 3.
where he thanketh God, that he had brought up his soul from be^, and revived
him from among them that did go down to the pit. Christ did look away from
Saint Peter, and he stumbled, and fell too, and that very low; for he denied,
yea forswore his master, so far was he from standing to, or dying for his
master. What can we say the to these things? If a King, a King of Israel, a
King after God own heart, Gal. 2.9.
if an Apostle, one of those three (...) Galathians 2. that seemed a pillar
among the Apostles, that was surnamed Cephas, in prophesied his faith: if such
a King, such an Apostle, King Da^i^ and Peter could not so stand, but they
fell; who in the Commonweal, who in the Church dare say, I shall never be
removed, I will never be offended? Surely, the weakness must needs be in all,
that tempts them the are the very best of all. He that thinks, (...), in
fullness of sense, he that seems. Now a man may seem only (...) others, or
also to himself; so that the sense is somewh^^ restrained, by translating it;
he that thinks: for he the thinks he stands, seems only to himself. But it
is (...) done without cause. If a man seem to stand, only (...) others, 1.
Cor. 2 11.
no wonder if he fall. No man knows the thing of a man, save the spirit of
man which is in him. Easy there fore it is to be deceived in our judgment of
another man. Hypocrisy may veil the greatest impiety. Dec^^ full workers
(says Saint Paul) transform themselves i^ the Apostles of Christ: and no
marvel, for Satan (...) self can be transformed into an angel of light. But
(...) smothered is like a sickness palliated: it will not be (...) ere it
break out, and break out more violently. The^ ample of Judas the traitor,
Simon Magus the sorcer^ Julian the Apostata, are proof enough that such stand^
will soon fall: but for him to fall that seems to (...) self to stand, his
case is more woeful, and this admon^^ on the more behoofefull. The Corinthians
were too well conceited of their own stability; therefore does the Apostle
press them with a consideration of their mutability. Hereupon the Translator
regarding fitness, rather ^hen fullness of sense, expresses the touch that
the Apostle gives at their pride, by rendering it, he that thinks. He that
thinks he stands.

Standing and falling are words borrowed from things corporal, to note those
that are spiritual; alluding both (...) the comparison of Gods word, to a way
wherein we ^ust all walk: In our walking there are enemies that would supplant
us; and according to our walking God will respect us, if we be neither foiled
of our enemies, nor ^isallowed of God. In both cases, the Scripture says, we
^and; stand against them, and stand before him. Of the ^^rst Saint Paul
protests unto Felix, Act. 24.16
that he endeavour^^d to have a conscience toward God and men (...), which
stumbleth not, without offense. And how far he ^ad obtained it, he reports to
King Agrippa; Acts 26.21.
for ^reaching repentance the Jews took me in the Temple, ^^d would have
killed me; nevertheless I obtained help (...) God, and stand to this day,
witnessing to great and small, (...) other things then those which the Prophets
and Moses ^id should come. And as himself was stable, so he ex^rteth these
Corinthians to be (...), ^^ke a house well founded or built upon a rock; Mat. 7
25.
though the ^inds blow, and the waves beat, yet that house will stand: ^^d such
are they, who as the Scripture says, stand. Nei^^er Scriptures only, but
Fathers too. In the Ancients no^ing more obvious, then that Confessors and
Martyrs, ^^e as it were by a proper name called stantes, standers. ^anders,
because in persecution they never fell.

But as there is a standing against our enemies, so is ^ere a standing before
God, this being a consequent to ^^d a reward of that. Watch and pray (says
Christ unto ^s Apostles) that ye may be counted worthy to escape all ^^ese
things, when the day of judgment shall come, Luke 21.36
and that ye may stand before the Son of man; for in that day the righteous
only shall stand, and stand in boldness, before them that have tormented
them: neither shall they only during that great assizes stand before the
Tribunal of Christ; Rev. 7.15. Zoc. 3.7.
but from thence be advanced to an high standing; they shall stand eternally
before the throne of God. If (says God to Joshua the high Priest) th^^ shall
walk in my ways and keep my watches, thou shall also judge my house, and
shall keep my Courts, and I will give thee a place inter astantes, among these
standers, pointing to the angels; for if Gods will be done on earth by us, as
it is in heaven by them, we shall in the Resurrection be like to angels, and
stand for ever before the throne of God. Unto this twofold standing, falling is
opposite: therefore we fall either into sin, or out o^ favor. He that
sins takes a fall, therefore are sins most usually in the Scriptures
called (...), falls, an^ the occasions or matter of sin, scandala blocks, fit
(...) give a fall. Saint James uses another word, but of the same force. In
many things we fall, we sin all. The prophet David notes sinning by slipping.
My feet had well night slipped, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked; and (...)
commonly meaning the sin, call it, the fall of angels and of men. And so do
the Fathers term weaklings it the faith, and revolters from the faith: the
first, laps^^ such as have taken a fall; the other, Apostatas, such (...) have
clean given over to stand. Jude 12.
Trees twice dead, (...) plucked up by the roots, Jude 12. But how does fallin^
resemble sinning? surely the proportion is very fit; for a fall comprehends in
it a descent of our body, and withal, a bruise: so does sin a debasing of
the soul, together with a wound. Gods creatures are not all of (...) degree,
and there are many steps between heaven an^ hell. By creation man was a
consort of the angels, but (...) sin he is ranged with the beasts. Man being
in ho^^^ (says King David) has no understanding, but through sin becomes
like the beasts that perish. It were well, if (...) were no worse by sin.
Mat. 3.7. Ioh. 8.44.
Abraham's seed becomes the serpents brood, as both John Baptist and Christ
pronounced. A great disparagement of their nature. But this baseness is
seconded with a wound, which Christ teaches in the simile of the man that
descended from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among thieves, who not only
robbed him of his raiment, but also wounded him, and left him half dead. God
in the first of Esaias describes this most excollently: Ah sinful nation, Esaias
1.4.
a people laden with iniquity; a seed of the wicked corrupt children: they have
forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the holy one of Israel to anger, they are
gone backward. This he speaks plainly. But see how he doubles it, speaking
figuratively: Wherefore should you be smitten any more? for you fall away more
and more. And what is their fall? The whole head is sick, and the whole heart
is heavy: from the sole of the foot unto the head there is nothing whole
therein, but wounds, and swellings, and sores full of corruption; which have
not been wrapped nor bound up, nor mollified with oil. Sin then indeed is a
fall, which bears such marks of a fall degrading and wounding us.

But men do not only fall into sin, but also out of favor, for the first
fall comes not alone. All they (says the Wiseman) that regard not wisdom,
have not only this hurt, that they know not the things that are good, but also
they leave behind them a memorial of their foolishness, they are spectacles
of Gods wrath. Job more fully, The steps of a wicked man's strength shall be
straightened, Job 18.7.
and his own counsel shall cast him down; for he is taken in the net by the
feet, and he walks upon snares; his hope shall be rooted out of his dwelling,
and he shall be made to descend to the king of fear. Deuteronomy 32 34.
Is not this laid up in store with me, (says God) and sealed up among my
treasures? Vengeance and recompense are mine, their feet shall slide in due
time. When I went into the Sanctuary of God, then (says King David) I
understood the end of wicked men. Surely thou (O God) have set them in slippery
places, and castest them down into desolation. But mark the difference
between the fall into sin, and out of favor: Pro. 7.16, 17
the one is willing, the other is of constraint. Sin is like the harlot, she
decketh and perfumeth her bed, with craft she causes man to yield, and lay
himself down and take his pleasure in her dalliance. But God endures not that
man should enjoy pleasure with his dishonor: therefore has he ordained that
this harlots house should be the way to hell, that it should lead down to the
chambers of death, as it is in the end of that chapter. Howsoever, a covenant a
sinner makes with death, and sinners are as secure as if they were in league
with death. Men promise themselves impunity, that are given over to iniquity.
But whatsoever league they make with death, Esaias 28.18
it shall be broken, and their agreement with hell shall not stand. When a
scourge shall run over and pass through, they shall be trodden down by it.
Whosoever willingly fall from God, shall (will they nill they) fall under
plagues. But falling is opposed to standing, as in two things, so also two
ways; negatively, and privatively: Negatively, when he finds himself down
that was never up: privatively, when he takes a fall, that indeed did stand. It
is a good rule which the Fathers observe in expounding sundry places of the
Scripture. Interdum res tum demum dicuntur fieri, cum incipiunt manifestari.
Things are oftentimes said to take their beginning from the time that they
first come to our understanding. Rom 7.9.
For example, and to our present purpose; I once (says Saint Paul) was alive,
being without the law; but when the commandment came, sin revived, and I
dyed. Not that before he was alive, and then gave up the ghost; but he then
perceived himself to be but dead, whereas before, in his imagination he was
alive. Psa. 69 28.
King David praying against the wicked, Let them (says he) be put out of the
book of life, and let them not be written with the righteous: contradictory
speeches; but that many think themselves entered, whose names were never in
that book. Jude 8.
Wherefore Saint Jude calls wicked Christians by the name of dreamers, and not
unfitly: for what the Prophet Esaias says of corporal food, is true also ^f
spiritual. Too many are like to hangry men that ^reame; Behold they eat, but
when they awake, ^say 2^.8.
their soul (...) empty: or like a thirsty man that dreameth; Behold he
drinks; but when he awaketh, behold he is faint, and his ^^ule longs. Quia
est hypocritae vita (says Gregory the Great) nisi visio quaedam phant asmatis,
quae hoc estendit in imagine quod non habet in veritate. Pro. 30 12.
Hypocrites are Solomon's generation, that are pure in their own conceit, and
yet are not washed from their filthiness. All their state (...) like a dream,
as the Psalmist speaks, when one waketh; yea, when God waketh, then he makes
this their image, or rather their imagination to be vile, and that in their
own eyes: Wisd. 5.4.
as the book of Wisdom brings them in confessing with their own mouths: We
fools thought a good man's life to be madness, and his end without honor; but
how is he counted among the children of God, and has his portion among the
Saints? But we contrary to our forther thought, have erred from the way of
truth; the light of righteousness has not shined unto us, and the sun of
Righteousness never rose upon us. When the Good Man of the house (...) up, and
has shut the door, many (says Christ) shall begin to knock at the door,
saying, Lord open to us; but he shall answer, I know you not. Strange news!
they had a better thought: for they shall begin to say, We have caren and
drunken in thy presence, and thou have taught in our streets. But he shall
answer; I tell you, I know you not whence ye are: Depart from me ye workers of
iniquity. Then they shall begin to weep (never before they mistook their
state) when they shall see Abraham, Isaac and Tacob, whom they took to be
their Fathers, and all the prophets whom they boasted of as of their teachers,
they shall see both in the kingdom of God, and themselves thrust out of
doors. See then how a man may be deceived, and flat down, when he thinks
himself bolt upright. This the Divines call a negative fall, because opposed
to a seeming, but not a true standing.

There is another fall which is privative, opposed to standing indeed. Pro.
30.19, 20.
The way of a righteous man should be like the light, shining more and more
until the perfect day: But many go back, making shipwreck of their faith,
and forsake their first love. When God offered a sign to Hezekiah, assuring
him of his recovery, will thou (says he) that the shadow of Ahaz dyall go
forward ten degrees, (...) backward? His answer was: It is a light thing
for the shadow to pass forward ten degrees: not so then, but let the shadow
go backward ten degrees. In the dyall of our soul over which mooveth the
Son of righteousness, we may see the clean contrary. A light matter for
the shadow (for our virtues are but shadows of Christ) to go backward, not
so, to go forward. The cause is not in the sun, but in the dyall: for here
Copernicus Theoricks prove very true, The sun stands still, but the earth
does move: God forsakes not man, but man God. Which the Scripture implies, when
it so often uses that phrase Abierunt retro, they have gone back, they have
declined, they have forsaken me, and such like. So the Galatians went so far
back, that of one that were able to run (you did run well) they became
babes, yea lest Little Children, with whom I am in travail again till les^
Christ be formed in you. He. 5.12, 13.
So did the Hebrews. Where as concerning time, ye ought to be Preachers, yet
have ye^ need again that we teach you, what are the first Principle of the
word of God, and are become such as have need of milk not of strong meat.
Neither may they go back only knowledge and in faith, but in love and works
too Write (says the Angel to the Church of Ephesus) I h^^ something to say
against thee, because thou have forsaken (...) first love. Remember from whence
thou art fallen, and (...) first works. And to the Angel of Sardis, I know it
works: thou have a name that thou live, but art dead^ wake and strengthen
the things which remain, and are ready to die. No doubt then but he that
stands, indeed (...) fall: the whole Church fall; they fall in faith, they
(...) ^n love. But this talking age is much troubled with two ^questions: how a
righteous man does fall, and how far ^he may fall, whether with full consent,
and whether as deep as hell. But my text leads me to remember you not to
fall, rather then to dispute of the manner and measure of their fa^l. Therefore
desirous to dismiss you rather religious then judicious,) though indeed he is
most judicious that is most religious, for the Scripture counts ^ll sinners,
fools,) I forbear to exceed the limits of my text, adding to the first point
only this, Nemo repent suit turpissimus. God forsakes not altogether at
first, as appears by Ezekiels vision. chap. 9. totum.
that the more consent we give to sin, the greater fall we take; and the
greater our fall, the nearer we draw to hell. The best men will yield too much,
and the least frown of God goes to a good man's heart; so that our best care
must be so to bridle our will, that we may be ever gracious in the eyes of God.
And so I pass from our mutability to our Vigilaney.

Whereupon I need not to stand long. If our mutability be apprehended well, we
need not much bidding to take heed of it. The difficulty is to resolve men that
sin is ill; to resolve the heart, not the wit: many are wise enough to vouch
it, but their lives do prove they never believed it: for can a man unfeignedly
acknowledge that to be ill, wherein he takes delight as in his soweraigne good?
But that our mutability may make the stronger impression, I will add something
of Vigilance, the second thing that I noted in the Apostles exhortation. Let
him that stands, take heed lest he fall.

Though a man standing be mutable; Psalm. 1.3.
yet if he be Vigilant, he may be immutable. It was an heresy condemned in
unchaste Marcian, to hold (after he was excomunicated for Incontinency) non
voluntate, sed necessitate perpetrari scelera, and so to extenuate his sin.
But for the ground of this necessity, men have sought to opposite places; some
to heaven, and some to hell. The opinion is ancient that fetches it from
heaven. Adam was the author of it, that laid his sin to God. The woman that
thou gave me, she gave me of the Tree, and J did eat. And (...) less
ancient is that which fetches it from hell: for the woman put it to the
Devil, The Serpent beguiled me, (...) J did eat. Both opinions have had many
Scholars. To the first the son of Syrach speaks in his days: Eccl. c. 15.
ver. 11.
say me that it is through the Lord, that I turn back; for th^^ ought not
to do the thing which he hates; say not, that (...) has caused me to err,
for he has no need of sinful man; (...) need of; Psa. 5.4.
nay, no delight in a sinful man. Thou art a G^^ that have no pleasure in
iniquity. And Abacuc, his pure eye cannot behold the wicked, yea they that
withdraw themselves shall perish, he hates all them that go a whor^^^ from
him.

The Manichees they were Scholars to Eve, and their tenent was, as Saint
Austine sets it down; Non tu pe^cas, gens tenebrarum peccat; thou deservest no
blame for sin, for it is not thee, but the Devil by thee that acts the sin.
But Saint Austin adds well: non est hoc tollere, s^^ geminare peccatum, this
excuse is worse than the fault. For as the same Father speaks; well may the
Serpert solicit, he cannot compel: non extorquet (...) nobis conse^sum, sed
petit: he does move us, he does not enforce us. And Prosper. Diabolus est
illecebrarum adjutor, non voluntatu^ generator: he allures us to sinful
delights, he actuates not the will: he recommends it, but we may refuse it. Be
his means never so great to strengthen the tentation; yet except we will, he
cannot defile us with corruption. Our selves judge evil to be good, we embrace
evil for good, yea we prefer evil before good. Our selves are the true cause
of our own fall. Therefore the H. Ghost bids us spart much unnecessary pains,
either of climing into heaven to know what God has decreed of us; or
descending into hell, to enquire how far the devil may prevail against us,
but stay at home, and there find the right party that does supplant us; and
that is our will. Man (as Solomon often speaks) perverteth his own way.
Perditio tua ex te. Every man when he is tempted, is tempted, ^^d etc. We fall
because we take no heed. As if Saint Paul should say, we should not fall, if
we did take heed. Not fall (I say) though we should sin. For though all
sins be in their own nature falls, And therefore Christ (...) the Lords
Prayer teaches us to ask forgiveness for ^^em; yet Saint Paul here means,
no ordinary, but ^reat falls, heinous and enormous sins. Heresy, Blas^hemy,
Profaneness, Adultery, Treason, Murder, and the ^^ke; these by an eminence are
called falls; and if we did ^^ke heed, we might avoid these falls; Videat, says
Saint ^aul, let him see that he fall not. Eccl. 2.14.
A wise man's eyes are in ^is head, but a fool walks in darkness. Surely
these Ob^ects are proportionable to our sight, though smaller sins ^re not:
they surprise us before we discern them: therefore God in Christ does pity us,
because of our yet dim ^^ight, when we fall into them. But God will not so
excuse him that winkes when he may see, as the Prophet speaks, or at least
will not use his eyes to the uttermost, that he may see. The Serpents wisdom
is much in his ^^es, and we should be wise as Serpents. The devil of^^rs at
one place, and strikes at another, therefore we must be armed at all points.
The seed perished many ways. We must (...) as Chrysostom speaks, we must
walk circumspectly. The perspectives ^^ch us, that nothing is seen
difficultly, but that where^^on we fix our eye directly. The word is (...).
Let (...) that stands, see, etc. He distinguishes between ^naturall and a
spiritual man; him that is down, and ^^m that is up. A natural man has no
eyes, he cannot perceive the things of God. But of a spiritual man he ^aith,
We are children of the day, and light in the Lord: therefore good reason that
God should call to us, for Vi(...), that we walk as children of the day. The
same di^^^nction Christ makes. He that walks in the day stum^^^th not,
because he sees the light of the world: but if a ^^n walk in the night, he
stumbleth, because there is no light (...) him. The stander then must see. But
that we may a little more fully comprehend it, and be moved to it; we must
observe the distinction so usual, of Gratia operans, and Cooperans: for
although in regard of the first grace which gives us the being of standers or
righteous men, we are merely passive, yet in regard of the second, wherein we
do manifest our selves to be standers, we are also active. Now in this
cooperative grace, wherein we concur with God, it is a grounded truth, That
except the Lord build the house, Psalm. 1^7.1.
they labor in vain that build it; except the Lord keep the City, the keeper
watches in vain. And as Saint Peter, We are preserved by the power of God,
who gives his Angels charge over us, that we dash not our feet against a
stone. And therefore as this Apostle tells the Ephesians, We must be strong in
the Lord, and in the power of his might. In the greatest storms or conflicts,
Christum vehis, must be our hope, and Spes mihi magna subit, cum te, fortissime
Christ,
Quae mihi, respicio dum mea facta, cadit.
The King puts his trust in the Lord, therefore shall he (...) miscarry.
Although in standing, the sinews of our stability is the conquering power of
Christ; yet this power of his is arbitrary, not necessary: he works; but when,
and as much as he will; and this will ordinarily inclines and proportioneth it
self unto such duties as he requiret^ of us, and those are principally four,
wherein stands the most that we can do, and that which we are boun^ to do.

In our Take heed, Watch and pray (says Christ) that you enter not into
temptation. Christ did (...) himself, when he conflicted with his most
grievo^^ temptation. If then we want strength, and have it not, it is because
we ask it not. S. Paul was better advised, whobeing tempted prayed, and prayed
often. Thrice he besought the Lord, that he might be rid of the messenger of
Satan that buffeted him; and he received a comfortable answer, My Grace is
sufficient for thee, my strength is made perfect in weakness. The world is
now much subject unto falling, because indeed it is little given to praying.
Many flock in Gods house in the time of preaching, but you shall every where
find it empty in the time of praying, people not remembering that the Preacher
gives them good armor, but it is God that gives them good arms and legs too.
Scanderbegs sword was sent to the Turk, but not his arm.

The second duty is Humility, when thou do stand. What have thou, that thou
have not received (says St. Paul?) And if thou have received it, why boastest
thou, as if thou had not received it? Quis te discernit? Men usually fall
into love with themselves, so far forth as to think themselves fit to be
Gods, as did the Angels, and Adam; whereas he should serve the Lord in fear,
and rejoice before him in trembling, serve the Lord with fear and trembling,
seeing it is God that works in us the will and the deed, especially seeing
that, God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. We must ever
remember how unworthy we are of that grace we do receave, how short we come of
him from whom we do receave it; that we bear not the root, but the root us:
and therefore ever have an awful respect to him, that does so graciously
respect us. The angels in heaven ever behold, not their own face, but the face
of GOD: and so must we be ever submissely pliable to the will of GOD. This is a
man's second Take heed.

The third is, to use our Talent, put on our Savior, Paul speaks Be doing
good, as King David: for babenti dabitur. Yea as GOD punishes sins with
sins, so does he multiply Grace for Grace. Therefore we must (...), stir up
the grace of God, blow off the ashes that will still cover it; not out of the
nature of grace, but out of the subject of grace. Gods grace is like fire; when
it is in its own Element it is pure; but being a fuel, it increases and
decreaseth. A man's strength (is not like the strength of a Be) is cleerer and
more dustie, according to the fuel and care of the fueller. Yea if he stir
it not in green wood, it will go clean out. Therefore as when God kindled
fire from heaven upon the Altar, he commanded the Levites carefully to attend
it, and employ it: so must we entertain the grace of God, that from Heaven is
kindled in our soul, we must blow it and cherish it. God kindled that fire
[Intendamus medijs non solliciti de fine] fire from Heaven; but he commanded
men to cherish it on earth. Men now take little care of God and gifts: they do
little good. Therefore does God so seldom multiply his graces upon men.

The last means is Mortification. Paul, chastise our body and keep it under,
mortify the flesh with the deeds thereof: not violating the substance, but
restraining the concupiscence, that the servant may obey, and the Lord command:
The flesh though it rebel, yet prevail not against the spirit. Strange it is,
that Philosophers observe that man is a little world, and indeed so he is: he
has his elementary, and his aethereall part: but sin has inverted, not the
places, but the virtues of them: the aethereall being made the patient, and the
elementary the agent. And so does that become corruptible, which by nature is
incorruptible: or the sons of God have an eye, but it is to see the daughters
of men, visu concupiscentiae, not providentiae: and so instead of heeding them,
they enter into league with them: and ^^ence are borne Giants Nephilim: their
name shows ^^heir case; they are no standers, but fallers; they take and give
falls: that History is inserted as a cause of the ^^eluge. Lubrica spes est
(says Saint Cyprian) quae inter fo^^enta peccati salvari sperat. And the
rather, because we must take no care for the flesh, if we will take care of our
selves. The more we bridle the flesh, the more we love it: vere, si severe
therefore though grace and concupiscence lodge both in our hearts, and pass
both from one man; yet they should (as the Optics write of the ^^ames of the
Sun) pass impermixti. You have seen ^^en the means of heed: and God, if he
keeps us from ^^lling, will keep us by this means: and he that choo^^th this
way of wisdom, walks without offense. And a stander especially must use
this means: for Christ (says Gregory) figured in his Baptism the case of a
stan^^r: and the dragon waits for the child borne; Lib. mor. 24 12.
he ^^aweth the stars. My son, when thou enterest, etc. Eccles. This is the
cause why Christian Princes are so ^^ch oppugned: the devil does not so much
envy our ^^odnesse as our glory. And therefore when he cannot ^aw us in hatred
of God, he would make us sin, that ^e might sin against God, and so fall.
The grievous^^sse of a standers fall must make him also to take heed. ^hen the
foul spirit is gone out of a man, etc. Better were (...) never to have known
the way of righteousness. The (...) when they degenerate prove the worst,
because the ^ill will take the stronger hold of them: and Gods ^^ath for their
perfidiousnesse is greater in forsaking ^^m: Examples, The angels, the sons
of God, Judas, ^^non Magus. A King how dishonorable a traitor ^^th he count
him, that will yield a town well fur^^^hed? Mors servituti anteponenda: and
bad men, when ^^^y recover a fall prove rare. Saint Peter, David, Solo(...),
Saint Paul, Saint Austine. The devil loves evil ^^ruments, and God does
detest rebellious traitors. If we cannot escape falling into sin, yet let us
by repentance escape falling into plagues; for God commonly does give space for
repentance, that in judging our selves we be not judged of the Lord. We stand
in need of his mercy so soon as ever we sin: but as a Tenant that has a
clause of reentry in his lease, when he breaks his covenant, makes his lease
voydable, rather then void: so are sinners depriveable, not deprived actually:
o^^ right unto all Gods promises is suspended, but restitut^ in integrum is not
denied. It was an error in the Novatians to think otherwise: yea,
irrepentance is a greate^ sin then any other: for to despise Gods mercy is
much worse, Romans 2.4, 5. Je^. 13.16.
then to provoke his justice. Romans 2. Therefore Jeremy says, Give glory unto
God, before it be dark, and your feet fall. Cha. 18.7. Ecclus. 9.5.
This falling into plagues is sudden, (...) dolor parturientis. When men say,
Peace, etc. ut pisces ^^mo, Cha. 5.5.
Eccl. 9. therefore take heed of this fall. De propiti^^ pecca to noli esse
securus, Eccl. 5.

The last Note is, that this Precept is of as long continuance, as our
possibility to fall: for he that persever^^ to the end, shall be saved: He
which overcomes, unto his will I give, Phi. 1.10. Col. 1.23.
etc. He which striveth lawfully, and is without offense unto the day of the
Lord, Phil. 1.10. If we (...) in the faith, rooted and grounded, Col. 1. si in
bono persti^^ris. Romans 11.20 21, 22.
Romans 11. We are made partakers of Christ, if we h^^^ fast the substance, etc.
statio de militari exemplo nomen (...) cepit: nam and militia Dei sumus; utique
nulla laetitia (...) tristitia obveniens castris stationem rescindit; nam
laetitia (...) bentius, tristitia sollicitius administrabit disciplinam. T^^
Philosophers comparing of a constant man to a Dy^ which ever falls upon a firm
basis, is worth the observi^^.

The sum of all is this; Lay together the parts: (...) Admonition issuing out
of all is that which Saint P^^^ uses to the Hebrews, Wherefore we ought
diligently to (...) heed to those things which we have heard, lest at any (...)
(...), we run out like water. Humidum suis ter^^^ non continetur, it cannot
stand: for if this word spo^^ ^o the Corinthians was steadfast, and their
disobedience thereunto has received a just recompense of reward; ^how shall we
escape, if we neglect the time of our salvation?

In good examples, he that follows another man's steps deserves the less
praise: but in evil, he that imitateth a wicked man, whose end he has seen
according to his deeds, deserves the more stripes; and why? nimium praeceps
est, says Saint Cyprian, qui transire contendit, ^ubi alium inspexerit
recidisse; and vehementer infraenis est, cui non incutitur timor, alio pereunte.

It is too true a Note of Machiavell; that we commend good men, when we read
their lives, but follow the worst. Ecclus. 21.10.
Wherefore follow the counsel of the Son of Syrach 21, 10. and walk not in
stony places. Take heed lest there be in any of you an heart of infidelity. Let
us make straight steps unto our feet, and strengthen our feeble knees: and
confirm O Lord, that which thou have wrought in us; in King and people.

Gracious God, thou have opened unto us our manifold infirmity, and thy
sovereign remedy. Grant that the sense of our weakness may stir up our
dullness to try our state, and grow up in grace, by that help which thou only
can give, and make fruitful in us; that truly having, and jointly using
both outward and inward means, we may upon a sound faith, and zealous charity,
so stand steadfast in thy word, that hereafter we may stand boldly before the
judgment seat of Christ, and blessedly before the throne of God. To him that
is able, etc.

A SERMON PREACHED AT SAINT CROSS NEAR WINCHESTER.
MATTHEW. 24. But as the days of Noah were, so shall the coming of the son of
man be.


A Wise man says Solomon, sees a plague, and hides himself, but fools
run on and are punished. In which words you may perceave that the fool is
not challenged for not discerning of, but not providing against the plague;
that plague which ^e wise man not only foresaw, but also prevented. Providence
then and improvidence make no small difference between a wise man and a fool:
it is so in worldly ^^ings. Much more in heavenly, but specially in the Ar^^^le
of the last judgment day. To which purpose our ^^viour in the next Chapter,
uses the parable of the foo^^^h and wise Virgins: both knew of the
Bridegroomes coming, and both went out to meet him, but only the Wise carried
oil in their Lamps, but the foolish when they should have trimmed theirs had
not wherewithal. Many men do believe that a judgment day shall be, they make
themselves ready against that day come. Now least of this improvidence we
should impute the cause not to our selves, but to the judge, as if he did
surprise us before he had forewarned us; he plainly foresheweth the signs by
which we may know that he is coming, and proposes fearful examples of their
state whom at his coming he shall find unprovided, and this example is the
argument of my Text: It is set down by way of a comparison, and the comparison
is of a world to a world. The world that was to the world that is; that that
was drowned, to this that shall be burnt. A comparison the^ here is. But in
this comparison we must note, the proportion of the parties, a proportion of
very great correspondency, but yet of great inequality. As it fared with one,
so shall it with the other, but though the fare be like, ye^ shall it not be in
the same degree: the latter shall be the worser: that which ascends to a
greater height of si^, shall also descend unto a lower depth of plagues. But
(...) us begin with the comparison, and so come to the proportion of the parts.
Christ compares this world unto the Old, that within his own person he shall
judge, (...) that which was destroyed in the days of Noah, and indeed there is
some answerablenesse between Noah a^ Christ. Saint Peter in the first of his
third Epistle, p^^teth us in mind of it, and the answerablnesse stands in
two things. The first in the prophecy that Lamec ga^^ to Noah's name, Genesis
5. called his sons name N^^^ which is by interpretation Rest, for he says
Lamec, sh^^ give us rest from our labors and our sorrows: and (...) earth
which God had cursed: and does not Saint P^ say, that all creatures do groan
together with us being s^^ject to vanity, for our sin, and look for a Noah,
that (...) for Christ? That shall set them free into the ^^bertie of^^ sons
of God, Romans 8. Yea our Savior Christ calls, the eleventh of Matthew. Come
unto me all ye that labor and be heavy ladon, and I will ease you, I will
refresh you; take my yoke upon you, and you shall find rest for your souls.

The second point wherein they are answerable is the Arc Noah built, even the
figure of our Baptism as St. Peter speaks, Or of the Church whereinto we are
received by Baptism. For the Arc was built according to the dimensions of the
body of a man to figure the mystical man. I mean the Church, which is the
body of Christ. Out of the Arc could there be no salvation corporal, no more
can there be out of this Church salvation spiritual. But we must heed the
confounding of the true Arc with Saint Peter's ship. The Catholic Church
with that Church of Rome, for the privilege of the whole Church, and the true
Church, they appropriate to themselves being but a part, and but the worst
part. Finally, the same flood that drowned the world, did bear up Noah's Arc,
and the same fire that shall consume the world, shall make the Church of God
more glorious, more illustrious, as gold is in the fire, of a different
condition from stubble. This was figured by Moses bush, and you had a taste of
it in the fiery furnace, the flames whereof consumed them that threw in the
three Children, but could not singe their hair or clothes, that lived and
walked in the midst of it: you see some reason of the comparison drawn from
Noah and Christ, the Arc and the Church, the sloud and the fire. But we must
take a more general lesson that is insinuated in the comparison, which is,
that God in all judgments past gives us a fore-tast of his judgments that are
to come. So does Saint Jude send men unto Angels. God spared not Angels, he
will not spare men. Jeremy sends Judah to Israel, Jerusalem is of no better
condition then Shiloh, Saint Paul sends the Gentiles to the Jews: If the
true Olive were broken off: how can the graft of the wild Olive (if it be as
unfruitful) presume that it shall escape the fire? Our Christ here sends a
world to a world, the world that is, to that that was, showing that they have
no discharge from Gods plagues, that make no conscience of keeping Gods laws:
there is no prerogative of nature, be we as excellent as the Angels, no
dispensation by Covenant, be we as near God as was the seed of Abraham, no
advantage of the Gospel above the Law.

Though the Gentile be in his full age, and the Jew in his nonage, though we
have the truth whereof they had the Types: for there is no respect of persons
with God. Cuivis contingere potest quod cuiquam potest. Saint Paul in the tenth
Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians gives us this Item, all things
happened unto our forefathers. No Types but they were written to admonish us
upon whom the ends of the World are come. Our case then is not better then
others, nay if there be any advantage, either of virtue or vice, it is on
their part, not on ours; for it is an undoubted rule that in well doing he that
follows another deserves less praise, because he had^ precedent to guide
him, to encourage him: but in ill doing the latter deserves the more blame then
the former, especially of Gods dislike, and his wrath manifested to dissuade
and deter, so that, he that believes after Abraham, it is well if he may go
as high as Abraham bosom: but it shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorra^, then
for Corazin and Bethsaida, for that these despised Christ. After those Cities
had been plagued for not hearing. Lo the conclusion is, Faelix quem faciunt
aliena pericula cautum.

We must make our forefathers case our case, in regar^ of sin, displeasing
God; except we mean to be i^ worser case, in regard of plagues, when we shall
be ^^sited of God. And thus much of the comparison in general. Come we now
to the proportion of the parts: a double proportion of correspondencie and
inequality. First, of the correspondencie; the correspondencie is double, as
the persons are of two sorts, bad and good. In regard of the bad, the story
does note the worlds wickedness and senselessness: their wickedness; for after
that the sons of God, had matched with the daughters of men, of them sprang
Giants: notorious outrageous wickedness. Rebels against God, Tyrants among men:
without all pity, without all charity. But the Scripture does in very
significant manner express the measure of their sin, and senselessness of
their hearts, saying of the first, that the very frame of their imaginations of
their heart was evil, and that continually even from their youth. Could there
be any spark of good in them whom the Scripture sets forth as so bad? they
were rotten at the root: for the frame of their imaginations was evil, and
that not for a moment, they were uncessantly evil, and that not in some part
of their age: but even from their youth, according to that in the 58. Psalm.
The wicked go astray even from their mothers womb. Add hereunto that which
God himself complains of, that this sin had not stinted it self within
some sew persons, but all flesh had corrupted his ways, high and low, old and
young, men and women, as it is expressly set down of Sodom and Go morrah, in
that impure siege of Lots house, so that their recoverie was desperate, when
the contagion was so general, and the more desperate in that, in so great
wickedness there appeared so great senselessness, for Gods spirit did strive
with them in his mercy, desirous for to reclaim them, but strived in vain, so
that being weary he was feign to break out into this speech, My spirit shall
strive no more with man. And yet see the bowels of a merciful God: that when
he was weary with striving, yet he did not give over striving, for unto
words he added deeds, and made Noah that was before a Preacher of
righteousness in words, to be unto them a Preacher of vengeance. But now in
deeds: to see whether he that could not persuade them to walk holily, could
strike a terror in them by building of the Arc: A visible prophecy of the
flood, to turn unto God penitently. And to this striving God allowed a large
term, even 120. years: but all was in vain, for they continued the same,
sinful and senseless: till the flood seized upon them, and took all hope of
recoverie from them. Thus it fared with the old world in regard of those
persons that were bad: and is it any better with our world? In this Chapter
Christ parallels the Jews with this world, their destruction with the
destruction of the whole, and the cause of their destruction even sin and
senselessness, he proposes as a looking glass for all: how wicked they were,
you may read in the first of Esaias, from the Crown of the head to the sole of
the foot, nothing but sores and blaines, he means not corporal but
spiritual, as you may read in the verse going before those words, where he
calls them corrupt children and seed of the wicked. In the same Chapter he
describes their senselessness showing that God gave over fatherly to correct
them, because the more they were smitten, the more they did apostatize from
him. Jeremy does speak of the like general sinfulness and senselessness, but
specially in the latter end of the book of Kings, and of the Chronicles, it is
amplified as the just cause of their Babylonian captivity, even when they were
besieged, and w^ll nigh famished, yet would they not believe that either God
was offended, or their City should be destroyed. Touching the second captivity
by the Romans, our Savior Christ briefly, but very sharply, and yet with
compassion, charge them both with sin and senselessness. O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, that killest the Prophets, a^^ stonest them that were sent unto
thee, that is their sin. how often would I have gathered thy Children
together as the hen does her chickens, but thou would not? That was the
senselessness. But what was the issue? even a sudde^ destruction from God, that
upon her might come all the righteous blood that was spilt, from the blood of
Abe^ unto the blood of Zacharias. So likewise in the Nineteenth of Luke. When
he beheld the City, he wept, and gives the reason in his prayer. O that thou
had known in this thy day, those things that belong unto thy peace! That is
their sin, but now are they hid from thine eyes, that is their senselessness.
He adds the issue: Therefore shall thine enemies cast a bank about thee,
etc. But does God enter into judgment only with the Jew, and are these only
the defects of the Jews? No, The parable made in this Chapter shows that it
reaches unto the Gentiles also: For when the Son of man comes, he shall
scarce find faith in the earth. And because iniquity shall abound, charity
shall wax cold. Sin shall be ripe even unto harvest, before Christ send the
Angels his reapers to cut down this field of the world. The world shall be
sinful, and as the Apostle speaks, The last days shall be perilous times,
men shall be lovers of themselves more then lovers of God. He goes on
particularizing their sins against the first Table, against the second,
showing that the fleshly tables of their hearts, shall scarce retain any print
of the hand writing of the spirit of God: the world does not grow more old in
regard of natural strength, then men grow old in goodness and virtue, or
rather sin grows unto his highest flood, when nature grows unto her lowest
ebb: and as men are more sinful, so are they more and more senseless,
resisting the Holy Ghost, with uncircumcised ears and hearts: the first world
strove against the Spirit of God, and no marvel, for the prophecy of Isaiah
in his eighth Chapter, which is reported by Christ and the Apostles, does
contain an inseparable property from sin, which is to make us wink with
our eyes, and stop our ears, and obdurate our hearts: that in seeing we
may see and not perceave, and in hearing we may hear and not understand, and
so the Devil does hood-winke us, and stupifie us, least we should be
converted, and so saved. Saint Paul notes it in the third Chapter of the first
Epistle to the Thessaloni^ns. Men shall c^y, Peace, peace, when sudden
desolation shall be at hand; Or as Job speaks, spend their days in pleasure,
and in a moment go down quickly to hell: so that King David's compassionate
admiration will prove true; who having described in Psalm. 73. the jollity of
the wicked, who in the height of their prosperity do open their mouth against
heaven, shows, that they are senseless of their slippery standing, and
wondering at their fault, crying out, Now do they perish suddenly, fearfully,
finally.

And indeed this world must answer that other world; it must needs be, that
they which will not neither be reclaimed nor forewarned, must be surprised. Our
Savior Christ expresses it in three fine similies. The first is of the
travel of a woman, so shall the judgment day come. Every wicked man has a
double travel; Saint James teaches it in his first chapter, Lust conceives,
and brings forth sin: that is a pleasant travel. But this womb rests
not here; for sin will not leave till it have brought forth death: that is a
painful travel, but an unexpected child: when a man is not delivered of that
which he conceived, his issue is death, when he at least expected a contented
life. But so does God overtake a sinner: even as Job also resembling sin to
sweet meat in the mouth, shows that it proves the gall of Aspes in the
stomach.

The second simile, is of a Thief; whereunto Christ resembles the judgment
day: not only to express his unexpected coming, but the event of his
judgment, which will rob us of all that wherein we set our wicked hearts
delight: you read it in the parable of the man whose ground bearing plenty, he
was to enlarge his barnes, but he adds his wicked affection, grovelling upon
earthly things; when he encourages his soul to eat and drink, because it had
provision for many years; but the Oracle checkes him, Thou fool, this night
shall they take thy soul from thee; then whose shall all these things be?
Dives, for all his soft raiment and delicate fare, had nothing left him when he
was summoned by death to shroud him from, or refresh him in the flames of hell.

The third simile, is of the snare of a Fowler or a Hunter, which takes the
beast, or the bird; who catching after the pray, is caught by the engine: and
Saint Paul tells us, that in committing sin, we do receive the sting of
death. The condition of Adams sin attends the sin of every son of Adam:
whiles eating the forbidden fruit, he looked to have eyes open, that he might
behold himself as a God: he found indeed how he was circumvented by the
equivocation of the phrase: that to be a god knowing good and evil, is but a
periphrasis of the devil, and indeed he became unexpectedly, but justly, a god
like unto him, and so shall all his sons that impiously transgress Gods
laws; hear that dreadful voice, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire,
provided for the Devil and his angels.

You have heard the proportion of correspondency so far as it concerns the
bad; now must you hear it so far as it concerns the good; for though the
world were so sinful and so senseless, yet was there a Noah left, and his
family: but one Noah, and one family. There was a Noah that found favor with
God, and was righ^eous in the sight of God. God never shows only justice, but
ever mingles it with some mercy. Though all should justly perish, yet some
shall be mercifully saved. ^n a whole wicked world, God will have some Noah:
and that he may fit him, he will give his holy Spirit un^o him. Noah had found
no grace with God, had he not ^eceived the grace of righteousness from God.
But Saint Paul expresses in the eleventh of the Hebrews, the two ^arts of
Noah's piety; which was reverence, and con^^dence: reverence, in making the
Arc; confidence, in ^sing the Arc: not only obeying Gods word in pro^iding
the means to save himself, but also using it when ^^e time came;
notwithstanding others, so many others ^id despise it. Whereupon followed two
effects, that he ^as not surprised by the flood; and as the Apostle says, he
condemned the world. You have heard that there was a Noah, but mark that there
was but one Noah and his family; a small number to a whole world, but such is
the excess of the wicked above the good: so many more are there that perish,
then those that are saved: it was so in the old world, so it shall be in this: to
follow the parable of the Jews and the Gentiles: but a remnant of the Jews
are saved. The Prophet compares it to a gleaning after a vintage, or a harvest.
Whereas the wicked are compared unto the stars of heaven, and to the sands of
the Sea, and to a whole harvest. This is meant by the parable of Gods choosing;
but one tree of all the forest, one Dove of all the birds, one City of all
the world: but consider that there is one, though there be but one; for God
will save a flock, though it be but a little flock: for the elects sake he
will hasten his judgment, lest there should remain no flesh to be saved. The
world little thinks upon that which is a grounded truth, that for the godlies
sake God forbeares to come to judgment. But in Romans 4. it is set down
plainly, when the souls that lay, under the Altar cried unto God, saying, How
long Lord righteous and true, do thou defer to revenge our blood upon the
world? answer is given unto them, that they must rest for a while, till the
number of their brethren was sulfilled; for then shall be an end of all. When
Jerusalem is fully built, the body of Christ has all his members, and the true
Olive has all his branches. Little therefore do the wicked consider that they
bane themselves, while they persecute the godly: For Obadiahs house was
blessed, whiles it was the place of the Arc: and so were the Roman Emperors
whiles they cherished the Italians. But as God will have a remnant, so it will
be but a sma^ remnant: there will be faith, but scarce faith, as Christ
speaks; and charity, though it will not be quite dead it will be very cold:
which makes that Romish conce^^ very frivolous, which makes the most
illustrious Church to be the true Church: whereas Christ answers truly to the
questioners, that demanded, whether there should be many saved; that the gate
is wide, and the way broad that leads to destruction, and many there be that
find it; but the gate is straight, and the way narrow, that leads unto life,
and few there be that find it. The conclusion of the correspondency is, that a
few, though but a few, shall imitate Noah in his reverence, and likewise in his
confidence; Observing the means prescribed by God, and trusting perfectly in
the promises of God, Saint Peter joins them both, when he makes Baptism an
antitype of the Arc; when he shows that Baptism has not only the putting
away of the filth of the flesh, which is the external washing, but also the
interrogation of a good conscience unto God, through the resurrection of Jesus
Christ: Christ means the same, when he says, that this little flock shall
watch the signs of his coming; and also they lift up their heads with joy,
knowing that their salvation draws near. The issue of their reverence and
confidence is, they shall be saved; they shall be taken up to meet Christ, and
ever to be with him: they shall enter into their masters joy, and be made
partakers of the marriage feast.

You have heard of the correspondency; but though in the comparison there be so
good a correspondency, yet must we consider withal, a great inequality; as
great an inequality of the things, as there is of the persons; I mean the
persons of Noah and Christ: as far as the son of man does exceed that man,
so far shall the end of this world exceed the end of that; whether you
respect the destruction of the bad, or the salvation of the good. In regard of
the destruction of the bad, there shall be four great differences.

The first is, That world was destroyed with water; this shall be destroyed
with fire; and who knows not how much more terrible fire is then water?

But which is the second, That water wasted only the earth, and those things
that lived upon the earth; ^ut this shall waste both heaven and earth, and
whatsoever is: I except Christ's little flock in either heaven or earth. If the
sight of the Deluge were fearful, how much more fearful shall this
combustion of the whole be, when it is compared to the inundation of a part: a
part which Astronomy proves to be so little in comparison of the whole.

Add hereunto the third, that of the wicked, That destruction was but
partial; but this shall be total Then there was at least a Cham, a seed of
the wicked; that escaping might be an example to reclaim the future wicked,
and indeed, the voice of a Nebuchadnezzar or an Antiochus experiencing and
acknowledging the justice of God, will in probability work more then the voice
of Moses, or Daniel or Judas Maccabeus to reclaim the wicked. God therefore at
that time was pleased to try also this means, and preserved not only a Sem,
but also a Cham. But in this last destruction God saves not so much as one
Cham, not a goat left among the sheep, if there be but one that wants his
wedding garment, the master of the feast will epsy him, and away with him, the
corn will be clean vnmowed from the Chafe, and the gold purified from all
dross. Add hereunto the last point, that destruction was but temporal, this
final, that that was but temporal, so some understand. Saint Peter 1. Epist.
4. but this is undoubtedly eternal, for the sentence is, Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire: no recall of the sentence, no recoverie of the state: so Noah
saved, to be the hope of the second world, as the book of Wisdom speaks Chap.
14. You have here the inequality in regard of the bad, and in regard of the
good, there is the same inequality also that fire shall as wonderfully preserve
them, as it fearfully destroys the wicked. There shall be a general
renovation of heaven and earth, wherein dwells righteousness, as there was a
combustion of the other, heaven and earth wherein dwelt wickedness. And in
this heaven and earth shall be no unclean thing, and that which is purified
shall remain so for ever, even blessed for ever, entirely and eternally
blessed, whereas the deliverance by Noah was but temporal, it was but
partial, it was from a death but only of the body, and that only for a time,
and that to live a mortal life, so that is, and so must have his destruction,
that in that example, we read that God is displeased with sin, that he
powers forth his vengeance upon sin, but how far he is displeased, how
much vengeance shall be exacted, we may guess it in the former world, but we
cannot thoroughly understand, that correspondency does not amount unto an
equality. Only for a close of all, he that reads that, may well believe
this: because that is a pledge of this, and our best course is to follow
Christ's counsel. Luke 21. Take heed least at any time your hearts be
oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness, and that day come upon you unawares.
For as a snare shall it come upon all the inhabitants of this world. Let us
watch therefore and pray that we may be worthy to escape the things that then
shall come, and stand before the son of man: for as it was in the days of
Noah, so shall it be at the coming of the Son of man.

Grant gracious Lord, that denying all ungodlines and worldly lusts, we may so
reverence thy word and depend on thy promise with such a confidence, that we be
neither sinful nor senseless, and so surprised with thy just wrath; but may
watchfully look for, and earnestly hasten unto the blessed appearing of our
glorious Judge and Savior, Jesus Christ.

FINIS.
IMPRIMATVR.

THOMAS BROWN.
APRIL. 16. 1640.

