A Fort for the afflicted. Wherein are ministered many notable and excellent
remedies against the storms of tribulation.

Written chiefly for the comfort of Christ's little flock, which is the small
number of the Faithful, by John Knoxe.

John. 16. 33 In the world ye shall have affliction, but be of good comfort:
I have overcome the world. Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the
Vintree, by Thomas Dawson, 1580.

To the Religious Reader.
WHo art thou (O Christian) that being sick in soul, and desire to be
sound? Sorrowful in spirit, and crauest comfort? unquiet in mind, and seek
to be at rest? wounded in conscience and would be in safety? tormented in
thought, and longest for relief? Who art thou (I say) that having offended thy
God, and art therefore punished? tried with tribulation, and criest out to be
refreshed? visited with affliction, and feign would be delivered? Get thee
to Gods word, and there learn thy lesson: hear his holy Gospel preached,
and thereby receive instruction: peruse and ponder, examine and consider,
meditate and exercise thy self in the good books of Gods faithful servants,
and they shall teach thee wisdom.

And among all books tending to this (...) Christian^ to be embraced and
followed, this notable exposition of that zealous man of God, Master John
Knoxe upon the sixth Psalm, containing sundry comfortable and excellent
doctrines, in number many, in matter weighty, under the person of that
Princely Prophet David, and after his example and pattern too be applied unto
all such as are touched either in mind or body, with any kind of cross or
calamity, to direct them to the path of patience, and to show them by a
president, unto whom they must run for refuge in the time of their visitation,
if they desire either partly too have their miseries mitigated, or themselves
wholly from troubles to be delivered.

The benefit of this Book belongs to every particular member of Christ's
Mystical body, and they only have the grace to use this and the like at
convenient seasons. Moreover, the manifold comfortes of this worthy Authors
most fruitful Epistle, written for the consolation of Christ's afflicted
flock, are of no less force and virtue, in cases of calamity, then his other
treatise: the one, commodious, the other necessary, both beneficial.

Thine to do thee good, Abraham Flemming.

To his beloved Mother, I. K. sends greeting in the Lord.
THE desire that I have to hear of your continuance, which Christ Jesus in the
day of this his battle which shortly shall end to the confusion of his proud
enemies, neither by tongue, neither yet by pen can I express, beloved Mother.
Assuredly it is such that it vanquisheth, and overcomes all remembrance and
solicitude, which the flesh uses to take for feeding and defense of herself.
For in every realm and nation God will stir up some one or other to minister
those things that appertain to this wretched life, and if men will cease to
do their office, yet will he send his ravens: so that in every place,
percha^ce I may find some feathers to my body. But alas where I shall find
children to be begotten unto God by the word of life, that can I not presently
consider. And therefore the spiritual life of such as sometime boldly professed
Christ (god knows) is to my heart more dear then all the glory, riches, and
honor in the earth. And the falling back of such men, as I hear daily to
turn back to that idol again, is to me more dolorous, then I trust the
corporal death shall be, when ever it shall come at God his appointment. Some will
ask then, why did I fly? assuredly I cannot tell. But of one thing I am sure
that the fear of death was not the chiefest cause of my flying, I trust that
one cause has been to let me see with my corporal eyes, that al had not a
true heart unto Christ, that in the day of rest and peace, bare a fair face.
But my flying is no matter, by God his grace I may come to battle, before all the conflict be ended. And haste the time O Lord, at thy good pleasure, that
once again my tongue may praise thy holy name before the congregation, if it
were but even in the very hour^ of death.

I have written a large treatise touching the plagues that assuredly shall
apprehende obstinate Idolaters and those also that dissembling with them, deny
Christ, in obeying to idolatry, which I would you should read diligently. If
it come not to you from the South, I shall provide that it shall come to you by
some other means. Touching your continual trouble given unto you by God, for
better purpose then we can presently epsy: I have begun unto you the
exposition of the sixth Psalm. And as God shall grant unto me opportunity and
health of body (which now is very weak, I purpose to absolve the same.

The Argument.
IT appears that David after his offense fell into some great and dangerous
sickness, in the which he was sore tormented, not so much by corporal
infirmities, as by susteining and drinking some large portion of the cup of God
his wrath: and albeit that he was delivered (as then) from the corporal death,
yet it appears that long after (yea and I verily believe that all his life)
he had some sense and remembrance of the horrible fear which before he
suffered in the time of his sickness. And therefore the holy Ghost speaking in
him, shows unto us what be the complaints of God his elect under such cross
how diversely they are tormented, how that they appear to have no sure hold
of GOD, but to be abject from him: and yet what are the signs, that they are
Gods elect. And so does the holy Ghost to teach us to seek help of God, even
when he is punishing, and appears to be angry with us.

The sixth Psalm.
1 O Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger, nor chastise me in thy hot
displeasure.
David sore troubled both in body and spirit, lamentably prays unto God:
which that you may more surely understand, I will attempt to expres in more
words. David speaks unto God, as he would speak unto a man: in this
manner.

O Lord, The dolorous complaint of David in his trouble.
I feel what is the weight and strength of thy displeasure, I have experience
how intolerable is the heaviness of thine hand, which I most wretched man
have provoked against my self, by my horrible sins. Thou whippest me and
scourgest me bitterly, yea, thou so vexest me, that unless thou withdraw
thine hand, and remit thy displeasure, there rests nothing unto me, but
utterly to be confounded. I beseech thee O Lord, His prayer.
rage not, neither be commoued against me above measure, remit and take away
thy heavy His confession.
displeasure, which by mine iniquity I have provoked against my self.

This appears to have been the meaning of David in his first words,
whereby he declares him self to have felt the gre^uous wrath of God before
that he burst forth to these words. In which first is to be noted^ that the
Prophet does acknowledge all troubles, that he sustained as well in body as
in spirit, to be sent of God, and not to happen unto him by chance: for
herein peculiarly differ the sons of God, from the reprobate, that the
sons of God know both prosperity and adversity, to be the gifts of GOD
only, as Job does witness. And therefore in prosperity commonly they are not
insolent, nor proud, but even in the day of joy and rest they look for
trouble and sorrow. Neither yet in the time of adversity, are they altogether
left without comfort, but by one mean or other God shows unto them that
the trouble shall have end. Where contrariwise the reprobate taking all things
of chance, or else making an idol of their own wisdom, in prosperity are so
puffed up, that they forget God, without any care that trouble should follow:
And in adversity they are so deiect, that they look for nothing bu^ Hell.

Here must I put you in mind (dearly beloved) how often you and I have
talked together of these present days, till neither of us both could refrain
tears, when no such appearance there was seen by man. How often have I said
unto you, that I looked daily for trouble, and that I wondered at it, that so
long I did escape it? What moved me to refuse, and that with displeasure of al
men, even of those that best loved me, those high promotions that were offered
by him, who^ God has taken from us for our offenses? Assuredly the foresight
of troubles to come. How often have I said unto you that the time would not be
long, that England would give me bread? Advise with the last letter, that I
wrote unto your brother in law, and consider, what is therein contained.

While I had this trouble, you had the greater, sent (I doubt not) to us both
of God: that in that great rest, and (as we call it) when the gospel triumphed,
we should not be so careless and so insolent, as others were. Who albeit they
professed Christ in mouth, yet sought they nothing but the world with hand,
with foot, with counsel and wisdom. And albeit at this present our comfort
appears not, yet before all the plagues be powered forth, it shall be known
that there is a God, who takes care for his own. Secondarily is to be noted,
God his very elect sometimes accuse God.
that the nature and ingenie of the very sons of God in the time of their
trouble, is, to impute unto God some other affection, then there is or can be in
him toward his children. And sometime to complain upon God, as that he did
those things that in very deed he cannot do, to his elect. David and Job
often complain that God has left them, was become their enemy, regarded not
their prayers, and took no heed to deliver them. And yet impossible it is,
that God either shall leave his chosen, or that he shall despise the humble
petitions of such, as do call upon his support. But such complaints are the
voices of the flesh, wherewith God is not offended, to the forsaking and
reiection of his elect, but pardons them among other innumerable infirmities
and sins. And therefore (dearly beloved) despair you not, albeit the flesh
sometime burst out into heavy complaints, as it were accusing God: you are not
more perfect then was David and Job. And you cannot be so perfect as Christ
himself was, who upon the cross cried: My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? Consider, dear mother, how lamentable and horrible were these
words, to the only son of God. And David in the 88. Psalm. (which for better
understanding, I desire you read) co^plaineth upon God, that night and day he
had cried, and that yet he was not delivered But (says he) my soul is
replenished with dolor, I am as a man without strength. I am like unto those
that are gone down into the pit, of whom thou have no more mind, like unto
those that are cut of by thy hand: Thou have put me in a deep dungeon, al
thy wrath lies upon me: Why leauest thou me, Lord? why hydest thou thy face
from me? thou have removed al my friends from me, thou have made me odious
unto them. And thus he ends his Psalm and complainte without mention of
any comfort at al received. And Job in diverse places of his book makes even
the like complaints, sometime saying, that God was his enemy, and had set him
as it were a mark to shoot at, and therefore that his soul desired the very
destruction.

These things I recite unto you, dearly beloved, understanding what have been
your troubles heretofore: and knowing that Satan will not cease now to
persuade to your tender conscience, that none of God his elect has been in
like case as you are, but by these presidentes and many other places, which now
to collect I have no opportunity, it plainly does appear that God his chosen
vessels have suffered the like temptations. I remember that often you have
complained upon the grudging and murmuring that you found, which in your self
fearing that it provoked God to more displeasure: Behold and consider dear
mother, what God has borne with his saints before: will he not bear the same
with you, being most sorry for your imperfections? He cannot other wise do^.
But as his wisdom has made us al of one mass and nature, earth and earthly:
and as he has redeemed us with one price, the blood of his only son, so he
according to his promise like mercifully pardons doneth the offenses of al
those that call upon the name of the Lord Jesus, Romans 10.
of those I mean that refuse all other Justice but his alone.

But to our matter of these presidents, plain it is that God his elect, before
you have suffered the like cross, as presently you suffer, that they have
complained as you complain, that they have thought themselves abject, as you
have thought, and yet may think your self: and yet nevertheless they were
sure in GOD his favor. Hope dear mother and look you for the same, hope I
say against hope.

How horrible the pain is to suffer that cross, can none express, except
such as have proved it: fearful it is for the very pain it self: but most
fearful it is, for that the godly so tormented, judge God to be angry, in
furor and in rage against them, as is before expressed. Seeing we have found
this cross to appertain to God his children, profitable it shall be, and
necessary to search out the causes of the same. Plain it is that not only
God works al to the profit of his elect, but also that he woorketh it of
such love toward them and with such wisdom, that otherwise things could
not be: and this to understand, is very profitable, partly to satisfy the
grudging complaints of the flesh, which in trouble commonly does question,
Why does God this or that? And albeeit the flesh in this earth can never be
fully satisfied: but even as hunger and thirst from time to time assaulteth it,
so do others more gross imperfections, yet the inward man which sobbeth unto
God (knowing the causes why the very just are so troubled and torm^nted in
body and spirit in this life) receives some comfort and gets some stay
of God his mercy, by knowing the causes of the trouble. Al causes may I not
here recite: but two or three of the principal will I touch.

The first is to provoke in God his elect an ha^^ed of sin, and unfeignedly
repentance of the same (...) the which cause if it were rightly considered,
were sufficient to make all spirit^all and co^porall troubles tolerable unto
us. For seeing it is so that without repentance no man does attain to GOD his
mercy (for it is now appointed by him whose wisdom is infinite, I mean of
those that are converted to the feeling of sin) and that without mercy no
man can come to joy: is not that which causes us to understand what repentance
is, gladly to be received and embraced? Repentance contains within it a
knowledge of sin, a dolor for it, and a hatred of it together with hope of
mercy.

It is very evident that God his own children have not at al times the right
knowledge of sin: that is to say, how odious it is before God: Much less
have they the dolor of it, and hatred of it. Which if they had, as they could
not sin, so could they never be able, having that same very sense of God his
wrath against sin, to delight in any thing that appertains to the flesh,
more then the woman whom God has appointed by the help of man, to produce
mankind, could ever delight in man, if at al times she felt the same pangues
of dolor and pain, that she does in her childebyrth. And therefore does God
for such purposes as are known to himself, sometime suspend from his own
children, this fore said sense and feeling of his wrath against sin. As no
doubt, here he did with David, not only before his sin, but also sometime
after.

But least the sons of God should become altogether insolent like the
children of the world, he sends unto them some portion of this foresaid
cup: in drinking whereof they come to such knowledge as they never had
before. For first they feel the wrath of God working against sin: whereby
they learn the justice of God, to be even such as he himself pronounces
that he may suffer no sin unpunished. And thus begin they as well to morn
for their offenses, as also to hate the same, which otherwise they could never
do: for nothing is so pleasing to the corrupt nature of man, as is sin: and
things pleasing to nature, cannot nature of it self hate.

But in this conflict, as God his childr^ feel torments, and those most
grievous, as they mourn, and by God his holy spirit begin to hate sin: so
come they also to a more high knowledge: that is, that man cannot be savior
to himself, for how shall he save himself from hell, that cannot save himself
from anguish and trouble here in the flesh, while he yet has strength, wit,
reason, and understanding: and therefore must he be compelled in his heart,
to acknowledge, that there is another mediator between God his justice and
mankind, then any that ever descended of the corrupt state of Adam, yea then
any creature, that only is a creature: and by the knowledge of this mediator
at the last, the afflicted comes by some sense and lively feeling of God his
great mercy declared unto mankind, albeeit they be not so sensible as is the
pain: and albeeit that torment by this knowledge is not hastily removed, yet
has the patient some hope, that al dolor shall have end: and that is the
cause why he sobbeth and gro^eth, for an end of pain, why also he
blasphemeth not God, but cries for his health even in the midst of his
anguishe. How profitable this is to the children of God, and what it works
in them as the plain scripture teaches, so experience lets us understand.

Verily even so profitable as it is to mourn for sin, to hate the same, to
know the mediator betwixt God and man, and finally to know his loving mercy
toward them: So necessary is it to drink this foresaid cup. What it
works in them, none knows but such as taste it.

In David it is plain, that it wrought humility and abiection of himself.

It took from him the great trust he had in himself. It made him daily to
fear and earnestly to pray, that after he should not offend in like manner,
or be left in his own hands. It made him lowly, although he was a king: it
made him merciful, when he might have been rigorous: Yea and it made him to
mourn for Absolon his wicked son. But to the rest of the causes.

The second cause why God permits his elect to taste of this bitter cup,
is to raise up our hearts from these transitory vanitles: for so foolish and
forgetful of nature, and so addict are we to the things that are present, that
unless we have another schoolemaister then manly reason, and some other
spur, and perpetual remembrance, then any which we can choose or devise our
selves: We neither can desire, nor yet rightly remember, the departure from
this vain and wicked world, to the kingdom that is prepared.

We are commanded daily to pray, Thy kingdom come: which petition asks
that sin may cease, that death may be devoured, that transitory troubles may
have an end, that Satan may be trodden under foot, that the whole body of
Christ, may be restored to life, liberty, and joy, that the powers and
kingdoms of this earth may be resolved and destroyed. And that God the father
may be all in all things after that his son Christ Jesus our Savior has
rendered up the kingdom for ever.

These things are we al commanded to pray for: but which of us in the time
when al abundeth with us (when neither body not spirit has trouble) from our
heart, and without dissimulation can wish these things? verily none. With our
mouth we may speak the words, but the heart cannot thirst the things to
come, except we be in such state that worldly things be unsavory unto us. And
so can they never be but under the Cross. Neither yet under al kind of Crosses
as are worldly things unpleasant: for in poverty riches do greatly delight
many. For although they lack them, yet desire they to have them: and so are
they neither unsavory nor unpleasant. For things that we earnestly covet, are
not unpleasant unto us. But when things appertaining to the flesh, are
sufficiently ministered unto us, and yet none of them can molifie our anguishe
nor pain: then sobbeth the heart unto God, and unfeignedly wishes an end of
misery. And therefore our heavenly father of his infinite wisdom, to hold
us in continual remembrance, that in this wretched world there is no rest,
permits and suffers us to be tempted and tried with this cross, that
with an unfeigned heart we may desire not only an end of our troubles (for that
shall come to us by death) but also of all the troubles of the church of God,
which shall not be before the coming again of the Lord Jesus.

The third cause I collect of Moses words

In these words are two things appertaining unto our matter most worthy to
be noted. First that Moses says that the Lord will not at once, but by
little and little destroy those nations, adding the cause, least perchance
(says he) the wild beasts be multiplied, and make vp^o are against thee.
The second that when they had abundance that then they should declare
themselves mindeful of God his benefits, and that they should not think that
their own power, wisdom, nor provision was any cause that they had the
fruition of those commodities.

By these Presidents the holy Ghost teaches them, that like as they did not
possess, nor obtain the first interest of that land by their own strength,
but that the Lord God did freely give it to them, so likewise were they not
able to brook nor enjoy the same, by any power of themselves.

For albeeit that God should have in one moment destroyed al their enemies:
yet if he should not have been their perpetual safegarde, the wild beasts,
should have troubled them. And if they had demanded the question, why will thou not destroy the wild beasts also? he answers, least thou forget the
Lord thy God, and say in thy heart, my strength has obtained this quietness
to my self.

Consider, dearly beloved, that such things as the spirit of God foresawe
dangerous and damnable unto them, the same things are to be feared in us: for all things happened unto them in figures. They were in Egypt corporally punished
by a cruel tyrant: we were in spiritual bondage of the Devil, by sin and
incredulity. God gave to them a land that flowed with milk and honey, for
which they never labored: God has opened to us, the knowledge of Christ Jesus
which we never deserved, nor yet hoped for the same. They were not able to
defend the land, after they were possessed in it: we are not able, to retain
our selves, in the true knowledge of Christ, but by his grace only. Some
enemies were left to exercise the^. Sin is left in us, that we may learn to
fight. If enemies had not been, wild beasts should have multiplied amongst
them. If such beasts as we think most do trouble us, were not permitted so
to do, worse beasts should have dominion over us, that is to wit: Trust in
our self, arrogancy, oblivion, and forgetfulness of that estate from which GOD
has delivered us, together with a light estimation of all Christ's merits,
which sins are the beasts that (alas do devour no small number of me^.
Neither yet let any man think, that if al kind of crosses were taken from us,
during the time that we bear the earthly Image of Adam, that we should be
more perfect in using the spiritual gifts of God: to wit, the remission of
sins, his free grace, and Christ his justice, for which we never labored:
than that people should have been, in using of those corporal gifts. And
Moses says unto them, Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God. He who
knows the secrets of hearts, gives not his precepts in vain: if man his
heart had not been prone and ready to forget God, and to glory in his own
strength, God had not given this precept, and repeated it so diligently. For
he neither does nor speaks in vain, but knowing what things be most able
to blind and deceive man, the wisdom of God by his contrary precepts,
gives him warning of the same. Experience has taught us how such beasts
have troubled the church of God: to speak nothing of the time of the
Prophets, of the Apostles, or of the primitive church.

What trouble made Pelagius by his heresy? affirming that man by natural power
and free will, might fulfill the law of GOD, and deserve for himself remission
and grace. And to come a little near to our own age, has it not been openly
preached and affirmed in schools, and set out by writings, that only faith
does not justify, but that works do also justify? Has it not been
taught, that good works may go before faith, and may provoke God to give his
graces? What has been taught of man his merits, and of the works of
supererogation: some openly affirming that some men have wrought more good
works, then were necessary to their own salvation? I pray you consider if
these men said not: our hand and our strength has given these things unto
us. What were these Diuelishe heresies, and others that have infected the whole
Papistrie? Assuredly they were cruel and ravenous beasts, able to devour the
souls of al those upon whom they get the upper hand: but the merciful
providence of our God, willing our salvation, will not suffer us, to come to
that unthankfulness and oblivion. And therefore here he permits us, of
our enemies, with his Apostle Paul to be suffered, to the end that we may
mourn for sin, and hate the same, that we may know the only mediator,
and the dignity of his office, that we may unfeignedly thirst the coming of
the Lord Jesus, and that we neither be presumptuous, lightly esteeming
Christ his death: neither yet unmindful of out former estate and miseries. And
so this cup is as it were a medicine prepared by the wisdom of our eternal
Physician, who only knows the remedies of our corrupt nature. Aduerte and
mark, dear mother, that al comes to us, for our most singular profit. It
is a medicine, and therefore presently it cannot be pleasing. But how gladly
would we use, and receive, when the bodies were sick, how unpleasant and
bitter soever it were, to drink, that medicine which would remove sickness,
and restore health? But Oh how much more ought we, with patience and
thanksgiving, to receive this medicine of our fathers hands, that from our
soul remoueth many mortal diseases, his holy Ghost so working by the same:
such as is pride, presumption, contempt of grace, and unthankfulness? which
be the very mortal diseases, that by unbelief do kill the soul: And does
restore unto us lowliness, fear, invocation of God his name, remembrance of
our own weakness, and of God his infinite benefit by Christ received. Which
be the very evident signs, that Jesus Christ lives in us: (...) signs and
tokens of those presidents have appeared in you, and in others that be in your
company, since your first profession of Christ, it needs me not to
rehearse. God grant that the eyes of men be not blinded to their own
perdition. But to our purpose, dearly beloved, accept this cup from the
hands of our heavenly father, and albeit your pains be almost intolerable,
yet cast your self, because you have none other refuge, before the throne of
God his mercy, and with the Prophet David being in like trouble, say unto him:

2 Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak, O Lord, hear me, for all my
bones are vexed. Now proceeds David in his prayer, adding certain causes,
why he should be heard, and obtain his petitions: but first we will speak of
his prayers as they be in order through this whole Psalm. David in summ^
desires 4. things, in this his vehem^t trouble: in the first verse he asks
that God-punishe him not in his heavy displeasure and wrath.

In the second verse he asks that GOD should have mercy upon him: and in
the third verse he desires that he should heal him: and in the fourth verse
he asks that God should return unto him, and that he should save his soul:
every one of these things, were so necessary unto David, that lacking any one
of them, he judges himself unfortunate. He felt the wrath of God, and
therefore desired the same to be removed, he had offended and therefore desired
mercy, he was fallen in most dangerous sickness, and therefore he cried, for
corporal health: God appeared to be departed from him, and therefore desired he
that the comfort of the holy Ghost should return unto him. And thus was David,
not as commonly are the most part of men in their prayers, who of a custom,
oftentimes do ask with their mouths such things, as their hearts do not
greatly desire to obtain. But let us mark principally, what things are to be
noted in these his prayers: which he with earnest mind powered forth before
God. Evident it is, that David in these his prayers sustained and felt the very
sense of God his wrath: And also that he understood clearly that it was God
only, that troubled him, and that had laid that sore scourge upon him. And yet
no where else but at God alone (who appeared to be angry with him) seeks he
support or aid: this is easy to be spoken, and the most part of men will
judge it but a light matter too fly to God in their troubles.

I confess in deed that if our troubles come by man his tyranny, that then the
most sure, and most easy way is, to run to God, for defense and aid. Let
this be well noted.
But let God appear to be our enemy, to be angry with us, and to have left
us: how hard and difficil is it then to call for his grace and for his
assistance? None knows, except such as have learned it in experience, neither
yet can any man so do, except the elect children of God: Enemies drive us from
God under this cross.
for so strong are the enemies, that with great violence invade the troubled
conscience, in that trouble some battle, that unless the hid seed of God
should make them hope against hope, they could never look for any
deliverance or comfort. The flesh lacks not reasons and persuasions, to
bring us from God. The Devil by him self, and by his messengers, dare boldly
say, and affirm: that we have nothing to do with God. And a weak faith, is
often compelled to confess both the accusations, and reasons to be most true. In
time of trouble the flesh does reason. O wretched man, perceiuest thou not
that God is angry with thee? He plagueth thee in his hot displeasure,
therefore it is in vain for thee to call upon him. The Devil by his suggestion,
or by his ministers does amplify and aggrauate these presidents, affirming
and beating into the conscience of the sore afflicted, in this manner: God
plagueth thee for thine iniquity, thou have offended his holy law, therefore
it is labor lost to cry for mercy or relief, for his justice must needs
take vengeance upon al inobedient offenders. In this mean season a weak
faith is compelled to confess and acknowledge the accusations to be most true,
for who can deny that he has not deserved God his punishments. The flesh
feels the torments, and our own weakness cries all is true, and no point
can be denied. The vehemency of this battle in the sickness of Ezechias, and
in the history of Job, plainly may be espied. Esaias. 38.
Exechias after that with lamentable tears, he had complained that his life
was taken away, and cut of before his time, that violence was done unto him,
and that God had bruised al his bones like a Lion: At last he says, Be thou
surety for me, O Lord: but immediately upon these words, as it were
correcting himself, he says: What shall I say, it is he that has done it. As
who would say, to what purpose complain I to him? If he had any pleasure in
me, he would not have entreated me on this manner. It is he himself,
whom I thought should have been my surety and defender, that has wrapped me
in all this wretched misery: He cannot be angry, and merciful at once (so
judges the flesh) for in him there is no contrariety, I feel him to be
angry with me, and therefore it is in vain, that I complain or call upon him.
This also may be espied in Job, who after that he was accused by his
friends, as one that had deserved the plague of God, and after that his wise
had willed him to refuse al justice, and to curse God, Job. 9.
and so to die: after his most grievous complaints, he says. When I called
upon him, and he has answered, yet believe I not that he has heard my
voice: As if Job would say, So terrible are my torments, so vehemement is my
pain, and anguishe, that albeit verily GOD had heard my humble petitions, yet
feel I not that he will grant me my request. Here is a strong battle, when
perfectly they understand that remedy is none* but in God only, and yet from
Gods hand they look for no support, as might appear to men's judgments: for
he that says, that God punishes him, and therefore cannot be merciful, and
he doubts whether God hear him or not, appears to have cast away all hope
of Gods deliverance. These things put I you in mind of, beloved mother, that
albeit your pains sometime be so horrible, that no release nor comfort you
find, neither in spirit, nor body: yet if the heart can only sobbe unto God,
despair not, you shall obtain your hearts desire: And destitute ye are not
of faith. For at such time as the flesh, natural reason, the law of God, the
present torment, and the Devil at once does cry: God is angry, and therefore
is there neither help nor remedy too be hoped for at his hands: at such
time I say, to sobbe unto God, is the demonstration of the secret seed of
God, which is hid in Gods elect children, and that only sobbe is unto God a
more acceptable sacrifice, than without this cross to give our bodies to be
burned, even for the truethes sake. For if God be present by assistance of his
holy spirit, so that no doubt is in our conscience, but that assuredly we
stand in Gods favor, what can corporal trouble hurt the soul or mind, seeing
the bitter frostie wind cannot hurt the body it self, which is most warmely
covered, and clad from violence of the cold. But when the spirit of God
appears to be absent, yea when God himself appears to be our enemy, then
to say, Oh (to think with Job in his trouble) albeit he should destroy or kill
me, yet will I trust in him: or what is the strength and vehemency of the
faith, which so looks for mercy, when the whole man feels nothing but
dolours on every side. Assuredly that hope shall never be confounded, for so it
is promised by him, who cannot repent of his mercy and goodness: Rejoice
Mother, and fight to the end, for sure I am that ye are not utterly destitute
of that spirit, who taught David and Job. What obedience I have heard you
give unto God in your most strong torment, it needs me not to write, only I
desire (which is a portion of my daily prayer,) God for our Jesus Christ his
sons sake, that in all your trouble you may continue, as I have left you, and
that with David ye may sobbe. Albeit the mouth may not speak, yet let the
heart groan and say, Have mercy upon me O Lord, and heal me, and then I
nothing doubt, your grievous torment shall not molest you for ever, but shortly
shall have an end to your everlasting consolation and comfort. Ye think
peradventure, that ye would gladly call and pray for mercy, but the knowledge of
your sins do hinder you. Consider, dearly beloved, that al Physic or
medicine serves only for the patient: so does mercy only for the sinner,
yea for the wretched and most miserable sinner. Did not David understand
himself to be a sinner, Objection of the flesh.
and an adulterer, Answer by a similitude.
and a shedder of innocent blood? Yea, knew he not also that he was punished
for his sins? Yes verily, he did, and therefore he called for mercy: which he
that knows not the heaviness and multitude of sins can in no wise do, but
most commonly does despise mercy when it is offered, or at the least the man
that feels not the burden of sin, lightly regards mercy, because he feels
not how necessary it is unto him, as betwixt Christ and the proud Pharisees,
in many places of the new Testament, it is to be seen. And therefore, dear
mother, if your adversary trouble you, either with your sins past or present,
obiecting, the mercy apperteineth not unto you by reason of your sins:
answer, to him as you are taught by Christ, That the whole needs no
Phisi^io^, neither yet the just, mercy and pardon. But that Christ is come to
give light to the blind, and to call sinners to repentance: of who^ you
acknowledge your selves to be the greatest, and yet that ye doubt nothing to
obtain mercy, because it was never denied to none that asks the same in
faith. And thus no doubt ye shall obtain victory by Christ Jesus, to whom be
praise for ever and ever, Amen.

In the rest of David's prayers, now will we be shorter, that we may come to
the grounds of the same.

After the desiring of mercy, now desires David a corporal benefit, saying,
Heal me, Lord. Hereof is to be noted, that bodily health being the gift of
God, may be asked of him without sin, albeit that we understand our selves
to be punished for our offenses. Neither yet in so praying, are we contrary
to Gods will: for his providence has planted in the nature of man, a desire of
health, and a desire that it may be conserved, and therefore is he not offended
that we ask health of body, when we lack it, neither yet that we seek
preservation of our health by such ordinary means as he has appointed:
Provided always, that God himself be first sought, and that we desire neither
life, neither health, to the hinderance of Gods glory nor to the hurt or
destruction of others our brethren, but rather that by us Gods glory may be
promoted, and that others our brethren by our strength, health, and life, may
be comforted and defended. These presidents now rightly observed, it is no
sin earnestly to ask at God health of body, albeit we know our sickness
to be the very hand of God, punishing or correcting our former evil life. This
I write because some are so severe, that they would not that we should ask
bodily health of God, because the sickness is sent to us by him: but such men do
not righteously understand, neither yet consider that sickness is a trouble to
the body and that God commands us to call for his help in our troubles. Surely
our submission and prayers in such extremity, is the greatest glory that we
can give unto God: for so doing we think that his mercy abounds above his
judgment and so we are bold to pray for the withdrawing of his scourge, Ier.
18. Mark vve^.
which petition no doubt he must grant, for so he promises by Jeremy his
Prophet, saying: If I have spoken against any nation or City, saying that I
will destroy it, and if it turn from iniquity and repent, it shall repent me
also of the plagues, that I have spoken against it. God promises to show
mercy to a whole City or nation if it repent, and will he not do the same to
a particular person, if in his sickness he call for grace? He has showed unto
us that he will, by diverse examples, and specially by the leprosy of Mary the
sister of Moses and Aaron, which she received at the Lords hand, punishing
her high and hautie mind: and again, upon her submission, and at the prayer
of Moses, she shortly was restored to health. But to proceed, David moreover
prays: Turn again O Lord. It appears unto David, being in the extremity
of his pain, that God was altogether departed from him: for so always judges
the flesh (yea the whole man) when trouble works by any continuance of time.
David had sustained trouble many days, he had prayed and yet was not
delivered. And therefore judges he that God being offended for his sins had
left him. And yet plain it is that God was with him, working in his heart by his
holy spirit, repentance* expressing forth those sobbes and groans: as also the
desire he had to be restored to that comfort and consolation, which sometimes he
had felt by the familiarity, which he had with God. Al these motions, I say,
were the operations of Gods holy spirit: and yet David could perceive no
co^sort nor presence of God, in that his trouble, but lamentably complains,
as before you have heard. Hereof it is plain, that the very elect sometimes
are without al feeling of consolation: and that they think themselves
altogether destitute, as may be seen in David. But it is chiefly to be noted,
that David in this his anguish remembers, that God sometimes had been familiar
with him: for he says, Turn again, O Lord, signifying thereby, that before
he had felt the sweetness of Gods presence, but now he was left to him self
without feeling of comfort or consolation. For thus appears David to
complain: Have thou not been familiar with me O Lord, thy unprofitable
servant? Did thou not call me from keeping sheep, to be anointed King
over thy people Israel? In trouble David remebreth what God sometimes bad
wrought by him.
Did thou not so encourage my mind, that I feared not the fresh strength
of the cruel Lion, neither yet the devouring teeth of the hungry Bear? from
whose jaws I delivered my sheep? Did not thou once inflame my heart with the
zeal of thy holy name? that when al Israel were so afraid, that none durst
incou^ter with that mo^ster Goliath, yet thy spirit made me so bold and so
valiant, that without harness or weapons (except my slingstaffe and stones) I
durst enterprise singular battle against him: was it not thy strength that gave
me victory, not only at that time, but also of al other my enemies, that have
sought my life since? Have not thou made me so glad by the multitude of thy
mercies, and thy most gracious favor which thou from time to time most
abu^dantly have powered upon me, that both soul and body has rejoiced through
the galdnes of thy countenance? have thou not bin so effectually with me
present in troubles and dangers, that my very enemies have known and confessed
that thy power was always with me, and that thou did take my defense upon
thy self? and will thou now so leave the habitation which thou have chosen?
Shall it be left desolate for ever? can thy mercies have an end? and shall thy
fatherly pity never appear more unto me? Shall thou leave me for ever thus to
be tormented, who^ thou have before so abunda^tly comforted? O Lord, I am sure
thy mercies will not so entreat me, and therefore turn again O Lord, and make
me glad with thy countenance, whom of long time thou have left void of
consolation and comfort. Aduert and consider, dearly beloved, in what estate
was David, when that he had none other comfort, except the only remembrance of
Gods former benefits showed unto him. And therefore meruel ye not, nor yet
despair ye: albeit that you find your self in the same case that David was.
Sure I am, that your own heart must confess that ye have received like
benefits at the hand of God, as David did. He has called you from a more vile
office, then from the keeping of sheep, to as great a dignity (touching the
everlasting inheritance) as he did David. For from the service of the Devil
and sin, he has anointed us Priests and Kings, by the blood of his only
Son Jesus: he has given you courage and boldness to fight against more
cruel, more subtle* more dangerous, and against enemies that be more nigh unto
you, then either was the Lion, the Bear or Goliath to David: against the Devil
I mean, and his assaults, against your own flesh, and most inward
affections, against the multitude* of them that were (and yet remain) enemies
to Christ's religion: yea, against some of your natural friends, which appear
to profess Christ with you, and in that part the battle is the more vehement.
What boldness I have seen with you, in all such conflictes, it needs not me
to rehearse. I write this, to the praise of God, I have wondered at that bold
constancy, which I have found in you at such time as mine own heart was
fainte. Sure I am, that flesh and blood could never have persuaded you, to
have contemned and set at naught those things that the world most esteems:
you have tasted and felt of Gods goodness and mercies in such measure, that
not only ye are able to reason and speak, but also by the spirit of God
working in you, to give comfort and consolation to such as were in trouble: and
therefore most dear mother, think not that God will leave his own mansion for
ever. No, impossible it is, that the Devil shall occupy Gods inheritance: or
yet that God shall so leave and forsake his holy Temple that he will not
sanctific the same. Again, God sometimes suspendeth his own presence from his
elected, as here by David may be espied: And very often suffer^th he his
elect to taste of bitterness and grief, for such causes as are before
expres^ed, but to suffer the^ to be at rest out of his hands, he neither will
nor may permit, for so were he a mutable God: and gave his glory to another,
if he permitted himself to be overcome of his adversary: which is as like
impossible, as it is that God shall cease to be God. Now lastly David prays:
Deliver my soul and save me. In this prayer no dout, David desired to be
delivered from the very corporal death at that time, and his soul to be saved
from those present plagues and grievous torments that he sustained. In which it
might appear to some, that he was more addict to this present life, and that
he loved more the quietness of the flesh then it became a spiritual man to do.
The most spiritual man desires rest.
But as before is said, God has naturally ingraffed and planted in man this
love of life, tranquillity and rest, and the most spiritual man often time
desires them, because they are seals and witnesses of that league and
fellowship that is between God and his elect. And albeit that troble does most
commonly follow the friends of God, yet is he nothing assured, that earnestly we
ask our quietness, neither is that our desire any declaration of carnalitie or
of inordinate love, that we have to the world* considering that the final
cause, wherefore we desire to live, is not for inioying of worldly pleasures
(for many times in the midst of those we grant and confess, that better it is
to be absent from the body) but the chi^fe cause why Gods elect do desire life,
or to have rest in earth, is for the maintenance of Gods glory, and that other
may see that God takes a care over his elected. But now to the grounds and
foundatio^s of David's prayers, and whereupon his prayers do stand. The first is
taken from the vehement troble which he sustained, and from the long
continuance of the same. The second is taken from the goodness of God. And the
third from Gods glory, and from the insolent rage of his enemies. Here is to
be observed and noted, that neither is trouble, neither long continuance of the
same, neither yet the proud and hautie minds of wicked men, the chief moving
cause, why God hears our prayers, and declares himself merciful unto us:
and therefore they may not be the sure and sound foundations of our prayers. But
only Gods infinite goodness is the fountain of al mercy and grace, which
springs and comes unto us by Christ Jesus his son. But they are causes by
operation of the holy Ghost, helping our weakness, to believe and to trust that
God, who is the father of mercies, will not be angry for ever at the sore
afflicted, neither yet that he will punish without mercy, such as call for his
help and comfort: as also that GOD, who has always declared him self enemy
to pride, will not suffer the proud and obstinate co^temners of his poor
Saints long to blaspheme his lenity and gentleness, but that he will power
forth his plagues upon them, according to his threatninges, and so are our
troubles and the tyranny of our enemies in that behalf fundaments, whereupon
our pray^rs may stand, as here appears. David describes his dolor, and the
continuance thereof, in these words.

I am consumed away with sickness, al my bones are vexed, and my soul is in
horrible fear: But how long lord will thou thus entreat me? I am weeried for
sobbing: I water my bed with my tears. Let us imagine that David thus
speaks: O Lord, may thou who ever have taken care for me from my mothers
womb, now forget me, the work manship of thine own hands? May thou,
that have declared thy self so merciful unto me in all my tribulatio^s, now in
the end, take thy mercies clean from me? Have thou no pity, O Lord? Do
thou not behold that I am pined and consumed by this grievous torment? wherein
is not only my tender flesh, but also my very bones (the stro^gest part of
my body) so vexed, that neither is there beauty nor strength left unto me.
If thy anguishes occupied the body only, yet were the pain almost
intolerable: but O Lord, so horribly is my soul tormented, that albeit it be
immortal, yet it so quaketh and tre^bleth, as very death should devour it. And
thus do I sustain most grievous torments, both in body and soul, of so
long continuance, that it appears unto me, thou have forgotten to be
merciful. O Lord, how long will thou entreat me in this manner? Have thou
forgotten thy loving mercies? Or have thou lost thy fatherly pity? I have no
longer strength to cry: yea, and for sobbes and groans I am so weery, that my
breath fails me: the tears of mine eyes ^ herewith nightly I have wette my
bed, have borne witness of my unfeigned dolor: but now my eyes are waxen
dim, and my whole strength is dried up. In all these lamentable complaints,
David speaks unto God, as he would speak unto a man that were ignorant, what
an other man suffered, whereof it may be understood, how the most prudent,
and the most spiritual man judges of God in the time of troble: assuredly he
thought that God takes no care for him, and therefore does he, as it were,
accuse God of vnmindfulnesse, and that he looks not upon him with the eyes of
his accustomed mercy, as clearly by these worodes may be espied. And yet are
David's troubles the first ground and cause why he makes his prayers and
claims to be heard, not that troubles (as before is noted) are sufficient by
them selves for Gods deliverance, but in recounting his dolor, David has a
secret access to Gods mercy, which chalengeth and clameth of duty to
appertein to al his, who in the time of trouble call for his support, help, and
aid. Mercy appertains to all the creatures of God that call for the same
unfeignedly. Job. 9.
And it is the same ground that Job takes, where he says: is it profitable
unto thee, that thou violently oppress me? will thou despise the work of
thine own hands? thou have formed and made me altogether: and will thou now
devour me? Remember I beseech thee, that thou have fashioned me as a moulde,
and that thou shall bring me to dust: thou have covered me with skin and flesh,
with sinowes and bones have thou joined me, with life and ge^tlenes have thou
beautified me, and thy prudence has kept my spirit. Here may be espied upon
what ground these two stood in this most grievous pains. Their trouble moved
them to complain, and to appeal to the great mercy of God, which as they
allege, even so is it most sure, he may deny to none that ask it: for as the
troubles of his creatures is none advantage unto God, so to deny mercy when
it is asked, were to deny himself, and herein, dearly beloved, I heartily wish
you to rejoice. For I can be witness how constantly ye have called for grace
in your anguishes, and your own conscience must testify, that oftentimes ye
have found release and comfort in such measure, that you have bin bold to
triumph against your adversaries in Christ Jesus our savior. Be nothing afraid
albeit presently ye feel not your accustomed consolation: that shall hurt you
no more then the trobles of David and Job did hurt the^, who in the time that
they spoke these former words, found no more consolation then you do now in the
most extremity of your troble. Neither yet did they hastily obtain comfort:
for David says, O Lord, how long will thou so cruelly punish me? And yet we
know most assuredly that they were heard, and that they obtained their own
hearts desire, as no dout every man shall, that in time of troble (be it
spiritual or corporal) appears only to Gods mercy. The second ground and
foundation whereupon the prayers of David do stand, is the infinite goodness
of God, for thus he says: Save me O God, for thy goodness. David before had
asked mercy, and declared his complaints, but now searching and reasoning
with him self secretly in his conscience, after this manner: Why should God
show mercy unto him, that so hainously had offended, and that justly was
tormented by Gods hand, for his transgression and sin? No other ground that
is always sure and permanent finds he: except Gods infinite goodness, which
he espieth to be only the stay, which neither tempest of winds, The eye of
faith.
neither floodes of water are able to overthrow, nor vndermind. And, oh how
pearcing are the eyes of Faith, that in so deep a dungeon of desperation, can
yet epsy in the midst of those troublesome darkness, goodness to remain in
God* yea, and such goodness as is sufficient and able to overcome, devour and
swalow up all the iniquities of his elect, so that none of them are able to
gainstande or hinder Gods infinite goodness, to show his mercy to his
troubled children. Hereby are we taught, beloved mother, in the extremity of
our trobles, to run to Gods only goodness, there to seek comfort by Jesus
Christ, and no where else. I fear nothing the blasphemous voices of such, nor
their raging against God and against his only eternal verity, that are not
ashamed to affirm that this kind of doctrine makes men negligent to do good
works, against whom no otherwise will I contend, then does the Apostle, saying:
their damnation is just. For my purpose and mind is, to edify those who^ God
has called from darkness to light, whose eyes it has pleased his mercy so
to open, that evidently they feel the flesh to rebel against the spirit, even
in the hour of their greatest perfection: in such manner, The most pure works
that ma^^ can do, are in the sight of God v^cleane.
that al power, al justice, and al virtue proceeding from us, is so contaminate
and defiled, that the very works which we do, must be purged by an other,
and that therefore can none of them be infallible grounds of our prayer,
neither yet a sufficient cause why we should be heard. But the goodness of
God, as it is infinite, so can it not be defiled by our iniquity: but it
pearceth through the same, and will show it self to our consolation, even as
the beams of the bright Sun, pearce through the mystie and thick clouds, and
bring down his natural heat, to comfort and quicken such herbs and
creatures, as through violence of cold were almost fallen into deadly decaie.
And thus the only goodness of God remains in all storms, the sure
foundation to the afflicted. Against which the Devil is never able to prevail.
The knowledge of this is so necessary to the afflicted conscience, that
without the same, it is very hard to withstand the assaults of the
adversary: for as he is a spirit most subtle and vigilant, to trouble the
children of God, so is it easy to him to de^ace and undermine all the grounds
and causes that be within man, and especially when we are in trouble: yea, he
can persuade that we lack those things, which most assuredly we have by Gods
free gift and grace. As for example: if we desire to be delivered from
trouble and anguishe of conscience with David and Job, sodeinely can the Devil
object, what appertains their example unto thee, they had many notable and
singular virtues, which thou lackest: if we desire remission of sins with
Magdalen, with Peter, or with any other offenders he has these darts ready
to shoot, they had Faith, but thou have none, they had true repentance, tho^
ar^e but an hypocrite, they hated sin and continued in good works, but thou
reioycest in sin, and dooest no good at al. By these means can he, who is
the accuser of us and of our brethren, ^uer find out some crafty accusation,
to trouble the weak conscience of the afflicted, so long as it rests upon
any thing that is within it self: and til by operation of the holy Ghost we
are ranished and refte up to the contemplation of our GOD, so that our minds
are fixed only upon Gods infinite goodness, clayming by the same to receive
mercy, as Job does in his former words, the sense and meaning whereof, is
this: O Lord thou made me, when yet I was not, thou gave me soul and
body, when I neither knew nor understood what thy power was, thou seddest
and nourishedst me, when I could do nothing but weep and mourn. And thy
merciful providence unto this day, has preserved my life, Oh most faithf^^
confession.
and yet neither I nor my works could profit thee: for thou (whose
habitation is in heaven) need not the help of man.

And as for my works, such as the fountain is, such must the water be: my
heart is corrupted, how then can any thing that is cleene proceed from the
same? And so what ever I have received, that either was, is, or hereafter
shall be within my corrupt nature, al proceeds from thine infinite goodness,
which begunnest to show thy mercy before that I knew thee: can thou then
leave me thus in my extremity? I grant and confess that I have offended:
but is there any creature clean and perfect in such perfection, that without
mercy he may abide the trial of thy justice? or is there any iniquity now in
me, which thy wisdom did not know before? And thus I appeal to thy mercy
which springs from thy infinite goodness. O dear mother, when thy afflicted
soul can thus forsake and refuse what ever is in man, and can stay it self
(how little soever it be) upon Gods infinite goodness: the^ are all the fiery
darts of the Devil quenched, and he is repulsed as a confounded spirit. It shall
hurt nothing, albeeit the stormy tempest cease not suddenly. It is sufficient
that this anchor be cast out, which assuredly shall preserve your ship, that she
violently run not upon the forelande of desperatio^. This I write beloved in
the Lord, knowing what has been your complaints heretofore, in that you
found your faith faint, that you could not repent your former evil life, chat
ye found no disposition nor readiness to good works, but were rather carried
away of sin and wickedness. If all this had been true, yet had ye been in
no worse case, then was the Apostle Paul, when he cried: O wretched and
unhappy man that I am! who shall deliver me from this body of sin? But I
assuredly know that the chief part of your trouble proceeds from malice and
envy of the Devil, who would persuade to your heart, that ye delighted in
those things, which to you were most displeasing. For how often have ye
complained upon the weakness of your faith? How often have ye lamented the
imperfection of your flesh? The tears of your eyes have wi^nessed before God,
that ye delighted not in such things, as your adversary falsely lays to your
charge. For who uses continually too mourn in those things that are pleasing
to his heart, if they be present with him at al times? Or who will desire
things pleasing: to be removed from him? ye have mourned for your
weakness, and have desired your imperfection to be removed, and ye have
detested all sorts of idolatry. How then can ye think that ye can take any
pleasure in the same? Desp^ire not, although that al remembrance of Gods
goodness or worthiness be removed from your mind* ye have David, Job,
Daniel, and al other the Saints of God, in equal sort with you* of David and
Job, ye have heard, and Esaias making his heavy complainte for the plagues of
the people of Israel openly confesses that al had sinned, that their right
eousnes was nothing but filthiness, that none sought God, that none called
upon his name. And Daniel in his prayer like wise confesses, that al had
wrought wickedly, that al had declined from God, yea and that none had
submitted them selves to GOD, nor yet had made supplication unto him, albeit
he had punished their former inobedience: and therefore says he, that they
did not allege their own justice in their prayers. Consider, dear Mother,
that no mention is made of any righteousness^ that was within them selves,
neither yet do they glory of any works or virtues, that they had wrought
before, for they understood that God was author of all goodness. And
therefore to him only apperteineth the praise. But as for their sins, they
understood them to be the infirmities of their own flesh, and therefore
boldly called they for mercy. And that by Gods infinite goodness, which is no
less free unto you, then unto the^, according to the riches of his liberal
graces, which plentifully he powers forth upon al them that call on the name
of the Lord Jesus. The third and last ground of David's prayers, was the glory
and and praise of Gods name to be showed and uttered in his life, as in these
words he declares.

For there is no remembrance of the^ in death: who landeth thee in the pit?
As David would say: O Lord, how shall I pray and declare thy goodness, when
I am dead and gone down in to the grave? I is not thy ordinary course, to have
thy miracles and wondrous works preached unto men by those, that are buried,
and gone down into the pit: those that are dead make no mention of thee in the
earth. And therefore, O Lord, spare thy servant, that ye for a time I may
show and witness thy wondrous works unto mankind.

These most godly affections in David did engender in him a vehement horror and
fear of death, besides that which is natural and common to al men, because he
perfectly understood that by death he should be let any further to advance
the glory of God. Of this same he complains most vehemently in the 88. Psalm,
where apparauntly he takes from the dead, sense, remembrance, feeling* and
understanding, aledging that God works no miracles by the dead, that the
goodness of God cannot be preached in the grave, nor his faith by perdition, and
that his meruellous works, are not known in darkness. By which speech we
may not understand, that David takes all sense and feeling from the dead,
neither yet that they which are dead in Christ, are in such estate, that by God
they have not consolation and life: no, Christ him self does witness the
contrary: but David so vehemently expresses their estate and condition,
because that after death they are deprived from al ordinatie ministration in
the Church of God. None of those that are departed are appointed to be
preachers of Gods glory unto mankind. But after death they cease any more ^o
aduannce Gods holy name, here amongst the living on earth, and so shall even
they in that behalf be unprofitable to the congregation, as touching any thing
that they can do, either in body or soul after death. And therefore most
earnestly David desired to* live in Israel, for the further manifestation of
Gods glory. Here is to be observed a short, but yet a most necessary note,
which is this, what the things be which we ought principally to seek in
this transitory life: Not those for the which the blind world contendeth and
strives, but God and his loving kindness to ward mankind, his amiable promises,
and true religion to be advanced and preached unto others our brethren that be
ignorant. For if we do not, we may rather be counted beasts then men, dead
stocks, not living creatures, yea rather things that be not at al, then
substance, having either being, or life. Seeing that the heavens declare the
glory of God, the earth with the whole contents thereof, what ever they be,
do give praise to his holy name, the Sea, floods and fountains, with the
wonders contained in the same, do not cease to make manifest the wisdom, the
power, and the providence of their creator, what then shall be said of man, that
neither seeks, neither regards Gods glory? Yea what shall be judged of
those, that not only hinder Gods glory, but also declare them selves enemies
to such, as would promote it? I must speak my conscience with a sorrowful
heart, they are not only dead, but they are also of the nature of him by whose
malice and envy, death entered into the world, that is, of the Devil. But them
I omit at this present because their accusation does not much apperteine to
this our matter, whereof now I must make an end, somewhat contrary to my
mind. For so I am compelled by some present troubles as well of body, as of
Spirit. The fourth part of this Psalm I omit til more opportunity: for it
does not much appertain to the spiritual cross, but it is as it were a
Prophecy spoken against all such, as rejoice at the troubles of Gods elect,
who assuredly shall be confounded and suddenly brought to shame, when the Lord
shall hear the voices of the sore afflicted.

Now, dearly beloved in our Savior Christ Jesus, seeing that the spiritual
cross is proper to the children of God, seeing that it is given to us as a
most effectual medicine, as well to remome diseases, as to plant in our souls
most notable virtues, such as is humility, mercy, contempt of our selves, and
continual remembrance of our own weakness and imperfection. And seeing that
you have had most evident signs, that this same medicine has wrought in you a
part of all the promises, receive it thankfully of your fathers hand, what
trouble soever it bring with it: and albeit that the flesh grudge, yet let the
spirit rejoice, steadfastly looking for deliverance, and assuredly ye shall
obtain according to the goodwil and promise of him who cannot deceive, to whom
be glory for ever and ever before his congregation. Amen.

Now seeing it is uncertain, beloved mother, if ever we shall meet in this
corporal life: which words I will not that ye take in any displeasure: for if
God continue you in life, and me in health, I shall attempt to speak with you
face to face, within less time the^ is passed since the one of us last saw the
other. And be ye assured, beloved mother, that neither shall it be the fear of
death, nor the rage of the Devil, that shall let me: and therefore I beseech you
take not my words in that part, as though I were not minded to visit you
again: no I assure you, that only Gods hand shall withholde me.

But because our life does vanish as the smoke before the blast of wind, my
conscience moves me to write unto you, as though I should ^^ke from you my
last good night in earth. The sum whereof is this, to exhort and admonish
you, even as that ye will have part with Christ Jesus, to co^tine we in the
doctrine, to the end, which before the world ye have professed. For before
God, before Christ Jesus his son, and before his holy angels, neither shame
I ^o confess, neither doubt I to affirm that the doctrine which you and
others have hard not only of my mouth, but also faithfully taught by the
mouths of many others, of whom some are ex^l^d, some cruelly cast into prison,
and the rest commanded to silence, is the only word of life, and that al
doctrine repugning to the same, is diabolical and erronius, which assuredly
shall bring death, and perpetual condemnation, to al those which shall thereto
condescend and agree. And therefore, Mother, be not moved with any wind, but
stick to Christ in the day of this his battle, and also I admonish you too
avoid that abomination which often ye have heard by me affirmed to be damnable
idolatry: and God I take to record in my conscience, that neither then,
neither now, I spoke, nor do speak, for pleasure or hatred of any living
creature in earth, whatsoever that it be, but as my conscience was certified by
the infallible and plain word of God, from which I praise my most merciful
father I am not this day one jot removed. Neither (...) I of that my blessed
and most happy society with the truth of Christ's Gospel, unto which it has
pleased God ^o ^alme, the most wretched of others: neither fore think I that
God has made me an open, and manifest enemy to Papistrie, superstition, and
to all that ^ilthie idolatry, which newly is erected in Gods hot displeasure:
neither yet would I reca^t (as they term it) one sentence of my former
doctrine, for all the glory, riches, and rest that is in earth. And in
conclusion, I would not bow my ^nee before that most abominable idol, for all
the torments that earthly tyrants can devise, God so assisting me, as his
holy spri^^ presently moves me to write unfeignedly. And albei^ that I have in
the beginning of this battle appeared to play the fainte Hearted and feeble
so^^^our (the cause I remit to God) yet my prayer is, that I may be restored to
the battle again. And blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, I
am not left so bare without comfort, but my hope is to obtain such mercy,
that if a sudden end be not made of all my miseries by final death, which to
me were no small advantage: that yet by him, who never despised the sobbes of
the sore afflicted, I shall be so encouraged to fight, that England and Scotland
shall both know, that I am ready to suffer more, the^ either poverty or
exile: for the profession of the doctrine and that heavenly religion, whereof
it has pleased his merciful providence, to make me amongst others a simple
soldier, and witness bearer unto men. And therefore, mother, let no fear
enter into your heart, as that I escaping the furious rage of those ravening
wolves, (that for our unthankfulness are lately loosed from their bonds) do
repent any thing of my former feruencie: no, mother, for a few Sermons by me
to be made within England, my heart at this hour could be content to suffer
more then nature were able to sustain, as by the grace of the most mighty and
most merciful God, who only is God of comfort and consolation, through Jesus
Christ one day shall be known. In the mean season yet once again as it were my
final good night, and last testament in this earth, in the bowels of Christ
Jesus, I exhort and admonish you constantly to contine we with the verity,
which yet shall triumph and obtain victory in despite of Sa^^an and of his
malice. And avoid ydolatrie, the ^aintainers and obeyers where of shall not
escape the sudden vengeance of God, which shall be powered sorth upon them,
according to the ripeness of their iniquity. And when they shall cry, quietness
and peace, (which never remained of any continuance with the ungodly) then shall
their sudden destruction come upon them without provision. The God of peace
and consolation, who of his power infinite and invincible, has called from
death the true and great bishop of our souls, and in him has placed our flesh
above principalities and powers, of what pre-eminence soever they be, in
heaven or in earth, assist you with his holy spirit in such constancy and
strength, that Satan and his assaults be confounded, now and ever, in you
and in the congregation by Christ Jesus our Lord. To whom with the Father and
with the ^oly Ghost, be al praise and honor eternally. Amen.

Yours with sorrowful heart. I. K.
Watch and pray.
The Argument of the Epistle.
A comfortable Epistle sent to the afflicted Church of Christ, exhorting them
to bear his cross with patience, looking every hour for his coming again,
to the great comfort and consolation of his chosen, with a prophecy of the
destruction of the wicked. Whereunto i^ joined a most wholesome counsel, how
to he have our selves in the midst of this wicked generation, touching the
daily exercise of Gods most holy and sacred word* Written by the man of God, I.
K.

Eze. 9.
Pass through the city, and put a sign on the foreheads of those that mourn
for the abominations that are committed.
WHen I ponder with my self (beloved in the Lord) what the state was of
Christ's true Church, The care of God is alvvaies one over his chosen.
immediately after his death and passion, and what were the changes and great
mutations in the common wealth of Judea, before the final desolation of the
same: as I cannot but fear that like Plagues for like offenses shall strike the
Realm of England, and in fearing, God knows, I lament and morn: so can I
not but rejoice, knowing that Gods most merciful providence is no less careful
this day over his weak and feeble servants, in the Realm of England, than it
was that day over his weak and sore oppressed flock in Jury. What was the
state of Christ's church between his death and resurrection: and from his
resurrection to the sending of the holy Ghost upon his disciples: and from
that time also to the final destruction of Jerusalem? The plain Scripture
does witness, that it was most afflicted without al comfort and worldly
consolation, and that it was so persecuted, that hauock was made over the
church of God. And what were the mutations and troubles in Judea and Jerusalem
before the destruction of the same, such as are expressed in histories, and
principally in Josephus and Egesippus, Egesip. lib. 1. cap, 44.
can not be ignorant. For they witness that over that unthankful people were
pe^mitted to reign, cruel, tyran^ous and most ungodly magistrates, by whom
the people were oppressed and spoiled of their liberties: by which occasion,
was stirred up sedition, and thereupon followed so cruel tyranny, that under
the name of justice no small number of the people were burned quick. After
which cruelty followed such murder universally in the city and in the
fields, that the fathers feared their sons* and the brethren their brethren.
Which unquietness ceased not, until Gods severe vengeance was once powered
forth upon such, as obsti^ately refused and persecuted Christ Jesus and his
doctrine. But to return to the entreatement and preservation of Christ's
church at this time, it is evident, that most sharply it was persecuted, and
yet daily did it increase and multiply. Acts 12.
It was compelled to fly from city to city, from Realm to Realm, and from
one Nation to another: and yet so wonderful was it preserved, that a great
number of those whom the wicked Priests, by their blooddie tyranny exiled and
banished from Jerusalem, were kept alive, til Gods vengeance was powered forth
upon that most wicked generation. The remembrance of this, beloved in the
Lord, is unto my heart such comfort and consolation, that neither can my
tongue nor pen express the same. For this assuredly is my hope and
expectation, that like as Christ Jesus appeared to his Disciples, when there
was nothing in their hearts but angu^she and desperation: and like as he
preferred and multiplied their number under the most extreme persecution: so
shall he do to his afflicted flock within the Realm of England this day.
First I say this is my hope that a just vengeance shall be taken upon those
blood-thirstie tyrants, As God did to his afflicted Church in Judea, so sha^
be do the same in England.
by whom Christ's Jesus in his members is now crucified amongst you. And
after that his verity shall so appear to the comfort of those, that now do
mourn, that they shall hear and know the voice of their own Pastor. And
this shall our merciful God do unto us, to let us know, and in practi^e
understand, that his promises are infallible, and that he will not entreat us,
according to the weakness of our corrupt nature, which always is ready to
fall from God, to distrust his promises, and to forget that ever we have
received benefit or comfort from Gods hand, when trouble lies upon us, or
when extreme danger does appear. And therefore, beloved in the Lord, Our
imperfection may not hinder God to be merciful.
albeit you find your hearts sometimes assaulted with dolor, with grudging or
with some kind of desperation: yet despair not utterly, neither be ye
troubled above measure, as that Christ Jesus should never visit you again.
Not so, dear brethren, not so, for such imperfections rested with Christ's
own Apostles of a long time: and yet did they not hinder his coming again
unto them. No more shall our weakness and imperfections hinder or let the
brightness of his countenance, and the comfort of his word yet once again to
shine before us. Provided always, that Judas his obstinacy, his impenitencie
and traitorous heart be absent from us. As I doubt not, but it is from all the members of Christ's body, who are permitted sometime to fall, so that of
the most fervent professors, they become fearful denyers of the most known
truth: Gods elect are permit^ed sometimes ^orribly to fall.
but they are not permitted of any continuance to blaspheme, neither to remain
in unbelief and desperation to the end, as in Christ's Apostles plainly may
be seen. And that more clearly we may understand, our time and estate
within the Realm of England, this day, to agree with the time and estate of
Christ's disciples, immediately after his death: let us consider what chanced
to them before and after the same. Before Christ's passion as they were
instructed by Christ's own mouth of many things, appertaining to that kingdom
of God, which they neither perfectly understood, neither worthily then
regarded: so were they advertised and often admonished, The state of Christ's
Church* before and shortly after his death.
that Christ their Master should suffer a cruel death, that they should be
ashamed, slandered and offended in him, that they should fly from him: And
finally that persecution and trouble from time to time should apprehende them.
With these most dolorous tydinges, he also promised, that he should rise
upon the third day, that he should rise for them again to their comfo^ce
and consolation, Note.
and that he should mightily deliver them from al troubles and adversities.
But what auailed al these admo^^tions to Christ's (...), before his death, or
in that extremi^ie of their anguishes shortly after the same? did they fear,
and verily look for trouble before it came? Or did they look for any
comfort, when the forespoken trouble was come? It is most evident that no such
thing did enter into their hearts. For before Christ's death their greatest
mind was upon worldly honor, for which sometimes they debated and contended
amongst themselves: (...). 22.
yea, even when Christ was most earnestly preaching of his cross. And after
his death they were so oppressed with anguishe, with care, with dolor and
desperation, that neither could the witnessing of the women, affirming that
they had seen Christ, neither the grave left empty and void, neither the
Angels, who did appear to certify his resurrection, neither yet the very
voice and presence of Christ Jesus himself, remove al doubts from their
afflicted hearts: but from time to time their minds wa^ered and fully could
not be established that their Lord and Master was verily risen to their
comfort, according to his former promises. (...)
In this case consider I the true professors of Christ's holy Euangelie to be
this day in the Realm of England. For these days of our present dolor and
tribulation have been before spoken and blown in our ears long time before
they came. Our weakness and frail infirmity was also painted forth before
our eyes: but who would have believed that those days of our trouble had
been so nigh? Or that so short a tempest should have overthrown so great a
multitude? I think no man within the whole Realm: for all men appeared to live
in such careless security, as that the immutable sentence of God pronouncing,
that whosoever will live godly in Christ Jesus, 2. Ti^. 1.
shall suffer persecution, had nothing appertained to our age. And such a bold
confidence (or rather a vain persuasion) had a great number of their own
strength, that if they had continued without any back slyding, they might have
been judged rather Angels then men.

But (beloved in the Lord) the sword of anguishe and of dolor has now
pierced the tender heart of Christ's mother (that is, Luke. 2. ^. Cor. 3.
of his very church^) that the cogitations of many hearts are sufficiently
revealed. The fire is come, which as it has burnt away with a blast, the
stubble, Hay and Wood: so in trying the gold, silver, and precious stones, it
has found such dross and duste, that the whole mass may appear to be
confused. For who now calls to mind that the same voice, which forespake
our dolours, forespake also our everlasting comfort with Christ Jesus? Who
delighted now in his amiable promises? Who reioiceth under the cross? yea,
who rather does not fear, tremble, grudge, and lament, as that there were no
help in God, or as that he regards not the trouble which we suffer? These
are the imperfections, that continually remain in this our corrupt nature: the
knowledge whereof ought to move us earnestly to cry: O Lord increase our
faith, The ^ause of ^^mforte.
be merciful unto us, and let us not drown in the deep for ever. Which if we
do with unfeigned hearts, ^hen yet shall Christ Jesus appear to our comfort:
his power shall be known to the praise and glory of his own name, in despite
of al his coniured enemies* And this is the chief and principal cause of my
comfort and consolation in these most dolorous days, that neither can our
infirmities nor daily desperation hinder or let Christ Jesus to return to us
again.

The other cause of my comfort and consolation is, VVby God should suddenly
strike the Papist^ in England.
that I am assured that the judgment of these Tyrants, that now oppress us,
shall not slip, but the vengeance shall fall upon them without provision. For
they have sufficiently declared the malice of their minds. They have violated
the law, and holy ordinances of the Lord our God. They have opened their
mouths against his eternal verity. They have exiled his truth and
established their own lies. They daily persecute the innocents, and stoutly
maintain open murders: their hearts are obdurate, and their faces are become
shameless like harlottes: so that no hope of repentance nor amendment is to
be had of them. And therefore destruction shall suddenly fall upon them. But
with what kind of plagues they shall be stricken in this life, What we ought
to avoid in extreme trouble.
and whom GOD shall appoint to execute his (...) upon them, that I remit to
his good pleasure and further revelation.

But their manifest inquitie, is unto me an assured assurance, that long they
cannot escape the (...) of them most justly deserved. But in the mean season,
beloved brethren, two^ things ye must avoid: the former, that ye presume
not to be reuengers of your own cause, but that ye resign over vengeance
unto him, who only is able to requite them* according to their malicious
minds.

Secondly, Mat. 5.
that ye hate not with any ^arnal hatred, these blind, cruel, and malicious
tyrants, but that ye learn of Christ, to pray for your persecutors,
lamenting and bewayling that the Devil should so prevail against them, that
headlong they should run body and soul to perpetual perdition. And note
well, that I say we may not hate them with a carnal hatred, that is to say,
only because they trouble our bodies. Psalm. 119.
For there is a spiritual hatred, which David (...) a perfect hatred which the
holy Ghost engenders in the (...) of Gods elect against the rebellious
contemners of his holy statues. Perfect and godly hatred.
And it is when (...) more lament that Gods glory is suppressed, and that
Chris^es flock is defrauded of their wholesome food, the^ that our bodies are
persecuted. (...)
With this hatred was Jeremy inflamed when he prayed: let me see thy vengeance
taken upon thine enemies, O Lord. With this hatred may we hate tyrants, and
earnestly may we pray for their destruction, be they kings or Queens, Princes
or Prelates. And further ye shall note that the prayers, made in the feruencie
of this hatred, are before God so acceptable, that often times he that prays,
obtains the selfsame thing, that the external words of his prayer do mean:
as David, Jeremy, and other of the Prophets saw with their corporal eyes:
the whote vengeance of God powered forth upon the cruel tyrants of their age:
and I am assured that some, which this day do ^ob and groan under your
tyra^nous bishops shall see the like upon the Pestilent Papists within the
Realm of England. (...)
This my affirmation proceeds not from any conjecture of man's fantasy, but
from the ordinary cause of gods judgments against manifest contemners of his
precepts, from the beginning which is this.

First to rebuke and notify by his messengers such sins, as before the
world are not known to be sin. Secondly, to provoke them to repentance.

Thirdly to suffer the reprobate to declare their own impenitencie before the
world: and last to power upon them so manifest vengeance, Exo. 7. 8. 14. ^.
Kings. 15. 3. Kings. 13.
that his church may be instructed as well of his power, as of his severe
judgments against inobedience. This was the order of his judgment against
Pharao, against Saul, against Jeroboam, against Herod, against the Scribes
and Pharisees, and against the whole city of Jerusalem. Our ears have heard,
and our eyes have seen, the first three diettes of the Lords judgment,
executed against the Pestilent Papists within the Realm of England. For we
have heard their summoning and citation duly executed by the Messengers of
Gods word. Papists have bin summoned.
We have heard them accused and convicted before their own faces of theft
and murder, Papists have bin ac^used and con^icted.
of blasphemy against God, of idolatry, and finally, of al abominations,
which crimes being laid to their charge in their own presence, Time of
repentance has been granted unto Papists.
they were not able to deny, so potent, so plain and evident was gods word,
whereby their secret botches and old festered sores were discovered and
revealed. We know that long process of time has been granted by Gods
lenity to their conversion and repentance. And how little the same has
auailed, these present days may testify. The due execution approaches.
For who now does not epsy their malice to increase, and their obstinacy to
be such, as none can be greater? Shall we then think, that God will give over
his cause, as that he were not able to preualie against Tyrants? Not so (dear
brethren) not so. But eue^ so assuredly as our god lives, by whose spirit was
stirred up some of his elect: first, to epsy the great abhominatio^s of those
tyrants in this our age: which his messengers in despite of their tyranny God
preserved to proclaim and notify, before their own faces, such sins, as
the world knew not to be sin: and assuredly as we have espied the^ still
to continue in malice against God, against his eternal verity, and against the
messengers of the same: so assuredly shall we see Gods extreme plagues powered
forth upon them even in this corporal life: That some (...) us may witness
to the generation that shall follow the wondrous works that the Lord has
wrought, and will work in this our age. Neither shall the^e plagues (more then
the word of God which passed before) work in them any true repentance, but
still in a blind (...) they shall rebel against the Maies^^e of God. Papists
shall (...) against God to the end.
For the deadly venom of that malicious serpent their father the Devil, can
^euer be purged from their cankered hearts. And therefore after these plagues
of whom some we have heard and seen, for what a Plague was it to the false
Bishop of Doresme, To^stal convicted of murder and theft to his face, at
Bervvicke. The last plague of the Papists.
before his face to be called murderer and thief, and of the same to be
convict, that neither could him self deny it neither any of his proctours or
divine doctors, being present with him durst enterprise to speak one word in
defense of his cause? After these plagues (I say) of whom some we have seen,
and the rest we shortly look for, res^eth the last, the vnq^e^chable fire
which is prepared for their portion. And therefore yet again, dearly beloved in
our Savior Jesus Christ, hope you against hope, and against al worldly
appearance. For assuredly as God is immutable: so, assuredly shall he stir up
one Iehu or other, to execute his vengeance upon those blood thirsty tyrants,
and obstinate idolaters. And therefore, abide ye patiently the time that is
appointed to our correction, and to the full ripeness of their malicious
minds. Be not discouraged, although the Bishops have gotten the victory. So
did the Beniamites (natural brethren to our Bishops) defenders of who^edom and
of al abhohominable adultery, twice prevail against the Israelites, who
fought at Gods commandment: Ye shall consider, (beloved brethren) that the
counsels of God are profounde and inscrutable. The most just man is innocent in
his sight. There may be secret causes, why God sometimes will permit the most
wicked to prevail and triumph in the most unjust action* but yet will he not
long delay to execute his his wrath, and justly deserved vengeance upon such as
be proud murderers, obs^inate idolaters, and impenitent malefactors. And
the^fore have they not great cause to rejoice. For albeit they have once
prevailed against flesh, yet shall GOD shortly bring them to utter confusion,
and great shame for ever. Let Winchester and his cruel counsel devise, and
study till his wits fail, how the kingdom of his father, the Antichrist of
Rome, may prosper: And let him and them drink the blood of Gods Saints, til
they be drunk, and their bellies burst, yet shall they never prevail long in
their attemptes. Their connsels and determinations, shall be like the dream of a
hu^grie and thirsty man, who in his sleep dreameth that he is eating or
drinking, but after he is awaked, his pain continues, and his soul is
impatient and nothing eased. Job. 5
Even so shall these tyrants after their profound counselles, long devises, and
assured determinations, understand and know that the hope of hypocrites
shall be frustrate, and that a kingdom begun with tyranny and blood, can
neither be stable nor permanent: but that the glory, the riches, and
mainteiners of the same, shall be as straw in the flame of fire: altogether with
a blast they shall be consumed, Job. 15.
in such sort, that their places shall be an heap of stones, their congregation
shall be desolate, and such as do depend upon their help, Esaias. 12
shall fall into destruction and ignominy with them.

And therefore (beloved brethren in our Savior Jesus Christ) seeing that
neither can our imperfection, nor frail weakness, hinde^ Christ Jesus, to
return to us by the presence of his word, neither that tyranny of these blood
thirsty wolves, may so devour Christ's small flock. But that a great number
shall be preserved to the praise of Gods glory: neither that these most cruel
tyrants can long escape Gods vengeance: let us in comfort, lift up our heads,
and constantly look for the Lords deliverance with heart and voice, saying
to our God: O Lord, albeit other lords then thou, have power over our bodies,
yet let us only remember thee, and thy holy name, to whom be praise for ever
and ever, Amen. God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, by his omnipotent
spirit, guide and rule your hearts in his true fear to the end, Amen.

Written at Deep, the last day of May. 1554.
The comfort of the holy Ghost, etc. For salutation.
NOt so much to instruct you, as for to leave with you (dearly beloved
brethren) some testimony of my love: I have thought good too communicate with
you in these few lines my weak counsel, how I would ye should behave your
selves in the mids of this wicked generation, touching the exercise of Gods
most sacred and holy word, without which, neither shall knowledge increase,
godliness appear, not feruencie continue amongst you. For as the word of God
is the beginning of spiritual life, without which all flesh is dead in God's
presence: And the Lantern to our feet, without the brightness whereof all the
posterity of Adam does walk in darkness: And as it is the foundation of
faith, without which no man understands the good wi^ of God: So it is also
the only organ and instrument, which God uses too strengthen the (...), to
comfort the afflicted to reduce to (...) by repentance, such as have (...): and
finally, to preserve and keep the very life of the soul, in all assaults: and
temp^ations.

And thereof if that ye desire your knowledge to be increased, your faith to
be confirmed your conscience to be (...) and comforted, or finally your soul
to be preserved in life: let your exercise be frequent in the law of the
Lord God. Despise not the precepts which Moses (who by his own expe^ieuce had
learned what comfort lies hid within the word of God) gave to the Israelites
in these words: These words which I command thee this day, Sow in thine
heart, and thou shall exercise thy children in them. Thou shall talk of them
when thou a^t at home in thy house, and as thou walked by the way, and when
thou lie down, and when thou risest up, and thou shall bind them for a
figne upon thine hand, and they shall be papers of remembrance between thine
e^es, and thou shall write them upon the posts of thy house, and upon thy
gates. And Moses in another place commands them to remember the law of the
Lord God to do it, that i^ may be well with them and with their children in
the land which the Lord their God should give them, meaning that like as
frequent memory and repetito^ of Gods precepts, is the means whereby the fear
of God which is the beginning of al wisdom and felicity, is kept recent in
mind: so is negligence and oblivion of Gods benefits received, the first
degree of defection from God.

Now if the law, which by reason of our weakness can work nothing but wrath
and auger, was so effectual, that remembered and rehearsed of purpose to do it,
it brought to the people a corporal benediction: what shall we say the glorious
Gospel of Christ Jesus does work, so that with reverence it be entreated?
Saint Paul calls it the sweet odor of life to those that shall receive life,
boro wing his similitude of odoriferous herbs, or precious ointments, whose
nature is, the more that they be touched or moved, to send forth their odor
more pleasant and delectable. Even such dear brethren, is the blessed
Euangelie of our Lord Jesus: for the more that it be entreated, ^he more
comfortable and puisant is it to such as do hear, read, or exercise the
same. I am not ignorant, that as the Israelites lothed the manna, because that
every day they saw and eat but one thing, so some there be now adays (who
will not be holden of the worst sort) that after once reading some parcelles of
the scriptures, do commit them selves altogether to profane authors, and
humane lectures, because that the variety of matters therein contained, does
bring with it daily delectation: where contrariwise, within the simple
scriptu^es of God, the perpetual repetition of one thing, is fashions, and
weerisome. This temptation I^confesse, may enter into Gods very elect for a
time, but impossible it is, that therein they continue to the end: for Gods
election besides other ouident signs has this ever joined with it, that Gods
elect are called from ignorance (I speak of those that are come to the years
of knowledge) to some taste and feeling of Gods mercy, of the which they are
never so satisfied in this life, but from time to time they hunger and they
thirst, to ea^e the bread that descended from heaven, and to drink the water
that springs to life everlasting: which they cannot do but by the means of
Faith, and Faith looks ever to the will of God, revealed by the word, so that
Faith has both her beginning and continuance by the word of God. And so I
say, that impossible it is that Gods chosen children can despise or reject the
word of their salvation of any long continuance, neither yet loath it to the
end. Often it is, that Gods elect are holden in such bondage and thraldom,
that they cannot have the bread of life broken unto them, neither yet free
liberty to exercise them selves in Gods holy word: but then do not Gods
children loath, but most gladly do they covet the food of their souls: Then
do they accuse their former negligence, then lament they the miserable
affliction of their brethren, and then cry and call they in their hearts (and
openly where they dare) for free passage of the Gospel. This hunger and thirst
does prove the life of their souls. But of such men, as having liberty to
read, and exercise them selves in Gods holy scriptures, and yet begin to be
weary, because from time to time they read but one thing: I ask, why are not
they weary, every day to eat bread, to drink wine, to behold the brightness
of the Sun, and to use the rest of gods creatures, which every day do keep
their own substance, course and nature? They shall answer (I trust) Because
such creatures have a strength to preserve the life. O miserable creatures, who
dare attribute more power and strength to the corruptible creatures in
nourishing and preserving the mortal carkas, then to the eternal word of God
in the nourishment of the soul, which is immortal! To reason with their
damnable unthankfulness at this present, is not my purpose: But to you, my
dear brethren, I write my knowledge, and do speak my conscience, That so
necessary, as the use of meat and drink is to the preservation of corporal
life, and so neces^arie as the heat and brightness of the Sun is to the
quickening of the herbs, and to expel darkness: So necessary is also to the
life everlasting, and to the illumination and light of the soul, the perpetual
meditation, exercise and use of Gods holy word. And therefore, dear brethren,
if that ye look for a life to come, of necessity it is, that ye exercise
your selves in the book of the Lord your God. Let ^o day slip or want some
comfort received from the mouth of God: open your ears, and he will speak even
pleasant things to your heart: close not your eyes, but diligently let them
behold, what portion of substance is left to you within your fathers
Testament. Let your tongues learn to praise the gracious goodness of him,
whose mere mercy has called you from darkness to light, and from death to
life. Neither yet may ye do this so quietly, that ye will admit no witness: no
brethren, ye are ordained of God to rule your own houses in his true feate,
and according to his word. Within your houses, I say, in some cases ye are
Bishops and Kings: your wife, children, servants, and family, are your
Bishopprike and charge: of your it shall be required how carefully and
diligently ye have always instructed them in Gods knowledge, how that ye have
studied in them to plant virtue, and suppress vice. And therefore I say, ye
must make them partakers, in reading, exhorting and in making common prayers,
which I would in every house were used once a day at least: but above al
things, dear brethren, study to practice in life, that which the word of
God commands, and then be ye assured, that ye shall never hear nor read
the same without fruit. And thus much for the exercise within your houses.
Considering that S. Paul calls the congregation, the body of Christ,
whe^eof every one of us is a member, teaching us thereby, that no member is of
sufficiency, to sustain and feed it self, without the help and support of
an other: I think it necessary, for the conference of scriptures, assemblies
of brethren be had. The order therein to be observed, is ^xpressed by S. Paul,
and therefore need not I to use many words in that behalf: only willing
that when the convent are come together, which I would were once a week, that
your beginning should be from confession of your offenses, and invocation of
the spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ to assist you, in all your godly
enterprises. And the^ let some place of scripture be plainly and distinctly
read, so much as shall be thought sufficient for one day or time: which ended,
if any brother have exhortation, question or dout, let him not fear to speak
or move the same, so that he do it with moderation, either to edify, or to be
edified. And hereof I dout not, but great profit shall shortly ensue: For first
by hearing, reading, and conferring the scriptures in the assembly, the whole
body of the scriptures of God shall become familiar: The judgments and
spirits of men shall be tried. Their patience and modesty shall be known, and
finally their gifts and utterance shall appear. Multiplication of words,
prolixe interpretations, and wilfulness in reasoning, is to be avoided at al
times, and in all places, but chiefly in the congregation: where nothing ought
to be respected, except the glory of God, and comfort or edification of
brethren. If any thing occur within the text, or else arise in reasoning,
which your judgments can not resolve, or capacities comprehend: let the same
be noted and put in writing before ye dismiss the congregation, that when God
shall offer unto you any interpretor, your dout being noted and known, may
have the more expedite resolution, or else that when ye shall have occasion to
write to such, as with who^ ye would communicate your judgments, your letters
may signify and declare the vnceasing desire that ye have of God, and of his
true religion. And they I dout not, according to their talents, will endeavor
and bestow their faithful labors to satisfy your godly petitions. Of my
self, I will speak as I think, I will more gladly spend ten hours in
communicating my judgment with you in explayning, as God pleases to open to
me, any place of scripture, then half an hour in any matter beside. Further,
I would in reading the scriptures ye should join some books of the old, and
some of the new Testament together, as Genesis and one of the Evangelists,
Exodus with an other, and so forth, ever ending such books as ye begin, as
the time will suffer. For it shall greatly comfort you, to hear that harmony
and well tuned song, of the holy spirit, speaking in our fathers, from the
beginning. It shall confirm you in these dangerous and perilous days, to
behold the face of Christ Jesus his loving spouse and Church, from Abel to him
self, and from him self to this day, in all ages to be one. Be frequent in the
Prophets, and in the Epistles of S. Paul: for the multitude of matters most
comfortably therein contained, requires exercise and good memory. Like as your
assemblies ought to begin with confession and in^ocation of God his holy
spirit: So would I that they were finished with thanksgiving, and common
prayers for princes, Rulers and Magistrates, for the liberty and free passage
of Christ his Euangelie, for the comfort and deliverance of our afflicted
brethren, in all places now persecuted, but most cruelly within the realms of
France and England: and for such other things, as the spirit of the Lord
Jesus shall teach unto you to be profitable, either to your selves or to your
brethren, whersoeuer they be. If thus (or better) I shall hear that ye
exercise your selves, dear brethren, then will I praise God for your great
obedience, as for them, that not only have received the word of grace with
gladness, but that also with care and diligence do keep the same, as a
treasure and jewel most precious. And because I can not suspect that ye will do
the contrary at this present, I will use no threatenings: for my good hope is,
that ye shall walk, As the sons of light, in the midst of this wicked (...)*
That Ye ^hal be a^ Starre^ in the night ^eason, who yet a^e not changed into
(...) That ye shall be wheat amongst the (...), and yet that ye shall not
change your nature, which ye have received by grace, through the ^elowship and
par^icipatio^ which we have with the Lord Jesus in his body and blood. And
finally that ye shall be of the number of the prudent vi^gins, daily renewing your
(...) with oil, as you that patiently do abide the glorious apparition and
coming of the Lord Jesus: whose omnipotent spirit ^ule and instruct,
illuminate and comfort your (...) and mindes^ in all assaules, (...) and
evermore, Amen.

The grace of our Lord Jesus, rest with you. I.K.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Dawson, dwelling at the three Cranes in the
Vintree. 1580.


