A SERMON preached by John Knox Minister of Christ Jesus in the Public
audience of the Church of Edenbrough, within the Realm of Scotland, upon
Sunday, the.19. of August.1565. For the which the said John Knoxe was inhibite
preaching for a season. 1. Timoth. 4. The time is come that men can not abide
the Sermon of verity nor wholesome doctrine. To this is adjoined an exhortation
unto all the faithful within the said Realm, for the relief of such as
faithfully travail in the preaching of Gods word. Written by the same John
Knoxe, at the commandment of the ministry aforesaid.

Imprinted Anno. 1566.

JOHN KNOXE THE servant of Jesus Christ, Inpreaching of his holy Euangell, to
the beneuolent Reader, desires grace and peace, with the spirit of righteous
Judgment.
WONDER NOT, christian Reader that of al my study and travail within the
scriptures of GOD these twentye years, I have set forth nothing in exponing
any portion of scripture, except this only rude and indigest Sermon preached
by me in the public audience of the church of Edingbrough the day and year
above me^cioned. That I did not in writ communicate my judgment upon the
scriptures, I have ever thought and yet think my self to have most just
reason. For considering my self rather called of my God to instruct the
ignorant, comfort the sorrowful, confirm the weak, and rebuke the proud by
tongue and liuelye voice in these most corrupt days, tha^ to compose books for
the age to come, seeing that so much is written (and that by men of most
singular condition) and yet so little well observed: I decreed to contain my
self within the bonds of that vocation, whereunto I found my self
especially called. I dare not deny (lest that in so doing I should be
injurious to the giver) but that God has revealed unto me secrets unknown to
the world, and also that he has made my tongue a trumpet to forwarne realms
and nations, yea certain great personages, of mutations and chaunges, when no
such things were feared, nor yet was appearing, a portion whereof can not the
world deny (be it never so blind) to be fulfilled, and the rest (alas) I fear
shall follow with greater expedition and in more full perfection, than my
sorrowful heart desires. These revelations and assurances not withstanding, I
did ever absteyne to commit any thing to writ, contented only to have obeyed
the charge of him, who commanded me to cry. If any then will ask to what
purpose this only sermon is set forth, and greater matters omitted, I answer,
to let such as Satan has not altogether blinded see, upon how small
occasions, great offense is now conceived. This sermon is it for the which
from my bed I was called before the Council: and after long reasoning, I was
by some forbidden to preach in Edingbrough so long as the King and Queen were
in the town. This sermon is it that so offe^deth such as would please the
Court, and yet will not appear to be enemies to the truth, that they dare
affirm that I have exceded the bonds of Gods messanger. I have therefore
faithfully committed unto writ, what soever I could remember might have been
offensive in that sermon. To the end that as well the enemies of Gods truth, as
the professors of the same, may either note unto me wherein I have offended, or
at the least cease to condemn me before they have convicted me by Gods
manifest word. If any man think it easy unto me to mitigate by my pen the
inconsiderate sharpness of my tongue, and so can not men freely judge of that
my sermon, I answer that neither am I so impudent that I will study to abuse
the world, in this great light, neither yet so void of fear of my God, that
I will auowe a lie in his own presence. And no less do I esteem it to be a
lie, to deny or co^ceile that which in his name I have once pronounced, than to
affirm that GOD has spoken, when his word assures me not of the same, for in
the public place I consulte not with flesh and blood what I shall propone to
the people, but as the spirit of my God who has sent me and unto whom I must
answer, moves me, so I speak, and when I have once pronounced threatenings in
his name (how unpleasant soever they be to the world) I dare no more deny
the^, than I dare deny that God has made me his messinger to forwarne the
inobedient of their assured destruction. At that sermon were auditors unto me
not only professors of the truth and such as favor me, but rank papists,
dissembled Hipocrites, and no small number of covetous clawbaks of the new
court. Now I will appeal the conscience of them all, as they will answer in
the presence of the eternal god, that either they bear me record now writing
the truth, or else note unto me the sentences offensive then by me pronounced,
and now ommitted in writting, for in Gods presence I protest that so far as
memory would serve me, I have written more vehemently, than in the action I
spoke and pronounced, but of purpose I have omitted persuasions and
exhortations which then were made for alluring of such unto the fear of God,
whom gladly I would have pleased, if so I could have done, and not have
betrayed the manifest truth of my God. The Lord be merciful unto me that I
did not more fullye express whatsoever his holy spirit laid before me, in
that text, which I am assured the indifferent reader shall think I have but
slenderlye handeled, all circumstances being co^nsidered. O Lord for thy great
name sake give unto us Princes and rulers that delight in thy truth, that love
virtue, hate impiety, and that desire rather to be roundely taught to their
salvation, than deceyueably flattered to their everlasting confusion. Amen.

At Edingbrough the.19. of September.1565.
Isaias.26. Chap. verse. 13. 13 O Lord our God, other Lords beside thee have
ruled us, but we will remember thee only and thy name.

14 The dead shall not live, neither shall the dead arise, because thou have
visited and scattered them and destroyed all their memory.

15 Thou have increased the nation, O Lord: thou have increased the nation,
thou art made glorious: thou have enlarged all the coasts of the earth.

16 Lord in trouble have they visited thee: they poured out a prayer when thy
chastening was upon them.

17 Like as a woman with child that draws nere to the travail is in
sorrow, and cries in her pains, so have we been in thy sight O Lord.

18 We have conceived, we have borne in pain as though we should have brought
wind: there was no help in the forth neither did the inhabitants of the
earth, world fall.

19 Thy dead men shall live: even with my body shall they rise, awake and
sing ye that dwell in dust: for thy dew is as the dew of herbs and the earth
shall cast out the dead.

20 Come my people enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors after thee
hide thy self for a very little while until the indignation pass over.

For lo the Lord comes out of his place to visit the iniquity of the
inhabitants of the earth upon them: and the earth shall disclose her blood,
and shall no more hide her slain.


A SERMON PREACHED by John knoxe.
AS THE CONninge Maryner being Master, having his ship tossed with vehement
tempest, and winds co^trarious, is compelled often to trauerse, least that
either by too much resisting to the violence of the waves, his vessel might be
overwhelmed, or by to much liberty granted, to be carried whither the fury
of the tempest would, his ship should be driven upon the shore, and so make
shipwreck: Eue^ so does our prophet I saiah in this text which presentely ye
have heard read. For he foreseing the great desolation that was decreed in the
counsel of the eternal, against Jerusalem and Judah, to weete, that the whole
people that bare the name of GOD should be dispersed, The dispotion.
that the holy city should be destroyed, the temple wherein was the Ark of
covenant, and where GOD had promised to give his own presence, should be brent
with her, the King taken, his sons in his own presence murdered, his own
eyes immediately after to be put out, the nobility, some cruelly murdered, some
shamefully lead away captives, and finally the whole sede of Abraham, rased as
it were, from the face of the earth, the Prophet (I say) fearing these horrible
calamities, does as it were, some times suffer himself and the people
committed to his charge, to be carried away with the violence of the tempest,
with out further resistance, than by pouring forth his and their dolorous
co^playntes, before the majesty of GOD, as in the 13.17. and.18. verse of this
present text we may read. At other times he valiantly resists the desperate
tempest, and pronounces the fearful destruction of all such, as trouble the
Church of GOD, which he pronou^ceth that God will multiply, even in such time
as when it appears utterly to be exterminate. But, because there is no final
rest to the whole body, till that the head return to judgment, he calls the
afflicted to patience, and promyseth such a visitation, as whereby the
wickedness of the wicked shall be disclosed, and finally recompensed in their
own bosoms.

These are the chiefest points which by the grace of God, we intend more
largely at thy^ present to entreat.

First the Prophet says: O Lord our God, Ver. 13.
, other Lords besides thee have ruled us.

This no doubt, is the beginning of the dolorous complaint in the which he
first co^playneth of the unjust tirannye that the poor afflicted Israelites
sustained, during the time of their captivity. True it is that the Prophet was
gathered to his Fathers in peace, before that this extremity appreche^ded the
people. For a hundredth year after his deceasse, was not the people lead away
captive, yet he foreseing the assurance of the calamity, did before hand
endite unto them the complaynt that after they should make. But at the first
sight it appears that the complaint has small weight. For what new thing
was it that other Lords than GOD in his own person ruled them, seeing that
such had been their regiment from the beginning. For who knows not that
Moses, Aaron, and Joshua, the Judges, Samuel, David, and other godly rulers,
were men, and not God. And so other Lords than God, ruled them in their
gretest prosperity.

For the better understanding of this complaynte, and of the mind of the
Prophet, we must first observe from whence al authority and dominion flows*
And secondly, to what end powers are appointed of God. The which two points
being discussed, we shall the better understand, what Lords, and what
authority rules beside God, and who are they in whom God and his merciful
presence rules.

The first is resolved to us by the words of the apostle, saying, There is no
power but of God. David brings in the eternal God speaking to Judges and
rulers, Psalm. 82.
saying, I have said ye are Gods, and the sons of the most highest. And
Solomon in the person of GOD, affirms the same, saying: By me Kings raygne,
and Princes discern the things that are just. Of which places it is evident,
that it is neither birth, influence of Stars, election of people, force of
arms, not finally what soever can be comprehended under the power of nature,
that makes the distinction betwixt the superior power and the inferior, or
that does establish the royal throne of Kings, but it is the only and perfect
ordinance of God, who wills his power, terror and Majesty in a part to
shine in the thrones of Kings, and in the faces of his Judges, and that for the
profit and comfort of man, so that who soever would study to deface that order
of regiment, that God has established, and by his holy word allowed, and
bring in such a confusion, as no difference should be betwyxt the upper powers
and the subjects, does nothing but euert and turn vpside down the very throne
of God, which he will to be fixed here upon earth, as in the end and cause of
this ordinance more plainly shall appear, which is the second point, we have
to observe for the better understanding of the Prophets words and mind.

The end and cause then, why God prynteth in the weak and feeble flesh of man
this Image of his own power and majesty, is not to puff up flesh in opinion of
it self, neither yet that the heart of him that is exalted above others, shall
be lifted up by presumption and pride, and so despise others, but that he shall
consider that he is appointed Lieutenaunt to one, whose eyes continually watch
upon him, to see and examine how he behaueth himself in his office, Romans 13.
Saint Paul in few words declares the end wherefore the sword is committed to
the powers, saying, it is to the punishment of the wicked doers, and unto the
praise of such as do well.

Of which words it is evident that the sword of God is not committed to the
hand of man, to use as it pleases him, but only to punish vice, and
maintain virtue, that me^ may live in such society, as before God is
acceptable. And this is the very and only cause why God has appointed powers
in this earth.

For such is the furious rage of man's corrupt nature, that unless severe
punishment were appointed and put in execution upon malefactors, better it
were that man should live among brute and wild beasts, than among men. But
at this present I dare not enter into the description of this common place,
for so should I not satisfy the text, which by gods grace I purpose to absolve.
This only by the way I would, that such as are placed in authority should
consider, whether they raygne and rule by God, so that God rules them, or if
they rule without, besides and against God, of whom our Prophet here does
complain.

If any lust to take trial of this point, Deuteronomy. 17.
it is not hard: for Moses in the election of Judges, and of a King,
describes, not only what persons shall be chosen to that honor, but does
also give to him that is elected and chose^, the rule by the which he shall try
himself whether God raygne in him or not, saying: when he shall sit upon the
throne of his kingdom, he shall write to himself an examplar of this law in a
book by the priests the Leuits, it shall be with him and he shall read therein
all the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his god, and to
keep all the words of this law and these statuts* that he may do them, that his
heart be not lifted up above his brethren, and that he turn not from the
commandment to the right hand or to the left.

The Same is repeated to Joshua Joshua. 1.
in his inanguration to the regiment of the people by God himself, saying: let
not the book of this law depart fro thy mouth, but meditate in it day and
night, that thou may keep and do according to all that which is written in it.
For then shall thy way be prosperous, and thou shall do prudently.

The first thing the^ that god craves of him that is called to the honor of a
king, What is required of a King or Prince.
is the knowledge of his will revealed in his word.

The second is an upright and willing mind to put in execution such things as
God commands in his law, without declyning either to the right, or left
hand.

Kings then have not an absolute power to do in their regiment what pleases
them, The authority and power of kings is Limmitted.
, but their power is limited by gods word. So that if they strike where god
commands not, they are but murderers, and if they spare, where GOD
commands to strike, they and their throne are criminal and guilty of the
wickedness that abounds upon the face of the earth, for lack of punishment.

O if Kings and Princes should consider what account shall be craved of them, as
well of their ignorance and misknoweledge of Gods will, as for the neglecting
of their office But now to return to the words of the Prophet. In the person
of the whole people he does complain unto God, that the Babilonians (who^ he
calls other Lords besides God, both because of their ignorance of God, and
by reason of their cruelty and inhumanitie) had long ruled over them in all
rigor, without pity or co^compassion had upon the aunciente men, and famous
matrones. For they being mortal enemies of the people of God, sought by all
means to aggrauate their yoke, yea, utterly to have exterminate the memory
of the^ and of their religion, from the face of the earth.

After the first part of this dolorous complaynt, the Prophet declares the
protestation of the people, saying, nevertheless, only in thee shall we
remember thy name (others read it, Put we will remember thee only and thy
name) But in the Hebrew there is no Conjunction copulative in that sentence.
The mind of the Prophet is plain, to wit, that not withstanding the long
sustained affliction, the people of God declyned not to a false and vain
religion, but remembered God that sometime appeared to them in his merciful
presence, which albeit then they saw not, yet would they still remember his
name, that is, they would call to mind the doctrine and promise which so^etimes
they hard, albeit in their prosperity, they did not sufficiently glorify God,
who so mercifully ruled in the midst of them. The temptation no doubt of the
whole Isralites was great in those days. They were carried captives from the
land of Canaan, which was to the^ the gage and pledge of Gods favor toward
the^. For it was the inheritance that God promised to Abraham and to his seed
for ever. The league and covenant of Gods protection appeared to have been
broken. They lamentably compain that they saw not their accustomed signs of
Gods merciful presence. The true prophets were few, and the abhominatio^s used
in Babylon were exceeding many. And so it might have apered to the^, that in
vain it was, that they were called the posterity of Abraham, or that ever
they had received law or form of right religion from god. That we may the
better feel it in our selves, the temptation, I say, was eue^ such, as if God
should utterly destroy al order and policy that this day is within his church,
that the true preaching of the word should be suppressed. The right use of
sacraments abolished, Idolatry and papistical abomination erected up again.
And therewith, that our bodies should be taken prisoners by Turks or other
manifest enemies of God and of al Godliness* Such I say was their temptation.
How notable then is this their confession that in bondage they make, to wit,
that they will remember God only, albeit he has appeared to turn his face
from them, they will remember his name, and will call to mind the deliverance
promised.

Hereof have we to consider what is our duty, if God bring us (as for our
offenses and unthankfulness justly he may) to the like extremity. This
confession is not the fair flattering words of hypocrites, lying and bathing
in their pleasures, but it is the mighty operation of the spirit of God, who
leaves not his own destitute of some comfort in their most desperate
calamities. The duty of Gods people
This is then our duty, not only to confess our god in the time of peace
and quietness, but he chiefly craves that we auowe him, in the middeste of his
and our enemies. And this is to do, but it behooves that the spirit of God
work in us above all power of nature. And thus we ought earnestlye to meditate
before the battle rise more vehement, which appears not to be far of, but
now must we enter in somewhat more deeply to consider these judgments of God.

This people entreated as we have heard, was the only people upon the face of
the earth, to who^ God was rightly known, among them only were his laws,
statuts, ordinances, and sacrifices used, and put in practice. They only
inuocated his name, and to them alone, had he promised his protection and
assistance. What then should be the cause, that he should give them over into
this great reproach, and bring them into such extremity, as his own name in
them should be blasphemed. The Prophet, Ezekiell, that saw this horrible
destruction forespoke by Isaiah put in just execution, gives an answer, in
these words. ^che. 20.
I gave unto them laws that were good, in the which, whosoever should walk,
should live in them. But they would not walk in my ways, but rebelled
against me, and therefore, I have given unto them laws, that are not good, and
judgments, in the which they shall not live The writer of the books of kings
and cronicles declare this in more plain words, saying: the Lord sent unto
them his prophets rising early, desiring of them to return unto the Lord,
and to amend their wicked ways (for he would have spared his people and his
tabernacle) but they mocked his servants, and would not return unto the
Lord their God to walk in his ways. 2. Reg. 17.
Yea, Judah it self kept not the precepts of the Lord God, but walked in the
manners and ordinances of Israel: that is, of such as then had declyned to
Idolatry from the days of Jeroboam. And therefore the Lord God abhorred the
whole seed of Israel, that is, the whole body of the people, he promised them
and gave them into the hands of those, that spoiled them, and so he cast them
out from his presence.

Hereof, it is evident, that their stubborn disobedience unto God and unto the
voices of his Prophets, was the cause of their destruction. Now have we to
take heed how we should use the good laws of God, that is, his merciful will
revealed unto us in his word, and that order of justice, that by him for the
comfort of man is established among men. It is no doubt, but that obedience,
is the most acceptable sacrifice unto God, and that which above all things he
requires, that when he manifests himself by his word, that men follow
according to their vocation and commandment. Now so it is, that God by that
great pastor out Lord Lesus, now manifestly in his word calls us from all
impiety, as well of body, as of mind; to holiness of life, and to his
spiritual service. And for this purpose, he has erected the throne of his
mercy among us the true preaching of his word, together with the right
administration of his sacramet, but what is our obedience. Let every man
examine his own conscience, and consider what statuts and laws we would have
to be given unto us.

Would thou O Scotland have a King to reign over thee in justice, equity,
and mercy? Subject thou thy self to the Lord thy God, obey his
commandments, and magnify thou that word that calls unto thee. This is the
way, walk into it, and if thou will not, Isai.
, flatter not thy self, the same justice remains this day in God to punish
thee Scotland, and thee Edenborough in especial, that before punished the
land of Judah, and the city of Jerusalem. Every realm or nation (says the
Prophet Jeremy) that likewise offends, Iere. 9.
shall be likewise punished. But if thou shall see impiety placed in the seat
of justice above thee, Eccle. 3.
so that in the throne of God (as Solomon does compain) reigns nothing but
fraud and violence, accuse thy own ingratitude and rebellion against God. For
that is the only cause, Isa. 3.
, why God takes away (as the same Prophet in another place does speak) the
strong man and the man of war, the Judge, and the Prophet, the prudent, and
the aged, the captain, and the honorable, the counceller and the cunning
artificer. And I will appoint, says the Lord, children to be their princes,
and babes shall rule over them. Children are extorcyoners of my people, and
women have rule over them.

If these calamities, I say, apprehend us so that we see nothing, but the
oppression of good men, and of all godliness, and wicked men without God, to
reign above us: Let us accuse and condemn our selves, as the only cause of
our own miseries. For if we had heard the voice of the Lord our God, and
given upright obedience unto the same, God should have blessed us, he should
have multiplied our peace, and should have rewarded our obedience before the
eyes of the world. But now let us hear what the Prophet says further.

The dead shall not live, Verse. 14.
says be, neither shall the tiraunts, or the dead arise, because thou have
visited and scattered them, and destroyed all their memory.

From this.14. verse unto the end of the.19. it apeareh that the Prophet
observes no order, yea, that he speaks things directly repugning one to
another. For first he says the dead shall not live. After, he affirms, thy
dead men shall live. Verse. 15.
Secondly he says, thou have visited and scattered them, and destroyed all
their memory. Imediately thereafter he says, thou have increased the nation O
Lord, thou haste increased the nation. They have visited thee, and have poured
forth a prayer before thee.

Who, I say, would not think, that these are things not only spoken forth
of good order and purpose, but also manifestly repugning one to another. For,
to live, and not to live, to be so destroyed that no memorial remains. And
to be so increased, that the coasts of the earth shall be replenished, seem to
importe plain contradiction. For removing of this doubt, and for better
understanding of the Prophets mind, we must understand that the Prophet had
to do with diverse forts of me^. He had to do with the coniured and manifest
enemies of Gods people, the Caldes or Babilonians, even such as profess
Christ Jesus, have to do with the Turk and Sarazens. He had to do with the
sede of Abraham, whereof there were three sorts. The ten tribes all degenerate
from the true worshipping, and corrupted with Idolatry, as this day, are our
pestilent papists in all realms and nations.

There rested only the tribe of Judah and Jerusalem, where the form of true
religion was observed, the law taught, and ordinances of god outwardly kept,
but yet there were in that body (I mean in the bosom of the visible Church) a
great number that were hipocrits, as this day yet are among us, that do
profess the Lord Jesus and have refused papistrie, not a few that were
lycentious lyuers, some that had turned their back to God, that is had
forsaken al true religion, and some that lived a most abominable life, Ezech.
8.
as Ezechiell says in his vision. And yet there were some godly as a few
wheat corns oppressed and hid among the multitude of such chafe. Now
according to this diversity, the Prophet keeps diverse purposes and yet in
most perfect order.

And first after the first part of the complaint of the afflicted, as we have
heard, in vehemency of spirit he bursteth forth against all the proud
enemies of Gods people, all such as trouble them, and against all such as mock
and forsake God, and says: the dead shall not live. The proud Giants shall not
arise. Thou have scattered the^ and destroyed their memorial. In which words
he fights against the present temptation, and dolorous estate of Gods people,
and against the insolent pride of such as oppressed them, as the Prophet
should say. O ye troublers of Gods people, howsoever it appears to you in
this your bloody rage, that God regards not your cruelty, not considers
not what violence ye do to his pore afflicted, yet shall ye be visited, yea,
your carcases shall fall and lie as stinking carions upon the face of the earth,
ye shall fall without hope of life, or of a blessed resurrection. Yea, howsoever
ye gather your substance and augment families, ye shall be so scattered, that ye
shall leave no memorial of you to the posterities to come, but that which shall
be execrable and odious.

Hereof have the tirauntes their admonition, and the aflicted church
inestimable comfort. The tiraunts that now do oppress, shall receive the same
end that they which have passed before, that is, they shall dye and fall with
shame without hope of resurrection as is aforesaid, not that they shall not
arise to their own confusion and just condempnation, but that they shall not
recover power to trouble the servants of God, neither yet shall the wicked arise
as David says, in the council of the just.

Now have the wicked their councils, their thrones, and finally handeling for
the most part of al things that are upon the face of the earth, but the pore
servants of God are reputed unworthy of men's presence, yea they are more vile
before these proud tyraunts, than is very dirt and mire that is trodden under
foot. But in that glorious resurrection, this estate shall be changed. For the^
shall such as now by their abominable living and cruelty, Apoca.
destroy the earth and molest gods children, see him whom they have pierced.
They shall see the glory of such, as now they persecute, to their terror and
everlasting confusion. The remembrance hereof ought to make us patient in the
days of affliction, and so to comfort us, that when we see tiraunts in their
blind rage tread under foot the saints of god, that utterly we despair not,
as that there were neither wisdom, justice, nor power above in the heavens to
repress such tirannie, and to redress the dolors of the unjustly afflicted.
No brethren, let us be assured that the right hand of the Lord will change the
state of things that be most desperate. In our God there is wisdom and power
in a moment to change the joy and mirth of our enemies, into everlasting
mourning, and our sorrows into joy and gladness that shall have no end.

Let us therefore in these apparent calamities (and marvel not that I say
calamities apparent, for he that sees not a fire begone, that shall burn more
than we look for, unless God of his mercy quench it, is moore than blind.)
Yet I say, let us not be discouraged, but with unfeigned repentance, let us
return to the Lord our God, let us accuse and condemn our former
negligence, and steadfastly depend upon his promised deliverance, and so shall
our temporal sorrows, be converted into joy everlasting, the doubt that might
be moved concerning the destruction of those whom God exalts, shall be
discussed if time will suffer, after that we have passed throughout the text.
Now proceeds the Prophet and says.

Thou have increased the nations, Verse. 15.
O Lord, thou have increased the nation, thou art made glorious, thou have
enlarged all the coasts of the earth.

Lord in trouble. Verse. 16.
etc.

In these words the Prophet gives consolation to the afflicted, assuring them
that how horrible soever that desolation should be, yet should the seed of
Abraham be so multiplied, that it should replenish the coasts of the earth.
Yea, that God should be more glorified in their dispersion, than he was during
the time of their prosperity: This promise no doubt was incredible when it was
made. For who could have been persuaded that the destruction of Jerusalem,
should have been the means, whereby the nation of the Jews should have been
increased, seeing that much rather it appeared that the overthrow of Jerusalem,
should have been the very abolishing of the seed of Ahraham. But we must
consider to what end it was that God revealed himself to Abraham, and what is
contained in the promise of the multiplication of his seed, and of the
benediction promised thereto.

First God revealed himself to Abraham, and that by the means of his word, to
let al flesh after understand, that without God first call man, and reveal
himself unto him, that flesh can do nothing but rebel against God. ^osu. 24.
For Abraham no doubt was an Idolater before that God called him from Vr of the
Caldeis. The promise was made that the seed of Abraham should be multiplied as
the stars of heaven, Romans 9.
and as the sand of the sea, which is not simply to be understood of his
natural seed, although it was sometimes greatly increased, but rather of
such as should become the spiritual seed of Abraham, as the Apostle
speaks: Now if we be able to prove that the right knowledge of God, his
wisdom, justice, mercy, and power, was more amply declared in their
captivity, than ever it was at any time before: then can we not deny, but that
God even when to man's judgment he had utterly rased them from the face of the
earth, did increase the nation of the Jews, so that he was glorified in them,
and did extend the coasts of the earth for their habitation. And for the
better understanding hereof, let us shortly try the histories from their
captivity to their deliverance, and after the same, to the coming of the
Messiah. It is no doubt, but that Satan intended by the dispersion of the
Jews so to have profaned the whole seed of Abraham, that among the^ should
neither have remained the true knowledge of God, nor yet the spirit of
sanctification. But that all should have come to a like ignorance and
contempt of God.

For I pray you, for what purpose was it, that Daniel Daniell. 1.
and his fellows were taken into the Kings court, were commanded to be fed at
the Kings table, and were put to the schools of their divines, South sayers and
Astrologians? it may be thought that it proceeded of the Kings humanity, and
of a zeal that he had, that they should be brought up in virtue and good
learning. And I doubt not, but it was so understood of a great number of the
Jews. But the secret practice of the Devil, was understood of Danyell, when
he refused to defyle himself with the kings meat, which was forbidden to the
seed of Abraham in the law of their God. Well, God begins shortly
thereafter to show himself myndefull of his promise made by his Prophet. And
he begins to trouble Nabuchodonezar himself, by showing to him a vision in
his dream, which did the more trouble him, because he could not forget the
terror of it. Neither yet could he remember what the vision, and the parcels
thereof were. Whereupon were called al divines, Interpretors of dreams, and
Southsayers, of whom the King demanded, if they could let him understand what
he had dreamed. But while that they answer, that such a question used not to
be demanded of any Southsayer or Magitian: For the resolution thereof only
appertained to the Gods, whose habitation was not with men: the charge was
given, that they all should be slain. And amongst the rest Daniell Daniell. 2.
was sought (whose innocence, the devil most envied) to have suffered the same
judgment. He reclaymeth and asks time to disclose that secret. (I only
touch the history, to let you see by what means God increases his knowledge)
which being granted, the vision is reveled unto him. He shows the same unto
the king, with the true interpretation of it. Adding, that the knowledge
thereof came not from the stars, but only from the God of Abraham, who only
was, and is, the true God* which thing understood, the king burst forth in
his confession, saying, of a truth your God is the most excellent of al Gods.
And he is Lord of kings and only he that reuealeth the secrets, seeing that
thou could open this secret.

And when the king after, puffed up in pride by the counsel of his wicked
nobility, would make an Image, before the which he would that al tongues and
nations subject to him should make adoration, and that Sydrack, Misacke and
Abednago, would not obey his unjust commandment, and so were cast in the
flaming furnace of fire, and yet by Gods Angels were so preserved, that no
smell of fire remained in their persons nor garments: this same king gives a
more notable confession, saying, the Lord God of Sydrack, Misack and Abednago
is to be praised, who has sent his Angels and delivered his worshippers, that
put their trust in him, who have done against the kings commandment, who have
rather given their own bodies to torment, Daniell. 3.
than that they would worship another God except their own God. By me
therefore is there made a decree, that whosoever shall blaspheme the God of
Sydrack, Misack and Abednago, that he shall be cut in pieces, and his house
shall be made detestable.

Thus we se how God began even almost in the beginning of their captiuitye, to
notify his name, to multiply his knowledge, and set forth as well his power, as
his wisdom and true worshipping, by those that were taken prisoners, yea that
were despised and of all men contempned. so that the name and fear of the God
of Abraham, was never before notified to so many realms and nations. This
wo^derous work of God proceeded from one Empire to another. For Daniel being
promoted to great honor by Darius king of Perses and Medes, falls into a
desperate danger. For he was committed to prison among Lions, Daniell. 6.
because that he was deprehended breaking the kings iniunctio^, not that the
king desired the destruction of Gods servants, but because the corrupt
Idolaters, that in hatred of Daniell had procured that law to be made, urged
the king against his nature. But God by his Angel did stop the Lions mouths,
and so preserved his servant. Which considered with the soddaine destruction of
Daniels enemies by the same Lions, king Daryus besides his own confession,
wrote to all people, tongues, and nations after this form. It is decreed by me
that in all the dominions of my kingdom men shall fear and reverence the God of
Danyell, because he is the living God, abiding for ever, whose kingdom shall
not be destroyed, and his dominion remains, who saves and delivers, and
shows signs and wonders in heaven and in earth: who has delivered Daniell
from the Lions.

This knowledge was yet further increased in the days of Cyrus, who giving
freedom to the captives to return to their own natyue cuntry, gives this
confession. Thus says Cyrus the king of Persians, all the kingdoms of the
earth has the Lord God of heaven given unto me, 1. Esd. 1.
and has commanded me that a house be built to him in Jerusalem, which is in
Judah. Whosoever therefore of you that are of his people, let the Lord his God
be with him, and let him pass up to Jerusalem, and let him build the house of
the Lord God of Israel, for he only is God that is in Jerusalem. Time will not
suffer to entreat the points of this confession, neither yet did I for that
purpose adduce the history. But only to let us see how constantlye God kept
his promise in increasing of his people, and in augme^ting of his true
knowledge, when that both they that were the seed of Abraham, and that
religion which they professed appeared utterly to have been extinguished above
men's expectation, I say, he brought fredome out of bondage, light out of
darkness, and life out of death. I am not ignorant that the building of the
temple and reparation of the walls of Jerusalem, were long stayed, so that the
work had many enemies. But so did the hand of God prevail in the end, that
a decree was given by Daryus (by him I suppose that succeeded to Cambises) not
only that all things necessary for the building of the temple and for the
sacrifices that were to be there brent, 1. Esd. 6.
should be ministered upon the kings charges: but also, that whosoever should
hinder that work, or change that decree, that a balke should be taken out of
his house, and that he should be hanged thereupon. Yea that his house should be
made a donghil: and thereto he adds a prayer saying. A prayer.
the God of heaven, who has placed his name there, root out every king and
people (O that kings and nations should understand) that shall put his hand
either to change or to hurt this house of God that is in Jerusalem, and so in
dispite of Satan was the temple builded, the walls repaired, and the city
inhabited, and in the most desperate dangers, it was preserved, til that the
Messiah promised, the glory of the second temple came, manyfested himself to
the world, suffered and rose again according to the scriptures. And so by
sending forth his gospel from Jerusalem, did replenish the whole earth with
the true knowledge of God, and so did God in perfection increase the nation and
the spiritual seed of Abraham.

Wherefore dear brethren, we have no small consolation, if the estate of all
things be this day rightly considered, we see in what fury and rage the
world for the most part is now raised against the pore Church of Jesus
Christ, unto the which, he has proclaimed liberty after this fearful bondage
of that spiritual Babylon, in the which we have been holden captives of
longer space, than Israel was prisoner in Babylon it self. For if we shall
consider upon the one part the multitude of those that live without God: and
upon the other part, the blind rage of the pestilent papists, what shall we
think of the small number of them that do profess Christ Jesus, but that they
are as a poor sheep already seized in the claws of the Lion, yea, that they
and the true religion which they profess, shall in a moment utterly be
consumed.

But against this fearful temptation, let us be armed with the promise of our
god, to wit, that he will be the protector of his church, yea that he will
multiply it, even when to man's judgment, it appears utterly to be
exterminate. This promise has our God performed in the multiplication of
Abraham's seed, in preservation of it when Satan labored utterly to have
destroyed it, in deliverance of the same as we have heard from Babylon. He has
sent his son Christ Jesus clad in our flesh, who has tasted of all our
infirmities, (sin except) who has promised to be with us to the end of the
world. He has further kept promise in publication, yea in the restitution of
his glorious gospel. Shall we then think that he will leave his church
destitute in this most dangerous age? Only lee us stick to his truth and
study to conform our lives to the same, and he shall multiply his knowledge
and increase his people, but now let us hear what the Prophet says more.

Lord in trouble have they visited thee, Verse. 16.
they poured out a prayer when they chastening was upon them.

The Prophet means that such as in the time of quietness did not rightly
regard God nor his judgments, were compelled by sharp corrections to seek
God, yea by cries and dolorous complayntes, to visit him. True it is that such
obedience deserves small praise before men, for who can praise or accept that
in good part which comes as it were of mere compulsion. And yet rare it is
that any of Gods children do give vnsayned obedience until the hand of God
turn them. For if quietness and prosperity make them not utterly to forget
their duty both toward God and man, as David for a season, yet it makes
them careless, insolent, and in many things vnmindeful of those things that
God chiefly craves of them, which imperfection espied, and the danger that
thereof might ensewe, our heavenly father visits the sins of his children,
but in the rod of his mercy, by the which they are moved to return to
their God, to accuse their former negligence, and to promise better obedience
in all times thereafter, Psalm. 119.
as David confesses saying, before I fell in affliction I went astray, but now
will I keep thy statuts.

But yet for the better understanding of the Prophets mind, we may consider
how God does visit man, and how man does visit God, and what difference there
is, betwixt the visitation of God upon the reprobate, and his visitation upon
the chosen.

God sometimes visits the reprobate in his hot displeasure, pouring upon
them his plagues for their long rebellion, as we have heard before, that he
visited the proud, and destroyed their memory. Other times, God is said to
visit his people being in affliction, to whom he sends comfort or promise
of deliverance, as he did visit the seed of Abraham, being oppressed in Egypt:
and Zachary says, that God had visited his people and sent unto them hope of
deliverance, when John the Baptist, was borne. But of none of these
visitations speaks our Prophet here, but of that only which we have already
touched, to wit, when that God lays his correction upon his own children, to
call them from the venomous beasts of this corrupt world, that they suck not
in over great haboundance, the poison thereof, and does as it were, weane them,
from their mothers paps, that they may learn to receive other norishme^t. True
it is that this weaning (or spaning as we term it) from worldly pleasure, is a
thing strange to the flesh, and yet it is a thing so necessary to Gods
children, that unless they be weaned from the pleasures of the world, they can
never feed upon that delectable milk of Gods eternal verity. For the
corruption of the one does either hinder the other to be received, or else so
trobleth the whole powers of man, that the soul can never so digest the truth
of God, as that he ought to do.

Albeit this appears hard, yet it is most evident. For what liquor can we
receive from the breasts of the world, but that which is in the world, and
what that is, the Apostle John teaches, 1. John. 2.
saying: what soever is in the world, is either the lusts of the eyes, the
lusts of the flesh, or the pride of life. Now seeing that these are not of
the father, but of the world, how can it be, that our souls can feed upon
chastity, temperance, and humility, so long, as that our stomaks are
replenished with the corruption of these vices.

Now so it is that willingly flesh can never refuse these forenamed, but
rather still delyghteth it self in every one of them, yea, in them all as the
examples are but to evident.

It behooves therefore that God himself shall violently pull his children from
these venomous breasts, that when they lack the liquor and poison of the one*
they may visit him and learn to be nourished of him. Oh if the eyes of worldly
Princes should be opened, that they might see with what humor and lyquor their
souls are fed, while that their whole delight consists in pride, ambition,
and lusts of the stinking flesh. We understand then how God does visit men,
as well by his severe judgments, as by his merciful visitation of deliverance
from trouble or by bringing trouble upon his chosen for their humiliation. And
now it res^^th to understand how man visits God: man does visit God, when
he appears in his presence, be it to the hearing of his word, or to the
participation of his sacraments, as the people of Israel, besides the
observation of their Sabothes and daily oblations were commanded thrice a
year to present them selves before the presence of the tabernacle, and as we
do, as often as we present our selves to the hearing of the word. For there
is the fotestole, yea, there is the face and throne of God himself, whersoeuer
the gospel of Jesus Christ is truly preached, and his sacraments rightly
ministered.

But men may on this sort visit God hipocritically, for they may come for
the fashion, they may hear with deaf ears, yea they may understand, and yet
never determyne with themselves to obey that, which God requires. And let such
me^ be assured that he (who searches the secrets of hearts) will be aue^ged of
al such. For nothing can be to God more odyous, than to mock him in is own
presence. Let every man therefore examine himself, with what mind, and what
purpose, he comes to hear the word of God, yea with what care he hears
it, and what testimony his heart gives unto him, when that God commands
virtue, and forbids impiety.

Repinest thou when God requires obedience? Thou hear to thine own
co^dempnation. Mockest thou at Gods threatenings? Thou shall feel the weight
and truth of them, albeit to late, when flesh and blood cannot deliver thee
from his hand. But the visitation (whereof our Prophet speaks,) is only
proper to the sons of God, who in the time when God takes from them the
pleasures of the world, or shows his angry countenance unto them, have their
recourse unto him, and confessing their former negligence with troubled hearts
cry for his mercy. This visitation is not proper to all afflicted, but
appertains only to Gods children. For the reprobate can never have access
to Gods mercy in time of their tribulation, and that because they abuse as
well his long patience, as the manifold benefits they receive from his hands.
For as the same Prophet heretofore says, let the wicked obtain mercy, yet
shall he never learn wisdom, but in the land of righteousness, that is
where the very knowledge of God abounds, he will do wickedly, which is a
crime above all others abominable. For to what end is it that God erecteth
his throne among us? but for that we should fear him. Why does he reveal his
holy will unto us? but that we should obey it. Why does he deliver us from
trouble? but that we should be witnesses unto the world, that he is gracious,
and merciful.

Now when that men hearing their duty and knowing what God requires of them
do malepertly fight against al equity and justice, what I pray you do they
else but make manifest war against God, yea when they have received from God
such deliverance, that they cannot deny, but that God himself has in his
great mercy visited them, and yet that they continue wicked even as before.
What deserve they? but effectually to be given over into a reprobate sense,
that hedlong they may run to ruin both of body and soul. It is almost
incredible that man should be so enraged against God, that neither his plagues,
nor yet his mercy showed, should move them to repentance, but because the
scriptures bears witness of the one, and the other. Let us cease to meruell,
and let us firmly believe that such things as have been, are even presently
before our eyes, albeit, many blinded by affection can not see them.

Ahab as in the book of the kings is written, received many notable benefits of
the hand of God, who did visit him in diverse sorts, some times by his
plagues, sometimes by his word, and sometimes by his merciful deliverance. He
made him King: and for the Idolatry used by him and by his wife, he plagued
whole Israel by famyne. He revealed to him his will and true religion by the
Prophet Helias, he gave unto him sundry deliverances, but one most special,
when proud Benhadab came to besiege Samaria, and was not content to receive
Ahabs gold, silver, sons, daughters, and wives, but also required, that his
servant should have at their pleasure whatsoever was delectable in Samaria:
true it is, that his elders, and people willed him not to hear the proud
tirant. But who made unto him the promise of deliverance? and who appointed and
put his army in order, who assured him of victory. The Prophet of God only,
who assured him, that by the servants of the Princes of the provinces, who in
number were only 232 he should deface that great army, in the which there
were.32. Kings with all their forces: As the Prophet of God promised, so it
came to pass. Victory was obtained, not once only, but twice, and that by the
merciful visitation of the Lord.

But how did Ahab visit God again* for his great benefit received. Did he
remove his Idolatry, did he correct his Idolatrous wife Iesabel? No we find no
such thing, but the one, and the other, we find to have continued and increased
informer impiety. 1. Reg. 22.
But what was the end hereof? The last visitation of God was, that dogs
licked the blood of the one, 2. Reg. 9.
and did eat the flesh of the other. In few words then we may understand,
what difference there is betwixt the visitation of God upon the reprobate, and
his visitation upon his chosen. The reprobate are visited, but never truly
humbled, nor yet amended. The chose^ being visited, they sobbe, and they cry
unto God for mercy (which obtained) they magnify Gods name, and after declare
the fruits of repentance. Let us therefore that hear these iudge^ents of our
God, call for the assistance of his holy spirit, that how soever it pleases
him to visit us, that we may stoop under his merciful hands, and unfeignedly
cry to him when he corrects us. And so shall we know in experience, that our
cries and complaints were not in vain, but let us hear what the Prophet
says further.

Like as a woman (says he) with child that draws near to the travail,
Verse. 17.
is in sorrow and cries in her pains, so have we been in thy sight. O Lord,
we have conceived, we have borne in vain, as though we should have brought
forth the wind.

Saluations were not made to the earth, neither, Verse. 18.
did the Inhabitants of the earth fall.

This is the second part of the Prophets complaint, in the which he in the
person of Gods people complayneth, that of their great affliction there
appeared no end. This same similitude is used by our master Jesus Christ,
John. 16.
for when he speaks of the troubles of his church, he compares them to the
pains of a woman trauayling in her child birth. But it is to another end.
For there he promises exceeding and permanent joy, after a sort, though it
appear trouble. But here is the trouble long and vehement, albeit the fruit
of it was not suddenly espied. He speaks no doubt of that long and dolorous
time of their captivity, in the which they continually trauayled for
delyuerance, but obtained it not before the complete end of 70 years. During
the which time, the earth, that is the land of Judah, which sometimes was
sanctified unto God, but was then given to be profaned by wicked people, gat
no help. Nor perceived any deliverance. For the Inhabitants of the world fell
not, that is, the tirantes and oppressors of gods people, were not taken away,
but still remained and continued blasphemers of God an troublers of his church.
But because I perceive the hours to pass more swiftly then they have done at
other times, I mind to contract that which rests of this text into certain
points.

The Prophet first fights against the present desperation. Verse.19. and. 20.
After be introduces God himself calling upon his people. And last of all he
assures his afflicted, that God will come, and require account of all the
blood thirsty tirants of the earth.

First fighting against the present desperation, Verse. 19.
he says, thy dead shall live, even my body (or with my body shall they
arise,) awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust. For thy dew is as the dew of
herbs.

The Prophere here pierseth through all impedimentes that nature could
object. And by the victory of faith, he overcomes, not only the common
enemies; but the great and last enemy of al, to wit, death it self. For this
would he say, Lord I see nothing to thy chosen, but misery, to follow
misery, and one affliction to succeed another, yea in the end I see, that
death shall devour thy dearest children. But yet, O Lord, I see thy promise to
be true, and thy love to remain toward thy chosen, even when death appears
to have devoured them. For thy dead shall live, yea not only shall they live,
but my very dead careasse shall arise. And so I see honor and glory to succeed
this temporal shame. I see joy permanent to come after trouble, order to
spring out of this terrible confusion, and finallye, I see that life shall
devour death, so that death shall be destroyed, and so thy servants shall
have life. This I say is the victory of faith, when in the midst of death
throughout the light of Gods word the afflicted see life: Hipocrites in the
time of quietness and prosperity can generally confess that God is true in
his promises, but bring them to the extremity, and there ceasseth the
hipocrite further to trust in God than he sees natural means whereby God
uses to work. But the true faithful, when all hope of natural means
fails, then fly they to God himself, and to the truth of his promise, who
is above nature, yea whose works are not so subject to the ordinary course of
nature, that when nature fayloth, his power and promise fail also therewith.

Let us further observe that the Prophet here speaks not of all dead in
general, but says, thy dead O Lord shall live. In which words he makes
difference betwixt those that dye in the Lord, and those that dye in their
natural corruption and in old Adam. Die in the Lord can none except those
that live in him (I mean of those that attain to the years of discretion)
and none live in him, except those that with the Apostle can say I live, not I
but Christ Jesus lives in me. The life that now I live, I have by the faith of
the son of God. Gala. 2.
Not that I mean that the faithful have at all hours such sense of the life
everlasting; that they fear not the death and the troubles of this life, no
not so, for the faith of all Gods children is weak, yea and in many things
imperfect. But I mean, that such as in death, and after death shall live,
must communicate in this life with Jesus Christ, and must be regenerate by the
sede of life. That is, 1. Pet. 1.
by the word of the living and everlasting God, which whosoever dispiseth,
refuses life and joy everlasting.

The Prophet transferreth all the promises of God to him self, saying, Even my
dead body shall arise, and imediately after, gives commandment and charge to
the dwellers in the dust, that is, to the dead carcasses of those that were
departed (for the spirit and soul of man dwells not in the dust) that they
should awake, they should sing and rejoice. For they should arise and spring up
from the earth, even as the herbs do, after they have received the dew from
above.

Time will not suffer that these particulars be so largely entreated, as they
merit, and as I gladly would, And therefore let us first consider, that the
Prophet in tra^sferring the power and promise of God to him self, does not
vendicate to himself, any particular prerogative above the people of God, as
that he alone should live and arise, and not they also. But he does it to let
them understand that he taught a doctrine whereof he was certain, yea and
whereof they should have experience after his death. As he should say, my
words appear to you now to be incredible, but the day shall come, that I shall
be taken from you, my carcas shall be enclosed in the bosom of the earth, and
therefore shall ye be led away captives to Babylon, where ye shall remain
many days and years, as it were buried in your sepulchers.

But then call to mind that I said unto you before hand that my body shall
arise. Even so shall ye rise from your graves out of Babylon, and be restored
to your own cuntry and city of Jerusalem. This I doubt not, is the true
meaning of the Prophet. The charge that he gives to the dwellers in the dust,
is to express the power of Gods word. Whereby, he not only gives life
where death appa^antly had prevailed, but also by it he calls things that are
not, even as if they were. Ture it is that the Prophet Isaiah saw not the
destruction of Jerusalem, much less could he se the restitutio^ of it with his
corporal eyes, but he leaves this, as it were, in testament with them, that
when they were in the extremity of all bondage, they should call to mind what
the Prophet of God had before spoken.

And lest that his doctrine, and this promise of God made unto them by his
mouth, should have been forgotten (as we are ever prone and ready to forget
Gods promises when we are pressed with any sorrow) God raised up unto the^ in
the midst of calamity his Prophet Ezechiell, unto whom among many other
visions he gave this. The hand of the Lord first led him in a place which
was full of dry and dispersed bones. Ezech. 37.
The question was demanded of the Prophet, if these bones being wondrous dry
should live. The Prophet answered^ the knowledge thereof appertained unto God.
Charge was given unto him that he should speak unto the dry bones, and say,
thus says the Lord God to these bones, behold I shall give you breath, and
ye shall live: I shall give unto you sinews, flesh, and skin, and ye shall
live. And while the Prophet spoke (as he was commanded) he heard a voice, and
he saw every bone join in his marowe. He saw them covered with flesh and
skin, albeit there was no spirit of life in them, he was commanded again to
speak and to say, thus says the Lord God, come O spirit from the four
quarters, and blow in these that are slain that they may live. And as he
prophesied, the spirit of life came. They lived and stood upon their feet.
Now does the Lord interpret what this vision meant, saying, Son of man
these bones are the whole house of Israel. Behold they say our bones are
dried, our hope is perished, we are plainly cut of, but behold says the
Lord, I will open your graves, I will bring you forth of them, ye shall live
and come unto the land of Israel, and ye shall know that I am the Lord.

This vision I say, given to the Prophet, and by the Prophet preached to the
people when they thought that God had utterly forgoten them, compelled them
more diligently to aduert, what the former Prophets had spoken. It is no
doubt, but they carried with them both the prophecy of Isaiah and Jeremy, so
that the Prophet Ezechiel is a commentary to these words of Isaiah, where he
says, thy dead O Lord shall live, with my body they shall arise. The Prophet
brings in this similitude of the deawe, to answer unto that part of their
fidelity, who can believe no further of Gods promises, than they are able to
apprehende by natural judgment. As he would say, think ye this impossible,
that God shall give life unto you and bring you to an estate of a common wealth
again, after that ye be dead, and as it were rased from the face of the earth.
But why do ye not consider what God works from year to year in the order
of nature, sometimes ye see the face of the earth decked and beautified with
herbs, flowers, grass, and fruits. Again ye see the same utterly taken
away by storms and vehemency of the winter. What does God to replenishe the
earth again, and to restore the beauty thereof. He sends down his small and
soft dew, the drops whereof in their descending, are neither great nor
visible, and yet thereby are the pores and secret veins of the earth, which
before by vehemency of frost and cold were shut up, opened again. And so
does the earth produce again the like herbs, flowers, and fruits. Shall ye
then think? that the dew of Gods heavenly grace shall not be as effectual in
you to whom he has made his promise, as that it is in the herbs and fruits
that from year to year buddeth forth and decays? if ye do so the Prophet
would say your incredibility is inexcusable, because ye do neither rightlye
waighe the power nor the promise of your God.

The like similitude uses the Apostle Paul against such as called the
resurrection in doubt, because that by natural judgment they could not
apprehende that flesh once putryfied and resolved, as it were in other
substance should arise again and return again to the same substance and
nature. 1. Corin. 16.
O fool (says he) that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die, and
that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be, but bare
corn, as it falls, of wheat or some other, but God gives it a body as it
pleases him, even to every seed his own body. In which words and
sentence, the Apostle sharpelye rebukes the gross ignorance of the
Corinthians, who began to call in doubt the chief article of our faith, the
resurrection of the flesh after that it was once resolved, because that
natural judgment (as said is) reclaymed thereto. He reproves (I say) their
gross ignorance, because that they might have seen and considered some
proof and document thereof in the very order of nature. For albeit the wheat
or other corn cast in the earth apeareth to die, to putrify, and so to be
lost, yet we see that it is not perished, but that it fructifieth according to
Gods will and ordinance.

Now if the power of God be so manifest in raising up of the fruits of the
earth, unto the which no particular promise is made by god, what shall be his
power and virtue in raising up of our bodies, seeing that thereto he is bound
by the solemn promise of Jesus Christ his eternal wisdom, and the verity
it self that can not lie, yea, seeing that the members must once comm^nicate
with the glory of the head, how shall our bodies which are flesh of his flesh
and bone of his bones he still for ever in corruption, Ephe. 5.
seeing that our head Jesus Christ is now exalted in his glory. Noyther yet is
this power land good will of God to be restrained unto the last and general
resurrection only, but we ought to consider it in the marvelous preservation
of his church, and in the raising up of the same from the very bottom of
death, when by titauntes it has been oppressed from age to age.

Now of the former words of the Prophet we have to gather this comfort, that
if at any time we shall see the face of the church with in this realmeso
defaced (as I think it shall be sooner than we look for) when we shall see, I
say, virtue to be despised, vice to be mayntayned, the verity of God to be
impugned, lies and men's inventions, holden in authority, and finally when we
shall see the true religion of our God, and zealous obseruers of the same, to be
trodden under the feet of such as in their heart say there is no God: Psalm.14.
Let us then call to mind what have been the wondrous works of our God from
the beginning, that it is his proper office to bring forth light out of
darkness, order out of confusion, life out of death, and finally that it is
he, that calls thigs that are not, even as if they were, as before we have
hard. And if in the day of our temptation (which in my judgment approaches
fast) we be thus armed. If our incredibilitie can not utterly be removed, yet
shall it so be corrected, that dampnable desperation oppress us not.

But now let us hear how the Prophet proceeds, Come (says he,) thou my
people enter within thy chambers, shut thy door after thee, hide thy self a
very little while until the indingnation pass over.

Here the Prophet brings in God amiably calling upon his people to come to
himself, and to rest with him unto such time as the fury and sharp plagues
should be executed upon the wicked and inobedient. It may appear at the first
sight, that all these words of the Prophet in the person of God calling the
people unto rest, are spoken in vain. For we neither find chambers nor rest
more prepared for the dearest children of God (so far as man's judgment can
discern) than there was for the rebellious and inobedient. For such as fell not
in the edge of the sword, or dyed not of pestilence, or by hunger, were either
carried captives into Babylon, or else departed after into Egypt, so that none
of Abraham's feed, had either chamber or quiet place to remain within the
land of Canaan. For the resolution hereof we must understand that albert the
chambers whereunto God called his chosen, be not visible. Yet notwithstanding
they are certain, and offer unto Gods children quiet habitation in spirit,
howsoever the flesh be trauayled and tormented.

The chambers are then Gods sure promises, unto the which gods people is
commanded to resort, yea within the which they are co^inaunded to close them
selves in the time of greatest adversity. The manner of speaking is borrowed
from that judgment and foresight, which God has printed in this our nature.
For when! that men epsy great tempests appearing to come, willingly, they will
not remain uncovered upon the fields, but straight way, they will draw them
to their houses or holds, that they may escape the vehemence of the same. And
if they fear any enemy to pursue them, they will shut their doors, to the end
that suddenly the enemy shall not have entry. After this same manner God
speaks to his people, as he should say, the tempest that shall come upon
this whole nation shall be so terrible, that nothing shall appear but
exterminatio^ to come upon the whole body. But thou my people, thou I say,
that hear my word, beleuest the same, and tremblest at the threatenings of
my Prophets, now when the world does insole^tly resist, let such I say, enter
within the secret chamber of my promises. Let them conteyne themselves quietly
there, yea let them shut the door upon them, and suffer not infidelity, the
mortal enemy of my truth and of my people that depend thereupon, to have free
entry to trouble (yea rather to murder) my promise. And so shall they
perceive that my indignation shall pass, and that such as depend upon me,
shall be saved.

Thus we may perceive the meaning of the Prophet. Whereof we have first to
observe, that God acknowledges them for his people, that are in greatest
affliction, yea such as are reputed unworthy of men's presence, are yet admitted
with the secret chamber of God. Let no man think that flesh and blood can
sodaynely attain to that comfort, and therefore most expedient it is, that we
be frequentlye exercised in meditation of the same. Easy it is I grant in time
of prosperity, to say and to think, that God is our God, and that we are his
people. But when he has given us over in the hands of our enemies, and
turned (as it were) his back unto us, then I say, still to reclayme him to be
our God, and to have this assurance that we are his people, proceeds wholly
from the holy spirit of God, 1. John. 5.
as is the greatest victory of faith, which overcomes the world, for
increase whereof we ought continuallye to pray.

This doctrine we shall not think strange, if we shall consider how suddenly
our spirits are carried away from our God, and from believing his promise, so
sone as any great temptation does apprehend us, then begin we to doubt if ever
we believed Gods promises, if God will fulfill them to us, if we abide in his
favor, if he regards and looks upon the violence and injury that is done
unto us, and a multitude of such cogitations, which before lurked quietlye in
our corrupted hearts, burst violently forth when we are oppressed with any
desperate calamity. Against the which, this is the remedy, once to apprehend
and still to retain, God to be our God, and firmelye to believe, that we are
his people whom he loves, and will defend, not only in affliction, but even
in the midst of death it self.

Secondly let us observe, that the judgments of our God never were, nor yet
shall be so vehement upon the face of the earth, but that there has been and
shall be some secret habitation prepared in the sanctuary of God for some of
his chosen, where they shall be preserved until the indignation pass by, and
that God prepares a time, that they may glorify him again before the face
of the world, that sometimes despised them: and this ought to be unto us no
small comfort in these appearing dangers, to wit, that we be surely persuaded
that how vehement that ever the tempest shall be, that it yet shall pass over,
and some of us shall be preserved to glorify the name of our God as is
aforesaid.

Two vices lurk in this our nature, the one is, that we can not tremble at
Gods threatninges before that the plagues apprehende us, albeit that we see
cause most just why that his fierce wrath should burn as a devouring fire. The
other is, that when calamities before pronounced fall upon us, then begin we to
sincke down in desperation, so that we never look for any comfortable end of
the same. To correct this our mortal infirmity in time of quietness, we
ought to consider what is the justice of our God, and how odious sin is. And
above all other, how odyous Idolatry is in his presence who has forbidden it,
and who has so seuerelye punished it in all ages from the beginning. And in
the time of our affliction we ought to consider, what have been the wondrous
works of our God in preservation of his church, when it has been in
uttermost extremity. For never shall we find the church humbled under the
hands of tirantes and cruellye tormented by them, but therewith we shall find
Gods just vengeance to fall upon the cru^ell persecuters, and his merciful
deliverance to be showed to the afflicted* And in taking of this trial, we
should not only call to mind the histories of ancient times, but also we
should diligently mark what notable works God has wrought even in this our
age, as well upon the one, as upon the other. We ought not to think that our
God bears less love to his church this day, than that he has done from the
beginning. For as our God in his own nature is immutable, so remains his
love toward his elect, always unchangeable Ephe. 1.
For as in Christ Jesus he has chosen his Church before the beginning of al
ages, so by him will he maintain and preserve the same unto the end. Yea, he
will quiet the storms, and cause the earth to open her mouth and receive those
raging floods of violent waters, cast out by the Dragon, to drown and carry
away the woman which is the spouse of Jesus Christ, unto whom, Apocal. 1^
God for his own names sake will be the perpetual protector.

This saw that notable servant of Jesus Christ Athanasius, ^^ele. histo.
^^omoni. (...) 5. ca. 5.
who (being exiled from Alexandria by that blasphemous Apostata Julian the
Emperor) said unto his flock, who bitterly wept for his envious banishment:
Weep not but be of good comfort said he, for this little cloud will
suddenly vanish. A little cloud he called both the Emperor himself, and his
cruel tirannie. And albeit that small appearance there was of any deliverance
to the church of God, or yet of any punishment to have apprehended the proud
tirants, when the man of god pronounced these words, yet shortly after, God
did give witness that those words did not proceed from flesh nor blood, but
from Gods very spirit. For not long after, being in warfarre, he received a
deadly wound, whether by his own hand or by one of his own soldiers, the
writers clearly conclude not, but casting his own blood against the heaven,
he said, Vicisti tandem Galilee, That is, at last thou have overcome thou
Galilean, so in despite he termed the Lord Jesus, and so perished that tiraunt
in his own iniquity, the storm ceased and the church of God rceyued now
comfort.

Such shall be the end of all cruel persecuters, their reign shall be short
their end miserable, and their name shall be left in execratoni to Gods
people. And yet shall the Church of God remain to Gods glory after all storms.

But now shortly let us come to the last point. For behold says the
Prophet, Verse. 2^
the Lord will come out of his place to visit the iniquity of the inhabitants
of the earth upon them. And the earth shall disclose her blood and shall no
more hide her stayne, because that the final end of the troubles of Gods
chosen, shall not be before that the Lord Jesus shall return to restore al
things to their full perfection.

The Prophet brings forth the eternal God, as it were from his own place
and habitation, and therewith shows the cause of his coming to be, that he
may take account of al such as have wrought wickedlye, for that he means,
where that he says: He will visit the iniquity of the inhabitants of the
earth upon them. And lest that any should think that the wrong doers are so
many that they can not be called unto account, he gives unto the earth as it
were an office and charge to bear witness against al those that have wrought
wickedly, and chiefly, against those that have shed innocent blood from the
beginning. And says, that the earth shall disclose her blood, and shall no
more hide her slain men.

If the tirants of the earth and such as delight in shedding of blood should
be persuaded that this sentence is true, they should not so furiouslye come to
their own destruction. For what man can be so enraged, that he would
willingly do even before the eyes of God, that which might provoke his
majesty to anger. Yea provoke him to beco^e his enemy for ever, if that he
understood how fearful a thing it is to fall into the hands of the living God.
The cause then of this blind fury of the world, is the ignorance of God, and
that men think that God is but an Idol, and that there is no knowledge above,
that beholds their tirannie, neither yet justice that will, nor power that
may repress their impiety. But yet the spirit of truth does witness, the
contrary, affirming, that as the eyes of the Lord are upon the just, ^^al.
and as his ears are ready to receive their sobbing and prayers, so is his
angry visage against such, as work iniquity. He hates and holds in
abomination every disceitful and blood thirsty man. Whereof he has given
sufficient document from age to age in preserving the one, or at the lest in
revenging of their cause, and in punishing of the other. Where it is said that
the Lord will come from his place, and that he will visit the iniquity of the
inhabitants of the earth upon them, and that the earth shall disclose her
blood.

We have to consider what most commonly has been, and what shall be the
condition of the church of God, to wit, that it is not only hated, mocked,
and despised, but that it is exposed, as it were in a pray, unto the fury of
the wicked, so that the blood of the children of God, Psalm.
is spilt like water upon the face of the earth. The understanding whereof,
albeit it be unpleasant to the flesh. Yet to us it is most profitable, least
that we, seeing the cruel entreatings of Gods servants, begin to misknowe
the spouse of Jesus Christ, because that she is not entreated in this
unthankful world, as that the just and upright dealing of Gods children does
deserve. But contrariwise, for mercy, they receive cruelty, for doing good to
many, of all the reprobate they receive evil. And this is decreed in Gods
eternal council, that the members may follow the trace of the head, to the
end, that God in his just judgments, should finally condemn the wicked. For
how should he punish the inahbitants of the earth, if their iniquity
deserved it not* How should the earth disclose our blood, if it should not be
unjustly spilt? We must then commit our selves into the hands of our God, and
lay down our necks, yea and patiently suffer our blood to be shed, that
the righteous judge may require account, as most assuredly he shall of all the
blood that has been shed, from the blood of Abell the just, till the day that
the earth shall disclose the same. A terrible, but most true sentence.
I say every one that sheddeth or consents to shed the blood of Gods
children, shall be guilty of the whole. So that all the blood of Gods
children shall cry vengeance, not only in general, but also in particular,
upon every one, that has shed the blood of any that unjustly suffered.

And if any think it strange that such as live this day, can be guilty of the
blood that was shed in the days of the Apostles. Let them consider that the
verity it self pronounced, that all the blood that was shed from the days
of Abel unto the days of Zachary should come upon that unthankful
generation, that heard his doctrine, and refused it. The reason is evident, for
as there is two heads and and captains that rule upon the whole world, to
wit, Jesus Christ, the Prince of justice and peace, and Satan, called the
Prince of the world, so are they but two armies, that has continued battle
from the beginning, and shall fight unto the end. The quarrel is one which the
army of Jesus Christ sustain, which the reprobate do persecute, to wit, the
eternal truth of the eternal God, and the image of Jesus Christ, printed in
his elect, so that whosoever in any age persecuteth any one member of Jesus
Christ for his truth sake, subscribeth as it were with his hand, the
persecution of all that have passed before him. And this ought the tirantes of
this age deeply to consider, for they shall be giltye not only of the blood
shed by themselves, but of al (as said is) that has been shed for the cause
of Jesus Christ from the beginning of the world.

Let the faithful not be discouraged although they be appointed as sheep to
the slaughter house, for he, for whose sake they suffer, shall not forget to
revenge their cause. I am not ignorant that flesh and blood will think that
kind of suporte, too too late. For we had rather be preserved still alive, than
to have our blood to be revenged after our death. And truly if our felicity
stood in this life, or if death temporal should bring unto us any damage,
our desire in that behalf were not to be dampened. But seeing that death is
common to al, and that this temporal life, is nothing but misery, and that
death does fully join us with our God, and gives unto us the possession of
our inheritance, why should we think it strange to leave this world and go
to our head and sovereign captain Jesus Christ?

Now last we have to observe this manner of speaking, where that the Prophet
says. The earth shall disclose her blood. In which words, the Prophet would
accuse the cruelty of those that dare so unmercifully ryue from the breasts
of the earth, the dearest children of God, and cruelly cut their throts in her
bosom, who is by God appointed the common mother of mankind, so that she
unwillingly is compelled led to open her mouth, and receive their blood.

If such tirannie were used against any natural woman, as violently to pull
her infant from her breasts, cut the throat of it in her own bosom, and
compel here to receive the blood of her dear child in her own mouth, al
nations would hold the fact so abominable, that the like had never been done
in the course of nature. And no less wickedness commit they that shed the
blood of Gods children upon the face (as I have said) of their common mother
the earth. But be of good courage (O little and despised flock of Christ
Jesus) for he that sees your grief has power to revenge it. He that will not
suffer one tear of yours to fall, but that shall be kept and reserved in his
bottle, till the fullness thereof be poured down from heaven upon th^se that
caused you to weep and mourn, this your merciful God (I say) will not
suffer your blood for ever to be covered with the earth, nay the flaming fires
that have licked up the blood of any of our brethren, the earth that has
been defiled with it, I say with the blood of Gods children, for otherwise,
to shed the blood of the cruel bloudshedders, is to purge the land from blood,
and as it were to sanctify it. The earth (I say) shall purge her self of it
and show it before the face of god, yea the beasts, fowls, and other creatures
whatsoever shall be compelled to render that which iniustly they have received,
be it flesh, blood, or bones that appartained to thy children O Lord, which
altogether thou shall glorify, according to thy promise made to us in Jesus
Christ thy son, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost be honor, praise, and
glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

Let us now humble our selves in the presence of our God, and from the bottom
of our hearts, let us desire him to assist us with the power of his holy
spirit, that albeit for our former negligences, God give us over in the hands
of other than such as rule in his fear, that yet he let us not forget his
mercy, and that glorious name, that has been proclaimed amongst us: but that
we may look throughout the dolorous storm of his present displeasure, and see
as well what punishment he has appointed for the cruel tirants, as what
reward he has laid in store for such as continue in his fear, to the end:
that it would further please him to assist, that albeit we see his Church so
diminished, that it shall appear to be brought, as it were, to utter
extermination, that yet we may be assured, that in our God, there is power and
will, to increase the number of his chosen, even while they be enlarged, to the
uttermost coasts of the earth. Give us O Lord, hearts to visit thee in time
of our affliction. And that albeit we see none end of our dolors, that yet our
faith and hope may conduct us to the assured hope of that joyful
resurrection. In the which, we shall possess the fruit of that, for the which
now we travail. And in the mean season, grant unto us O Lord, to repose
our selves in the sanctuary of thy promise, that in thee, we may find
comfort, till that this thy great indignation (begone amongst us) may pass
over, and thou thy self, appear to the comfort of thy afflicted, and to the
terror of thine enemies. Let us pray with heart and mouth. Almighty God and
merciful father, etc. Lord in thy hands I commend my spirit. The castle ^f
Eden^rough was ^^ooting against the ^xiled for christ Jesus ^ake
For the terrible roaring of Gunnes and the noyce of armor do so pierce my
heart, that my soul thirstith to depart. The last of August. 1565. at.4 at
after noone written indigestly, but yet truly, so far as memory would serve,
of those things that in public preaching I spoke upon Sunday the.19. of
August. For the which I was discharged to preach.

Be merciful to thy flock, O Lord, and at thy good pleasure, put end to my
misery.

John Knoxe.

The Superintendents Ministers and commissioners of the Churches reformed
within this realm of Scotland assembled in Edenbrough the.xxv. day of
December.1565. to all faithful within the same realm desire grace and peace.
from God the Father and from our Lord Jesus Christ with the perpetual comfort
of the holy Ghost.
THE Sorrowful complayntes of all Ministers in general, and of some now more
to be lamented in others in particular, being considered in this our last
assembly (beloved in the Lord Jesus) diverse men were of diverse judgments,
how the grief and poverty of such as faithfully travail in their vocation
within the Church of God, might somewhat be relieved. After long reasoning it
was concluded, that a supplication should be direct to the Queen's Majesty, The
an^were is, the Queen can ^pare nothing.
requiring that respect might be had to the extreme necessity of our
Ministers. But because that the necessity of our brethren is great, and their
poverty present, and that the remedy can not be sudden nor yet certain, it
was thought expedient, that a general admonition should be made to all the
faithful, to have respect to the necessity of the Ministers universally. But
especially, that the faithful in every parish have consideration to the
necessity of such as travail amongst them in true doctrine and wholesome
exhortation, This is the commandment of the spirit o^ God. Hebr. 13.
which admonition, whosoever dispiseth, dispiseth no doubt, the chief duty of
a christian. For alas with what conscience can we eat our own bread, and
know the bowels of such as offers to us the bread of life, and minister to us
spiritual things, to crave of God and us but a reasonable sustentation, and
yet can not find such favor at our hands, as Turks find amongst Turks,
and Jews amongst that blinded nation.

Alas where are the bowels of mercy that sometime were found amongst the
faithful? How far is this our filthye auariounesse, distant from that
liberality which appeared in the primitive Church, when that the faithful
cast their substance at the feet of the Apostles? Act. 2.
Where is that charity which Rom 15.
moved the Churches of Macedonia 2 Corint. 9.
and Achaia and other cuntries to make most liberal collectours, and to send
the same to relieve the indigence of the pore at Jerusalem, and in Judea Where
is the zeal that was in the Galathians and Philippians, Galat. 4.
of whom the one would have given their eyes to the Apostle Paul, Phil. 4.
if that might have supported him, the other spared not to send to their
preacher being prisoner in Rome, their supporte and comfort most liberally. If
we think to be partakers with such men in glory, why study we not to
follow their virtues? If this be the same Euangel of salvation, (as no doubt
it is, that the Apostles preached, that now of Gods great mercy, is preached to
us, alas why brings it not forth some part of the former fruits, Let every
man descend within him self.
if we think they are but men and not Apostles, that now preach unto us, let
us consider that the Apostles were men, and received of men support and
comfort, and also that others than the Apostles were grounded for by the
liberality of the faithful, Act. 6.
as in the Acts of the Apostles may be seen.

We have not Paul to write unto us new Epistles, neither yet Mathewe, Mark,
Lucas, or John to dite unto us a new Euangell, because things written are
sufficient if we understand and follow the same: but of Gods great mercy we
have men that open and explane unto us not only writings of the new, but also
of the old testament. We have the servant of God endued with rare and notable
graces, whom if we contempne, it is to be feared that God shall so punish our
ingratitude, that he shall take from us the light of his word, and the true
messengers of the same, and suffer darkness again to apprehende us, ^t
Scotland ^duert.
and the slaves of Satan tirannously to impire above us, and then woe to us
and our posterity. For better it had been that the word of life had never
been shewe^ unto us, tha^ that we in our default, should suffer our selves to
be defrauded of so great a benefit. Let us therefore begin to reverence the
blessed Euangell of our salvation. Reverence nor magnify it we can not, when
that we suffer the true preachers thereof to be oppressed with poverty before
our eyes, ^ho are ^^ey that ^^uerence ^^t the eua^^^list of Ie^^s Christ.
^^^od. 22.
and yet we shut up the bowels of mercy from them.

Let us consider dear brethren how carefully God commands in his law that
the Levites and such as served that material tabernacle, should be provided of
sufficient livings, yea let us consider with what plagues God punished Israel
and Judah when his statutes and his servant were despised. Leuit. 27.
Shall we think that the eternal God will spare us, Nu. 28.
if we be found contemners of such as truly preach the Lord Jesus, Deuteronomy. 12.
or lawfully bear any charge within his Church, we may be assured that he
will not. For as the body is more excellent, than is the shadow, and as the
verity is to be preferred to the sign, so are the Ministers of the new
testament and their spiritual service, to be preferred tu the levites, and
their carnal ceremonies, the contempt whereof, can not but crave at Gods
hands most severe punishment, because (as said is) the office of the one
does far excel the office of the other. They did but read the law, kill the
sacrifice, sley the beasts, take of the skins, wash the flesh, and offer the
same as was commanded in the law, and for such service were the tenthes first
fruits, and other duties appointed for their sustentation: but the Ministers
of Jesus Christ have an office without al comparison more excellent, for they
bring to us the glad tidinges of salvation, by the two edged sword of Gods
word, which is mighty in operation, they sley that old man that never fightes
against God, they make his thought patent to his own confusion, that the new
man of God may take life. Hebr. 4.
They wash the souls with the Romans 8.
blood of Jesus Christ which abundantly drops from their lips, As Christ was
crucified amongst the Galathians.
when truly they preach the virtue and effect of the death of Jesus Christ,
Gala. 3.
and rightly minister his sacraments left to be used in his Church, Romans 12.
to hold us in recent memory of that so great a benefit.

Finallye by them are we taught and conducted, to offer not only prayers and
thanks giving: but also our bodies and souls in a reasonable and lively
sacrifice unto God by Jesus Christ. And yet (O cruel ingratitude) shall we care
no more for their sustentation, than that we were nothing addicted unto them,
neither yet that God had raised them up after over long blindness, to reduce
us again to the right way of salvation, and to conduct us in the same to the
end.

If we think that al these things may be due without ministers or without
preaching, we utterly deceive our selves. For the same order that God has
observed since that he has collected his visible church, he will shall be
observed so long as it continues upon the face of the earth, that is, Deuteronomy. 17.
that eue^ as under the law the people were commanded to require wisdom from
the mouths of the priests, Math. 2.
and Leuits had a charge to teach and so turn many from their iniquity: so
in this most acceptable time, did Jesus Christ ascending to the heavens,
distribute his glory in diverse sorts: for some he made Apostles, Cor. 12.
some Prophets, ^ph. 4.
some Euaungelistes, that is preachers of glad tidings, some pastors, some
teachers, to the end that we might all come to the unity of the faith, and to
the knowledge of the son of God.

Now if we think that none within Scotland lackes true faith, ^et yet Scot^and
ad^ert.
yea if we think that our children can attain to the right knowledge of God,
without true doctrine, then may we dream with our selves. that ministers are
not necessary, and so are we nothing addicted unto them. But if that faith
comes by hearing, Romans 10.
and that by the hearing of Gods word, and that Gods word is not sent unto us
absolutely from heaven by Angels, but is planted by the holy spirit in the
hearts and mouths of men whom God of his mercy sendes forth into the world,
to sow therein the seed of his Euangell, we can not but confess our selves
detters to our ministers. The dispisers of whom, yea all such as to their
power supporte them not in their necessities, are before his throne judged
contempners of his own majesty. And therefore yet once again, let every
faithful consider what is his duty, and let us abhor that ingratitude that
we should suffer the servants of the Lord Jesus to beg, or travail in
poverty before our eyes, for if we do, we banishe from us Jesus Christ and the
light of his euangell. The Apostle commands a bishop, and every true
preacher of Jesus Christ is a christian bishop among the rest of his virtues to
be one that keeps hospitality, and is able to receive strangers. This can
he not do without reasonable provision, and by whom the bishop should be
provided, S. Paul answers in these words. Gala. 6.
Let him that is taught communicate in all his goods, with him that teaches
him, and again, is it any great thing, that while we sow unto you spiritual
things, that we should reap of you carnal things? of which and many more places
it is evident, that the flock is bounde^ to provide for their pastor.

I will not excuse us dear brethren to cry and complain, we are compelled to
answer our bishops, persons, and vicars. Our teachers are taken up most
rigorously, how shall we then be able to sustain our ministers. These
complaints and appearing reasons dear brethren, will vanish with wind, when
we shall come to the straight examination of consciences before God. Pro. 3.
For are we not commanded to honor God with our substance? and think we that
we do honor him when with our substance we fill the bellies of dumb dogs, yea
of Gods coniured enemies, and suffer his servants to fall into poverty,
before our eyes, if ye think we shall be excused because that the order of
law constrayneth us thereunto, the Godly fear in case this reason shall be
admitted before God, lest tirannie under color of law, will take from us our
tithes, and so can we not sustain our ministers. This reason brethren will be
weak, yea so weak, that we fear it shall be repelled before the incorrupt
judge. For how many of us have complained upon that tiraunt? Who has made
intercession to the Maiestrats for redress of that enormity. Yea alas, how
many of us are not maintayners of those thieves, and partakers of their murders,
called Bishops, Abbottes, and Pryors. Let no man wonder that we term such men
with so odious terms, no, let them rather wonder, that God pours not forth
the uttermost of his vengeance upon the realm, and us that maintain such
tirants in their tirannie, in this great light of his Euangell. Thieves they
are, for they take large fee and serves not, murderers they are, because that
by withholding the bread of life, they cause the souls of men to dye, for
hunger of Gods word. And yet how conspire we with the^, what do we to
maintain that abuse: of those thieves, Or Leases.
we have tacks by them, we have interest and title to tithes, and for love of
the spoil, we mainetaine their murders in oppression of the pore. Let us not
be deceived dear brethren. Howsoever* the world mock this God shall aproue
it.
There is no law made by man, that can make these lawful, neither yet the
substance of one to be the just possession of an other, without a just title.

The tenthes were once appointed by God to the Levites, to the pore, to the
widow, fatherless, and strangers, and the laws of Emperors, Kings and
Princes, did after Christ, appoint the same to the like use, to wit, to the
sustentation of such, as travail in the Church, for the relief of the pore,
and for maintenance of learning. Now say we, to transfer the tithes from
these uses, the persons before named not being provided for, is both to commit
theft and sacrilege, yea, the spoil of the pore is in the houses of so many,
as unjustly possess them, and who they are ye have before heard, neither
shall they in the end escape that sentence of the Prophet. Zacha. 5.
The malediction of the Lord is upon the house of the thief. But yet brethren,
let us suppose that in no sort we did consent with those oppressio^s, but that
we opponed our selves unto them to the vttermoste of our powers, and yet we
were oppressed in our just cause by the tirannie of unjust laws? should we yet
be excused before God if we communicate not with the necessity of the
ministers of Jesus Christ? Let us be most assured that we can not, for that
sentence of our Lord and judge stands ever in force. ^ Corin. 9.
Worthy is the laborer of his wages. And again you shall not mussell the mouth
of the Ox that treads forth the corn. The execution of these precepts he
will always require of you, howsoever we flatter our selves in our own
imaginations, neither does extremity of laws, nor corruption of times excuse
us before God, of the duty he requires of us. Which thing did Abdias,
servant to Achab, and Iesabell, rightly consider, for when by them (but
Iesabell, chieflye) the Prophets of the Lord were destroyed, 1. Reg. 25.
he hid in caves an hundredth Prophets of the Lord, and fed the^ with bread and
water, that is, liberallye, and sufficientlye, for then was water more scant in
Israel than ale or wine is (as yet) amongst us. Did a man feed an hundred
servants of the Lord, and in that time when things were most scant, and yet
both the King and the Queen sought the subversion of true religion, and the
destruction of all Gods true servants, and shall not a thousand of us and more
that have professed the Lord Jesus with in this realm, upon our charges,
sustain two or three hundereth of such as have travailed, and yet travail to
advance the kingdom of Jesus Christ amongst us? if we do not, fearful shall
the sentence be, that shall be pronounced against us, by him, whose voice we
shall not then be able to gainstand, when from his throne he shall say. Math.
25.
Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, for I was hungry and ye fed me not,
thirsty ye gave me no drink, naked ye clothed me not, I lacked harbrowe, and
ye received me not into your house.

Plain it is that Christ Jesus in his own person neither suffers hunger nor
thrist, he needs neither clothes nor house, but as him self in the same place
says, whatsoever ye did not to the lest one of these, that ye did not to me.
Let us dear brethren ponder these words, and let us now begin to show the
fruits of repentance, and unfeignedly to magnify the word of our salvation.
Let the bowels of our mercy be opened to our brethren. Let never the
pestilente Papists have cause to rejoice over us, that they shall hereafter
say, that our own ingardenes banished Jesus Christ from us. Which thing if
without hypocrisy and of good courage we begin to do, then no doubt but God
shall bless the labors of our hand, he shall restore to us our former
courage, and strike the hearts of our enemies with the same fear, that they
have felt before.

It is we dear brethren, it is we, that has exponed the glorious Euangell of
Jesus Christ to this danger within this realm, for while that the most part
of us studied for the building of our own house, (...) grant that this ^ay yet
^e vnder^^ande, for ^ft before it was heard and mocked of many.
the house of the Lord was neglected and despised. And in the mean time has
the enemy so prevailed that we and it stand in equal danger, save that the
spiritual house of God can never utterly be suppressed. But we may fall, both
temporally and eternally, if we despise the sermon of exhortation, which calls
us again to our first profession. If we hear and obey his voice, there is
mercy, power, and good will in our God. Mercy, to pardon our former negligence,
power to repress the pride of our enemies, and good will, to maintain the
cause of his truth, that once of his mercy he has made to prosper in our
hands.

O Lord for thine own name sake move our hearts to consider our duties.
Preserve the flock to whom thou of thy mercy have reveled thy self. Purge
this realm of damnable Idolatry, and continewe to our posterity the light of
thy word in the same purity that thou haste offered it unto us. Take our rude
exhortation in good part, dear brethren, and be bold upon us in all things
not repugning to god. The grace of our Lord Jesus rest with you and us now and
ever.

At Edingbrough in our general assembly the last cessions thereof the.28. of
December 1565.
John Knoxe at the commandment of the brethren before mentioned.

