A Confutation of monstrous and horrible heresies, taught by H. N. and embraced
of a number, who call themselves the Family of Love.

by I. Knewstub.

Ephe. 4.14.15. Henceforth let us be no more children, wavering and carried
about with every vvind of doctrine, by the deceit of men, and with
craftiness, whereby they lay in wait to deceive. But let us follovv the
truth in love, and in all things grow up into him, which is the head, that
is, Christ.

Seen and allowed, according to the Queens Majesty's Injunctions.

Imprinted in London at the three Cranes in the Vine-tree, by Thomas Dawson,
for Richard Sergier. 1579.

To the right honorable his very good Lord and Master, Ambrose, Earl of
Warwick, master of her majesty's Ordinance, Knight of the noble order of the
Garter, and one of her highness most honorable privy Council, John Knewstub
wishes increase of all true happiness and honor, with the continual comfort
of a good conscience.
Great have been those harms (right honorable and my very good Lord) which
the Church of God in every age has suffered at the hands of strangers and open
enemies unto the truth: but yet nothing so grievous, as that hurt which she
has from time to time had at home, by some who have long layen in her own
bosom, and as Children been served from her own table. For, as civil war
is always more dangerous then foraine force: So the enemies within the church,
be they who of al other deal with greatest danger against the Church. Against
the force of an open enemy we have the strength of a double wall: the credit
of a cause for Religion: and the concord of our minds. But these walls are
wanting, when the Church deals against enimyes gone out from her, which
sometimes have been of her. For touching the cause of religion, they will be
equal with us: and touching the points wherein we differ, they may be thought
even of some who are no sworn enemies unto Religion (if matters be not very
wisely and with great judgment examined) to ouermatch us. For the continuance
of friendship as they pretend unto Religion, seems to assure us that their
profiting in knowledge and judgment, and no other cause, has moved them
as well to be diverse from them selves, as to depart from us. As for the
professed enemy, he is more hardened against our cause and better armed
against our selves, when he sees the cause it self as it were parted by
opinion, and us divided from our selves in affection. These enemies of the
Church do both strengthen the enemies arm abroad, and also discourage the
friends at home, yet has the true Church always been subject to this trial,
even when Doctrine was most pure and pastors most painful. 2. Tim 3.8
Was not Moses in his time troubled with Iannes and Iambres? 2. Tim. 2.17. 1.
John. 2.18.
Paul in his time with Hymenaeus and Phyletus? John the Evangelist with a
multitude of Antichrists: and yet I think no man dare take exception either
against the purity of doctrine at those times, or against the travel and
pains of those persons. Neither have we only examples to tell us it has been
so, but doctrine left in the Church to tell us that it must be so: 2. Pet. 2.1.
There were false Prophets among the people (says Saint Peter) even as there
shall be false teachers among you, which privily shall bring in damnable
Heresies, denying the Lord that has bought them. 1. Cor. 11.19.
There must be heresies (says Saint Paul) even among you, that they which
are proved among you may be known. The causes why it must be thus with the
Church, do I find in the scripture to be these: that the good may be tried
and known: and the wicked found out and punished. The good are tried whether
they love the Lord, as well by their affection toward the doctrine of Christ,
Deu. 13.3.
as by their fruits of conversation. For there is no man that loves an other,
who is not studious of his disposition, to know what is well liked of him and
acceptable unto him, that he may serve his humor and be set a work to his
good liking and pleasure. So that he who has bestowed no study that way,
either is not otherwise settled in judgment or moved with affection, but that
every seducer may deceive him: does plainly declare therein that he bears
no love toward him.

Punishment is executed against the wicked, either by giving them up into
heresies and erroneous opinions, for that having the truth in knowledge, they
made no conscience of it, neither in affection did bear any love toward it:
either else because not submitting them selves to the simplicity of the word,
they have desired to be fed with curious questions, matters of wit and
subtle speculations. Of both those offenses, we are not only warned off by
the doctrine of the word, 1. Timo. 1.19.20. 2. Tim. 2.16.17.
but also by the heavy judgment of God which did fall upon certain offenders
herein, whereof there is express mencio^ made in the word. Great is the
grossenes the^ of the Papists, who therefore stu^ble at the true church, because
some prove heretics that have been brought up in the bosom thereof, as if
they had never red this in the Scripture spoken in the person of the Church,
They went out from us, 1. John. 2.19.
but they were not of us, for if they had been of us, they would have
continued with us: but greater is the carelessenesse of many that would be
accounted Christians, who notwithstanding all these heavy examples and visible
warnings of Gods wrath, be not touched for all that with care to join
conscience unto knowledge, and to let a good judgment have the honor of a
loving affection always waiting upon it.

May professors of the truth now possibly be any longer satisfied with bare
profession, when the almighty has already taken the reuengme^t thereof into his
own hands, and begun to drive such out of their dens, and to hunt them out of
their lurking holes, and not to leave them before he have brought their
deserved judgment of palpable blindness upon them: so that we se them before
our eyes, glory in their shame, and put upon them as a garment of honor the
covering of confusion: therefore the punishment of God fallen now visibly upon
this family, is the judgment of bare professors and carnal Gospellers. In
these persons they al are arrained, found guilty and judged. Now have we
learned by trial and experience, that the Gospel disdaineth the sole
attendance of our knowledge, and looks to be received in like manner with a
good heart and friendly affection. And good cause and reason there is why it
should be so, for who is so mean amongst men, that would be content with this
entertainme^t amongst his friends, if at his coming to them they would
vouchsafe to name him, and take knowledge that they had seen him. And is not
this the best welcome that many in these days do make the Gospel? they are
content to speak to it, and take knowledge of it, but they are but a few, that
so friendly do entertain it, as that their hearty goodwil and affection may
be seen to appear thereby toward it. This judgment of God upon H.N. and his
Family, speaks plainly of the Gospel, that we can not enjoy it, if we give
no better entertainment then they have done unto it. For as for them, they are
now farther from the knowledge of the Gospel, then they were the first hour
that ever they looked upon the light. For Christ is nothing with them but
obedience unto that doctrine which they profess. Which may easily be discerned
by H.N. his description of him, which is this: Christus does signify unto us
(says H.N.) the safe making oil of the God saving being: and yet more
plainly is that matter expressed in the Book entitled Theol. Ger. A book
that every man who has red any of his works (if his own cou^trimen had never
discovered it) might easily perceive to have come from the same spirit which
spoke in him. These words are found there touching that matter. Vetus homo est
Adamus, Theologia Germanica. Cap. 14.
et inobedientia, ipsitas, egoitas, et similia: at nouus homo est Christus et
obedie^tia. Ada^ is the old man and disobedience, he, I, and such like: but
Christ is the new man and obedience. Where that obedience is, nothing that he
does is sin and where that is not, there is nothing but sin: God has
nothing so proper unto him, wherein by this doctrine of H.N. his illuminate
elders be not fellows with him: everlasting life if that we believe him, is
fully felt and possessed in this life: here is our heaven, and here is our
hell: the resurrection is not corporal of the body, but spiritual of the
mind: Now is Christ come to judgment, and this doctrine is the last trump:
they are risen again and in perfect joy, who have perfectly embraced it, and
those have already received their judgment and be in hell, who do resist it: to
be gilty of death by the sin of an other, or to be justified by the
righteousness of an other, is a doctrine not only not received of them, but
throughout all their books impugned: our sins by this doctrine, are
answered within us, and no righteousness that shall do us good is without
us. Touching which point, this is said in the Book alleged before: Etiamsi
Deus omnes homines quicunque sunt ad se assumeret, and ipse in eis homo fieret,
and ipsi in eo deus fierent, Theologia Germanica. Cap. 3.
and idem in me non fieret nunquam corrigeretur meus lapsus. Although GOD
would take all men to himself and were made man in them, and they were made
God in him, and the same should not be done in me, my sin and offense
should never be discharged: They only are the Church, and al co^gregations
whatsoever that join not with the^, they call the^ Synagouges of Satan and
nestes of Devils: they hold that every man is his own Savior and a Chrst for
him self: every man that has well profited in the school of H. N. is perfect
and without sin. To conclude this matter, the errors be so many, so foul
and so filthy, as would force the very pen in passing to stay and stop the
nose. The only way whereby a man should enter to do them good, have they
hedged and stopped up against us, for they say that they only are spiritual,
and therefore judge truly of the word, that they have the sense, and we
nothing but the words: they have the spirit, and we nothing but the letter:
that they have the life, and we the body: they have the carnel, and we the
shell: they have the sword, and we the scabbard. To be brief in this matter of
doctrine, H.N. turns religion up side down, and builds heaven here upon
earth, makes God, man: and man, God: heaven, hell: and hell heaven, For venom
and poison which will bring present death, has he dispersed over every member
and article of our belief, so universal is the poison of his opinion.

Touching conversation, how may we imagine that there is any soundness, when
the doctrine and vital parts be thus infected. For do we not read in the
scriptures, that most shameful corruption of life has always followed as a
due and deserved punishment, the corruption of doctrine. Romans 1.24.
God gave them up (says the Apostle) to their hearts lusts unto uncleanness, to
defile their own bodies between themselves, which turned the truth of God
unto a lie. Which thing Priscillianus (of whom H.N. has borrowed not only that
villainous wresting of the word by allegories: but also that monstrous opinion,
that perjury and lying be lawful and may be done with good conscience to
conceal religion) confessed being condemned to dye for heresy: Priscillianus
(says Daneus) was put to death at Treuyris, which is the most famous City of
Germany, having confessed before that that he had oftenten times committed
most shameful wickedness with the women of his sect. Danae. in Aug. de
haere. cap. 70.
And what a liberty H. N. his doctrine gives unto all lewdness of life, in
his allegory of the woman that is ravished in the field: I leave it to the
consideration of the godly. Document. senten. cap. 13. sect. 8.
These be his words in his book called Documentall Sentences, speaking of
temptations unto sin: If they take and lay hold on us with force and
violence, and that then although we cry, there comes not any power or help
unto us, for to withstand them in their force and violence: and that they even
so ravish us against our will, so are we guiltles of the transgressing: for we
have cried to be released of the tyranny of the evil, and there is no help come
unto us. Of the which guiltless transgressing, the law likewise witnesses,
where it says: A woman which is violently taken in the field, where as there
is not any help, and so ravished, Deuteronomy. 22.
and although she have cried aloude, yet gotten no help, she shall be
guiltless of the transgressing. What can open any window wider unto all
wickedness, then this doctrine does? For if temptations press us, and our
prayers presently prevail not, by this doctrine we are discharged of all
danger from the fact, how often and how grievously soever we shall offend.
Whom would not this doctrine, not only encourage unto sin: but also make him
impudently secure, and senseless in the same. This monstrous birth so beastly
and so blind has the contempt of the word and want of care to keep it in a
good conscience, nourished and brought forth. Whereby we may see with what
danger we walk not only wickedly, but also carelessly against the word. For
this spectacle does plainly show, that it is more precious in the Lord his
sight, then that he either can or will put up at our hands, the contempt and
neglect of the same. And therefore when we see at this day, those men who
sometimes have known the truth, become as beasts void of all reason: let us
understand that the Lord thereby means to magnify his word, and to let
men perceive the might and Majesty of the same. For when he cannot abide that
they should any longer enjoy so much credit by his word, as the show and bare
profession would yield unto them, which is all that they would require* but that
he will have the^ turned out of their clouts and laid naked in their shame: does
he not from heaven by such judgments preach and declare the majesty and might
of his word? Is not that the great seal sent from heaven into the earth, to be
set unto the word for the authorizing thereof? For seeing they would not
reverence it brought unto the^ under the Lords own hand and seal of signs
and miracles: they have forced him by bringing these heavy judgments upon
them for the further confirming of it, to set his seal the second time unto
it. Should not all men now fear to profane it, when there is here among us a
mark of such majesty set upon it? Should not every man now examine what
rereuerence he does bear unto it, when he sees for the freeing of it from
contempt so great and plain a print of authority to be joined unto it? Let
people now take heed how they cherish that humor within themselves, which
cannot bear any other teaching of the word, then that which is so interteyned
of the ear, that it can not be hired so much as once to vewe and visit the
heart. Let those fear who cannot digest the word unless with eloquence and
wit, curious questions, and profane hystories and fables, the power and
strenght of it be so allayed, as now there is no more any majesty in it. And
seeing we have such sensible judgment among us against them, who like not the
simplicity of the word, but will feed of speculations and mystical matters:
let them who minister the word, take heed they feed not that affection in
them, by laying on such painting and colors, as may rather make them wonder at
the workmanship, then take any profit by the work. Let them teach and exhort
with wholesome doctrine, not only planting knowledge in them, but earnestly
calling upon them to keep their knowledge in a good conscience, and so much
the rather, because we see before our eyes, what a dangerous shipwreck they
have made even of knowledge, who have gone unto the sea with it, in the riuen
vessel of a corrupt conscience. Let them stir them up to have their
reckoning in a readiness, seeing the Lord has already begone to visit the
contempt of his word. Let them urge them likewise to seek for judgment in
the word, whereby to discern spirits, that seeing now we be sought and
sifted that way by Satan, we may be found sufficiently armed likewise on that
side against him, lest wilful ignorance should be punished in us with
obstinate error. Let us provide that those may be joined together which the
Lord cannot abide to put a sunder: that zeal, for lack of knowledge do not
degenerate either into some dangerous schism or superstition: neither yet
knowledge for want of zeal and affection, either into unprofitable curiosity,
or else into some horrible heresy. Touching those who be of opinion that these
heresies will vanish away of themselves, because the matter is so gross, and
the men be so utterly unlearned, and therefore would neither have sword nor pen
pulled out against them: They are to be required that they would vouchsafe to
have their judgment waied by the word, so should they find it lighter then the
wind. For does not the Apostle tell us, that want of affection and love toward
the truth, pulls the eyes of our knowledge out of our heads, and procures
belief and credit unto manifest lies and untruths: insomuch that where this
judgment of god enters, the greatest untruths shall not be received waueringly
in opinion, but constantly in belief, and strong persuasion: now with what
affection the gospel is received of many among us, whether with so good an
affection as will warrant us that way, I think in this behalf a good
confession is much better then an evil defense. And touching the want of
learning in the patrons of these heresies, who knows not, that Alexander the
Coppersmith wrought more woe unto the Apostle S. Paul, by hindering the course
of the gospel, then any either eloquent Orator, or subtle Philosopher. For
when simple men such as be artificers, thrust forth themselves with as much
boldness as blindness, to be guides for others unto God: forthwith that is
fathered by the multitude upon the miraculous and extraordinary work of God:
and therefore they will have all of them, who have atteined unto knowledge by
ordinary means, of necessity yield and give place to their better and
superior. My purpose was at the beginning to have dealt only with his book
entitled Euangelium Regni, but finding it stand often upon one thing (as what
order can confusion afford unto us?) I thought I should better provide for the
Reader, if I should examine his judgment upon every several article of our
belief, which he has set down in his first exhortation: and withal for the
better understanding thereof should cite these places out of his Euangelie,
where he handles the same matter, and that so largely, as it may easily
appear unto all men, that neither I have missed of his meaning nor yet dealt
unfaithfully by suppressing any truth in my allegations. Where he does usually
pester his margent with plenty of authorities, as if nothing but scripture
might at any time be heard out of his mouth: It is a bayte laid for the
simple, who either cannot or will not examen the matter. For falshoode will as
well guard the truth, as those authorities defend the cause he has in hand. I
have perused them one by one, which are alleged to warrant his calling, where
I am sure he brings forth the best evidences that he has, because it
touches his freehold: let them be viewed, that is the treatise which I first
deal withal, and as they deserve, so let the rest be believed. Wherein unless I
should overmuch abase H.N. I can no better match him then with S. George, as
the papists do describe him. For as S. George loves to be always on
horsbacke albeit he never ride: So H.N. has great liking to be mou^ting in the
margent upon the autorities of the sacred word, albeit they never step forth
with him, to speak so much as one word for him. I have added next unto that
before I enter to examine the articles of the belief, his judgment of
original sin, taken out of the 5. Chapter of his Euangelie, because those
only were the matters which that book had more and besides that doctrine which
is handled in his exposition upon the Creed. His words be wrapped in such
darkness and obscurity as do give evident testimony of his mind that he
means to deceive. As for the parts of his arguments, they be at such variance
with in the^ selves, that the co^sequens can by no right be denied the good
abearing against his antecedent. For mark their meating, and you shall perceive
that always the one draws upon the other, and will never leave him before he
have either a leg or an arm of him. And in as much as partly by his dark
speaking, and partly by his allegorical exposition, he has hatched a mo^ster
of perfection, which he calls Christ: I have added to the end of this book
3. several short treatises, of those 3. special matters, concluding the book
with a Sermon which I made heretofore, moved thereunto by the judgment of some,
not only for that the present occasion did then force me to stand upon that
history of Christ his death, which H.N. would wholly and altogether transform
into an allegory: but also for that in so large a matter of doctrine to
reform our judgment, I wished there might be somewhat joined to further our
conversation. I have likewise set down the judgment of some godly and learned,
as well of the Dutch church as of our own, touching these heresies of H.N. that
themselves may see I am not alone, neither in my opinion of the^, neither in
this necessary contention by writing with the^. These fruits of my labors my
(very good Lord) I present unto your honor as a public testimony of my
humble duty and good will unto your L. not only in respect of my self for
your L. great good deseruings toward me, but also in regard of many others,
who find a safe harborow under your honorable protection, and have such an
easy access and entrance unto your honor, in all their good occasions and
lawful requests: as binds us unto all duty and thankfulness unto his
majesty and your honor as his instrument for the same. Which has made me bold
at this time to commend unto your honorable care, the redress of a dangerous
enormity, which of late has broken out in this land, I mean this Athisme
brought in by H.N. and that his household who will be called the Family of
love. The service your honor may do unto God in it; is great: the hope to
prevail against them in like manner is good: for as true Religion spreads and
increases under the cross, so punishment and affliction is the bane of
heresy and false religion. With what care and conscience such matters are to
be dealt withal, that which is read in Deuteronomy. 14. may sufficiently direct your
honor. Where it is plainly declared, that if any shall secretly entice unto a
strange religion, either friend, husband, or brother, (the nearest bonds that
nature or friendship has) they stand charged not only to reveal it, but also
that their hands shall be first upon them, to put them to death. To bewray the
secrets of a dear friend, who is to a man as his own soul, seems to flesh
and blood an heinous matter: to deal so with a man's brother the son of his
mother, or with his daughter the bowels of his own body: the law of nature
does cry out of it: and yet for the glory of our God, we are not only in
such a case to reveal this against them, but our selves to be the chief doers
in the death and execution of the^: which tells us that with the true worship
of God and religion, neither friendship nor nature may enter any comparison:
nay it tells us that at the bringing in of Idolatry and a strange religion
how secretly soever the seeds thereof shall be sown, rather the^ by the
impunitie thereof, Gods glory should be defaced, and the danger that is due
for the neglect thereof should be sustained: we are not only to lay aside
natural affection, but eue^ to break into our own bowels, and to bathe our
selves in our own blood. The case so nearly touching the glory of our God, I
am in good hope, that this which has been said, shall sufficiently persuade
your honor, to enter into some speedy care and consideration, how to
suppress so great and grievous a danger. Your L. labor in this cause so
directly and so daungerously dealing against the highest, he can never forget
to recompense: who has promised to reward, eue^ to a cup of cold water
bestowed upon the least of those little ones, who do believe in his name The
God of all glory make you partaker of that honor, which is assured unto all
them, who by these and such like fruits of faith, shall travail the ratifying
of their own election, and the removing of all such enormities, or blemishes,
which either hurt the health, or hinder the beauty of the Church.

Your Lordships most bounden to serve in the Lord. John Knewstub.

To the Reader, grace and peace.
THe holy Apostle speaking of the coming of the Romish Antichrist, 2. These.
2.10.
shows that the Lord would set up that rennagate seat, as it were an
executioner or sergeant of his wrathful judgment, against those which should
not have the love of the truth: that they which would not effectually believe
it, receiving sentence of the Lord himself to believe lies effectually, should
be put to the execution thereof by the ministry of that seat. The truth
whereof as in other places of Europe, so in this our Country especially, is
evidently seen: where the Lord sitting in his Assise not twice a year, but
all the whole year long, reuengeth the shameful contempt and neglect of his
truth: by sending numbers to their stie or walter again, which being drawn
into the fouldes of Christ by the preaching of the Gospel, behaved themselves
coldly and carelessly therein. And albeit in long process of time, this only
ca^ker of Popery, be able to eat up the whole church: yet the sins of our
Country cry so loud, that is to say are done so openly and so vnco^trolledly
in the sight of the Lord, that as if he would make a short hand of all, he
sets upon us with diverse engines, at once to pull down that which he has
so graciously builded, and with diverse axes laid even to the root, utterly
to cut up that which his own hand has planted.

And to follow the former comparison, as where there are great store of
fellons, the Justices of Assise, are feign to sever and single themselves, to
make the speedier hand of them: even so through heaps of those which have no
love of the truth in them, the lord is as it were feign to erect up other
judgment seats, by the which he may ease himself of them: and to appoint
other hangmen, for their quicker dispatch to the place whereunto they are
adjudged. And therefore contenteth not himself now with the heresy of the
Papists, which have been a long time the principal sincke to receive the
outcastes of the Church, nor with the heresy of the Arians and Anabaptists, as
it were other houses of office, whereunto some of the filth of the Church has
been discharged: but stirs up other brandes of hell, to set fire as it were
in every corner of the Church. Of this sort are the unlovely company of them
that call themselves the Family of love.

Whereupon it may be understood how untruly the Gospel is charged, as that
which is in small favor with God: because in the time of the preaching
thereof, there rise such damnable sects, and that from them, which have borne
the name of Gospellers. Wherein the Gospel needs so little to fear the
confession hereof: that the same tends even to the justifying of the great
price and estimation, that the Lord has it in. For as the great estimation of
the laws of the land, is taken from the severe punishment practiced against
the despisers of them: so these fearful judgments executed upon them, which
in their mouths vaunting the Gospel, in their works denied the virtue of the
same, are preachers of the great jealousy, which the Lord has over the
doctrine of the Gospel. Which also because he would not have slaundered with
the filth of such sects, he so orders the matter: that where our Church has
no strength to throw the^ out, they should willingly cast out themselves:
thereby to receive their shame upon their own heads, and to clear the Gospel
with all reasonable men, of that slander which some would gladly fasten upon
it. For if holding their monstrous opinions, they had notwithstanding remained
in the bosom of the Church: although falsely, yet colourably it might have been
said, that the Gospel favors such misshapen and deformed things. But when as
the Lord, in care to uphold the good report of the Gospel, has cast them out,
and they in a conscience of the hatred that the Gospelling Churches bear unto
such frensies, have sundered themselves from them: it is marvel that there
can be any so blind as not to see, or so impudent as not to confess, that
neither the gospel is the mother, nor the Churches thereof the nourcerie of any
such hellish opinions* It is not therefore the love of the Gospel professed of
us, but the want of love, not the profession but the fruitless profession:
that is cause of these confusions.

Whereof there is yet more clearer proof, in that as the rout of these
heretics, looked for the enmity of our Churches: so have they felt their hand
more sore upon the^, then the hand of any other company in the world: yea our
Churches little finger has weyed heavier upon the^, then the loins of all
other assemblies whatsoever. The Papists pretend great enmity to the
Anabaptists, Swinkfeldians, Arians, and other such detestable Antitrinitaries:
yet for twenty of our fields fought against the^, they are not able to show
two: for a hundredth strokes given by us, they are scarce able to show one given
by them: that is to say, they are scarce able to show a line for a leaf, or a
leaf for a book. And even in this Apostume of the family of love doubt you
nothing, but the Papists make show of such a hatred, as cannot be outmatched.
Howbeit it if you look either to the cause, or the effect of hatred, you shall
see their visard easily pulled of. As touching the cause, it shall plainly
appear by the discourse of their opinions: that the Papists having more things
in common with them then we have, have less cause of hatred then we. And for
the effect, let them show where any of the Justices leaning to Popery, have
so carefully and painefully dealt for the suppressing of them: as have the
Justices which favor the Gospel. Or let them show, where any of their
Popish Clergy, has labored for the overthrow of their Heresies: as have
the Ministers of the Gospel. I mean not to charge their Clergy for not
speaking, where their silence is so just: but yet for not writing, how can
they deliver themselves, considering their leisure which they both have a
hundredth fold more then our Ministers, and which they can use against us at
their pleasure.

But as in this effect of our hatred against heresies, we have in Christ Jesus
a godly triumph, in respect of the Papists: so for the want of that care which
should further be in us, as well for the preventing of such mischiefs before they
fall, as for the removing of them when they are fallen: we, eue^ we all have
great cause to hang down our heads. For albeit the lord in his most just
judgment, for revenge of the contempt of the Gospel, has given up these
miserable men to their own fantasies: yet is it also' certain that our
incircumspection has had a mighty stroke, to the bringing of it to pass. For
first the gates of the City of God with us, lie so wide open to all that will
enter in: as if we might look for that security here upon earth, that both
doors and bars, locks and keys should be needelesse. For if any will
enter into our Churches, who almost is there, to ask him from whence he
came: to instruct him of the laws of the City: to require public, both
confession of his former infidelity, and profession of a sounder faith?
Secondly, if being thus rashly admitted, there were yet some wall or rail to
hold them in, until such time as they might be better taught: The careless
receiving of them, might have been somewhat recompensed by a narrow watch
and ward, that they should not issue out again. But both the gates of our
entering in, and going out, being thus unkept: there grows unto the Church an
infamous slander, whilst they are all judged to have been of our Religion,
the greatest number whereof have been such babes therein, as they knew not
the difference between their right and left hand. So that the bare name of
Gospellers excepted, which they gat by treading now and then upon the pauement
of our assemblies: they still remained in the same ignorance of the truth,
wherein they were at first. Where again it appears, how unjustly the
Gospel is charged with these fallings away, which it would have stayed, if it
might have had the full course: as is to be seen in other places, where the
same Gospel being received, such offenses so thick and threefold have not
ensued. For this happiness, that no offenses at all should be: happened not
unto the Churches governed by the Apostles themselves.

This then being a great piece of our fault, for that we met not with these
mischiefs aforehand: another piece is, that due care has not been taken, for
the abolishing of them, after they were entered in upon us. Whereunto albeit (as
is aforesaid) diverse godly, both Magistrates and Ministers have put to their
hand: yet as in a house set on fire, all run to the quenching of it, so it
behooved that to the suppressing of this fire, coming forth of the bottomless
pit of hell, all jointly should have given their attendance, and every one
have drawn a bucket of those waters, 1 Samuel 7.15.
which the Israelites did in their calamity. For I mean not, that they
should have met to deal with the family of love: but with the Lord our God.
Who as in his just wrath, he has raised up this cursed sect: so unless the
same be first appeased, in humbling our selves before him in prayer with
weeping and fasting, our eyes may faint in our heads with looking for remedy
either of this evil or of any other, that hang over us.

But I see well enough what the cause is: why in so great an overplus of cares
for other things, there is yet so small care taken of this, and it is, because
it is not esteemed perilous unto the estate. So (by the way) is the glory of
God trodden under our feet, which howsoever it be defaced: yet so that it be
imagined (for truly it cannot be) without hazard of the estate, there is almost
none that lays it to his heart. But yet tell me (I pray you) how come we to
be so secure of the estate against this route of heretics. For let it not hurt
the estate, that it is the pestilentest heresy that ever was in the land, that
it leaves never a piece of the knowledge of GOD whole and unshaken, that it is
a mass or pack of Popery, Arianisme, Anabaptisme, and Libertisme: I say let
all this not once touch the foot of the estate, which notwithstanding preaseth
to the very throat of it: yet that it makes no conscience of any duty to
men, their own brood only excepted, that they may lie to all, so they say
true to themselves, that they think every thing lawful (how filthy and how
disorderly soever) that their fantastical spirit tells them, does it not
go straightly and directly to the overthrow of the common wealth? For if it
should but suddenly come into the giddie pate of one of their perfites, that
there ought to be no Magistrate, or that none ought to be better than other,
or possess more then other: it must be by and by holden for so resolute a
doctrine amongst them, as if it had been ripely debated and decreed by all
the Universities in Europe: yea (a horrible thing) as if it had proceeded
from the sacred mouth of GOD. And who can tell, whether these be their
thoughts already: which they smother, until such time as they have gotten an
army to execute them.

A number in this land, upon a false alarm, have been in a vain jealousy
and fear of Puritanisme. Now the justice of GOD has paid us. For that which
was spoken before in slander, now may be spoken in truth: and that which
was believed, when it was not, is scarce suspected when it is. For if you seek
after the Puritans, these they be. Which although for their looseness of
life, they are from the top to the toe nothing but blottes: Iud. 12.
yet brag they of all perfection, even unto a very deifying of themselves,
what mischief therefore ye fear might come from the Puritans, that look for
assuredly at their hands.

How beit the ouglinesse of this Heresy which should drive to a fear, does
(as it seems) make men careless of it. For they think that such a monstrous
misshapen heresy, should find lovers either very few, or if any number:
yet such sweepinges of the people, as may, at good leisure, easily be cast
out. For the first whereof, they little know either what the corrupt nature of
man is: or what is the desert of the contempt of the Gospel amongst us. For
there is no wickedness so gross, the print whereof our waxie and pliable
nature to all evil, is not meet to receive: and it is the Lords just
judgment, that they which have despised the highest wisdom, should be
thrown into the extremest folly.

And if any hartning were taken, in that they are of the rascal sort. First
it is not generally true: these shameless dogs thrusting themselves (for a
fatter soppe) into houses of great wealth. Secondly their baseness, should
not free us from the fear of them: if we remember that the Iuie which is so
despised and so low a shrub, does in climing by little and little, kill the
tallest and mightiest Oak in the forest. Acts. 19.23.
Take example first of Demetrius the Siluersmith, who set the whole City in an
uproar, against the Gospel: and then of Alexander the Coppersmith, 2. Tim. 4.14.
of whom by the complaints which Saint Paul makes of him, and imprecations
against him: it is apparaunt, that he had by him received more hinderance in
his ministry, then by any other, either Doctors of the Law, or Princes of
the common wealth. And if they were so strengthlesse, as they be supposed: yet
the swarms of them should cause men to be waking, unless they have
forgotten, that neither all the wisdom nor power of Egypt, was able to
resist the army of Lice, which the Lord sent against them. And it is to
be feared, least this lousie company of the family of Love, be stirred up,
not only to beat us, but as it were to dry beat us: that like as the Gospel
has been mocked amongst us, so the Lord should chose him such rods, wherewith
he might as it were in great scorn and disdain strike us again. Such were
the Hunnes, Goths, and Vandales, which being raised out of the dunghill, and
men of whom there was no reckoning made: yet had they such strength through the
weak profession of the Gospel, such great success through the small success
thereof, such swiftness through the slacknesse in it: that setting upon the
mightiest and most warlike nation in the world, they made in short time such a
hand of them, as if men had had to do with Mice, or fire had met with Stubble:
such a wonderful GOD is the Lord, who as he oftentimes in mercy, delivers
his by things of nothing: so again in wrath, he plageth them by things of
like value.

But peradventure, as the very name of the householde of love, is their great
glory: so it may breed in us an opinon of their harmlesnesse. For who can
fear any evil from love, which does good to all, and hurts none. How beit
add only (which the truth it self does prove) that it is the household of
Selfeloue: and then what mischief is there, which we may not make just
account of, if their hands be as able to deliver it, as their hearts are
fruitful to conceive it. For except a few fair speeches, wherewith they
would (forsooth) approve them selves to be led with the spirit of Love, and
which are rather a cloak to cover their hatred against us, then any wholesome
fruit of unfeigned love: their love is so lame, that it cannot step a foot
out of their own doors. And as we have nothing to trust to in this title, so
they in vaunting them selves of it, do but glory in their own shame. For I
can as well afford it them, to the discovery of their own fylth, as the name
of Jesuits unto the Papists, which pride themselves therein. For as they
leaving the title of Christians commended to us in the holy scripture, Acts.
17.
and coining a new of their own brain, carry the note of their intolerable
arrogancy in their forehead, red of all which understand any thing of
Christian modesty: even so also is it in this vermin. For besides their pride,
whereby they have sought them selves a title apart from others: what an
intolerable arrogancy is it, to leave the titles of the scripture, Gal. 6.
for a liking they have to those of their own forge? For if they would needs
single themselves by a several name: why took they not the name of the
householde of faith mentioned in the Scripture, rather then the name of the
householde of Love, whereof there is no such mention.

The same or not unlike judgment, of their strange phrases, wherewith they
apparel and set forth their strange opinions and devises: that to those
which have their senses well inured to discern of doctrines, it will be as easy
thereby to discry their new learning, as it is to know an outlandish man by his
tongue or speech. For they are so swelling, as if they had feared least they
should not have been sufficiently known, to be of those deceivers, 2. Pet.
18. Jude. 16.
which the Apostles Saint Peter and S. Jude have marked out: unless they had
showed us this brande, which the holy Apostles did set upon their tounges.
Albeit to say the truth, in this manner of handeling, there is not more pride,
then craft and deceit. For therefore, no doubt, do they so far pass and
exceed the measure of the common speech: that the ruder sort not able to
understand them, being astonished, might be as it were hanged in an admiration
of them. Whereof if I should give you a pattern, I could not do it more aptely
then in sending you to the gibberish of our Rogues, or of the counterfeit sort
of Egyptians: which were woonte to have a special chat: wherewithal they
amazed the simple men, whilst they drew them into their nets. Whatsoever it
is, it is most unlike the language of the holy spirit of God. For in steed
that it does utter grave and high matters, in a low and familiar style: they
set forth their trifling and halfepeny doctrines, with lofty and high phrases
of speech.

Now it remains, that for the glory of God so shamefully defaced, for the
truth so slanderously reported, for the Church so grievously stricken, for
the common wealth presently wounded, and further hazarded: that all those to
whom the Lord has given any means of stopping this gap, where at his wrath
has thus broken in upon us, make have to the rescue of the truth, and
resistance of the evil.

First of all therefore we must all humble our selves under the revenging hand
of GOD, in prayer and fasting, in sackcloth and ashes: that if by standing
before the Judge, and confessing our giltinesse of crime, we do put the
halter as it were about our own necks, he may peradventure have compassion
on us, and repent him both of this, and other the evils which he threateneth
against us. The exercise whereof ought (without all controversy) to be
public: to the end, that the Church with all her Children together lying
prostrate before his Majesty, all their cries and complaints at once sent up,
may so ring in his ears, as that he may be the rather moved to pity toward
her. But if it be holden out, from the public assemblyes: then the Lord
casts this charge of sanctifying a fast upon private and common houses. And
if the private houses be sparred against it, through their careless Masters:
yet let every faithful person, who trembles and quaketh when the Lord
roareth, take him to his Chamber for the humbling and submitting of himself
before his GOD.

Then her Majesty is here most humbly to be desired, that that God which
has preserved her royal person unto the crown, and in the crown, from all
the treasons intended against her: may have her sword (or rather his own
swoorde committed unto her) drawn upon these horrible treasons, which are in
a high hand committed directly against his own person: to the launchinge of
such as are curable, and to the quite cutting off of those that are desperate,
the Captains especially. Her most honorable Council, is likewise most humbly
to be desired, that they would so croude up other their weighty and grave
consultations, that this also which in weightinesse, gives place but unto few,
may have the rowme that it deserves. Namely how her Majesty's Swoorde, may be
most coningly and rightly handeled, for the speediest and effectuallest
riddaunce hereof. Her worshipful Justices and other inferior Magistrates,
that they would so diligently wait upon the execution: as that they remember,
that the greater have they make against them, the greater stay the Lord will
make in his judgment against us. The careful ministers of the land, that they
would not only labor to keep their flocks from the contagion of this
pestilence: but seek also to pull such out of the fire, as through simple
ignorance have fallen into it. The godly people, that they would remember daily
so to commend the good success of both the ministeries, of the word and of
the sword, unto the Lord: that the prospering in the subduing of this
detestable heresy, it may (by continuance of a godly peace) go well with them
and theirs after them. So shall not only the evil it self, but also the
slanderous charges against the Gospel, be clean wiped away: whilst the
heresies which sprang without the fault of the Gospel, shall be removed by the
power of the Gospel: and whilst the evils which rose through the sleepiness of
some of the professors, shall be put down through the watchfulness of them
all: whilst finally this heresy being of some confuted, of other some
punished, prayed against of all: the Gospel may have a greater triumph in the
conquest of this heresy, then if it had never been invaded by it.

FINIS.
The judgment of a godly learned man touching this matter, sent me in a
Letter.
WHen I did first hear that you had taken in hand a confutation of the
heresy, or rather of the heap of heresies, which some years past coming out
of Dutchland arrived in England, and received in many places secret, but
dangerous and yet too too safe entertainment: I did rather fear an evil, then
hope for a good issue of that your godly labor. For considering first the dark
and deceauing words, the new phrases, and blasphemous allegoryes wherewith the
Family of Love, fill their books, which speeches may be expounded thus if they
will, and otherwise if they list, changing with every change of person in
that family as he is more or less urged, or able to answer, or as may most
deceive or avoid a mischief: Secondarily noting that they deny principles, and
grounds of Religion, scorning the ground of all grounds, the most holy
Scriptures of God, and that in the most holy points touching the person and
offices of Christ Jesus, our justification and sanctification: thirdly finding
that they have a double heart and a chaungeable tongue, renouncing and recanting
before Magistrates, and upon their commandment before the world that they
maintained, and are resolved notwithstanding to maintain still in sworn
obedience to H.N. according to the like practice of counterfaiting Papists, who
make show of religion having sworn hearts to the Pope, whose dispensation
either they have, or trust in some reconciling relics and ceremonies from
Rome: for these causes I thought it some danger to lay open such blasphemies,
such escapes of an evil and erroneous conscience, which beginning long ago in
the ancient heretics, the Priscillanistes, Montanists, Pelagians, Anabaptists
and Catharists etc. and having been long time buried in the botome of Hell, are
not thence to be raked any more. Also I thought it almost impossible to meet
with such an inconstant and slippery serpent, that has so obscure words now
to hide, and now to convey her poison, thereby to avoid the wholesome remedy
by the word, and just punishment by the magistrate. But, my good brother,
these my doubts grew from the eye I had to their will and way: finding the
Serpent so subtle to charm others, and yet him self to shut his care so
against the truth, that he will not hear the voice of the charmer, charm he
never so wisely: and that it is as hard to find out his way, as the way of a
Ship that has sailed through the sea.

For afterward considering that Antichrist did bring (as he thought) to
perfection the mystery of iniquity in the working force of Satan, in all
powers and signs and lying woonders, and in all deceit of unrighteousness, as
S. Paul prophesied, and we in these last ages, have clearly seen: and that
notwithstanding God has already, almost altogether consumed that man of sin
with the spirit of his mouth, which is his word preached in the Gospel. I
acknowledge with praise to God the father in Jesus Christ for that sword of the
spirit, that two edged sword, that it is able either to heal, or to wound to
death all adversary power, be it either in all impiety of heresy, or in all
corruption of manners. Yea if H.N. were freed from all his sin, and washed
from all corruption: If he in deed were, as he is in the fancy of his family
an angel from heaven, or by an other transubstantiation more then an
archangell, or that which they affirm and I dare not write: yet teaching
otherwise then we have received from the holy Prophets and Apostles, he is to
be holden accurssed, and his Gospel of the kingdom with all other his doctrine
to be had in abomination. They that pray, are thus to pray against such
heresies: they that write, are so, upon occasion to write, and Magistrates are
in a zeal of Gods house to put on that mind, that the holy truth may be
exalted, and all heresies rooted out to the glory of GOD, and the preservation
of his Church from those damnable ways, wherein many, not esteeming nor
seeking the truth, are sooner destroyed, then they can fear destruction.
Therefore you have done well in the Lord, drawing out that sword of the word
of God, to make a separation between thought and thought, between practice
and practice, between secret and open paths of error and contempt, between
joints and marrow, between soul and spirit, that all the outgoings and escapes
and dens wherein these heresies either lie in wait and work against the
truth, or hide themselves from discovery, may be discovered, and the bright
face of the truth appear to the great glory of God, overthrowing of al error,
co^uerting those of that family of Love, whom he has loved and in mercy will
convert, delivering their eyes from blindness and feet from falling: and to
stay those that might, for want of the voice of the trumpet, suddenly fall into
the enemies hand, to be carried away into the miserable captivity of those
heresies, and to the second death that follows the^ as their just reward.
Also the Magistrate by such a manifest discovery of those blasphemies against
God, against his Christ, against his word, shall more and more see into the
great danger of their horrible sect, and find necessary cause to join with the
word to cut it off, lest in the end they with their brethren the Anabaptists,
exalt themselves as much against the holy and necessary authoritte of
magistrates, as they do already against God and his word, by whom Princes
reign and receive their blessed peace and safety. Against which Magistrates
this practice they have used and still do use, abusing their holy place of
Justice: they recant in words, without recantation in heart (as I noted
before) holding it for a rule, that they ought not to destroy the Temple of GOD
(which is say they in a gross and absurd interpretation) our body: and
therefore we will not be brought to persecution and death. Making a rule
against the rule of Christ, and against the most wonderful practice thereof in
him self, and his holy Martyrs: who loosing their life here have found it in
heaven: and having their bodies burnt to ashes in hope they look for the
joyful resurrection of the same bodies at the coming of Jesus Christ.
Therefore, my very good brother, I thank God for your labors praying his
majesty to bless them, that the offenders may see and repent their offense:
that others yet free, may remain by such instruction free for ever from those
and such heresies: and may be more and more armed against error with the
truth, and comforted therein to their salvation.

Praying also that God would continue with increase that spirit of zeal and
wisdom in the heart of our most excellent sovereign the Queen and other in
authority under her, to repress those fantastical and erroneous spirits,
being indeed the true succession of those ancient Catharists and Puritans, who
thought themselves not to sin, but actually to be possessed with absolute
holiness and pureness. For so those think of themselves, and plainly affirm
it of their illuminate elders. But howsoever they seduce some goodly and
zealous men and women of honest and godly conversation, placing them at the
porch of their Synagogue, to make a show of holiness, and to stand there as
baits and stalles to deceive others: yet alas who can without blushing utter
the shame that is committed in the inward rooms, and as it were in the heart
of that Synagogue of Satan. These are the things I have thought touching the
book, and a testimony of my great joy touching the same. And besides the
good I have already noted this confutation shall testify to all ages at large
that the blessed government of our gracious sovereign the Queens majesty
suffers neither Papists nor other heretics to go vnco^futed or unpunished,
howsoever first in great abundance of singular clemency it pleases her to
seek their salvation and draw on their effectual conversation. Which blessed
fruit of that singular clemency the Lord God grant in Christ Jesus, and a
perfect peace to this Church for ever. Amen.

Yours assuredly in the Lord W. C.

A Confutation of monstrous and horrible heresies, taught by H. N. and embraced
of a number, who call them selves the Family of Love.
The Title which. H. N. claims unto himself, in the first Chapter of his
book entitled Euangelium Regni, The Gospel and joyful message of the
kingdom.
H. N. Through the grace 1. Cor. 3.15
and mercy of God, and through the holy spirit of the love of Jesus Christ,
John. 6. s Acts. 17. d Ephesians. 2. ^
raised up by the highest GOD, from the death, according to Romans 8. c. d.
the providence of God and his promises: anointed with the holy Ghost, in
the Ephesians. 4. b.
old age of the holy understanding of Jesus Christ: John. 14.17 Apoca. 21. a.
Godded with God, in the spirit of his love: made heir with Christ in the
heavenly goods of the riches of God: illuminated in the spirit with the
heavenly truth, the true John. 1. a.
light of the perfect Being: elected to a Minister of the gracious word
(which is now in the last time raised up by God, Iere. 33. b
according to his promises) in the most holy service of God, under the
obedience of 1. Cor. 13. b
his love.

Answer. THE first thing, that. H. N. would persuade us, is, that God has
raised him from the dead: or (to use his own words) that he is raised up by
the most highest God from the death. For confirmation hereof, he alleges the
sixth of John, the 17. of the Acts, and the second to the Ephesians: For he
will not seem to say that thing, which two or three, shall not be ready to
witness with him. We are therefore to hear what these can say to that point.
In the sixth of John he directs us by this letter (f) unto this Scripture
(contained in the 54. verse) Whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood,
has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day. Here is a promise
made unto all true christians (for they only have their hearts prepared by
faith to digest the flesh and blood of Christ:) that the Lord will raise them
up at the last day, which we call the day of judgment, and the second
coming of Christ. The promise I grant is past, but the day taken to perform
the covenant, is yet to come. For by the promise it is plain, that we may not
look to have the matter performed, before the last day, which is the second
coming of Christ. I will not here call it into question, whether H. N. be one
of them, who eat his flesh, and drink his blood, that shall go as granted
at this time, only this I will say, that he is to beg shamefully, who with
no other help, then that he has from hence, shall obtain so much as a
place among the common sort of Christians: but he that will upon this
warrant, deal as a Prophet and Teacher in the Church: It cannot be excused,
but that he does felloniously enter, break in and steal: For there is no
color of any good title, to be showed for the same. Now I pray you consider
of his argument, which is this: The Lord will raise up all his faithful at
the last day, and therefore H. N. is already risen from the dead. The matter is
established as done, but the ground is no other, then a grant and promise
made in express words, for the time yet to come: For our Savior Christ
says plainly, that he will raise them up at the last day. Where there is
not only noted a time to come, but of that time also, the last and furthest
day is taken: and yet ye see, that H. N. will have the matter to be already
accomplished in him self and that not otherwise, then by virtue of this
promise. Let that be granted which H.N has begged, and let his felonious
act, for once be pardoned: yet has he proceeded no farther in proof, then
that he ought to be taken as a Prophet risen from the dead with condition, to
wit, if that the day of iuddgeme^t already be past, The Lord open the eyes of
his family, least as he is no Prophet, unless that be paste, which is yet
to come: so they in like manner become no true Christians, before that, which is
for ever past, hereafter shall come. If the cause of such confusion be
demanded, this it is: He expounds the doctrine of our resurrection
Allegorically, and takes it to be nothing else: but to rise in our judgment
and affection, from the likyng of all other, too the embracing of his doctrine
and religion. And therefore the day of judgment which we look for, is in his
opinion, already come, because the troumpe of his doctrine now sounds, which
woorketh this his spiritual resurrection. The confutation whereof, you shall
(God willing) have more at large hereafter, and yet there is sufficient, even
in this place aleadged by him to overthrow it. For speaking of the children of
GOD, who are true Christians, possessed by faith of eternal life, and
therefore already risen from the dead, (because to rise from error, to the
imbrasing of the truth, (which he takes his own doctrine too be) is with
him the rising from the dead, even) of those he says, I will raise them up in
the last day: appoynting an other resurrection yet to come for those: who by a
true faith have already taken hold of that spiritual rising from darkness to
light, from sin and iniquity, to righteousness and true christianity. If
his best bulwark, appointed to bear of the first and greatest assault that
shall be made against him, be thus weak: there is good hope, it will be no great
work too win the hold it self.

Acts. 17.31
His second confirmation, is taken out of the Acts, 17. verse 31. The words
be these: God will judge the world in righteousness, by that man whom he has
appointed, whereof he has given assurance unto al, in that he has raised him
from the dead. A place proper and peculiar unto Christ alone, whom God the
father has raised from corporal death, to be an assurance unto us, that he
is the man appointed, who shall judge the world in righteousness, at the latter
day. There can be no other place more peculiar and proper unto Christ, then is
this: whereunto for all that, H. N. will be entitled. Notwithstanding, if the
word of GOD have given it unto him, good reason he should enjoy it. Let it
therefore be considered, what he has said for it. This is his reason: GOD
has given us assurance, that he will judge the world in righteousness, by
the man Christ, in that he has raised him from the dead: therefore H. N. is
already risen from the dead. If H. N. be Christ, it follows necessarily,
though not by force of this argument, yet by sufficient strength from the
truth of the matter it self, that he should be risen from the dead, because
he is the same person, of whom it is said, that he is already risen from the
dead, to assure us of the last judgment, that it shall be holden by him self:
But if H.N. be any thing beside Christ, there is no manner of help, to be
had from this place. For he speaks plainly here, of the bodyly death of
Christ him self. As for the affinity between H. N. and Christ, how great
it is, that shall GOD willing hereafter appear. What shall we be able to hold
free from his assaults, when he shameth not to give the attempt, for breaking
of so strong bars as these be, and that to get the possession from Christ
himself? Cicero does give it forth of Caesar, that there was almost no man to
be found, who had not rather yield to his request, how unreasonable soever,
then once to enter into the field with him for to fight: Nec adhuc fere
inueni, qui non concedendum putaret Caesari, quod postularet, potius quam
pugnandum. But (we are to rejoice in it) it fares far otherwise with the
captain of this band, for he is so shameless in demaundes, and so foolish in
his fight, that he would tempte the mildest man that is, to take his own
weapon from him, and to beat him with it unto blood, before once he begone
to reason the matter for his request.

The last authority, alleged for proof that H.N. is raised from the dead,
is taken out of the second Chapter of the Epistle unto the Ephesians, and sixth
verse: Ephe. 2. ver. 6.
these be the words: God which is rich in mercy, even when we were dead by
sins, has quickened us together in Christ and has raised us up together.
A benefit flowing from Almighty God, unto every member of his, to be
quickened and raised up in Christ, and by his grace, from the death of sin.
If it shall fall out by plain proof, when we come to speak of Christ, that
H.N. denies both his person, and his office: then has he no manner of color,
or show of reason at all out of this place. For the resurrection which the
Apostle speaks of here, is said to be in, and by Christ. But be it, that
his judgment touching Christ were sound, the contrary whereof (God willing)
shall hereafter plainly appear: yet this spoken of men approved both in
doctrine, and in life, and that by the testimony of the Apostle himself: is
no proof to induce those to think, that H.N. is risen from the dead, by whom
his life as well as doctrine, shall at any time (as now it is) be called into
question. I hope H.N. will never go about, to have goods that be private,
made common in his family, seeing that himself turns things common unto his
own private use. For this place is common unto ali true Christians: wherein
notwithstanding H N. clameth property. For otherwise what reason is it, that
every one, who is risen fro^vnder ye dominion of sin, should therefore have the
place and authority of a Prophet in the Church.

It remains now to consider, with what judgment or conscience, H N. has
joined together these testimonies, for the proof of one matter. So shall we
come to some sight of his dangerous doctrine. The first testimony (as you see)
plainly speaks of the resurrection in the last day The second of Christ his
rising from death corporally. The third of rising from sin and iniquity.
These, how diverse soever one from an other, are notwithstanding by H. N. yoked
together, for strengthening of one and the same matter. And the reason thereof
is, because he takes the doctrine touching the resurrection unto life at the
second coming of Christ: And the doctrine also of Christ his bodily rising
again from death: to be understood only of rising from sin, and to leave
no other doctrine beside that unto us. You perceive then by this doctrine we
are deprived, both of the comfort coming unto us by Christ his dying in the
flesh, and also of the hope that we shall rise up at the last day, both in
body, and soul, to inherit everlasting life. For both of these are sunk up
by his doctrine, into one only spiritual rising from sin: and that not
otherwise, then by embracing his religion and doctrine, for the government of
our lives.

This is the stuff that he has bound together, for drawing of himself out
from among the dead. But if the lines of his life, had been no more able to
have holden him among the living, then these cords are to pull him out from
among the dead: then (I am well assured) Satan should long before this time,
have lost one principal factor for him, here upon earth.

When this Author adds more, that this his rising from death is according to
the providence of God, and his promises, he sends us for proof hereof, unto
the eight chapter of the Romans, and by these letters, C. and D. unto the
thirtienth and twenty three verses thereof. In the thirtienth verse it is thus
written: If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die, but if ye mortify the
deeds of the body by the spirit, ye shall live. His reason is this: The
children of GOD, who by his spirit mortify the deeds of the flesh in this
life, shall in the world to come live for ever: therefore by virtue of this
promise H. N. is already risen from the dead. He claims still his old
privilege, that it may be lawful for him by special dispensation, to make
that which is yet to come, to be already done: everlasting life, to be in
this life: and the resurrection in the last day, to be no other thing then the
rising from sin. If this absurd kind of reasoning, had been his gheast but
for one night, the matter might happily have had some color from a cunning
excuse: but being a servant of his, down lying and vprising with him every
day: there is no place left for any defense, to clear him of the shame and
infamy thereof. Marvel no more therefore, why H. N. should in all his
writings, so sore inueigh against the Scripture Learned (as he calls the^:)
it was no small point of wisdom to complain first. For he was well assured it
could never be, that learning should attain any such portion of patience,
as were able to bear the weight of half that wrong, which he had in purpose
to lay upon it. In the 23. verse it is thus written. We also which have
received the first fruits of his spirit, even we do sigh in ourselves,
waiting for the adoption even the redemption of our body. This is then his
reason, the faithful do wait for the adoption and resurrection: therefore it
must be by promise, that H. N. is already rise^ from the dead. How repugnant
unto all show of reason and truth is this, that H. N. should therefore be risen
from the dead, because the children of God, do yet wait for the resurrection?
In effect he says thus much: There is a thing which shortly is like to be
lost, and therefore H. N. has already found it. Who can yield to such
absurd conclusions, unless it be proved unto him before, that H N. has a
special commission, to find things before they be lost, and to take them up,
when as yet they are not fallen? How heavy is the hand of God, upon heresy
and idolatry? and how great is the blindness that they be in, and yet
perceive it not? 1. Sam. 5.
palpable was that blindness of the men of Ashdod, who ceased not to worship
their God Dagon, notwithstanding they did see him fallen before the Arc, and
his head lying a part from his body: But yet this family does far pass
them, for they do bring into the world, and woorship here as God, one H. N:
who is not removed a little from his head, but utterly without any head,
judgment, or sense at all: his proofs being generally such, as reason and
judgment do utterly renounce. The Lord in mercy keep us from those sins,
which in due desert, do so close up our eyes, as we can see no thing at high
noone day.

An other Title, which he takes upon himself, is, that he is anointed with
the holy Ghost, in the old age of the holy understanding of Jesus Christ.
This title he claims to be given him from the Apostle, in the 4. chapter to
the Ephesians, verse 13. Where, the Apostle speaking of the diversity of
gifts, that were in the Church, says. God has given some to be Apostles,
some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and teachers, for the gathering
together of the saints: etc. giving the reason withal: to wit, that we
might grow up to be men in Christ, and to be no longer as children, ready to
be carried away with every wind of doctrine. He tells us then, what a
good order the Lord has left in his Church, to keep us from the danger of
error, and to make us like men grown, to be strongly stayed in the truth:
But we hear nothing, what special success, this ordinance of the Lord has
had with H N. For what a reason is this: Apostles and Pastors are given of God
to keep his Church from error, and to make them as men strong and stayed in
the truth: and therefore H. N. is strongly stayed in the truth, or (as it
likes him rather to speak) therefore H. N. is anointed with the holy ghost,
in the old age of the holy understanding of Jesus Christ?

Upon order taken for procuring things to be done, H. N. will necessarily
enforce that the same are done. He might with as good reason say, that because
there is a law in this land against theft, therefore every man lives justly
and truly of his own, and there is not a thief to be heard of in this
realm. For upon no other warrant then this, that order is left in the Church,
to keep men stayed and strong in the truth: H. N. will infer it must of
necessity be, that himself is stayed in that truth. He proceeds further in
his titles, as not taking himself sufficiently commended hitherto: and
affirms that he is godded with God, in the spirit of his love, and refers
us for the trial of this title, unto the 21. Chapter of the Revelation, and
third verse, as unto the best evidence that he can bring: and therefore he has
dealt wisely, to leave the other chapters without any specialtie. In this
place, the state of the godly is described, what it shall be in the life to
come: to wit, that they shall be glorified, and enjoy the presence of their
God, being freed from all grief and pain. The words of the text be these:
Reuela. 21.3.
I heard a great voice out of heaven, saying, behold the tabernacle of God with
men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself
shall be their God with the^, and God shall wipe all tears from their eyes, and
there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, neither pain Because it is said in
the text, that God shall be their God with them, so that they shall enjoy his
glorious presence, whereas albeit he be now their GOD, yet he is not their
GOD with them, in that glory which accompanies the presence of his Majesty:
H.N. reasons thus: God shall be God with his people: and therefore H. N. is
GOD with God, or godded with GOD. It asks no pains of me, in many words
to set these two parts asunder, that is performed in the same labor that
brings them together. For it is never better seen, how white and black
differ, then when they come once to be vewed the one with the other. Can not
God have license to dwell with his people in the life to come, except before
there shall pass a grant to H.N. to be godded, or made God with God here in
this life? or if there were any such compact, does this place prove it, that
has not so much as a syllable sounding that way? Can not God be with them, but
thereupon it must follow, that they be Godded with him? If there were any such
thing in truth, as (God willing) it shall hereafter appear, there cannot be:
yet this place does not so much as with a good countenance comfort him
therein. The place, being so direct for our comfort in the life to come, and
for all that, by him included within the limits of this life: tells us, that
he has not yet changed his judgment touching everlasting life, but that here
(in his opinion) all that is to be hoped for must be had. As for the title it
self [to be godded with God:] it is a blasphemy not to be borne. And the place
from whence they draw it, will not suffer it to be hid under the propriety
of the Dutche tongue.

In the next title, he challenges again, that which is proper and peculiar
only unto Christ in that he is God, that is, to be the true light of the
perfect being. For in that place whereunto he appealeth for defense, after a
plain denial of John the Baptist, to be the true light, it is verified of
Christ, That he was the true light, John. 1.^.
which lighteneth every man that comes into the world. Giving him this
prerogative above Angels, and all creatures, that he is the true light,
shining of, and in himself, whereas all other borow their brightness of him.
What will this man be ashamed of, who dare to say of himself, that he is that
true light, which lighteneth every man that comes into the world, for so be
the very words of that place, whereunto he sends us? what can be more
blasphemous, then to lay claim to that, which belongs not unto Christ
himself but only in respect of his Godhead. This blasphemy is yet more
evident in that which follows. For there it is thus written: God is light, 1.
John. 1.5.
and in him is no darkness at all, thereupon H. N. concludes himself to be
the true light. These blasphemies, if a man should deal with them in desert,
are rather by open execration to be repelled, then to have the honor of any
entertainment, though not otherwise then by confutation. Thus much of his
person: Now to his office.

Touching his office, he says, that he is elected to be a minister of the
gracious word, which is now in the last time raised up by God, according to
his promises. He brings nothing for proof of this his election, but passes
it over as a matter out of doubt: and yet might it well be, that the word
whereof he is a Minister, were a gracious word, (as he calls it) and for
all that his election thereunto neither good nor gracious. But would you
hear, what this gracious word is, according as the Prophet testifies of it?
Surely it is no other thing, then even now to bring us the first news of a
matter done and past many hundredth years ago, to wit, that Judah and
Jerusalem should be inhabited again by the Jews, after the captivity of
Babylon. In the place which he alleges out of the Prophet, it is written
thus: Thus says the Lord, again there shall be heard in this place, which ye
say shall be desolate, without man and without beast, eue^ in the cities of
Judah, and the streets of Jerusalem: Iere. 33.10.
the voice of joy, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and
the voice of the bride. For I will cause to return the captivity of the land,
as at the first. The Jews are comforted by the prophet, with this promise from
the Lord, that they shall return from their captivity, and inhabit Judah and
Jerusalem, with comfort and joy of heart. For (says he) there shall be heard
in your streets, the voice of joy and gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and
the voice of the bride. H.N. might well have stayed among the dead, and never
have striuen so much about his resurrection from among them, if he have no
other message then this: for they are dead many hundredth years ago, to whom
this matter did apperteine. It is plain therefore by his own testimony, that
he has no authority to deal with us, but with Judah and Jerusalem: nor to
bring any doctrine into the world, touching everlasting salvation: but only
concerning a temporal deliverance: neither to have any thing to do with men
now living, but with people long before this time dead. Thus much in
particular both touching his person and his office.

For his title in general, I have to say, that this title which is so ample
and glorious, being compared with the preface of the Apostles, set before their
writings, will soon discrie the diversity of spirits. They dispatch us
touching the knowledge of themselves, in ye words of [Seruant, and Apostle]
when they stand the longest with us upon that matter. By [seruant] declaring
what they hold in common with all Christians: by [Apostle] what they have
special in the function and ministry of the word. Romans 1.
Paul a servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an Apostle. 2. Pet. 1.1.
Simon Peter a servant, and an Apostle of Jesus Christ. And sometimes they are
so sparing, that they will not spend both upon us. James. 1.
James a servant of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ: Peter an Apostle of
Jesus Christ: Jude a servant of Jesus Christ: 1. Pet. 1. Jude. 1.
But H. N. as if he could no longer bear such baseness, steppeth in before
them with his stately style, and says:

H.N. Through the grace and mercy of God: and through the holy spirit of the
love of Jesus Christ,

Raised up by the highest God from the death, according to the providence of
God and his promises,

Anointed with the holy Ghost, in the old age of the holy understanding of
Jesus Christ.

Godded with God in the spirit of his love.

Made heir with Christ in the heavenly goods of the riches of God,

Illuminated in the spirit with the heavenly truth,

The true light of the perfect being, Elected to a minister of the gracious
word, which is now in the last time raised up by God, according to his
promises in the most holy service of god, under the obedience of his love

What man (measuring the matter, by the outward face that is set upon it)
would think the Apostles worthy, to hold the candle to this man's cunning? And
what friend of theirs (if H.N. would take upon him, to teach them the depth of
his divinity) would once seem to offer with them less, then the service of
vii. years? Neither is there so great odds between them, in the multitude of
titles, as in the magnificence and dignity of them. How plain, simple, and
far from pride, be the names of servant, and Apostle? How glorious, swelling,
and magnifice^t, be these speches, Godded with God: anointed with the holy
Ghost in the old age of the holy understanding: illuminated in the spirit: the
true light of the perfect being: raised up by the highest God from the dead.
But no marvel, if H. N. be so glorious in titles, for this he has in common
with the Heretics of all times. The Montanists, who had their name and
beginning of Montanus, (the first heretic, that practiced to draw on
disciples, by procuring stipend and wages from the richer sort of that sect,
to others the teachers and mainteyners thereof: Eusebius. eccles. hist. lib. 5.
cap. 16.
which was a bait that brought many to bite of those morsels: and therefore
(upon good consideration is now a fresh practiced in this family, where
there is so great famine of better arguments to persuade with all:) did affirm
that they were wiser then the Apostles, and alleged that place of the Apostle
for it, where Paul (setting him self in the number with other) says: We
know in part: For they mainteyned an absolute, clear and perfect revelation
in themselves: affirming Montanus to be the holy Ghost promised to the Church,
whereof the Apostles had received but a little measure. There were also a sect
of people, in that part of Pisidia, which belongs unto Pamphilia, who refused
to receive any into their fellowship and communion, that kept any thing private
and proper to themselves, excluding them, as strangers from the kingdom of
God: and they would be called Apostolici, Apostolical, and be known by no
other name. August. de haere. lib. 9. Ad quod vult Deum. Calvin in Daniel, cap.
12.1. Bullinger contra Anabap. lib. 2. cap. 11.
Seruetus the heretic, called himself Michael, the keeper of the Church of
God, and the great prince of his people. David George, H. N. his
Schoole-maister, though the scholar (setting up for himself) will now take no
more knowledge of any master or superior: calls himself the seventh
Angel of GOD, and the last trumpe. And H. N. the father of this family, will
be godded with GOD, and become the true light of the perfect being, that in no
wise he might seem to want that badge of boasting, which is so special and
proper unto heretics.

That which is commonly said of pictures, and painted works, has a fit
place in these works of H.N. Picturae atque imagines, eminus, non cominus
videndae. Pictures and Images, they are fair a far off, but if the eye draw
near them, there is then no sight or show of them. If a man look at the
divinity, that is here delivered, a far off, he would think it came from
above the hiest heaven: so great and goodly speeches of love and peace, be
contained in it. But come near, and lay it to the line of God his word, and
beside that the lowest pit of hell, shall not be able to afoorde worse wares,
then some that here be uttered: It would loath a man, to look upon the joints
of it: while no member, has dew proportion and place: but is either looking
backewarke, when it should see straight forward: or else starting aside, when
it should stand upright. For the conclusion, August. de ciuit. Dei. cap. 2.
does always look a clean contrary way from the Antecedent. If by
Hipocrates those two children were truly judged to be brethren of one birth,
and the nearest in blood that could be, who were observed always to laugh, and
weep together, always to be sick and whole together: Then may we safely
say, by warrant from the rule of contraries, that H. N. his Antecedentes, might
marry with his conclusions, for any kindred that is between them: for the
one shall no sooner begin to laugh, but the other will be sure to weep: If
the one seem to build up any thing, the other will do what in him lies
to cast down the same.

Heavy is the hand of God against them, who have refused to bear love unto
his truth, even so heavy, as to be given up, to be strongly settled in the
belief of open and manifest lies. As we see it fall out with this Family:
who receiving sometime the truth, but refusing to reserve it in love, are now
so thoroughly persuaded of manifest lies, that when before their eyes they fall
a sunder, burst in pieces, and starte one part from another, by violent
rushing against the truth: yet be their eyes so blind, they do not see it,
and their hearts so hardened, they will not beeleeue others telling them of
it. The Lord in mercy keep us far from that sin, which causes his
hand to be so heavy upon us, and grant us in affection to be so linked to
the truth, that the eyes of our mind, may be always clear, to discern,
as well the spots of corrupt doctrine, as the defilementes of wicked
conversation.

H. N.
Apoc. 14. a
For to publish now in the last time: out of the same grace and hearty
mercifulnes of God, and through the same holy spirit of the love of Jesus
Christ, good tidings, or a joyful message of the kingdom of God, unto all
people, which Esaias. 42.61. a
sit in the darkness, and have a lust or longing after the true light, and to
bring unto the believers a great light of the true being of Jesus Christ. And
the glorious day of his godly clearness: as also to express, that God has
pitied the generations of mankind, and that Jesus Christ has not left us
John. 14. b.
as Orphants: but as our faithful father, for to beget us John. 3. a
a new, out of the safe making water or Doctrine of his service, and out of
his holy spirit of love. Also Esaias. 11.32. a Iere. 23. a. 33. b
to judge us with his righteousness, and to bring us into his rest, is come
again unto us, according to his promises, to the end that they all, which
love God and his righteousness, and Christ and his upright being, might
presently enter into the true Heb. 3.4. a
rest which God has prepared from the beginning for his elect, and Mat. 25. d.
inherit the everlasting life.

Answer. H. N. continues his speech touching his office, and affirms that
he is appointed to publish good tidings or a joyful message of the kingdom of
God, unto all people, which sit in darkness, and therefore applies that unto
himself, Esaias. 61.
which is in the Prophet Esaias, of healing the broken hearted, and preaching
deliverance unto the captives and recovering of sight unto the blind: Which
our Savior Christ pronounces to have been fulfilled in him self, Luke 4.21.
when he came to Nazareth upon a Sabbath day, and had the Book of the Prophet
Esaias delivered unto him. If H. N. had remembered, that it is said in that
place: The spirit of the Lord is upon me, and therefore has the Lord
anointed me, and sent me to preach good tidings unto the poor: And thereupon
made first sufficient proof, that the spirit of the Lord had stirred him up,
and enabled him to preach the glad tidinges to the people: he might have better
been borne with all: But it is apparent by that which already has been
said, if no more should be added thereunto: that the spirit which speaks
in him, is a spirit of error and delusion, which has so wholly possessed
him, as there is nothing now, beside most blasphemous and heretical doctrine,
to be heard proceeding from his mouth. If H. N. had any simple and sincere
meaning in him, or any portion of that spirit which was in the Apostles, he
should after the example of the Apostle Paul, in this his purpose, to persuade
men of his calling, that it is lawful and from God: long before this time have
communicated with them, that were the chief, and accounted as pillars of the
Church: touching the Gospel, which he preaches and sets forth. Which thing
S. Paul thought to be so necessary, that he affirms, Gal. 2.2.
him self did perform it, lest by any means he should have run in vain. And
if he had been of opinion, that all the world from the beginning, unto the
appearing of his doctrine had been seduced, he should then have taken
profitable pains, in making a plain confutation of the errors and heresies:
that be holden contrary to his doctrine throughout all christian countries. But
this secret winding in of him self into the hearts of the simple, under the
pleasant speech of love, without either true ioying with them, or plain
confuting of the^, sauoureth more of the serpents subtletie, then of ye doves
simplicity. His charge is also (as he says) to declare, That God has pitied
the generation of mankind, and that Jesus Christ has not left us as Orphants
but as our faithful father, to beget us anewe, and to judge us with his
righteousness, and to bring us into his rest, is come again unto us, according
unto his promises* to the end that they al, which love God and his
righteousness, might enter presently into the true rest, which God has prepared
from the beginning of his elect, and inherit the ever lasting life. This
heretical doctrine, is so full fraught with violent wresting of ye word of God,
thereby to establish most horrible blasphemies. That a man can not so sone begin
the cure of any one part, but the danger almost desperate of an other, does
violently hale him forth to give a helping hand unto that. Now H.N. as one that
in his own opinion has prevailed so far, as to match him self with God the
father and Christ, even in titles most proper unto them: will enforce the holy
Ghost to bring forth his evidence, and show how he alone could come upon the
Apostles, and the faithful immediately after the ascentio^ of Christ. For he
chalengeth that promise, which our savior Christ made unto his Apostles in
John (for the sending of a comforter unto them, John. 14. ver. 16.17. and 18.
and not leaving of them comfortless) to be now verified, at the breaking out
of this doctrine, which he has broched now of late. If Jesus Christ had
deferred his comfort so long a time after his Resurrection, I do not see but
the Church (as one overcome by reason of so long lack of comfort) might say at
the hearing of this joyful message of H.N. as the wife of Phinehes did, when
it was told for her consolation that she had borne a son: 1. Sam. 4.21.
The glory (says she) is allredy gone from Israel, and therefore let the
child have his name accordingly, and be called Ichauod.

Now if this were the true word of GOD and Gospel of Jesus Christ, which
never had seen the light before but by H.N. had been the first dug out of
darkness, what ignorance is it to confound the Gospel with the holy
Ghost, as if the holy Ghost were no other thing, then the doctrine it self?
For that place is plainly and expressly mente of the spirit of God, and not of
any doctrine, that he should have in purpose, to send them from Heaven. That
which he speaks further of his office, that it is to express, How that
Christ is come again according to his promise, to beget us anew: to judge us
with his righteousness. That we might presently enter into the true rest,
which God has prepared from the beginning, and inherit the euetlasting life,
is nothing else, but a very sink of absurd doctrine. For first how absurd
is this to say, That Christ his coming again shall be to beget us a new out
of the doctrine of his service, when as the Apostle plainly says, His coming
shall be to render vengeance unto all them, tha^ are no at that time already
borne anewe by obedience unto the Gospel. It is a righteous thing with God, 2.
Thessa. 1.8.
to recompenc tribulation unto them that trouble you, and to you which are
troubled, rest, when the Lord Jesus shall show him self from Heaven with his
mighty Angels, in flaming fire, rendering vengeance unto them that do not
know GOD, and obey not unto the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. It will then
be to late to learn when the bridegroom is once come. It will be to late then
to seek Oil for their Lamps. Their Lamps shall then be burning, that shall
be admitted to enter in with the Bridegroom. And therefore he comes not
again now to beget us a new: but to render vengeance unto so many as shall not
be found at his coming borne again, and already begotten a new. Besides,
what a match is that, to have the first coming of Christ, to join in time
with the second: Esaias. 11.
for that out of the Prophet Esaie is plainly spoken of his first coming in
the flesh: which notwithstanding is here joined with the coming of the Lord
unto judgment, and bringing of the elect into that rest, which has been
prepared from the beginning, even the inheritance of everlasting life. Now
H.N. says, that they both take effect at the publishing of this his doctrine.
Moreover of this doctrine it does follow, that regeneration is the joys of
heaven: and that when a man does reform his life by the word, he is presently
entered into those joys, which have been prepared from the beginning for the
elect. It does plainly make the comforts of everlasting life, to be no other
then those that are felt of the godly in this life: It binds also those
joys of heaven and everlasting life, unto this life, and unto the embracing of
H.N. his doctrine: that in the receiving thereof, a man should enter the
possession of the joys of heaven. Matthew. 25.34.
For the place of Matthew is so plain for the day of Judgment, and for the
possessing of such everlasting joys, as in this world are not enjoyed: as no
thing can be more. These be the words: Then shall the king say unto them on
his right hand: Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared
for you, from the foundations of the world: For I was an hungered and ye gave me
meat, I thirsted and you gave me drink etc, these were men regenerate and
borne again, for he recites their fruits of new life, and the works of
regeneration, which they had done, and these men, which had showed forth these
fruits, he then puts in possession of the kingdom, prepared for them from
the beginning of the world: saying, Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you. If they be then called out to inherit a kingdom,
which have practiced the fruits of Christianity before: then is there an
other kingdom abiding for the Children of God, beside that which they are
possessed of presently, upon the newness and reformation of their life. For
me^ are not wont to be called out to take the possession of that, which they
are already entered upon. And how could they have brought forth such fruits as
the Lord does crown, unless there had been newness of life before? The
Apostle Paul affirms our estate which trust in Christ, to be the most
miserable of all other, 1. Cor. 15.19.
if so be that we have no other hope, but in this life only. For here the
estate of the godly, is subject to so great affliction and persecution, that
sometimes men that feared God, have been greatly tempted, to follow the ways
of the wicked while they did see them to flourish, in all worldly prosperity,
inioying as it were a heaven here upon Earth: and the servants of GOD,
almost continually living such a life, as that death it self, might seem
justly to be wished before it. David professes that him self fretted at the
wicked, when he did se the prosperity of them, and that his steps had well
near s^pt, and his feet were almost gone. Psalm. 73.
For they are not in trouble (says he) like the other sort, and therefore
pride is as a chain unto them. Titus. 2.11.
The grace of God (says the Apostle) which brings salvation has appeared,
and teaches us to deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to live
temperatlie, justly, and godly in this present world, waiting for that blessed
hope and appearing of the glory of the mighty God, and of our Savior Jesus
Christ. If in a sober, just, and godly course of life, we have to wait for
that blessed hope and glory, which shall appear with the coming of Jesus
Christ: then is not that sober, just, and godly course of life, the blessed
hope and glory it self. For men do not wait for that, which they do enjoy
already. We give thanks (says the Apostle) unto God, Collo. 1.3.
since we hear of your faith in Christ and of your love toward all Saints,
for the hopes sake which is laid up for you in Heaven. If they did abound in
faith toward Christ, and in love toward the Saints, for the hopes sake,
which was laid up for them in heaven: Then was not their Heaven and hope
contained within the limits of this life, and much less was that fruit of
faith and love, the hope and heaven it self.

And lest any man might imagine, that I have taken the advantage of this one
place unadvisedly penned by the Author, let him read his Books, and he shall
find it to be a doctrine, often and with great deliberation set down, and
confirmed by places of the scripture after his accustomed manner. And even in
this same chapter, he has these words, Happy are they which have now in this
day intended or minded the love, and the peace, for in this self same day,
shall now the good, with all repentant ones, which stand good willing toward
the good, become known and made manifest from the wicked, and from all
unrepentant ones, which have a lust to the iniquity, and to the and wicked and
corrupted world, and they shall separate the^ the one from the other. Matthew. 25.
d
The separation which shall be at the last day, between the sheep and the
goats, as it is evident in that place of Matthew, which he alleges: is (as
he says) fulfilled now, while some join with his doctrine and that his
family, and other separate themselves from it. And a little after in this same
chapter, thus he speaks again of this same thing: Behold, in this present
day the Esa. 3. b. Mat. 24. d. 25. d Jude. 1. b.
glorious coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, with the many thousands of his
saints, becomes manifested: which has set himself now upon the seat of
Esaias. 16. b.
his majesty, for to judge in this same day which the Lord has ordained or
appointed: the whole Acts. 17. d.
world with equity and with faithfulness Zach. 8 a.
and truth, according to his righteousness. The places quoted by him in the
margent out of Matthew, Jude, and the Acts, are so plain for the second
coming of Christ, to the judgment both of quick and dead, and not for
bringing any doctrine for their further instruction, as that it can admit no
interpretation to the contrary. The Scripture is not more plain in any point,
then that eternal life, is a matter diverse and distinct, from the fruits of
regeneration which are practiced of the godly here in this life. For thus
says the Apostle of him self, I have fought a good fight, and have finished
my course: 2. Tim. 4.7.
I have kept the faith, from henceforth is laid up for me the crown of
Righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and
not unto me only, but unto all them also, that love his appearing. If
eternal life be the same with Christian conversation, then could not the
Apostle who had kept the faith, look for any other crown, then that which he
had already, neither yet for any other appearing of Christ, if yt be his last
coming, when he works the reformation of our life. Let us brethren learn of
the Apostle to keep the faith, that we may also with him, be assured to
receive the crown of Righteousness at the appearing of Jesus Christ. For the
father of this family together with many of his householde, because they have
not kept the faith, but made shipwreck thereof, not only now themselves want
the comfortable hope of that blessed inheritance, which holds us up, in the
midst of all our distresses: but also labor to take away from others, the
grounds of all hope hereafter to be had.

Now if any be so favorable to this family, as to answer for them, that
whatsoever their words be, it is not their meaning to imagine that the day
of Judgment is already come, and that Christ is come again, to judge the
quick and the dead, or that now we are parted from the Goats, and possessed
of everlasting life: I would ask that man what he would say, if he should
by occasion happen to hear a man conspyring with others his fellows about
the breaking of his house, and afterward him self should take the same
party, when he had undermined the strongest part thereof: whether he could
not be brought for all this, to think the man had any meaning to hurt or
hinder him. Now the words of H. N. are plain, that Christ is already come
with thousands of his Angels, to judge the world with righteousness: and the
strongest holds of our hope, for an other life, and other joys in the world
to come he has attempted utterly to overthrow, telling us, that those are
already possessed of us even here in this life.

H. N. The fifth Chapter of his Euangelie, or joyful message of the kingdom.
Behold and consider, ye dearly beloved, how that God after the man's falling
away, has always showed his love on the man: and promised him eue^ so, to the
destroying of the sin, Genesis 3. b.
to set enmity betwixt the serpent, whose head is the sin, and the woman
which consented to the sin: and betwixt the serpents seed and the woman's
seed, to the treading down of the head of the serpent: And how that the same
promised enmity against the sin, and the sinful seed, had her beginning by
the single minded Abel. Which Abel Genesis 4. a.
offered up his willing gift or offering, out of a good heart, unto the God of
Heaven, and was slain by the wicked nature of the sin, through the hands of
his brother Caine: And how that Seth, after the death of Abel, was placed by
God Genesis 4. c.
to be an other seed in the place of Abel, to the establishing of the
foresaid promise of God: As also how that Seth, which is the second seed in
the place of Abel, and his seed is the right stock or lineage, whereout the
believers and children of GOD (namely all they that have been enemies unto the
sin) are borne or brought forth, to the establishing of the promises of God the
father. But all other people or generations, which were borne upon the earth,
without the stock of Seth, and all they that walked not in the form of Abel,
according to the manner or ordinance of Seth, were not of the right stock of
Seth: but they were foraine branches, which turned them away there from, and
were never prudent nor understanding in the godly wisdom, but very well in
their own felfe knowledge and good thinking, wherewith they turned unto them
selves: and forsook even so the upright childishness and simplicity: and the
willing oblation or god service of Abel.

Answer. TOuching the fall of man, this Author speaks darkely and
daungerously in every place. GOD (says he) after the man's falling away, has
always showed his love on the man: and in the later end of the fourth
Chapter, he has these words: (We will declare from the time forth, of the
falling away or disobedience of the man, the earnest love which GOD has
always till unto this same day, showed toward the man, through his elected
Ministers, to bring him again, unto the heritable beauty of the former
kingdom, From the which he turned him away. In the beginning likewise of that
fourth Chapter, he says to the like effect, that from the former kingdom,
full of all righteousness, love, peace, and amiablenesse, the man has from
the beginning, turned away his heart: and fell away from, or was disobedient
unto the word of his God, the upright life of his true light. Thus does he set
forth the fall of man: for he has no place touching this doctrine, plainer
and fuller then these be. Wherein I beseech you mark the diversity of this
doctrine, from that which is delivered touching this matter, in the holy
scriptures. In the Scripture we do read of one man, by name Adam, the first
offendour among men: Romans 5.15.
here is no mention made of any one man, 1. Cor. 15.22
but the blame is wholly (after his accustomed obscure and dark dealing) put
over unto to a general and confused notion, which is called of him (the man)
and that his (the man) is no one man, By the doctrine of H.N. Adam was no one
man.
it appears by that which was even now alleged out of the fourth Chapter.
For no one man has continued from the beginning until this day, to receive
continual mercies from the Lord: And you have heard that he says, we will
declare from the time forth of the falling away or disobedience of the man,
the earnest love which God has always until this same day, showed toward
the man. It is plain therefore, that his (the man) is set here, to hide an
horrible error, to wit, the mankind has no common harm, Man has no common
infection from Adam, or any other one man.
from any one man. For he is persuaded that we have no infection from any man,
otherwise then so so far forth, as we shall in doing the like evil, become
folowers of that man. So that by his doctrine, any evil man, may be an
occasion of as great hurt unto us, as was Adam. In the Scripture we do read
of one principal offendour, and we do likewise read there, of one particular
and yet principal offense: to wit, the eating of the forbidden fruit, which
brought the gilte of condemnation upon al. This author delivers that point
of the particular offense, in like manner generally unto us in these words The
man from the beginning, fell away from or was disobedient unto the word of his
God, the upright life of his true light. Some not of the least among that
family, with whom I have had conference, according to this doctrine of H. N.
have in plain speech told me, that there was no material tree, neither was it
any material, fruit that Adam did eat, but that Adam was therefore said to
eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, because in transgressing the
will of GOD; Adam mingled evil with that goodness which was in him, and so
was found to have done evil, as well as good. When this family does not
acknowledge this particular offense, it follows necessarily that they should
be altogether ignorant, both of the number unto how many that infection
reaches, and also of the danger thereof growing unto the same. In the word
of God it is plain, especially in the Epistle unto the Romans, Romans 5.18.
That one offense, brought condemnation upon all men. Where one offense of one
offendour, is set against one righteousness, of one righteous man Jesus
Christ. For as Adam was the spring from whence flowed corruption unto all, and
in whose offense, we all had offended, as being a part or parcel of him,
closed up within his loins: so Christ in like manner is the root of all
righteousness, in whose obedience, all the faithful are found innocent and
reckoned as righteous before the Lord. The doctrine which delivers unto us
how dangerous a disease, we have from Adam, is a chief point of our
religion, that does principally concern us. For the disease is so dangerous,
that it does infect unto death, bringing with it condemnation: and so
universal, that it denies privilege unto any, scattering deadly poison every
where and over all. And therefore if H. N. were sound in all other points of
religion. yet this one error of his touching original sin were sufficient
to cut him of as a rotten member from the Church of Christ, until he
should confess his fault, renounce this his heresy, and with the Church of
GOD profess the truth of that doctrine, which touching Original sin, is
delivered unto us in the word of GOD. The infection that comes by Adam is
not an evil without us not able otherwise to harm us, then when we shall draw
so near as that i^ may breathe upon us: but an inward infection that dwells
within us, which would both counsel and and practice wickedness, though there
were no former example thereof through the whole world. When the Apostle
says, that he was by nature the child of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3.
as well as others: He seems to find a fountain of sin in nature, as now
it is corrupt in Adam: but not to charge any man, or men, by evil example of
life, to have been the occasion of that wrath, and curse of GOD. So that
infection of nature, not imitation of example, is the ground of all our
grief. Evil being so near unto us as is our nature, has the credit with
us of our best and next neighbor, before we be warned of it by the word: not
the light regard, which is commonly had of a forener and stranger. But the
word teaches that it ought not lightly to fear us, as an enemy without us,
against whom are shut the gates of all our hearts, as well as of our holds:
And casts so great care upon us to withstand it, as is required to drive out
an enemy already within our gates, and possessed of our strongest holds. Let
H. N. therefore have that credit and entertainment with all good Christians,
that he deserves who certifieth of our enemy, that he is yet in his own
land, when he has entered our chief cities and walled towns. Or let his
fees be the same with those counselors, by whose advise all our munition is
sent into foraine Countreies to war upon them: when before they are privy,
that subjects are ready to rise up and rebel in our own land. In Leuiticus,
there was enjoined unto every woman, Leuiticus. 12.
which had brought forth seed, and borne a child: that she should bring unto
the Priest a sin offering, after the days of her purifiyng were expired: to
the end he might make an attoneme^t for her, and so purge her of her blood. A
notable example to let us see the spring of sin, that we may be humbled in
our uncleanness, and being discharged of hypocrisy, may consider how lowly
we ought to be in our own eyes, whose birth is so polluted, that our mothers
become therewith all foully slained. Let us therefore say with Job not in
impaciencie against the Lord, but in all humbling of our selves: Job. 14.4.
Who can bring a clean thing out of filthiness? Let us likewise with David
(Who came not in hypocrisy excusing him self to accuse his mother: but in
humility, to condemn him self, that he might be pardoned of the Lord:)
confess that our mothers have warmed us in sin, Psalm. 51.
and that we have been borne in iniquity. Let us begin at the head, and hide
nothing from the Lord: So shall our conscience be cleared, and our provision
made in truth for assured peace. As for that question, common to the Papists
with the family of Love: how this infection is conueighed from Adam into his
posterity: Whether by the body, or by the soul: seeing thus much is plain by
the scriptures, that there it is, And from Adam it came: It is altogether
curious and unprofitable. It were a more profitable question, to discuss how
we might have it with least hurt, seeing we cannot be rid of it altogether,
then to examine how it is entered into us. And he that shall cast of the care,
how to rid him of the danger of it, holding a disputation how he fell into
it: is no less foolish in my judgment, then if a man, thruste by another
into a deep and dangerous pit, should refuse to speak of his coming out,
enquiring only of them that came by, who he was that did hurl him in: And when
he is resolved therein: will have it further debated, (while he is yet in the
pit, and before once he thinks of coming out, whether the man (in their
judgments) prevailed against him, because his heart fainted, or because his
strength failed. Now if the Lord be clear, and not to be touched, when he
does harden the hearts of the wicked and punishes sin with sin, which thing
the scripture declares, and every Christian confesses, because sin has
been before in them to deserve the same: Why should the Lord be blamed, since
that we all being in Adam, have (as was even now proved) grievously offended:
If he deal no otherwise with the soul of man, then from the same balance of
equity and justice which we have approved, may return with like equity
cleared and discharged? As this doctrine of H. N. warranteth us from any hurt
by Adam his fall, except we shall be found transgressors actually after his
example, against the will and commandment of GOD: so it sets forth in
like manner Christ Jesus, no otherwise to be an helper unto us, then so far
forth, as we shall by his example of doctrine and life be led into the like
obedience. And therefore as Adam (in his opinion) has nothing special in the
falling away of man from God: so Christ yields no private and peculiar help
to his salvation. All the wicked have been stumbling blocks, and occasion of
sin unto the rest: and all that feared God in every age, have brought the
benefit of good instruction and example unto those among whom they have had
their conversation: And therefore in his judgment, no one man stands alone to
hold out so much as is the help of good doctrine and good life toward our
justification: but all how many so: ever have been found faithful from the
beginning, are matched together and made fellows at the praise of that
work. That this is his doctrine, touching the restoring of man, it does
appear, out of this place. For when he has affirmed, that the promise for the
overthrow of sin does consist in setting enmity between the Serpent and the
woman, and between the Serpents seed: and the woman's seed: he declares that
this promised enmity, began with Abell, and after his death was established
with Seth, and that Seth became the right stock or lineage whereout the
beleeuees and children of God (namely all they that have been enemies unto
sin) were borne and brought forth, to the establishing of the promises of
God the father: These are his own words. Now for the manner, how after Abel,
Seth became the stock, from whence sprang all the believers, that it was only
by imitation, and following of his example, he declares afterward, in these
words: All they that walked not in the form of Abel, according to the manner
and ordinance of Seth, were not of the right stock of Seth, H. N. establishes
righteousness by imitation.
but they were foraine branches, which turned them away therfrom, and were
never prudent nor understanding, With H. N not Christ but Seth is the root
of righteousness.
in the godly wisdom, but very well in their own self knowledge, and good
thinking. What dampnable doctrine lurketh vner these words? Do the believers
now, or did they at that time, spring out of Seth, as out of their stock: or
were all that have been enemies unto sin, brought forth out of Abel and Seth
and not out of Christ, the root of the righteous. Who (as the Apostle says) is
before al things, and in him al things consist. Colloss^a. 1.17.
And he is the head of the body of the Church, he is the beginning and the
first borne of the dead, that in all things he might have the pre-eminence,
for it has pleased the Father, that in him should al fullness dwell? Are the
promises of God the father, established indifferently in all those that have been enemies unto sin? are not al ye promises now in Christ yea and Amen? 2.
Cor. 1.20.
Does not the Apostle reason from the words of the covenant and promise, and
prove plainly, that Christ only was this promised seed, and that he had
no fellows joined with him, because the covenant was not (as he says)
delivered in these form of words: To thy seeds, Gala^hi. 3.16
as speaking of many, but thus: And to thy seed, as of one, which is Christ.
Moreover shall we say that righteousness was derived from Seth by imitation,
unto all those that walked in the same pathe of righteousness: When the
apostle says, 2. Cor. 5.19.
that God was in Christ, reco^ciling the world unto himself, not imputing their
sins unto them? If we be reconciled unto God by imputation, then comes not
our righteosnesse, by imitation. If we be justified, because our sins be
not laid to our charge, then are we not free therefore, because in following
the footesteps of the righteous, we have wrought our own discharge. And if
this be not thought plain enough to prove that H. N. does acknowledge no
other righteousness in man beside that which comes by imitation, neither any
other help from the Lord for our salvation, then continual lights of good
doctrine and good life, shining out of his servants at all times, for the
benefit of that age and time, wherein they lived: Toward the end of this
Chapter you shall have yet more plain confirmations thereof, if possibly that
may be performed. For there he reckons up by name, the patterns and
examples of every age, and says: Behold, in such sort, has this upright
seed, in the light and righteousness of his God had his procreation, to
righteousness and life upon the earth, namely, Genesis 4. c.
from Seth the second seed, in the place of Abel Genesis 5.9 c.
till unto Noah and Sem. From Noah and Sem Genesis 11. b. c.
until Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Which Jacob, whom Genesis 32. c.
GOD named Israel, begot the twelve Genesis 29. c. d.
fathers of Israel, out of the which, GOD Gen 49.
chose him Judah. From Judah until 1. Kings. 16.
David the king of Israel and Judah. From David the king until 1. Esdras. 3.
a. 2. Esd as 5. a.
Zorababel in the captivity of Babylon. From Zorababel until Matthew. 1. b. c.
Luke. 1. c 2. a.
Joseph which had a virgin to wife, out of the same stock of David named Mary:
of whom Jesus Christ the consu^mation of all the works of GOD, and the
perfect light of the godly clearness was borne and brought forth. Now least
any man might imagine, that when this author comes to speak of Christ, he
dare not but give out otherwise of him, then that he should have others joined
with him in that work of our salvation: Consider I pray you of that which is
written in the eightienth chapter of this book, where of purpose he ha^dleth
that matet^ and history of Christ at large. There he has these words:
Consider ye beloved, how that there is showed unto us, and given us to
understand through the speeches of the Angel Gabriel which he used with Marie:
that at the same time (when the holy Ghost came through the power of the most
highest Luke. 1
upon the Virgin Mary, and procreated the true seed of promise) the time of
procreating of the seed of Abraham according to the flesh, turned it self
about: to wit, that the holy and true seed of Abraham should not from
thencefoorth be conceived of the flesh,
but of the holy Ghost, through the power of the most highest in the belief:
And that the same should eue^ so be borne out of the true faith of Abraham For
the seed out of the faith of Abraham, and out of the pure Virgin Mary, is the
true Ce^. 21. b. 22. b. Rom 9.2. Gala. 3. b.
seed of promise to the blessing of al generatio^s of the earth. And thus from
that time forth the Genealogy of the seed of Abraham according to the flesh,
ceased with the believers. For the upright children of the belief: which had
their descent out of the seed of the faith of Abraham: and the pure Virgin
Mary: as also from the holy Ghost: were known Romans 9.2.
to be the true seed of Abraham, because the same seed was the seed of the
promise of God the Father: and was likewise in his mind according to the
spirit, the likeness of God his father: also spirit and spiritual of the godly
nature and being. And according to the will of GOD, wholly minded with God.

You see, that the words of the Angel unto the Virgin Marie, to persuade her
touching the work of the Lord within her, to wit, that the holy Ghost
should come upon her, and the power of the most high should ouershadowe
her: are by this Author wrong by way of Allegory unto all the faithful that
shall come after Christ: who are made by his doctrine, to come out of the pure
Virgin Mary, and to be the very true seed of promise jointly together, for the
blessing of all generations of the earth, For the seed (says he) out of the
faith of Abraham, Christ with H.N. is the head of Abraham's faith, but not of
Abraham's flesh, which opinion overthrows his humanity.
and out of the pure Virgin Mary is the true seed of the pramise, to the
blessing of al generatio^s of the earth, These be his own words. And
immediately after, least that any should think this was spoken of one only,
and therefore of Christ alone, continuing the same matter, he speaks in the
plural number and says: The upright children of the belief, which had their
descent out of the seed of the faith of Abraham, and of the pure Virgin Mary,
as also from the holy Ghost, were known to be the true seed of Abraham,
because the same seed was the seed of the promise of God the father. Ca^ any
thing be added to this blasphemy, to join many to make up this seed of
promise by whom should come the blessing of all the generations of the earth:
When as the Apostle says in the third to the Galathians, Gala 3.16.
(which place is here alleged by him) That the promises were made to Abraham,
and his seed, which was Christ, and not to his seeds, as speaking of many?
If any man, either for want of knowledge, or through abundance of good will,
would here gladly become a proctour for H.N. and affirm that he meant nothing
less, by this speech [of blessing all generations of the earth,] then to
declare the way and means of our salvation: besides that the whole chapter is
occupied about Christ, and therefore about our salvation, and that it is the
phrase of speech, which the holy Ghost uses to express that matter by: The
places, which are quoted in the margent out of Genesis, and the Epistle to the
Galathians, Genesis 22.18. Gal. 3.16.
directly dealing for that work of our salvation: do leave no color for this
excuse. All the ground that he has of this blasphemous doctrine, is a
blind, ignorant, and altogether unlearned descanting about the names of men,
wherein consists the deapth of all his divinity. For when once he has with
allegories, as it were with hot irons, seared the word, taking away thereby the
life and natural sense of the same, then begins he to rattle the dry bones,
and to descant upon bare names as best likes himself, without any help at
all given unto his interpretation, from the circumstances of the place and
matter that is inhande, resting only, upon a childish and ridiculous
deriuation of the words from the Hebrews. For because (as he says in that
chapter,) Galilie signifies a turning either winding about, He will have this
doctrine established thereupon, that the procreating of the true seed, turned
it self about, to wit, that the holy and true seed of Abraham, which
(according to his doctrine) all he faithful are, should not from thencefoorth,
be conceived of the flesh, but of the holy Ghost. What danger lurketh under
this doctrine? By H. N. his doctrine all the faithful are conceived by the holy
Ghost as was Christ.
Is it not proper only to that one man Jesus Christ alone, to be conceived by
the holy Ghost? How then dare H.N. secretly insinuate that Christ had no other
kind of conception, but that whereof all the faithful are partakers together
with him. Now if he meant no mischief herein, what need has he to set his
turning about from Galilie, to tell us, that the true seed of Abraham should
not from thencefoorth be conceived of the flesh. For if he have relation unto
regeneration, Who is ignorant, that the work thereof not only since Christ but
before his coming, has been always wrought through the holy Ghost, and
never performed by flesh. Marie (after the like manner of interpretation)
signifies with him a doctrice. For that is his own word, in this Chapter,
whereupon he gathers, that the true seed, is brought forth by the most
highest in the belief, that is by himself, who only (in his own judgment)
teaches purely and so consequently, they all are borne of the pure Virgin
Marie, that are brought by his doctrine and instruction, which only he holds
for pure, to join with him in his faith and religion. Thus blasphemously does
he deal, through gross ignorance, joined with intolerable arrogancy and
pride, to overthrow the ground work of our salvation. As for these words,
which in the end of this his speech, are spoken of all the faithful after
Christ,) The same seed, was the seed of the promise of God the Father, and was
likewise in his mind, according to the spirit, the likeness of God his
Father, also spirit and spiritual, of the godly nature and being: and according
to the will of God, wholly minded with God: Whether they eueroch upon Jesus
Christ, or attribute any other divinity and Godhed unto Christ, then they are
persuaded the faithful after him, be all pertakers of: I leave it to the
consideration of the learned that fear God, without any other speech thereof,
then that here, all the faithful as one head, are said to be the likeness of
God his Father, to be also of the godly nature and being, and finally to be
according to the will of God, wholly minded with God: then the which, I do not
remember that I have found in all his works, any greater thing given unto
Christ. By this which has been said it is evident, that this heresy of the
family of love, touching Adam and Christ, is the self same with the heresy
of the Pelagians: August. Epist. 10.
For Augustine does report the opinions of the Pelagians to have been these.

1. Peccatum Adae ipsum solum laesit. The sin of Adam hurt only himself.

2. Infantes nuper nati, in illo statu sunt, in quo fuit Adam ante
praeuaricationem. Infantes are in the same state, that Adam was before his fall.

3. Adam sieve peccaret, sieve non peccaret, moriturus esset. Adam if he had not
sinned should notwithstanding have died.

4. Dei gratia secundum merita nostra datur. The grace of God, is given
according to our deserts.

5. Filii Dei non possunt vocari, nisi omnino absque peccato fuerint affecti.
They cannot be called the children of God, unless they become altogether
without sin. Touching their opinion of the grace of God, in an other place
Augustine does report it to have been this. August. Epist. ^4.


6. Hoc solum ad dei gratiam pertinere contendunt, quod cu^ libero arbitrio, et
non peccandi possibilitate creati sumus. This is al which they give to the
grace of God that we are created with free will, and possibility or power not
to offend. Where he opens their opinion touching infantes more plainly in
these words.

7. Paruuli non indigent gratia saluatoris, eo quod nullum ex Adam contagium
damnationis contraxerint. Infantes need not the grace of a Savior, because
they have no damnable contagion or infection from Adam.

Now these opinions do necessarily follow of that doctrine which H.N. has
here delivered touching Adam and Christ, which in effect all of them, not only
I my self, but diverse others have heard some of the chief men of this
family affirm and constantly maintain. Whereby we may plainly discern,
that they lie under an heavy judgment of God, in that so plain testimonies of
the scriptures, cannot prevail with them for the chaunginge of so corrupt
opinions. Is it possible in playner speech to prove, that life came into the
world by one, to wit, Christ, and that we are justified by the righteousness of
one man, than the Apostle does in the epistle to the Romans? Whose words
touching that matter are these, Romans 5.18.
As by the offense of one man, the fault came on al men to condemnation, so by
the iustifiing of one the benefit abounded toward al men, to the justification
of life. Here we see it confirmed, that one benefit by one man, does bring
justification unto all that are justified. This is the Gospel of Jesus Christ
and the doctrine that we have from him: but H. N. his Gospel sets forth
many benefits of good doctrine, and good life, proceeding from many men, even
so many as have been found to fear GOD, as causes of justification and
righteousness, unto all that shall be holden as righteous before the Lord.
Thus ye see this horrible heresy of Pelagius to be revived again by H. N. and
his family, albeit somewhat subtly for fear of being espied, and therefore
he has got him both a new name and a new coat. My hope is, all this
subtlety notwithstanding, that he shall now find the Church of GOD the same
in affection toward him and his doctrine, that he has tried it to have been
in former times. Sure I am there is cause, he should have us more severe
against him the^ ever Pelagius had them. For there is more poyso^ in his
opinion touching Adam and Christ, then yet ye have heard, yea more then ever
Pelagius powered out, as shall God willing plainly appear, when I come to open
his opininion of Christ. The young disciples of H. N. be Adam, and his
illuminate elders be Christ.
In the mean time this I will say (referring you for the proof thereof unto
that place) that Adam with H N. is no man, but an estate of men, yet subject
unto sin: and Christ likewise is with him no man, but a condition of men
altogether void of sin. Therefore al his young disciples be Adams, and all his
illuminate elders be Christ's.

H.N. In his first exhortation Chapter 7. The first article of the Christian
faith.
WE believe in God the Father Genesis 17. a.
almighty Genesis 1. a.b.c.
maker of heaven and earth, we confess or acknowledge that the same is a true
John. 1. a.g.b
and living God, a mighty spirit, a perfect Sap. 7.8. 1. John. 1.2. Heb. 1. a.
clear light, and a true being, And that the same being, is GOD the Fathers
name, and his 1. John. 4. ^.
love it self.

Answer. THe Devils themselves will confess no less of the almighty, The
Devils be fellows with H.N. at his faith.
they do acknowledge him to be a true and living God, a mighty spirit, a
perfect clear light, and a true being, and yet have no comfort or trust in
him, but shake and tremble at the remembrance of him. Pagans and heathen men
will confess thus much, and yet notwithstanding are void of all comfort or
true confidence in the Lord. Touching the great multitude of testimonies that
are mustred here in the Margent, and ready for the defense of this confession:
when I compare it with the small or no number that before came forth in the
defense of Pelagianisme, for the descent of sin only by imitation: I may
well say as did Aristippus of Dionisius his liberality. Tuto Dionisius
liberalis est, his enim qui multis indigent, pauca mittit: Platoni vero, qui
nihil accipit, plurima. Dionisius says Aristippus (I dare give you my warrant
for it) mainteyneth all this his liberality well enough, For Plato has the
most of these gifts that ye see go from his door sent him, because he takes
nothing: As for those that have need of many things, and therefore like to
receive if any thing find be offered, (mark it when you will) you shall them
tempted of him with very few. That God is a true and living GOD, a mighty
spirit, is so plain and confessed of all, that it may well refuse these so
many gifts of defense which here be offered by H. N. But that desperate and
more then pyned cause of Pelagius (to have sin not to be original in us) for
all this his feasting here, departs from his gates, not releued so much as
with one crum of bread, nay (which does more bewray the want of all conscience
and fear of God in him) it is so cunningly couched, that he is to look
nearly upon it, who shall after the second or third reading, find out his
opinion, and meaning therein, and yet for all that, it is a principal point of
H.N. his religion, and the chief ground work, whereupon stands a great
part of his monstrous corruption. But to let that alone, what means H. N. in
the profession of his faith, to say, We confess or acknowledge almighty God to
be a true and living God, a mighty spirit, a perfect light and a true being?
does our belief in God import no more, then a bare acknowledging or confessing
of him to be a true and living GOD? What comfort or confidence can we have
from hence, seeing that the Devils (as was said before) are fellows with us at
all this consolation, who know by miserable experience, that he is a mighty
spirit, and a living God? Why does not H. N. in his explanation of these
articles of our belief, use that form of speaking which the Church
receives? The Church of God says: I believe in God the Father almighty: which
has more in it, then to say, I confess that there is a GOD, and Father
almighty, or that the same is a living God, and mighty spirit. For faith or
belief has not only in it, a knowledge of the mind, but also a comfort or
confidence of the heart, reposed in that party whom we trust. Which to be so,
if for the resolution thereof we had no help from the scriptures, yet would
our common speech, lend us sufficient light. For we are not wont to have a
trust or confidence in any man, so soon as we know the man, or understand
generally what is the disposition and quality of that man: which may
peradventure be of that sort, as nothing can make more for the withdrawing of
our heart and affection from him: But when we have good knowledge of such a
special good disposition toward us, as we may safely commit our selves unto,
then are we said to have a confidence or trust in him. Now for this special
good will of God to us ward, we have not only his bare work, but also a
plain covenant of his: As appears in Genesis: Genesis 17.7.
I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee in
their generations, for an everlasting covenant, to be GOD unto thee, and unto
thy seed after thee, which is more plainly and plentifully set forth in the
Epistle to the Hebrews: Heb. 8.10.
After these days (says the Lord) I will put my laws in their mind, and
in their heart I will write them, and I will be their GOD, and they shall be my
people, I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and I will remember
their sins, and their iniquities no more. For this cause the Gospel which is
the glad tidings of our salvation, Romans 10.8.
is called by the Apostle The doctrine of faith, to give us to understand that
faith feeds not upon a bare knowledge of the Lord, but has for diet, the
large and liberal provision of his promises contained in the Gospel, where is
plentiful confirmation of a most loving league between the Lord and us, and
of a special love, liking, and good will, that he bears unto us: even to
show forth all loving and fatherly dealing toward us, not for some short
term of time, but (by an everlasting covenant) to continue the same for
ever. Hereupon it is, Romans 5.2.
that (in the Epistle to the Romans) it is given forth as an effect of faith,
that the faithful do already glory under the hope of the glory of GOD,
knowinge that seeing they are already entered into league, fellowshippe, and
communion with the Lord, and that by an everlasting covenant, wherein the
Lord stands bound to remember their sins, and their iniquities no more:
It can not be he should cut off that course of his kindness, which he
has already entered into. The Apostle likewise, Ephe. 3.12.
in his Epistle to the Ephesians affirms, that faith causes boldness, and
makes our access unto GOD, to be with confidence. And why? Even because (as
the Prophet says) we are betrothed unto the Lord, ^os^. 2.19.
and he has married himself unto us for ever, in righteousness, in
judgment, in mercy, and in compassion: so that we are to assure our selves
of all goodness and compassion at his hands, as being our ioynture that he
has assured unto us for ever. For the league is made between him and us, that
we should be no more as forreyners and strangers, but Citizens with the
Saints, Ephe. 2.19.
and of the householde of God, that as the honor of our welfare should be
his, so should the study and care thereof, in like manner lie upon him. This I
confess requires knowledge, For how shall they believe in him, Romans 10.14.
of whom they have not heard? Yea, and that also from his word: Let thy
loving kindness and thy salvation come unto me according to thy promise, Psalm.
119.41.
(says the Prophet.) And again, O Lord, thou have dealt graciously with thy
servant, Ibid. 65.
according to thy word. For we are not set at liberty to conceive of the
Lord whatsoever likes us: but charged to look after that, which is pleasing
in his eyes, whereof he has given us notice by his word. Notwithstanding
every thing contained in the word, cannot truly be said to bring forth
this faith, but his free promise of grace and mercy, is the true mother
thereof. For does any man then knitte our hearts unto him, when we see
nothing but heavy looks, and hear of nothing beside fearful and heavy
words: or rather when his favor is amiable, and his words assured pledges
of a mind, that means nothing but peace and prosperity, wealth and
happiness unto us? Does the Apostle in the place before alleged, Romans 10.13.
inquiring how that ani^ man should believe in him, of whom he has not
heard, stay as satisfied when once he comes to that point of hearing? Does
he rest before the glad tidinges of peace, and the glad tidinges of good
things be heard of, by that Messenger whose feet be full of beauty, and
whose coming is most acceptable? He drives faith from ignorance and blind
devotion, unto the hearing of the word, and yet finds no perfect rest
there, before the glad and good tidinges thereof be made known and assured
unto the faithful. Albeit then faith have in it knowledge and can not be
without certificate from the word, yet is not that all: for unless there be
settled in our hearts a comfort from his free and sweet promises, we have not
what to repose our hearts upon. And therefore as they are deceived who maintain
a faith without the knowledge of the word, so is H.N. and whosoever else that
will uphold faith to be a knowledge only, without comfort or confidence from
the promises of the word. That description helps greatly for the
confirmation of this matter, which the Almighty makes of himself, when he
affirms him to be strong, merciful, gracious, slow to anger, Exodus 34.6.
and abounding in goodness and truth, reserving mercy for thousands,
forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin, not making the offender
altogether innocent, but visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon children,
and upon childrens children, unto the third and fourth generation. Wherein
albeit the later words, at the first sight may seem to signify the Lords
everlasting wrath toward the wicked: yet if we remember, that in the former
Chapter, where the request was made by Moses to have this glory of GOD showed
him, the Lord promised that he would make all his good go before him: it
will refourme our judgment herein, and cause us to conceive that it is no
other visitation he means here, then such as his best children, after their
offenses are forced often to feale at his hands. I mean not (as the Church of
Rome would have it) that the Lord does thus wreake his wrath upon them,
until they shall have made a just satisfaction for their sins: but that he
does herein provide that himself might receive no stain by them, While
albeit he be content to be merciful unto them in their sin, yet will he
reserve for all that unto himself the right of a fatherly visitation, to
declare that he is far from being a favorer or friend unto sin. In this
explanation of H.N. his faith, we hear nothing why unto GOD there should be
added this word [father] and yet it were requisite since he is called in
question for his faith, by all Christian Churches planted through out the whole
world, he should speak plainly to every principal point, yea or no,
touching his agreeing or dissenting from them. The cause of his silence herein,
is for that he acknowledges no distinction of persons to be in the Godhead,
whereas of purpose this word [father] is set down in the Creed and Articles
of our faith, to meet with that mischief of H.N. and others, the like their
errors and heresies. It had been requisite likewise, since in so short a
draught of Christianity, we may not think any thing to be superfluous or
unnecessary, that he had showed some good help for the strengthening of our
faith to have come from that almighty power, which the Almighty showed in the
workmanship of heaven and earth, whereof there is express mention made to
that end in this place. The Scripture, does discern the Lord from all Idols
by this alone mark of his Majesty: I^^^. 10.11.
the Gods (says the prophet) which have not made heaven and earth, shall perish
from the earth, and from under those heavens. The scripture does likewise make
it a strong fortress of our faith, which drives out doubtfulnesse and
distrust, as we read of Abraham, that he did not doubt of the promise through
unbelief, but was strong in faith, because he was well assured, Romans 4.
that he which had promised, was of sufficient power and ability to do it.
And undoubtedly, when we shall unto any promise of the Lord, join in serious
and earnest consideration this remembrance withal, that it is the promise of
that God, who by his power out of nothing, brought all the fair furniture of
this world: it cannot but be forcible, to keep off such doubts of having the
promises of God performed, as flesh and blood are full of. Good reason it is
therefore, that H N. should not have been altogether silent, in a matter of so
great importance, but of that we hear nothing. There is another matter that
he shoots at, to wit: after he has affirmed God to be a true being, to
prove that the same being is god the fathers name, and his love it self, for
they are his very words. Now he brings no other proof of it, then that of
John, where it is said, John. 4.8.
That God is love, but no word heard that his being should be no other thing
beside love it self, which is the matter that he would willingly establish.
Now this is his accustomed crafty and subtle dealing, the sooner to deceive
the simple thereby, he will aduouche Scripture, when he sets down most
absurd things, albeit there be no part of his opinion established thereby,
It suffices him if there be found in the Scripture one of those words that
he uses, how far soever he swerve in sense and meaning from the purpose
of that place from whence he takes it. For what reason is there in this, to
say, because GOD is love, therefore his essence and being is love. Shall
every thing that a man is, become an essence and being unto him? One man is
religious, rich, learned, well favored, temperate, chaste, humble,
charitable: yet are not all these his essence and being. For one thing cannot
have more then one essence and being. And in truth none of these can be called
the essence and being of a man, for there be men that want all these, and yet
have the essence, being, and nature of men. Now albeit the Almighty cannot
be without love, yet thereupon it follows not that his being is love, no
more then it does to say, fire cannot be without smoke, nor snow without
whiteness, therefore the essence, and natural being of fire, is smoke, and
the substancial nature and being of snow is whiteness, which is well known to
be most untrue. Moreover, mercy, wisdom, righteousness, strength, and
holiness, al these be as near the nature and being of the Lord as is love, for
as he is love, so is he wisdom, righteousness, holiness and strength, and all
these are absolute and perfect in himself. But if all these severally should
be his essence and being, then should there be many beings and natural essences
of one thing, nay distinct natures and beings of the same thing, then the
which, what can be more monstrous? For the Lord God is but one in essence and
being, howsoever he be three in person, and therefore this assertion of H.N, and
such like, which being granted, do necessarily infer that the Lord God is
not one in nature and being, are dangerous, nay heretical and blasphemous. It
is no new thing to have such slender proofs from him, for such strange
opinions, for it is his common, and general practice throughout al his books,
and therefore it is assuredly true, that if his religion were no better stayed
and vpholden, by the wealth and fatness of some in that family, then it is by
authority from the Scriptures: the credit thereof would have been cracked
with diverse of them long before this time. I think H.N. has been his
scholar, who now of late has brought to light and taught a kind of
persuasion, which he calls a princely proof, whereof he speaks thus:
Oratione persuadere, non Regium, sed Oratorium munus esse: Regiam autem
persuationem in donis, ac muneribus sitam esse oportere. It beseems not a
King but an Orator, to persuade by speech, for a King is to persuade by gifts
and rewards. And surely H.N. his proofs are altogether Princely by rewards
and gifts: as for proofs and persuasions from the scripture by word or
writing, whatsoever show of sufficiency be made that way, yet in truth he is
content to let that alone to poor Orators and the meaner sort of men, as over
base and beggarly for so mighty a personage as is himself. Touching the
number of authorities that here are brought forth, this one thing I am well
assured of, and so will every man affirm, that shall with any judgment
examine the same, that unless he take something for their standing, other
benefit he has none by them.

This true essence and being of God, which H.N calls his love, is not
according to his doctrine any thing that the Almighty has proper and peculiar
unto himself, in that he is God: but that which all the faithful are
possessed of, and that not in some little measure, but so as there dwell, live,
or rule no other thing in all there spirit, thoughts, mind, and soul, but
alone this true godhead, with his lovely being of the upright love. For these
are his own words in his first exhortation. Chap. 15. and Section. 26. The
true freedom verily is this, that the man, through the ministratio^ of the
gracious word, is wholly released, and purged or purified from all wicked
nature, which has reigned over him, and that there dwell, live, nor rule any
other thing in him (namely in all his spirit, thoughts, mind and soul) but
alone the true godhed, with his lovely being of the upright love, yea to be so
wholly replenished with all virtues of God, that there flow nothing in him, but
the spiritual heavenly and living waters. And because H.N. his doctrine
tends to establish a kind of love, which in his opinion is the true being,
divinity and deity of God: therefore he calls also his counsel and
instruction, this true being. For thus he speaks in his first exhortation
Chapter. 12. Section 54. If ye stand minded to fear the Lord, to be
obedient to his law, that passes forth presently out of the true Sion, and
his word that passes forth presently out of the heavenly Jerusalem, and give
over your selves after my counsel and instruction (according to it al as the
Lord has revealed the true being unto me out of Sion and Jerusalem,) wholly and
altogether, so will I then in like manner, even out of the hearty love, stand
seruiseable, so much as I may in the Lord, unto you daily, and at all times
thereunto, to the end you should fear the highest God, and might learn to
know his righteousness. For his righteousness is the love, the true being,
and the everlasting life. Speaking (as you hear) of his doctrine, and
exhorting them to the embracing thereof, he calls it the true being, when
he says, according as the Lord has revealed the true being unto me. And
in the end he concludes, that the righteousness which he teaches, is the
love, By the doctrine of H.N. there is no other divinity belonging unto God,
but such as men are partakers of in this life.
the true being, and the everlasting life. So that the Deity and being which
H. N. gives unto GOD, is no other then that which mortal men attain unto.
For the righteousness which they perform by his doctrine, is (as he says)
the love, the true being, and everlasting life. And forasmuch as this true
being is no other thing with him, then that love, which by his doctrine, many
are made partakers off: therefore in the beginning of his Euangelie, H.N.
affirms himself to be godded with God, in the spirit of his love, and
likewise says, that he was the true light of the perfect being. And in his
first exhortation Chapter 17. Section. 5. The Child confesses of the Father
and eldest Elder, that the most highest has revealed the possession of his
most excellent Majesty in him, and that with the same being of the perfect
Godhead, he has made a godly dwelling with him. This doctrine does utterly
overthrow the true divinity, and deity of God, it robs him of his true
essence and being, and covers him with no other essence, nature, or being,
then is found in man: it sets the creator among the creatures: and it
matcheth the the creature with the creator. The Lord (if it be his good will)
open their eyes that they may see it, and give them hearts that may blush and be
ashamed of such blasphemy, that e^that they may received in true repentance,
or otherwise if they will still harden their hearts, that we may see them laid
down in their confusion, and covered with their own shame.

H.N.
In which name of the father we are John. 6. c.
plucked Matthew. 1.
or Savior: the Col. 1. b. Heb. 1. a.
very like being or substance of his Godhed: Mat. 28. b.
and even so baptized or washed in the same name of the father.

Which John. 6. c.
plucking of the father, and baptising in Exo. 20. a. Deuteronomy. 5. b. 11. a.
Law or ordinance of the Lord. And with his Psalm. 89. d.
correction or discipline: wherewithal we even so, as in an enmity against
the sin, beecome prevented and infourmed, to an incorporating in the godly
righteousness.

For even so in the becoming baptized in the name Prou. 3. b. Heb. 12. b. Apo.
3.
chastise or nurtur with his law: every man which he plucketh or receives
unto him: where through it becomes than all made manifest in the man Ephe. 5.
b.
whatsoever becomes chastised by the light or through the light.

Pro. 3. b. Heb. 12. b.
discipline in the becoming manifest Rom 7. b.
of the sin we are in seeing and perceiving in the light all the horriblenes
Romans 7. b.c.
of the sin, together with Devils and the fleshes lying, crafty and
deceitful or false nature, and Gods Iere. 30. c.
indignation and Eccle. 5. a. Romans 2. a.
wrath, over the same, and over all such as Psalm. 5. a.
are of one mind therewith.

Apo 3 c.
chastised by Gods grace through his Ephe. 5. b.
light of the fatherly love, so bear we at that time grief, sorrow and
anguish, or affliction for the sins cause: and Psalm. 32. a. Prou. 28. b.
confessing the same sins with humble hearts, in the service of the holy
word, under the obedience of the love of the father, we become wholly inclined
and goodwilling Psalm. 45. b. 139.
to hate, to leave, and to lay away, or to mortify the sins, and all what is
ungodly: Prou. 1. a. 3. c. 14. Eccle. 4. a. 32. c. Heb. 13. b.
and to that effect we do, as than: wholly give over our selves in the Mar. 1.
Acts. 2 d.
counsel of the holy word, and of the elders in the service of the love. To
the end that God the fathers name, according to the requiring of the service
of his love, might become Mat. 6. d. Luke. 11. a.
hallowed and magnified in us.

Prou. 3. b. Heb. 12. b.
correction, kept and led forth, even unto Jesus Christ the son of GOD the
father. For to become justified and released, or John. 8. d. Romans 6. c.
made free, through the name of the son, unto whom God the father has given
Mat. 11. c. 28.
all power both in heaven and earth from the Mat. 1. c.
sin* and from her Apoc. 2^. a.
kingdom of the death of the Devil, and of all wicked spirits, namely to our
preservation in the godliness, in the great and terrible Joel. 2. a. Amos. 5.
b.
day of the Lord, and of the righteous judgment of God, which shall burn in
wrath or Sop. 1. b. Mala. 4. a.
fire over all ungodly, which have despised the love in her service and
requiring, and refused the fatherly Pro. 29. Heb 1.2. b.
correction: as a fire to Mat. 25. d.
their everlasting condemnation in the fire of hell, which is prepared for the
devil and his angels or ministers.

In which preservation Bar. 3. b.
and extending of grace or Psalm. 89. d.
discipline of his law: manneth himself according to the inward man: with us
and we become like wise with the cleerenesse of his godly Ephe. 5. d.
light (wherewith all he with the law Psalm. 89. d. Prou. 3. a. Heb. 12. b.
of his chastising, is always against us, in the sin) godded or made
conformable, in a good willing spirit to the upright Matthew. 5. a
righteousness with him, to the end that we through his own being, should
bear or carry: as men of God: his holy name under the obedience of his Gal.
4.5. a.
law, and live and walk even so according to the law or ordinance of his 1.
Pet. 1. b. 2. 2. Pet. 1. a.
true being in all love.

Answer. The Riddels and dark speeches of H.N. I mean God willing to touch
hereafter in a place proper and peculiar to that matter: the name of father
(that we may learn with Alphabetaryes first to spel, and then to join
together) signifies his love, as appears by the last line of the former
Section, the line that went immediately before this: By plucked or plucking, he
means Baptising, as appears out of the fourth Section and first line.
Savior is a preservation in all godliness, and notes unto us an estate when
men are void and free from sin, and walk in all love, as is apparent in the
8. and 9. Section. The very like being and substance of his Godhead, is nothing
else but love, as appears by the last line of the 2. Section. Now to join
these together, this he affirms, that we through the service of H.N. his holy
and gracious word, and our obedience thereunto, are led of the father to the
love of Jesus Christ. So yt by his doctrine God the father brings us, no
otherwise, then by the hand of our own obedience, unto the love of Jesus
Christ. Our obedience must necessarily go before, for we are to pass through
the service of the holy and gracious word, under the obedience of he law of
the Lord, to the love of his only son Jesus or savior. These be his own
words. And this is that which is contained in the 3. Section. He describes
particularly in the 4. Sections following. How we become thus preserved from
sin, to walk in all love, which is our baptising in the fathers name, affirming
yt the law of God comes first with correction or discipline letting us see
sin, the devil, and the flesh, their lying, crafty and decietfull or false
nature, and God his indignation and wrath over the same, and thereupon grows
grief and sorrow for sin, a mind wholly inclined to mortify it, and then
they give over them selves wholly to the counsel of the holy word, and the
elders in the service of the love. And thus are men become prevented and
informed (as he says in the 4 Section) to an incorparating in the godly
righteousness, which is this love, and the walking therein. These sundry
Sections cannot in number compare with the errors therein contained. For first
in this his discourse upon the Articles of our belief, where he was to
entreat of faith, he is wholly occupied about love, and obedience unto the law
of God. So that faith is nothing but deeds in his opinion: Love is belief:
believing is working: and loving or working, is become believing. For he will
have our works and obedience unto the law to get and give unto us the name
of believers, that in so doing we may be accounted faithful, and that the same
should not be a fruit of faith, but faith it self. So that by H N. his
mystical doctrine, a riddel darker then was that which Sampson propounded unto
the Philistines, is put forth unto us: to wit, how the son should beget
the father, and afterward they two make but one man. He says that works beget
faith, and they grow to be but one and the same thing. The Scripture affirms
faith to be the father, and works not to be children lawfully begotten, how
fair soever they shall be to the show, unless they proceed out of his
loins. Heb. 11.33.
So do we read in the Epistle to the Hebrews, where all the good works of
the godly fathers, are fathered upon Faith: and it is said that through faith
they wrought righteuosnesse. Faith is swallowed up of works by this doctrine,
For they are made all in all with H. N. he makes no account of our persuasion
of the goodness of our God, through the merciful promises of his word, and
therefore altogether leaves that doctrine, when he is even haled unto it by
the matter which he has in hand, and falls into the discourse of works.
Iam. 2.23.
The Apostle Saint James keeps a clean contrary course: for when he is
forced by the matter he has in hand, to advance works to their highest
degree: yet does he hide them under the covert of faith, saving of that
principal work of Abraham, that this scripture was fulfilled in it: Abraham
believed, and that was reckoned unto him for righteousness, so that it was his
belief that set that price and value upon it. Romans 4.35.
The Apostle Paul likewise affirms that Abraham his belief was counted unto
him for righteousness, and adds more, that to him who trusts not to his
works, but believes in him yt justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for
righteousness. One and the same spirit cannot be Author of such diversity. The
Apostle so commends faith, that he affirms us to be accounted righteous
through the same, utterly excluding works for the procuring of our
righteousness. But H.N. contrariwise so aduanceth works, that he does
altogether banish faith, and cause it as one that dare not show his face, to
creep into the corner of works, and to lie covered with the garment thereof.
Neither is H.N. content with this spoil of faith, the chief treasure in our
house: but remembering that he left the house standing, turns back again to
fire the same, overthrowing the Sacraments in like manner, and will have our
Baptism to be no other thing, then this walking in the obedience of his love,
and therefore terms it [the plucking of the father, or Baptising in the
fathers name.] And that is not the least of his errors, although I do give it
the last place that he delivers in the eight Section. That in this
communialtie of love, through the service of the holy word, and of the
fatherly correction, which is the sight and misliking of sin, we are led
forth unto Jesus Christ, to be made free from sin, Man brings him self
unto Christ by this doctrine of H. N.
preserved in godliness, and to have GOD manned with us according to the
inward man. For it gives unto man the preventing of GOD his goodness, the
dignity and desert of bringing him self unto Christ, by his hatred and
mislyking of sin: whereas the mislyking of sin as well as the love of
righteousness, are fruits that follow our being in Christ, not causes that
go before to procure the same, as appears in the Epistle to the Romans: Romans
6.11.
Likewise think ye also (says the Apostle) that ye are dead unto sin, and
living unto God in Jesus Christ our Lord. He joins with the Pelagians
against the grace of God, which renueth and regenerateth us, and inwardly
draws us by his spirit to believe and do the will of God, and will have the
grace of GOD no further to stretch unto us, then that we have from the Lord a
law and doctrine, whereby we may learn what to believe, and what to do, but
the power to perform this, albeit they will not refuse to call it the grace of
GOD, yet they say it is our nature, according as August. reports.

Agust. Epist. 89.
Isti autem asserunt sicut a fratribus qui eorum libros legerunt cognouimus: in
eo dei gratiam deputandam: quod talem hominis instituit creauitque naturam:
quae per propriam volumtatem legem dei possit implere: sieve naturaliter in
cord conscriptam: sieve in literis datam: eandem quoque lege^ ad dei gratiam
pertinere: quod illam Deus in adiutoriu^ hominibus dedit: illam vero gratia^,
qua (vt dictum est) Christiani sumus, cuius Apostolus Praedicator est, dicens:
condelector legi dei secu^dum interiorem hominem. Video autem aliam legem in
membris meis repugnantem legi mentis mei, et captiuantem me in lege peccati:
miser homo, quis me liberabit de corpore mortis huius, gratia dei per Iesum
Christum dominum nostrum: nolunt omnino cognoscere: nec aperte quidam oppugnare
audent. In their opinion as Augustine says, the grace of God toward us is
this that we have such a nature from him, that by our own will and power, we
may satisfy and fulfill the law of God, and that this is also that other part
of the grace of God toward us, that he has given a law for the help of
man: But as for that grace whereby we are are Christians, whereof the Apostle
speatketh saying, I am delighted with the law of God in the inner man, but I
see an other law in my members, striving against the law of my mind.
Miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of sin, The
grace of God through Jesus Christ our Lord, that will not acknowledge that,
neither dare they openly impugn or speak against it. This plucking through
the service of that gracious word, which he affirms to have the foregoing by
us in the administration of the holy word, in the third and fourth Section
is (according to the Pelagians) the other grace of GOD, which is added to that
of our good nature, even to have a rule and instruction from God to guide this
nature, which (in their opinion) is so frank and so free unto good, that if it
may once see the way, there is no stay with it, or let to keep it from going
forward. And therefore where it is written in the Gospel after Saint John. No
man can come unto me, John. 6.44.
except the father which has sent me draw him: H.N. calls this drawing of
the father, a plucking, and that plucking to be the giving of a law, and word
to rule our lives by. In opinion then he joins iumpe with the Pelagians, for
denying original sin, he is forced to confess the grace of GOD to be in
nature, and again we see the law which does point out the right way unto
life, is called the plucking of the father or baptising in the fathers name.

H.N.
Mat. 18. b.
name of the father, and is the true baptism which has the forgoing in the
christian doctrine of the service of love.

Mat. 16. b. Romans 6. a.
baptized through the service of the holy word, under the obedience of the
law of the Lord, or of the doctrine of his word, in Gods love or true being,
bear or carry not Gods holy name, nor the spirit of his true being, nor are
Galla. 3. ^.
baptized in the name of the father, and that in like manner it is not meet or
convenient that men should count such unbelievers and unbaptized ones, for
Christians, neither yet also, for men at whose hands one should any way
suppose or trust to find any word John. 1. a 3. a.
of Gods truth, or yet any works Mar. 1. a.
of righteousness or good service, that God regards or accepts.

Answer. It appears by these words, that H. N. reckons of all beside his
own sect (For there are no people beside him self and his family, who
think or believe so erroniously as this confession teaches) as of Heathen,
unbelievers, and unbaptized ones, they be his own words, as also be these: It
is not meet that men should account such for christians. When he concludes
that we may not think to find any word of God his truth, or any works of
righteousness among them, whosoever believes otherwise: he speaks not only
ignorantly (for that some truth may be found, where there is store of error,
and a wicked life may be found where the grounds of religion are truly
holden) but also maliciously against the true Church of GOD, as that no word
of truth, or work of righteousness were among us, who abhor his religion
as Heretical and deuilishe doctrine. What benefit do these men receive by the
ministry of the word, being thus persuaded of the Church of God? In what
readiness are they, to join with any enemy for the overthrow of the
Church, being persuaded of us, that neither work of righteousness, nor
word of truth is among us? I trust the Lord will move the hearts of those
who have the government in their hands, either to travail to plant in them a
better opinion of the Church, or if that will not be, to cut them of as rotten
members before they shall work any greater woe unto the same. The opinion of
H. N. touching the Church of God, as appears by this his speech is most
pernicious, neither thinks he worsse of Turks and infidels, then he does of
all Christians that receive not his doctrine. What effects this opinion may
work in the hearts of the simple people, that be seduced by him: I leave it
to their godly care, to whom it does chiefly appertain to refourme the same.

H. N. The second Article.
We believe in Math. 1. a. c. Luke. 1. d. 2. b
Jesus Christ the Math. 16. b. 17 Romans 1. a
only son of God our Lord. We confess that the same son of GOD Jesus
Christ, is the very like being of the living God his father, Col. 1. b. Hab. 1.
a.
through whom god the father has Genesis 1. c. Ihon. 1. a.
made and accomplished all his work: and that he (namely the son of God
Jesus Christ) for that cause bears also all things Heb. 1. a
with the word of his power, and makes the purging of our sins throw him
self.

Answer. I Have sufficiently before declared, that Christians are taught to
believe in Jesus Christ, and that it is not enough for them to confess, that
there is a Christ, or that Christ, is the son of the living God. And yet
notwithstanding H. N. usually in explaning the articles of our belief,
shunneth as rocks all words of faith and belief, and embraseth in steed
thereof, words of confessing, whereof he has as it seems conceived some
better liking, but the cause thereof he is content to keep secret to him
self. Where he professes that Jesus Christ is the very like being of the
living GOD his father, and that GOD the father through him has made and
accomplished all his works, that he bears all things with the word of his
power, and has made the purging of our sins throw himself: It shall (God
willing) appear hereafter in my answer unto this reason, that he means
nothing less touching Christ, then that his words seem at the first sight
to give out of him. As for his reason, which is, that because GOD the father
has made, and accomplished all his works by Jesus Christ, in the creation of
the world, therefore he should make the purging of our sins through him
self alone: if it were good and sufficient, the holy Ghost might as well have
the name of the mediator and redeemer, as Jesus Christ. For GOD the father
accomplished not that work without him. Genesis 1.2.
Moreover how absurd is it, that his dealing in the creation, should charge
him with the work of our redemption? When did H. N. ever see the obligation,
whereby at his entering upon the Creation, he stood bound to perform the
work of redemption? The Scripture tells us, he laid down his life
frankly and freely of his own accord, not to discharge any duty or debt of
his own, growing upon any former covenant he had made for him self to
perform: but that it was to acquit us thereby from everlasting death and
destruction, which otherwise was in justice to fall upon us. And for that
cause has he given him this name Jesus, as we read in the Gospel after S.
Matthewe. Thou shall call his name Jesus, Matthew. 1.21.
for he shall save his people from their sins. He came not then to rid him
self from the danger, that any former covenant, tharge or duty of his own,
had laid upon him or bound him unto: but to deliver his people from their
sins, which had laid hold upon them, and as an heavy burden did press
them down unto death. So that the reason rendered in the scriptures why he had
to name Jesus, does sufficiently declare that it was no private commodity of
his own, but the salvation of his people that was sought for and accomplished
by him. And that we should not doubt of his authority or ability, to go
through with so great a matter as is the work of our salvation, therefore
comes he from God the father with special authority, and graces in all
abundance anointed and enabled thereunto. And thereuppon has this name
[Christ] accordingly* which in our tongue signifies [annointed,] that our
faith might not roaue uncertainly about our salvation, but directly look at
one both sufficiently authorized, and also fully furnished for that work,
where we might particularly and clearly see the ground of all this good will
between GOD the father and us. For from hence had this league the beginning,
and here is the hope and assurance that we have for the continuance of it.
Wherein the Lord his dealing is in all mercy toward us, that we should have
such specialtie given us, as might put out of doubt and point forth
particularly the occasion of our salvation. For the scripture which is our
evidence, does not barely mention this matter of our salvation, but tells us
at large, by whom, and at what time it was purchased for us, what price was
paid for it, what enemies stood against it, and how great a work it was
after the beginning to go through with it, and that Christ Jesus did execute
both the office of a Priest, and also of a Prophet in the acco^plishing thereof,
not only praying for us in that he was a Priest, as appears in the Gospel
after S. John, John. 17
and so declaring himself to be our mediator of prayer and intercession: but
also offering up him self once for all, a sufficient sacrifice for all the
sins of his servants, and so became in like manner the Mediator of our
redemption. In which two points of offering prayer and sacrifice to God for
the people, did the Priest his office consist. Wherein the comfort of a
Christian is exceeding great, for that he has so singular a person, the force
and efficacy of whose prayer and sacrifice, is daily in God his sight for him,
Hebrews. 9.24
as it is written to the Hebrews: Christ is not entered into the holy places,
made with hands, but into very heaven to appear now in the sight of God for
us. Psalm. 110.
And seeing as the Prophet speaks, The Lord has sworn and will not repent,
that he is a Priest for ever: it follows necessarily that there should*
(...) everlasting use and fruit of that Priesthood toward the faithful. He
did also execute the office of a Prophet toward us, and had special commission
likewise for that fu^ctio^, as appears in the Prophecy of Esaias, The spirit
of the Lord God is upon me, therefore has the Lord anointed me, Esaias. 61.
he has sent me to preach good tidinges to the poor etc. Which speech our
savior Christ in Luke affirms to be verified in him self, Luke. 4.
being of all other most sufficient too make true report of the will and
pleasure of the father, and to deliver us from all fear, of not atteyning unto
so high and secret a thing, because (as saint John says) he dwells in his
bosom, John. 1.18.
and is his only begotten son, and therefore not only of all other most
dear unto him, but also most privy unto his greatest secrets. For which
cause he is called by the Prophet Counselor, Esaias. 9.6
And in as much as his kingdom wherein should dwell holiness and righteousness,
was to be governed by the scepter of his word and preaching of the Gospel: he
has promised his presence even to the end of the world, unto that office and
function: Math. 28.19
Go therefore and teach all nations, to observe what so ever I have
commanded you, and lo I am with you unto the end of the world. For by virtue
of this function, he has not only barely and nakedly to set down a truth
unto us, but also to work effectually with it, to transfourme us into the
same, that we might give credit to the promises and be humbled unto the
duties commanded. The comfort that comes unto a christian, for that Christ
is made our teacher and Prophet is likewise very great, for who can make us
doubt or make any question of it, how we should know the will of God
generally, or his affection toward the beleuer perticularly, when the son
himself, to whom (as being nearest unto him) the will of the father is wholly
and altogether made known, has opened the same in his Gospel? Who dare now
tell me, that as one who has no judgment or discretion, I am wholly to put
over my self in matters of faith, to Councelles, fathers, and consent of
nations: when I am taught too believe that Christ Jesus is anointed Prophet
and Teacher: as well inwardly to persuade by his spirit, as outwardly to teach
and set down a true rule of righteousness according as it is written in John.
1. John. 2.20
But ye have an ointement from him that is holy, and know al things. These
things touching his name and office I have uttered more at large, because H.N.
with one breath passes from the creation of all things by Christ, unto the
work of our redemption, as if they had not only both one workman, but also
were both of them nothing else but one and the same work, nay which more is, as
if the coming of Christ in the flesh, and his suffering, had been only to
answer a duty, that was laid upon him by some covenant from the creation,
which stood him self upon to answer for his own benefit, whereas the
Scripture lays out at large, the matter of our salvation, as the most
special and principal thing that it handles. A thing so several and sundred
from the creation, as that the son of God has not only now another matter
in hand, but also a new name, and another nature, a diverse office, and a
distinct condition. H.N. notwithstanding al these good words, is not of opinion
that Jesus Christ is God, for then here especially he would have been plain,
and laid out the matter at large, not only for that necessary occasion is
offered him, by the mention that is made of the only son of God: but also
because our redemption, which is the matter he has in hand, could not be
accomplished by any that was but man only. For what just satisfaction could a
mortal man make, for offenses committed against the high majesty of GOD, when
offenses grow to be greater or less, as the party offended is in place and
dignity higher or lower? According as we see that an evil word spoken
against a Prince, has in justice greater punishment, then the same word
ought to have, being spoken but against a private man. Now when so great a
person as the only begotten son of GOD, and GOD him self, has humbled him
self in our nature for us, and been obedient even unto that most slanderous
death of the cross for our cause, no man can deny, but that such a sacrifice
is able to weigh with all the sins of his servants. For that obedience has
estimation and desert from the person who did perform it. Romans 5.15
How daungerously then deals this Family as much as in them lies, to shake
out faith, beside the injury that they do offer unto his Majesty, when they
deny the Godhead of Christ: seeing no man is able to bring that price,
wherewith sin may be sent away as answered in desert, and our consciences
rest upon, as in a sufficient discharge against the same. Moreover who not
being the Almighty him self, had been able to prevail against death, and to
break through the iron bars, and mighty chains of the grave, which yet is
but the prison of the body only, and not that darkest dungeon and safest ward
that Satan has, where the soul is imprisoned, when sin cease upon the
conscience? Now the gates of both these prisons were to be opened, and that so
wide, as infinite multitudes beside him self, might safely pass through them
nay they were to be broken unto so small sheuers, as it were impossiible ever
after to make them of strength able, to be kept shut against the feeblest of
his servants. But I know you are desirous out of H. N. his books, to know
what he thinks of Christ, seeing I do so constantly affirm that he
denies him to be GOD, and have before referred you for your further
satisfaction touching his opinion herein, unto this place, and likewise what
you may safely say by warraunt from his own writings, that he believes Christ
to be. By the doctrine of H.N. Christ is no one man, but an estate and
condition in men, common to so many, as have received his doctrine, that they
are grown thereby to perfection, and now sin no more. Which estate he
calls the true light, or true being and perfection. For proof whereof, I
refer you unto the xiii. Chapter of his Euangelie or joyful message of the
kingdom, toward the end of second section there he has these words. This
same true light, is the anointed with the holy ghost, which anointed in
Hebrew, is named Messiah, in Greek Christus. He was also in times past,
called of certain Rabbis among the Jews, the Lord his Sabbath. And they say
that the same anointed, is the seventh day in the Paradize of God, wherein God
rests from all his works, and is the perfection, the which also is very
true, for this same Messiah or anointed is the Sabbath day, Messiah and Christ
is the state of perfection with H.N.
which the Lord has commanded to be always had in remembrance, that we when
the same comes, might rest therein, and hallow or sanctify the same: wherein
the law the service of the Priesthood of Aaron out of Leui, and the elders
testament does cease and has accomplished his service. For the same anointed
which comes at that time out of heaven, with his anointing of the holy Ghost
in the spirit, and is the very like being of the godhead it self, he is a
Priest of the most highest, higher and greater of dignity then was Aaron,
because he bideth everlastingly, and is a minister of the spiritual and
heavenly goods. This same true light which H. N. brings, ye see he calls
it the anointed with the holy ghost, Messiah and Christ, the seventh day, the
perfection, and to cloak his horrible heresy the better, that it might not be
espied, he speaks of this his estate of perfection, in the Masculine gender,
as if it were a man, and says, as you have heard before, he was also in times
past called of certain Rabbis among the Jews the Lords Sabbath, and
likewise he speaks of this estate as if it were a man, when he says [he is a
Priest of the most highest, higher and greater of dignity then was Aaron.]
This horrible blasphemy, is yet more plainly laid out, in the viii.ix. and.
x. sections of this same chapter, where he speaks thus. Oh alas, how grossly
have then certain wise of the world, and Scripture learned ouerreached them
herein, which have without diversity forsaken the law and the service of the
elders Testament, and of the Priests office after the ordinance of Aaron, and
set back the same as a thing vnneedefull, not once distincting, unto whom the
service after the ordinance of Aaron is yet necessary, nor yet with whom the
same at the appointed time cease or leaves of, but have al for the most
part cried Christ, Christ, and we are Christians, and attributed to themselves
much freedom, ere ever the time of the appearing of Christ, or the anointing
of the holy Ghost was come to pass, or fulfilled with them in the
accomplishing of the old Testament. Oh that they yet now awaked, and took
heed in the word of the service of love, unto this gracious time, and gave
ear unto the same, that they might understand their safemaking, and so then
be rightly and according to the truth, brought to the true being, that is
unto Christ. You hear that he complayneth greatly of the Scripture learned,
that they have altogether and generally least the Leuiticall Priesshoode, and
service after the ordinance of Aaron, forbidding it unto all without
exception, when as the time of the appearing of Christ is not yet come to pass
with many, because they have not taken heed in the word of the service of
love, unto this gracious time, and therefore he wishes in the tenth Section,
that they yet would now awake, and take heed in the word of the service of
love, unto this gracious time, that so they might rightly and acording to the
truth be brought to the true being, that is as he says unto Christ: for
these be his own words in this place: And so then be rightly and according
to the truth brought unto the true being, that is unto Christ. So that now
you see clearly by receiving effectually this his doctrine, men are made that
true light, whereof he spoke before in this chapter, when as he said: And this
same true light is the anointed with the holy Ghost, which is named in Hebrew
Messiah, and in Greek Christus. In the sixth Section, he declares when men
may be said to come to this true being and perfection which he calls Christ.
To wit, when the law and services do change with the believers, out of the
letter and serviceable word, into the revealing of the holy spirit of
Christ. For then (as he says in that Section:) The honorable Priest is come
unto them, who teaches not after the manner of Aaron, by requiring them yet to
observe the will or righteousness of the law, but after the manner of
Melchisedech, bringing with him the blessing, the acco^plishing of the law, the
salvation of life and the anointing of the holy Ghost, these be his words:
Where now the^ the law and the services do in such wise change, by the
believers of the anointed, to wit, out of the figures, into the true being,
and out of the letter and serviceable word, into the revealing of the holy
spirit of Christ, there is also then by these same, the Priest his office
changed, for Christ the honorable Priest comes unto them, from the right
hand of God the Father, out of the heavenly being, which has or uses not his
service after the manner or ordinance of Aaron, which is yet a teaching and
requiring to observe the will or the righteousness of the law of the Lord,
but after the manner or ordinance of Melchisedech, with brings with him the
blessing, the accomplishing of the law, or of the Lord his will, the
salvation of life, and the anointing of the holy Ghost, to a pleadge of the
godly inheritance, and to an everlasting treasure or riches of God, and
reigns in the righteousness of the same. See the misery of this mischief,
he will have Christ to be an estate in man which leaves the written word,
which he calls the letter, Christ is that estate, when men leave the written
word and betake themselves to revelations.
and hearkeneth wholly to the revelation of the spirit, which banisheth Aaron,
that is that estate which is careful to do the will and commandments of
God, and rests resolved, that they have already accomplished the law and
sin no more. And this is that true seed of promise, whereof we heard before
out of the eightienth chapter of this book, which is not (as he says)
conceived of the flesh, but of the holy Ghost, through the power of the most
highest in the belief, this seed out of the faith of Abraham, and also of ye
pure virgin Marie is (as he says in that place) the true seed of the promise,
to the blessing of all generations of the earth. And this seed he calls the
upright children of the belief. Albeit I have set down the words before, yet
it shall not be amiss to recite the place again word for word as it lies
there. Consider ye beloved, how that there is showed unto us, and given us to
understand through the speches of the Angel Gabriel, which he used with Mary,
that at the same time, when the holy Ghost came, through the power of the most
highest upon the Virgin Marie, and procreated the true seed of promise, the
time of the procreating of the seed of Abraham according to the flesh, turned
it self about, to wit, that the holy and true seed of Abraham, should not
from thenceforth be conceived of the flesh, but of the holy Ghost, through the
power of the most highest in the belief, and that the same should eue^ so be
borne out of the true faith of Abraham, for the seed out of the faith of
Abraham, and out of the pure virgin Mary, is the true seed of promise, to the
blessing of all generations of the earth. And thus from that time forth the
Genealogy of the seed of Abraham, according to the flesh, ceased with the
Believers, for the upright children of the belief, which had their descent out
of the seed of the faith of Abraham, and of the pure Virgin Mary, as also from
the holy Ghost, were known to be the true seed of Abraham, because the same
seed was the seed of the promise of God the Father, and was likewise in his
mind, according to the spirit, the likeness of God his father, also spirit and
spiritual of the godly nature and being, according to the will of God, wholly
minded with God. It appears likewise plainly in that his book which is
entitled The Prophecy of the spirit of love chapter xv. and v. Section that
this state of perfection, which is there called the second birth, is Christ
Jesus the Lord and savior. These be his words: O ye holy ones of God, thou
lovely communaltie of love, fear not, but be now of good cheer upon the
earth, against all your enemies. For behold your GOD comes to be avenged on
all your enemies, for to lay them that they may be trodden down under the
feet of your Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and even so in your second birth
out of the holy spirit of the love of Jesus Christ, to transporte or yield
over the judgment and dominion upon the earth, unto you and your Savior Jesus
Christ, to the end that ye with him, and he with you, and your savior Jesus
Christ, and with his holy spirit, should from henceforth world without end
reign with righteousness upon the earth, and judge the same with equity
according to the promises. When he has affirmed that almighty God will lay
down their enemies, Our second birth or regeneration is our Savior according
to the doctrine of H. N.
under the feet of their Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, forthwith explaning
that matter more, he says: And even so in your second birth, yield over the
dominion upon the earth unto you, and your Savior Jesus Christ. So that it
appears plainly, he takes their second birth, to be their Savior. For when
he has mentioned their Lord and Savior, the next words that follow be
these, And even so in your second birth, etc. Sometimes this name [Christ] in
a degree of excellency is given to the oldest Father in the family of love,
because he is possessed of this estate of perfection in the highest degree and
greatest measure, as in the 31. chapter of his Euangelie and 14. Section where,
speaking of the offices, and functions that were in the Church of Rome,
whereof he shows great liking, as being figurative services of that truth
which H.N. has newely started, he says of the parish Priests, Therefore
they were joined with others, in the service of the holy word, because they
let pass the childhood, or the yongnes of the holy understanding, The oldest
father of the family is Christ.
and grew up according to the requiring of the service of love, unto the manly
agednes of Christ, that is, unto the true being, of the oldest and holiest
father. For these be his own words in that place. Where (as ye hear) he
calls the manly agednesse of Christ, the true being of the oldest father. And
to confirm the same, he has these words in the sixteenth Section of this
chapter, Hereunto serve the parish Priests, as to such procurators or helpers
forward of the communialties, for to bear a good care over them: and to
witness and to teach the^: daily, the holy understanding of Christ: the oldest
father: where as before Christ and the Eldest Father which is H. N. himself,
be by apposition made one and the same person. Sometimes this doctrine of H.N.
for yt it teaches this state of perfection which is Christ, This doctrine of
H.N. because it leads to perfection, is sometime called Christ.
and leads men thereunto is called Christ, as in the two and forty chapter
of the Gospel after H.N. and 8. Section in these words. Whosoever now the^
forsakes himself, and gives over himself obedie^tly in Jesus Christ the
gracious word of the Lord, becomes now admitted or received in Jesus Christ
and in the obedience of his requiring. And likewise in his first exhortation,
chapter seventh, the first article, Section 23. in these words, We confess
that no man can become partaker with all the holy ones of God, of the
resurrection of Christ, but such as endeavor themselves in the belief, under
the obedience of the love of Jesus, to become implanted into Christ, the
gracious word of the Lord, and even so then to die with Christ, in his like
death, etc. Christ and the gracious word of the Lord, which is H. N. his
doctrine, are here united by him, and made one and the same thing, which thing
not only the sense will lead you unto, but also the manner of poynting, which
has no little mystery in it. For after [Christ] ye shall find in his book a
full and perfect point, albeit the sense be yet hanging, above the head of it,
there is an other point reaching forward, which is a privy mark between him
and his disciples, telling them that the word following does open and
expound it, After [the gracious word of the Lord.] Ye see an other full
and perfect point, and above the head of it, a point looking backewarde, to
insinuate unto them that the word behind, does in like manner open and
declare it. There is not one iodde in H.N. his Gospel, that goes for nothing.
For even this Childishe toy, is made a mystery, nay a miracle with many of
them. Now whenever H.N. uses this form of speech, [by Jesus Christ.] He
means either this state of perfection, or else this gracious word of his,
wherein the sense will direct us whether of the interpretations we are to
admit off. The like is to be said of this form of words [in Jesus
Christ:] that is in the state of perfection, which his illuminate Elders do
euioy, or in the gracious doctrine, which he has brought into the world.
Christ then is nothing else but anointed, and (as ye have heard) by his
allegorical exposition is given to all that are come to that infection (he
calls it Perfection) which was spoken of before, H. N. his opinion of Christ.
to wit, when they have done with Aaron and the serviceable word, and have met
with their Melchisedech, who does all to berubbe their heads with revelations,
and as for their conversation, tells them whatsoever their doings be, they
are no longer now to be said or accounted to have any sin in them. Now to
color his doings, he speaks of all the upright children of the belief, that
are thus anointed in ye singular number, as of one body, that his young
disciples should not smell out his heresy at the first: but remain still of
this opinion that when he speaks of Christ, he means no other beside that
same one person, whereof the Scripture speaks, which is both God and man:
Whereas in truth he comprehends under that name, all that multitude or number
how many soever, who have to diet, from H.N. this roste meat of revelations.
It appears by this which has been said, Christ is not God.
that H.N. his Christ is not GOD, but an affection or disposition in man, which
if it were good, were yet no more but godliness, not GOD himself. But we
have heard manifestly proved unto us before, that of necessity the mediator
and redeemer of man, must be GOD himself. And therefore this miserable man,
pulls up the doctrine of our salvation by the roots. His doctrine of
Christ is declared yet more plainly, if possibly that may be, in that allegory
which he makes of Esau and Jacob in the nienth Chapter of his Euangelie. Where
he affirms, that the righteousness of the Law, with the great knowledge of
the flesh, or of the earthly being, which is borne out of the letter, and has
to name Adam, Esau or Edom: must serve the little single minded simplicity,
which is borne out of the spirit or heavenly being. He affirms in the 8.
Section of that chapter, That those, who live under the obedience of love, that
is his family, do openly perceive these two birthes in themselves. The first
birth is, when we understand the word according to the letter, and are
reaching or striving to atteine to the perfection which his illuminated elders
are possessed of. And this birth he calls in this Section, The right
knowledge of man out of the flesh or letter, the seed that is borne according
to the flesh, Adam and Christ after the flesh are one with H.N.
and has no inheritance in the promises. And in the tenth Section he calls
it the mind of the flesh, which is named Adam, Esau, or Edo^, and the
knowledge of Christ after the flesh. The second borne, as he affirms in the
eleventh Section, holds himself in stillness, and obteyneth through the
prudence of the holy Ghost, the blessing of the promises. In the nienth
Section, he calls it the Godhead, the truth. Gods true being it self, H.N.
calls the second birth, Christ, the Godhead, and Gods true being it self.
the inheritance of all spiritual and heavenly goods, the true seed of the
belief, that becomes borne in us according to the spirit and inheriteth the
promises of God the Father. And in the twelfth Section and last line thereof
he calls it Christ, these be his words: The second birth, which is not
minded according to the flesh, but according to the spirit of the heavenly
truth, obteineth the victory, bears rule with God, and brings forth the
name of Israel or Christ it self. By this which has been said it appears
evidently, that H.N. his Christ, is that estate of man or men, which lives as
it best likes, not being now any more under the government of the written
word, which he calls the serviceable letter, having let the rain loose
unto revelations, so that nothing shall now be good, but that he thinks to be
good, neither shall any thing be evil of it self, unless he judge it to be
evil. For he is now the rule himself, to make by his revelation what
construction soever he will of the word, so it be not according to the letter
and natural sense of the same, for that is with him the first borne, which
cannot inherit the promises. It shall now be now be no great hard matter by
the light we have had from these former places, to find out the poison that
lies under the sweet words, with he gives Christ in his confession. For
confessing Christ to be the very like being of God his Father, we may soon
perceive what he means, when he calls the second birh (whereof so many be
partakers as shall inherit the promises Gods true being it self, and the very
like being of the Godhed it self, which are his own words, in the xiii.
chapter of his Gospel and fifth Section. Confessing likewise that God the
Father, by Christ has made and accomplished all his work, what is this more,
then that he attributes in the xiii. Chapter of his Gospel and third Section,
to this estate of his illuminate Elders and perfect men, who be come to the
second birth, which he calls in that place, The Lord his Sabbath, the
seventh day in the Paradise of God, wherein God rested from all his works? So
that then they are said to rest, as having accomplished all their works,
when this their estate of perfection, whereunto he gives this name of Christ
is come unto them. And in the like sense he says, That Christ bears all
things with the word of his power, and makes the purging of our sins through
him self. For that estate understands the word after the spirit, and
therefore has it in that power whereby it bears and does all things, and
that estate likewise freeth them from all danger of sin, in as much as it
wholly purges and cleanses them from the same. This so wicked, horrible and
monstrous construction and meaning under so great good words, does plainly
declare that H.N. and his family, are children of that great Whore, described
in the seventeenth chapter of the Revelation, Reave. 17.4.
which gives forth all her abomination out of a Golden Cup.

H.N. The third Article.
14. We believe that the same son of GOD is conceived of the holy Esa. 7. b.
Matthew. 1. c. Luke 1. d.
Ghost, through the power of the most highest: and borne of the holy Luke 2.
b. Gal. 4. a.
Virgin Mary.

15 We confess that this same son of God, which is conceived of the holy
Ghost, and borne of the holy Virgin Mary, is the true and promised seed Genesis
22 b. Romans 4. b. Gal. 3. b.
and borne to the blessing of all generations of the earth according to the
promises.

Answer. In this Creed so full of new and strange matters, marvel not if
H.N. add some thing new and strange in words. We say in our common Creed as
of a thing paste, That Jesus Christ was conceived of the holy Ghost. In H.N.
his Creed ye hear, we are taught to say as of a thing present, that he is
conceived of the holy Ghost, whereby he puts us in remembrance of this
new Christ, which he has brought into the world, whom because he has
imagined to be nothing else but a perfection in the mind of so many as have
been or shall be inheritours of the promises, he cannot say that his
conception is altogether paste: for so often as any are brought on, to that
estate which H.N. sets forth in his doctrine, so often in his opinion is
Christ conceived of the holy Ghost, as appears in the eighteenth chapter of
his Euangelie, which place is already set down before and alleged by me. And
albeit enough has been spoken to him that will understand, Christ is so often
conceived of the holy Ghost, as any shall have profited well in this doctrine
of H.N.
for proof that H.N. takes Christ to be but a course in life and
conversation, which so many attain unto, as shall avoid the wrath of God, or
as himself speaks, [a walking in the lovely beeing]: yet I think it not
amiss, to add unto the former one testimony more, because this place we now
have in hand, is occupied about that matter. In the twelfth Chapter of his
first exhortation Section 22. and 34. these be his words: If ye will not that
the wrath of GOD should come or fall upon you, so deal faithfully before GOD
and his holiness, and walk with your spitite in the lovely and virtuous being:
fasten your mind thereto: and build your righteousness thereon, for that is
an eternal fast standding foundation, whereon all GOD his Prophets and Ephesians.
2. d.
holy ones have builded, and is Christ him self. This walking with their
spirit in the lovely and virtuous being, he calls as you hear [Christ
himselfe] and those who keep this course of life, and walk in the lovely
being how many so ever, does he speak of here in the singular number as of
one person and one seed, when he says, This same son of GOD which is
conceived by the holy Ghost, and borne of the holy Virgin Mary, is the true
and promised seed, borne to the blessing of all generatio^s of the earth: As
also he speaks in his Euangelie or Gospel, when he says, The upright
children of the belief which had their descent out of the seed of the faith
of Abraham, and of the pure virgin Mary, as also from the holy Ghost, were
known to be the true seed of Abraham, because the same seed was the seed
of the promise of GOD the father, and was likewise in his mind according to
the spirit the likeness of God his father, also spirit and spiritual, The
Gospel after H.N. Cha. 18 Section. 10.
of the godly nature and being, and according to the will of God, wholly
minded with God.

Now touching the humanity of Christ, he is so far from thinking that
Christ is a person now did take flesh of a Virgin called Mary, that woondering
at the madness of them who have defended that, he says thus, Euangely
eighteen and Section seventeen. Oh alas, how great contention and
unprofitable disputations has there been concerning the conception of Jesus
Christ, in the womb of Mary, and touching his birth, but if they all which
contended here about, Euang. 18.
had known the power of God, and that also the mystery of the mind and works
of God, had been given the^ to understand, so should they then verily not have
contended there about. And whereas the Scripture declares that Christ should
come of the seed of Abraham, he wipeth that away after his mystical manner, and
says, that ye seed out of the faith of Abraham, and out of the pure virgin
Mary, is the true seed of promise, to the blessing of all generations of the
earth: Euan. 18.10
so that otherwise he will not have him to be Abraham's seed, Christ, not
Abraham's seed after the flesh, but only as he follows the faith of Abraham.
but in that he follows the faith of Abraham. And as for being borne of the
virgin Mary, he will have that a matter common to all his illuminate elders
and perfect men of his family. Where he says That the upright children of the
belief, which had their descent of the seed of the faith of Abraham, and of
the pure virgin Mary, Euang. 18. Section. 3.
were known to be the seed of the promise: His reason is rendered before,
because Mary with him signifies nothing else but a doctrice. They therefore yt
are taught in his schole, from whence only comes (as he thinks) pure
doctrine, are said to be borne of the pure virgin Mary, and for this cause,
Euang. 18. Section. 9.
when he had affirmed that the true seed of Abraham should not be conceived of
the flesh, but of the holy Ghost, He says further, that this is to be
done, through the power of the most highest in the belief. The word of God
teaches us another doctrine, that Christ was very man borne of a woman, as we
read in the Epistle to the Galathians: G^lla. 4.4.
When the fullness of time was come, God sent his son made of a woman, that
he might redeem them that were under the law. And in the first of Matthewe
and third of Luke, he is so plainly proved to be the seed of Abraham, and
the seed of Adam after the flesh, that there can be no admitting of H N. his
mystical meaning or allegorical exposition. Which thing the Apostle likewise
affirms plainly, when he says: Romans 9.5.
I wish my self to be separate from Christ, for my brethren that are my
kinsemen according to the flesh, which are the Israelites, of whom are the
fathers, and of whom concerning the flesh, Christ came, who is God over all,
blessed for ever. This damnable doctrine of H. N. overthrows all comfort,
which is given to Christian consciences in the word of God. For seeing by man,
and in our nature, sin was committed, and corruption did take beginning: the
justice of God did require, that he should be very man, and have our nature,
who was to make satisfaction for the same. That as equity does require, where
the offense was committed, there the satisfaction might be made. Otherwise how
could our consciences rest satisfied, that the law in justice were answered,
and for this cause the holy Ghost says: He took not on him the nature of
Angels, but the nature of men, and the seed of Abraham. Heb. 2.16.
And therefore in that he refusing the nature of Angels, has taken upon him
the nature of man, he has in so doing overthrown all H.N. his spiritual
constructions, and supercelesticall interpretations, touching the flesh and
humanity of Christ: and forces him to a true and natural meaning in that
matter. It was necessary likewise for our comfort, that his conception should
be pure, and therefore that he should be borne of a virgin, without the help
of man. For otherwise, if he had not been pure in and from the conception, he
had been no meet Mediator for others, but one that had stood in need of a
Mediator him self. Neither should the satisfaction make our full and perfect
discharge against the justice of God seeing his best children, are not rid of
the remnaunts of sin, but still feel prouocations and motions unto evil in
them: if our nature in him, who is the peacemaker, were not pure, and
altogether without spotte or stain. And therefore damnable is that doctrine of
H.N. that would wring this comfort out of our hands, and make us believe that
Mary signifies nothing but a pure teacher, and that so many are borne of the
pure virgin Mary, as are brought up in the doctrine of H.N. which is as full
of purity, as Antechriste is of Christianity. And as by his doctrine we are
left comfortless, touching our satisfaction for sin: so are we likewise,
touching the hope to obtain any thing by way of Prayer and intercession. Let
us go boldly (says the Apostle) unto the throne of grace, Heb. 1.15.
for we have not an high Priest, which can not be touched with the feeling
of our infirmities, but one who was in all things tempted in like sort, yet
without sin. If the bold presenting of our selves in Prayer before the
throne of grace, arise heerevppon that our mediator is ready to take
compassion, because he has our nature, and in it had taste and natural feeling
of our infirmities: then by the same stroke that H.N. ouerthrowth his
humanity, he gives the deadly wound to the comfort that we have to call
upon God in our necessities.

H.N. The fourth Article.
We believe that this holy seed of blessing, namely thissame only son of
GOD Jesus Christ, our Lord and Savior, Colo. 1. b.
the very like being of GOD the Father, Esa. 53. a.b.
has suffered under Matthew. 27. b. Luke 23. 1. Timo. 6. b.
Pontius Pilate: was crucified 1. cor. 15. a. 1. Pet. 2. c.
dead and buried and descended to the hell.

We confess that thissame son of GOD, inasmuch as he bears all things
with the Heb. 1. a.
word of his own power, Esai. 53. b.
bears also in us our sins.

Answer. For as much as this Mathematical Christ which H.N. discribeth, is
in the mind of man, as a quality or affection thereof, begotten by his
doctrine: therefore he is constrained to say, that he bears our sins in
us. For he will have the obedience which his family does perform, through his
doctrine which he calls the belief, to be of that valewe: that immediately
upon the receite thereof, they have a Quietus est of the Lord for all their
sins, are clearly discharged of all their iniquities, and stand fully
reconciled unto their God, because then in all things they do his will,
according as is declared in the twelfth chapter of his Euangelie, Section 7.
where speaking how the Priesthood of Aaron had place until the revealing of
his doctrine, he has these words: According to thissame manner, had this
Testament. administered by the elders of the holy understanding, the foregoing
and his fruitefulnesse, with the vnilluminated, until that the belief, out of
the power of GOD, became with child through the holy Ghost, and bare or
brought forth a new man, or a new creature, according to the very like
being of the heavenly Godheade, by the believers, and illuminated them even so
in their spirit and mind, with the upright righteousness and holiness. For
this is the right procreation, to the renewing of the spirit and mind of the
believers, and is also the true new Testament, which God has promised to
errect with his people, which new Testament is the very true that God himself
witnesses in his people, which are obedient unto him out of faith, in the
service of his word, and brings even so unto them in the spirit of their
mind, the true God service of the spiritual and heavenly goods, and writes
according to his godly and heavenly truth, his law, institutions and rites,
in the being of their inward mind. In such sort works the Lord, the
holy one in Israel, and brings forth even so his children, sons and
daughters, servants and handmaidens, upon which he in these last days pours
forth his spirit, and remembers no more their sins, for they are a
reconciled people unto him, which do in all his will. Behold and consider,
such is the new testament with his children, for that same new Testament is
in his children the heaven, the seat of the most highest, also spirit and life,
and for that cause it is with his children, heavenly, spiritual, and liuingly
minded, which children of the new testament, love not the world, nor that
which is in the world, in as much as that the new testament, is wholly and
altogether of God, also the love, the life, and the upright being of the holy
Ghost it self.

The state of his young scholars, which he calls the belief, inasmuch as
they hope for the perfection, becomes (as he says) with child through the
holy Ghost, and brings forth a new creature, according to the very like
being of the heavenly Godhead, and illuminateth the beleuers in their spirit
and mind, with the upright righteousness and holiness. He calls his
doctrine likewise, The true new testament, and all those upon whom the spirit
is powered forth in this sort now in these last days, he affirms of them,
that the Lord remembers their sins, no more, rendering this reason, because
they are a reconciled people unto him, which doin all his will. He affirms
here in like manner that these his children of the new testament, love not the
world, nor the things in the world, and will have this to be the cause and
occasion thereof, for that the new testament is wholly and altogether of God,
the love, the life, and the upright being of the holy Ghost it self, of such
virtue and operation, that so sone as a man has had a few receites thereof, all
his worldly humors are forthwith voided thereby, and he as clear purged of
them, as if he never had been infected with them, and which is yet more, he
says that this new testament, The new testament is heaven, and the seat of
the most highest.
is in his children the heaven, the seat of the most highest, also spirit and
life, for they be his own words even in this place. You see then, according to
the doctrine of H.N. that our obedience whereunto we be brought by it, bears
our sins in us, because when in all things we do his will, we stand as a
people fully reconciled unto our God, and therefore wholly and altogether
discharged of all danger for our former sins. For according to this
doctrine, when once we have ceased to sin, sin likewise cease to lay any
thing to our charge, and thus this obedience bears our sins in us. This
doctrine is confirmed by the Prophet Esaias, in his 53. Chapter, (if we will
believe H.N.) for that place is alleged by him for it. Wherein he plainly
bewrays unto all the world, that the spirit of darkness, even palpable
blindness does possess him. For if a man should come prepared to speak
against that point, (of having our sins answered and borne in our selves) it
were not possible to speak more plainly, and more effectually against it, then
does the Prophet in that place. For is it possible to add any thing plainer
then this speech: Esaias. 53.5.6.
We like sheep have gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way, and
the Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all, he was wounded for our
transgressions, he was broken for our iniquity, the chastisement of our peace
was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed? Such gross blindness is a
just punishment from God upon the^, which are offended and stumble at the
clear light that now shines in the Gospel, and so blind guides are meet
Scholemaisters for so many as love darkness more then light. Could H.N. the
seed of Satan justify our sins to be borne in our selves as from the
Prophet, even in that place, where he in plain words says, that the
iniquity of us all are laid upon another: if the Prince of darkness, had
not bereft him of al judgment, and pulled clean out of his head the eyes of
understanding. We did judge him to have been plagued of God, (says the
Prophet) but it is clear and out of all doubt, he has borne our infirmities,
and carried our sorrows. Neither is the Prophet more plain in this case, then
is the Apostle Paul in the Epistle to the Romans, Romans 5.9.
where he sets the righteosnesse of one man, for the making of many
righteous, against the disobedience of one, unto the making of many sinners.
Can the righteousness of one man make many righteous if this doctrine of H.N.
be true, that our sins are borne in our selves, and our righteousness not
laid up in another for us, but rests in our own breasts within us? In the
second Epistle to the Corinthes, the Apostle does yet more plainly declare
himself to have a contrary spirit to H.N. in that he is flat contrary in
speech. For he affirms Christ, to be a sinner in us, and us to be righteous
in him: our sins to be imputed unto him, and his righteousness to be
reckoned ours: our sins to be borne in him, and so he to be made sin for
us: and we righteousness in him. 2. Cor. 5.21.
For he made him to be sin for us, (says the Apostle) which knew no sin,
that we should be made the righteousness of God in him. If he be made sin
for us, then are not our sins borne in us, if we be righteous before God, or
the righteousness of God in him: then not in us, but in him, are our
transgressions both borne and buried, and our righteousness wholly and
altogether purchased. If the Sacrifices for sin, appointed to make
reconciliation, had been eaten as were other, then H N. and other heretics,
should have had some color to bleare the eyes of their Disciples withal,
touching this doctrine: (to have their sins borne in them, and their
righteousness wrought by themselves:) but the sacrifices for sin, whose
blood was brought into the tabernacle of the Congregation, to make
reconciliation in the holy place, being figures of that alone Sacrifice by
Christ: by express words were forbidden to be eaten and received into men.
Wherein the holy Ghost no doubt made a special Prouiso against this dangerous
doctrine, which not only H.N. but all other Heretics profess [of having our
sins answered by and in our selves, either wholly, or at least in some part,]
that the very figures should have light sufficient in them, to drive away
all darkness and doubting herein. But what light can make him see, that is
blind, or open those eyes, that in just judgment are closed up by the Lord?

H.N.
And has suffered in all obedience of the word Phil. 2. ^.
of his heavenly father, the death of the cross, in reproach, blasphemy,
contempt, and false Hebr. 12. ^
defamation or accusation for our sins cause.

Answer. The name of Christ (as you have heard) is given by H. N. unto all
his illuminate Elders, as unto those who have atteyned unto an estate of
perfection, by means of their obedience unto his doctrine. Whom (how many
soever) he comprehends under one name, and speaks of them as of one
person. It is given also as you have heard by special prerogative unto the
eldest Elder, that is H. N. himself. The suffering of this Christ, and his
death of the cross, is set forth in this, that he has yielded all obedience to
the word of his heavenly father, which is this doctrine of H.N. and gone under
and borne reproach, blasphemy, contempt, and false defamation or accusation for
the same. Thus has H. N. his Christ suffered the death of the Cross, in that
himself, and his illuminate elders, could neither by their own affections,
nor yet by the reproach and contempt of others, be brought from this doctrine
and service of love, which thing is confirmed in the. 20. Chapter of this his
first exhortation, and third Section, in these words: Against these
assaultings, the man ought in his yongnesse, to learn to take up his cross on
him, to follow after Christ his Savior, in his like suffering or death of the
cross, and to show forth patience with Christ, against all the assaultings,
until that all the enemies or adversaries of the lovely life, through the death
of Christ, (that is in manner of suffering) be utterly vanquished, and that he
even so is grown up, through the death or together suffering of Christ, which
is the daily oblation in the holy, to the old age of the man Christ, and
entered through the second birth from the dead, into the everlasting life, which
passage or way to the everlasting life, we have witnessed and figured forth
distinctly and clearly, in the figure of the true and spiritual tabernacle,
and in other more places in the glass of righteousness. The young scholar in
this scoole of Love, whom he calls the man in his yongnesse, is (as you
hear) to follow Christ, that is H.N. and those illuminate elders, in his like
suffering and death of the cross. So that Christ had no other suffering or
death of the Cross, then the youngest scholar in H.N. his school, must suffer
and go under, and that is nothing else (as he says in this place) but to show
forth patience against all assaultings, until all the adversaries of this
lovely life, by this manner of suffering become utterly vanquished, and he
grown up to the old age of the man Christ, that is a perfect and absolute
elder. And therefore in his two next sections, he exhorts them, that it
should not be tedious unto them to show forth this patience, and to abide
this death of the Cross for a little time, in bearing the assaults of those
enemies, who would turn them from the good will they have to this godly
being, under the obedience of the love, and does promise unto them, that after
a little time of this their distress, affliction, and anguish, the Lord will
bring his Christ, that is (as he there says) his best beloved, and most holy
being unto them in power and glory. In the 26. and 27. Sections of this
Chapter, he does in plain words declare, that while a man is in this
yongnesse, and not fully settled in the doctrine and service of love, but
subject to anguishe and affliction with temptations and assaults, either with
himself, or from others that would draw him from the same, and with grief
for his stumbling or falling by means thereof: then is he suffering with
Christ upon the Cross for the redemption of his sins. These be his words
in that place: Wherefore when as now your stumbling and falling, becomes daily
figured very great and horrible before you: and that ye for that cause being
woeful of heart, feel yet the pricking of the sin, the darts of the death,
and the condemnation of the hell, or bear the same with anguish in your
hearts, yet fear not, nor be dismayed in your hearts, That Christ which H.N.
has brought into the world was a sinner in his young years.
but show forth patience, and follow after Christ in his suffering, for
those are the days of affliction, heaviness and death, wherein Christ has
gone before you in the holy, for to prepare you through the same death of the
cross, the everlasting forgiveness and redemption of sins, as there is
before said. Where you may painely see, that H.N. his Christ in his yongnesse
(as he calls it) was a sinner, and was woeful in his heart, for his
stumbling and falling are woeful in heart, he says: Those are the days of
affliction, and heaviness, wherein Christ has gone before you, for to prepare
you through the same death of the cross, the everlasting forgiveness and
redemption of sins. And if yet some more specialtie touching the death of
H.N. his Christ be asked after, that shall be the sooner answered, if we call to
remembrance that, which was uttered before out of the 9. Chap. of the
Euangelie, and tenth Section, to wit, that the knowledge after the letter and
the obedience unto the same is the first birth, and the knowledge of Christ
after the flesh, which must be crucified and put to death, that the lawful
heir, which is after the spirit, spiritual, and heavenly, may take place:
comparing it with that which is written in the 21. Chapter of his Euangelie, in
these words: Forasmuch now, as that in times past, the clearenesse of Christ
through the holy ghost, was yet unknown unto the upright and faithful
disciples of Jesus Christ, whilst that they knew him not otherwise but after
the flesh, so was it therefore needful, that Christ should keep the Pascha,
or Passover with them, for that cause the Lord Jesus caused the same to be
prepared him, for to keep the Passover with his Disciples in the true being,
and told them before of his suffering and Passover, and that they must also
do the like, if they would come to his clearenesse in the heavenly being with
his father. Therefore he gave them to understand, in what manner his Passover
should be, to wit, that he (namely Christ after the flesh) should be slain,
and even so accomplish according to the true being, the true God service, with
the gift or offering of his flesh in the holy, namely on the true altar of
the holy offering, which is his cross, whereon he died in the belief,
herewith Christ showed unto his disciples, how or in what manner his flesh must
be offered, and given over to a life of men, and that they all even so, which
in the belief of their safe making from their sins, eat his flesh and
followed after him even unto the second birth, should have the life in
fullness, in all godly clearness according to the spirit. Behold this is the
upright Passover with Christ, or the right supper which the upright believers
and disciples of Christ keep with Christ, to wit, that they depart even so
with Christ, out of the flesh, into the spirit, and out of the death or
mortality, into the eternal life of everlasting immortalite, wherethrough the
sin, and all destruction becomes vanquished. This death of H.N. his Christ
in the flesh, is to renounce the knowledge of Christ after the letter, to die
unto that, and so to pass into that clearenesse of the spirit, in knowledge
and obedience, whereto we are led by the doctrine of H.N. which he calls that
eternal life of everlasting immortality, whereby sin and all destruction
becomes vanquished. The manner of the death and suffering of H.N. his Christ,
what it is, may well be conceived by the Allegory of Agar and Sara, in the 8.
Chapter of his Euangelie. By Agar, (as he says in that place) is signified
the written word, which he calls the serviceable writing or letter of the
belief. By Sara, a perfect estate according to H.N. his doctrine. For he
says, That so many be her children, as are borne out of the belief of the
true being of Abraham, and are grown up in the holy and godly understanding.
Now when the seed of Sara the free woman which before was called Christ after
the spirit, is borne, then is Agar with her seed, that is Christ after the
flesh, or the written word, which he calls the serviceable writing or letter
of the belief, put away and discharged. When and how Christ is put to death.
And therefore then is H.N. his Christ killed and put to death, when any
disciple of his has so profited yt he is now no longer led by the written
word, but altogether ruled by revelation, with estate as H.N. teaches is
altogether void of sin and imperfection.

If it be required what benefit we reap from his passion and suffering,
because H.N. affirms in this place, that he has suffered for our sins
cause: that is answered in the 20. Chap. of this first exhortation, Sect. 17.
For when in the 12. Section, he had exhorted his young disciples, that if they
should offend, or (as he speaks) ouerreach themselves in any thing, they
should not suffer themselves to be judged or condemned by their conscience,
but should humble themselves to the elders or Ministers of the word, in the
service of the love, to be instructed by them: giving the reason of his speech
in the Section following, he has these words: For we have in our
communiaitie of the love, a true judge Jesus Christ our Lord and King, he is
unto us in all our walking, a fountain of life, and to amaking a live of us
all against the death and the deadly venime of the sin. And continuing his
speech of the same matter speaks thus: We have also through him, a daily
offering in the holiest, his spiritual and true tabernacle, into which holy he
is gone before us, and therein himself bears our sins, through his
suffering and death of the cross, wherethrough he shows or teaches us, the
upright offering for our sins, and prepares for us even so a free entrance
with him, into the holy to an eternal and living way. H.N. therefore, and
these illuminate elders or Ministers of the word in the service of Love, to
whom he gives the name of Christ, and speaks of them all as of one person:
are said to suffer for our sins, because they having gone before us in the
conflictes with these enemies of the lovely being, have showed unto us by their
example, the upright offering for our sins. And this is all the help we
have, from the passion, death, and suffering of H.N. his Christ: that we have
the way beaten before us, how to suffer for our own sins, and to procure
the remission of the same. Which thing he testifies likewise, in the 19.
Section of this chapter saying: Through which daily God service and offering
in the holy, in the taking up of our Cross in the imitation of Christ in his
death, we obtain the remission of sins, they be his own words. But I
need not to travail far for proof, that this is his opinion of the
benifite we have by Christ, for even in the words which do immediately follow
this place we have in hand, he affirms that Christ is gone before us in the
obedience of the word of his Father, in reproach and contempt, that we should
in like manner follow after him, under the obedience of his love, in his death of
the Cross, to the safemaking of us from all our sins. What blasphemy can be
uttered against Christ, that does not follow this opinion of H.N.? for by
this docrrine H.N. by special prerogative, and the illuminate elders in the
service of love after a second sort, be Christ himself. By this doctrine, H.
N. is Christ.
Christ when he was a young one had sin, Christ in his yo^g years was a
sinner.
and suffered the death of the Cross for it. By this doctrine, we suffer the
death of the Cross for our own sins, Christ suffered for his own sin. We
must make the purchase of our own righteousness by our selves.
and make the purchase thereof by our selves. By this doctrine we are released
of our sins by imitation, but not not by imputation. And whether would not
this heresy stretch, if a man should thoroughly search the length, deapth, and
breadth thereof, seeing that by this doctrine, the history of Christ his
birth, death, and suffering, had no truth according to the natural sense and
meaning of the letter, but was only a figure of a spiritual kind of birth,
death and suffering, which should be procured by obedience unto this doctrine
of H.N. not signifying a thing once done by one man, according to the natural
meaning of the words: but a figure of a thing to be often done and by many
according, to an illegitimate and bastardely wringing of the words, in
utterly denying the truth of that doctrine, which tells us that Christ has
come in the flesh, overthrowing both his person and office? The Cross then
that H.N. his Christ died upon, The doctrine of H.N. is the cross whereupon
Christ died.
was his doctrine, which he calls the belief, and therefore as we heard
before in the twe^tieth chapter, he says, that he died in the belief. And in
truth it is a doctrine that kills the true Christ, and all true
Christianity. These things being considered, it shall be no hard matter to
discern who is Judas here, and who be the Scribes and Pharisees, that bring
Christ to the death of the Cross. For who is the chief man to bring other to
the belief, (which is the cross whereon Christ dies in flesh, H.N. is
Judas, his illuminate elders be the Scribes and Pharisees.
) but H N? He therefore of necessity must be Judas. And as for the illuminate
elders, by necessary consequence they are the Scribes and Pharisees, because
they are other Ministers about this matter: which likewise help forward the
death of Christ. You may see how safe it is to leave the natural sense of the
Scripture, and to follow allegories, as does this family. For H. N. has
walked so long this way, in the belief: leaving the certainty of the word,
that he has proved himself to be Judas that betrayeth Christ, and his
doctrine to be that cross which does take the life from Christ. He has
proved that Christ was worthy of his death, and could not have come to
everlasting joy, if he had not died in the flesh, and so consequently, that
Judas and the high Priests, did a very good work unto Christ himself, in
putting him to that death: that the Cross was a blessed thing, and the death
thereof a blessed death for Christ himself: that Judas and the Jews, were
blessed men in that work of procuring Christ his death: and that his life and
estate before* that time, for his own good and benefit, did necessarily
require the same: that the life of Judas and the Jews that crucified Christ,
was better then the life of Christ: and their estate in all respects better
then his: that they walked in the ways of life, and he in the ways of death:
that they who wished and procured his death were his best friends: and his
mother and disciples who stood against it, and councelled him otherwise, were
his greatest enemies, By the doctrine of H.N. Christ himself had the greatest
benefit by his own death.
and those who did in truth betray him: that Christ himself had the greatest
benefit by his own death: and should have had the greatest loss himself,
if he had not dyed. And that others should have no further benefit from his
death, then they receive instruction and example by his death, to suffer as he
has done the death of the Cross. How does this passion agree with that
history of Christ his passion, which is set forth in the Scripture? The
word of GOD reports this matter of Christ his passion and death, not as an
Allegory or a type and figure of a truth to be accomplished, but with
circumstaunces of time, place, person and order of proceeding, sets it
forth as a true history, and the very truth it self of that thing, which by
types and Figures had been shadowed out long before, and was now in Christ
one person, and yet both GOD and man truly accomplished. We have an history
in the word of GOD touching his apprehension, and the manner of proceeding
against him before Pilate. In like manner touching his death and burial, not
barely and in a word delivered, but with all circumstances fully discharged.
He foretells his Disciples both of the time of his death, that it should
be within two days, Mat. 26.^.
when his adversaries had purposed to defer it till after the feast, for
fear of an uproar among the people: and of the manner of his death. A woman
coming by the instinct of GOD his spirit, Mar. 14.8.
with a box of very costly ointment, and pouring it on his head as he sat at
the table, declare thereby that the death of his body, and burial were at
hand, and not any spiritual dying in respect of sin and imperfection, which
he never had (no, not in his youngnes, as H.N. speaketth.) The chief Piestes
the Scribes and the elders of the people assembled together into the Hall of
the high Priest called Caiphas, consulting how they might take Jesus by
subtlety and kill him, determining that it should not be at the feast of the
Passover for fear of uproar, Matthew. 26.3.
at which time notwithstanding, the Lord would have it performed, that the
very time might admonish us, that Christ was the true Paschall lamb, 1. Cor.
5.7.
and the true body of those shadows and figures that had gone before,
according as the Apostle restifieth. If this had been a conspiracy of many
men against their affections, because they would not yield obedience to true
doctrine, or a type and figure of any such matter, why then is a thing common
to so many, made special in the type and figure? Why is there such specialtie
of person in the pattern, where so many have interest in the thing? Such
choice likewise of the day, to foreshewe a matter free and lawful to be done
at all times, and bound to no day? Why is there such fear of displeasure
from the people at one special time, whose malice against true doctrine ends
not with any time? Here Christ his Adversaries work procure, and in end
perform with their own destruction, They that crucified Christ in the flesh,
wrought thereby their own salvation.
his death and suffering: But to conspire the death of H.N. his Christ in the
flesh, is required necessarily to their salvation, and therefore the one
cannot be a type of the other. He that betrayed Christ, was one of his
disciples hired thereunto with thirty pieces of silver, who after that he
saw him condemned, brought the money again, confessing that he had
betrayed the innocent, and went and hanged him self, and bursting asunder in
the midst, all his bowelles gushed out, so just and heavy was the judgment
of GOD upon him: but he that should betray H.N. his Christ in the flesh,
has for recompense everlasting life, Neither can any pass into immortality,
but by betraying and killing of him, and therefore one of these cannot be so
much as a tipe or figure of an other, much less the thing it self. We
read that our Savior Christ charged Judas and his company, that they came
with material weapons, swords and staves, as unto a thief to apprehend him,
when notwithstanding he had taught daily in the Temple, and been in their
company continually there, and yet they had no power before that time, which
he tells them was their very hour, Luke. 22.
when darkness had power granted to prevail against the light for a time.
And the Disciple likewise who wounded the servant of the high Priest with his
sword, received a reproof from Christ with this answer, That he might with
a word have obtained armies of Angels from heaven in his defense, but that
it might not be otherwise, for then the scriptures should not have been
fulfilled. This declares that the true Christ was subject to external force
and apprehended, and yt he was willing to die to fulfill the Scriptures, whereas
otherwise he might have had legions of Angels in his quarrel, and therefore
that Mathematical Christ, who suffers in wardly in the mind of man, a
departure out of the letter into the spirtie has no resemblaunce with this
Christ which is here set forth in the Scriptures. When this true Christ his
passion and suffering is in hand, it is declared particularly and plainly
how the Scriptures which foretold that matter, and the manner of it also, are
verified in him who accomplished all that truth which they foretold, and
therefore can not the history of him, be a foretelling or shadowing out of a
truth, yet to be performed by H.N. or any other their doctrine or doings
whatsoever. They crucify two thieves with him, that the Scripture might be
fulfilled which says, he was counted among the wicked: they parted his
apparel among them by lottes, that it might be fulfilled likewise which was
spoken by the Prophet: They parted my garments among them, and upon my vesture
did they cast lottes. So that it is evident he was that true Christ, in whom
the Scriptures became accomplished and beside him there is none to be looked
for, but false Prophets and false Christ's.

H. N.
And that he likewise under the obedience of the love of his father, is gone
before us Phil. 2. a. 1. Pet. 2. c. Heb. 5. b.
therein, for that we should in like manner, 1. Pet. 2. c.
follow after him, under the obedience of his love in his death of the cross,
to the safemakinge of us from our sins, become incorporated to him with his
like Romans 6 a. Phil..3. b.
death, and baptized or washed under the obedience of the belief in his name
or safemaking, Romans 6. a. Colos 2. b.
and bury even so through the belief the old man, Ephe. 4. c.
which is destroying through the lusts of error, to the forgeuing and
releasing of our sins through his name or safemaking, to the end that we
might even so through Act. 4 b. 1. John. 2. a.
Jesus Christ, obtain the renewing of our spirit and mind, in an upright life,
and the resurrection from Esai. 26. c. 1 Cor. 15.^. 1. These. 4 b.
the dead, with Christ in the appearing of his Matt. 24. d. Luke. 17. c. Act. 1
b.
majesty for when as we in such sort become Ephe. 4. b. Col. 2. b.
incorporated as fellow members of Christ into the body of Christ, so is
Christ then in like manner, Mat. 1 ^. Ephe. 5. c.
a Savior of his body, or of his people from their sins according to the
Scripture. And this is the upright christian Baptism, in the Mat 18.4. Mat.
16. b.
name of the Son, and is the true forgiveness and Heb. 9. b.
purging of our sins through Jesus Christ.

Answer. THis following of Christ in his death of the Cross, which H N.
requires of us to the safemaking of us from our sins: declares that he is
as ignorant of true fruit and effect of Christ his death, as before he has
bewrayed himself to be of the truth and true manner of his suffering. For the
death of Christ upon the Cross, was a sacrifice for our sin, of that
excellency, that it could not be imitated of any man, and of that
sufficiency, that it needed not by imitation to be reiterated. According as we
read in the Epistle to the Hebrews, in these words: Such an high Priest it
became us to have, which is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners,
Heb. 7.26.
and made higher the^ the heavens, who needed not daily (as those high
Priests) to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the
peoples, for that did he once, when he offered up himself. Before he does
declare touching Christ the true high priest, that his once offering of himself
was sufficient for the sins of his people, and that he needed not as the
Priests under the law to offer often he tells us of his excellency, that he
was separate from sinners, and made higher then the heavens, that we should
cease to make any question (seeing ye person was of that dignity) why the once
offering up of himself, should be of such force and efficacy to wipe away
the sins of so many. This doctrine is H.N. and his family utterly ignorant
of; they see no reason why the sacrifice and obedience of one man, should
discharge and aunsweare for the sins of an other, and therefore says H.N. in
this place, Mortification is our justification according to the doctrine of H.N.
that we likewise should follow Christ in the death of his Cross, to the
safemaking of us from our sins: when notwithstanding in plain words it is
written, that we are sanctified by the once offering of the body of Jesus
Christ. Heb. 10.110
Where it is plainly proved that the sacrifices under the law were therefore
convict of imperfection, and made unable to satisfy for sin: because they
were reiterated, and year by year offered. For as it is written in that
Chapter: If the sacrifices under the law had sanctified the co^mers thereunto,
they would then have ceased to have been offered: for where remission is of
sin, there is no more offering for sin, and they being once purged, should
have had no more conscience of sins. So that by the reason of the holy Ghost
in this place, there is no remission of sin to be looked for, by the
suffering and death of H. N. his Christ, because it is often renewed and
continually reiterated. For every one of that family, is to suffer with Christ
the like death of the Cross. And as the true sacrifice for sin was but one,
to declare the sufficiency and perfection thereof: so the true Sacrificer for
sin, to argue his ability, had none to take his place after him in that
work, in respect whereof Christ has the prerogative above the Priests under
the law, who because they could not live always, had others to succeed them
in that function: Whereas he enduring for ever has the office for ever
remaining to himself alone, according as it is written to the Hebrews: Heb.
7.23.
And among them (speaking of the Priests, under the law) many were made
Priests, because they were not suffered to endure by reason of death. But this
man because he endudureth ever, has a Priesthood which cannot pass from one
unto another. Whereby it appears plainly, that the true Christ can have none
to follow him, either in the office, or in the offering for sin. And therefore
this doctrine of H. N. which tells us that we are to follow Christ in his
like death of the Cross, to the safemaking of us from our sins: disagreeth no
less with the truth, the^ does light with darkness. It is at open war with
the doctrine of justification, which is left unto us in the word of God: for
the Apostle proves that we are righteous by favor freely given us from God,
and not by any duty or desert that is coming unto us in the right of our
works, grounding his reason upon the phrase and form of Speech, which the
Scripture uses in this matter, when the righteousness even of Abraham and
David, (men, who of all other were best stored of good works) is of purpose
discussed touching this point. Where because he finds it written of Abraham
that he believed, and that was imputed or reckoned unto him for righteousness:
And that David describing a blessed man, says, He is blessed, to whom the
Lord imputes not sin: He pronounces plainly, that our righteousness
comes of favor, and not of duty: because we do not use this word
imputing or accepting, when it is duty in the man answering, but only when it
is a free gratifiyng. For the wages that are growing unto us for our works
are called due debt, and claymed in equity by just title, and when they shall
truly pay them, yet is that no more but duty which proceeds from them: But
favor and and friendship ruled in the matter, when Abraham was justified,
because the scripture (says he) was accepted or reckoned righteous, bringing
nothing with him beside faith, that is a resting in the gracious good will of
God, whereof he had a merciful promise and grant made unto him. Likewise when
David his sins were not imputed neither laid unto his charge, that was favor
in the Lord pardoning them, and not imputing them unto him. How does this
hang together with the doctrine of H. N. who says, that we are to follow
Christ in the death of his cross, to the pardoning and releasing of us from
our sins? And how will this following of Christ in his death of the cross,
for the safe making of us from our sins, stand with this not imputing of our
sins unto us? For if our righteousness stand by imputation, then is it not
purchased by imitation and following of Christ in his like death and
suffering. If Christ his satisfaction for sin, stand beetweene the wrath of
GOD and us, then does not our imitation of Christ in his death, keep of the
danger of our sins from us. The Brazen Serpent erected in the wilderness at
the commandment of Almighty God, which was a figure of Christ, Number 21. g.
declares that it is faith in him that did hang upon the cross, and not the
following after him in the death of the cross, that does justify us, and
keep the sting of our sins from being deadly unto us. For those who are
bitten with the living serpents, were promised if they should look upon the
dead Serpent, to live and recover by that means, but were not enjoined, to
have them selves after death erected and set up upon a Pole, for their
recovery from that danger. As appears in the book of Numbers: And the Lord
said unto Moses. Make thee a fiery Serpent; and set it up for a sign, that
as many as are bitten may look upon it, and live: So Moses made a Serpent of
Brass, and set it up for a sign, and when a Serpent had bitten a man, then
he looked to the Serpent of Brass and lived. Now the sharp and dangerous
biting and stingyng of the living Serpent, did force them to leave them selves,
and too look after comfort where it was to be found. And when sin shall
once sting the favorers of this opinion of H. N. (their consciences being
awaked which now are in a deadly sleep) they shall then be forced to feel
and confess, that there is no medicine in them selves, able to assuage the
heat and anger thereof. But as it seemed unlikely to flesh and blood, that a
Serpent of Brass being but a dead thing, could ever work a cure upon them,
who were stoong with quick and living Serpents, and in danger of present
death, especially by the looking and beholding of the same: So does it unto H.
N. (the eyes of whose understanding are altogether fleshly) that Christ his
obedience upon the cross, being but looked upon with the eyes of our faith,
and not imitated in the self same practice, should be able to heal the
sores of our soul, Albeit our Savior Christ affirms in plain speech, That
as Moses lift up the Serpent in the wilderness so must the Son of man be
lift up, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
eternal life. The opinion of H. N. that our following after Christ, and
obediennce in the imitation of him, should be able to discharge us of our
sins that before were committed: declares that he is ignorant altogether,
of the righteousness of GOD revealed in his word. For obedience if it were
perfect in us, and no transgression to be found against the law of God,
either in thought word or deed, after that once we have begun to fear
him, yet could not all this answer, for the least sin that went before. For
it is but a part of that is due unto the Lord from us: Who teaches us, that
when we shall have discharged the whole debt, and have done every thing
commanded: yet are we humbly to acknowledge, that we be but unprofitable
servants, and have done no more then that which was our duty to do,
according as he by our own experience and practice does plainly prove unto
us. For which of you (says our Savior Christ) Having a servant plowyng, or
other wise labouryng all the day long, will by and by, Luke. 17.7.
after he be come home, say unto him, Go and sit down at the Table, will
he not rather be ready to enjoin him an other work within the house, as to
prepare things for his own Supper, and when that is done, lay the third
labor upon him, as to wait at the Table, and see nothing to be wantyng,
until himself have supped: yea and when all this is done, does he so much
as once open his mouth to thank that servant, because he did that which was
commanded unto him, I trow not, says our Savior Christ. And in very deed,
we do look for such duty from a servant, that if he shall deny to do any
thing of that which his master shall command him, forthwith we give
sentence that he is no man meet for service, because we think that the servant
ought not (as if he weere a free man) to have any liberty or privilege, but
to reach in obedience unto all, that his master by commandment shall enjoin
him. And therefore accordingly when our servant shall have dispatched labor
after labor, and obeyed commaundedement after commandment, yet do we not
once thank him for all that, because we think it is all duty that a
servant does, how much so ever. Hereupon came that Proverb, That no man can
serve two masters, because service is void of all privilege and liberty, of
infinite duty, if masters shall make no end of commanding, for all is
accounted duty in a servant, which the master shall command him to do. A
man cannot therefore sufficiently wonder at the blindness of H. N. and
others, who acknowledgyng that they be servants unto the Lord, dare
notwithstanding in the pride of their heart, make such a reckoning of their
service a few days or years, as that it should make a sufficient
satisfaction for those days and times wherein they were not only loyterers and
did no duty unto him at all: but also were retained of his adversary, and
spared not to wound his glory. Dare a servant, who has loytered one whole
week, and done his master no work or service at all, for shame open his
mouth the next week when he has traveled for his master as a good servant
ought always to do, and say: Sir I trust now (your self being judge) I have
made a sufficient satisfaction for my loitering all this last week? I cannot
think this Famelie either to be so full of love, or so empty of upright
judgment, as to take this for sufficient service, or as a reasonable answer,
to be put up at the hands of any of their servants, not excepting those to
whom they shall give the least wages. This family of love and the Papists,
they are the best husbands that I have ever heard of, and the most can they
make of that little they have* for duty with them not only pays their old
debt, but also purchases more land and living. Let one of them yield a little
service unto their God, in their devotion such as it is: and they will make
that to answer the debt and danger of their former sins, yea and to deserve
also more and greater graces to be given them from God: according as H.N. says
here, that they must bury the old man, to the end that they might even so
obtain the renewing of their spirit and mind in an upright life. If they
could persuade men, that there were either equity right or reason in this
kind of dealing, which they will force upon the Lord: it were no great matter
too grow soon as rich in goods, as they do take them selves to be in
godliness. For when they have long time gone upon credit, if after their
beginning to pay for wares as they shall take them: they could persuade their
creditours, that the same dealing which now at the last they have light
upon, does not only answer their former debtes, but also in equity deserve
to have better penie-worthes always after: howesoeuer it should fare with
their creditours, they were sure to gain greatly by it. Thus blind is man
when he walks without the word. And when his reason for some long time has
been his rule, his punishment from GOD is so great, that he takes it in the
end to be reason, to depart from all equity and reason. If our sins were
answered in that obedience whereby our life is reformed, how comes it then to
pass that the Apostle speaking to the Church of Corinth, after they were
turned from their lewd life to serve the living God, affirms: that if
Christ be not risen, they are yet in their sins. 1. Cor. 15.17.
They walked in humble obedience unto their GOD, they had left idolatry,
fornication, drunkenness, and other fruits of ignorance, wherein before they
had lived: Notwithstanding the apostle tells them, that if Christ by his
rising up again, have not made a conquest for them over sin, hell, and
destruction: their rising from sin will stand them in no steed. Because
albeit they have left those sins, yet have they not answered the Justice of
GOD for the offense, whereof they have made them guilty by their committing of
the same: as the Thief or other malefactor may not think that all his
offense passes, when the action is once past, and the purpose left of doing
the like: it is no Plea, either in law, or reason, for him to say [the deed is
long since done, and my ways are now otherwise:] his offense committed
against the good laws under the with he lives, and against the peace of his
Prince, must necessarily either be pardoned, or else in his punishementes
satisfied. For albeit the deed passes away with the time it is in doing, yet
leaves it that giltinesse in us, which no other thing but either pardon, or
punishment can discharge. As for that H. N. affirms [that our burial of the
old man, obteineth the renewing of our spirit and mind in an upright life:] it
will in no wise stand with the doctrine left unto us in the word of GOD. The
word of GOD will not bear that blasphemy. Touching this point, God (says
the Apostle) which is rich in mercy, even when we were dead by sins, (not
when we had put our sins to death) has quickened us together in Christ, by
whose grace ye are saved, and has raised us up together, that he might
show in the ages too come the exceeding riches of his grace, through his
kindness toward us in JESUS Christ. For by grace are ye saved through
faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of GOD, not of works,
least any man should boast him self. Which doctrine, Ephe. 2.4
not only affirms, that grace and not works, has brought us unto the
estate of salvation: but also, that we have passed immediately, from the
works of darkness and a damnable estate, into the works of light, and
estate of our salvation. Even when we were dead in sins, (says the Apostle)
has God quickened us in Christ by whose grace ye are saved. Verse 5.
How is our salvation of grace and not of works, if by buriyng the old man,
and woorking the death and destruction of sin, we obtain the renewing of our
mind in an upright life? How can it be said that he has quickened us even
when we were dead by sins, if we have by our woorks greatly prevailed against
sin, even so far as to procure the death thereof, before we be quickened by
being renewed in our spirit and mind in an upright life.

H.N.
Behold, after this manner as we beeleeue, and do here confess or
acknowledge: become we rightly 1. Peter. 1. ^ 3. c.
baptized in the name of the Son, and Romans 11. c.
incorporated or implanted as fellow members of Christ, into the body of
Christ, and the stock of Israel, to the end that we should even so,
according to the truth, as true Christians and an holy people of Israel, of
the seed of Abraham, bear or carry his holy name, Matt. 10. d. Luke. 12. ^.
confess or acknowledge the same Christ, as our Savior before men, and even
so live and walk in his lovely upright being. We confess likewise, that
all such as do not imitate or follow after Jesus Christ, in his death of the
cross, in all obedience of the holy word of Jesus Christ, and of his holy
spirit of love, Romans 6. a. b. 8 1. Cor. 15. f. Colloss 2 b.
to the vanquishing of the sin, the death, and the hell, and to a burying of
all iniquity destroying nature, and ungodly being, or become not even so
baptized, or washed in his name, neither yet bear the death of the sin, Romans
6. a.
through the death of the cross of Christ in their 2. Cor. 4. b. Gala. 6. b.
inwardnesse: are no christians, nor yet baptized in the name or salvation of
the son. For all such as become not baptized or washed in the name of Jesus,
(that is in the saving health of his death) to the mortifiyng Romans 6. a Gala.
5. c. Colloss. 3. a.
of the sinful flesh according to the inward man: neither yet endeavor them
thereto: and yet nevertheless boast them to be christians, they are al false
(n) Christians, also lying in all their confessing and teaching, Mat. 24. a.
John 8. c.
because they enter not into the John. 10. c.
co^munialtie of the sheep of Christ, through the death and Romans 6. a.
coincor porating of the death of Christ, which is the right door of the
sheep fold of Christ, but break in some other way, and believe not the
salvation or saving health of Jesus Christ,

Answer. THis conteyneth nothing else, but a iustifiyng of that which he has
professed before, to wit, that our imitation of Christ in his death of the
cross, is our belief in the son, and our baptizing in the name of the
son, and a condemning of al as false Christians, who shall not enter by this
his way, into the sheepefolde of Christ. And therefore my former answer does
dispatch this also. Through this doctrine professed by H. N. faith is utterly
banished, and works only and altogether imbrased, so that instead of
saying, I believe in Jesus Christ, if we will become scholars unto H. N. we are
to say, I work Jesus Christ. The matter that ministers unto us faith and
comfort in Jesus Christ, is, that he being God equal with his father, has
notwithstanding abased himself in our nature, and for our salvation unto the
estate of a servant, wherein he has humbled himself unto all reproach,
contempt, anguish, and bitterness of pain both in soul and body, in the
time of his life: and unto all infamy and slander by his death. For his death
was the death of the cross, and his grave was given him with the wicked, and
the wicked had their will of him, insomuch that the Prophet says: Esaias. 53.
He was famous for his misery and affliction. This is that love and
friendship, which the Apostle says has no fellow or match to be found among
men. For who has been found to offer himself to an infamous death for his
friend, the son of God does it for his enemies. For he was counted among the
transgressors. Here is the ground work of our faith and comfort, that when
there was no religion or fear of God in us, and therefore deadly enmity
between him and us: yet so great was the good will he did bear unto us, that
himself would wade throughout all those raging waves, to save and preserve us
that were under the water of everlasting destruction. Here is the triumph of
Christians in whom religion is in truth begone, and his fear truly entered,
and therefore hatred banished, and they truly reconciled: that if his death
were able of enemies to make friends, his life (which is of much more efficacy
and power) shall well be able where friendship is begone, to continue it for
ever. If that which is weaker, has done the greater work, the stronger, The
estate of H. N. his Christ, was nearer unto glory and more honorable in the
time of his suffering, then ever it was before.
will be much more able to go through with the less labor. H. N. his Christ
cutteth of all this comfort. For his estate in suffering, was not abased, and
lower then before it had been: but better and nearer unto glory. H. N. his
Christ was not equal with God before the time of his passion and humiliatio^,
but an utter enemy unto God. For the time of his humiliation and suffering, is
from his first entrance into the family, until he become an illuminate elder,
before which time (in his opinion) he is a stranger, nay an utter enemy to
God and all godliness. Here is then no argument of good will, by abasing
himself from a better estate unto a worse, whereby comfort especially comes
unto us. Besides, H.N. his Christ, suffers for his own benefit, for he
could not come to everlasting joy and his perfect estate, unless he should
die in the flesh. And this utterly kills all comfort: for what argument of
good will toward us can we have from another in that matter, whereby
himself is either the whole, or at the least the greatest gayner? Moreover,
shall his death by reconciling of us to God (which is the greater work from
the weaker instrument) put us in assured hope, to be safely kept by his life
unto eternal glory: when we are both by our own death and suffering, to rid
us from the danger of our sins: reconcile us unto our God: and by our life,
to continue and preserve our selves unto glory? How fearful is the fall of
H.N. and his family, that have forsaken the true Messiah, that brings so
great comfort unto mankind, to embrace so cursed and comfortless a Christ?

H.N. The fifth Article.
We believe that the God of Abraham has Matthew. 28. a mark. 16. a Luke. 24. a
b. c. Acts. 1.2.3.4.
raised up this his son Jesus from the dead, and that he even so the third
day rose again from the dead: and appeared or made manifest himself unto his
John. 20.21. Acts. 10. e. 13. d. e. 1. Cor 15. a
friends which loved him, showing unto them, through his suffering and death of
the Cross, the Romans 6. a. b. c. 1. Cor. 15. f.
victory over the sin, death, devil, hell, the flesh, and the world.

Answer. The resurrection of H.N. his Christ, answers unto that doctrine,
which he has delivered before touching his death. For as that was nothing but
a passing out of the flesh or letter of the law, (which is a condition common
to the Nouices and young ones in H.N. his school:) so this is the resurrection,
when a man is come into the spirit, or that estate of perfection, which his
illuminate elders are pertakers of. That which has been spoken of before, may
sufficiently satisfy us touching H.N. his opinion, that thus he thinks and
not otherwise of the resurrection: yet shall it not be amiss to add one
testimony out of his Euangelie, where of purpose he handles the resurrection
of Christ: it is in the. 22. Chapter, where he speaks thus: Now when Jesus
Christ was found faithful in the death of his cross, til unto his burial, to a
true Passover out of the flesh, into the making alive according to the spirit,
and was also through the power of God his father, raised up from the death, and
made alive again: and that he had showed himself in his making alive, unto
his disciples, for that they should steadfastly believe, so was he then wholly
taken up from the eyes of their flesh, and he set himself according to the
spirit, at the right hand of God his father in the heavenly being: and entered
even so, as the true high Priest (when as the service had perfectly ended his
course, according to the true being in the holy) into the most holy, his
disciples therefore were mindful of all this, and what he had said unto them,
and remained within Jerusalem, waiting concordably with supplication and prayer
for the promises of the father, until that Christ after the spirit, appeared
unto them out of the heavenly being, the most holy in the holy, in spiritual
and heavenly powers, like as he after the Spirit, and according to the truth
of the heavenly Godhead, is an everlasting and true Christ of GOD. He is plain
as you hear in this point, that Christ his resurrection and making alive, was
according to the spirit, for he says that Jesus Christ was found faithful
in his death of the cross, According to the doctrine of H.N. Christ sicteth
not in our nature (that is in the flesh) at the right hand of his father, but
only in Spirit.
to a true Passover out of the flesh, into the making alive according to the
spirit. He is likewise as plain in this, that his sitting at the right hand of
God, is in spirit and spiritual. For those are his very words (as you have
heard) he set himself according to the spirit, at the right hand of god his
father (in the heavenly being.) More over, he is of opinion, that he is not a
true Christ, but (as he speaks and imagines of him) that is according to the
spirit. For touching this point, these are his words, He after the spirit, and
according to the truth of the heavenly Godhed, is an everlasting and true
Christ of God. And that in this absurd doctrine, heaven and earth might come
together, and a mingle mangle made of all things, he shameth not to affirm
that Christ is the holy ghost, and that the doctrine which is delivered in the
2. of the Acts of the Apostles touching the holy ghost appearing in cloven
tongues like fire: was nothing else, but ye appearing of this his Christ after
the spirit. These are his words touching this matter: The holy Ghost is Christ.
His disciples therefore were mindful of all this, and what he had said unto
the^, and remained within Jerusalem, waiting co^cordably with supplication and
prayer for the promises of the father, until that christ after the spirit
appeared unto them out of the heavenly being. The subtlety of that ancient
enemy unto mankind, may here evidently be seen, for albeit heaven be not
further distant from the earth, then the meaning of H.N. is from the truth of
the doctrine set forth in this common Creed and these articles of our belief:
yet to color his craft withal, he keeps him to the same words which the
church uses: professing ye christ rose the third day from the dead, save that
he interlaceth some odd words, which cannot well be discerned, but by the^ that
are well acquainted with his books, under the which he conueyeth all his
corrupt doctrine. Here he says that the God of Abraham has raised up [this
his son Iesus] having relation in these words [this his sonne] unto that
Christ which he describes. And likewise when he affirms that Christ rose
even so the third day from the dead: by this speech [euen so] he caryeth us
from the resurrection in the flesh, unto the rising in the spirit, according
as himself has imagined of the matter, and yet is he content to make mention
of the third day, as if there were no ill meaning in the man, when as indeed,
this rising the third day, must be even so as he means, that is nothing so
as the truth is. Where the scripture affirms, that Christ appeared in the
flesh after his resurrection, unto his disciples, John. 20.20.
and showed unto them his hands and his side: and that he willed Thomas, (who
had affirmed he would never believe his resurrection, unless he should put
his finger into the print of the nails, and his hand into his side) to put
his finger where the nails had been, and his hand into his side: John. 20.27.
H.N. to maintain his doctrine of the resurrection in the spirit, affirms
that he showed unto his disciples, nothing else but the victory over sin,
death, devil, and hell: as if he had declared unto them, how by his suffering
and passion, he came by the victory over sin, death, the devil and hell: to
the end they might follow him in the same footesteppes, and so become
partakers of the like victory with him. Which thing in plain words he
professes in the next Section. Here he sets forth the matter not
altogether so plainly, and yet clearly enough, to him that is any thing
acquainted with his subtle writing, and crafty manner of speaking. These be
his words in this place: He appeared or made manifest him self to his
friends, which loved him, showing unto them through his suffering and death of
the Cross, the victory over the sin, death, devil, hell, the flesh, and
the world. What plainer proof can be brought, not only that Christ did rise
in the flesh, but also that he rose in the same flesh wherein he suffered,
then this even now alleged out of the Gospel after saint John: for the
Apostles see his hands and his side, Thomas puts his finger into the place,
where the nails had been, and his hand into his side, which thing H. N.
shall never be able to wipe away, by any mystical interpretation whatsoever,
inasmuch as our Savior Christ reproouing the want of faith in Thomas, and that
he was so hardly led to believe his resurrection, before his senses were
satisfied: says unto him: John. 20.29.
Thomas, because thou have seen me, thou beleeuest: blessed are they that have
not seen, and have believed. In the second of the Acts, saint Peter proves
that Christ must be raised up concerning the flesh, and be set upon the throne
of his father, and that he should not be left in the grave, neither should his
flesh see corruption, and yt David long before, as he was a prophet, did both
foresee and foretell this: therefore seeing he was a prophet and knew that God
had sworn with an oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins, he would raise
up christ concerning the flesh, Acts. 2.30.32.
to set him upon his throne, he knowing this before, spoke of the resurrection
of Christ, that his soul should not be left in grave, neither his flesh should
see corruption. This testimony of the apostle, cannot agree with H. N. his
Christ. For his flesh must necessarily be left in the grave, and see
corruption, The flesh of H. N. his Christ is left in the grave and sees
corruption.
because when his Christ after the flesh is dead, he never resumeth or takes
unto him again that estate: but as having for ever done with it, rises up in
the spirit, and continues in the same, being for ever after an illuminate
elder, who neither can err in judgment, nor offend any more in conversation.
So that death or the grave, do still keep that possession or power which once
they had of his flesh, neither will he, that they yield it unto him any more
again. As for the true Christ, it was impossible for death, to keep and
continue that hold, Acts. 2.24.
which once it had of him, as appears in the Acts. The Lord (if it be his
good will) give this Family to see, what a Christ H. N. has brought unto
them, that they refuse no longer the true Christ and only comfort of all
Christians: for this miserable Christ, whom the grave has closed up, and
holds all that ever it had of him. For their Christ after the spirit was
never in the grave, and their Christ after the flesh, by H. N. his own
testimony, does never arise after that once he has been in the grave. How
shall these men be ever able to get out at the doors of death, when their
Christ and Captain, is yet groping, and to this day has not found the gate
that leads out of the grave?

H.N.
We confess that no man can become partaker with all the holy ones of God,
and believers of Jesus Christ, of the resurrection of Christ, nor of the
resurrection from the dead, or yet rise up with the holy ones of God and
Christ, but such as endeavor themselves in the belief, under the obedience of
the love of Jesus Christ, to become implanted into Christ, the gracious word
of the Lord: and even so then to die with Christ in his Romans 6. a. Phil. 3. b.
like death, Romans 6. a. b. c. 2. Peter. 4. a.
as also to lay away, slay, and bury through the death of his cross, the
sin in the flesh, whereby they may even so, out of the John. 3. a. Romans 6 a.
second birth from the dead, become Ephe. 4. e.
renewed in the spirit of their mind, in Jesus Christ. For therethrough we all
obtain and enjoy, in the upright Luke. 1. g. Ephe. 1. a.
righteousness and holiness which GOD esteems, the Romans 8. b.
making alive from the dead, namely with all the Esaias. 26. e. Ezec. 36. c. 37. b
righteous and holy ones of God: in the day Ose. 13. b. John. 5. c.
of the resurrection: and inherit Romans 6. g.
everlasting life.

Answer. All the comfort that H. N. does assure his family of, by the
resurrection of their Christ, is, that such as shall become obedient unto his
doctrine, which thing he expresses in these words (such as endeavor
themselves in the belief, under the obedience of the love of Jesus Christ, to
become implanted into Christ, the gracious word of the Lord, for Christ (as
you have heard before) signifies sometimes nothing else with H. N. but this
word and doctrine which he has brought into the world) shall by this their
slaying and burying of sin in the flesh, become renewed in the spirit of
their mind, obtain and enjoy the resurrection, or (as he speaks) the making
alive from the dead, and inherit the everlasting life. But we have not thus
learned Christ, so many as have been taught out of the word of God, the
truth of him, and the true fruit of his resurrection. For as Christ Jesus died
in our sins, and went down into the grave in our iniquities, inasmuch as it
was our sins, and no offense of his own, that drew him unto death: so his
resurrection, was the perfect absolution and clearing of the faithful, from al
their transgressions. For had one sin of his servants been unsatisfied for,
neither would death have resigned her right, who had arested him as surety
for sin, neither would the righteous Lord, by raising him from the dead, and
bringing him out of the danger that he lay under for our sins, have given
sentence on his side, and so justified us in him. Which thing the apostle
confirms, triumphing over comdemnation, not only because we have discharged
it by his death: but also because we have our Quietus est, and acquittance to
show for the same, Romans 8.33.
even his resurrection. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of god his chose?
It is God that justifies, who shall co^de^ne? it is Christ that is dead, yea or
rather which is rise^ again. And likewise the same apostle, in his epistle to
the Corin. affirms plainly, 1. Cor. 15.17.
that if Christ be not risen from the dead, we have nothing to show for our
discharge against sin, Romans 5.25.
but do remain yet under the danger thereof. And in the Epistle to the
Romans, he declares also, that we are by his resurrection cleared from our
sins, and they now no longer imputed unto us. And therefore when he had
before declared, that not only Abraham his faith was imputed unto him for
righteousness, but also that ours shall be imputed unto us, he tells us more
particularly how this comes to pass, to wit, because Christ who was
delivered to death for our sins, is risen again for our justification. For
as God the father in delivering Christ unto death, did cast all our sins upon
him, and condemned our sins in him: Romans 8.^.
so in raising him from the dead he justified and absolved him, and us in him,
(inasmuch as but for us, neither sin, nor death could have any thing to do
with him) from all our sins and tra^sgressions whatsoever. Now if the Lord
had let him make an escape who was in hold for our sins, inasmuch as he had
once taken upon him to satisfy for the same, or wrougt his deliverance and set
him at liberty, before a full and sufficient satisfaction had been made: then
could not himself have been cleared of iniurye offered unto us, nor his
Justice have been unspotted even before us, which if once we suffer to enter
but into our thoughts, it makes us giltye of high treason against our God.
This doctrine therefore of H. N. who will have our dying unto sin, not only
to prevent, but also to procure our rising unto righteousness, not mencioning
any other benefit that we have from Christ his resurrection, beside the
example that is set before us, for our imitation and following after him in the
same: is at defiance and utter enmity with the truth which is taught in the
word of God. For Christ his resurrection which H. N. makes so small an
accounpt of, not only is our justification from the giltinesse and danger of
sin: but also the head and well spring, of all that righteousness, holiness,
and newenes of life, that is to be found ni the conversation of his servants.
Ephe. 2 6.
And therefore the Apostle in the 2. to the Ephe. does fetch our rising unto
righteousness from Christ his resurrection, and joining them together speaks
thus: God which is rich in mercy, even when we were dead by sins, has
quickened us together in Christ, and has raised us up together. And
accordingly to the Collosians, draws his exhortation unto newness of life,
from the resurrection of Christ, as from the fountain, from the which flows
the reformation of our life. If ye the^ be risen with Christ (says the
Apostle) seek those things which are above, Collo. 3.
where Christ sits on the right hand of God, set your affection on things
that are above, and not on things which are on the earth. Which thing is also
confirmed out of the Ephesians, Ephe. 4.8.
where we do read, that the large and liberal distribution of his graces,
did follow his resurrection and ascension, when that notable victory and
conquest over sin and death was fully accomplished. The resurrection therefore
of Christ, according to the truth of his word, is not only our discharge
against sin: but the fountain and spring also of all that change of life
and conversation, which is to be seen in his servants. But according to this
doctrine of H.N. it is neither our discharge against sin, nor yet the
beginning of our good life, and therefore without mention either of
justification from sin by it, or vivification and quickening in the ways of
righteousness: we are sent to make war with our affections, according to the
rules of his doctrine, that so we may obtain the resurrection from the dead,
and the renewing of our spirit and mind. So that we have nothing in H.N. his
Creed to be believed, but many things in our conversation to be practiced,
nothing to leave unto that was once done by him, but all that we may trust to,
must proceed from our self. Touching this point, Whether our dying unto sin,
do both prevent and purchase the renewing of our mind, it has been
answered in the article immediately going before.

H. N. The sixth Article.
We believe Mark. 16. b. Luke. 24. f. Acts. 1. b.
that this same Jesus (like as the Scripture mencioneth thereof) is Mark. 16.
b. Luke. 24. f. Acts. 1. b.
ascended into Heaven sitting at the Phil. 2. a. Collo. 3. a. Heb. 12. a.
right hand of God his almighty Father. We confess that he has Mark. 16. b.
Acts. 1. b.
taken in the heaven, and reigns and rules essentially in the heavenly
being with his father, until that all his enemies be laid under his fete:
Psalm. 116. a Ephe. 1. c.
and that he in like manner shall in every behalf take in the kingdom, 1. Cor.
15. c.
and all dominion, and power, and render it all over unto his father, that God
may even so be Number. 14. c. 1. Cor. 15. c.
all in all according to the promises.

Answer. This confessor H. N. acknowledges and confesses that this same
Jesus of his, is ascended into heaven, sitting at the right hand of God his
almighty father, but with this cautio^, that it is like as the scripture
mencioneth thereof, that is, as his own head shall imagine the Scripture to
speak, when it is transformed from the true and natural sense, into
allegories and mysteries of his own making. And therefore after his woonted
manner, loving to make his Commentary darker then the Text which he has
taken in hand to open and explane, he says: That his Jesus has taken in the
heaven, and reigns and rules essentiallie in the heavenly being, that is,
that being free from sin, and the knowledge of the word after the letter, he
is now become altogether heavenly and spiritual, inspired with knowledge
immediately from God himself. For his Christ after the spirit, is him self, and
all that his number, who are by obedience unto his doctrine, grown to such
perfection, that now they sin no more, being replenished with the fullness
of the holy spirit of Christ, as himself speaks. And that he means no
other ascending into heaven* neither any other taking in of the heaven, is
evidently proved out of his Euangelie, chapter 26. and 10 Section.: Euangelie.
16.10.11.12.
Behold when as now the law of Moses, was in such wise, as is said fulfilled
or accomplished: and had no longer service with the death of the sin, and
with the beleuers of Christ, which through the law were dead unto the law, but
the spirit of Christ, which made the diseassed believers of Christ, alive
again in righteousness, out of the death of Christ: so had then also the
Priesthood, in his Images, figures, and shadows, after the manner of Aaron,
no more ministration with the living in Jesus Christ, neither yet gave it any
clerenes more with them, because the heavenly clearness of Christ, and his
upright being of love, wherein the disciples of Christ were comprehended,
excelled far away all cleerenesse of the figurative services, for that cause
the priesthood of Aaron, changed also with the Disciples of Christ, and
ceased by them, for with them there was a spiritual heavenly priesthood,
appeared in upright righteosnesse, and even so was the same with his service,
established on Christ after the spirit, the true light, which is an high
Priest, that bideth for ever at the right hand of God in the heavenly being:
whose service of the spitituall and heavenly ministration, comes not to
pass in the letter, nor in the figures, but in the very true being. Behold,
even so was Christ after the spirit, in his office or service, a minister of
the very true and heavenly goods, among his disciples and believers: and has
when he had taken in the Heaven, multiplied him self through his seed of the
holy Ghost, out of the heavenly being, to the increasing of his generation:
the upright seed of Abraham according to the promises, and even so became
Christ fruitful upon earth, in many thousands of his Saints, all which he
through his death made free, or justified from the sin, and made them alive
through his holy Ghost, taking them up from the earth, and assembling them unto
him at the right hand of God his father in the heavenly being.

He affirms (as you hear) in the 10. Section, that when the law of Moses
was accomplished by the death of sin and had resigned unto the spirit of
Christ, which made the deceassed beleuers alive again in righteousness: the^ had
the priesthood after the manner of Aaron, no more ministration, with these
living, neither gave it any more clearnes unto them, and this is his reason,
because the heavenly cleerenesse of Christ, wherein the disciples of Christ
were comprehended, excelled far away all cleerenesse of the figurative
services. The same reason he renders in the next Section, saying, that the
priesthood of Aaron ceased with the disciples of Christ, for that unto them
there had a spiritual heavenly priesthood appeared, who was with his service
established on Christ after the spirit, which is an high Priest that bideth for
ever at the right hand of God, in the heavenly being. In the 12. Section,
continuing his speech of those to whom now the heavenly Priesthood had
appeared, he calls them [Christ after the spirite] and affirms, that when
he had taken in the heaven, he multiplied himself through his doctrine, which
he calls his seed of the holy Ghost, for being perfect they may publicly
teach and profess) to the increasing of his generation, the upright seed of
Abraham according to the promises, and so became Christ fruitful upon the
earth, and assembled many unto him at the right hand of God his father in the
heavenly being. This is the taking in of the the heaven, How H.N. his Christ
has ascended into Heaven.
or the ascending into Heaven of H.N. his Christ, and the sitting at the right
hand of God his father: even to become heavenly minded, and inspired from
above, in all fullness with this knowledge and obedience, which H.N. requires
in this his service of love. Here is neither hope nor comfort for us in any
other man beside our selves, neither is any consolation opened, either from the
ascencion of Christ, either else for that he sits at the right hand of God
his father: only this is confessed, that the number of his perfect ones, are
become inclosers, and have taken in the heaven, so that there is no portion of
heaven and other true happiness to be hired, or otherwise had, unless a man
renounce the knowledge of the word after the letter, become void of all
sin, and perfectly illuminated with thefull cleerenes of H.N. his doctrine.
The greatest comfort that I see a man (who would willingly become a disciple)
can have by H. N. his doctrine, is, that though his religion be very high and
mystical, yet his Heaven is very low, even here upon Earth among us. For
this ascension of his Christ, and sitting at the right hand of his father: is
performed in this life, when the disciples become once comprehended of this his
heavenly cleerenesse, and of his upright being of the love. When shall we once
come to the bottom of this dungeon of darkness? How hard is it, when once a
man has given way to heresy, to find that stop which shall make him stay
and recover himself? How great is the goodness of our God, that has armed
us with clear and plain doctrine out of his word, against these and the
like dangers, and has left unto us, the knowledge of his Christ, to our
exceeding great comfort and consolation: insomuch that every article of our
belief, adds something to the consolation of a christian? For albeit our
hope be great, in that we hear of him (who went down into the grave in our
sins) that he is risen again, and so acquit of that danger and judgment,
which he lay under for the same: yet is it much more, when we understand that
the Lord has not so left him and cast him of, who was the whole dealer and
doer for us: but has received him into heaven, his own seat and habitation.
Neither have the arguments and tokens of his love here had their end, but he
has set him on his right hand, that is, has committed the whole government
and administration of his kingdom heervpon earth into his hands. How can it
go hard with us, when our mediator, and he that has had all these dealings
for us, is become so great with our God, as to be made the head of his church,
and to have received the government and charge over his chosen? May we not with
the Apostle triumph and say: Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
chosen: it is Christ which is dead, or rather which is risen again, nay which
is at the right hand of God, making intercession for us? If his death brought
us from such danger, what benefit will this his life bring unto us, and against
how many and how great dangers, shall it be able to defend us? If when we were
enimyes, we were reconciled unto God, by the death of his son, much more
being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. For both the instrument has
now more power and strength to perform, and the matter is the fitter to be
wrought upon. Christ is not entered into the holy places, that are made with
hands, which are similitudes of the true sanctuary, but is entered into very
heaven, to appear now in the sight of God for us. Seeing then we have an high
Priest, which is over the house of GOD, let us draw near him with a true
heart, in assurance of faith, sprinkling in our hearts from an evil
conscience, and washed in our bodies with pure water, abhorring from our
hearts this cursed and comfortless Christ, which H.N. has brought out, not
meaning to comfort and feed, but to pyne and famish his family withal. We
have not only comfort by our Christ, touching his priesthood, for that he
appears now in the sight of our God for us, and that the sacrifice is
continually before his eyes whereby we stand discharged against sin, and made
acceptable, and in good favor and grace with our God: neither yet for that he
being ascended on high, and leading captivity captive, does give gifts to
his Church generally, and to the several members thereof particularly in
governing them by his spirit, and word, being forcible by the working
thereof to promote his glory in them: but also touching his kingdom, because
he is our Christ, to whom is given all power, both in heaven and earth, and of
whom it is written: The Lord, said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right
hand, until I make thine enemies thy footestoole, Be thou ruler in the midst
of thine enemies, without whose license and leave, even in his humility and
lowest estate, the devils themselves durst not to deal, no not against Hogs
and swine. And therefore being now exalted into such glory, how dare they be
bold to attempt any thing against the least of his servants, without special
license from himself.

The Family can find no such comfort in their counterfaite Christ, who
sets and breeds only in their brain, hatching his revelations, and
coining these and such like mysteries, ruling over no other enemies, neither
being careful to keep of other adversaries, besides the true and natural
meaning of the word of God. Thus as you have heard, has H.N. stopped the
heads of all the well springs of life, taking from us all the several
comfortes, which by these Articles of our belief, we are lawfully entitled
unto, sending us to dig pittes in our selves, and there to seek for this
spring of life, where, by the word of God we are well assured, it can never
be found.

H.N. The seventh Article.
We believe that Jesus Christ shall come from thence (namely, from the Act. 1.
b.
right hand of God his father, out of heaven, to Mat. 16. d. 24.25. Act. 10. c
2. Tim. 4. a. 1. Peter. 4. a.
judge the living and the dead. We confess, that he will even so in his
coming, shewforth his great power and majesty, and make manifest, with him,
the Luke 21. 1. Thesta. 4. a. Jude. 1. b.
glorious Lordlines of the many thousands of his holy ones, in their
garnishing, possess his inheritance with God his father and with all his
saints, in triumph and perpetual joy everlastingly. And judge eue^ so, with
all his holy ones, as a righteous Judge, Esaias. 3. b. Sapien. 3. a. Mat. 19. c.
c. 2. Thessa. 1. a
the world and all nations, generations and languages, according to the truth
with Act, 17, d. Jude. 1. b.
righteousness.

Answer. This coming of Christ to judge the quick and the dead, is by the
doctrine of H.N. in this life, yea it is even now in this time, when H.N. and
his doctrine are manifested, and brought to light. Now (says. H.N.) shall the
glorious lordlynesse of the many thousand of his holy ones in their garnishing
be made manifest, now shall Christ possess his inheritance, in triumph and
perpetual joy everlastingly, and judge even so all nations and languages
according to the truth with righteousness. In his title I have
sufficiprooued, that the day of judgment is in this life if we will believe his
doctrine, and that it is no other thing then the publishing of this his
doctrine: Yet because I would not have any sent away unsatisfied herein, I
will add one or two testimonies unto the former. In his Euangelie cap. 34.
thus he speaks of that matter. Behold and consider my beloved, how
wonderfully god works in his holy ones: and how that now in this day, or
light of the love, the judgment seat of Christ is revealed and declared unto
us, out of heaven, to a righteous judgment upon earth: from the right hand of
God: and how that on the same judgment seat of Christ (that the Scripture
might be fulfilled) there sits one now in truth in the habitation of David:
which judges uprightly, thinks upon equity, and requires righteousness.
Through him God will now in this day which he him self, has appointed or
ordained thereunto, judge the compass of the earth with righteousness. In which
this same day or last time (namely in the perfection of the works of God and
in his righteous judgment) the God of heaven has now declared him self, and
his Christ, together with all his Saints unto us his elect: also made a
dwelling with us: and brought even so unto us out of his holy being, the most
holy of his true tabernacle, with the fullness of his garishing and spiritual
heavenly riches, to an everlasting fast standing Jerusalem, and house for Gods
dwelling, according to the Scripture, the which is the very true vndisturbable
kingdom, full of all godly power, joy, and of al heavenly beautifulness,
wherein the laud of the Lord with fulness of eternal life and lovely
sweetness is song from everlasting to everlasting, and wherein al minds of
pure hearts, do dwell, live, and walk with freedom and christian triumph, in all love. He professes here that the judgment seat of Christ, is now revealed
in this day of love, and that God will now in this same day, through him whom
he has appointed (that is him self, for this same place and authority out
of the 17. of the Acts, he has challenged to himself in his title as you
heard before) to judge the compass of the earth with righteousness, Here in
this life is the fullness of eternal life.
and that the God of heaven has now declared him self and his Christ to his
elect, with the fulness of his garnishing and spiritual heavenly riches, to an
everlasting house for God his dwelling, the which (as he says) is the true
vndisturbable kingdom full of all godly power, joy, and heavenly
beautifulness, wherein is the fullness of eternal life. And in the 35. chapter
of his Euangelie, he confirms the same in these words. Behold in this present
day is this scripture fulfilled: and according to the testimony of the
scripture, the raising up and the resurrection of the Lords dead, comes also
to pass presently in this same day, through the appearing of the coming of
Christ in his majesty. Which resurrection of the dead, seeing that the same is
come unto us from gods grace, we do likewise in this present day, to an
Euangelie or joyful message of the kingdom of god and christ, publish in all
the world, under the obedience of the love, In which resurrection of the dead,
God shows unto us, that the time is now fulfilled, that his dead, or the dead
which are fallen a sleep in the lord, rise up in this day of his judgment and
appear unto us in godly glory, which shall also from henceforth, live in us
everlastingly with Christ, and reign upon the earth. Wherein the scripture
becomes fulfilled in this present day, The dead shall rise and live in H.N.
and in the illuminate elders everlastingly and reign upon the earth.
like as there stands written thereof. He affirms here in plain words* that
ye dead wc are fallen a stepe in the Lord, rise up in this day of his judgment
and appear unto H.N. and the illuminate elders of his family, in godly glory.
He affirms like wise, yt they shall from he^ceforth live in him, and his fellow
elders everlastingly, the^ the with, what can be more erroneous? For by this
doctrine, the resurrection, should be only of the^ that sleep in the Lord,
that is, of the good, of which number he takes the^ to be alone, who now
receive his doctrine: and everlasting life which they rise up to enjoy, should
be only to live after that course of life, which he and his illuminat fellow
elders do keep. For he says that they are to live in him, and in his fellow
elders everlastingly, and to reign upon the earth. If their eyes be not
altogether closed up, who favor the doctrine of H.N. they may well discern,
that this resurrection is not that resurrection which the Scripture
mencioneth, neither is this change of them that embrace his doctrine that
which the Apostle reports. 1. Corinthians, 15.52. Which (as he testifies there)
is to be performed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last
Trumpe. Now I am well assured experience will tell the^, beside the doctrine of
H.N. which confirms the same, that they are not by and by in a moment, after
they have heard the blaste of H.N. his doctrine, partakers of the
resurrection, that is, made elders and illuminate men. In the 37. Chapter of of
his Euangelie, likewise this same matter is testified of him more clearly, if
possible that may be: Yea happy is he, which now respects well the true light,
and assembleth him in this day, unto the mercy seat of the Majesty of God and
Christ to his salvation, for after this day, there shall no day of grace come
upon the earth, because all the works of God, and his Prophecies be come
fulfilled according to the scripture in the same. And for that the righteous
judgment of God, to an everlasting death and damnation of all ungodly, and to
an eternal life and salvation of all the holy ones, and elect of God,
becomes also executed therein. This opinion of his, is confuted before at
large in my answer to that title, which he challenges unto him self, This
only testimony I will add to the former, for the overthrow of this opinion,
If to do good and live well, be the resurrection of life, how is that true,
which S. John testifies, that they which have done good, shall come forth of
the Graves, unto the resurrection of life? With what truth or in what sense
can it be said of a man, John. 5.29.
that he comes forth to that, which already he has in him self and is
possessed of? Nay if this be the resurrection to arise up to the imbrasing of
H.N. his doctrine, with what truth can it be said, that they which already
have done good, shall come forth unto the resurrection of life: when he is of
opinion that we are void of al goodness and grace, until we become seasoned
with this service of the love? And how can they which have done good come out
of the grave, when by his doctrine they have come out of their graves, before
they have done good? For death and burial unto sin, are in order before the
resurrection, unto righteousness and newness of life. What comfort can our
faith find in this article of our belief, if H.N. his doctrine be true? If
all were performed which he promises, yet can we come by no other comfort
from him then this, that if we shall embrace his doctrine, then shall we live
as he does here upon earth. This is all the benefit that our faith
obteyneth by the resurrection of H.N. his Christ from the dead.

H.N. The eight Article.
We believe in the holy John. 14. c. 16 1. John. 5. a
Ghost: and that the same, in the oldnesse of the Joel. 2. c.
time, when the days of the patience of Christ, in the obedience of the holy
and gracious word* and his service of love, are fulfilled, becomes Acts. 2.
c. 10. c
powered forth from the right hand of God, through Jesus Christ, namely over
them all that have Mat. 19. c.
followed Christ in his death of the cross obediently, and have kept his
doctrine, with the word of his patience Luke 22. c. 24.
even unto the end, that is which are passed through, or have accomplished the
Passover with Christ till unto the second Mat. 19. Romans 6.
birth from the dead. Or unto the new life of the true being of Christ.

Answer. We do hear nothing from H. N. to move us too think, that the
holy Ghost is God, which thing would not have been omitted, if he had been
sound therein, seeing he opens unto his family the principles of religion,
whereof this is one of the chief, and sets down beside the words of our
Creed, his own exposition and explication of the same: seeing also that of all
the churches which profess Christianity throughout the whole world, there is
no one, that has unto this day imbrased his doctrine, or joined with him in
religion, and those which thoroughly know him, profess war with him:
considering likewise, that the scripture has not left us without sufficient
light, to prove the holy Ghost not only to be God in substance one with the
father and the son, but also distinct in person. I say in these, and such
like respects, his silence in so principal a thing, bewrays him self not to
be sound in the same. But to omit conjectures how evident soever they be, and
to come to the matter justified and warraunted by express writing: how is it
that H. N. professes that his holy Ghost becomes poured forth (as he
speaks) in the oldnesse of the time, when men have followed Christ in the
death of his cross, unto the new life or second birth? Can men make any
beginning in Christianity, before the spirit of God be geeuen unto them? Nay
can they truly co^ceine of that way, before they be lightened with the spirit
of God? Does not the Apostle plainly affirm, That no man knows the things
of God, but the spirit of God, And therefore in the next verse confesses,
That they had received the spirit of GOD, whereby they might know the things
that were given them of GOD? 1. Cor. 2.11.
Have the servants of GOD, his spirit powered upon them, when they have been
dead unto sin? is it not by the power of the spirit of GOD, that they die
unto sin, as well as they that live unto righteousness? Does not the Apostle
attribute the mortifiyng of the deeds of the body to the spirit in these
words? Romans 8.13.
If ye mortify the deeds of the body, by the spirit, ye shall live. How
then dare H.N. utter such dangerous dreams as these be of the holy Ghost,
that he should not be given unto the servants of GOD, before they have
altogether left sin, and become utterly dead unto the same? For he is of
opinion, that the holy ghost is not granted unto his family, before that time
that Christ in the spirit (as was spoken before) appear unto them, and they
become partakers and possessed of that estate of perfection, which he dreameth
of. And therefore (as was declared before) he calls the visible coming of
the holy Ghost upon the Apostles, whereof mention is made in the second of the
Acts: [the appearing of Christ in the spirite]. For that estate which his
family are partakers of before this perfection, was called before [the estate
of the man in his youngnes] and here it is called, [the days of the patience
of Christ in the obedience of the holy and gracious word, and his service of
love, and the keeping of the doctrine of his patience.] Now (says H.N.) when
those days of the patience of Christ are fulfilled, and when they have kept
the word of his patience, unto the end, then becomes the holy Ghost powered
forth upon such, from the right hand of GOD. Those of the family which dye
before they be elders and come to perfection, be damned for ever by the
doctrine of H. N.
By this doctrine (in my judgment) H. N deals hardly with the man in his
youngnesse. For if it should please the Lord, to call any of his family,
before they were come to this perfection which he speaks of, they should
dye as reprobates, out of the favor of GOD, the heirs of everlasting
destruction. (For as saint Paul testifies,) If any man have not the spirit
of Christ, the same is not his: and by this doctrine of H. N. they are not
partakers thereof, Romans 8.9.
before those days of the patience of Christ be fully expired, and this
estate of perfection entered: which he calls [the second birth from the
dead,] or [the new life of the true being of Christ.]

H. N.
Which upright beleuers, that follow after Christ in death and life, become
Acts. 1. a.
baptized or washed through Christ, in the pure and living John. 3. a. 7. 1.
Acts. 2. c.
waters of the holy ghost: and those same shall also (i) become powered forth
over the^, with full clearenesse of God abu^dantly, for even so, through
shedding forth of the holy Ghost, over the upright believers in Christ, under
the obedience of the love of the holy Ghost, does Christ make manifest Apo.
21. a.
his holy church, the Acts. 2. a. Ephe. 1 c. 2. c.
co^munialtie of his holy ones, and establishes on the same the promises Genesis
12, a. 22
of God his heavenly father, and even so plainly shows who are the right
Christians, and in what manner of wise that they become baptized, under the
obedience of the belief of Jesus Christ, in the name of the holy Acts. 10. e
Ephc. 1. b. 4. d.
Ghost. And that is the upright christian baptism, in the Mat. 28. b. Acts.
1. a. 2. a. 10. e.
name of the holy Ghost, and it is the true second John. 3. a
birth, out of the holy Ghost, the ttue love of GOD and Christ.

Answer. THese upright believers have the waters of the holy Ghost, as H. N.
affirms, powered forth over them with full cleerenes of God abundantly: and
thus does Christ make manifest his holy Church under the obedience of the love
through the shedding forth of the holy Ghost, who is nothing else, but [the
love of God and Christ] with H.N. as appears in the less line of the last
Section, and this he calls the baptism in the name of the holy Ghost. This
doctrine has been confuted before: there is nothing therefore remaining now,
but to give you a sight of those absurd things which follow upon it. First
of all by this doctrine, H.N. his Christ in the spirit, and his holy Ghost,
be all one. Secondly the holy Ghost is not given, Sin is subdued in us
before we have the holy Ghost.
but to them that are of this family, and subscribe to the doctrine and
religion of H.N. Thirdly, sin is subdued, before the holy Ghost be granted
and given unto them. Fourthly. Baptism is no cutwarde seal and assurance of
that good will the Lord bears unto us, but an inward perfect obedience, that
we yield unto him. And last of al, the holy Ghost, is not that with begets
in us the love of God and Christ, as it is written: but it is the very love it
self of God and Christ, and nothing else. These errors be so evident, Romans 7
that if nothing had been said severally unto them before, being once brought
out unto the bar, and arrayned, a man would think they would at the first
have yielded, confessed, and never for shame by pleading not guilty, have made
any further trouble unto the country for their trial.

H. N.
We confess, that they all, which become not grounded in this same upright
faith of Jesus Christ, nor become even so baptized, as is before mentioned in
the first article, in the name of the Father, under the obedience of the love
of the father, and his law, (and as is before mentioned in the fourth article)
in the name of the Son, under the obedience of the love of the son, and his
belief, and as is before mentioned in this 8. article,) in the name of the
holy Ghost, under the obedience of the love of the holy Ghost, and his
renewing of the life and mind: are no true Christians: and that they also all,
that boast themselves to be Christians, without this same upright faith, and
baptism, are doubteles false Mat. 24. a. Luke 21. a.
christians. Sectio 33. Therefore shall now in this same day of the love, the
word that the Lord Jesus has spoken concerning the true be, liefe and
baptism, be a judge, also become fulfilled and found very true, and make
known the believers from the unbelievers. Section. 34. For verily who so
believes and becomes Mar. 16. b. Acts. 1. a.
baptized, after this manner (like as we here confess or acknowledge, according
to the word of Jesus Christ, the upright faith and baptism) he shall become
saved: but who so believes not, he shall according to the word of Jesus
Christ become ^ar. 16. b.
condemned 35. For that cause let no man boast him to be a christian, that has
not in the upright faith received the true tokens of the Christianity, that is
Mar. 28. c.
that bears or carries not the name of the Father, and of the Son and of
the holy Ghost, Mark. 16.6. Acts. 1. b. 2. a.
essentially and liuingly in him (otherwise he shall assuredly in this same day
of the love of the righteous Mat. 25. d. Romans 14 b.
judgment, before all the holy ones of God, which are comprehended in the
communialtie of the love be found false and lying. For the word that the
Lord Jesus Christ has spoken John 12. d.
shall judge him in this same newest day.

Answer. H.N. proceeds now to the sentence of everlasting condemnation,
which he thundreth out against all how many soever, who shall not now in
this present day of the love, believe this doctrine which he has here
published and professed. What sentence he himself lies under, I leave it
unto the Lord, but if there be any place left unto prayer for him, I pray God
he may be so truly touched with repentance, as that curse may be turned from
him, which wayteth for so many, as by damnable doctrine, shall lead blind and
simple souls out of the way. In the mean time we stand assured from the
mouth of the lord, Prou. 26. ^.
that the curse which is causeless shall not come. The true Church of Christ
acknowledges the holy Ghost to be God equal with the Father, and the Son:
because the Scripture gives liberty and freedom unto him, in distributing of
graces and gifts unto the children of GOD. According as we read in the former
Epistle to the Corinthes: Al these things works one, and the self same
spirit, 1. Cor. 12.11.
distributing to every man severally as he will: and because in like manner it
joins him with the father and the son, making but one God of those three
persons, 1. John. 5.7.
as it is written in the first Epistle of Saint John, There are three which
bear record in heaven, the Father, the word, and the holy Ghost, and these
three are one. We do assuredly believe, that the holy Ghost will be our
comforter unto the end, as well in woorking the works of sanctification in
us, as in making strong and sealing up unto our spirit the assurance of
salvation and everlasting life: bringing all that to pass in our weakness,
which the Lord has promised in his word. For the which end he is sent from
the Father and the Son into the world. Which effects, are many in number,
and merueilous for the great workemanshippe thereof in such frailty, as we
are forced to feel and confess to be within our selves. For what a wonderful
work is this in flesh and blood, to have a wise and understanding heart in the
will and word of his God? The Apostle sets this sight of God his goodness
toward us which is offered in the Gospel, far above the reach either of
sense or reason, attributing it only to ye holy Ghost: The things which eye
has not seen, 1. Cor. 2.9.
neither ear heard, neither came into man's heart, has God prepared for them
that love him, but God has revealed them unto us by his spirit, for what man
knows the things of a man save the spirit of a man, even so the things of
God knows no man but the spirit of god. What a rare work is this in like
manner, to give unto men who are privy to themselves of manifold offenses,
and great wretchedness, the confidence and boldness to call God Father, making
a full reckoning of his favor, and good will toward them? which thing is
notwithstanding wrought in the servants of God, Gala. 4.
by the spirit of God as the Apostle witnesses: because ye are sons, God
has sent forth the spirit of his son into your hearts, which cries Abba,
Father. Of what difficulty likewise is that work, [to quicken this not dull,
but dead disposition within us,] in the ways of the Lord his laws, and in
the works of his commandments? yet does the spirit of God perform it in
us, as we read in the Epistle to the Romans: If the spirit of him that
raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, Romans 8.11.
he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal
bodies, by his spirit that dwells in you. Moreover that passes the power of
man, in our afflictions to be guided unto God, and to have beside the matter,
the acceptable manner also of mourning and groaning ministered unto us, which
proceeds from the spirit of God, Romans 8.26.
as it is written to the Romans: Likewise the spirit also helps our
infirmities, for we know not what to pray as we ought, but the spirit it self
makes request for us, with sighs which cannot be expressed, but he that
searches the hearts, knows what is the meaning of the spirit, for he
makes request for the faults, according to the will of God. And how
wonderful is the Lord by this work of his spirit in us, who are yet kept
from our Country and kingdom, and oftentimes so evil entreated and so little
regarded, that not only men, but the Lord himself, seems to reckon of us
as unworthy of any welfare here upon earth to have notwithstanding within
us, a good earnest of our inheritance in heaven, eue^ the spirit of God, Ephe.
2.14.
who has also to name [Comforter] for these and like effects of consolation?
after that ye believed ye were sealed with the holy spirit of promise, which is
the earnest of our inheritance, for the redemption of that liberty purchased,
to the praise of his glory. As for H.N. his holy Ghost, there are no such
things to be had from him, for concerning the earnest and assurance to be
made for our inheritance, what use can there be thereof, when once we are
entered upon the same: now by H.N. his doctrine, everlasting life, is in this
life and in this estate of perfection which he professes, and therefore when
possession is taken, there is no longer place for any pledge or earnest of
assurance, and therefore H.N. his holy Ghost, cannot be he which the
Scripture sets forth, and makes known by the property of a pleadge or
earnest? Beside this, when H.N. his holy Ghost is once come, they are past
prayer for sin, they have not to pray against it being no sinners: and
goodness they want not, being perfect, and therefore he is not that holy
Ghost which the Scripture speaks off, that helps their infirmities, who
know not what to pray as they ought, making request with sighs and groans that
cannot be expressed.

H.N. The nienth Article.
We believe one holy Church a communialtie John. 17, c. Romans 12. a. 15. b. 1.
Cor. 12. a. Ephe. 4. b.
of holy ones: which is the conjoined body Ephe. 10.5. a.
of Christ or incorporated through the love, to Christ: and that the shedding
forth Acts 2. a.
of the holy Ghost comes to pass: under the obedience of the love upon the
same. For through the holy Ghost (wherewith she is: in all love anointed,
blessed, and elected, to a sanctified Apo. 21. a.
bride of Christ:) she becomes named one holy communialty of holy ones,
which is the holy conjoined body of the body of Jesus Christ

Section. 37
We confess that this same one holy Acts 2. a.
comunialtie which becomes even so as is above said incorporated through the
love: into the body of Jesus Christ, as one John. 17. c.
body with him, and baptized in his saving health: is the true Christianity,
and the upright holy Apo. 22. a. 22.
church of Jesus Christ. Whereunto all people should of right assemble them
under the obedience of the love, to their blessing and salvation according to
the promises: For she is God majesty, John. 14. b. Apo. 21. a.
or the true house of the love, for his dwelling, wherein God will have mercy
on all people.

Section 38.
Who so now therefore assembleth him not under the obdie^ce of the love: unto
the same holy Church of Jesus Christ, neither yet submits him humbly, under
the same majesty of GOD, but contemns the righteousness of GOD: and the
spiritual gifts and riches of Christ and so turns Tim. 4. a. 2. Tim. 3. a. 2
Pet. 3. a.
away him self from the communialtie of the love, the chosen holy ones of God,
he shows that he is false of heart, and stands minded against GOD and his
holy Church, and brings even so the judgment Iud. 1. b.
of his condemnation over himself.

Answer. H.N. professes here, that this sect is the true, and only Church
of Christ, incorporated through love to Christ, whereunto all people should of
right assemble themselves, to their blessing and salvation, because she is Gods
Majesty, for these be his own words. He professes likewise, that whosoever
turns himself away, from this communialtie of the love, he brings even so
the judgment of his condemnation over himself. In many places of this book
he flatly condemns all people, that are not of this sect, he affirms
their estate to he a false being, the Devil, the Antichrist, the wicked
spirit the kingdom of Hell, 1. Exhor. 15.17.
and the majesty of the Devil himself: they are his very words in the
fifteenth Chapter of his first exhortation. I will not stand long upon this
point, but content my self only with two testimonies, and those taken out of
this, and the next chapter, whereby every man may easily perceive, what his
judgment is, both of the Preachers and people, wheresoever, or how many
soever that are not of his family. Thus he speaks in the fifteenth Chapter
of his first Exhortation, and tenth Section: The vnilluminated unsent teachers,
busy, and apply them very earnestly about the profounde knowledge of the
Scriptures, or high understandings, according to the pleasing, either
contentation of men, or about a painted holiness, or false righteousness,
according to the flesh, or outward appearance, that has before the fleshly
minded, a show of righteousness, but inwardly their nature or mind, is full of
iniquity and full of all false witnessinges, against God his gracious word,
and his Ministers, and they are not else what, but a nest of Diuelles, and of
all wicked Spirits. Therefore surely, the riches of the knowledge, in all
false hearts, of the Scripture-learned, and in all presumptuous or arrogant
self wise is the false spirit of Antichrist, which through his show of
outward holiness, and great knowledge in the Scripture, works a secret
iniquity, and esteems himself as more worthy, then the love and her
service, and above the wisdom of God, or the upright life, to be the spirit
of the full wisdom it self. And in the sixteenth Chapter, which is the next
following, and seventeenth Section he confirms his judgment in these
words. Therefore it is assuredly al false, and lies, seducing and deceitful,
what the ungodly or vnilluminated men, out of the imagination or riches of
their own knowledge, and out of the learnednes, of the Scriptures bring forth,
institute, preach, and teach. They preach in deed the letter and imagination
of their knowledge, but not the word of the living God. Seeing then they have
not fulfilled obediently, the first entrance, into the doctrine of the gracious
word, and yet nevertheless, with free hearts presumptuosly boast them to have.
and to use all what is brought, and given out of grace, to the holieones of
God, in the communialtie of the love, There is no true Christianity but among
them that grow up in the family of love unto illuminate elders.
and lie or err therein: so is doubtless all their doing, and word that they
use, out of the free mindednes of their heat, a false freedom, out the false
light, the imagination of the knowledge, and all their congregation, let the^
esteem themselves so holy as they will: a false Christianity, and Deuilles
Synagogue or school. For there is none other co^munialtie of holy ones or
true Christianity but the communialty of holy ones in the love of Jesus Christ,
and al such as adioyne the^ thereunto, and grow up under the obedience of the
love, in the same love, to elders of the holy and godly understanding. His
words can no way be arrested so, but that any man, who shall read them may
see and plainly perceive, that he thinks of all that are not of his family,
embracing his doctrine, and adjoining themselves to that number as of a false
christianity, a devils sinagogue or schole: they be his own words even now
cited as you have heard. It is very expedient therefore to examine what truth
there is, in this his assertion. The true Church of Christ, rests upon Christ
and his obedience: H.N. his family, rests upon the law, and their obedience
yielded unto the same: for that is their Christ, and all the means of
salvation that they do acknowledge, as does plainly appear by that which
has been spoken before of their Christ. We may therefore say unto them with
the Apostle: Galla. 5.4.
ye are abolished from Christ, who soever are justified by the law, Galla. 3.29.
ye are fallen from grace. The Church of Christ is Abraham his seed, and
therefore as he was, so they be heirs by promise: H.N. his family, comes to
all their happiness by their own pains and proper purchase, and therefore
fallen from grace, and lie under the curse of God: For so many as are of the
works of the law, are under the curse, says the Apostle. Galla. 3.10.
In the true Church of Christ, the iusi man, who because he is just, cannot be
void of the fruits of righteousness and true holiness: yet leans he not
to that his labor, as now being altogether free from imperfection: but lives
by his faith, and rests in the mercy of his God, according as it is written
by the Apostle: The just shall live by faith. Galla. 3.11.
But in this Family, there just men leave and let go, all faith and credit
in the goodness of any other, and will live by their own labor.

This sanctification and holiness of the Church of Christ, albeit it be
sound and sincere, yet is it never perfect and absolute in this life, without
sin and imperfection at all. John. 15.2.
For we do read in the Gospel after Saint John, that branches, even all of
those without exception, which bring forth fruit, be in no other estate, but
that they have in them notwithstanding matter of necessity to be purged, that
so they may bring forth more fruit: Every branch that bears fruit, he
purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit: and therefore do we say in
the next Article, that we do believe the forgiveness of sins: but the
sanctification and holiness of H.N. his Church and Family (as they say) is
perfect even in this life. The members of the true Church, be branches of
that true Vine Christ, and have from thence their sap, and strength to bear:
but the fellows of this Family have all their sap in them selves: for they
do not acknowledge original sin, nor yet the doctrine of our free election
in Christ, and therefore must of necessity with Pelagius, plant grace
generally in our nature, and so consequently confess that we have our sap in
our selves.

H.N. The tenth Article.
We believe the forgiveness of Matthew. 9. a. 16.18. John. 20. c. Acts. 13. c*
sins, namely in the same communialty of holy ones, which stands grounded
in thssame upright and godly belief of Jesus Christ, and becomes baptized in
that same holy being of GOD above rehearsed, and where the Col. 3. b.
love has obtained the victory. We confess also, that no man shall obtain
grace, or forgiveness of sins at Gods hand, without thissame holy
communialtie of Christ. For thissame is the holy Christianity: the family of
Love: wherein GOD himself 2. Cor. 6. b. Apo. 21. a.
dwells, lives, and walks: and the true communialtie of Israel, which
reigns with God and Christ, over all her enemies.

Answer. He that calls to mind that doctrine which H.N. which has set
forth before, in his exposition upon the 4. Article, shall plainly perceive,
that remission and forgiveness of sins, is nothing else, but to be set free
from sinning any more against God: and that not to be attained unto any
otherwise, then by following his Christ, in the death of the cross, under the
obedience of the love. Which opinion is confirmed in his Euangelie Chapter 30.
Section 6. The clensing, which is called Purgatory, Euan. 30.6.
signifies unto us, the making pure of the believers of Christ, which they in
distress, affliction, sorrow and anguish for the sins cause, do pass
through, wherein they, as in a fire of humiliation, are purged, or justified
from all their sins, through the belief, for to enter even so with pure
hearts, into the kingdom of the GOD of heavens. In which fire of clensing, or
Purgatory, the upright believers of Christ, show forth patience in prayer unto
God, and even so in the belief, and in manner of suffering, they follow after
Christ in his death of the cross, to the purging of their sins. And the 28
Chapter of that same book, and first Section, this his opinion is likewise
established. These be his words. Whilst now the children of men cleaued unto
the upright faith of Abraham, which was of one being with the true light of
life, or grounded themselves therein, and even so obediently suspected the
service of the belief, administered out of the true light, which is Christ
himself in his requiring, exercised them therein, and only gave ear and had
regard unto the ministers of the holy word, which had kept the Passover with
Christ, out of the flesh, into the spirit, and out of death into life, and were
even so implanted into Christ, and coedified with God: and also being obedient
unto the word, in his requiring, bide steadfast therein, until that they had
also kept the passover with Christ, and obtained the renewing of their spirit
and mind, in Jesus Christ, the which is the upright supper, or Pascha, wherein
men rightly eat the body of Christ, drink his blood, are partakers of his
suffering, and baptized in his death, unto his burying: and even so remember
the suffering of Christ, and witness or publish his death, till unto his
coming, that is, until the true light arise in the heart, so were they made
safe, justified from their sins, renewed in the spirit of their mind, and
sanctified in Christ, to fellow members of his body, and to coheires in the
riches of God his father, in the everlasting life. This doctrine which makes
man his own Savior and redeemer, is plentifully confuted in the fourth
Article, whereunto I refer the reader. A man would not imagine that they could
attempt so much mischievous matter against us, and our salvation: even then,
when they give us no worse words, then the holy Ghost does use. For here
are heard no other words, then words of pardon, and forgiveness, and yet
there is no other matter in hand, the^ matter of purchasing and paying for our
salvation. But no marvel if H.N. (who before was sufficiently proved to be
Judas) do now kiss, when he means to kill, and in words puts us in
hope of a pardon: when in deed is drift is, to have us pay the utmost
farthing. Heb. 10.16.17
In the tenth Chapter to the Hebrews, it is plainly proved, that even those
his dear and best beloved Children, in whose hearts and minds, himself has
written his own laws: have in them notwithstanding matter to be pardoned and
forgiven. After those days (says the Lord) I will put my laws in their
heart, and in their mind I will write them, and their sins and iniquities I
will remember no more. The place is alleged out of the Prophet Ieremye,
Iere. 32.
I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I will never turn away
from them to do them good: but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they
shall not depart from me. These people to whom the Lord has made this large
and liberal promise, that they shall enjoy such a portion of his fear, as
shall be able to keep the^ from departing from him: these (I say) that have and
enjoy such a measure of mercy from the Lord: have all this notwithstanding in
that their estate sins to be pardoned, and that with one offering for all,
never after to be renewed: With one offering has he consecrated for ever (says
the holy Ghost) them, that be sanctified. And again, Verse. 14.
Where remission of these things is, there is now no more offering for sin.
If one offering consecrate for ever them that be sanctified: then are there not
so many offeringes to consecrate wtall, as there be persons sanctified: which
is the doctrine of H.N. If one offering consecrate for ever, them that be
sanctified: then H. N. and his Family, are not sanctified, because they refuse
that one offering, which the Lord has appointed, thereby to consecrate for
ever them that are sanctified: and have erected in stead thereof, a continual
offering, and oblation for sin, wherein every man must play the Priest for
himself. And therefore, albeit he affirm words, that there is remission, and
forgiveness of sin in his Family: yet in truth it is otherwise: Heb. 10.18.
for where there is remission of sin, there is no more offering for sin:
Now in H. N. his Family, there is more offering for sin, and therefore there
is among them no remission of sin. The Prophet David affirms, Psalm. 3 2.6.
that because the Lord had pardoned him his sin, therefore every man that is
godly should be emboldened likewise in their sins to fly unto him:
whereupon it follows that every man that is godly, is subject to sin. And
if this offense of David, which had pardon from the Lord had not been
ommitted after his calling, and walking unto the word of God: then could it
not have been an argument of hope for the godly, because it was committed
before he began to live in the fear of God: and therefore their estate and
condition should be so diverse, that one could not yield the help of hope
unto an other. Now if every godly man should have hope by it: then is there no
man so illuminate, but he remains subject to sin, and therefore must live
by faith, and with the true Church of God, believe the forgiveness of sins.
Now forgiveness of sin (if H.N. his doctrine may be believed) is not to be
had or hoped for, without this his family of love: so that every man, not
being of that his number, is shut out of the Church, He that is not of this
family of Love, shall never obtain forgiveness of his sins at God his hand.
and kingdom of Christ, and lives without all hope of mercy, and forgiveness
from the Lord. For these be his words, in explaning this Article: No man
shall obtain grace, nor forgiveness of sins, at God his hands, without
thissame holy communialtie of Christ: for thissame is the holy christianity,
the Family of love, wherein God himself dwells, lives and walks etc.

H. N. The xi. Article.
We believe the Esa. 26. e. Ezec. 36.37. b.
resurrection of the flesh: we confess that the dead which are deceased or
fallen a sleep in Christ, rise up John 5. d. 1. Cor. 15. e. d. 2. Cor. 5. a.
1. These. 4. b.
with their bodies, and appear with Christ, in his glory: where through the
whole house of Israel becomes Iere. 30. b. 31. d. Ezech. 37. c.
erected or restored in the last day according to the promises.

Answer. That the resurrection of the body, is wholly and altogether a
spiritual matter, according to the doctrine of H.N: it plainly appears in
all his books. I in deed he uses this word body, in this place, but as his
accustomed kind of dealing has been heretofore, that the simple may the
sooner be deceived thereby, in not suspecting any strange matter to be there,
where they hear no other beside the known and accustomed words. He calls
it [the resurrection of the body be] cause it is accco^plished, while yet we
are living in this body: for so many as now embrace the doctrine of H. N. and
are grown to perfection in the same: in his judgment, those are risen from
the dead, and that is with him, the resurrection of the body in the last day:
whereunto he draws all the scriptures, which mention the day of judgment, and
the second coming of Christ: when as well good, as bad, shall rise again in
the flesh, and be adjudged either to joy or pain everlastingly. That thus he
thinks of the resurrection, it is plain and evidently to be seen, in his
Euangelie Chapter. 35.8. Behold in this present day, is this Scripture
fulfilled, and according to the testimony of the scripture, the raising up,
and resurrection of the Lords dead, comes also to pass presently, in
thissame day, through the appearing of the coming of Christ in his majesty,
which resurrection of the dead, seeing that the same is come unto us, from Gods
grace, we do likewise in this present day to an Euangelie or joyful message
of the kingdom of God, and christ, publish in all the world, under the
obedience of the love. In which resurrection of the dead, God shows unto us,
that the time is now fulfilled, that his dead, or the dead that are fallen on
sleep, in the Lord, rise up in this day of his judgment, and appear unto us
in godly glory: which shall also from henceforth live in us everlastingly with
Christ, and reign upon the earth, wherein the scripture becomes fulfilled,
in this present day, like as there stands written thereof. And in the second
chapter of the Euangelie. Section 3. For that cause, awake now in the spirit,
ye lovers of the truth, and thoroughly measure or try out the ground of this
same spirit, which to the making alive of all the dead that are deceassed in
the Lord, is proceeded from God: and marvel not at any of thissame: but
search or examine the scripture, whether that it make not mention of the same.
Likewise in the 4. Chapter Section 14. For this cause our hope stands now in
this day, very little on many inhabitours of the world, for of them there
shall few come, which shall stand minded, or adioyne them unto the love, and
the requiring of her service, with all their heart: and yet many fewer, which
shall persevere therein unto the end. Therefore hope we with joy, much more on
the appearing of the dead, which dye in the Lord, or are dead in him, to wit,
that they in their resurrection from the death, shall liuingly come unto, or
meet with us. For all the dead of the Lord, or members of Christ, shall now
live and arise with their bodies, and we shall assemble us with them, and they
with us, to one body in Jesus Christ, into one lovely being of the love, and
be altogether concordable in the love, and peace of Jesus Christ. He that shall
read the book of H.N. with judgment, shall soon see and perceive, that the
knowledge of his doctrine, and obedience thereunto, is with him all in-all, it
is the coming of Christ, the sound of the last Trumpet, the resurrection from
the dead, and everlasting life: of many I will give you one place for proof
hereof, it is in his Euangelie Chapter 38. Section 2, Wherefore awake now all,
lift up your heads: hear and see the wonderful acts of God, and have
regard unto the sound of the last Trumpet, and consider the forefront of the
true Tabernacle of God: wherein the beginning of the true God service, and of
the upright Christian life, becomes erected: the holy of the true tabernacle
of God: wherein the true God service, and his requiring and the obedience of the
belief, even unto the upright christian life is accomplished, and the veil
removed from the most holy: the most holy of the true tabernacle of god:
wherein the perfection of the true Christian life, and all that which God has
spoken from the beginning, and promised through his Prophets, is set up: the
kingdom of the God of heavens, full of al pure beauty, and heavenly powers:
wherein all minds of pure hearts do live with christian triumph, free without
fear: the day of the righteous judgment of God: in which the compass of the
earth becomes judged with righteousness: the judgment seat of Christ:
before which all things must needs be manifested: the perfect being of God and
Christ: in his abundant clearness, of the godly light: the true rest of all the
children of God: in their perfect loveliness, and upright being: the mystery
of the heavenly truth: wherein the right service of love has his
ministration, and the declaring of the spiritual treasures or riches of the
heavenly goods, which are administered, and brought through the service of love,
to an everlasting perfection, unto the upright of heart, and wherein al
imperfect or childish things, Images, figures, and shadows do cease,
becomes now in this present day (O ye lovers of the truth) euangelized and
declared unto you all, and thereto also ye all, so well as we, were created
for to live therein, and are called and bidden unto the same, out of the grace
and mercy of God by me H. N. in whom God has sealed the dwelling of his
glory, and his holy name. We are taught out of the word of God to believe
and assuredly to look for the resurrection of this our flesh, which by death
is taken down, and laid into the dust. For by that league and covenant,
wherein the Lord stands bound unto us, to become our God, he has not only
taken our soul, but our flesh and body also into his fatherly protection:
and that not for the time of this life alone, but in like manner for the life to
come. And therefore our Savior Christ Jesus, by these words of the covenant,
proves that the dead shall rise again, yea that Abraham, who had been already
partaker of rising from sin in truth (the shadow whereof H.N. urges, for the
rising again of the flesh) should have yet an other resurrection: which is to
rise up in flesh and bone, to inherit everlasting comfort, as well in body,
as in soul. For as the godly do glorify GOD here upon earth, both in body
and soul: so shall they likewise be glorified of him in both, in the life to
come. And this is an article of our belief, and especial comfort left unto
Christians. But how can it be that H.N. should be privy unto these, and such
like comfortes, who is utterly ignorant of Christ the procurer of the^? The
Apostle Paul, whose conversation was in heaven, and therefore already
possessed of the rising from sin: looked notwithstanding for this
resurrection of the body, when it should be changed, and made like unto the
glorious body of Jesus Christ: Phil. 3.20.
as it is written in the Epistle to the Philippians. But our conversation is in
heaven, from whence also we look for the savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ,
who shall change our vile bodies, that it may be fashioned like unto his
glorious body, according to the working, whereby he is able even to subdue
all things unto himself. It is manifest then by this which has been spoken,
that the resurrection of the body, cannot be drowned, as H.N. his doctrine
does teach us, in the rising from sin and wickedness. And beside, in this
short abstract of the principal points of our faith, is it possible to persuade
any man, that one and the same thing, should be the matter and argument of
sundry articles? Now by the doctrine of H.N. this article is the same in
effect, with those of Christ his rising the third day from the dead, his
ascending into heaven and his sitting at the right hand of God his father: yea,
it is the same in meaning, with those of the holy ghost, the holy catholic
Church, the communion of Saints, the forgiveness of sins. For all these be
nothing else, besides that estate of life, which his doctrine does describe,
to be the lovely being, and that estate of perfection, which his illuminate
elders be possessed of. What cause have all true hearted Christians, to cry
out against this doctrine, which shrinketh up so many and special comfortes,
so proper and peculiar unto them?

H. N. The.xij. Article.
And we believe one John. 6. c. 17.
everlasting life, Amen. We confess that the same everlasting life is a true
John. 1. a 1. John. 1. a.
light of men, and that God has made and chosen him the man hereto, that he
should live in the same Genesis 1. c. a. ^ Sapi. 1. b.
light everlastingly, it is very true.

Answer. This everlasting life which H. N. speaks of, is no other thing,
then that doctrine which he professes. And therefore he calls it, a true
light of men, according as we have heard before in his title, that in respect
of this doctrine, he chalengeth unto him self, to be called the true light of
the perfect being: alleging the same place that here is cited for proof
thereof. But least some might say, that this place is not plain enough, to
warrant this to be their opinion, let us hear himself open his own meaning
more at large. These are his own words in the 34. Chapter of his Euangelie,
Section. 4. In this same day, or last time, (namely in the perfection of the
works of God, and in his righteous judgment) the God of heaven has now
declared himself, and his christ, together with all his saints to us his elect,
also made a dwelling with us, and brought even so unto us, out of his holy
being, the most holy of his true tabernacle, with the fulness of his
garnishing, and spiritual heavenly riches, to an everlasting fast standing
Jerusalem, and house for Gods dwelling, according to the Scripture: the which
is the very true vndisturbable kingdom, full of all godly power, joy, and of
all heavenly beautifulness, wherein the land of the lord, with fullness of
eternal life, and lovely sweetness, is sung from everlasting to everlasting,
and wherein all minds of pure hearts do dwell live, and walk with freedom,
In this kingdom of H N. his love is the fullness of everlasting life.
and Christian triumph in all love. This day of love is with him (as you hear)
the last time, and therefore now does God make his dwelling with us, and
brings the fullness of his spiritual riches. And this kingdom (as he says
here) is the very true vndisturbable kingdom, full of all godly joy, and
heavenly beautifulnes, wherein is the fullness of eternal life. He calls it
the eternal life, because this doctrine must reign on earth for ever: and
therefore in his exposition upon this Article, he does not affirm, that any
one man shall live in the same light everlastingly: but speaking indefinitely,
says, the man shall live in it everlastingly: because there shall be from
henceforth in all times hereafter, men found that shall walk in perfect
obedience unto this Doctrine. It appears likewise out of his Euangelie, that
he professes everlasting life, to be nothing else, but his doctrine. So that
to live in perfect obedience unto that, is no other thing, then to live in the
life everlasting, and in that light that shines therein. And it is therefore
called everlasting, because it shall be professed for ever, and no religion
prevail against it. These be his own words. Euangelie. 37.13. Therefore
also is this day, or light of the love with his service in the most holy, the
last day, and the perfection or conclusion of all the works of God, in the
which God himself, with his Christ, and with all the thousands of his
Saints, as in the most holy of his true tabernacle, appears and comes
unto the believers, and obedient ones, to the requiring of his word, to an
eternal rest of his holy ones, and to a godly consolation for all afflicted
hearts, which hope on God, and on his righteousness, and bear the love of God
and Christ in their hearts: to the end that they all, which love God, and his
Christ, might now live lovely, and peaceably in the same rest, with all the
holy ones of God, and Christ, in all love: which most holy the most pure
perfect beauty, and his upright and gracious service of love, we have received
or atteined unto, now in this last time, wherein we inherit the fullness of the
life, to an everlasting joy, with God and his Christ. The joys of H. N. his
heaven, are here upon earth.
And that same most holy, and his service of love, reaches also no further,
but it is the perfection it self: for that cause the service of love, which
the Lord has erected with us little ones, and elected ones, shall stand fast
everlastingly, in his ministration, and remain for ever according to the
Scripture. This service of love (as H.N. does here declare) is the perfection
it self, which shall stand fast everlastingly in his ministration, and remain
for ever, according to the scripture: and he that lives obediently in this
service of the love, is already over head and ears in the joys of heaven.
H.N. his heaven, that is builded here upon earth, has been overthrown before
in the confutation of his title. I mean not therefore to have any other
dealing against it, before I shall be fully certified, that either it is
builded higher: or else, that the foundation is made surer: only this I
desire, that the eyes of this family may be opened, so to see the true
happiness laid up in heaven, for the faithful: as that they may grow into a
true detestation of all those, who teach no other joys to be there, then such
that are felt and perceived in this life.

A confutation of H.N. his estate of perfection.
THat which in this doctrine of H.N. is all in all, according to the truth of
God his word, is not at all to be found among men: I mean his estate of
perfection: which with him is Christ, the holy Ghost, the resurrection, and the
everlasting life, and what is it not? Now he imagines that his illuminate men
have profited so well in godliness, that they sin no more. A doctrine, which
the whole course of the Scripture does utterly overthrow. For the scope and
drift of the word of God, is, to leave all flesh indebted unto the goodness
of God, that he who will glory, may glory in the Lord. And therefore it
does in many places teach and declare, that sin and imperfection is in all
men. Iam. 3.2.
In many things (says the Apostle Saint James) we offend all. The Apostle
does not exempt any man, no not himself, from sin and offense against God
in this his doctrine. Whereunto accords that saying of Saint John: 1. John.
1.8.
If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not
in us. When the Apostles, and pillars of the Church of GOD, acknowledge
themselves to be sinners: he cannot be guided with that spirit, which did
speak in them: who shall deny him self and others to offend at all. They
allege for them, 1. John. 3.9.
that saying of Saint John: Whosoever is borne of God sins not: and that
likewise: He that commits sin, 1. John. 3.8.
is of the Devil, To the which I answer, according to that principle which is
begone, and grounded upon reason, which also our usual speech and practice
does continue: that the whole does bear the name, after that which is
principal in the thing. And therefore, when men have dealinges in diverse
trades, they always bear the name after that which is principal. The
Merchant who has a house in the Country, and some dealinges in husbandry,
is notwithstanding called a Merchant, and not an husbandman: because it is the
chief and principal thing which he trauaileth in, and whereby his especial
maintenance does grow. The wine which is mingled with water, has to name
wine, and not water: because wine is the principal and chief part. And that
lump which has great store of dross, is named notwithstanding of that gold,
which is in it, how little soever the quantity thereof shall happen to be:
because it is principal in value and account. So that, whether we shall
compare quantity with quantity, or quality with quality, the principal
shall always bear away the name. And therefore no marvel, if the Evangelist
shall say, that he is of the Devil who commits sin: because here he
disputes not of one, or some few actions, that break out of a man: but of
that which is principal in a man. For he draws all men to these two heads:
either to be borne of GOD, or of the Devil. According to this doctrine, does
the Apostle exhort us, saying: Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies, for
if sin be principal, bear rule, and reign in any, (they giving
themselves as servants thereunto) we may lawfully say of such with the
Apostle, that they are of the Devil: as contrariwise, when any shall humble
themselves to those duties, which are set down to us in the word of GOD,
so as that course of life shall be chief and principal in them, though in
many particular actions, they shall be found offenders: yet may they (all this
notwithstanding) be said to be borne of GOD, and not to sin: because it is
not in them as ruler and principal, but as a slave and underling: and
therefore not able to bear the name: When the contention is, as now, for
principality and rule. According to this distinction, we do find in the
scriptures graces denied unto sinners, when sin is in rule and government:
which are not denied, when it is in subjection and service. In the Gospel
after Saint John it is thus written, touching sin, John. 9.31.
when it is principal and governs* We know that God hears not sinners. And
in the Epistle it is plainly set down concerning sin, when yet it is in us,
though not ruler over us: 1. John. 1.9.
that if we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins. We do find likewise in other places, because of this diversity,
diverse and distinct things uttered touching sin. For in the Epistle of Saint
John, 1. John. 3.8. 1. John. 1.8.
it is there said, He that commits sin, is of the Devil. And in the first
Chapter of that Epistle, the Apostle affirms plainly of himself, and of all
the servants of God, who live here in this world, that if we say we have no
sin, we do deceive our selves and truth is not in us. So diverse speeches
uttered in the Scripture of sin, must of necessity force us, according as
the godly and learned of all times have done before us, thus to distinguish the
same. For the further warrant of this doctrine, which gives the name of the
whole, unto that which is not yet whole and perfect, because of a special
study, travail, profiting therein, and contending thereunto: consider I pray
you of that which is written by the Apostle: Phil. 3.1.2.15.
who when he had before confessed, that he had not attained unto perfection,
but did follow after it, speaks notwithstanding immediately after of him
self, as of one perfect: because it was a chief and principal study and
travail of his to grow toward it. Let us therefore as many as be perfect, be
thus minded, and if ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even the same
unto you. And in the second book of the Chronicles, (albeit the high places
were not taken away out of Israel, 2. Chron. 15.17
wherein King Asa was an offender against the law of his God, as also in
sundry other things, whereof mention is made in the next Chapter: yet are
these words uttered by the holy Ghost of him: The heart of Asa was perfect all
his days. We do read also, for further confirmation of this matter, in the
second of the Chronicles: that Amazia and Osias did uprightly in the sight of
the Lord: 2. Chron. 26.4 and 26.2.
and yet for all that Amazia was guilty of one so great trespass, as did
procure unto him an heavy judgment from the Lord, as appears in the Chapter
going before: And Osia in like manner, 2. Chron. 29.2.
did so offend in usurping the Priest his office that he did smite him with
the plague of Leprosy for the same: Which punishment was not removed from
him, unto the day of his death. And do we not read in like manner of David
and Hezechias, 2. Chron. 32.25.31.
that they did uprightly in the sight of the Lord? Yet who is ignorant of
David his grievous offenses: either else of the trespasses of Hezechias so
plainly noted in the second of the Chronicles? We then plainly perceive,
that the Scripture is well acquainted with the naming of things after that
which is chief and principal in them: and that in the Scripture they are
called righteous and perfect, who are not freed from all unrighteousness,
neither yet void of all imperfection. And this rule which the holy Ghost
observes, will lead us to the right sense, and meaning of all those places,
which heretofore have been alleged, by the Pelagians, and are now afresh
renewed by H.N. and his family, for this doctrine of perfection: a doctrine,
whereof a man may truly say, that as there never has been any more pernicions,
so was there never any oftener revived, and more easily received: for Adam his
children would: still be Gods, and have their happiness and perfection in
themselves. And so favorable are we to our selves, that if our testimony may
be taken, we will justify that saying of Solomon: Prou. 16.
All the ways of a man are clear in his own eyes. The places alleged
heretofore by the Pelagians, for their perfection, and now again urged by H
N. and his family, their lawful successors, be these: Genesis 6.9. Genesis 7.1.
Deuteronomy. 18.13. Iosu. 24.14.
Noah was a just man. Walk before me and be thou perfect. Thou shall be
perfect with the Lord thy God. Fear the Lord, and serve him in perfectness.
And thou Solomon my Son know thou the God of thy father, and serve him with
a perfect heart. 1. Chron. 29.19. 2. Chro. 15.17.
Give unto Solomon my Son a perfect heart, to keep thy co^maundeme^ts. The
heart of Asa was perfect al his days. I beseech the Lord remember, that I have
walked before thee in truth, Esai. 38.3.
and with a perfect heart. His heart was not perfect with the Lord his god, 1.
Reg. 11.4.
as was the heart of David his father. 2. Chro. 2.52.
He did uprightly in the eyes of the Lord, but not with a perfect heart. Ye
shall therefore be perfect, Mat. 5.48.
as your father in heaven is perfect. Mat. 19.21.
If thou will be perfect, go sell that thou have. Whosoever will be a perfect
Disciple shall be as his Master. Luke. 6.40.
We speak wisdom among them that are perfect. 1. Cor. 2.6.
Till we all meet together, unto a perfect man, and unto the measure of the
age of the fulness of Christ. Ephe. 4.13.
Let us therefore as many as be perfect; Phil. 3.15.
be thus minded. Colos. 1.28.
That we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus, Strong meat belongs
to them that are perfect. Heb. 5.14.
Let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and lacking
nothing. James 1.4. James 3.2. 1. John. 2.5.
If any man sin not in word, he is a perfect man. He that keeps his word,
in him is the love of God perfect in deed.

It is no new thing in the Scriptures, to give any thing the name absolutely,
and without any caution or condition, A termino ad quem tendit, (as the
philosophers do speak:) that is, of that thing whereunto it tends: because
albeit it have not perfectly atteined unto the same, yet with a special care,
and principal desire, which can never be without some profiting, it keeps
the right course thereunto. Solomon geeueth him the name of a wise man
absolutely, without any restraint, or exception, who is yet subject to such
imperfection therein, as must necessarily, and will gladly for his further
profiting, admit reprehension: Give admonition to the wise, and he will be the
wiser: Teach a righteous man and he will increase in learning. Prou. 9.9.
He gives him the name of a wise man, without any restraint: Give admonition
to the wise: and yet is he not absolute and perfect therein, but only in the
way and travail thereunto, for admonition will make him wiser: Now to that
which is perfect and absolute already, can nothing be added. Solomon likewise
in the Proverbs, sticks not to call them righteous, simply, and without
exception, who are yet but in the course and way of righteousness, aspiring
and contending to profit and proceed in the same: The way of the righteous
shines as the light, that shines more and more, unto the perfect day. Prou.
4.19
As before he had the name of a perfect, and absolute wise man, who was yet to
profit, and therefore imperfect in the thing: So now he is sound and whole
(as ye hear) touching the name of a righteous man, who wants a leg, arm
or some other member of righteousness it self: For he is said to be as the
light, which shines clearer and clearer, unto the perfect day. If it be
replied, that this word [Perfect,] urged in so many places of the Scriptures,
by the Pelagians and their lawful successors the family of love, is not yet
heard off, joined with any kind of want and imperfection: I aunsweare, that the
Hebrew word, which in the old Testament, they translate perfect, signifies
soundness, and that simplicity, Esaie. 1.
which is opposed to frowardness and wickedness: and not that estate which is
altogether void of al imperfection. And so is it used in the first Chapter of
Isaie, 2. Chron. 15.
and in the second of the Chronicles. The like is to be said of the Greek word
used in the new testament, by the which diverse good writers signify, the
consecrating and sound addicting of a man unto religion, and the fear of God:
in which sense it is taken in the Epistle to the Hebrews. Heb. 2.
And that it may stand with want and imperfection, appears plainly in the
Epistle to the Philippians: when the Apostle having in plain speech professed,
that as yet he had not atteined unto perfection, immediately after has these
words of himself: Phil. 3.12.15.
Let us therefore as many as be perfect: be thus minded. So that the perfection
of the Apostle, and all Christians (for his doctrine is our instruction) is in
acknowledging our imperfection, to long for that which is yet wanting, and to
endeavor our selves unto that, which is before. John. 15.2.
According to this truth it is said of every true Christian, without
exception, that they are to grow, and to increase in the fruits of
godliness. Every branch that bears fruit, (says our Savior Christ) My
heavenly Father does purge, that it may bring forth more fruit. Aug.
Whereunto agrees this saying of Augustine in his second book De peccatorum
meritis and remissione cap. 15. A man may be called perfect, and be accounted
worthy of that name, not because there is no thing now wherein he may
profit, but because he has greatly profited: as we call him perfect in the
law, who notwithstanding is yet ignorant of some thing in the same; As the
Apostle calls them perfect to whom he says: If ye be otherwise minded, God
shall open even the same unto you. Hitherto Augustine. Herevppon it follows
necessarily, that this saying of S. Luke: There is more joy in heaven, Luke. 15.
for one sinner that conuerteth, then for nientie and niene just men which
need no repentance: is to be taken by way of comparison: that is, that need
no repentance, in comparison and respect of the other. In which sense likewise
is that taken, (which they also object against us) out of the prayer of
Manasses, in the end of the second book of the Chronicles: Thou O Lord that
art the God of the just, 1. Cor. 1.17.
have not appointed repentance unto the just, as to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
which have not sinned against thee. This form and manner of speech, Mat.
28.39.
to deny that in words simply, which is not denied in sense and meaning, but in
respect of some other thing: is sundry times used in the Scripture: as in the
first to the Corinthes, The Apostle affirms, that Christ sent him not to
baptize, but to preach. Yet was the commission granted unto the Apostles, not
only to preach, but to baptize also. And himself confessed even in the next
verse going before, that he had baptized the household of Stephana. It is
therefore of necessity to be taken by way of comparison, that they stood
nothing so greatly charged from the Lord, with baptizing, as with preaching.
Which phrase of speaking is likewise used of the Prophet Jeremy: Iere. 7.22.
I spoke not unto your Fathers, concerning burnt offering and sacrifice, but
this thing commanded I them, saying: Obey my voice: When notwithstanding it
cannot be denied, but that burnt offering and sacrifice, was expressly given
unto that people in commandment. But he means, that the respect was not
alike, of the outward offering of sacrifices, and of the true spiritual
service of God after his word. The aunsweare of Pelagius that ancient
Heretic, and of his successoures, who would have the acknowledging of sin
in the servants of GOD, to be a speech of modesty and not of verity:
cannot stand with that saying of Saint John, 1. Epistle 1. Chapter verse
eight. 1. John. 1.8.
For there he charge them, who will take no knowledge that they be sinners,
not with want of humility, but with falsehood and untruth: If we say that
we have noe sin, we deceive our selves and truth is not in us: if we
acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins. If
we have sins to be pardoned, then are they in us, and ought in truth to be
acknowledged, and we are deceived, if we think that there is no such thing in
us, which in truth it ^aght to be confessed. Their second shift is of like
force: when they say that the Saints and the servants of GOD, are called
sinners, in the Scriptures, not because they be such in their own persons, but
only because they be of that number of people, which has sinners in it: in
respect whereof, and not otherwise, that name is given unto them. Dan. 9.20
Do we not read in Daniel, that he confessed his own sin, as well as the
sin of the people of Israel? And is it not written in like manner of
Nehemiah. Nehemi. 1.6.
Chapter 1.6. that he confessed both himself and his Fathers house, to have
grievously offended? It is evident therefore that in themselves they were
sinners, in as much as it is said expressly of them that they confessed
their own sins, as well as the sins of the people. Whereby also that third
shifte of Pelagius: (That good men should be called sinners, only for the
condition of their nature, because it is frail: and not for any thing that is
in their will, by inclining in any consent unto evil) is not only shaken, but
utterly ouerturned: for by their confession it is plain, not only that they
had a brittle, and unstayed nature, but that they had yielded in consent to
will, nay beyond the will, even unto the deed, and doing of that, which was
displeasaunt in the sight of God. Some of the disciples of H.N. have affirmed
unto me, that the Apostles after they were Apostles, sinned not, thinking if
that were once granted, forthwith the estate of perfection in their illuminate
Elders were fully established: to whom when I aunsweared that they as all
Christians, stood bound to call upon God, all the days of their lives, for
the forgiveness of their sins: being a peticion in that prayer, which
himself has prescribed to be used of his Church for ever: They replied that
it could not be proved, that ever they used that prayer, after once they were
Apostles. To contend with them for the form of words, when the argument and
matter it self is manifest, were an unnecessary contention. This cannot be
denied but that James was an Apostle, neither can it be denied, Jacob. 3.2.
but that after he was an Apostle he uttered this of himself, and of al other:
In many things we offend all. John wrote his Epistle after he was an Apostle.
Wherein he speaks of himself, and of all others, that if we shall say: We
have no sin, we deceive our selves, and truth is not in us. The Lord give
them (if it be his will) with true touch, 1. John. 1.8.
to see that which the scripture does assure us they have, I mean their sin
and offenses against God: least with the proud Pharisey, that came before God
with an opinion of his perfection, they hear when it shall be to late: Every one
that exalts himself shall be brought low. It is written in the Gospel after
Saint Luke, of Zachary and his wife, that they were just before God, and
walked in all the commandments, and ordinances of the Lord without reproof:
Luke 1.6.
wc is objected against us: And yet who is ignorant, that Zachary was a priest
and therefore daily ^^ered sacrifices for his own sins, Heb. 5.3.
as well as for the sins of the people: with had bin in vain, if he had bin
altogether without sin and offense. Where they do affirm, that because contraries
cannot dwell together therefore sin cannot be in him in whom there is any
religion and Christian conversation: they do bewray great ignorance: for who
knows not, that the humors of our body, be within themselves, of a diverse,
nay of a contrary nature and disposition and yet are they so ordered and
tempered within our bodies, that one has the pre-eminence and government: and
the others do reient and yield thereunto: and being so qualified, the body
has a good constitution by the same. In like manner, albeit sin in the
extremity thereof, that is in the rule and government of the same, can not
be in him in whom righteousness rules: Yet when sin is a servant, and
brought under subjection, it both is, and may be, in him that greatly fears
GOD: otherwise how could the Apostle have said, Romans 7.22.
I delight in the law of God, concerning the inner man, but I see another law,
in my members, rebelling against the law of my mind. And whereas simply in it
self, sin is a deadly poison, to them that fear God, where the government
is taken away, it being subdued: it has the place and office of a profitable
medicine. For it helps to expel security, and contempt of God, in that by
the sting thereof, we are spurred to God ward, and forced, upon the
consideration of our want, to be humbled under his grace, and to have daily
dealinges with him, for the upholding of us in the midst of so many dangers,
and so great experience of weakness and infirmity.

A confutation of a detestable practice of H.N. in supplanting the true and
grammatical sense of the word, by bringing in place thereof, a bastardly
brood of Allegories.
TO uphold the heresies of H.N. this is one especial and principal practice,
that the History and native sense of the word of God, is altogether
neglected of him, and in steed thereof is entertained, an Allegorical and
bastardly construction, which thing utterly defaceth the certentie of the
sacred scripture, and makes no other thing of it, then a nose of wax, which
will receive as many sundry figures, and impressions, as shall please a man to
press upon it: and being in it self one and the same thing, will
notwithstanding bear forms and faces, which within them selves are most
diverse and distinct. Now if the word be made so uncertain, our faith which
is grounded thereupon, can not be sure: And if our faith be not sure,
howesoeuer it it go with us, when the weather is calm, it can not be avoided,
but we shall sink and suffer shipwreck, when the least storm of temptation
shall begin to blow over our heads. And like as we have no stay for our
selves, no more have me any good weapon, wherewith either to bear of an
adversary, or to make an assault against a deadly and sworn enemy. For if the
word stand indifferent to such diverse, and differing constructions, as must
of necessity be admitted, if Allegories be allowed: and our selves receive no
help from the writing, and letter, to decide more with one, then with an
other: What will hold of the assaults of an heretic, being a subtle
adversary? or where shall we have a weapon able to give a deadly wound to any
Heresy? Wheresoever then Allegories shall happen to have so good liking, and so
great allowance, as H. N. does make them: there can nothing be long safe from
our adversaries, neither any thing well assured to our selves. And therefore the
meaning of such as turn all into Allegories and borrowed speeches: is no other
then to have strength and defense, to uphold in religion and conversation,
whatsoever any man his lust and liking shall leave him unto. As for the estate
of these men, who in this their Allegorizing, are always borowing
constructions and meaninges: their dealinges are like to the traffic of such
as go all upon trust: for be their shoppes never so well furnished of wares,
yet all is but borrowed: And albeit they bear the countenance of men worth many
thousands: yet when their estate is truly tried, they are found worse then
nothing: for this long borowing, does bring them in the end to plain
begging. And it is out of question, these shall find it to true (who turn all
their Scriptures into Allegories, and borrowed speeches) when temptation shall
try them, they shall have nothing to uphold them: though in countenance and
show, they will be taken now for the best and richest among the christians.
Where it is answered for them, that they receive the word, hear, and read
it, allege, and allow it: true it is, they have it, and as they have it,
Satan both may and will very gladly spare it: For it is so disguised by
Allegories, that the true sense, (and therefore the power and virtue that is in
it) is plainly abolished. So that Satan his gain grows too be greater
thereby, in as much as the shadow and show of liking, and alleging the
word, keeps many simple souls from any suspicion, to receive hurt or harm
by imbrasing of their doctrine: whereas if that show and color were wantyng,
and Christian jealousy had brought them once to a searching and examining of
the matter: such horrible heresies could never long hyds them selves.
Touching that place and credit which they give unto the word of God: in truth
Esope his fables may stand in as good steed, as the word of GOD does with
H. N. and his family. For if a man be no longer bound too the signification
and sense, which the words being set together, yield of them selves: but may
be permitted without any prejudice of the natural sense, to take up for his
own use an other meaning and construction: Esope his fables will be made to
afforde as good divinity, as the scripture shall be able to yield any. And what
blasphemy the^ is this, against the majesty of the word, to be in effect,
no other thing, then a tale of Robin Hoode: nay to be in effect no other thing:
then are the words and Characters of Coniurers, which of them selves (yield
no sense or signification to the hearer, but have all their virtue and
operation, from the strong persuasion and imagination of the Inchaunter.
Allegories, by the judgment of the godly and learned, are not allowed to give
any evidence in matters of doubt, neither is their testimony taken for any
proof, when matters are called into question: because as they do speak
darkly, so is there great uncertainty in that which they say. And therefore
says Augustine very well in his Epistle. Quis autem non impudentissime nitatur,
aliquid in Allegoria positum, pro seipso interpretari, Agust. Epist. 48.
nisi habeat manifesta testimonia, quoru^ lumine illustrentur obscura? What
impude^cie is there in him, that will allege an Allegory for him, unless he
have other manifest testimonies, by the light whereof, those dark things may
be clered? This was spoken by that learned father against the Donatists, who
alleged an Allegorical speech used in scripture, for proof that they only
were the Church. Now if unto Allegories used in the scripture, it be denied to
speak as witnesses for the deciding of doubts, because their speech is so
doubtful and obscure in it self: with what conscience can the testimony be
taken of H. N. his Allegories, to decide the chief points of religion withal,
seeing they are all hatched at home of him self, and not one to be found in
the writings of the holy Ghost? Irenaeus likewise in his second book Aduersus
haereses, and the tenth chapter, speaking to the same purpose has these
words: Omnis autem quaestio, non per aliud quod quaeritur, habet
resolutionem, nec ambiguitas per aliam ambiguitatem soluitur, apud eos qui
sensum habent: aut aenigma per aliud magis aenigma: sed ea quae sunt talia, ex
manifestis, and consonantibus, and claris accipiunt absolutiones. Matters
called into question can have no resolution by other things, that are likewise
in question, neither can one obscure thing be cleared (among them, that have
either judgment or sense) by an other that is dark: but of questions that be
dark and obscure, are wise men wont not otherwise to be resolved, then by
apparent and manifest proofs. It is plain therefore by the judgment of these
ancient and learned fathers, that Allegories, which are H. N. his best
witnesses: be as those men who have heretofore worn papers. For their
testimony may not be taken to decide matters of question. And he that brings
no better matter then is an Allegory, for the deciding of a doubt, is as he
(who because he wa^teth better witness,) is glad to call a perjured person to
the book: I except not in this speech Allegories, that are read in the
scripture: unless they be such, as by plain words either going before, or
coming after, be clearly opened, and made manifest unto us. The dispositions
of such, as have their sense by circumstance made certain, and are found in
the scripture (I deny it not) may be taken: but that is altogether for the
assurance that the circumstances do make unto us, not for any certain that is
to be had from them selves. They must be plain and certain, that shall induce
a man to give credit unto any matter, that he is not already resolved of. The
Logitians therefore refuse too have them among their places, from whence they
derive their proofs and probalities. I deny not, but that the Rhethoritians
have entertained them, among their figures to move and delight us; when before
the truth of that thing is out of al doubt with us. The Family therefore are
greatly abused of H.N. their Lord and master, while they are enforced of him,
to take Allegories only for their evidence: And yet are not Allegories so
much abused when they be admitted for proof, as when they are made to
overthrow the natural and historical sense of the word. For albeit the case
be to be pitied, when a man shall be, forced for lack of credible persons who
have been present, to take a perjured man to decide a doubt: yet is this more
lamentable, when the party perjured shall be suffered, (to the end that he only
may be heard) to stop the mouths of men of good credit, who both could and
would resolve us of the right. And in truth so ye case stands with H. N.
his Allegories, for they utterly abolishe the natural sense of the word: and
of an history when H.N. has done with it, there is nothing left to be heard
or seen, beside a naked Allegory. Jerome him self, albeit he had some times
over great a lykyng of Allegories, yet was he never so be witched with them,
but yt he held this truth in opinion, that the literal and native sense of the
word was first to be laid as a sure fundatio^, before the roof of any
spiritual sense, or Allegorical meaning, might be made thereunto. Cum Historiae
habuerint fundamenta, tunc spiritualis intelligentiae culmen accipiant:
Hieronymus. in Amos. Cap. 9.
vt, vere Christus de virgin natus sit: Vere Lazaru^ mortuu^ susetarit,
quamuis quotidie de anima Virginali nascatur sermo diuinus, quotidide peccato
mortui, and vitiorum funibus alligati, de sepulchro scelerum suorum iubentur
exire. When they shall have the foundation of an History, then let them build
the roof of a spiritual fence, As for example. It is the truth of a deed
once done, that Christ was borne of a Virgin, and that he raised up Lazarus
when he was dead: albeit a divine word, is daily borne of a pure and chaste
mind, and they that are dead unto sin, and bound with the cords of their
offenses, are daily commanded to come out of the graves of their sins. How
far is H. N. from this moderation? for his Allegories in the weightiest
matters, as in the birth, death, and resurrection of Christ, have wholly drunk
up, and altogether drowned the histories: And generally throughout al his
writings after once he has begun with it, he never ceasseth to pursue his
Allegory, until he have seen it play the hangman unto the natural sense, and
history. For the drift and scope of all his doings, is to make us keep our
ears shut, against that which the Lord does speak plainly unto us out of
his word, that we may only reverence these rydles, that proceed from him
self. The word of GOD will not suffer us, with H. N. to place, and put into
possession Allegories, which be illegitimate, that the natural sense and
signification of the word, which is the lawful heir, might thereby be
dispossessed and driven out. The practice of our Savior Christ, and of the
Apostle Saint Paul is our president to uphold the credit of the natural
sense, and meaning of the word: which Allegories being suffered, to have so
large alowance, as H. N. does make them, would soon drive out at the doors.
For the least part of an History (as a word and circumstance of time) the
whole whereof H. N. his Allegories would unhorse and overthrow) is with our
Savior Christ, advanced to the credit of deciding, and determinyng matters
of greatest weight and moment in religion. Now if aworde in his proper
signification, be so much made of with Christ, and the Apostles, as that it
shall be of sufficient credit, to carry away a matter of greatest weight: What
wrong does H. N. offer the world, that with Allegories would bear down not
the native sense only of a word, but of many words and sentences set
together, to maintain a proper and natural sense and signification? Our
Savior Christ, when he will prove him self the true Messiah, to be more then
a man, he urges the natural signification of the word [Lorde,] that because
David whose son he was after the flesh, calls him Lord, therefore it
could not be, but that he was more then a mere man. Moreover in that
weighty matter of justification, does not the Apostle stand upon the
signification of this word [impute] which is ever used when favor and mercy
preuayleth, but never when men are dealt withal according to desert? And
because the Prophet David had ascribed blessedness to that man, to whom the
Lord imputes not his sins, and it was written, likewise that Abraham his
faith was imputed unto him for righteousness: he is not afraid to set it down
as an assured truth, that our justification comes by mercy and favor, and
not by merit and desert, So that the natural signification of the word,
does carry away justification from works, and gives it by good right unto
favor and grace. Wherein this is also worth the observation, because we are
about the force and credit of the natural sense and History of the word,
that the Apostle lays great weight upon the circumstance of time, which the
History does yield unto him: insomuche that because righteousness was
imputed unto Abraham (as appears in Genesis, by that history, before he was
circumcised) he concludes that justification stands by favor and mercy
alone, and needs not to be underpropped by works: for that Abraham before
circumsicion (which was with them as is baptism with us, the entrance into
religion and service of God, the first beginning to obey to the word and will
of GOD) was reckoned of God him self as a righteous man. If there be such
weight in the words, and circumstances, which are the least part of the
history: then does H.N. (as was said before) offer great wrong unto us who in
his Allegories, drowneth not only circumstances, and the natural signification
of words: but also the proper sense of Histories, and whole sentences when they
are set together. The Heretics in all times have by Allegories vpholde^
their errors. And Allegories in all ages have been their strongest instruments
to work with all. Epiphani. contra haereses. Lib. 1 cap. 27.
Epiphanius makes mention of a beastly sort of Heretics, who by Allegories
maintained the sin of the Sodomites, not only as a thing that might be
suffered, but as a duty that must be done: most shamefully racking to the
defense of that shameless opinion, these words of our Savior Christ:
Verily I say unto thee, Matthew. 5.26.
thou shall not come out thence till thou have paid the uttermost farthing. The
Heretics called Priscillianistae, who taught that it was lawful to lie and
forswear in causes of religion, thereby to hyde their religion and shameful
life, from the danger of their adversaries: by Allegories did avoid
whatsoever out of the Scripture was brought against them. These be the words
of Augustine touching those persons and that matter: in suos sensus
Allegorizando vertunt, quicquid in sanctis libris est, quod eorum euertat
errorem: Whatsoever is found in the Scripture, August. de haeresibus ad quod
vult Deum.
that overthrows their error: by an Allegorical exposition they make it to
maintain the same. And the Anabaptists now in our days, with Allegories (as
it were with Rackettes) do toss the Scriptures too and fro like tennes balls
to serve their turn withal. And who knows not, that Allegories are the
hooks, wherewithal the Romish Church has pulled up their Purgatory, and
such other pelf of theirs? Hierome says of Origin, that by his Allegorizing,
he made his own wit Sacraments of the Church. These be his words,
Hieron. in praefatione december visionum Esaiae ad Amabilem Episcopum.
Origines liberis Allegoriae spaciis euagatur, and ingenium suum facit
Ecclesiae Sacramenta. In as much as in an Allegory there is one thing spoken,
and an other meant, the Heretics of all times, have drawn the scriptures
generally, without any respect, into Allegories: that whatsoever the words
be, they might have liberty to make a meaning thereunto, of, and for
themselves, and that without any help at all from the matter that is in hand.
Now the Allegories and figurative speeches used in the Scriptures, must have
their meaning made manifest, and beaten out, by the circumstance of the places,
from whence they are taken, and by help from the matter which is in hand:
neither may any place in the Scripture be urged, in an Allegorical sense,
unless the same taken literally, and in the Gramaticall sense, shall
establishe some thing repugnant, either to faith, or Charity.

A plain proof that the dark and obscure form of writing which H. N. uses,
is an evident note of the Spirit of error and deceit.
THe great obscurity and darkness of speech, which H. N. uses in all his
works, bewraieth his doctrine and spirit suficie^tly, if we had no other
matter to charge him withal. For the truth is simple and plain. Ethnickes
could by the light of nature, sufficiently see into such things. One of them
touching that matter says thus. Veritatis sermo est simplex, and apertus, nec
variis indiget explicationibus and ambagibus: sed iniusta causa, cum per se sit
morbida, necessario indiget astutis pharmacis. The truth (says he) is simple
and plain, and needs not variety of windlaces, and fetchinges of matters
about the bushe: but an evil cause, in that it is sick and diseased, has
need to have a cunning plaster conveyed unto it. An other of them has these
words: Simplex sententia est communis ac omnibus vsitata, nihil admodum
profundi, and astute cogitati habens, aut etiam aliud quid celans. That phrase
and form of speaking has simplicity in it, which is common, and used of al,
having in it nothing craftily devised, neither cloking some other thing then is
professed. I leave it to the judgment of every indifferent man, whether H. N.
his style were able to abide even this touchestone given us of the Ethnicks to
try the truth withal: for what strange words has he devised, from that the
scripture uses, to express the same thing by? And how does he after once he
has begone a thing, by continual winding in of words, draw a man so far from
the place where he was, that hardly can he get home again. Moreover how
craftily does he use the word and name of Christ, and for all that mean no
other thing thereby, then that estate of perfection, which himself has
devised? so that if heathen men, having no other evidence then that which the
light of nature does give them: might be permitted to pass upon him, he
would undoubtedly be found guilty even by them, of false and corrupt
doctrine. In the word of God, which is a rule of all righteousness unto us,
the borrowed speeches which be most obscure, be taken from matters usual, and
commonly falling out in the life and affairs of men. For who knows not what
the Lord his meaning is, when he calls himself either away, a door or a
vine? And if all the similitudes, parables, and borrowed speeches in the
Scriptures be examined they shall be found to have been drawn and derived from
such matters, as the people then were well acquainted withal. This simplicity
and plainness of the word: which is a rule to al them that are guided by
that spirit, which spoke in the same: is very plainly proved out of the
Proverbs of Solomon under the person of wisdom: Prou. 8.
All the words of my mouth are righteous, there is no lewdenes nor frowardness
in them: they are al plain to him that will understand, and straight to him
that would find knowledge. Augustine ad volusianum.
Which thing also is confirmed in the last verse of the Prophet O sea:
whereunto accords Augustine, Diuinitus visum est, vt sacra oracula simplici
and perspicuo exararentur dictionis genere, ne praetendere quisqua^ possit,
nihil a se in illis intelligi. It was thought good unto almighty God, that the
Scriptures should be penned in a simple and plain kind of speech, least any
man might pretend that he could understand nothing in them. And in the same
place he speaks yet more plainly, unto the same end, in these words:
Modus ipse dicendi quo sacra Scriptura contexitur, ea quae aperta sunt, quasi
amicus Familiaris sine fuco ad cor loquitur indoctorum atque doctorum, ea vero
quae in mysteriis occultat, nec ipse eloquio superbo eregit, quo non audeat
accedere men's tardiuscula, and inerudita, quasi paupet ad diuitem: sed inuitat
omnes humili sermon, quos non solum manifesta pascat, sed etiam secreta
exerceat veritate, hoc in promptis, quod in reconditis habens: sed ne aperte
fastiderentur, eadem rursus operta desiderantur, desiderata quoda^momodo
renouantur, renouata suauiter intimantur. Augustine affirms in these words,
that the form of speaking with the Scripture uses, even in the parables and
darkest places thereof, creeps so low upon the ground, that not only an
unlearned man, but even a dull head may reach unto it. And touching the
matter contained in those parables and dark speeches, he affirms it to be
no other, then that which is in plain words delivered, elsewhere in the
Scripture: neither has the holy Ghost any other meaning, in speaking that
darkely and in parables, which before was delivered in plain speech (as he
says) but to keep contempt from the word, which through our corruption,
continual plainness and familiarity casts upon it: and that we might so
bring a new and fresh desire and appetite unto the same thing, which in an
other form comes (as it were) a new and fresh unto us.

Now as for H N. he is far from this low style, that creeps in the most
difficult matters upon the ground: for when he is the lowest and most near
unto us, he is at the least soaring in the middle region of the air, and very
often a man shall not meet with him, no not if he were rapte into the third
heaven: so mystical is his meaning. Whereby we may easily see and perceive,
that H.N. is not guided and conducted with that spirit, who has penned the
Scriptures: in so plain and simple a style as inuiteth even the simplest sort
to resort thither.

As H.N. does imitate ancient Heretics in Allegories: so does he likewise in
his dark and strange form of spelaking. Marcitae (a kind of Heretics, who^
Augustine makes mention of, in his book of heresies, who affirmed themselves
to be perfect, and wherein H. N. is a faithful follower of them denied the
resurrection of the body) did with a dark and strange style, so astonie the
simple people, that woondering at the matter because it was above their
capacity: they yielded unto it as unto an oracle lately come from heaven.
Touching the style which the first Author thereof one Marcus used, thus I
find it written. Obscurissime and quibusdam verborum tanqua^ mysteriorum
inuolucris vtens loquebatur de Deo vt stuperent audientes homines, Danaeus in
Ang, de haere.
potius quam intelligerent Hebreae quoque linguae fuit peritus, itaque
vocabulis Hebraeis, and Graecis hominibus exoticis deliria sua tegebat. He did
speak darkely, and used such a wrapping kind of words, that the hearers
were rather astonished with the strangenes of the words, then edified with any
understanding they had of the meaning thereof: and his heresies and doting
dreams, he covered with Hebrew and Greek words among the^ who were ignorant
of of these tongues. Who sees not here the plain picture of H. N. both in the
darkness of his writing, and in the making of al his mysteries, wc are coined
by a certain foolish and doting deriuation of names from the Hebrews? The
Libertines likewise, had a picked kind of speech, which one thing, that
worthy instrument in Christ his Church Master Calvin did so mislike of, (as
being an infallible note of iugling, and crafty conueying) that he wills al
men to cut them of here at the first, and either to have them leave their
pedlars French speaking plainly, and simply as the Scripture does: or else
to let them talk unto themselves as men not meet to have any audience, among
those scholars, who have been trained up, in the plain and simple teaching of
the Scriptures

FINIS
A Confutation of the doctrine of David George, and H. N. the father of the
Family of love, By M. Martyn Micronius Minister of the word in the Dutche
Church at London, under Edward the vi. of blessed memory, King of England,
taken out of his book concerning holy assemblies, which he wrote in Latin a
little before his death, at Nord in East Freeslande, which also afterward M.
Nicholas Carinaeus set forth publicly in printe, certain things being
added unto it, translated word for word into English.
IT is not faith but a certain faithless and arrogant falling away from GOD,
and a mere deceit of the Devil, to feign that Idolatry, superstition and
outward vices are free and pure unto them, which under the pretense of a
certain faith and inward purity, boast that they know no sin in the
heart. Into which gulf of execrable error, are fallen, not only those which
are commonly called Libertines, and those that follow David George who
rejecting Jesus Christ, foolishly fained unto him self a certain immortality
in this earth, which he hoped to purchase with the sword for those that were
his but in vain they being already dead and buried: but also those evil
Chickens, which are hatched of that evil egg, who this day deceive the
world under the amiable title of a certain peace, gloriyng that they have
found the house and region of love, in which all differences of good and evil
being taken away, al things besides love are free. Out of which house of peace,
they feine it lawful for theirs to go into the regions of the world, and as
they say safely to go through them: which is, that they may colourably and
dissemblingly apply themselves to the manners, words, and deeds of al other
men, which yet belong not to that house of peace. Hereof it comes that they
mock in their minds and contemn all separation from the impure sacrifices and
ceremonies of the Romish Church, and so consequently all weighty profession
of any religion: and outwardly join them selves to all religious and wicked
factes, unless they be witheld from thence, through the fear of danger, or
some hope of commodity. But how execrable this error is to the Church of
GOD, how pernicious to the common wealth and private families, and how far
from the spirit of GOD: forasmuch as thereby the Lord Jesus is bereft of all
his kingly, Priestly and Prophetical dignity, all godliness is over thrown,
a window is opened to all sins and wickedness, to fraud: deceit, lying,
fornication, theft, idolatry and covetousness: and after this life the hope
of eternal life in immortal flesh, and the fear of hell fire are taken from
the minds of men: every one having but a spark of godliness, and of the
knowledge of Christ does easily perceive: so that there needs not here
many words for the confutation thereof. This one thing is briefly to be
added, that it may not seem wonderful to any, if many in our age do fall
into this so gross an error. For in such disagreementes of true religion,
men knowing the Idolatry of the papacy (the which can be unknown to none
but too the dullest kind of men) and being terrified from the profession of
true religion through the fear of persecutions and troubles, or of pride,
plucking away the shoulders from under the yooke of Christ, do most easily
fall into that most detestable error, which is beautified with the Title of
sweet peace and concord, and is very plausible through the large promise of
lyberty. God also is just with punishes this intolerable unthankfulness of the
world against Christ and his word, 2. These. 2.10.11.12.
with such gross errors, according to that prophecy of the Apostle: Because
they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved: Therefore
god will send the^ strong delusion, that they may believe lies* that al they
might be damned, which have not believed the truth but have had pleasure in
unrighteousness. But if any shall more diligently examine the Apostolical
prophecies wc are written in the 2. Tim. 3. and 2 Pet. 2. and 3. Chapter: and
in the epistle of Jude concerning the last times, shall then be sufficiently
armed against that diuelishe peace. We are also admonished in the Scriptures,
that true peace is enclosed in certain limits: least we should be deceived
with some vain shadow of peace. For true peace is joined with an unspeakable
knot to faith and charity: It consists also in a good thing, and that also
according to Christ: as it is manifest by these words of the Apostle: Now
abides faith, hope and charity, these three. Again, Let every one of us
please his neighbor in that which is good or in a good thing to edificatio^.
1. Co^. 13. d 13 Romans 15. a. 2. Romans 15. b. 5.6.
Also, The God of patience and consolation, give you that ye be like minded
one toward another, according to Jesus Christ, that ye with one mind and
one mouth may praise God, even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Away
therefore with this new and cursed peace, together with the house and the
founder thereof which passes neither for faith nor hope, and is occupied in
evil things and forbidden of GOD, and shuts out Jesus Christ. Exodus 32. e.
22. 1. Sam. 13.6.9. c. 13. Gal. 2. c. 14.
For if the study of peace excused not Aaron for making a Calfe: nor Saul for
sacrificing: nor Peter for dissembling: neither shall these truly escape
unpunished of the Lord, who under the title of peace overthrow all honesty
and religion, especially seeing that the Prophets in old time have vehemently
cried against all promise of false peace. Esaias also cries, Iere. 8. d. 11. et.
23 d. 17. Ezech. 13.6.10 Iosu. 5. c. 20.
Woe to them which call evil good, and good evil: which put darkness for
light, and light, for darkness: who put sour for sweet, and sweet for
sour. This same people of peace, as they will be called, cannot free it self
from this fault, whiles that it leaves those things free to them of their
own profession, which GOD in his word has severely punished and most
grievously condemned. Hitherto therefore we hope, it has been sufficiently
showed of us, how greatly we ought to take heed of them all, who to the
godly that are enlightened with the true knowledge of the Gospel, will have
that departing from the impure congregations and superstitions of the Romish
Church to be unlawful (*)

A Confutation of the Doctrine of David George and H. N. the Father of the
Family of Love, By M. Nicholas Charinaeus, who died here at London Minister
of the word in the Dutch Church about the beginning of September, in the
year 1563.
DAVID George, of whom mention is made before, added to the foresaid
arguments of the adversaries, against the observation of the Ecclesiastical
congregations, that the use of all rytes and ceremonies instituted of Christ,
was simply taken away by him: because that he (as he thought) executing the
office of the holy Ghost, should lead al men into all truth, and should bring
forth that which was perfect, and therefore should abolishe that which was but
in part. And seeing that he fained that his doctrine is most perfect, more
excellent and far surpassing the doctrine of Christ, as which must be
constrained to give place unto him: whatsoever the scripture witnesses of man's
perfection in the coming of Christ, all that he so impudently draws unto him
self and to his doctrine, that he promises unto him self and to his
disciples, the full dominion of the whole world and immortality, also perfect
righteousness, yea and that in this flesh, understanding by the name of perfect
righteousness, that same inward affection of the mind, altogether free from
all sense of sin.

But a certain chief builder of the house and City of peace, and a framer of
that same glass of righteousness, perceiving that yet that same full liberty
was not permitted unto men by David George, as he that yet bound them unto his
person, boasts that he has found out a more perfect doctrine then that was
of David's: To wit, that whosoever dwells in the house of Love, not only is
free from all religion of Christ, but also altogether from all outward
religion and from all holy ceremonies. Now he calls love that same affection
of the mind, by which a man neither feels in him self nor in any other, any
evil or sin, but all things what soever they be, he interprets them to
be good. Now because the near kindred of the opinions of both these
Antichrists, do not only bring to nothing the religious observation of
Ecclesiastical congregations, which come together in the name of Christ, but
also takes out of the minds of men, the hope of the life to come in Christ
Jesus, and does open windows and doors to al iniquities, I am constrained to
confute it in this place and that in few words.

First of all I require of both of them, that they would plainly prove by
manifest testimonies out of the holy Scripture, that the doctrine of the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, must once be abolished out of the Church, and a another more
perfect succeed in the place thereof: and if it ought too be abolished, that
it is theirs that ought to succeed it, and to continue for ever. Besides that
let them perform those things in deed which the holy Scripture testifies
should be performed of our Lord Jesus Christ in his coming to judgment.
And forasmuch as they cannot bring one title to prove those things unless it
be amongst men stark mad, and deceived with the enchauntment of false liberty
(For none can lay any other fundatio^ then that is laid, which is Jesus
Christ) and these things not being proved all their dreams must fall: it
follows then that the doctrine of Christ must be holden as perfect, and
that it is a mere blasphemy and deceit of the devil, whatsoever they
unadvisedly or vainly boast, of a greater perfection of their doctrine then
the doctrine of Christ, and whatsoever they promise of the liberty of
Ecclesiastical congregations.

Now in that they object, that the holy Ghost was promised, John. 14.6.16.17.
d. 26. et. 15 d. 26. Act. 2. a. 4. et. 5. f 32 et. 8. c. 17. et. 4. c. 17. et.
10. 44. et. 11.6 15.
which should lead them into al truth: it helps the^ nothing at all, for the
scripture which testifies the holy ghost to be promised, the same also
testifies, that the promise is fulfilled in the disciples of christ. If one
part of the scripture is to be believed, it is meet that the other also be
received. That therefore which was performed of Christ Jesus in the disciples
1500, years ago and more, they vaynely dream to be differred unto their
time. The Apostles were led by the holy Ghost into all truth, as much as was
necessary for man's salvation: and the same spirit does yet seal and
confirm the same truth in the hearts of the faithful. And the same scripture
also testifies that the holy Ghost will deliver nothing differing from the mind
and doctrine of Christ, but altogether the same. So Christ said to his
disciples: Romans 8. c. 16. 2. Cor. 1. d. 22. et. 5 a. 5. Gal 4. a. 6 1. These.
4.6.8. 1. Pet. 1.6 11
That Spirit of truth which proceeds from the father, that bears witness
of me. And again, It shall teach you al things which I have told you. Also, He
shall glorify me, for he shall receive of mine and show it unto you. So the
Apostle Peter calls the holy Ghost which GOD has given the witness of
Christ. John. 5. d. 26 et 4. d. 16. et. 16.6.14.
And Paul agreeing in the same says: None speaking by the spirit of GOD
calls Jesus Execrable. And no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the
holy Ghost. As though he should say, here by a man may know, Act 7 f. 32. 1.
Cor. 12.^3.
whether any be led by the spirit of God or no, to wit, if he love Christ and
his doctrine and study to promote it. In vain therefore under the pretense of
the holy ghost, is any other doctrine then of the Lord Jesus Christ hoped for,
seeing that it is the office of the holy Ghost to bear witness of Christ, to
glorify him, to teach his words, and to declare those things which he has
received of him.

But if the adversaries will yet further say, that there is mention made in the
Scripture of an imperfect and perfect doctrine, and an imperfect one to be
delivered to the Apostles, which at the length should give place to a more
perfect: according to that: 1. Cor. 13. c. 9.10. d. 12.
For we know in part and we prophesy in part: but when that which is perfect is
come, then that which is in part shall be abolished. Also: Now we see through a
glass darkly. etc. We answer that the Apostle conferreth not the doctrine or
Apostolical knowledge, Heb. 1. a. 2. 1. John 2. c. 18. 1. Pet. 1. d 20. 1.
Cor. 10. c. 11.
with any other which ever should be revealed in this world: (For in these
last days God has spoken unto us by his son: that not without cause the
time of Christ might be called the last hour, the uttermost and very last
time, the end of the world: to wit, because that by him the last declaration
of the will of God should be made) but he respects the world to come after
the resurrection, 1. Cor. 13. c. 9.10.
in heaven, where mortality being put of, that which is in part shall be
abolished. And in the same place the scripture speaking of that perfection of
man, calls us back to the coming of Jesus Christ unto us from heaven. So
the Evangelist John: When Christ (says he) shall appear, 1. John. 3.2.
we shall be like unto him: for because we shall see him as he is. And Paul
to the Philippians uses these words: Phil. 3. d. 21.
We look for from heaven the Savior even our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall
change our vile bodies, that they may be fashioned like unto his glorious
body. Colos. 3. a. 4. 1. Cho. 15. c. 1. These. 4. d. 16.17.18.
Also to the Coloss. When Christ which is our life shall appear, then shall you
also appear with him in glory. And in the Epistle to the Corinthians
disputing of the glory of the faithful, he wills them to look unto the
coming of Christ. And least that any should think that the apostle spoke of
any other time then of the last resurrection, they write that they also shall
come to the perfect knowledge and sight of God. Then says the Apostle, I shall
see face to face, 1. Cor. 13. c. 9.10.8.12. Phil. 3. d. 21. 1. John. 3. a. 2.
now I know in part, but the^ I shall know even as I am known. Also, he shall
change our bodies. We shall see him as he is, etc. But if the Apostles had
respected that time, which our adversaries will have, they had bereft
themselves of perfect knowledge. Our adversaries therefore are deceived, who
after the manner of impacient men, will have that time of perfection, to come
before the season, and would draw it unto this world. But this perfection of
knowledge which Paul speaks of, differs not by nature and of it self from
that imperfect doctrine and knowledge, but only it differs in manner, as
well in enjoying, as also in understanding it. For now we have need of sundry
helps, to atteine to the knowledge of God, and to this knowledge, may always
in this life some thing be added: but in the life to come, the same knowledge
which here is had of him out of his word, shall not be changed into any other,
but shall be made perfect by a new means, and shall be had, by the only
beholding of God. Only therefore the means of obtaining this knowledge shall
be diverse and the revealing more full: Because God shall be all in all. And that
which the Apostle writes to the Hebrews: Therefore leaving the doctrine of the
beginning of Christ, 1. Cor. 15. p. 28. Heb. 6. a. 1.2.
let us be led forward unto perfection, not laying again the foundation of
repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God of the doctrine of
baptism, and in laying on of hands, and of the resurrection from the dead, and
of eternal judgment. He declares not that there shall at length come a time in
this world, in which there shall be revealed a more perfect doctrine then that
of Christ and the Apostles: But he calls the doctrine of the general mystery
of the priesthood of Christ, a certain perfect doctrine, in comparison to the
first principles of the Catechism. As are the profession of amendment of
life: of faith in God: the doctrine of baptism and the laying on of hands: the
article of the resurrection of the dead: and of the judgment to come: which
are as it were the chief principles of religion, which generally ought to be
known and understood even of children: when as al do not so perceive the
excellency of the priesthood of Christ. Therefore not unfitly is it here
called perfection of Paul, which perfection he leaves not at all to be
declared afterward, much less too David George or any others: but he
promises that he will do it, Heb. 6. a. 3. Heb. 6. a. 3.
which he most happily performs in the Chapters following unto the eleventh.

Now we have proved that the doctrine of Christ is to remain in the Church of
God continually, as a doctrine which is most perfect, notwithstanding that
which belongs to the manner of revealing and perfection of the same in the
faithful to be wrought in heaven, where Christ our lord shall make al his
enemies subject unto him: and further more, that to be more vain then vanity
it self, with our adversaries boast of the absolute perfection of their doctrine.

But if further they will yet continue to dispute, that a more perfect doctrine
then that of Christ, is to be looked for, then I would have them by evident
tokens to prove unto me, that their doctrine is it, Deuteronomy. 18.21.2^.
neither any other again to be looked for. For David George has boasted that
his was the most perfect doctrine, and now that preacher of the house of love
succeeding him, rejecting that of David, attributes the same to his doctrine:
and again another may also conceive to him self the like dream. Therefore
we desire that they would with as plain arguments prove their doctrine too
be the most perfect, as Christ our Lord has approved his. If nevertheless
they will still pretend that perfection, which we look for at the coming of
Christ, then we desire, that they would in very deed perform al those
things, which with undoubted faith we look for of Christ Jesus, at his
coming: To wit, that their bodies may be glorious like the body of Christ:
spiritual, celestial, not any longer subject to the miseries of hunger, thirst,
wearines, sickness, age, and death. That their women may bear and bring forth
their children without grief of womb, that all ungodliness being taken away
only righteousness may reign, that without the help of books, admonitions,
and such like things, which are daily used, they may obtain the full knowledge
of heavenly things: and finally that they would restore all things lost in
Adam. But as long as they perform not these and such like things, as
assuredly they cannot, it plainly appears, that it is a mere beewitching of
the mind, or rather an extreme madness, to believe such spirits.

FINIS:
T.D

The judgment of an other godly learned man touching the same matter.
MY very dear and good freende, I cannot answer you so fully as I would in
the matter you demanded of me, touching mine opinion of that sort of men that
name themselves the Family of love: my time is abridged, and my businesses are
many, and yet I must say something because you did so frie^dly request it. How
much I may know of the opinions of that sect, some can witness with me, that
have been acquainted with my conference had with some of them and with the
reading of a good part of their writings: But how much soever it be, this may
suffice to justify me before the godly and men of understanding for my dislyke
of them and their heresy: that they diguyse themselves with a cou^terfait
title, making profession of one thing in word, and another thing in truth and
deed. They term them selves the family of love, but their meaning is that
they be more the^ the Family eue^ the love it self: for though they agree not
always and in all places with themselves, and sometime they take this word
love, as is stands, for love in deed, yet in other places they take it after
the words of John, where he says: God is love, so making themselves, not the
householde of God, but god himself. This they vouch in many places of their
writings, in saying that they are deified, that is made and become gods, and
God is hominified, that is made man: not meaning of the incarnacion of Christ,
but as they express in another place saying, that Adam was all that God was,
and God all that Ada^ was: which words besides that they contain blasphemy in
them selves, so are they made couers to abuse the simple: and yet for all that,
this may not be their name whereby they will be called, that is they will not be
called gods nor goddified, nor love, but only the Family of love. Thinking by
this means sooner to allure the simple, whereas otherwise if they should in
title themselves Gods, and desire to be so called, they would cause all the
world to abhor and detest them, as they justly deserve. This name is but a
new coat shapen of some bodging workman, that knew not how to take the true
measure of their body: their old coat becomes them better. They are in
truth the Libertines, those ancient loose lyuers, for they live as they list,
no law of God or man to control them, as men under no law, for they are men in
deed, as they profess (believe them if you will) that cannot sin. And
therefore of the law they make none account, the Gospel serves them to as
little purpose, they take scorn to ask forgiveness of sins at Gods hands,
yea they say, that whosoever prays as Christ has taught us, argues himself
of imperfection. Christ gave that precept to his disciples, when they were
yonglinges before they had received the holy Ghost: and after those abundant
graces received and as they expound it, after that they were deified, it is
not to be found they ever prayed. And as their opinion is for prayer, so is the
practice of their life, they hold they may do all things yea the grossest
sins that we make account of, and yet in doing and committing them they
cannot sin. How we may accou^pt of them S. John tells us, He that says he
has no sin, is a liar, if they went no further, they were liars, but he that
says he cannot sin what rekoning shall we make of him? This is their love
and their lovely sect. And while they stand thus affected for the second table,
is there any marvel that they stand as euilly minded in the first? They carry
like minds toward al religions whatsoever, the Turk, the Jew, the Barbaria^,
the Papist, the Arria^, the Pelagia^, as well welcome to them as the professors
of the truth of God: they say we have marred al with making these differences:
were it not for these diversities of names whereby we maintain dissentions,
their family would be spread over the face of the whole earth. And surely I
believe it, for if all men could be persuaded that sin were no sin, if the
judgments of God were removed from their eyes and hearts, if they could so
basely esteem of Christ and salvation wrought by him, as these men do, if
they could be persuaded, that there were no need of invocation and exercise of
godlynes, I doubt not but the whole world would quickly become a lovely
family. I could never yet hear of any man that there was any exercise of
religion amongst these people: I could never hear of any due preaching of the
word, or receiving of the Sacraments: how they spend their times in their
private assemblies, it would be known. But this I am sure that put
licentiousnes of sin a part, there is nothing taught or done in their
conuenticles, that might offend the horriblest Heretic that ever was. Wherein
they take a course fit for themselves and meet for their purpose, a man may
be a scholar amongst them xx. years before he shall understand one
principle of Religion: nay they will not draw their doctrine into principles:
save only this that is their first and principal ground, that who so will be a
follower of them must become a God, and he must love. I might here enter into a
ripping up of their writings, and of the manner they use in teaching, which is
clean contrary to the way that God has taken to teach his servants and
children, being as darksome and void of clearnes of understanding, as their
profession it self is: Whereas the doctrine of christ is lightsome, and so
lightsom that it gives light and understanding even to the simple. But I must
of necessity forbear to enter into this discourse, because my leisure is so
small, I must for go to speak of this third prophet of the world, sent to
preach forth the new Gospel of the new Kingdom. Moses was one, and Christ
the second, so confessed also the Turks, but the third to them was Mahomet,
and the third to these is H. N. The first prophet that ever came into the
world that had no name, whether of these two last Prophets is the better I
cannot stand now to discuss, only I will say this shortly and in few words,
that by many good coniecturall and probable reasons I could prove that Mahomet
is the better: But I will let them go both: for this present, it may be god will
give me some time, when I may with more leisure set down to you what I find
in their writings and what thereafter I judge of them. In the mean season I
pray to god, to open their eyes, that they may see their error, and to keep
all other from going a stray after them, so forsaking their L. and Savior. To
this true and everlasting God who carefully watches and in great mercies over
his children, I leave you, whose holy spirit be always with us, to lead us
and keep us in all truth. From the Court at Whitehall the 26. of June 1579.

Your poor friend always assured L. T.

Errata.
Fol. 2. page lin. 9. for iuddgement, read judgment. Ibidem. for, past, the.
read past. The. Follio 9. page 2. line 13. for, blasphemies. The. read
blasphemies, the. Fol. 10. page 1. li. 18. for, tha are no, read that are not.
Ibidem lin. 20. for recompenc read recompense. Fo. 11. pa. 2. li. 15. leave out
and. Ibidem lin 13. for the, read that Fo. 17. pa. 2. marg. li. 2. for head,
read sede. Fo. 18. pa 1. li. 17 for he, read the, Fo. 20 pa. 1. li. 25. leave
out find, in the same line for, shall them, read shall find them, fo. 21. p.
1. l. 5. for work read word. fo. 25. 1. l. 6. for ei-that they may received,
read either that they may be received. Fo. 26. pa. 2. lin. 9. for follovving.
How, read fallovving, how. Fo. 27. pa. 1. li. 17. saving for saying. Ibi. pa.
2. li. 29. for it is our, read it is in our. Fo. 28. pa. 1. li. 19. for that
vvil, read they will. Fo. 32. p. 1. li. 31. for have received read have so
received. Fo. 33. p. 2. li. 30, for with read which. Fo. 38. pa. 1. li. 4.
holiness for holy ones. Ibi. li. 30. now did, for who did. Fo. 43. pa. 2.
li. 1. leave out are woeful in heart. Fo. 48. p. 1. l. 3. of true for of the
true. F. 63 pa. 2. l. 32. they that for that they. Fo 68. pa. 2. l. 35.
arrested for wrested. Fo. 70. p. 1. l. 2. lean out which. Fo. pa. 1. l. 35.
ommitted for committed. Ibi. p. 2. l. 1. vvalking unto the word, for vvalking
in obedience unto the word. Ibi. p. 1. the last line I in deed for Indeed.
Fo. 72. pa. 1. li. 6. body be) for body) because. Fo. 75. p. 1 li. 33. as that
for that as. Fo. 81. pa. 1. li. 20 me for we. Fo. 82. p. 2. li. 32.
dispositions for depositions. fo. 83. pa. 1. li. 35. quotidide, for quotidie.
fo 87. pa. 1. li. 21. spelaking* for speaking.

A Sermon preached at Paul's Cross the Friday before Easter, commonly called
good Friday, in the year of our Lord. 1576. By John Knewstub.
IT is thus written (right Honorable and well beloved in our Savior Christ)
by the Apostle Saint Paul, in the second Chapter of his Epistle unto Titus.

11 The grace of God, that brings salvation unto all men, has appeared,

12 And teaches us, that we should deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and
that we should live soberly, and righteously, and godly, in this present
world.

13 Looking for the blessed hope, and appearinge of the glory of the mighty
GOD, and of our Savior Jesus Christ,

14 Who gave him self for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquities,
and purge us to be a peculiar people unto himself, zealous of all good works.

15 These things speak, and exhort, and rebuke with all authority.

This text does divide it self into four principal parts, The first part
commends a Teacher unto us, in these words: The grace of God that brings
Salvation, has appeared and teaches us. The second, declares what it is
that he teaches us, to wit, To deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to
live soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present world, waiting for
the glorious appearing of Jesus Christ.

The third, notes what cost and charges the Son of GOD Christ Jesus our
Lord and Savior was at, to have us good Scholars, and to profit well in this
doctrine, and is contained in these words. Who gave himself for us, that he
might redeem us from al iniquity, and purge us to be a peculiar people unto
him self, zealous of good woorks.

The fourth and last part, describes the order of this Shoole, and the manner
of teaching and training up of Scholars, in these words: These things speak
exhort, and rebuke with all authority.

Concerning this Teacher (to resolve you in few words.) It is the Gospel of
GOD, which is the power of GOD unto salvation, for so many as shall believe
it: And therefore may well be called the grace of GOD that brings salvation.
The comparing of this verse, with the next before, will let you plainly see,
that it can not otherwise be meant, then of the word of salvation, the
Gospel of Jesus Christ: Which for just causes, is commended unto us under
this glorious title of the grace of GOD that brings salvation. It is the
Gospel then, that teaches us to deny ungodliness, neither does it only
tell us barely and nakedly what is to be done, But with sweet promises
allureth, and with great persuasion and most loving council and advise, does
exhort and provoke us thereunto, craving, beseeching, and entreating us to
yield and consent: not leaving out any thing, that is likely to further the
matter that is in hand.

The nature of man being (as it is) destrous of knowledge, how can he but
be welcome unto us, that professes to teach. If there were no more but the
name of a Teacher, it were enough to drive us to some consideration for the
good intertainment of him, Albeit we had never seen nor heard the manne
before. But when these Teachers bring gifts with them, the better to persuade,
and when those become Teachers and perswaders, to whom for all our welfare and
happy estate, we are wholly beholden, may there advise possibly (think you)
be neglected, and not esteemed of any, who has but the least spark of
humanity or good disposition in him? And behold the grace of GOD that
brings with it our salvation, teaches and entreats us, to deny
ungodliness, and worldly lusts: and to live soberly, righteously, and godly
in this present world.

If you like Teachers, that persuade and enter into the hearts of men by
gifts, you can not mislike him I am well assured, that brings no less gift
then your salvation. If gifts do commend, I think he is sufficiently
commended unto us, and most true it is, that gifts and benefits, can not
but commend their Masters that bring them. Solomon says, Prou. 21.14
That a gift laid secretly and closely in the bosom of him that is offended
with us, is able to assuage anger when it is grown so strong, that it may be
said to have sinews and bones. Prou. 17.8.
He says more and besides this, That a reward is as a precious stone, it
prospers and prevails, whethersoeeuer it turns. Rewards and gifts
received, hold a man as captive and Prisoner unto the giver, so that he is
scarce his own manne, but sees with an other man's eyes, and deals with an
other man's hands, for he who comes commended unto us by some reward and
gift, is able, as it were by some enchantment, to set what color he will
upon his matter, and that so cunningly, as the wisest man that is of us all,
shall not bewray it. Deuteronomy. 16.16.
For do we not read in Deuteronomie, That rewards blind the eyes of the
wise, and peruerte the words of the just. And this is the cause, why in that
same place, the Judges are forbidden to take rewards, for such is the
corruption of man, that he will not stick to persuade his evil cause, by those
means, if he shall understand that the Judge lies any whitte open on that
part. But this infirmity of man, who oftentimes furthereth his evil cause by
gifts, may not so prejudice the holy Ghost, who is without all suspecion to
commend evil causes unto us, but that it shall be always lawful for him to
use what way of persuasion as shall best like him: yea to enter upon us even
by gifts, and to cause the grace of God bringing with it our salvation, to
entreat us to deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts: to see if that which is so
pearcing of it self, be able to touch us: that which persuades so greatly, be
of force to prevail with us: that which often times speedeth in evil matters:
may find favor with us to promote the best things. For what has he not
obtained among men, that by gifts has continued to persuade. and among gifts,
there is some diversity, some be more able to move us, then others are: some
persuade more effectually then others do: For those benefits, have always
been regarded above the rest, that have drawn us out of some great danger,
or have comforted us in some great extremity. the memory of such, is wont to
be of greatest continuance, and of most thankful remembrance with us. When
David would persuade Bethsabe his wife, that Solomon should be king after him,
and put her out of all doubt, that she need never to fear the matter any
longer, he pledgeth for the assurance of his word, his thankfulness unto
God, for such benefits, as could not but bind his obedience: That is, his
often deliverance out of trouble. As the Lord lives (says David) who has
brought my soul out of adversity, 1. Reg. 1.2^
Solomon thy son shall reign after me.

The benefits are not lightly regarded, that are received in adversity: For
the present sense and feeling of the misery, does greatly enhaunce the price
thereof: And therefore David took away all occasion of doubting, when he
pawneth for assurance of his word, so great a matter, as was his
thankfulness for deliverance out of adversity: For it could not be, that
he should forget to redeem so great a gage. And in this highest degree of
gifts, comes this benefit commended unto us, for it is the grace of GOD
that brings salvation: And bringing of salvation, proves our estate to have
been damnable before. It is not only misery then, that we were plunged in
before this benefit came, but a misery of miseries: for we were holden under
the thraldom of death and damnation. Such a benefit deserves thankeful
remembrance, it speedeth, where any persuasion will prevail: Such a gift, a
man would think, should find favor, and prosper whither so ever it
turns. Having succeeded so great and grievous a misery: how can it, but have
the taste of most bountiful and sweet mercy? We may learn by this that has
been said, what the cause is, why the holy Ghost says not simply. The Gospel
teaches and exhorts us: but says the grace of GOD, which brings
salvation, teaches and exhorts us: for it is the Gospel that he means,
and yet he calls it the grace of GOD that brings salvation: to make us more
mindful of the matter. This manner of persuading by gifts and benefits, used
of the holy Ghost: may learn us a profitable lesson, how to withstand
temptations unto sin what so ever: to wit, by keeping fresh in memory, the
several benefits of GOD toward us, making them as Bulwarks, against our
sinful assaults, so that when they allure us, we may thus aunsweare them, the
GOD, who has redeemed my soul from all adversity, does forbid it me: The
grace of GOD to whom I owe my salvation, does deny it unto me: the goodness
of that GOD, of whom I have received life, health, honor, wealth, delieraunce
out of these and these troubles, preservation from the murderer, evil tongue,
and slaunderer, does desire me, that for all the good will that ever he has
borne me, I would not consent unto it.

If any Prince should by special pardon, deliver a Subject from death, that
by Law and Justice had deserved it, and after advance him to some place of
honor in the Land: hard and unthankful were his heart, if those suits
especially of the Prince, which brought with them the remembrance of this
mercy for their better entertainment, should nothing be regarded: and in
very deed, the benefits received from our GOD, should be notes of remembrance
unto us, for his several suits against sin, and should be always at the
Elbowe iogging of us, to remember him, when sin would pull us from him, And
with these or such like speeches to sound in our ears: that Lord that took
thee off the Ladder, when the sentence of everlasting death had passed against
thee, bids thee now remember him: that GOD who has picked thee out of so
great a multitude, that continewe in their infidelity, hardness of heart
and obstinacy, and blessed thee with speaciall knowledge, comfort and
confidence in him, now wills thee not to forgette him. It shall be
profitable for us, to beeholde this in practice, which now in doctrine can
not but delight us.

Joseph, warring with the wicked attemptes of his Mistress, who would have
intised him to commit wickedness with her, bears off all her wicked
assaults, with this armoure. For the very remembrance of his Masters good
will, and benefits toward him, brideleth him so, that he dare not consent
unto her shameful demand, Genesis 39.8.
even in respect of the injury, that he should do unto a Master, so good
and well deserving at his hands. Behold (says Joseph unto her) my Master
knows not what he has in the house with me, but has committed all that
he has into my hand, there is no man in this house greater then I, neither
has he kept any thing from me, but only thee, because thou art his wife.
How then can I do this great wickedness?

The benefits of his master toward him, seem so great a matter in his
eyes, that he would learn of that impudent and shameless woman, if
impudency it self could happily find out any color of reason or excuse,
for so great and grievous an offense: How then (says Joseph, after he had
recited the great kindness of his master) can I possibly do so great
wickedness? not thinking otherwise, but that shamelessenes it self, would
blushe at such unkindness, and unthankfulness, as that was, and with shame
enough begin to give over, as one who had nothing more now to aunsweare, in so
foul a matter. There is no man so base, but in respect of some benefit
received from GOD, he speaks that sometimes in his heart, which Joseph
utters in word: to wit there is no man greater then I: but there are few
that infer therevppon, as Iosephe did, how then can I do such wickedness
against him, that has made me the greatest. It were a godly advantage had of
Pride, to make this gain of our mounting and aspiring thoughts, which would
persuade us, that we be the greatest: and thus to reply upon them: If I be
such a one, how then can I lie sleeping in security, ignorance of God, and
his word, malice, and unmercifulness: being sworn enemies to his Kingdom,
that has thus advanced me? You see by this that has been said, what is the
use of God his benefits, even to be the bane of ungodliness, and to smite
through this old man of ours, this corrupt nature: directing the Spear of God
his grace, even to the heart root of Sin, when it stirs within us: So
that sin shall no sooner put out the head, but we (calling to mind some
one, or other, special benefit of GOD) shall be ready with that same weapon
of his grace, to run upon it, and wound it at the heart. Therefore we see
what necessity lies upon us, (except we will exceed in all unthankfulness)
to yield our selves obedient scholars unto this Teacher: even the grace of God,
which brings salvation.

Having spoken thus much of the Schoolemaister, order requires to tell you
what the lesson is, which this good Scholemaister, would so gladly learn us,
and that is this: To deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live
soberly, justly, and godly, in this present world. Let us see what this great
grace requires of us, even denial of ungodliness, and worldly lusts. Thus
does the spirit of God begin with us, for we are so wretched and wicked
matter, that we must be weeded ere any thing may safely be sown or planted in
us. This monsterous contagion and Leprosy are we admonished of, in the order
of teaching, used by the holy Ghost, generally throughout the scripture. In
the morrall law, almost all precepts were negative: Thou shall do no murder:
Thou shall not commit adultery: Thou shall not steal. etc. to declare that
the chief goodness of a Christian, is to have conquered most evil in
himself: and that man to be the best, that has drained his corruption most: I
mean, that has driven most corruption, out of himself, and holden his
affections in most subjection and obedience. David demanding how he may do
good of a young man, sets out his meaning in these words: Psalm. 119
Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his ways? Job after he has greatly
commended wisdom, not finding any thing of sufficient value to esteem it
by, nor any creature that can point out the place unto him, and say, here is
the breed of it: in few words closes up the matter, and says: to depart
from evil is understanding: Job. 28
So that a man, who does not weed evil out of him, can nouer look for any
good of that he has sown. But let us come unto the particulars: we must deny
ungodliness. What ungodliness is, I cannot better tell you, then by opening
who be ungodly men, as they are described at large in the 21. of Job. They say
unto God depart from us, Job. 21
for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, who is the Almighty that we
should serve him? and what profit shall we have, if we pray unto him?

The first note of them is, they say unto the Lord depart from us. Not, that
they are grown to such wickedness, as that this should be the speech of the
tongue, but the affection of the heart: neither yet that simply they would
have God go from them, but that they would meet him, and be acquainted with
him, without his word: For they say, We desire not the knowledge of thy ways.
That this is the true meaning, that they do not otherwise put ye Lord from
them, but because they would not deal with him in his word: is apparent in the
next Chapter: where Elephas reputing Job among the ungodly, and willing him to
acquaint himself with God: uses these words: Job. 22
Receive the Law at his mouth, and lay up his words in thy heart. The Lord
may not be divided from his Law for that is to transform him, and to sunder
him from himself, his wisdom being a part of himself, and to make an Idol
of him. Yet is nothing so common, as to do those duties of service which
perteine unto him, or unto our brethren, without consulting or conferring with
the word. For to let the Papists alone, who do transubstanciate the word,
both into a foreign tongue, and also into a strange sense: How many be
there among us, that go into great matters at adventure (as they say) even led
by the common and ordinary course of custom, because they have been so
accustomed, Prou. 2^.18.
notwithstanding that Solomon does teach us, not to let thoughts tarry in the
heart, but such as have been placed there, by council and authority from the
word: and so does he think also of war, and charge us, that we should
not enterprise it, but by counsel from the word? Which both of them, might
seem of duty to plead privilege, and to claim pardon in regard of the
sudden coming, and unadvised bursting out of them.

Now when it comes to pass, that we are particularly pressed by the word,
to let go any pleasure or profit, that we have long inioyed, who sees not
then, how with full mouth we cry, depart from us, we will none of thy ways?
Then you see there is no remedy, but we must hold the Lord fast to us in his
word, for it has been always the commendation of the godly, to have walked
with God. We are not said to walk with God according to his infinite Majesty,
and essence, neither yet in that sense are we said to depart from him, for his
divine being, does not show it self unto creatures, neither is he visible
unto us, but he has drawn nie unto us in his word, and we must walk with
him by that. For how shall we fear that corruption, that is so naturally
ingraffed in us, if his presence do not fray us from it? And what Christian,
who any whit has known his own infection, dare but once dream, that his
presence by his word, should not be greatly needful, to awake him often, and
to rouse him out of the sleep of sin, while he understands by the word
ever and anon: that the Lord goes quite contrary to him, and is departed
altogether from him. We are therefore to question with the word of God: how
fares it with me in this deed? am I gone from my God? have I in displeasure
taken my leave of my Lord? have I driven my Savior far out of my sight? Can
it be well with me, while my God turns his back on me? But when men live
without remorse of conscience, while they cannot abide once to look upon
themselves, in the glass of God his word, while it is death for them, once to
examine their doings, do they not say depart from us, we will none of thy
ways? When Jeremy the Prophet in his 8. Chapter, would note out the
desperate state of the people in his time, he sets no other mark upon
them but this: Ierem. 8.
There is no man that says what have I done: but every one turns to their
raze, as the horse rusheth to the battle. Then there is no way, unless we
would join with this desperate people, but that we must still hold God before
us in the light of his word, and often come into his presence, while we take
at sundry times the accountes of our doings by the word: accounting not
only with the word of God, for the general duties of Christianity, Esai.
30.1.2.
but also for the several duties, that our particular calling and place does
bind us unto. We must needs conclude then, that ungodliness reaches further
then to Turks, Atheists, and Papists, who set the Lord clean beside his
word, even to those which without remorse run on, without any presenting of
them selves and their deeds, before the presence of his word, which the Lord
sees to be so necessary, as that we can not want it, being otherwise as
untoward scholars, that will do nothing, when their master his eye is not
upon them. Therefore let us all in the fear of God pray that we may have love
unto the word, and liking to be in the sight of our God, which is, when we
have our lust and longing, to be under the government of the Gospel. This is
it, that Solomon spends so much time about, in the Proverbs: urging still,
that Wisdom must delight us, and find some loving entertainment with us: and
that we never so please our selves in our towardnes, as to imagine, we could
long want this necessary help of his presence. Prou. 2
Unto this familiar conversation with GOD, in his word, he promises al
blessigs, and deliverances from the greatest dangers. We must deny this
ungodliness, that speaks these words unto the Lord: Depart from us, for
we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. What wickedness were it, either
with the Papaist, to set a visour upon the Lord his face, and to make him
look as we list: either else with the secure and careless Christian, to let
him look as he likes, so we need not to look upon him? The Lord has
planted the ministry of the word in his Church, not only to teach bs
barely, but also to comfort us in our journey, and to quicken us in our
duties, yea, and to fear us also from sin.

Who is the Almighty that we should serve him? This is a second note of
ungodliness, an usual speech of ungodly hearts, howesoeuer the tongue be
clear of it. For in deed they have no inward acquaintance with him, neither
do they in truth see any such deserts toward them, why they should be
servants unto him. The benefits they have, they see them common with other,
but as for any special regard had of them, they do not understand of it, and
while they see nothing in God toward them, but that is general unto all, they
ascribe nothing unto him, but a general kind of goodness, which they take to
be indifferently cast down among men: to be taken up of so many as will.
Besides this, they never acquaint them with the sight of their sins, and the
desert thereof, which should lead them into a misliking of themselves, and let
them see other wages then benefits, to be by all equity and right due unto
them. Thus it falls out, that they would have him show, wherein he has so
bound them, as he might demand so great things of them: as if they should call
for a reckoning, to see what is come in, seeing the charges arise so great, and
the duties laid upon them, so many and diverse. Thus while the ungodly
receive benefits, but not as tokens of fatherly affection, while in the use of
the benefit, they are no whit confirmed in the peculial care and affection,
which he bears his elect, they cannot but say: Who is the Almighty that we
should serve him? What token have we of his special good will, why we
should in such difficult matters serve him, and with such danger attend
upon him? For in very deed, he that shall get out more then ordinary
service, had need see more then common good will in him, who shall exact it.
They enjoy the benefit as other do, but so, as they do repose them in it,
and return no special thing into the accountes of the benefactour, whereby
they might know he makes an other reckoning of them, then of the common sort:
even such as a loving father does of his own son. Moreover, their sins
are seldom or never in their sight, I mean with this consideration, that in
justice they do deserve, not only the stopping of the course of his grace:
but even to have let in upon them, the floudes of his wrath. Which thing if it
were truly seen, could not but set a great price upon those benefits, that
come in over such deserts. The mind of the giver, commends not the gift
with them, for they see not so far: they join them not as seals, to his
letters of free grace, I mean, to the free grant of his grace:
notwithstanding, we be forewarned of this dividing of them, and so straightly
charged to unite them: Deuteronomy. 8.17, 18.
Beware least thou say in thine heart, my power, and the strength of mine own
hand prepared me this abundance, but remember the Lord thy God. For it is he
which gives the power to get substance, to establish his covenant, which he
swear unto thy fathers, as appears this day. Is it not a great villainy, to
taste so liberally of his benefits, and yet to persuade us so sparingly of his
good will? to have so friendly dealing with his gifts, and so little liking of
him self, that when we have devoured so many benefits, we should inquire of
the Almighty, who he is, that we should serve him, as if yet we had seen
nothing, to bind our service unto him? Can there be more unkindness, then in
so many benefits bestowed, to gain no good will? so many benefits to be let
out, and no good will to come in with them again? That we may the more
clearly see into his good will, and free mercy through his benefits, we must
be brought back now and then unto our sins, and the just deserts thereof.
For then shall we reckon them to be benefits in deed, when we see what doings
they have succeeded, and been joined withal. Thus allayeth Moses the pride of
the people of Israel, and gets GOD his due honor among them in the ninth of
Deuteronomy. Speak not thou in thy heart, Deuteronomy. 9.4.
(after the Lord thy God has cast them out before thee) saying, for my
righteousness the Lord has brought me in, remember and forgette not, how
thou prouokest the Lord GOD to anger in the Wilderness, since the day thou
did depart out of the land of Egypt, until ye came unto this place: ye
have rebelled against the Lord. He calls to mind sundry of their grievous
transgressions, particularly reciting the time and the place, By these rules
let us try, who in matters of any weight laid upon them by the Lord, are like
to return this answer: Who is the Lord that I should serve him? Even so many
as do find, no sweetness nor taste in him by his benefits, as are no more
confirmed by his blessings, in his fatherly affection toward them: such as
get thereby no strength of faith: such as do not hold themselves, the more
bound unto him: as are not the more delighted in him: as are not the more
desirous to walk worthy of him: as find not their heart the more joyful in
him: as find them no better minded to his law, to the which he has set over
his own love: even those I say, that dwell in the benefits, and so they have
their desire, they hold that their heaven, and their happiness: that look no
further then the benefit, that stay upon it, and inquire no further whether
God do love them, and is become a father unto them, so as they may account
upon his benefits, as gifts from a loving father: those that think
themselves then to use his benefits best, when God and all goodness is the
furthest from their mind: those that can find no taste in these temporal
blessings, unless the mention of him who gives the taste and savor unto
them, be indented and conditioned withal, to depart far from them, for that
time which they have to use them: those that will never set their sins in
sight, that they may further the account of the benefit, and the good will of
the benefactour. We must deny this ungodliness, that yet demands, Who is
the Lord that we should serve him? after so long use of his benefits.

Now would I know, where we might have a place for them, that are less
acquainted with him, then they were many years a go, who have less comfort
in his word, less Religion, less obedience, less good conversation: as for
them that take his benefits, and with them do war against him, the place is
taken up already in the nethermost pit, if the Lord give not great repentance:
therefore brethren for Gods cause, let us haste^ our better acquaintance with
him, who by benefits, has so long time commended him self unto us, and let it
be our shame that he should thus long be a stranger unto us, that of so long
time has had so loving dealing with us. Let us joy more in his delights, set
our hearts more upon that he commands, and commends unto us: so shall we
come out of their rank, which in heart say: Who is the Lord, that we should
serve him: Which men by his benefits, have received no earnest of their
salvation, no pledge of any special goodwil, no assurance of true safety, no
delight in his love, no more familiarity with him, nor greater comfort of him:
who are no more drawn out of the world, and her delights to follow him, who
has in so sundry gifts, witnessed his good will: called them unto him, and
pledged these as earnestes, that his own glory abides for them.

Now would I see where we might set them, if not in his rank who have so often
been fetched up from the love of the world, by so many messengers of Gods
mercy, and yet have so little joy to be above, and so hungerly pursue the
pleasures and profits here below, as if they had never (no not in meditation)
had the sight of any other delights. The benefits then lead us unto the
Lord, when in them we see him to be our father, and make the more have to come
to him, having an eye to the endless life he calls us unto: Coming more in
desire from these things here below, and getting more hold, and more hope
above: showing as well in prosperity as adversity, that we are not wedded in
our lust and desire, unto worldly goods, in wealth, by not being let by
it, to follow the way that God does set before us, nor yet to deal mercifully
with our neighbors, and to walk humbly with them: And in affliction, by
holding our selves well contented, in so much as we want not him, who is a
plentiful portion, and the best heritage.

The last note of ungodliness is this, they say, what profit shall we have if
we call upon him? These are no speeches of the tongue, as I have said before,
but the sense of the heart. No man so evil that makes not some reckoning of
his prayers, how some do value them, we can not be ignorant. The holy Ghost
when he has reproved ye people, for their outward worship in sacrifices,
wills them to call upon the Lord in the day of trouble promising that he will
hear them, and they shall glorify him: Psalm. 50
making prayer a special worship of God, and setting it before the outward
sacrifices, in the 4. of Deu. it is made the peprerogatiue of the people of
God, because there are none in such a case as they be, who have their Gods so
nigh them, as our GOD is nigh unto us, in all that we call unto him for. Then
must it needs be, that they are in an evil taking, that see no fruit of
their prayers: it being the special blessing of the people of God, to have him
nigh in their prayers, by granting their petitio^s. But forasmuch as it is
said to be the voice and affection of the heart, and no man being asked, will
give out so slenderly of his prayers: Let us come to a further examination of
it. The most sort of men, have no profit by their prayers, because they make
not conscience to know and do those things, which the Lord by his word has
revealed, to be pleasing in his sight: Whatsoever we ask, (says S. John) we
receive of him because we keep his commandments: 1. John. 3.22
and do those things which are pleasyng in his sight. No marvel the^ if
those be far from having their prayers heard of the Lord, who have neither
knowledge nor liking of his word. And a great sort of others, who in
profession have received his word, when they want any thing, if they see
means how to come by it, either pray not at all, but forthwith use the means:
either else, if they pray, it is but of fashion, as being in their judgment
sure and safe already: If they se no likelihoode to atteine it, being without
hope, they let prayer fall. So if any thing fall out, where there was the work
of an ordinary mean, it steppeth between God and his praise, and darkeneth
the light of prayer: If otherwise any thing come, where prayer for want of
faith was let down that is put over to miracle or fortune: therefore in heart
and of experience they cannot say, that they are any whit beholding unto their
prayers. But we learn in the book of GOD, that the godly pray in matters
most hard to be brought to pass, and most unlikely in regard of any usual
and ordinary means: and yet are heard, and give him the praise. There are
named in the 107. Psalm, Psalm. 107
diverse matters that seem to be mere casual, coming without al means, yet
prayed for, granted, and with praise returned to the geuer: and under those
are al other also understood, that may be thought to be as casual. There is
mention made of the Mariners in the Sea, tossed with tempests, now hoysed up,
now plunged down, till their hearts fail within them: yet when they pray
unto the Lord, they are heard of him, and then do they give him thanks. Other
casual things are mentioned, and al comprehended. But in the last verse the
holy Ghost, makes it only the wise and godly man's work, to understand this,
in truth to comprehend it, and by true and inward assurance thereof to give
him the praise for it. The ungodly therefore in ordinary things, are hindered
by the means: inextraordinarie, they see nothing but chance: and therefore
they say, What profit shall we have if we pray? The children of GOD, know
that nothing is pure unto them, unless it be sanctified with prayer: 1. Tim. 4
and therefore they resort to him in all their necessities by prayer. They
pour their griefs into his bosom, with desire to obtain, that they might
praise his mercies, and they surely find, if they continue asking, either
deliverance, either else a tolerable condition: which does assure them, that
it is not in vain to seek the Lord, and that the end will be happy. Prayer
for benefits, acknowledges God to be the geuer, and makes praise to be given
in truth: Not to pray to GOD, is to be an utter enemy to his glory: not to
pray particularly, as necessity requires, is to envy him and his praise, and
the practice of David (in particular considerations making his prayers and
Psalms) does reprove it. The Papists take Gods grace to be thrown down
indifferently. And men not experienced of his goodness particularly, must needs
think, that he has put all things unto a general government, for as for
any particular experience, of his goodwill toward them, they have it not. We
must deny this ungodliness, that grows by prayer, into no experience of GOD
his goodness. Do we think that any man, shall ever safely put him self over
unto the hope of the promises, at the hour of death: which all his life long,
he never tried to be true before? We must also deny worldly lusts, and not
only those, which tend to hurt our neighbor, in body, goods, or good name:
but even those that hold us so in this world, as we can get no true taste in
the pleasures of an other: For we are holden captive of worldly lusts, in one
respect or other: until we become new creatures, looking for that glory,
which shall appear at the coming of Christ. The next thing required, is to
live soberly. This sobriety, is a gift that moderateth the mind in his
delights and affections, and may therefore well be termed the moderatour of
the mind. It is a gift, that does keep the mind from pleasures altogether
unlawful: and in those that be lawful, it keeps a man from the excess and
abuse of them. That it is not only restrained to the filthy desires of the
flesh, may be proved in the. 12. to the Roma. Where the Apostle appoints
this gift and grace of God, to order every man in his calling, That he take
not upon him, Romans 12
but according to that measure which GOD has given him. For in very deed, the
mind of man has many things, beside the filthy desires of the flesh, to
ouerturne it, wherein this gift of GOD has good use. It was this gift that Paul
had, when as he professed him self to have learned, to be rich, and to be
poor: to have been instructed, to abound, and also to want: to be content
withal estates, and to hold him self happy in them, as in a portion sent him
from the Lord. In may be thought no great gift, for a rich man to learn to
be rich, yet does the Apostle say, it is a matter that requires learning,
and does ascribe it unto Christ his work within him. It is therefore worth
the labor, to enter into some farther consideration, what he should mean in
this matter. The meaning he gives in the same place, Philip. 4
when he says: I have learned in what estate soever I am, therewith to be
content. A lesson necessary for all men. A lesson necessary for rich men, to
learn them to be rich, that is, to hold them selves contented, to remember
they have their bounds appointed them, and there to accquaint their affections
to find contentation, sufficiency, and a rich portion. So shall they truly be
thankeful to God for it. For in very deed these hearts of ours must find them
in their own perswation richely provided for, ere they shall in truth and
vnfaynednesse be joyful in the Lord. Let us then learn from a contented mind
to say unto our hearts: This is thy lot appointed thee of the Lord, here are
thy bounds, this estate has the Lord distributed unto thee, There is good
cause, not only to be content, but also well appaide with it. We must learn
our hearts to be content with it, nay to take it as rich and liberal portion
whatsoever it be, and as a bar to hold in our affections from raunging into
greedy desires. For our affections are as gulfs, insatiable, that would never
rest with contentation in a-thing, but still be enflamed with the desire of
more, which would still draw and hale us forward, and so hold us in
continual torment. The remedy whereof, the Lord has appointed our own
estate whatsoever to be: that it might appease our affections, and settle them
with rest, peace and good liking, as in the seat which our good God has seen
to be convenient for us, and therefore set us in it, to find ease, quiet,
comfort, and contentment therein. For if thy heart be not settled in thine
estate, with good liking and contentation, as in a good provision: it is
impossible, that ever thou should become thankful for it. For to seem to
joy without joy, is to play the hypocrite, and to dissemble with God. We must
therefore take our selves to be rich already, and let go this desire to be
rich, For as Paul says, They that desire to be rich, 1. Tim. 6
fall into snares and noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition and
destruction, which while some have lusted after, they have erred from the
faith. We must let go the seeking greedily after that we have found already:
for there is riches and sufficient treasures in every estate, which must be
found out of us, to quench this desire to be rich. Let us learn to be
content with our estate, and to hold that as a certain rule, for he that has
no sure rule, shall be so tossed of his affections, and so carried hither and
thither, as he shall never find a time to say, it behooves me to hold my
self here within my bounds. Let every man therefore with S. Paul, learn to
be rich, and to take up good liking of his condition and estate, and take
heed he conueye not the title of true thankfulness from his God, while the
unquiet desire of increasing his condition, steals all comfort, which must be
matter of true thankfulness, from his present estate. But we must learn also
with Paul to be poor, as well as to be rich, for he had learned, and we must
learn in what estate so ever we be, therewith to be contented. And this
contentation of mind is a medicine for covetousness, as the Apostle
testifies, saying: Heb. 13
Let your conversation be without covetousness, be content with that you
have. The rich man must be learned to be poor, even to be ready with
contentation of heart to go under a poor estate, and to assure him self to
find find the Lords blessing and comfort in it. He must in his riches take
out this lesson, and school himself herein, and by exercise and meditation
acquaint his mind to the liking of a lower estate, if the Lord should so see
it good: hopyng to find the Lord very good to him in the same. Behold a
meditation in riches, and a lesson that is of all men to be studied, and not
that only, but learned also, and taken out: that if their estate should yet
be poorer, they should persuade them selves to find the Lord good unto them,
in that their condition, and therefore before to make their reckoning of a
poorer estate, by much meditation of it, and yet a rich blessing in that
notwithstanding, even a quiet and contented mind. And this would further the
account of our present estate, when we should assure our selves, of a very
good portion and plentiful, if our estate were yet lower. Neither ought we so
to learn it, as a lesson not likely to come to practice: but as one whose
practice were not like to be deferred. This lesson has in it, a very
necessary use to try us by. For whatsoever he be, that cannot bear a low
estate laid upon him by the Lord: if he have an higher, he will abuse that
in like manner. For he that is ashamed of poverty, will be proud of wealth. He
that is impatient when he is humbled: will be insolent: when he is exalted.
For what can bind him to true duty, if it be not conscience unto GOD? which
if he dare dispense withal in poverty, he will not greatly regard in
abundance. Thus we see for a man to learn to be rich, it is expedient he
learn to be poor. For a man to learn to be honorable, it is required he
learn with patience and contentation, to go under an estate without honor.
This sobriety then, that keeps the mind from being ouercharged, and
drunken with the desire of a better estate: is principally and cheefely
required in a Christian, yet reaches it further, and contains within it
those, who albeit they be not greatly seeking after an other or better estate,
yet be they to much wrapped and entangled, in the cares and delights of that
they alredie have.

This does the Apostle note unto us: 1. Cor. 7.29 30.31.
in the first to the Cor. This I say brethren, because the time is short
hereafter, that both they which have wives, be as though they have none: and
they that weep, as though they wept not: and they that rejoice, as though they
rejoiced not: and they that buie, as though they possessed not: And they that
use this world, as though they used it not: for the fashion of the world goes
away. And he does not only open the disease, but also give us the remedy of
it: the consideration of the shortness of this life, and the speedy passage
thereof. Which he would have to season our joy, to season our delights, even
our bying and selling. As if he should say, there were in no place right joy,
right grief, true bying, true selling, where the consideration of the
shortness of this life, and the hope of that other did not step in, to
moderate the joy, the grief, the bying and selling, the cares that do
accompany a married estate. How needful it is that we should (even in
lawful things) have our affections temperate: The parable in the 14. of Luke
does apparantlie declare. Luke. 14.
Where they that are bid to the Supper make their excuses, only by those
things that of them selves are lawefull and permitted. For it is lawful to
bye a farm, it is lawful to prove Oxen, it is lawful to marry and to be
married. Yet is it said that rather the basest of the people, shall be compelled
to enter in, then that these (who have been bid and are hindered by these
things) (though in them selves not unlawful) should taste of the supper. We
see then how needeful this sobriety is, that keeps us from surfettyng with
these transitory things. The very Ethnickes have found and taught that there
is a blessing, which a good man may find in every estate. Scaenica has these
words: Scaenica de tranquilitate vitae.
Assuescendum itaque conditioni suae, nihil tam acerbum, in quo non equus
animus solatium inueniet. If Heathen men found joy in every estate. by custom
and continuance, shall we find none, who have the promise, of our God, for
special blessings and assistaunce, Let us answer our affections, which will
not here of our abasing: as David did Michal, the daughter of Saul: 2. Sam. 6
2. Sam. 6. Who scornefully checking him that he had so abased himself, in
bringing home the arc of the the Lord, and that before the maids of his
servants, received this answer from him: it was before the Lord who chose
me rather then thy father, and all his house: and commanded me to be ruler
over all the people of the Lord: and therefore I will yet be more vile then
this, and will be low in my own sight: and of the very same maid servants
which thou have spoken of, shall I be had in honor. Let us I say answer our
affections, and say, it is before him, and for him, of whom we hold all: let
us say, we are yet ready to be more vile and lowly, if need require, and our
God see it so good: for we must cheine up our affections, with consideration
that our bonds are limited unto as, and that we are ready to be abased, if
such a condition should be laid upon us, from the Lord. Let us learn in the
fear of God, to take up our affections, from pursuing these delights,
remembryng that the Lord has pledged him self for assurance of a sufficient
provision: Let your conversation be without covetousness, for it is said: I
will not leave thee, Heb. 13
nor forsake thee. If we had but the word of some wealthy man, to assure
unto us a sufficiency, how would it comfort our hearts, and lessen our
labors and cares? Behold the words of the highest for him that is content
with that he has: if this will not move us, let us remember that in the eight
of Luke: Luke. 8
there is mention made of a cursed kind of ground, that received the precious
seed of Gods word into it: but either riches, cares, or voluptuous life,
does so choke it as there comes no fruit of it. And if this will not
prevail with us, let us call to mind the watchwoorde that is given us by our
Savior Christ in the 21. of Luke: Luke. 21
Take heed, least at any time your hearts be oppressed wirh surfeiting and
drunkenness: and cares of this life. Now if there happen to be any, who
being weery with the burden of their weakness, in this part, shall be come
earnest suitors unto the Lord, to prevail against their corruption in this
behalf: let them assure them selves that the unfeigned petition and prayer of
a man, leaden with the burden of his want, being continued: cannot return
empty from that GOD, who by name calls out such, to come unto him, with
promise that he will hear them. Therefore to conclude this matter of
sobriety, let our lot given us of the Lord, be our limitte, let a lower estate
be well digested by meditation: let God his assurance be sufficient, let his
threatninges fear us: let his promise (if we be weery) encourage us.

To live righteously, is so to order our life, as every man may have his own
at our hands: for justice is a virtue that gives to every man his due. The
Lord to maintain brotherly love among his, has made one the storehouse of
necessaries, for another: So is the welfare of every man laid out of himself,
that love may by such means, rather be maintained. He that is in the place of
justice and judgment, is to remember, that he give to every man his own: For
the fatherless, in his good cause, has the right of a father in him: The
Widow, of an husband: the blind and ignorant man, that cannot discern where
the help of his cause lies, has the right and title of an eye in him: the
oppressed of a Patron. Thus does Job clear him self, Job. 29.
in the 29. of Job. I delivered the poor that cried, and the fatherless, and
him that had none to help him, the blessing of him that was ready to perish,
came upon me, and I caused the widows heart to rejoice, I was the eye to the
blind, and feet to the lame, I was a father to the poor, and when I knew not
the cause, I sought it out diligently: I brake the jaws of the unrighteous
man, and plucked the pray out of his teeth. Thus did Job discharge him, of the
defense he did owe unto the^: lending his eye unto the blind, to spy out the
right of his cause: and his hand to the oppressed, to pluck the pray out of
the unrighteous ma^s teeth. More and besides this, the whole land has title,
to a defense and safety by them from sin. For sin and wickedness unpunished,
makes the land guilty of blood, and brings the wrath of God upon it. Deuteronomy.
21.
Which we have notably proved unto us, in the 21. of Deuteronomy. A man is found
dead, it is not known who slew him, the Elders and Judges must come forth,
and measure to the cities, that are round about him that is slain, the Elders
of the City next unto the slain man, must take a Heifer out of the drove,
and bring it unto a stony valley, and strike of the Heyfers neck: and wash
their hands over the Heifer that is beheaded, and testify, and say: Our hands
have not shed this blood, neither have our eyes seen it: O Lord be
merciful unto thy people Israel, and lay no innocent blood to the charge of
thy people Israel, and so the blood shall be forgeuen them: so shall ye take away
the cry of innocent blood. This care and prayer was there, to unburden the
land of blood: even when the malefactor could not be found, and this
confessing of a kind of guiltiness, in the Elders and Judges, next unto that
City: for that (if justice had been straightly looked unto by them) it is
credible, the malefactor durst not have approached so near. Thus would the
Lord teach us, that wickedness unpunished, cries out against the land
wherein it is committed. Now seeing by the express commandment of GOD,
there was such care taken to purge the land of murder, or manslaughter, when
the aucthour thereof was unknown: And that not otherwise, then by sacrifice,
prayer, and solemn protestation before the Lord, of their innocence, either
for doeyng it, or seeing it done, they were discharged of the danger thereof:
What conscience and care ought ye, and all other that sit in judgment, to
have, that you make not your selves, and this land guilty of the blood, by
winkyng at sin and wickedness: especially, by letting the murderer that is
manifest escape you? And if the whole land, (where wickedness committed
against the second Table, is winked at) be found guilty of blood: we stand
in greater danger of that iniquity that directly concerns the glory of GOD: I
mean the offenses done against religion, and the true woorshyppe of God. And
the whole land, is to look for defense against so great danger, at the
Magistrate his hand. And because it is a duty they owe unto us, it stands
them upon to seek the peace of their own conscience, in that calling: which
cannot be otherwise compassed, then in the true discharge of that: which is det
and due on their behalf. That which is recorded in the 22. of Joshua, does
notably direct Magistrates, with what care and vigilancie, Ios. 22.
they are too deal against corruption, in the worship of GOD. It is worth the
noting to observe, how they were afraid of the Alatr erected by Jordan:
insomuche that they geathered them together, to go up to war against
their brethren, so soon as they heard, that an Altar was builded in that
place: Albeit their brethren had no ill meaning in that matter. Nay as
afterward they do profess, their meaning therein was very good, and godly:
but conscience of duty, and experience of plagues, where such offenses as
there they feared, had escaped without punishment: made them jealous over
every occasion, and afraid of every light suspicion: as appears by the
speech, which they had to their brethren: Ios. 22.17
Have we to little (say they) for the wickedness of Peor, whereof we are not
cleansed unto this day: ye are turned this day from the Lord: and even to morrow
he will be wrath, with all the congregation of Israel. Did not Achan trespass
greatly, in the execrable thing, and wrath fell on all the congregation of
Israel, and this man alone perished not in his wickedness. The Lord put it
into the minds of our Magistrates, in like manner: that whenever they shall
hear of an altar erected, in any secret corner of this land, and false
worship used, they make no delay, until they have seen the offense punished.
We see then, what cause Magistrates have to watch over evil, and what
occasion we have to commend them to God, by fervent prayer, that they may
sincerely serve the Lord, in so great a calling, least the whole land should
be arraigned, before the judgment seat of the highest, and all found
guilty of much blood, outrage, and Idolatry, which has long laid upon the
land unpunished, which plague, the Lord in mercy keep far from us.

Justice and judgment, they are the strong holds, and fenced places of this
land, they are the keys of our Country, they keep us better then all the
Blockhouses, or places of defense wheresoever: they are better able to
encounter with our enemies, then any garrison of men, how well practiced
soever they may be. But contrariwise, the neglect of justice, is worse then
rebellion: it pulls Princes out of their thrones, makes the land cast out
her inhabitants, joins with foreign power, opens the gates of al our
castles and holds, takes the weapon from the warrior, takes the heart from
the valiant soldier, wisdom and forecast from the wise Counselor,
poysoneth all our munition. And in the 5. of Esai, Esaie. 5
the Lord under the similitude of a vine, does most lively declare, how he
will deal with his people, when judgment and righteousness, can not be
found among them. He will break down the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden
down, he will take away the hedge, and it shall be eaten up. It is our part
therefore to pray for our Magistrates, and those that be in place of justice,
that they may look to the cause of the widow, fatherless, and oppressed,
that they may purge the land of blood, by taking punishment upon malefactors:
that they may have courage, and the fear of God, that they may hate
covetousness, so that our Prince may sit sure among us, our holds strongly
fortified, our headges still vpholden that we may long enjoy peace, to the
better honoring of our God. And their own safety does require great care in
this behalf. Iere. 22
Shall thou reign (says the Prophet to Iehoikim) because thou closest thy
self in Cedar? Did not thy father eat, drink, and prosper, when he executed
justice and judgment, when he judged the cause of the poor he prospered, was
not this because he knew me (says thy Lord)? but thine eyes, and thy heart,
are only for the covetousness, and for oppression: therefore thus says the
Lord of Iehoikim, he shall be buried as an Ass is buried.

The Lawyer he must deal justly, and give every man his own: for he is the
living land mark, that limiteth men their inheritance, that points out
their right and title, how far it goes, and so breaks controversy, and
tells every one in his doubtful cause, where his claim and title lies,
what law and equity will bear him in, and where it will forsake him. He (I
say) is a living land mark, that by true opening of the laws, boundeth
every man, within the compass of his own title. And because of that, does
highly deserve of the common wealth, as a most necessary, and profitable
member thereof. Such men are the common treasure house of the Land, where unto
the evidences of every man are committed: And they put in trust withal, to
reserve for every manne his title: that when he is incombred for his right,
they should out of that Treasure house, of the law, bring good evidence for
him, and so forthwith, clear his innocence. The law is the house of every
man, where being tossed with many storms abroad, he finds a place to hide
his head in, and being in safety, does boldly contemn both wind and
weather, quietly take his rest. For being tossed with injuries, either in
body, goods, or name, we have no house of refuge, and rest, beside the law:
no sanctuary in our unjust vexation, besides that. The place which they serve
God in, who are ministers of the law, is very high and honorable: the good
they may do, very much, if God give them conscience and care of it. The hurt
in like manner, is exceeding great, where the fear of God does not rule. For
is it not a merueilous mischief to remove the land mark of any man? it is
that sin, that had a solemn curse, called for against it, by the ministry,
of the Levites, whereunto all the people were commanded to say. Deuteronomy. 27.
Amen: And what diversity or difference is there between him, that sets in
the land mark, and so boundeth a man shorter: and him, that either by wresting
of the law, or hiding the true meaning of it, is an occasion of cutting short,
or empayring the true Title of any man? Every man will grant, that if a man
of no conscience, had the custody of all the Evidences of this land, he
might do much mischief, by canceling, crossing, interliuing, putting in and
out, at his pleasure, hiding, or showing, renting, or reserving, as him
lusts. And is not this performed, while the law is made to speak that, they
knew in truth, it did never mean: and to bury that in scilence, which it
was appointed to give testimony and witness unto? and if all this were
nothing, what can be so miserable, as when a man has been all the day abroad,
in the storms, and tempests, at night when he comes home, he shall find
his house in that case, that it can neither hold out wind nor rain? And do
not many who, are forced by reason of Storms and Tempests abroad, to take
them to this their house and harborowe I mean the law: find the tempest
often as grievous there, as before they did in the plain? would to God there
were none turned out of their own doors in ye midst of the storm, without
any hope at all of harborow from thence? or if a man that had been dogged, to
his own doors, by thieves, and having gotten his house upon his head,
begins to breath himself, and rejoice, for his good escape, thinking all to
be safe, and suspecting no harm: who could sufficiently bewail him, if in
the midst of his Triumph, they be found in his own house, that fall upon
him, and murder him? And is not the law, the house of the troubled, and vexed
man? Yea, Westminster Hall is the poor man's house. And therefore does he
pay, tax, and subsidies, that it might be an house of defense unto him, able
to keep out wind and weather, how tempestious soever. If a man that is
oppressed, and wronged abroad, in any part of this land, shall bring his
matter unto hearing at Westminster Hall, look that ye be good unto him in
his own house, let him take no harm at home: His grief is great enough
abroad. It has always, even by the laws of man, been counted an heinous
offense, to vex and annoy a man in his own house. What ye think of the
matter, I cannot tell, this I am assured of, it is his due, to be well dealt
withal there, and ye are to answer the Lord, not only for deniyng, but also
for delaing and deferring of judgment. For why? the man has right and title,
in his good cause, unto as speedy a dispatch at your hands, as possibly may
had. And therefore Job professed, that he had not weried the eyes of the widow,
Job. 31.16:
with waiting long for help, before it came. It is a true saing of that
Heathen man. Bis dat, qui cito dat, He doubleth his gift, that gives it
speedily. It was a grief to Iethro, Moses his father in law, to see the
people stand from morning to evening about Moses, waiting for their dispatch.
How would, he have taken it, if he had seen men, (which commonly happens here
among us) to wait from term to term, nay from year to year?

We are all of us severally, to deal righteously with our brethren, in all
our conversation with them, and thereby declare, the love we bear them. And
the Lord has appointed us to show this love, not only unto them, but unto
the things that be dear unto them, as goods, and good name: even unto these,
has the Lord bound us, as well as unto there persons. For we must thus
intermedle one with another: and find succor one from an other. And their
name and goods by his appointment, go through our hands and charge, as well
as his person, and must find succor there. This is the charge from our GOD:
that when any thing of theirs passes through our hands, it find that
affection toward it, which may give testimony of our brotherly goodwill to
them, and witness our obedience unto GOD. And the same GOD that forbids the
murder of his body, forbids also the stealth of his goods. And the same
GOD, that has bound over our love, and good affection to his body: has in
like manner done it toward his goods. Hardly shall any man be persuaded,
that he is loving unto him, who is empairing him, in any thing, that is dear
and precious unto him, always gayning by his loss. The poor man, whose money
must pass through the hands of the Merchaunt, the Farmer, the Draper, etc. by
that time, that every one ouerselling his commodities, has gotten a fleese,
brings the sweat of his brows (that is his blood) which he has plentifully
powered out, and made no spare of it, through out the whole year, into a narrow
rowme: Neither can he give a true report of any love he found at their
hands, more then one might find at the hand of a Turk, or Infidel. In the
25. of Leuiticus, Leuit. 2^.
the people of God are charged, not to oppress one another, in buying and
selling, but as the year of Iubile was nigh, or far off, so to sell dearer,
or better cheap. Wherein the seller was bound, to regard the profit of him
that bought, for longer then the year of Iubile, he could not possess it: At
which time, by the law of God, it must return to the owner again. The year
of Iubile is abolished, but the law of conscience (being the equity of that
law) remains, that a man should regard, not himself only, but also the
state of another. Whereby it is apparent, it was not lawful for a man, to take
whatsoever he could get, without regard, what a bargain his neighbor was
like to have at his hands. We are exhorted by the Apostle, to make conscience
of such matters, 1. These. 4.
in the first to the Thessal. 4. Let no man oppress or defraude his brother,
in any thing, for even the Lord is a revenger of such things. 1. Cor. 6.9.
Know you not (says Saint Paul) that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
kingdom of God? And what right has any man to another man's money, not giving
him the value or worth of it in wares or merchandise? Be not deceived (says
the holy ghost in the same place.) Neither thieves, covetous persons, nor
extorcioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God. The want of equity and
conscience in this behalf, is notably taxed by Solomon, Proverb. 20. It is
naught, it is naught, says the buier, but when he is gone apart, he
boasts. It touches this natural corruption, where every man would have
regard only of him self, even without any respect of another, when not only
his own thoughts, but even his own words, do oftentimes condemn his
dealing, both of injury and dissimulation. Our careful walking in the ways of
righteousness, have plentiful promises of blessing from the Lord: so that if
his word be of any credit with us, we may be well assured, that by such
dealings our gains will grow, to be the greatest. Prou. 20.7.
He that walks in his integrity (says Solomon) is just, and blessed shall
his children be after him. He that follows after righteousness, Prou. 21.21.
and mercy, shall find life, Prou. 28.20.
righteousness and glory. A faithful man shall abound in blessing, but he
that makes have to be rich, shall not be innocent. Men who being greedy of
gain, had suddenly attained unto wealth, were the most infamous of all other
men, even among the heathen, so that (...) grew with them to be a name of
greatest reproach. A verlet is not more odious with us, the^ he was with them.
The order that here is observed, may in no wise be neglected: for sobriety is
set before righteousness in this place: We must live soberly and righteously
(says the Apostle.) Without sobriety and temperance, righteous and just
dealing cannot be holden up, and maintained: for if a man have not learned to
be rich, and to be poor, he shall never hold out the course of justice and
righteous dealing: when it lies upon the loss of favor, estimation, credit,
wealth, or countenance, to proceed in justice and righteousness. He shall never
buie and sell with conscience, that has not accounted with himself to carry a
low sail, and lower then he has done, (if God see it so good.) We should
have more justice, if we had more sobernes in the la^d: for if whatsoever come,
the old estate must be holden, justice and righteous dealing must sometime be
stretched. It is this te^perance and sobriety, that strengthens righteous
dealing and justice. For if we could be content to be humbled in the world, if
God could not otherwise be served, or a good conscience mainteyned: we should
have more power to do justice, and to live uprightly in our calling whatsoever.
But while men are so drowned in profits, pleasures, and honors in the world,
they are never put to any strait, but justice is stretched, that the old
compass may be kept, and their estate vpholden. Let us embrace this temperance
and soberness, so shall we hold fast this reine of justice and upright
dealing in our places and callings. Many good laws we have made, to cause us
live justly one with another, but little fruit of them: for why? the root is
not touched. We have taken so large a measure of port and countenance, being
void of this temperance, that the cloth must needs be cut out thereafter. The
sobriety that pleased our fathers in attire, in fair, in port, in
countenance, will not suffice us, we have taken a larger measure, and therefore
must we not stretch out the cloth? they have left us accordingly. Must not our
rentes be raised, our revenues increased, the prises of our wares augmented,
our pains dearer, our gifts greater, our pleasuring of me^ better considered,
our pains more rewarded, our liberality to the pore, or to any good purpose
lessened, our compassion abated, and so our fathers good report decayed? Let
every man taste more of temperance, so shall he be able to afoord a better
peniworth of righteous and upright dealing in his calling whatsoever. For sure,
while the measure is so infinitely enlarged, the cloth must needs be set upon
the Tainters, and excessiuely stretched. It shall be in vain to make laws
against injurious and unrighteous practices, if before, this great excess and
intemperancie, that rules in all estates, be not repressed. For if that in no
case may be abated, how can it be but that the old ordinary dealinges in
righteousness and equity, must be racked? The great want of sobriety that
is every where, speaks that there is much unrighteousness in this land, and
so consequently does plainly and evidently foretell us, that the righteous God
has a quarrel with the inhabitants of this our Country, for the
unrighteousness thereof, which increases in every kingdom as moderation and
sobriety abateth. Now how sobriety decays, and intemperancie is daily
augmented, even he yt is most guilty herein, will not seem to deny it. Whereby
it is evident, that this land shall not be able any long time, to bear the
unrighteousness thereof. For this great intemperancie tells us, that the
burden of unrighteousness which it bears, is grown to such greatness, as
cannot long be sustained, if our reformation herein be not speedily attempted
and taken in hand: which the Lord in mercy grant, may be thoroughly thought
upon by you, who have especial help in your hands to perform it.

To live righteously is the request of our God: The grace of God that brings
salvation has appeared, and teaceth us to live justly. His graces offer
themselves to take up their consideration, in our righteous conversation, they
crave that our upright dealing may speak, in what regard we have them, how
we think our selves beholden unto them, they have set over the pleasuring of
them, to upright living, there they would have it seen, how they are valued,
prised, and esteemed. Let us then behold a Christian Meditation, for men of
all callings and trades, when they deal in the work of their callings, to
move them to equity, conscience, and regard of those with whom they deal:
Behold, my GOD calls me to witness to the world, my thankfulness for
his benefits, he calls me now forth, to value his deseruings, now am I
called to set my price upon his mercies, and to leave a record behind me, how
highly or basely I esteem of his goodness: for the recompense of his kindness
has he turned and set over, to be answered in obedience, and upright dealing
one with another: The grace of God that brings salvation has appeared, and
bids us live righteously. Now am I to signify unto the world, how I think
my self indebted unto God, for the benefit of redemption, for the benefit of
his word, for honor, health, for children, for friends, peace, wealth* these
are now craving some consideration. Were it not great cruelty, that craving so
little, they should nevertheless be repelled? bringing all things, their
consideration should be nothing? Now therefore will I consider of my God for
this blessing, now will I answer in dutiful remembrance, for that benefit.
And so draw forth his special mercies, to have them severally considered, in
our upright life and just dealing with men. Not with the Papists, to seem to
requite him by merit: but with the godly Christian, to show him self not
unmindful of them, in humble obedience to his will. Saying after our best
obedience, with David in the building of the Temple, Who am I, 1. Chro. 29.
and what is my people, that we should be able to offer willingly after this
sort? for all things come of thee and of thine own hand, have we given thee
all this abundance. That we have prepared to build thee an house, is of thy
hand, and all is thine. This meditation will in like manner meet with our
crooked and disordered affections, in our dealinges, which are void of all
consideration of justice, and mercy. While that we shall in this manner urge
and press them: do thou thus answer thy redemption? is here the price of
thy sanctification? do thou thus requite thy preservation? is this the
thankfulness for thy health? and al thou may find in thy heart to afford God
for thy wealth.

It follows, we must live godly, this necessarily is joined to
righteousness. For it were but a vain thing to be precise in giving man his
right, and then to withholde the Lord his, through impiety. Job. 22.
We must communicate with him, as I told you before in his word: Receive the
law of his mouth, and lay up his words in thy heart, David having declared
before how the heavens do declare the glory of God, and how the creatures
do lead us unto some knowledge of him immediately as one ravished with the
majesty and excellency of that knowledge of God, which we have by the word,
and as one who takes that other kind of teaching, to be nothing in respect of
this: affirms that the law of the Lord conuerteth the soul, that it gives
wisdom to the simple, gives light to the eyes, and brings joy to the
heart: making these to be the special prerogatives, of the word of GOD, which
neither by the creatures, nor yet by any other outward means, may be atteined
unto, It behooves us therefore, to have often use of the word of GOD, not
only to take our knowledge from thence how to serve him: but also to seek
for encouragement and quickening thereunto from it. For the word of God
quickens us to our duties, and stirs up the slownesse, that by nature is
in us. A notable example whereof we have in the 2. of the Chronicles, 2. Chron.
15.
cap. 15. We are likewise to rest upon his goodness, whereof he has made us
such large promises in his word, to apply his benefits as special helps to
strengthen our faith, in the persuasion of his fatherly affection toward us,
and to provoke our obedience the rather thereby, and to be often and earnest
in prayer with him, both to have our strength and ability to serve him by that
means increased: and also to provide that neither by our subtle adversary,
nor yet by our own frailty, we be intrapped in the net of destruction.
For albeit by his grace our spirit be ready, yet have we a weak flesh,
which is to be dragged forward by strength obtained through prayer from our
GOD. These things must we be given unto, and neither by a plain rejecting of
them, and erecting of our own devotion: neither yet by a cold and careless
use of them, to tempt the Lord, and to uphold us in ungodliness, and the
fruits thereof. The Papists, Anabaptists, Libertines, and family of Love,
are all sworn enemies unto godliness, for as much as they will have the
word altogether subject to their spirit. For they will have it not to
speak, but as their spirit shall indite, and hereupon they build, that they
are the Church: and therefore have a promise of the holy Ghost, to keep them
that they err not. Enquire of a Papist, from whence come their unwritten
verities, and manifold traditions, they answer, there were many things that
the Apostles then were not able to bear, which the holy spirit being now
come has taught them. The Anabaptists, Libertines, and house of Love, urged
with the Scripture, will ask you, what says the Spirit, affirming that to
be but the killing letter. Thus both of them, howsoever in other things
greatly differing, have this common principle for their foundation and
beginning: that the Scriptures being but an ABC to Christianity, the spelling
and reading thereof must be drawn from their Spirit, as if the Gospel should
give place to revelations, and so carry with it the stain of imperfection: or
as if the Spirit could be divorced from the written word, which it was sent
to teach and confirm. As it is written: John. 14.26.
He shall bring all things to your remembrance, which I have told you. What
can be a more shameful abasing of Christ, then to make him but usher, and
their Spirit in place above him, chief Schoolemaister? that as the law
brought us by the hand to Christ: so Christ should be our guide unto
revelation, and resign unto it, as the law did unto him. They will not deny
the word, but in truth, they make it a matter of nothing. For they will
allow no sense unto it, but such as their Spirit shall set upon it. So
that in very deed how so ever they would be thought to lead us to the
word, they do lead their Disciples, only to the dreams and devises of
their own head. In the time of the Law when visions and revelations were
often and usual, yet were they then subject to the word, and to be tried by
it, nay to be ouerruled of it. According as we read: If there arise among you
a Prophet, Deuteronomy. 13.
and give thee a sign or wonder, and the sign or wonder which he has told
thee come to pass, saying: let us go after other gods: thou shall not hearken
unto the words of the Prophet, ye shall walk after the Lord your God, and
shall keep his commandments, and hearken unto his voice, but that Prophet
shall be slain, because he has spoken to thrust thee out of the way, wherein
the Lord thy God commanded thee to walk. If in the times, when visions and
revelations had their best alowance, and the most lawful title that ever they
had: all that notwithstanding, they were to give up their account unto the
written word of God, and from thence to receive their quietus est: We may not
then in these times, receive such wares, under the alone warrant of their own
weightes, when faith must fight against miracles and revelations, for the
word, which in the infancy of the Church, was helped by miracles unto the
word.

How can there be any true godliness among this people, among whom God is
not licenced to speak in his word what pleases him, but the word strained
by their spirit, to speak after the liking of miserable men? Great is the
ungodliness likewise of those men, who having banished superstition and
fantastical revelation: yet for all that, leaning unto the hold of their
profession of the truth, as unto a sufficient fortress: do not submit
themselves to any often and earnest use of the word and prayer, with
conscience and care to have their ways reformed by it, and with persuasion of
any great necessity that they have of it.

We can not give our selves unto these duties, unless we shall be in the
expectation and lookinge after the hope of an other life. and therefore very
fitly does the Apostle join unto these several duties that we have heard
of, this speech: Waiting for the blessed hope and glorious appearing of the
mighty God our Savior Jesus Christ. For it can not come to pass, we should
be taken of from things here below, unless we be assured else where. No man
will let go things assured, for uncertain. Faith must give us assurance of
greater glory from god, ere we can let go the hold that we have here.
Therefore it is made a special note of god his children, and necessarily joined
to his worship: to be in expectation of the latter day, and the glory
thereof. When Paul will set out the commendation of the Thessalonians, and fame
that was given out of them in all places: he does no otherwise commend the^,
then that they we are turned from idols to serve the living god, and to wait
for his son from heaven, 1. These. 1.
which should bestow upon them this benefit, to deliver them from the wrath
to come. And in the second to the Thessa. persuading them by that which was in
most reverence and regard with them, 2. These. 2^.
and likest to bring them into the carnest consideration of his words: he
frames his speech thus: I beseech you brethren by the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and our gathering together and uniting unto him. So that the
loking the last day, seems to him to be in great reverence, regard and
assured expectation among them: when he makes their reverence unto that, the
matter and ground of this exhortation. And when he labors to lift them of
the earth, commonly he reareth them up with no other instrument than this: the
waitinge for the glory and hope of an other life. In the 3. to the Colossians
he reasons thus. Colos. 3.
When Christ which is your life shall appear. then shall you appear with him
in glory, mortify therefore your earthly members, uncleanness and covetousness,
which is Idolatry. Phi^. 3.
And in the third to the Philippians openyng the mean of their stay from
huntinge after the Earth, with the false Apostles, which minded earthly
things: He says thus: But our conversation is in Heaven, from whence we
look for a Savior, even the Lord Jesus, who shall change our vile body that
it may be like his glorious body. In the eleventh to the Hebrews, Heb. 11.
the obedience of Abraham in leauinge his own Country, not knowinge where he
should become, is ascribed to this, that he waited for a City that had a
foundation, whose maker is GOD: for all things in the world are subject to
corruption. The great things that are spoken of Moises, in accountinge the
rebuke of Christ, to be of more valewe then the treasures of Aegypte, and his
not fearing the fury of the King, is only imputed to this, that he was as
if he had seen him that is invisible. The coming of the glory of that great
GOD, was always before his eyes. The greatness of the thing and the
excellency of it is noted in these words: The glory of the great God our
Savior Christ. It is the same glory, the great GOD our Savior Christ
inheriteth, that we wait for. It is worth the waiting for, there is cause why
we should be moved to sobriety, having so great things in expectation.
We beseech you (says Paul) that ye would walk worthy of GOD, 1. Thessa. 2.
who calls you to his own kingdom and glory. The glory of this world
daseleth our eyes, and therefore must we be drawn up by meditation of greater
things, before we shall be able to let these be of small reckoning with us.
The greatness of that glory once thoroughly digested, would set these in a base
and low place, it would make them vanishe as Smoke from our presence. The
expectation of a transitory kingdom, when it is but once devoured and
digested by hope, we see it makes men neglect lives, goods, lands, friends,
children and country to hazard all. The Merchant that is in expectation of
some great gain, we see into what unknown Countries, into what dangers by
the Seaes he will commit himself. The great regard and care that is had
every where, to things here below, the gredie following after them, the
careful pursuing of pleasures, profits, and honors: do plainly speak,
that the hope of an other life, is not yet settled in the hearts of a great
number. Let us call to remembrance, how that this is our day to wait, it is
our time to serve: when Christ which is our life shall appear, then shall
we be glorious and appear with him in glory. There is no pleasure which the
Lord has not matched with some grief and pain, to take off (if it might)
our delight, and to fasten it in surer things. If the glory of God cannot
prevail with us, if it cannot change our taste, how shall we look for
renewment? If so great hyre as is his own glory, cannot allure us brutish and
senseless must our nature needs be. What a greater argument can we have of
our blockishnesse, then that so great things can get no more attendance. The
truth is, we are not persuaded of the excellency of them, and therefore in
all those places alleged for the waiting of his coming: there is the benefit
set forth with it, and the greatness of it, which poynteth at our darkness
and unbelief herein, and tells us that the glory of this world, stands as
a cloud between it and our sight. To conclude, let us enlarge our hope, and
by meditation and Prayer, enter into some consideration of the length, breadth,
and deapth of that glory: so shall we see such a portion in it, as will
comfort us even in our greatest afflictions, counting it a great honor, that
we are vouchsafed his service, as the Apostles have done.

Now we are to consider of that, which is the third thing in this our
division: to wit, what was given to make us good scholars in this his
doctrine, and to become a people zelously given unto good works. The gift is
so great as himself, for he gave himself for us. He laid not down his life
at the pleasure of his adversaries, being otherwise unwilling, but franckly
and freely of his own accord did yield it up for us. This is that which we
esteem above the benefit often times: the mind of the geuer. Great gifts are
darkened, when they come from an unwilling mind, and leese their commendation:
but a willinge mind aduaunceth the lest gift, that can be. No man takes my
life from me, John. 10.
(says our Savior Christ) but I laid it down of my self. His willingness
also appears in this, that he went forth to meet them, askinge of them whom
they sought, and confessing him to be the man. As his adversaries did not
compel him by violence to leave his life, John. 18.
no more did good deserving on our part procure him thereunto: And therefore S.
John does herein note a special thing that he began with us, 1. John. 4.10.
and provoked us unto love, and not we him. This love was voluntary and not
forced. It had likewise the preeminence of beginning and prouokinge: and was
neither borne nor begotten, of any former benefit of ours to himward. In this
gift that was given, we are to remember, not only that moment of his passion,
wherein he passed imediatly from life to death: but also the whole course of his
life, while he had his aboade with us here upon earth. For he served us with
his life, as well as with his death: performing in it all that obedience, which
the Lord requires of man. And this obedience unto the law, could not be urged
of duty upon him who was Lord of the law, in his own name, and for himself:
but only in respect of us, whose cause and person he was content to sustain.
Touching his life, what a rare argument and token of good will was this to
begin withal: that he would be abased so far for us, as to lay down the
majesty and glory, wherein he was nothing inferior to his father, and to
take upon him the estate and condition of a poor and miserable servant, to
leave the highest estate in heaven, and to go under the basest condition here
upon earth, to change the highest dignity, with the basest condition, the
greatest glory with the greatest infamy: the place that has superiority
over all, with that which is to serve all? what is the glory of all kingdoms
in the world, if they were joined together, to the glory of Heaven? and yet
how impossible were it to entreat him, who is king of the least Islande in
the world, to change his estate with a servant, to leave the glory of his
kimgdome, and to embrace the estate of the meanest subject and servant in the
land.

What subject, how friendly soever in former times he had been to the
Prince, could after long suit prevail thus much with him? and behold the king
of heaven and Lord of life, does force this friendship upon his enemies. It
requires our earnest meditation of the matter, to consider the greatness of
the goodwil that lies under it: for it has never before or since been heard
off, that the son his life, should be the price to purchase unto the servant
his fredom: that the son should be sold to serve, to ye end the servant (nay
enemy) might be made free. Wonder at this work thou earth, and be amassed at
it ye heavens, for from the beginning, if al your regesters were searched, the
like shall not be heard of at any time to have happened. The gift had been
exceeding great, if we should have had no more at his hands, then is the
service of his life, lead in all manner of obedience for our sake here upon
Earth: but after this obedience unto the will of his father in all duty
accomplished, he himself must pass through death, and so become a slain
sacrifice for the sins of his servants. Wherein let us a little behold the
weight of such a work so shall we make ye better account of him, who has
wrought it for us. Let us behold his behavior, when ye time approached of his
appearing before the judgment seat of the righteous God for sinners. Which
although it be but the entera^ce into his passion and suffering, will
notwithstanding let us have some sight and taste, whereby to discern how hard a
work he had in hand. When he was to enter the answearing of sin, he went, as
appears in the Gospel after Saint Matthew, into a place called Gethsemane,
Mat. 26.36.
saying to his Disciples. Sit ye here, while I go and pray yonder. While he
was on the way, he began to wax heavy, sorrowful, and grievously troubled. In
so much that he (complaining of his grief unto Peter and the two sons of
Zebedeus whom he took with him) says unto them: I feel my heart heavy unto
death, tarry ye here and watch with me. The pain pressed him so sore, that he
craves the eomfort of their presence in that combat. Ye may well consider
that it is no small matter, which drives the son of God, to entreat his
Disciples to watch with him. But are they able to afforde him any help? In
truth they can give no help unto the matter he has in hand. It is no great
thing that is required, and yet for all that it cannot be obtained. It is no
great matter to look on, though the matters which be in doing, were never so
dangerous: and yet the Scripture does tell us, that the chief of the Apostles
could not hold up their heads, and help their master at his desire, while he
yet was but in the beginning of his conflict, with so much as a comfortable
countenance, no not after he had complained of their great unkindness, and
expostulating the matter with them, had used these words toward them: What
could ye not watch with me one hour. A wonderful matter, that Peter the
Prince of the Apostles, should bebewray so great weakness, that being sundry
times requested by his Master, could not perform toward our salvation so
little a matter, as is the looking on. So far was he from afording either
countenannce or speech of encouragement, in this cause. The Lord had a
special purpose in it, and we are therefore to draw special instruction from
this, that there did never greater want appear, neither mo infirmities break
out of the Apostles, then when the work of our salvation was in hand. For had
they given but the least help unto that work, how should men have been kept
from matching them with Christ in the matter of mediation? For many be so mad,
that notwithstanding the best of them could not help with a comfortable
countenance; when our salvation was to be procured: yet will they have the
meanest of them, at least fellows with Christ at half of the Mediatorship?
for they will not be persuaded, but that they must pray unto them, and so have
them fellows with Christ in the office of intercession. How has the holy
Ghost met with man his infirmity heerin, and removed all stumbling blocks,
that we might have free passage to that alone Mediator between God and man,
the man Jesus Christ? Who can deny but that the only wise God did foresee,
what great folly and susperstition many would fall into with the Apostles and
Saints of GOD? and therefore would have the work of our salvation so clear
and void of any help from the Apostles, that the chief of them could not be
kept from sleeping at the beginning: neither from perjury and forswearing,
after a little farther proceeding in the same. For so far were they from
healping our salvation forward, that being requested to watch and solace
their Master with their sight in his agony: that they are daunted and lie
like dead men. And when they are wakened, and reproved for that they would
not watch one hour: by and by they fall fast a sleep again, so that no
manner of comfort can be had from them. And no marvel, for the Almighty had
determined, that the combat should be single, performed of one alone, and
therefore it could not be, that Peter and Christ should suffer together. In
deed there wear two thieves crucified with him, but there was no doubt (which
thing the learned do well note) that the sacrifice for sin, should have any
supply from their suffering. The form of prayer which our Savior Christ used
unto God the father, when he entered into this agony, does likewise tell us
what pain and anguish he did sustain. For sundry times he made this peticion
unto God: O my father, if it be possible let this cup pass from me. Let us
cease to meruel that the Apostles did bear no part in it, for this his prayer
does declare, that Jesus Christ had his hands full of it. Let us not marvel
why the Apostles had no more lust nor affection to deal in it: for Jesus
Christ him self, if he had followed the sense and persuasion of his flesh,
had flatly refused it, fainted at the first, and never have gone through with
it: O my father if it be possible let this cup pass. How heavy a weight of our
sins was upon him, not only, is bewrayed by his prayer: but also by the
drops of blood that fell from his face, and by his often passage, as a man
greatly distressed and in sore anguish: from his Apostles, to the place where
he prayed, and from thence, to them again. Sometimes waking them and seeking
comfort from the sight of them, and sometimes again entreating his father for
favor. Neither does he this once and away, but sundry times does he renew
it, and make often attemptes to have ease by it. This was the beginning of this
his conflict. Much anguish was in it as you have heard, and little comfort
coming from any, yet the farther he proceeds, the more his pain increases,
and the less comfort he feels. Before he had the sight of his Apostles,
albeit they could not be kept waking for his comfort, now they all flee and
forsake him, save Peter, who did abide by it a while, but in the end did
forswear him. His father whom before he did attempt to entreat, now stands
forth taking the place of justice, and the seat of judgment, and summoneth
al his servants to appear and answer for their sins: Then the son of
man Jesus Christ comes forth to the bar, and appears in the person of
all sinners, there stands he to receive sentence, and afterward execution
accordingly, which could be no slender punishment, for it must be a
sufficient satisfaction for the sins of all his servants. It could be no
little blow that he did bear, for why it was such a one, that the sins of
all his servants did dye of it. How could it be a little stripe or stroke,
that was the death of so many sins? Nay universally of all the sins in his
servants? When he went under it, this speech of his: [O GOD, my God, why
have thou forsaken me?] did sufficiently testify what weight and burden he
had of it. Before he was forsaken of men, and his dearest Disciples had leaft
him: Now sin has set his father against him, and he feels him an utter
enemy unto him. For that he wrestled not with an ordinary and usual kind
of death, his words to his father do bewray. He was to bear the punishment
for sin, which must touch him, else how should we be persuaded, that the
punishment was sufficient, and meet for such a matter. Behold a true
balance, wherein to way sin, a Glass that will give us the true sight of
sin. Look upon this glass ye, which think that at your last hour, ye
shall be well enough able to drive away sin with a sigh. Behold this
spectacle, ye that take sin in young men to be the grace of those years:
and so slender a matter in old men, that it cannot abide the least breath, or
sight of one that has gray hears* You see when sin is to be aunsweared, the
Apostles left it, and Christ him self did sundry ways declare, that he had
enough of it. We may see sufficiently by this, that they never felt the sting
of it, who in their speeches and remedies appointed to redress it, do give
out so slenderly of it. There is one thing whereof we are especially to be
admonished, that we never make our selves guilty of so great vnduetifulnes
against our god, as to call his divinity into question, because he was humbled
unto this anguishe and pain in our person, and bewrayed such sense and feeling
thereof in our nature. For how do we answer the Lord, if we will let him
have no longer any honor from us, for that he was so greatly humbled for v^?
Hereby we may sufficiently see and discern, what a cursed and counterfayte
Christ, that is, which H.N. has brought into the world. For H.N. his
Christ, was not first God, and then after when he was to suffer made man, but
first man, and after by his suffering, was Godded with God. He gave no special
arguments of good will unto us by his passion and suffering: for him self had
the greatest benefit by it, insomuche as that he could not have been saved
without it. He is not this true Christ, who offered him self a sufficient
price, for all the sins of his servants: for he leaves every one to
answer for his own sin, telling him that he him self and no other is to
answer for it. And therefore look what the sins of. H N. his Christ cost
him, the same price must they pay for theirs, if they will believe him. All
the help that they have from him, is that he has paid his money before them,
so that now they shall not need to trouble them selves, either about the
price, to spend any long time in learning what is required: neither yet about
the manner, to understand where and how it is to be paid. If any do
maruelle how H. N. can make away this so plain an history, let them
understand, that it is well known to those, who be any thing acquainted with
him, that to sink any history, H. N. will require no more, then one single
shot of an Allegory. The Lord grant that they which thus abolishe the true
Christ, and his office, to set up so cursed a creature in his place, may be
looked to in time: before they shall draw others into the same condemnation.
Christ Jesus gave him self for us, to purge us, that we might be a peculiar
people unto him self, zealous of good works. Here are all the carnal
Gospellers condemned, who live in hope, that under the countenance of their
profession, all liberty of life, will well enough be borne out: that make
Christ his death to be nothing else, but a band unto their lewd life. Here
may we see that the Lord has not laid down his life, to purchase no other
thing at our hands, beside a profession of the truth: but that he bought
with his blood a zealous addicting of our selves to christan conversation. It is
a wonder to see how the wicked will boast of the benefit of Christ his
blood, how mighty it is to merit, how sufficient to save from sin: But for
all that will they not give over any liberty of life, that before they have
enjoyed: whereas it was given to purchase a new conversation, as well as a new
profession. For he gave him self for us, that we might give our selves unto
him, a peculiar people zealous of good works. Let us mark it then my
brethren, that he gave him self for us, to have the honor of a Christian life
from us. He left his life for us, that our life might be let out to honor him.
He made not so slender a purchase with so great a price, as that if he had a
good sigh, or a good word at our last breath, that would suffice him this life
was given for the purchase of a zealous giving of our lives to the works that
please him. And therefore does the Apostle tell us that we are not our own men,
to frame our life after our own liking, but are to serve the Lord, both with
our body and with our spirit, because they are the Lords, 1. Cor. 6.20.
bought of him with a price. If we humble not our selves to a zealous following
of good works, we wthold the lords due, for he has paid a great price, to
purchase a good life at our hands. He has with no small price, but dearly
bought of us the honor of a life, led in zealous obedience unto his word. For we
are not barely to give some good words, either else to show some good
countenance toward religion and christian conversation: but to have our
conversation declare that we are affected with the same, and become studious of
such an estate of life. Such men declare themselves to be that peculier
people, for who^ the Lord laid out his life. As for those who wa^ke so
indifferently between true religion and false, that a man can not discern
whether they are more inclined unto: As also those that walk so even between a
civil life, and a christianlike hehauiour, that the difference is not easily
discussed: they do declare themselves as yet not to be affected in desire,
toward those duties which the Lord has laid upon his. Now where this
purchase of his has taken place, they are become a peculiar people zealous of
good works. If cold christians have so little comfort from the death of
Christ: what shall become of them, that are sworn enemies, either to true
religion, or else to good life, and christian behavior? It is said here by the
Apostle, that we must be purged, to become a peculiar people unto our God,
zealous of good works: which office of purging, the holy Ghost perfourmeth not
by miracle, but by means: wherein we have great cause to be thankeful unto
God, that whereas our food was exceeding gross under the government of the
Pope, as having only for diet the inventions of man: Now that pure and fine
food of the word of God, is not only made lawful unto us, but also
liberally laid out for us. But herein again, we are both to confess and
acknowledge our want, that seeing we are not void of sin, while we remain in
this flesh, and therefore have need to be often purged and cleansed: our
purgations (for all this so great a change and so good a constitution of the
mind under the Gospel) be now at this day nothing diverse from those, that
were used in that that great grossenes which we had under the Pope. The Cannon
law I confess might purge somewhat in those times of ignorance, when because
the food was so gross, the mind could not but be full of great and grievous
humores: but now the constitution of our minds being altered, by reason that
the food is so clean diverse from that it has benne, how can it purge to any
purpose? Let us therefore every one pray, that seeing by reason of this good diet
of the Gospel, the state and constitution of our mind is changed: in steed
of the Cannon law, which passes over many dangerous humors, and purges them
never a whit, by reason of the great grossnesse that is in it: We may have
rules and Canons out of the word of God, which will pearce further, and purge
other humors, whereof we have great store, and those such, as do greatly
blemishe the Gospel, and causes so great slander unto our profession, as
hyndreth many from coming thereunto. How often does the whole body of this
realm assemble together in that high court of parliament, to redress those
evils that are among us, either in body goods, or name: making new statutes:
and repelinge old, according as by that wisdom and experience which God has
given the^, they see and perceive any danger either present, or shortly like to
fall upon them? But as for the Church, which Satan maliceth infinitlye more,
and therefore makes many sorer assaltes against the same: how slenderly in all
such assembles is her estate thought upon? And what statutes are their made, to
prevent the practices of Satan? Or what old ones be once repelid, how
unprofitable or hurtful so ever experience does tell us that they be? The Lord
touch them with the care of it, who have especial authority to redress it. I
have already been very long, and the weather has been very tedious unto you,
a word therefore or two of the last point, and so I make an end.

The manner of teaching, and trayning of scholars in Christ his school, is by
teaching, exhorting, and rebuking these things, says the Apostle: Speak,
exhort, and rebuke with all authority. We cannot conceive the matters of
salvation, by and of our selves, they must be taught us, and when we yield
unto them in judgment, being persuaded of the truth thereof: it is another
labor then the former, to be rightly affected with them. And therefore they
must be pressed upon our affections by exhorting, and rebuking, for we are not
by and by truly touched with our duty, and humbled to the obedience thereof,
when once we have subscribed in our judgment, to the truth and equity of the
thing. Men must have special cunning and skill from God, that shall come
within us, and make us in judgment and affection, to yield unto duty: how
shall they preach says the Apostle, unless they be sent? This argues a
strong and a woonderful corruption to be within us, which has so blinded our
reason, and hardened our affection, that they must be men of special gifts
and graces, that shall be able to open the eyes of our mind, to conceive the
truth, and to touch our affections so, as they shall be moved to make
conscience of the same. We may well discern then how unprofitable those
ministers be in their place, who know nothing how to exhort and rebuke. Who
would hyre into his harvest a Mower, that could not set an edge upon his
since, when it should happen to be blunted by stones, or other things, that
were hid in the grass? And is not teaching, exhorting, and rebuking, the edge
of the word, which makes it cut? And be not our hearts of themselves, if
Satan should cast in no outward occasions, a ground that is full of stones?
and what should he do then in the harvest of the Lord, that cannot give an
edge to the word, by strengthening the truth of the doctrine, if false
Prophets and Teachers should cast in stones of heresy, and erroneous opinions:
nor yet by waking and rowsing the affections of men, by exhorting, and rebuking
acording to sound doctrine, when Satan shall (as he daily does) cast in great
and mighty stones of security, and hardness of heart? Now the Scripture has
plainly foretold us, that in these latter Days especially, the Lord his
field shall be full of such stones. It is a matter, that ought to get both
fears and prayers from us, even in the behalf of the Lord, as well as in
respect of our selves: to see so many unmeet men in our country, carry sithes
into the Lords harvest, who when once they meet with any stop, and be set
but a little beside their book, must be forced to return home with their
sithes upon their shoulders, and let the Lords medowe continue, until it
shall be withered, or eaten up of the adversary.

The Lord give them hearts to think of it: whose labor although it were but
a little, might do great good for the reformation thereof. And as the Church
has a great plague of these men, so has it of another sort, who have gifts,
and are well able to teach, and to exhort, but yet for all that they will not
abide and be resident upon their flocks, to discharge that duty in their
own persons, but carelessely commit them over unto others. An offense that
in the greatest darkness of Popery, has been found fault withal among
themselves, and taken to have been the only decay of their kingdom. And
therefore a pitiful thing yt is, that in this light of the Gospel, it should
not be acknowledged, that there is great sin in such things. Espensaeus in
Timotheum.
Espensaeus a Popish Prelate, affirms that a famous Preacher of his time,
did oftentimes thunder out against those men, that so carelessely set over
their charges unto others: telling them plainly, that the Lord would serve
them in the world to come, according as they did serve him here: Adibunt per
Vicarios paradisum, in persona, inferos. The Lord (says he) will send such men
to heaven, by Vicares, and to hell, in their own persons. He confesses that
the Preacher, did openly denounce such judgments against them: Solitus est
palam illis polliceri vicariam salutem, personalem vero perniciem. Others shall
go to heaven for them (says he) for as for themselves in their own person,
they must be of necessity resident, upon a personage of theirs in Hell, which
is called perdition. The speech as he confesses, is over pleasant, for so
weighty and grave a matter, as also for so heavy and hard judgment. God
grant that so pleasant speech, may find gentle and courteous intertainement,
with so many as shall be found faulty herein. Well so great is the corruption
of our nature, that we have need of diligent teaching, exhorting and
rebuking, if we shall yield any glory unto our god, or good example to our
brethren. To conclude therefore, (for I have stood long, and am afraid, have
weried you as well as my self.) The Lord of all Majesty and power grant, that
as Christ Jesus, when he came into the world, found the Sheepheards of Jury
carefully looking to their flocks: so when he shall come again to judgment,
he may find those shepheardes, who have his Church, and chosen people for
their flock, so diligently watching and faithfully attending over the same: as
that by the means thereof, he may have great glory from his people, by
plentiful fruits of godliness, righteousness, and sobriety: and that the
Gospel being in all places thus glorified, our consciences may be truly
comforted in Christ Jesus, To whom with the father and the holy Ghost, one true
and everliving God, be al honor, glory, and dominion, both now and ever.
Amen.

FINIS

