THE Duties of Constables Borsholders, Tythingmen, and such other low
Ministers of the Peace.

Whereunto be (...) ^dioined the several offices of Churchwardens: of
^rueiors for amending the high ways: of Distributors of the provision for
noisome Foul and Vermin: of the Collectors: Overseers: and Governors of the
Poor: and of the Wardens and Collectors for the houses of Correction.

Collected and penned by William Lambard of Lincolnes Inn Gent. 1582.

Printed at London, by Roger Ward.

THE DVTIES OF CONstables, Borsholders, Tythingmen, and such other low
ministers of the Peace.
Understanding by sundry friends of mine, 1. The preface.
that many well disposed men do earnestly wish, that some one short and
plain collection might be made of the duties of high Constables, petie
Constables, Borsholders, Tythingmen Headborrowes, and such like inferior
ministers of the Queens Majesty's peace, to the end that when any of them
should be called to any of the said offices (or the like) they might the better
behave themselves in doing the same: I have thought it a thing worthy the
labor, to send abroad among them this little treatise, which I have drawn to
satisfy in some part their honest desire: heartily praieng unto God, that as
their knowledge may be increased in the reading hereof, so also their diligence
may be amended in the practice of the same, to the setting forth of the glory
of God, and to the advancement of the Queens Majesty's service in this behalf.

The division of this work.
2 And because I purpose (by the help of God) to make this work so short, and
so plain withal, as the matter thereof it self will suffer me, and as the
understanding of unlearned men does require: I will first speak somewhat, both
of the sundry names and beginnings of these officers, and then afterward I
will go in hand with the parts of their several duties.

The names of these officers.
3 The sundry names of Constables, or high Constables that be of Lathes,
Rapes, Wapentakes, Hundreds, and Franchises: and the diverse names also of
Constables, petie Constables, Tythingmen, Borsholders, Boroeheads, Headboroes,
chief pledges, and such other (if there be any) that bear office in towns,
parishes, hamlets, tythings, or boroes (for of Constables of Castles, otherwise
called Castellanes, and such others I mean not to entreat) are all in effect
but two, that is to say, Constables and Borsholders: for these two words do
contain as much as all the rest of those names, and to these two may all the
rest of them be well brought: and therefore, in speaking severally of these two,
I will pass along, and touch all the rest also.

4 The name Constable, Constables name.
is made (as I have read) of two English words put together, namely, Cuning) or
Cyng) and Staple, which do signify, the stay (or hold) of the king. For by
the ancient custom of this realm, there is a great officer called the
Constable of England, who by means of the great authority that he had, was a
principal stay unto the Kings government: 13 R. 2. cap. 12.
and this man had jurisdiction and authority in deeds of Arms, and in
matters of war, both within and without the Realm. Out of which office, this
lower Constableship was at the first drawn and fetched, and is (as it were) a
very finger of that same hand. 13. E. 1.
His beginning.
For the statute of Winchester which was made in the time of King Edward the
first, and by which these lower Constables of hundreds and Franchises were
first ordained, does (amongst other things) appoint, that for the better
keeping of the peace, two Constables in every Hundred and Franchise, should
make the view of Armor.

So then, the name of Constable in a hundred or franchise does mean, that he
is an Officer that supporteth the Queens Majesty in the maintenance of her
peace, within the precinct of his hundred, or franchise: and he is many times
called the High Constable, in comparison of the Constables, or Petie Constables
that be in the towns or parishes within his hundred or franchise, whose part
it is likewise to maintain the peace within the several limits of their own
towns or parishes.

Borsholders name.
5 As touching Borsholder, which is the other general name and does contain
within it the men^ng of Tythingmen, Borrowheades, Headborrowes, Thirdborrowes,
and chief pledges, that also is made up of these two English word, Borhes,
and Ealdor; of the which, Borhes betokens pledges, and Ealdor signifies the
Chief, the Head, or the Elder: and so Borhesealdor in one word, does mean the
chief, or head of the suerties, or pledges.

6 But now, His two offices.
that you may the better understand what is meant by this, you must further
know, that every of these Borsholders, Tythingmen, Borrowheads, Headborrowes,
Thirdborrows, and chief pledges, has two several offices at this day: the
one being his ancient and first office, and the other his latter made office.

Archaionomia
7 His first office began thus: His first office.
by the ancient laws of this realm (before the coming in of King William the
Conqueror) it was ordained for the more sure keeping of the peace, and for the
better repressing of thieves and robbers, that al free borne men should cast
themselves into several companies, by ten in each company: and that every of
those ten men of the company, should be suertie and pledge for the
foorth-comming of his fellows: so that if any harm were done by any of these
ten against the peace, then the rest of the ten should be amerced, if he of
their company that did harm should fly, and were not forthcomming to answer
to that wherewith he should be charged.

And for this cause these companies be yet in some plates of England (and
namely with us in Kent) called Boroes of the said word Borhes, Pledges or
Suerties: albeit in the western parts of ye realm they be commonly named
Tythings, because they contain (as I told you) the number of ten men with
their families. And even as ten times ten do make an hundred, so, because it
was then also appointed that ten of these companies should at certain times
meet together for their matters of greater weight, therefore that general
assembly (or court) was (and yet is) called a Hundred.

Furthermore, it was then also ordained, that if any man were of so evil
credit, that he could not get himself to be received into one of these
Tythings or Boroes, that then he should be shut up in prison, as a man
unworthy to live at liberty amongst men abroad.

Tything man. Headborow, etc.
8 Now whereas every of these Tythings (or Boroes) did use to make choice of
one man among themselves, to speak and do in the name of them all: he was
therefore in some places called the Tythingman, in other places the Boroes
Ealder (whom we now call Borsholder) in other places the Boroehead, or
Headboroe, and in some other places the Chief pledge, which last name does
plainly expound the other three that are next before it: for Head or elder of
the Boroes, and chief of the Pledges be all one. And in some shires, where
every third borrow has a Constable, there the officers of the other two be
called Thirdboroes.

49. E. 3. ^in. Kanc.
9 Moreover, in these Tythings (or boroes) sundry good orders were observed,
Old orders in Tithings
and amongst others these: first that every man at the age of 12. years should
be sworn to the King: Vid. 45, Ed. 3.27 Et Kitc. Fol. 12.
then, that no man should be suffered to dwell in any town or place, unless
he were also received into some such suertieship and pledge as is aforesaid.
Thirdly, that if any of these pledges were imprisoned for his offense, that
then he ought not to be delivered without the assent of the rest of his
pledges: again, that no man might remove out of one Tything (or Boroe) to
dwell in another, without lawful warrant in that behalf: lastly, that every
of these pledges should yeerlie be presented and brought forth, by their
chief pledge at a general assembly for that purpose, which we yet (in
remembrance thereof) do call the View of Frank pledge, or the Leete court.

10 Hitherto have I opened the ancient office of the Borsholder, Tythingman,
and the rest, whereof also there is yet to this day some show or remnant in our
Leetes or Lawdaies: but if the very substance thereof were thoroughly
performed (as I know no let, but that by law it may) then should the peace of
the land be much better maintained.

His later office.
As touching the later office that these Borsholders, Tythingmen, Headboroes
Boroeheads, Thirdboroes, and chief pledges have, it is in manner all one with
the office of a Constable of a town or parish, which is commonly named a
Petie Constable, or Vnderconstable, because he is a small Constable, in respect
of the Constable of his Hundred, within whose limit he is. For, as about the
beginning of the reign of King Edward the third, petie Constables were devised
in towns and parishes for the aid of the Constables of the Hundreds: so of
latter times also, Borsholders, Tythingmen, Headborroes, and such like, have
been used as petie Constables within their own Borrowes and Tythings. And yet
not so universally, but that some of them have at this day none other but
their old office. For in some of the Western parts of England, you shall
see, that where there be many Tythingmen in one parish, there only one of
them is a Constable for the Queen, and the rest do serve but as the ancient
Tythingmen did. Now therefore, having spoken of the names and beginnings of
these inferior officers of the peace, let us also come to the parts of their
duties.

11 For So Much as a great and chief part of the duty both of these High
Constables of Lathes, Rapes, Division of their office.
Wapentakes, Hundreds, and Franchises, and also of these Constables, Petie
constables, Tythingmen, Borsholders, Borrowheads, Headborrowes, Thirdborrowes,
chief pledges, and such like ministers, by whatsoever other names they be
called in any Towns, Parishes, Tythings, Borrowes, Hamlets, or other places
of the Realm, does consist in the maintenance of the Queens Majesty's peace,
wherein (as also in some other points) the power of them all is alike, and but
one, within their several limits and places of authority: therefore I think
it good to show, first what their common and equal duty is in matters
concerning the peace, either by their own authority, or under the authority
of others: then afterward to declare, what their common and like duty is in
some other things, not concerning the Peace: and lastly, to open those things
wherein they have a distinct and several duty one from another.

Their of^ice concerning the peace.
12 The Conservation (or maintenance) of the Peace, stands in three things,
that is to say, first in foreseeing that nothing be done that tends, either
directly, or by means, to the breach of the peace: secondly, in quieting or
pacifieng those that are occupied in the breach of the peace: and thirdly, in
punishing such as have already broken the peace.

And here least any man should be deceived in not understanding what is meant
by these words. What is the breach of the peace.
The breach of the peace, he must first of all know, that by the breach of the
peace, is understood, not only that fighting which we commo^lie call the breach
of the peace, but also that every murder, rape, manslaughter, and felony,
whatsoever, and every affraieng, (or putting in fear) of the Queens people,
whether it be by unlawful wearing of armor, or by assembling of people to do
any unlawful act, are taken to be disturbances or breaches of the peace.

13. H. 7.10. Cur.
13 But now, To prevent things against the peace.
for the better preventing that nothing be done against the peace, any of
these officers aforesaid may take (or arrest) suspected persons, which walk
in the night, and sleep in the day: or which do haunt any house, where is
suspicion of bauderie: and they may carry them before a Justice of the peace,
to find suerties of their good behavior. And if any such officer be not of
sufficient strength to do that alone, Fitz in Just. Del ^.171.
then may he take meet aid of his neighbors thereto: and they, in such cases,
be compellable to help and assist him.

Any of these officers may also arrest such strange persons as do walk
abroad in the night season: and for that cause the said statute of Winchester
did ordain, 13. Ed. 1
that night watches should be kept yeerelie, from the feast of the Ascension
until Michaelmas, by six men at every gate of every city, by twelve men in
every Borough town, and in every other town by six men, or four men, or
according to the number of inhabitants in the town, all the night long from
Sun setting to Sun rising: so that if any stranger did pass, he should be
arrested till the morning, and then for at large (if no suspicion were found of
him) but if any suspicion fell out against him, then he should be imprisoned
till he might be lawfully delivered. And of these watches, the officers before
named have the charge within the limits (or places) of their authorities as the
Constable in his town, the Borsholder in his Boroe, and the high Constable
within al his Hundred: and these officers ought to see these Watches duly set
and kept, and ought also to cause Hue and Cry to be raised after such as will
not obey the arrest of such watchmen.

^a. Nor ^amp. ^Ed. 3. ^ap. 3.
Again, if any person whatsoever (except the Queens servants and ministers in
her presence, or in executing her precepts, or their offices, or such as shall
assist them: and except it be upon Hue and Cry made to keep the peace, and
that in places where acts against the Peace do happen) shall be so bold, as
to go, or ride armed, by night, or by day, in Faires, Markets, or any other
places: then any Constable or any other of the said Officers, may take such
armor from him, for the Queens use, and may also commit him to the Jail. And
therefore, it shall be good in this behalf, for these officers to stay and
artest all such persons as they shall find to carry Dags, or Pistols, or to be
apparelled with privy coats, or dublets: ^1. Eliz. Reg.
as by the Proclamation (made in the one and twentieth year of the reign of
our Sovereign Lady that now is) they are specially commanded.

17 R. 2. c. 8.
Furthermore, if any great assembly, or rumor of people be made in manner of
insurrection, then the Shiriffes, Constables, and the said other ministers,
having knowledge thereof, ought to go with the strength of the county, and to
set themselves against it, and ought also to take and imprison such offenders.

Lastly, Bar. 2^ e^ Fi^ 22. Ed. 35. Bri^
if any man do threaten to kill another, and he which is so threatened do pray
any of these Officers to arrest the other to find suerties of the Peace, then
may such an officer arrest him to find such suertie before a Justice of the
Peace, and may also carry him to prison if he refuse to find it.

To pacify and punish the breach of the peace.
14 Thus much I have spoken of those things which do bend toward the breach
of the peace: 1. H. 7*
but now I will come nearer, to the breach it self, and withal to the
pacifieng and punishing of the same.

If therefore a Constable, or any other of the said officers, shall see any
men going about to break the peace, as by using hot words, by which an Affray
is like to grow, then ought such Officer to command those persons to avoid upon
pain of imprisonment: and if they will not depart, but shall draw weapon, or
give any blow, then ought he to do his best to depart them, and to keep
them in sunder: and he may (for that purpose) both use his own weapon, 3. H.
7. cap. 10.21. H. 7. cap. 21.
and may also call others to assist him. In which doing, if any such officer,
or other person coming on his part, do take hurt, he shall have good remedy
by action against him that did the hurt: but if any of them that made the
Affraie, be hurt by such officer, or by any of his company, then such a hurt
person has no remedy at all for it.

13. E. 4. cap. 9.
And if he that makes an Affray do fly into an house, when such an officer
comes to arrest him: then may that officer break open the doors to take
him: and if he that made the Affray do fly from thence also, yet may the
Officer follow him, and in fresh suite take him, though it be in another Shire
or County.

So, if two men be fighting together in a house (the doors being shut) yet may
such an Officer break open the doors to cause the peace to be kept, though
none of the parties have taken hurt, And in both these causes, such an officer
may carry them before a Justice of the peace to find Suertie for the peace,
because they have broken the peace already, and are meet to be bound that
they shall not thenceforth break it again.

But if any of the parties to an Affray, Fitz. 72.38. Ed. 3 6. and 22. li. As.
56.
have received any dangerous hurt, then ought such Officer to arrest him that
did the hurt, and to carry him to the Jail, there to remain till he find
suertie to appear at the next Jail delivery: otherwise he may with less
labor carry him to a Justice of the peace, who ought to take order for such
suertie, because the fact may fall out to be Felony, if so be that he which
was hurt do happen to die within one year and a day next following such hurt
done.

And as these Officers ought to are rest those that do make Assault upon any
private persons, 5. H. 7.
so also may they arrest any such as shall make assault (or Affray) upon
themselves whilst they be in doing their offices: and may for that purpose
both lawfully defend themselves, and also take the offenders and commit them
to the Jail, or carry them to a Justice of the peace, for the finding of such
suertie as is aforesaid.

Bar. 101 en Fitz.
But if one do assalt a man, in, or nigh the high way, to rob him, and be taken
by the true man, or by any other, and be brought to the Constable, or such
other Officer of the place: then ought such Officer, not only to take him to
his ward, but also to carry him before a Justice of Peace to cause him to
give suertie for his Good abearing.

^. Ed. 3. cap. 14.17. E 4. cap. 5.
So, if any man do suspect another of Murder, or Felony, and do declare the
same to any such Officer of the place, the^ such officer may arrest the
suspected person, and he shall do well to carry him to a Justice of the Peace
together with him that does suspect him, to that end that they both may be
examined as apperteineth. Yea, any of the said officers may search within the
limit of his authority, ^. Ed. 4. ^ap. 9.
for any persons suspected of Felony: for it is a chiese part of their office
to repress felons.

^. H. 7.^5.
And therefore any of these Officers may (of his own authority) arrest one
that is indicted of Felony: So, if the common voice and fame be, that A. B.
has done a felony, that is sufficient cause for any of these Officers (that
shall thereof suspect him) to arrest him for it.

And I like well of their opinion which do hold, 1. H. 7.7
that if information be given to any such Officer, that a man and a woman be in
adultery, or fornication together, then the Officer may take company with
him, and that if he find them so, he may carry them to prison.

But this is to be marked, 3. H. 4.22. E 4 cap. 35.
that in the cases before, and such like, where such an Officer has arrested,
or has in his ward any offender that ought to be carried to the jail, there
such an Officer is not bound forthwith to carry him, but may well for a
reasonable time keep him in the Stocks, until that convenient provision of
strength may be made to convey him safely thither. 4. Ed. cap. 10
And when he shall bring such offender to the jail, then ought the Jailer to
receive the same freely, without taking any thing of the Officer for it.

Serving of precepts.
15 Hitherto (as you see) I have spoken of the Constable, and of these other
Officers, so far only as they have authority by their own offices, without
any commandment from others. But for so much as a great part of their duty
(concerning the peace) rests in the making of due execution of the precepts
of Higher officers, and specially of the Justices of the peace, who be (as it
were) immediately set over them, let us also see after what manner these
Constables, and other the said inferior ministers of the Peace, ought to
behave themselves in that behalf.

Albeit then, that these said Officers be subject to the commandments of the
Justices of jail delivery, and of Oier and Terminer, and of some Higher
Justices, yea, and to the precepts of Coroners also, and of other Officers, in
some certain cases, yet because most commonly they are called upon by the
Justices of Peace, ^. H. 8. p. 18. ^. H. 7. p. 22.
they ought specially to show themselves obedient to their precepts, and may
not dispute whether their commandments be grounded upon sufficient authority,
or no: as knowing that although a Justice of the Peace (which is a Judge of
Record) should direct a Warrant beyond his authority to a Constable, or one
other of the said Officers, yet shall such Officer be holden excused for
executing the same, howsoever that Justice of Peace himself be blamed for it.

If therefore a Warrant for the Peace, or good abearing, happen to be directed
to any of these said Officers, then ought he with all speed and secrecy to
find out the party: and then also may he lay his hands upon him, and show
him the matter, and require him in the Queens name to go with him to put in
suertie according to the Warrant. 21. H. cap. 3
And this if the party shall refuse to do, then ought such Officer forthwith
to arrest him, and to conueye him to prison, without carrieng him to any
Justice: in which doing, if the party shall offer any resistance, or shall
seek to escape, then also may such Officer justify the beating, or the
hurting of him.

But if the party shall yield to go and give Suertie, 21. H cap. ^
and yet will not go to such Justice as made out the Warrant, but to some other
Justice, then ought such officer to give him that liberty, so that it be not
far out of the Limit, for else so great travel might follow upon the Officer,
as rather he than the offender might seem to be punished by it.

And here the Officer must take regard, and consider whether the Warrant do
come directly from the mere authority of the Justices of Peace, or else be
grounded upon a writ of Supplicauit sent down from higher authority (which
difference ought to appear plainly in all Warrants that be well and orderly
made.) And if the Warrant be grounded upon such a Writ, then may such Officer
compel the party to go to the very same Justice or Justices of Peace that
made out the warrant, and otherwise he may carry him to prison, as is said
before.

Neither is it requisite, that such an Officer should danse up and down after
the party (as many use to do) until he can find out suerties: but he may
lawfully keep him, until that he can get suerties to come unto him: the
ignorance of which point is the cause, both that many an evil man escapes,
and many an honest Officer is punished for it.

But here it happens many times, that the purtie (hearing that the peace is
granted against him) offers himself with suerties, for that cause unto some
other Justice of Peace, or finds such suertie in some of the Courts at
Westminster, and so has a Supersedeas ready to show such Officer, as comes
to him with a Warrant as is aforesaid. Now, if that be so, then is the Officer
discharged thereby, and ought not any further to molest the party. But yet it
shall be good, that such Officer do keep the Supersedeas for his better
discharge: least otherwise he be called to account for not serving the Warrant
that was sent unto him.

If a Warrant be directed to a Constable, or such other Officer, to arrest our
that is indicted of Felony, 22. lib. Ass 55. Cor. 261 288.318 en Fitz.
then may such Officer justify the killing of such a party, if it so be, that
he cannot otherwise take him: or of so be, that he resist, or fly, when he is
taken.

Finally, the Constable or such other of the said Officers, having arrested any
to be conveyed so the Jail, must take good heed, that he do not willingly, or
negligently, suffer such party to escape from him. For, if the arrest were for
Felony, then by a willing escape the Officer himself becomes a Felon also.
And of whatsoever other kind the offense be, if the Officer do, by his will,
or negligence, suffer the party to escape from him, he shall be fined for it,
according to the quantity of his fault, by the discretion of those that shall
be Judges of it. And least any such Officer should flatter himself, in
thinking that he may pass through with some easy Fine, ^1. H. 4. cap. 12.
Stan^. 35
I let him know, that the Judges of his fault may set his fine, equal with
the value of all his goods, if in their discretions the same do so require.

16 Thus have I performed the first part of my promise, and have showed, The
equal duty of these Officers, in matters besides the Peace*
what is the equal and like duty of every of the said Officers in matters
concerning the Peace, both by their own authority, and also in doing the
commandments of the Justices of peace: now therefore I must go forward to the
second part of my purpose, and am to declare their like duty in other points
of service, that do not concern the Peace. For equal power is indifferently
given to any of these Officers by some Statutes of the realm, whereof these
that follow be the chief.

Attenda^t for the execution of statutes.
17 All Constables and other the said Officers ought to be attendant, aiding,
33. H. 8. ca. 10 and 37. H. 8. cap. 7.
and assisting to the Justices of Peace, for the execution of all and every
the acts (made in, or before the Parleament, holden in the 33. year of the
reign of King Henry the eight) concerning Reteinors, giving of Liueries,
Maintenance, Embracerie, Bowestaues, Archerie, Unlawful games, Forestallers,
Regrators, Vittaile, Vittailers, and Inholders, or any of them, upon pain
that the said Constables, and other the said Officers shall make such Fines,
as by two of the said Justices of Peace shall be assessed.

Physicians.
18 All Constables, and other the said Officers within London, 14. H 8. cap.
5. 32. H 8. cap. 2.1. M. Pa. 1. cap. 9.
or within seven miles thereof, ought (upon request made, to aid and assist
the President of the College of the Physicians in London, and other persons
authorized for the due execution of the Statutes made concerning Physicians,
Apothecaries, and Surgeons.

23. H. 6. cap. 14.
19 If any person shall (without lawful bargain) puruey or take any thing of
any of the Queens liege people, Purueiors.
to the use of any (other than of the Queen and her house) and thereof notice
be given to the Constable, or such other Officer of the place, then such
Officer ought (under the pain of twenty pound) to arrest such taker, and to
carry him to the next prison.

28. H. 6. sta. 2 c. 2
No Purueior of the Queen ought to take any horse, or cart, but by the
delivery of the Mayor, Bailife, Constable, or such other officer of the place
whence that taking shall be.

25. Ed. 3 cap. 1. 36. Ed. 3 sta. 2 c. 2
Corn ought to be taken for the Queens house, by striked measure of eight
bushels to the quarter, according as is used throughout the land: and the
takers of all things to be taken for the Queens house, shall make their
purueiance by the very values thereof, by the view of the Constable, or other
such Officer, and by appraisement under oath of four other good men of the
town, where the taking shall be: and such taking shall be made without driving
the preisors by compassion, menacing, or other villainy, to set any other price
than their oath will, and as commonly runs in the next Markets.

Takers, Undertakers, 2 and 3. P and Mar. cap. 6.
their Deputies, or servants, shall not take any Beefes, Weathers, Lambs,
Calves, or any kind of Saltfish, or any kind of grain, or any Butter in any
vessels, or Cheese, Bacon, Conies, Pigs, Geese, Capons, or Hens, but by
Commission, and a Blanke thereto for that shire annexed: in which Blanke, the
said several things so to be taken, and the prises of them shall be written,
and to which Blanke, the High Constable, Pety Constable, or Headborow of the
place which any such taking shall be, ought to subscribe his name or sign
manuell. And such Taker ought then also to make a Brief or Docket in writing
subscribed with his name, containing every of the said things so taken in
every place: and ought then also (under the pain of a Hundred Marks) to
deliver the same to the said High Constable, Petie Constable, or Headborow,
who also ought to deliver it over to the Justices of Peace at their next
general Sessions within that county.

10. Ed. 3 cap. 1.
20 In the takings for the Queens house, Tails (or Indentures) ought to be
made and sealed, between the taker and the owner (in the presence of the
Constable, or such other officer, and the preisors of the place) by which
Tails (or Indentures) satisfaction ought to be made to the owner for his
things so taken.

20. H. 6. cap. 8.
21 If any Taker will make purueiance of any thing (not exceeding the value of
xl. s.) and make not ready payment in hand therefore, it is lawful for the
owner to retain the thing so taken, and to resist such purueiance: and the
Constable, Tythingma^, or chief pledge of the place (being thereto required by
the owner) ought to aid and assist such owner in making such resistance, under
pain to yield unto him the value of the thing taken, and his double damages.

14. Eliz. cap. 5.
22 If the Constable, Tythingman, Rogues*
or such other officer, of any place, be negligent, and do not his best
endeavor, for the apprehension of all sturdie Rogues, or vagabends, that shall
beg, wander, or misorder themselves within his authority, and for the bringing
of them before a Justice of Peace, but shall suffer any such to escape, then
shall such Constable, or Officer forfaite vj. s. viij.d. for every such Rogue.

Coroners.
23 All Constables and other the said Officers must be attendant upon Coroners,
21. H. ^ cap. 2.22. H. 8* cap. 14.32. H. 8* cap. 3.
for the abiuring and conueieng of such persons, as shall take the Churchyard as
a Sanctuary, for safegarde of their lives, by occasion of any Felony by them
done.

22 All these things heretofore rehearsed, whether they concern the
preservation of the Peace, or any other matter besides the Peace, may and ought
to be done and executed indifferently (as I think) by any of the said
Officers within the precinct of his authority: that is to say, as well by the
high Constable of the whole Hundred or Franchise, within his Hundred or
franchise, as by the Constable, pety Constable, Tythingman, Borsholder,
Boroehead, Headboroe, Thirdboroe, or chief Pledge, within his town, parish,
Tything, Boroe, or Hamlet: and that so, as none of them has more power of
office therein than the other, although some of them have longer limits of place
tha^ the rest.

But now I am come to such things as do severally belong to some of these
Officers, High Constable of a Hundred.
so as the others may not meddle therewith (which is the third part of my
promise) and therefore I will take that in hand also: and because the Constable
of the Hundred, or franchise, is the greatest of these Officers, both in
respect of his larger precinct of place, and also of the higher trust that is
committed unto him, I will begin at him: who, as he is not by and by set alone,
but is for some matters no further authorized than some other of the said
Officers, so I will first begin at those, and then come to the rest that belong
only to himself.

14. Eliz. cap. 5.
25 The money appointed to be levied by the Churchwardens of every parisheth
Sunday for the relief of Prisoners in the Jail, Prisoners.
ought (under the pain of five l.) to be paid by them once every quarter of
a year to the high Constables or head Officers of every Hundred, Tything,
Wapentake, town, or parish: and the said high Constables, or head Officers
ought (under the pain of 5. l.) to pay over the same money so to them paid,
of the next quarter Sessions of the Peace, to such person as shall be appointed
by the Justices of Peace to receive the same.

Collec^or for the poor.
26 If any person lawfully appointed by the Justices of Peace to be Collector
for the poor, shall refuse to accept it, 14. El^ cap. 5.
or accepting it, shall be negligent therein, he shall lose to the poor of that
place forty shillings, which shall be levied by distress, or recovery by
Action by the high Constable, or Tythingman of the place: who also, if he be
negligent, or refuse so to sue within two months next after such default,
shall lose five pounds.

It seems to me, that in these two cases next above, the words, high
Constables, high Tythingmen, and head Officers do exclude Petie Constables,
Borsholders, and such like to meddle therein: because none are called High, or
Head, but in comparison of Low and Base. High Constable alone.
Now therefore I will speak of matters concerning the high Constable of the
hundred alone.

5. Eliz. cap. 4.
27 High Constables of Hundreds in all such Shires, Pety sessions.
where Petie Sessions for servants and laborers (otherwise called statute
Sessions) were used to be kept, before the first day of the Parleament holden
in the fifth year of the reign of our gracious Queen Elizabeth may yet still
hold their said Sessions, so that nothing be done in them, repugnant to the
Statute of laborers and servants made in the same Parleament.

13. E. 1. sta. Wy.
28 The Constables of Hundreds, Watches and highwaies.
and of Franchises, ought to make presentment to the Justices of Peace, and to
all other Justices thereto assigned, of the defaults of watches, and of the
defaults of the Queens highwaies not enlarged so, as no ditches, underwood, or
bushes be within 200. foot on every side of the same, and also of such as
lodge strangers in vplandish towns, for whom they will not answer.

14. Eli. cap. 5.
29 The Constables, or Tythingmen of every Hundred, Rape, Poor people.
or Wapentake, in which any abiding place to set the poor people in, shall be
appointed by the Justices of Peace, shall once every month (under the pain
of twentis shillings) make a view and search of all the aged, impotent, and
lame persons within their authority, and all such as they shall find, not
being borne, nor within three years next before dwelling within that division
(except lepreus and Bedread persons) they shall presently see conveyed, on
horseback, in cart, or otherwise by their discreations, to the next Constable,
and so from Constable to Constable, the directest way, till every of them be
brought to the place where he or she was borne, or most conversant by the space
of three years next before, there to remain in some such abiding place, or
otherwise to be provided for.

High ways.
30 Estreates indented ought to be made by the Clearks of the Peace, 2. and 3.
P and Mar. cap. 8 and 5. El. 13.
and by Stewards of Leetes, of all forfaitures rising in the Sessions of the
Peace, or in Leetes, upon the Statutes of highwaies: of which Estreats, one
part ought to be delivered yeerelie within six weeks after Michaelmas, to
the Bailife or high Constable of the Hundred, Lathe, or Wapentake, wherein the
default was committed, and the other part to the Constable and Churchwardens of
the parish in which the default was made, to the insent, that such Bailife, or
chief Constable, may thereby levy by distress the same forfaitures, or the
double thereof (if no distress can be found, or if such forfaitures be not
paid within twenty days after a lawful demand of the same by the said
officer) and to the intent also that the said Constable and Churchwardens of
the parish may thereby call the said Bailife, or High Constable to account before
two Justices of the Peace (the one being of the Quorum) between the first day
of March, and the last of April yearly for the said forfaitures, which ought
by the said Churchwardens to be bestowed on the Highwaies in their parish. And
upon such account, every such Bailife, or high Constable shall have for his
pains viii. pence of every pound levied and paid by him, and may also
retain xij. pence for the fee of the Clearke of the Peace or Steward of the
Leete, for every such Estreate by any of them delivered, as is aforesaid.

Constable of a town.
31 Next after the Constable of the Hundred, Wapentake, or Franchise, follows
the Constable of a Town, who is somewhere called a High Constable, for that he
has there a Petie Constable under him, and is sometimes also termed a Head
Officer, because in some Corporate towns Constable is part of the name of
their Incorporation. And now also because there be sundry things that are by
the Statute Laws indifferently referred to him, or to the Tythingman,
Borsholder, or such other inferior officer of the place: therefore I will
first set down those, and then afterward speak of the rest that are committed
to him only, and to none of them.

Servants
32 No person retained in husbandry, 5. Eliz. cap. 4.
or in any the Arts appointed by the Statute of Laborers (made in the fifth
year of our Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth) may depart, after the time of
such reteinour expired, out of the town or parish where he last served, to
serve in another, unless he have a Testimonial under the seal of the
Constable, or other such Officer, and of two other honest householders of the
town or parish where he last served, according to this form: Memorandum, that
A.B. late servant of C.D. of E. in the county of K. husbandman, or Tailor,
etc. is licensed to depart from his said Master, and is at his liberty to
serve elsewhere, according to the statute in that case made and provided. In
witness whereof, etc. dated the day, month, year, and place of the making
thereof. Which Testimonial, the Parson, Vicar, or Curate of the parish where
such Master, Mistress, or Dame does dwell, ought to register, taking only
ij.d. therefore. And if such person be accepted into any other service, without
showing such Testimonial to the Constable, or such other Officer, Curate, or
Churchwarden of the place where he shall be accepted, he shall be imprisoned
till he procure such a Testimonial, which if he do not within 21. days next
after the first day of his imprisonment, he shall be whipped as a Vagabond.

5. Eliz. cap. 4.
33 In the time of hay, Laborers.
or corneharuest, the Constable, or such other Officer of any township, upon
request made, and for avoiding the loss of any corn, grain, or haie, may
cause all such artificers and persons (as be meet to labor) by his discretion
to serve by the day, for the mowing, reaping, shearing, getting, or inning of
corn, grain, or hay, according to the skill and quality of the person: and
if any such person shall refuse so to do, then ought such Officer (under the
pain of forty shillings) to imprison such refuser in the Stocks, by the space
of two days and one night.

Rogue.
34 Every Rogue that shall be apprehended, 18. Eliz cap. 3.
ought to be conveyed (from the Justice of Peace before whom he shall be
brought) by the Constable, or such other Officer of the parish where the
apprehension shall be, but only to the Constable, Tythingman, or other such
Officer of the next Towneship, or parish, in the next Hundred, and so from one
Hundred to another, by the Constable, or such other Officer of every such
Towneship or parish which shall be next in every such Hundred, the direct way,
until they shall come to the Jail or prison appointed for such Rogues: under
the pain of vj. s. viij d. for every default of such Constable or Officer.

35* The Constable, Borsholder, High ways.
or other such Officer, and the Churchwardens of every parish, ought yearly
upon the Tuesday or Wednesday in Easter week, to call together a number of the
parishioners, and to choose two honest men of their parish, to be Surueiors of
the works for amendment of the high ways within their parish leading to any
market town: and ought then also to appoint six days for the amendment of
those high ways before Midsommer then next following: and ought openly in the
Church, the next Sunday after Easter, to give knowledge of the same six days.

They also ought to have one part of the Estreates indicted, and may call the
Bailife or high Constable to Account, ^2. and 3. P and Mar. cap. 8. and ^5. El.
13.
concerning the forfaitures for default of amending Highwaies, as has already
appeered before. And they also or any of them, may levy by Distress and by
sale of such Distress, all sums of money forfaited for any cause within the
Statute of Highwaies made in the eighteenth year of the Queens Majesty that
now is (if so be that the Surueiors of High ways shall not before have levied
and employed the same within one year next after the offense committed) and
shall yield Account thereof before two Justices of the Peace, 18. Eliz. cap. 10.
as is before showed.

36 These things last aforesaid, do (in mine opinion) pertain as well to the
charge of a Tythingman, Borsholder, Headboroe, Chief pledge, or such other
inferior Officer of a town or parish, as they do to the Constable of such a
town or parish, Things belonging only to the Constable.
that has any of those other Officers there under him. But some other points
of charge there be, that belong to him only, and to none of them: as for
example.

Weights and measures.
37 Every City, Borough, 8. H 6. cap. 5. 11. H. 7. cap. 4.
and market town, that have a Constable, ought also to have common measures
sealed, and also common weights sealed, at which the inhabitants may freelye
weigh.

Merchandise.
38 If any woolles, 14. H. ^ cap. 5.
or other merchandise, be shipped to the Staple, in any suspected place
adioining to the coast of the water, then Indentures ought thereof to be made
between the owner, and the Mayor or Constable of that place: or otherwise such
merchandise shall be forfaited.

^3. H. 8. cap. 9.
39 The Mayor, Shirifes, Bailifes, Unlawful games
Constables, and other head Officers within every City, Borough, and town
within this Realm, where any such Officers be, ought under the pain of xl. s.
for every default, once every month at the least, to make search (as well
within liberties, as without) in all places where any unlawful games shall be
suspected to be kept, and may arrest and imprison as well the keepers of such
places, as the haunters to the same, till they be bound, no more to keep and
haunt such places. And if any such Head Officers, shall find or know, that any
artificer, craftesman, husbandman, apprentise, labourer, servant at husbandry,
iourneyman, or servant of artificer, or that any mariner, fisherman, waterman
or seruingman, does play at the Tables, dice, cards, tennise, bowls, clash,
coiting, logating, or any other unlawful game, out of Christmas time, or out
of their Masters house or presence in the Christmas time (unless it be by the
license of such Master as has 100. l. by the year, or above, and then also
that plaieng be within the precinct of such Masters house, garden, or orchard)
then such head Officer may commit such offender to ward, till he will be bound
by Obligation to the Queens use (in such sum as to the discretion of such
Officer shall be thought reasonable) that he shall not from thencefoorth use
such unlawful games.

Bridges.
40 Those four Justices of Peace, 22. H. 8. cap. 5.
that be authorized by the Statute to make taxation of money for the amendment
of any decayed bridge in the high way, ought to make that taxation, by the
assent of the Constables, or of two of the most honest inhabitants of every
town or parish.

Vessels.
41 In all Cities, Boroughes, 23. H. 8. cap. 4.
and towns, wherein no Wardens of Cowpers be, the Majors, Shirifes, Bailifes,
Constables, or other head officers there have power to search, view, and gawge,
barrels, kilderkins, firkins, and other vessels, to be made there, and to take
such advantage thereby, and in such manner, as the Wardens of Cowpers within the
City of London may take on every behalf.

42 The Majors, Shirifes, Hats and caps.
Constables, 21. H. 8. cap. 9. 1. Mar. Parl. 1. cap. 11.
and other head Officers of any place, to which woollen hats, bonnets, or caps
(being made out of this Realm) shall be brought, ought (upon knowledge thereof
to them to be given by the Customer of such place, or his deputy) to join
with such Customer, or deputy, in the sale of such hats, bonnets, or caps for
such prises, as by the statute are limited: upon pain to forfaite twenty
pounds for every time that they shall be remiss in that sale.

43 In all these cases also, last before rehearsed, it seems that
Borsholders, Tythingmen, Headboroes, and other such (being in towns and
parishes, underneath Constables that be there) cannot meddle: because such
Constables be (in comparison of them) called Head Officers.

Now therefore upon all the whole discourse before written, The Conclusion.
it may well appear, that Borsholders, Tythingmen, Headboroes, Boroeheads,
Thirdboroes, and chief pledges, whether they be there the only Officers for
the peace, or be underneath Constables, may within their Borowes, Tythings, or
Hamlets, do many things that the others may do: and that there are many
other points, which those other Officers may do, and wherewith these
Borsholders and the rest cannot meddle at all. And therefore, to avoid idle
repetition of matters already spoken, I say shortly, that it an Under
Borsholder, Tythingman, Headboroe, Boroehead, Thirdboroe, or chief pledge,
will see what belongs to him to do, he must look before upon all such
cases, where his power is declared to be equal (for those points) with the
power, either of a High Constable of the Hundred, or a Constable of a town or
parish: for in all such things he has to deal as well as they: but where any
thing before is showed to apperteine only to the High Constable of a Hundred,
or only to the Constable, or chief or head Officer of a town or parish,
there such a Borsholder, Tythingman, or any of the rest, has nothing to do
with it.

And thus, having opened, so shortly, and plainly, as I could the duties of all
these said ministers of the peace, I do shut up this work: desiring those
that shall take any profit of this labor, to yield thanks to God the most
liberal giver.

FOr the more ease of every of these Officers, in finding out of that which
belongs to them, I have divided this Treatise before into three and forty
Articles (or parts) by which each of these Officers may readily come to all that
which belongs to his own charge, if he will mark this Table following: for,

The High Constable of the Hundred, Franchise, or Wapentake, has to deal with all those matters that be contained within any of these Articles, that is to say,

Articles concerning 3. His name. 4. His beginning. 11.12.13.14.15. The Peace
to be kept: and serving of Warrants. 16.17.18.19. 20 21.22.23. Execution of
Statutes: Physicians: Purueiors: Rogues: Coroners. 24.25.26 27.28.29.30.43.
Prisoners: Poor: Petie Sessions: Watches: High ways: Poor: High ways.

The Constable of a Town, or Parish has his part in all such things as be
expressed in any of these Articles:

Articles concerning 4. His name and beginning.
11.12.13.14.15.16.17.18.19.20.21.22.23. Keeping of the Peace: Serving of
warrants: Execution of statutes: Physicians: Purueiors: Rogues: Coroners.
24.25.26.31.32.33.34.35.36.37.38.39.40.41.42.43. Prisoners: Collectors for the
Poor: Servants or laborers: Rogues: Highwaies: Weights and measures:
Merchandise: Unlawful games: Bridges: Vessels: Hats and Caps.

And every Borsholder, Tythingman, Borochead, Headboroe, Thirdboroe, and
chief pledge, may for his Boroe, or Tything, learn his office by these
Articles:

Articles concerning 5.6 7.8.9. His name: Beginning: first Office: latter
Office. 10.11.12.13.14.15.16.17.18.19.20.21.22.23. Keeping of the Peace:
Serving of warrants: Execution of statutes: Physicians: Purueiors: Rogues:
Coroners. 31.32.33.34.35.36.43. Servants and laborers: Rogues: Highwaies.

THE DVTIE OF CHVRCHWARDENS.
Whilst I passed through some of the statutes before, concerning the Offices of
Constable and Borsh^lder, I found them mingled with diverse duties perteining to
the Churchwardens of parishes: the Surueiours of the highwaies: the
Distributors of the provision for the destruction of vermin: the Collectors
and Overseers for the poor: and the Wardens and Collectors for the houses of
Correction: whereby I was also moved to add somewhat of these Offices, the
rather because I was persuaded, that with that little more of labor, I might
do a great deal more of good, seeing that thereby the plain country man
should (after a sort) be furnished with all manner of understanding (in the
temporal law) needful for the exercise of any of those offices that may
lightly fall upon him.

First therefore, I will speak of the Churchwardens office, but that so far
forth only, as the common laws and statute Laws of the Realm do lead
me* knowing, that such other parts of that Office, as do rest upon the Laws
Ecclesiastical, be from tune to time sufficiently both taught and called upon,
by those that have the Execution of the same.

These Churchwardens of Parishes be taken (in favor of the Church) to be for
some purposes a manner of Corporation at the common law: that is to say, Office
of Churchwardens by the common law.
Persons enabled by that name, to take mooueable goods or cattels, and to sue,
and be sued at the Law, ^. H. 7. ^l^mo.
concerning such goods for the use and profit of their parish. And therefore,
a man may well in his life time give, or by his last will beqeath money, or
other moveable things to the Churchwardens, or to the parishioners of a parish,
either for the reparation of their Church, or toward the ^uie^ of books, Li.
Intra ^ol. 576.
Communion cups, Linneen clothes, or other decent ornaments or furniture for
the Church. Which maney of gift is so much favored in the Law, that it is not
altogether needful, in such a gift, for a man to use to express words or
writing. For if a man do buie a Bell, and do hang it up in the Steeple, or
do make a Pewe, and do set it up in the Church, and do neither make any
word or writing thereof, yet is this Bell, 11. H. 4. cap. 12.8. H. 7. cap. 1^.
or Pewe, by this dedicated or given to the Church.

They shall have Action.
2 Now, although Churchwardens shall have none Action at the common law to
recover a legacy, or such other thing which they never had: yet nevertheless,
if any such goods, or ornaments of the Church be once in their possession and
custody, 37. H. 6.30 and 34 11. H. 4. cap. 12.8. E. 4.^
then shall they maintain an Appeal of Robbery against him that steals
them, or an Action of Trespass against him that shall wrongfully take them away
(though it be the Vicar, or Parson himself) and the damages that they shall
recover thereby, shall be to the use and benefit of the parish, and not to
their own use. Fitz. n^ br. 91. ^ mes. 19. H. 6.66. ad on^
But if those Churchwardens (from whom the goods were so taken) shall happen
to die, before any Action by them brought for the goods, yet shall the next
Churchwardens have Action for the same.

3 And for so much as these Churchwardens be officers, They may not waste the
Church goods.
put in trust for the behoof of their parish, therefore also are they not
enabled with any other power, than for the good and profit of the parish. So
that Churchwardens can neither give away, nor release, at their own pleasure,
the goods of the Church. For if the Parishioners shall find that they do
unprofitably waste, or mispende the goods of the Parish, then may they remove
such churchwardens, by making their choice of new: ^ E. 4.6
which new Officers may (by Action of account) call to account the former
Churchwardens, They may be removed, and braught to account.
and shall thereby compel them, both to give reckoning of their doings during
their office, and also to make satisfaction to the use of the Parish for the
harm that it has received by their fault. And although the usage and custom
of the Parish be, that the Churchwardens there shall continue in their Office,
^. H. 8. p. 5.
by the space of one whole year or two years, or more (as indeed some Parishes
have such customs) yet upon such, or the like misdemeanor found in them, may
the parishioners at all times proceed to an Election of new Churchwardens, and
may remove the old, for that otherwise they have no mean by our Law to call
them to their Account, but by such as shall be put in their place. Nevertheless,
those former Churchwardens shall (upon the making of such their Account) have
allowance of all needful sums of money, or other things, which they have
expended, either upon the reparation of the body of the Church, or for the
provision of meet and lawful ornaments, or other furniture of the Church or
Parish: because they are compellable (by the Ecclesiastical Laws) so to lay
forth the goods of the parish committed to their custody and charge. They
shall have allowance also (upon such their Account) of the money paid by them
for relief of prisoners in the common jail, by virtue of the Statute 14. Eli.
caep. 5. and of whatsoever other thing that they are by law chargeable to do.

They have not to do with lands.
4 This (in effect) is the power and charge that the common Law does give to
Churchwardens: for, as touching any estate in lands, or the profits of any
lands, Churchwardens have not to meddle at all: insomuch, that if the walls,
windows, or doors of the Church, be broken, or the trees in the Churchyard
be cut down, or the grass thereof be eaten up, then the Parson, or Vicar (and
not the Churchwardens) shall have the Action for it: 11. H. 4. cap. 1^.12. H.
7. cap. 27.23. H. 7. cap. 9.
because Churchwardens are not by Law allowed to be a Corporation for any
other thing, Churchwardens office by the statute.
than for mooueable goods only. Now therefore I will show how their office is
increased by a few Statute laws, that do concern the same.

^. Eliz. cap. 2.
5 All persons inhabiting within the Queens Majesty's dominion, Repair to the
Church.
shall diligently and faithfully (having no lawful or reasonable excuse to be
absent) endeavor themselves to resort to their parish Church or Chapel
accustomed, or (upon reasonable let thereof) to some usual place where common
prayer and such service of God ( as is contained in the book of common prayer)
shall be used in such time of let, upon every Sunday and other days ordained
and used to be kept as holy days: and then and there to abide orderly and
soberly, during the time of the common prayer, preachings, or other service of
God, there to be used and ministered, upon pain of punishment by the Censures
of the Church, and also upon pain that every person so offending shall forfait
for every such offense xij.d. to be levied by the Churchwardens of the parish
where such offense shall be done, to the use of the poor of the same parish, of
the goods, lands, and tenements of such offender, by way of distress.

High ways.
6 The Constables and Churchwardens of every parish shall yearly upon the
Tuesday or Wednesday in Easter week, 2 and 3.^ and Mar^ cap. 8.^ 5. El. 13^
call together a number of the parishioners, and shall then elect and choose two
honest persons of the parish to be Surueiors and orderers of the works for one
year for amendemint of the Highwaies in their parish, leading to any Market
Town: which persons shall take upon them the execution of their said offices,
upon pain, every of them making default to forfaite xx. s. And the said
Constables and Churchwardens shall then also name and appoint six days for
the amendment of the said highwaies before Midsummer then next following: and
shall openly in the Church the next Sunday after Easter give knowledge of the
same six days. And they also ought to have one part of the Estreates
indented, and shall call the Constables to account, etc. as it does appear
before in the 30. Article of the Constables office.

See after also in the office of the Surueiors of the High ways, for leuieng
those forfaitures, by the Churchwardens, if the Surueiors shall not levy and
imploie the same within one year after the offense committed.

5. Eliz 5
7 If any person within this Realm shall (without lawful license) eat any
flesh upon any days now usually observed as fishdaies, Eat flesh.
or shall upon any Wednesday now newly limited to be observed as Fishday, have
above one dish of flesh, for which also he shall then have three several
dishes of Sea fish, shall forfaite three pounds for every such offense, or
else suffer three months imprisonment. And every person within whose house any
such offense shall be done, and being privy or knowing thereof, and not
effectuallye disclosing the same to some Public Officer having authority to
punish the same, shall for every offense forfaite forty shillings: the third
part of all which forfaitures shall be to the use of the Parish wherein the
offense shall be, and to be levied by the Churchwardens after any conviction in
that behalf.

License to eat flesh.
The license for eating of flesh, 5. Eliz. cap. 5.
to be given to any person for notorious sickness, by the Bishop of the
Dioces, or by the Parson, Vicar, or Curate of the Parish, ought to be registered
(if that sickness shall continue above eight days after such license
granted) in the church book with the knowledge of one of the Churchwardens
there: and the party licenced shall give iiij. d. to the Curate for the entry
thereof.

8. In every parish, 8. Eliz. ca. 15. and 14. Eli. cap. 11.
the Churchwardens, Destruction of vermin.
with six other parishioners (to be required by the Churchwardens) shall
yearly in one of the holydaies in Easter week, and at every other time when it
shall be needful, tax and assesse every person having the possession of any
lands or tithes within that parish, to pay such sums of money as they shall
think meet, according to the quantity of such their land or tithes. And if
any such person do deny to pay the same, or do not pay the same (within
fourteen dais next after request thereof made by the Churchwardens, or one of
them) then such person shall forfaite for every time five shillings, which
(together with the (...) assesed) shall he levied by distress of the goods
and cattels of such person, to be taken by the Churchwardens, or one of them,
the same distress to be ordered and used, as distresses taken for amerciaments
in any Leetes. And as well the said sums as penalties (if any of them be so
levied) shall be yearly by the Churchwardens, or one of them, for the time
being, delivered by Bills indented to two honest and substantial persons of
the parish which shall be elected and appointed by the Churchwardens, and shall
be named, The Distributors of the provision for the destruction of noisome
foul and vermin. And if the said Churchwardens, six persons, or
Distributors, or any of them, shall refuse or make default in the execution of
any part of this act, contrary to the form thereof, then such offender shall
forfait for every default five pound, the one moitie to the Queen, the other
to him or them (using tillage yearly within the same shire) that will sue
therefore in any court of Record.

For the rest of the office of the churchwardens, concerning this matter, see
afterward in the duty of these Distributers. See also in Constables, Artic.
25. for the jail money to be levied by churchwardens.

THE OFFICE OF the SVPERVISORS, Surueiors, or orderers of the works for
amending of the Highwaies.
Upon the six days appointed for 2. and 3. and Man cap. 8. 5. El. 1^
working in the High ways in such sort as is before declared in the sixth
Article of the Churchwardens office, every person for every Plough land in
tillage, or pasture that he or they shall occupy in the same parish, and
every other person keeping there a draught or plough, shall find and send,
at every day and place to be appointed for the amending of the ways in the
parish as is aforesaid, one waine or Cart, furnished after the custom of the
country, with Oxen, Horses, or other cattle, and all other necessaries, meet
to carry things convenient for that purpose, and also two able men with the
same, upon pain of every draught making default ten shillings. And every
other householder, and also every cottager and labourer of that parish, able to
labor, and being no hired servant by the year, shall by themselves, or one
sufficient labourer for every of them, upon every of the said six days, work
and travel in the amendment of the said highwaies, upon pain of every person
making default to lose for every day twelve pence. And if the carriages of the
parish or any of them shall not be thought needful by the Superuisors to be
occupied upon any of the said days, that then every such person that should
have sent any such carriage, shall send to the said work for every carriage
so spared two able men there to labor for that day, upon pain to lose for
every man not so sent to the said work twelve pence. And every person and
carriage abouesaide, shall have and bring with them such Shouels, Spades,
Pickes, Mattocks, and other tools and instruments, as they do make their own
ditches and fences withal, and such as be necessary for their said work. And
all the said persons and carriages shall do and keep their works, as they
shall be appointed by the said Superuisors, or one of them, eight hours of
every of the said days, unless they shall be otherwise licensed by the said
Superuisors, or one of them.

From henceforth it shall and may be lawful to all and singular Superuisor and
Superuisors and orderers of the works for the time being, for the amendment of
the said highwaies thereunto elected and appointed, according to the statute
made in the second and third year of King Philip and Queen Marie, for the
better reparation and amendment of the high ways within their several
parishes and limits where they shall be so made Superuisors (if it shall be so
to them thought necessary) to take and carry away of the rubbish or smallest
broken stones of any Quarrie, or Quarries lieng or being within the parish
where they shall be Superuisors without license, controllment or impeachment of
the owners or owner, so much as by their discretions shall be deemed and
judged necessary to the amendment of the said ways. And that for default of
any such Quarry or Quarries, it shall and may be lawful to every such
Superuisor, or Superuisors, for the use aforesaid, in the several grounds of
any person or persons, being within the parish, and limits where they shall be
Superuisors, and nigh adioining to the way or ways wherein such reparations
shall be thought necessary to be made, and wherein gravel, sand, or sinder is
likely to be found, to dig or cause to be dug, for gravel, sand, or
sinder, and likewise to gather stones lieng upon any lands or grounds within
the parish, and meet to be used to such service and purpose, and thereof to
take and carry away so much as by discretion of the said Superuisors shall be
thought necessary to be employed in the amendment of the said highwaies.
Provided always that it shall not be lawful to any such Superuisor, or
Superuisors, by virtue of this act, to cause any rubbish to be dug out of
any Quarrie or Quarries, but only shall extend to such rubbish as shall be
found there ready dug by the owner or owners of the said quarrie or
quarries, or otherwise by his or their license and commandment, nor shall not
extend to give authority to any Superuisor or Superuisors to dig, or cause
to be dug, any gravel, sand, or sinder in the house, garden, orcharde, or
medowe, of any person or persons, nor that it shall be lawful by this act to
any such Superuisor or Superuisors to cause any more pits to be dug for
gravel in any several and enclosed ground than one only, and that the same
pit or hole so dug for grauel as is aforesaid, shall not by any way be in
breadth or length above ten yards at the most. And that every such Superuisor
as shall cause any such pit to be made, and dug for gravel, sand, or
sinder, as is aforesaid, shall within one month next after any such digging
or pit made, cause the same to be filled, and stopped up with earth, at the
cost and charges of the Parishioners, upon pain to forfaite to the owner and
owners of the soil, wherein any such pit shall be made and dug, for every
default, five marks.

Eli. 13.
From henceforth, every such Superuisor and Superuisors, as is aforesaid, shall
by force of this act, within the parish or limits where he or they shall be
Superuisors, have full power and authority to turn any such water course, or
spring of water, being in any of the said highwaies, into any ditch, or ditches
of the several ground or soil of any person or persons whatsoever next
adioining to the said ways, in such manner and form as by the discretions of
the said Superuisors shall be thought meetest and convenient.

Such Superuisor, or Superuisors, for the time being within one month next
after default or offense made, done, or committed by any person or persons,
contrary to the provision, purport, and true meaning of the statute made
(concerning highwaies) in the second and third year of King Philip and Queen
Marie, shall present every such default or offense to the next Justice of Peace
for the time being, upon pain to forfeit for every such default and offense,
in such sort not by them presented, xl. s.

Every person or persons (except such as shall dwell in the City of London)
that shall be assessed to the payment of any Subsidy to her Majesty to five
l. in goods, or forty shillings in lands, or above, during all such time as he
shall stand so assessed and not altered, and being none of the parties
chargeable for the amendment of highwaies by any former law, but as a
Cottager, shall find two able men yearly, to labor in the highwaies, at such
days and times, as by the several statutes thereof are limited and appointed.
And every other that hereafter shall occupy a plough land in tillage or
pasture, lieng and being in several parishes, shall be chargeable to the
making of the ways within the parish where he dwells, as far forth, and
in such manner and form, as any person having a plough land, in any one parish,
is or ought to be chargeable, by reason of the said former statutes, or either
of them. And every person or persons, occupieng and keeping in his or their
hands or possessions, several or diverse plough lands, as aforesaid in
several or diverse towns, shall be charged to find in each town or parish
(where the plough lands being in his occupieng do lie) one Cart, Waine,
Tumbrell, dung Pot, or Court, Sleads, Carres, or Dragges, furnished for the
amendment and repairing of the highwaies within the several parishes where the
said plough lands do lie, in such manner and form, as if he or they were a
Parishioner dwelling within the parishes, where the same several plough lands
do lie.

Every person or persons, that shall not repair, ditch, or scowre any haies,
fences, ditches, or hedges adioining to any high way or common fairing way, or
shall not cut down or keep low all trees and bushes, growing in or next
adioining to any the said ways according to the true intent and meaning of
the act made in the fifth year of the Queens Majesty reign that now is, for
every offense committed therein, contrary to the true intent thereof, shall
forfuit and lose for every default ten shillings And all and every person and
persons that shall occupy any lands adioining to the said ground, so adioining
to any such high way, or common fairing way, where any ditching or scouring
should or ought to be as aforesaid, shall from time to time, as need shall
require, ditch or scowre in his and their ground so adioining, whereby the
water conveyed from the said high way, or common fairing way, over the ground
next adioining, may have passage over the said ground, so next adioining to
that ground, upon pain of forfaiture for every time so offending, for every
roode not so ditched and scowred, xij.d.

No person or persons having any ground by lease or otherwise, adioining to any
high way, or common fairing way, leading to any market Town, shall cast or
scowre any ditch, and throw or lay the soil thereof into the high way, and
suffer it to lie there by the space of six months to the annoiance of the said
high way, or common fairing way, upon pain of forfeiture for every load of
soil, so cast into the high way, or common fairing way, in ditching or
scowring, xij.d. And where any heretofore have been so cast into the high way,
or common fairing way, that there is a bank between the said way and the
ditch, it shall be lawful for the Surueiors and workmen, by the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm, appointed for the amendment of the said ways, to
make stuces or other devises by their discretions, to convey the water out of
the said way into the ditch: any law, right, interest, custom, or usage to
the contrary notwithstanding.

Every penalty, sum or sums of money forfeited for any cause within this
statute, shall be levied in every parish by the Suruciors of the ways within
that parish for the time being, by distress, and sale of distress, in manner
and form as fines or amerciaments in Leetes have been used, and the money so
levied, to be employed upon the high way, or common fairing way where the
offense was committed. And if the Surueiors shall not or will not levy and
employ the same within one year after the offense so committed, that then the
said sum or sums, forfaiture or forfaitures, shall be levied in form
aforesaid, by the Constables or Churchwardens of the town or parish where the
work ought to be done in the highwaie (as aforesaid) and that he or they so
leuieng any of the said penalties or forfaitures, shall make and yield such
account as is appointed in the before recited statutes, or either of them.

THE OFFICE OF the DISTIBVTERS of the provision for the destruction of noisome
foul and Vermin.
THese Distributers being so chosen, 8. Eliz. ca. 15.^ 14. Eli cap. 1^
and having money ( as is before showed in the 8. Article of the Churchwardens
office) shall give and pay of the same money so to them delivered to every
person that shall bring to them any heads of old Crows, Choughs, Pies, or
Rookes, taken within the several parishes, for the heads of every three of
them a penie: and for the hends of every six young Crows, Choughs, Pies, or
Rookes taken, as is aforesaid a penie, and for every six eggs of any of
them unbroken a penie: and likewise for every xii. Stares heads a penie. All
which said heads and eggs, the said Distributers in some convenient place shall
keep, and shall every month at the least bring forth the same before the
said Churchwardens and taxors, or three of them, and then and there to them
shall make a true account in writing, what money they have laid forth and paid
for such head and eggs, and for the heads of such other ravenous birds and
vermin, as are hereafter in this act mentioned. That is to say: for every
head of Merton, Hawks, Fursekite, Moldkite, Bussard, Schagge, Carmerant, or
Ringtaile two pence, and for every two eggs of them a penie: for every Iron
or Ospraie^ head, iiii.d. for the head of every Woodwall, Pie, Iay, Raven, or
Kite, a penie: for the head of every bird, which is called the Kings Fisher,
a penie: for the head of every Bulfinch, or other bird that deuoureth the
blouth of fruit, one penie: for the heads of every Fox, or Gray, twelve pence:
and for the head of every Fichew, Polcat, Wesell, Stote, Fair, Badge, or Wild
cat, a penie: for the heads of every Otter, or Hedgehogs, ii.d. for the heads
of every three Rats, or twelve Mice, a penie: for the heads of every Moldwarpe,
or Want an half penie: for the heads of every which birds and vermin last
mentioned, the last Distributers shall likewise pay and give to the bringer of
them, for every head killed and taken within their several parish, as before is
limited, and shall keep the same to be showed forth upon their account in
manner and form as is aforesaid. All which said heads and eggs shall be
forthwith after such account made in the presence of the said Churchwardens,
and Tarors or of three of them, burned, consumed, or cut in sunder. And if upon
any account to be made, in the end and determination of the office of any such
Distributers, it shall appear that any sum of money is remaining in the
hands of the said Distributers, or any of them: then the same shall be by Bill
indented, as is aforesaid, delivered over to such persons, as be or shall be
elected to the same Office, for the year next following, by them to be
distributed as is aforesaid. This shall not in any wise extend, to give any
liberty or authority to any person or persons, to use or exercise any means
or engine, for the destruction of Crows, or Rookes, Choughes, or other the
Vermin aforesaid in any place or places, to the disturbance, let, or
destruction of the building or breeding of any kind of Hawks, Herons,
Egrittes, Paupers, Swannes, or Shouelers: or to the hurt and destruction of any
Dooues, Doouehouses, Dear, or Warren of Conies, nor extend to give or appoint
any sum or sums of money to be given paid, or distributed, to any person or
persons, for the head or heads of any Bussard, Ringtaile, Herne, Polcat,
Fitchew, or Stote, taken in any Park, Warren, or ground employed to the
maintenance of any game of Conies, or to any Stares taken in doouehouses, nor
to the killing or bringing the head of any Kite or Raven, killed in any City
or Town Corporate, or within two miles of the same.

THE OFFICE AND duty of the COLLECTORS, and Overseers for the poor, settled in
their abiding places.
THe Justices of Peace in all the shires of England and Wales and the Majors,
Bailifes, Shirifes, 14. Eli. 5 and 18. El. cap 3.
and other officers of the Cities, Boroughes, and Franchises whereof they be
Justices of Peace, having appointed within the limits of their several
authorities convenient abiding places for settling of the poor people, and
having also assessed the inhabitants within the same limits toward a weekly
contribution for the relief of the same poor people, ought then also to
appoint Collectors and Overseers for one whole year: which said Collectors
shall gather the said weekly contribution, and shall make delivery of so much
thereof to the said poor people, as the said Justices, Majors, Shirifes,
Bailifes, and other officers shall appoint them. And if the said Overseers
shall refuse to be overseers, then every of them so offending shall forfaite
ten shillings for every such default. And if any person so appointed to be
Collector, shall refuse the said office, or shall (after he has agreed to it)
neglect the same, he shall lose for every offense to the use of the poor of
the same place, xl. shillings.

The said Collectors, and every of them, so to be chosen, as is aforesaid,
shall make their just account half yearly of their said collection and
gathering, to two Justices of the Peace, dwelling next the said abiding place
or places, not being within any City, Borough, or Town corporate: or to the
Majors or other chief Officers of such Cities or Towns corporate, and when
they go out of their Offices, they shall deliver or cause to be delivered
forthwith upon their accounts, all such surplusages of their Collection and
gathering, as shall then remain vndistributed to be ordered by the said
Justices, Majors, Bailifes, or other head Officers, upon the pain of teane
pounds. If any such Collector shall refuse to make his said account, or
neglect the same by the space of fourteen days after request to him therefore
made: then the said two Justices, or one of them, may commit the said Collector
to the next Jail in the said County, there to remain without Bail or
Mainprise, til he have made his said account, and immediate payment, and
delivery of all such Susplusages as he has received.

No person or persons, having charge of any voyage in passing from the Realm
of Irelande, or from the Isle of Man into this Realm of England, do
wittingly, or willingly transport, bring carry or conueigh, or suffer to be
transported, brought, carried, or conueighed, in any ship, picarde, vessel,
boat, or boats, from and out of the said Realm of Irelande, or from, or out
of the said Isle of Man, into the Realm of England, or Wales, or any part
thereof, any Vagabond, Rogue, or Beggar, or any such as shall be forced, or
very like, to live by begging within the Realms of England or Wales, being
borne in the Realm of Irelande, or in the said Isle of Man, on pain of every
such person or persons, so bringing, transporting, carrieng and conueighing,
either suffering to be brought, transported, carried, and conueighed in manner
and form aforesaid, to forfeite and loose for every such Vagabond, Rogue,
Beggar, or other person, which shall be forced, or like to live by begging
within this Realm of England or Wales, being transported, and set on land in
any part of England or of Wales, twenty shillings of lawful English money, to
the use of the Poor of the same parish in which they were set on land, to be
levied by the Collectors of the same poor for the time being, by seizure and
selling of any of the goods and cattels of the same person which shall so
bring, transport, carry, or conueigh, any such Rogue, Vagabond, or beggar, or
other person which shall be forced, or like to live by begging, within the
Realm of England or of Wales, to the value of the same forfaiture.

THE OFFICE OF the COLLECTORS and Governors of the poor.
IN every City and Town corporate within this Realm, 18. Eliz. cap. 3.
a competent store and stock of Wool, Hemp Flax, Iron, or other stuff by the
appeintment of the Mayor, Bailifes, Justices, or other head Officers, having
rule in the said Cities, or Towns corporate (of themselves, and of other
inhabitants within their several authorities, to be taxed, levied, and
gathered) shall be provided. And that likewise, in every other Market Town or
other place, within any country of this Realm, (whereto the Justices of the
Peace, or greater part of them, in their general Sessions yearly next after
Easter, within every limit shall be thought meet and convenient) a like
competent store and stock of Wool, Flax, Iron, or other stuff, as the
country is most meet for, by appointment and order of the said Justices of
peace, or the greater part of them at their general Sessions, (of all the
inhabitants within their several authorities, to be taxed, levied, and
gathered) shall be provided. The said stores and stocks, in such Cities and
Towns corporate, to be committed to the hands and custody of such persons, as
shall by the Mayor, Bailifes, Justices, or other head Officers, having
authority in every such City or Town corporate, be appointed: and in other
towns and places, to such persons, as to the said Justices of peace, or the
greater part of them in their said general Sessions of the Peace in their
several Counties, shall be by them appointed. Which said persons so
appointed, as aforesaid, shall have power and authority (by the advice of them
who do appoint them, to dispose, order, and give rules, for the division and
manner of working of the said stocks and stores, who shall from henceforth be
called, the Collectors and Governors of the Poor to the intent every such
poor and needy person, old or young, able to do any work, standing in
necessity of relief, shall not for want of work go abroad, either begging,
or committing priferings, or other misdemeanour, living in idleness: which
Collectours and Governors of the poor, from time to time (as cause requires)
shall and may of the same stock and store, deliver to such poor and needy
person, a competent portion, to be wrought into yarne or other matter, within
such time, and in such sort, as in their discretions shall be from time to time
limited and prefixed, an^ the same afterward being wrought, to be from time to
time delivered to the said Collectors and Governors of the poor: for which
they shall make payment to them that work the same, according to the desert of
the work: and shall of new deliver more to be wrought, and so from time to
time to deliver stuff unwrought, and to receive the same again wrought, as
often as cause shall require: which Hemp, Wool, Flax, or other stuff, wrought,
from time to time shall be sold by the said Collectors and Governors of the
poor, either at some Market, or other place, and at such time as they shall
think meet, and with the money coming of the sale, to buy more stuff, in
such wise as the stocks or store shall not be decayed in value. And if hereafter
any such person able to do any such work, shall refuse to work, or shall go
abroad begging, or live idly, or taking such work shall spoil or imbesell
the same, in such wise, that (after monition given) the Minister or
Churchwardens of the parish, and Collectors and Governors of the poor, or the
more part of them, shall think the same person not meet to have any more work
delivered out of the same store or stock, that then upon Certificat made under
their hands, and brought by one of the said Collectors and Governors of the
poor, to the hands of such person or persons as shall in that County have the
oversight and government of one of the houses of Correction, in convenient
apparel meet for such a body to wear, he, she, or they, from such town,
place or parish shall be received into such houses of correction, there to be
streitly kept, as well in diet, as in work, and also punished from time to
time, as to the said persons, having the oversight and government of the said
house of Correction shall be appointed, as hereafter is declared. All which
stocks and stores, shall be provided and delivered to the hands of the said
Collectors and Governors of the poor, at all times hereafter as occasion
shall serve.

THE DVTIES OF the CENSORS (or Wardens) and of the Collectors for the houses of
Correction.
WIthin every county of this Realm, one, two, 18. Eli. ^
or more Abiding houses, or places convenient in some Market Town, or
Corporate Town, or other place or places, by purchase, lease, building or
otherwise, by the appointment and order of the Justices of Peace, or the more
part of them in their general Sessions (of the inhabitants within their
several authorities to be taxed, levied, and gathered) shall be provided, and
called the house, or houses of Correction: and also stock and store, and
implements, to be in like sort also provided, for setting on work and
punishing, not only of those which by the Collectors and Governors of the
poor, for causes aforesaid to the said houses of Correction, shall be
brought, but also of such as be, or shall be inhabiting in no parish, or be, or
shall be taken as Rogues, or once punished as Rogues, and by reason of the
uncertainty of their birth, or of their dwelling by the space of three years,
or for any other cause, ought to be abiding and kept within the same County:
which said House, or houses of Correction, with stocks, stores, and implements
appointed for such houses of Correction, shall be provided in every County,
within such time as to the Justices of Peace, or the more part of them, in
their said general Sessions of the peace in every County, within their
several jurisdictions, shall be thought meet and convenient, so as it exceed
not two years after taxation in such County for that purpose made, or else
the money levied to be repaied: and that every person refusing to pay, or not
paieng such sum of money toward the making, obteining, and furnishing of the
said houses of Correction, and buieng of stocks, and stores, and for the
relief and sustentation of such persons as shall be appointed to the said
houses of Correction, as upon them or any of them, shall be (by order aforesaid)
taxed, and at such time (as by the same order shall be appointed) shall for
every default forfeite double so much as he or they shall be so tared unto. And
the said Justices of Peace, or the more part of them in their said general
Sessions in every County, shall and may appoint from time to time, persons
which shall be Overseers of every such house of correction, which said persons
shall be called the Censors and Wardens of the houses of Correction, and shall
have the rule, government, and order of such houses of Correction, according
to such orders as by the said Justices of Peace, or the more part of them, in
their general Sessions in every County, shall be prescribed. And the said
Justices shall also appoint others for the gathering of such money, as shall be
taxed upon any person or persons within their several jurisdictions, toward
the maintenance of the said houses of Correction, which shall be called the
Collectors for the houses of correction: and if any person or persons refuse to
be Collector and Governor of the poor, or Censor and Warden, or Collector of
or for any the houses of Correction, every person so refusing, shall forfait
and lose the sum of five pound. And all and singular person and persons,
appointed by the authority of this act to be any Collector and Governor of
the poor, or Censor and warden, or Collector for any the houses of Correction
in any County, City, Town corporate, or other place in this Realm, shall as
often as they or any of them shall be called thereto by the persons having the
appointment of them, make a just account of all such sum or sums of money
or other things, as they or any of them have gathered, had, or raised in
commodity, within their several collections or charge: and if any such
Collector or Governor of the poor, Collector, Censor, or Warden of or for the
houses of Correction, refuse to make such account, or neglect the same by the
space of xiiij. days next after request therefore to him made, or shall not
within one week after such account rendered, yield and pay the whole
arrearages, which he or they (upon such account) shall be found in, to such
person or persons, as they shall be appointed unto, by them before whom their
said account shall be taken: that then the said Collector, governor, Censor,
or Warden, to be committed to any usual jail within the said County, there
to remain without bail or mainprise, till he have made his account and
payment of such arrearages as he has received: upon the making of which
account, it shall and may be lawful to such persons as have the appointment of
the said Collectors and Governors of the poor, Censors, Wardens and
Collectors of the houses of Correction (every of them within their authority)
to allow, as well such reasonable allowance to every the said Collectors and
Governors of the poor, Censors, Wardens and Collectors of the houses of
correction, for such money as they or any of them have employed or disbursed in
the execution of the said several offices, as also such reasonable fees and
wages for their pains taken in that behalf, as to them shall be thought
convenient and reasonable.

FINIS.

