THE METHOD OF PHYSIC, CONTAINING THE CAUSES, SIGNS, AND CVRES OF INWARD
diseases in man's body from the head to the foot.

Whereunto is added, the form and rule of making remedies and medicines,
which our Physicians commonly use at this day, with the proportion, quantity,
and names of each medicine.

By Philip Barrough.

ANCHORA SPEI.
printer's or publisher's device

Imprinted at London by Thomas Vautroullier dwelling in the Blacke-friers by
Lud-gate. 1583.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND HIS SINGVLAR GOOD LORD AND MASTER THE LORD
BVRGHLEY, HIGH TREASVRER OF ENGLAND KNIGHT OF THE MOST NOBLE ORDER OF THE
GARTER and one of the Queens Majesty's most honorable privy counsel. P. B.
wishes all health, with long life and increase of honor.
THE chiefest thing (Right Honorable and my singular good Lord) that emboldneth
men to dedicate, their labors unto any personage, is the affinity between
the matter of the work, which they offer, and the mind of him to whom it is
presented. And as the ancient comicall Poets were wo^t to pen such
Enterludes, as they thought would be plausibly heard of their auditory: so our
common writers do fashion and shape the subject of which they entreat,
according to the affection of him, whose patronage they require in
countenau^cing their writings: this (I say) though it be practiced of all
writers now a days, and migt have served as a fit president for me to have
followed: yet have I swarued and digressed from so general a custom, in
preferring this labor of mine to the vewe of your Honor (the matter so far
dissenting from your Honors dispositions) so that as it may perhaps not without
some color be objected, that I might have provided far better (had I been any
way sufficient) both for the acceptance of my labor, and also for the fit
answering of your Honors affection, if I had treated of the politic government
of our contry, and of the weilding of a commonwealth: to the necessity of which
calling, not Fortune the Queen of the old Philosophers, but God himself has
called, or rather enforced you if that opinion of Plato be true, that every
good Magistrate takes upon him his office unwillingly. But that objection will
sone be taken away, if we consider how foolish a thing it were to instruct him
with his imaginary precepts, whom (besides a great light of nature) most
happy experience has made a perfect and absolute governor. Plato that most
grave and wise deemer of the state tyrannical, was so many times convicted of
folly, how often he adventured in the presence of kings to discourse of the
regiment of a common wealth. Dionysius (of whom it was doubted, whether he did
more harm by his extreme cruelty, or good by his provident wisdom which
both he left alike to his successors to imitate) called that notable
Philosopher (whom I even now named) in Scicilia of purpose to hear him, and
with great patience listened to him, as he disputed of man's felicity and
admired him as he handled those moral virtues, which Socrates his master was
feigned to have brought from heaven, and as he treated of the frame and machine
of the world: but on a time (taking advantage by the kings attention) when he
had stolen into the discourse of policy, Dionysius felt himself so moved,
that he had exercised his tyranny against him also, if Dio and Aristomanes had
not recovered him out of his jaws, and so rid him out of the land, by
selling him to Polis the Lacedemonian merchant. And this was the verdict, that
the wise king (when his fury was somewhat calmed) gave of that most learned
Philosopher for his wholesome counsel (as he thought) namely, that his
discourses seemed unto him to be the prattles of idle old men: so much
experience disdaineth to be controlled by art, and so impatient is he of
institution, whose knowledge is acquired Vsu and Memoria, (the two ancient
parents of wisdom.) What a great argument of folly therefore shall he give,
that shall go about to lay a plot for your Honor, from whence you may derive an
example of government, who have so many years in so troublesome a common
wealth, and to the most wise and virtuous Princess in the world ben retained
as a most honorable and grave counselor? I will not say, as Zopyrus unto
Darius, or as Cineas unto his Pyrrhus, or as Cresus unto his Cyrus, the one of
which by policy advised his king to circumuent his enemies, the other allured
them to his subjection by his eloquence, and the third by his own unfortunate
experience directed him how to convey any dangerous enterprise. All which
served their Princes to none other use, but to help them to purchase the worst
part of glory by bloody oppression: but rather as a Nestor unto his
Agamemnon, as a Zenophon unto his Cyrus, and as a Plutarch unto his Traian,
which thought it not so glorious to tie their enemies to them by forced fear,
as their friends and neighbors by peaceable amity, the strongest guard that
Princes can trust unto. I must needs confess that these co^parisons do fail
in representing so much as I do conceive, for that I may not fear the
suspision of flattery in so manifest a truth, can the whole Scene of man's life
so gorgeously and stately set forth by the historia^s of several ages, show us
at one time, on one stage two such notable actors (namely) so redoubted, so
perelesse, and so virtuous a Princess holding the scepter, so grave, so wise,
and so provident a counselor susteyning the person of Eubolus? I would I might
(my credit saved with your Honor) pursue your praises yet further, but I know
very well, that you (who with an unwearied affection do not cease continually
to commit such virtuous deeds as deserve to be eternized for ever, are sone
tired, when you hear them remembered by another. And truly I would not have
spoken so much for fear of offense, but that I know for a certainety, that you
ascribe the being of your virtues to God the giver of al good things, before
who^ to extenuat our graces, I know not whither it be more blame worthy, the^
shamelesly to assume unto our selves, whatsoever is wrongfully attributed unto
us by our flattering friends. But to what end (will you say) are all these
words? namely to this: to excuse my self, in that I have not labored to fit
your affection in the presentme^t of this my labor, which is so impossible, in
respect of your singular knowledge in all kind of good lerning, that there is no
man so selfwise or lofty, which fears not to come under your learned
censure. Which excellency of yours when I had looked into, and had found my
self altogether unable to answer: I purposed (as I thought) more politically
to assaie your humanity, which (in deed) graceth all the rest of your virtues,
which (I thought) I might sone abuse in offering such a subject, in which some
study, and industry (besides many years had made me in part able to judge,
and such a one, as the earnest affairs of the Common wealth, in which you are
always busied, together with the inconvenient vneasines of the study has
kept your Honor from being acquainted with. Which bold attempt of mine, your
wisdom shall so much the easier be brought to pardon, by how much the more
ernestly your rare clemency encouraged me to enterprise it: for I do plainly
confess, that I have not thought this Book of mine worthy to be perused of
your Honor, as well because of mine own inability, who am altogeither
insufficient to perform any thing that your Honor may like of, as also in
respect of those manifold graces, wherewith the Lord has filled you: by the
virtue of which you could in a tongue (far more eloquent then this of ours)
discern and know the secrets of physic which I have now in part revealed: If
the common weal of us all did not rather carry you away, then that delight
which is otherwise reaped by private study. And yet nevertheless, when I
consider with my self, that it was not the affectation of any popular praise,
but an honest zeal to benefit my countrymen, which begotte in me this desire
to publish this work, and also (if I may without the suspect of vain glory
seem to divine of the issue of my labors) perceiving that they might bring
some commodity unto the more ignorant sort of our common Practicioners and
Aemperiques (if they were with diligence perused:) and thirdly, when I
perceived in my self a certain earnest willingness which I have always had
(though of late it has been more vehemently inflamed) to commend some piece of
service unto your Honor: (I say) these causes meeting thus together did
especially adduce me (though many doubts stepped before me in mine enterprise,
offering to reenforce my over presumptuous determination) with such a bold
confidency as it were to rush into your presence, and to demand without any
show of merit your Honors most favorable Protection, that this book of mine
(unable of it self) may run under your Patronage, which as it were Gorgon his
buckler, I will obuert and turn against all the venomous bitinges of
sclanderous tongues. The Lord God, (who has made you a notable instrument to
work the advancement of his glory, the furtheraunce and propagation of good
learning) lengthen and protract your life beyond your fatal period, and give
you a will to live, a desire still to bear up that burden, which her Majesty
has laid upon your shoulders, and with these, all good success in this world,
and eternal happiness in his kingdom.

Your Honors most humble servant, PHILLIP BARROVGH.

The preface to the Reader.
WHEN God had perfited that vvonderfull work of his (mean the frame of the
world) and had ascribed to every part thereof his especial duty* namely to the
water to harbor fishes, to the air to uphold all feathered fowls, to the
earth to foster beasts, and to produce and bring forth good and wholesome herbs
and trees: and over all these, as regent and governor, had appointed man his
last and noblest creature: he demanded of his Angels who were present
with him at this work what might be desired in this so rare and straung a
vvorkemanship: who answered, nothing but a tongue to unfold the secrets of
his labovvres, to talk and commune of them, with the which also, he, as the
vvorkeman of all, might be extolled and magnified, who partly moved with this
suggestion, perceiving it to be a notable means to advance his glory, as
before he had infused into man a conceaueable mind, apt to understand and his
mysteries: so now he gave him a tongue, able to utter the sundry conceptions
of the heart whatsoever it imagined. This fable proceeding (I know not from
what brain) is remembered of Philo the levv, in his treatise of the world
which seems to implie thus much, that as there is nothing within this
mortal circuit, that God has, as it were kept to himself, and not made
subject to the industrious capacity of man: so there is no means by which a
man can approach nearer unto the perfection of that nature which he first
enjoyed, and then lost by his fall, then by the painful indagation of the
secrets of nature, or any way, whereby he may more truly glorify his
maker, then in his life time with his tongue to communicate that knowledge
which he has by his industry atcheiued, and to have a care also, that it may
be faithfully commended to his posterity. And doubtless this was the
consideration, that moved the wise king Solomon to vvade so far in the
searching of the causes of things, who abandoning all those glistering
shows which his riches and kingdom proffered him, applied his mind to the
study of nature, and compiled a great volume, vvherin he larglie discoursed
not only of birds and beasts, but of all herbs and trees, even from the
cedar in Libanon, to Hisop that springs out of the wall. And the self same
opinion of the excellency of that kind of life has from time to time invaded
the minds of many kings and noble personages, vovving to them selves without
any light of their forefathers, to go through the cloudie darkness of nature.
And althoug they sometime stumbled, yet are they to be pardoned, if we consider
both the obscurity and the length of the way they went in. Zoroastes the
reputed son of Noie was the first, that of many confused experiments, began
to fashion out and as it were to delineat the beginning of an art by setting
down cartaine precepts of the same, and after him Osiris the king of Egypt,
and Zesostris also king of the same contry (though rudlie) laid the foundation
of Astronomy by demonstration of the course of the heavens, and of physic by
opening the nature of many herbs, and also of the secrets of their water of
Nilus. To the worthiness of which secret, Plato that great philosopher did
willingly subscribe, when falling into a grievous malady in Egypt, and beng
not able by his own experimentes (though he had assaied many) to cure him
self, he was preserved by the Priests of that country, who taught him the
virtue of their water, whereas after, in remembrance of this benefitte, he
vvrote this verse, rehearsed by Laertius: Mare vniuersa proluit hominum mala:
the sea does wash away all the infirmities of man. So that by this we may
see, that this noble and learned Philosopher had never brought us nevves out of
Egypt, either of there policy and government of their country, or of the
rare and exquisite knowledge in Astronomy, if he had not tasted of the
benefit, which the Physic of that time affoorded him. But we will remember
some of those kings, who had an especial fantsie to this art, whose names
are de^olded and brought unto us by the succession of ages, though their
works have not escaped the vvracke, but have perished in the Sea gulf of
antiquity, which has svvallovved the doings of many men. And Mithridates the
king of Pontus shall be the first, who at one time undertook two mighty
battles the one with the Remains, the other with nature. In the last of
which the more dangerous he prevailed like a co^querour, and in the first he
dealt so valiantly, that the glory of his forepassed victories suppressed and
killed the remembrance of his last overthrow. The which (as Pliny
remembers) was a like profitable to the common wealth and to man's life: for
in his manor where he lay, there were found many books written by his
own hands, both of the virtues of herbs and of the constitution of man's
body, with remedies of many infirmities of the same. Euax also the king of
Arabia wrote a book of the effects of simples, which he dedicated to Nero
the Emperor. But what should I reckon perticularly the names of every one,
when in former ages there was no king, either of AEthiopia, Egypt, or
Arabia, who did not himself either write somevvhat concerning this art of
Physic, or else by his liberality encouraged others to emploie their times
in the same? which may make much (no doubt) to the credit of the art, when
as kings have appropriated it to themselves, and have thought themselves
honored by the profession of the same. And as many arguments do induce me to
believe besides the witness of the Historians, that Physic is the art,
wherein many kings have travailed and delighted: so nothing more strongly then
this, that whereas other gods were tied to their several places, as Jupiter
to Elis, Diana to Ephesus, Apollo to Delos, and so forth. AEsculapius the son
of Apollo by the daughter of Phlegias made a god for his cunning in Physic,
has his temple and altars every where in Corinth, in Lacedemon, in Athens,
in Thebes, in Epidaure, in Arcadia, Messenia, and in many other countries (as
Pausanias remembers) all which honors which were done to him (no doubt)
were instituted by the kings and rulers of those countries, vho especially
favored that art, thinking it great reason, that he who invented an art so
generally auailable for mankind, should be generally honored of all men. And
(I pray you) how much inferior was the reno^^ne of Hippocrates, who
descended of his line, saving that the one was placed amongst the gods in
heaven, and the other reverenced as a mortal god upon earth? Did not he make
Coos, the place where he was borne, of an inglorious Island, a famous contrie,
only by the access of other nations, who were brought thither by the report
of his vvonderfull skill in Physic? what familiarity had he with kings?
what estimation among the Philosophers of that time as Democrites and other?
and to conclude, how was his fame spread universally throughout all Greece? I
will not tarry upon the recital of the famous Physicians, who have lived
before us in several ages, as Dioscorides, Galen, Paulus AEtius, AEgineta and
others. For it will easily appear of what credit this noble science of
physic was in times past, if you consider the insolencitie and pride of
ancient Physicians, vvherof many of them disdained the fellovvshippe of
kings, and some of them emboldned only by the credit of their science
purchased amongst men, grevv to such impudency, that they would have
ceremonies and rightes performed unto them as unto gods. One such was
Themison Ciprius the dainty of Antiochus, another was Thessalus whom Galen
makes mension of, who went about to innouate and change the method of
physic set down by Hippocrates and others. But the most famous of all was
Menecrates the Syracusan, who foolishly usurped the name of Jupiter,
oftentimes boasting, that by his art he could breath life into mortal men
after the manner of Jupiter, which arrogant title the people never went about
to derogate from him, but rather supposed that it was deserved on his part,
because he cured many of the falling evil, which disease especially reigned
in his time. This Menecrates in a certain epistle which he wrote to Phillip
the king of Macedon uses these words: Thou art king of Macedon, and I of
Physic it lies in thy power at thy pleasure, to destroy men which enjoy
their health, and in mine to preserve sickemen, and restore dead men to life,
and to keep the health of men unspotted even unto their old age, if they
will obey me. Unreasonable surely and monstrous was the pride of this man,
and it was so fed with the applause and approbation of his citizens who
vvondred at his rare cunning, that he marched in the city with a train of
gods after him: one in the habit of Hercules, another in the shape of
Mercury, another took upon him the form of Apollo, and he himself
supereminent in the midst resembling Jupiter, wore a purple robe, and a
crown of gold upon his head, and held in his hand a mighty scepter. The
opinion of this science did so possess the minds of the people in those
days, that they imagined the professor of the same to be sent immediately
from heaven, for the commodity of the whole country, and for the
preservation of mankind: which made them not to doubt to do unto them all
superstitious reverence that might be, whereof grevv this excessive pride,
which has arested as it were the minds of many Physicians. I would not
vvish that the Physicians of our time should dravv this unto an example, but
rather with all lovvlynes to visit even the poorest, when their help is
required: for seeing that the life of the most miserable vassal is as dear in
the sight of God, as the life of the most renoumed Monarch, shall not the
Physitio^ look to have a shrevvd check at Gods hand, if either he has proudly
denied his help to the poor, or negligently visited them? I will not descend
into this common place, though (to speak the truth) the arrogancy of many of
our Physicians might give me sufficient occasion, vvishing them to leave of to
imitate the swelling insolency of Mencerates, and the rest, and to tracke,
rather in the stepes of Hippocrates and Galen, of whom it is thus written,
that they never disdayned to shroude them selves under the simplest roof in
their country, to do the poorest man good. And as they themselves said
(besides the glory that they purchased by their courteous benignity) they
added alvvayes to their cunning, and by experience confirmed their art and
knowledge, which might well stagger, if you respect the infinite variety of
diseases, and the strange diversities of men's dispositions. And truly if
nothing else, yet the enriching of their knowledge which is gathered
especially by long experience, might be cause good enough to attract and dravv
them to lay hold of any occasion to go to the diseased person. And in mine
opinion, the neglecting of this, which proceeds either from covetousness or
pride, has been the only cause, that even from the beginning, there have been
reckened so fevv good Physicians: For (exempt only Hippocrates, Galen,
Auricen, AEginet^, Aetius, and Soranus, though the number of common Physicians
has been great) you shall not find any that have climed up to the perfection
of their science, nay far from that which might chaleng the fifth or sixte
place. Which although some men will ascribe to the laborious difficulty and
confused vastenes of this art especially: yet I dare boldly affirm, that
there has not been nor is, any such block or stay, which has impeached so
much their endeavors, as the defect of experience. And truly I cannot more
fitly compare our ampiriques and practisioners, then to him that puposeth to be
a seaman and trauailer, who though he studiously strives to attain to the
perfection of his art, though he carefully busieth about the cosmographicall
mappes, though he industruously peruseth the books of navigations, naie (that
which is more) though he diligently conferreth with very expert sailors: yet
when he has forsaken the quiet haven, and launched out into the rough seas,
and has taken upon him the government of the ship, when he shall behold so
many horrible mountains of water, the roaring of so many huge waves, and
the outraging surges of the disquieted monstre, he will then confess that he
only dreamed before, when he imagined of the course of the seas, that his
books were lame scholemaisters, that the tales of his companions were a
great deal less then the things themselves: when he shall cast up his eyes
and think that every star which he had hoped to have used as guides and
directions, had threatened his ruin and destruction, when he shall look
down and tremble at the rising of every vvaue, when he shall turn him
about, and with great fear seek to eschew those rocks, which he had read
were c^uched in that part of the sea, and to conclude, when he shall consider
the hugenes of the ocian sea, and the smalnes of his bark, he will think
sure the least pirrie or gale were of force to ouervvhelme him, not
vvithstanding his great cunning he had thought he had gained one the land: Even
so fares it with our common physicians, who, while there contain them
selves within the compass of their little study, where they do as it were,
e tabula pictos ediscere mundos, where they perceive their science redicted
into a method, where they see Galen reaching his hand to them to lead them
throughout the whole body of physic, by whom they are taught the
constitution of the body, the diuer sitie of temperature, the variety of
diseases, the causes, signs, and simptomates of the same, they straightvvaie
imagine, that they have run the race, and that they have acquired as much
knowledge as becomes an AEmpirique. But after that, when they shall go into
the common wealth to practice, when they shall meet with diseases, which
Galen never dreamed of, when they shall veivv the marvelous and secret
affections and proprieties of men's bodies, the sudden and momentanie changes
of the same (which a man can scarcely follovv with his mind) when they
shall perceive, that in respect of the straung temperature of the body, and
the violent alteration of the same, they scarcely can arm at the disease,
when they shall strike upon so many rocks, besides their great pains and
vvatchfull industry: vill it not (think we) amase them? will they not
confess then, that their art is imperfect? will they not acknovvledge
(think you) that as experience was the ancient beginner of physic: so,
that now it is the true and sincere accomplisher of the perfection of the
same? Since therefore the case so stands that art is vveake without
practice, and that (as Galen says) experience is gotten longo rerum vsu: let
the Physician (if he does not prefer lying fame and vile lucre before true and
absolute knowledge) let him (I say) that his mind may be enriched, not leave
the poorest house unfrequented. But to say the truth, there is nothing
derogateth so much from the excelling in their science, as does the opinion of
perfection, which is especially gotten by the judgment of the multitude, the
perverse determiner of things. For when a man knovveth his name to sly
amongst the^, he sits still, and admireth himself, thinking then, that he
has studied enough both for him self and his country, when he has gotten
his name enrolled amongst the number of excellent Physicians by that ignorant
and unadvised register. I have spoken this by the way, and the interiection of
these fevv lines has not made me to forget (good Reader) that I before
discoursed of the glory of this science, and how it has been accounted of in
times past: the dignity vvherof, though it be something lessened and empayred
(which whether it has happened by the ignorance of our Physicians, or by
the sinister opinion of the world I will not now discuss) yet if we will
uprightly vvaigh with our selves, we may perceive that the judgment of men
has not any whit detracted from the true dignity of the thing it self. For
truly what can be more noble the^ to preserve the body of man in a good
estate, which of the philosophers is termed a little world, in respect of the
variety of his several functions? what can be more excellent then to be able
to maintain and keep in order that best workmanship of God, and (that which
is more) to correct, reform and amend it, and as it were a cunning Pylot to
govern and rule it as a little vessel cast out into the great ocean, subject
(I do not know) to how many rocks and dangers, if it be not uprightly
vveilded? And seeing there is nothing given unto us of God, more acceptable
then the health of the body, how honorably must we think of the means,
by which it is continued and restored if it be lost? Pirrhus the king of Epir
did sacrifice unto no other god or goddess, but only unto health, to whom he
erected a famous temple in his own country, calling it Templum sanitatis. He
contemned or at the least neglected all oracles which other princes busily
sought after, as predictions of the euentes and successes of the battles
which they attempted, or any other the like enterprise. He craved nothing at
the hands of the gods, but only the fruition of his health, thinking that
industry and diligence, meeting with the health of the body, were able to
atchiue any thing, were it beset vith never so many dangers. And in mine
opinion (as the Historian very gravely discourses) men do folishlie err,
when they complain of nature, for lymiting the age of man within the
compass of so fevv years, as three or four score: whenas truly, if the
matter were well expended, we would confess, Industriam potius quam tempus
deesse (as he says) and that there is no art or science, be it never so
difficult, but might be perfectly known within that short precinct, if the
greater part of our life did not pass and vanish away in darkness (sloth
and ignorance drowning and ouervvhelming in us all light of nature) or if the
course thereof were not interrupted and cut of by untimely death, which is
hastened on our parts by our inordinate and heedelesse living. The youg man
flourishing as it were in the April of his age, cockereth in himself a
foolis imagination of his own lustiness, and reputeth it as a discredit to
him to seem to fear the approache of any disease, leaving the provident
government of the body to decrepite and vvythered old age. In the mean time
he lays the reyne upon his affections, and exposes himself to any
inconvenience: either he vveltreth in idleness, or is tired with immoderate
exercise, or (that which is incident specially to that part of our age) he
admits unseasonable vvatchinges, surfeiting bankets, and the unsatiate
execution of the follies of Venus, thinking in deed that there is nothing
less agreeing unto youth and adolescencie, then to be pliant and obedient to
any commendable and wholesome method of life: yea many of them are of this
mind, that the time of their youth is infamously ouerslipped, when they do
not rush in their voluptuous and inordinate demeanor at what time the lusty
prime of their age do somevvhat enable and support them: and if at any time
they be overtaken with any infirmity (which often happens) as unwilling
to be beholding to the science of Physic, they leave it to be worn away by
the strength of their body, which in deed I confess hides many diseases,
and for the time takes away the sense of them, but it never utterly
extinguisheth any: for although in the infancy of the infirmity, in respect
of the weakness of it, is be easily depressed and ouermaistred by the valor
of the body (which in youth is something puissaunt and forcible) yet when
age coming one with his stealing steps, or else recklesse life does detract
from the force of the one, and makes way for the other to spread and gather
power, the disease being as it were the suruiuour possesses the whole
body, and at the last procures his utter subversion. And many times it
happens that a disease breaks out in old age, the cause vhereof perhaps
was given in our youth. And it fares with us, as it does with them which
are bitten vith that little serpent of Arabia, which strikes a man, but so
secretly, that he never feels it, neither does he know it but by the vvound
which shows it self a long time, after the foundation thereof was laid.
The opinion that the ancient Physicians had of the effect of snow water is
of force to persuade this, who have vvritte^, that if snow resolved into
water be dronke^ of a young child, it will as it were maintain war
against natural heat, and that with such continuance, as it will not shevve
his effect, until he has attained unto extreme old age. I do not
altogether believe this, although the great cold which is naturally in that
water, may lead me to think, that it is of a mighty operation. But there is
nothing more certain then this, that many men, reposing to much trust in the
strength of their bodies, and so being careless in gaine-standing and
resisting the beginninges of many maladies (which their dissolute order of
life has begotten and engendered) have been yoked by old age before the course
of their years did require it, and have brought it so to pass that their
bodies have been nothing else, but storehouses and mansions of diseases. Which
kind of men I may well compare to an evil and negligent tenant, who being
settled in a fair dwelling house by his Landlord, suffers it to ruinate and
in the end to fall upon his ovvnt head for want of repayring: so they, when
God has bestovved their bodies upon them as gorgeous palaces or mansion
houses, wherein the mind may dvvell with pleasure and delight, do first by
their evil demeanor shake, and discrase them, and then being altogether
careless of repairing them, do suffer them to run to destruction, or else while
they go about to late to underprop them declining to ruin, (as he that is
lodged in an old cabin fears, least with every puff of vvind it shoulbe
ouerturned) so they quake at the least alteration of their body, and at every
little pain, do expect a final dissolution: then will they confess unto
you, that while they ryoted unadvisedly in their youth they did but build
matter for repentance in age. And what do they else but by their examples
give us to learn, that as the interception and praescision of diseases is very
available, which carries a man throughout his race with pleasure and
delight, so that nothing comes more near unto the goodness thereof, then (if
by chance when we be plunged into any disease) carefully to provide that the
beginning thereof may be impeached: the which that thou may the better do, I
have (good Reader) for thy benefit, collected out of sundry authors, as it
were a breuiarie or abridgement of physic, and together with those
diductions, I have interlaced experimentes of mine own, which by long use
and practice I have observed to be true. Throughout the whole book I have
been more curious in prescribing the sundry curations and ways to help the
diseases, then in explaning the nature of them, my reason was, because if my
books should come to the hands of the unlearned a little would suffice (the
former being more necessary.) Again I knevv, that the learned would not be
contented or satisfied with it, though it had been never so great: and yet I
have not omitted any necessary sign, that the disease may appear easily to
any capable brain. I shall seem boldly to have adventured the edition of this
labor, seeing that I shall run into the babble of our country physicians,
who think their art to be discredited, when it is published in so base a
tongue* and again, are loath to have the secrets of their science revealed to
every man. In deed I know that under some color they may object somevvhat,
but yet they may understand, that I have follovved the example of many learned
Physicians both of our Englishmen and other country men also, who published
their practices in their mother tongue, and in other countries especially it is
so rife and common, that in Italy and France you shall not find any learned
Physician, that has not written as much, (nay rather more) in his own
country language, then in Latin: yea we have many books in physic, that
have first been set out in French and Italian, and afterward for the
commodity of other nations, have been translated into latin, and so made
general, which before the writer had as it were bequeathed to his
countrymen. And no doubt they were all touched with an especial care to
profit their own country, being vvilling that all men (as in deed it
concerns all) should reap the commodities of their labors. For I cannot see
how that saying of Quintilian can be verified in this one art (which is
this) that then all arts should be truly happy, when the professors of the
same should only judge of the^, but I have alvvaies been of this mind, that it
behooves every man to be cunning in his own constitution, and to know so
much as may serve to forestall the coming of many ordinary diseases, which
commonly light upon the ignorant: yea and sometime to be able to chase away a
malady when it has already caught hold of the body: my reason is, both
because every man may judge best of his own body, and perceive the
declininges and alterations of the same, And again we know, how many have
died, and do die continually for want of help, (the Physician being not
alvvaies at their elbovve) whereas in the beginning of their sickness, a
little knowledge might have stopped the passage of the infirmity. In the old
time when physic was brought under no form, but consisted only of a fevv
experimentes which passed from hand to hand, young children together with
other arts did receive certain precepts and rules, how to order and govern
the body, and learned also preservatives against poisons, and the receipt of
salues to cure any green vvound, and the means to help certain ordinary
diseases, which (in deed) were but fevv (the age of man being the^ far more
strong.) We read how Linus, who was scholemaister to Hercules when he had
instructed him in the art of wrestling, (which then was honored
especially) and in Music, that he gave him the receipt of a certain balm,
which he often used in many of his adventures. And what was it, that gave
matter to the fable of Achilles, how his mother Thetis had made his body
impenetrable, but that knowledge of his which he had learned of his master
Chyron the centaure, who taught him the virtue of an herb, which to this
day bears his name, by which he healed all his vvounds he received in
battle? What an honorable mension does Homer make of Machao and Podalirius
the sons of Aesculapius, in that they could cure themseues, when they were
at any time hurt of the enemy? This cunning also had Mithridates, and
Fabricius the Roman he that vanquished Pirrhus, and also Marcus Curious and
many other who are recorded by Histories, whose names I would remember, if I
did not see the enlarging of this common place by examples to be altogether
unnecessary, when there is no man which so far svvarueth from common
sense, that will not confess it to be very expedient and needful for all
to know the estate of their own bodies. I will therefore foresake the
proving of so manifest a thing, and return unto thee (good Reader) whom I
have already offended in exceeding the just length of a Preface, like unto
that vvaiefaring man, who when he had purposed to undertake a long journey,
stumbled even in the very thresshold of his door. But if it be an offense, I
did voluntarily run into it, choosing rather to be carped at of the
Rethorician for using too many words, then to be vvorthely reprehended of the
readers for being to sparing in uttering the reasons, whereby I was first
adduced to publish this my labor. For I know not how it comes to pass,
yet we see it daily, that ridiculous t^res and absurd pamphlettes being put
f^rth without any color, be nevertheless plausiblie and pleasingly accepted:
whereas a man (...)ed with an honest care to profit his country, being
vvilling to leave a testimony of the same behind him, when he offreth to
publish any work, if it has not a delectable subject, it behooves him to
show many grave and substantial reasons of his doings, or else they will not
yield their hoped for benefit, which is to be benignelie construed and perused
with humanity, so that if a man covet to have his books favorably accepted
and read, he must behave himself so in vvriting, as Solon did in framing his
laws, who (as Plutarch says) did not fashion them according to the true
line of equity, but set down such as he thought the people would willingly
observe: even so the iniquity of the time has brought to pass, that those
books which are generally perused and read throughout, must not serve the
time, but must satisfy the opinions of me^. A man may easily discourse of
this, but the fantasies of man are to variant to prevail a whit in dissuading
them. For mine own part (that I may now end) I have not sought or hunted
after any vain glory by the edition of this my labor, but only I have
endeavored by this means (being unable any way else) to do some good to my
countrymen, which desire of mine shall sufficiently comfort me, though I want
the outvvard approbation of the world. And yet this one thing I vvoulde crave
at the hands of the learned, that If by chance my books come under their
censure, they will either give them their good word, or else suffer
themselves to be judged of by perfourming the like labor. And as Martial
prettily sung. Cum tua non edas, carpis mea carmina Leli,
Carpere vel noli nostra, vel ede tua.
though in deed this supplication of mine may rather more fitly be preferred
unto the unlearned, who think they have gotten a goodly means to purchase
their own credit, when they can under some color malign the doings of any
man, as though others well doings were as impeachmentes to their
estimations, or the errors of other men the subject and matter of their
praises. Those kind of serpents (I say) which do nothing else but pick
quarrelles with authors, I would advise either to speak themselves, or (if
their ignorance will not let them) to lay their finger on their mouth till
other men tell their tale, and not to make their harvest of other men's offenses
vnvvillingly committed, vvhiles they themselves rest unable to do any whit of
good. And thus (good Reader) I will abruptly end, expecting thy favorable
acceptance of these my labors, which expectation of mine (if it be not
deluded) I shall be further encouraged to consecrate the residue of my studies to
thy commodity.

Phillip Barrough.

An INDEX OR TABLE OF ALL THE EVILS AND diseases with their causes, signs,
judgments, and cures, universally contained in the five books folloving.
A
Of the Apoplexy. 25 Of the Asthma. 64 Of Abhorring of meat. 85 Of a doglike
Appetite. 86 Of the cure of Abscessions. 216 Of a tumor called Aquosum
Apostema. 253 Of the swelling caled Apost. 299
B
Of blearednes of the eyes. 44 Of black and blew marks. 45 Of bleeding at the
nose. 51 Of the stone in the bladder. 133 Of blood broken out of the bladder or
crudded in it. 133 Of ulcers of the bladder, and his neck. 135 Of the remedy
against Barraines. 157
C
Of Carus or Subeth. 22 Of Congelation or taking 23 Of the Crampe. 32 Of a
Cataracte. 39 Of the Inflammation of the Columella. 58 Of a loose Columella. 59
Of the Coughe. 63 Of Choler. 93 Of the Colicke. 101 Of Cachexia, or evil state
of the body 121 Of the loss of carnal copulation. 142 Of sore trauail in
childbirth. 159 Of the Carbuncle, the Cancre and the evil called Sphaselus.
226 Of the cure of a Carbuncle. 227 Of a cancrous tumor called Cancer
Apostematosus. 273
D
Of Dead sleep. 24 Of Deafnes and slow hearing. 49 Of distilatio^, reume and
horenes. 53 Of evil Digestion. 88 Of the Dropsy. 121 Of the Dropsy
Anasarcha. 123 Of the Dropsy Ascites. 124 Of the Dropsy Tympanites. 125
E
Of Exulceration of the privy me^bres. 140 Of Exulcerat. of the womb. 150 Of a
fever Ethicke. 189 Of the general method of curing the abscessio^s called
Exiturae. 212 Of Erysipelas and other tumors caused of choler. 233 Of the
signs and tokens of a true Erysipelas. 235 Of the cure of Erysipelas. 236
F
Of the Frenisie. 17 Of the Falling sickness. 31 Of great Famine. 87 Of the
Flux Diarrhaea. 94 Of the Flux Lienteria. 96 Of the Fuxe Dysenteria. 97 Of
the clefts of the fundame^t. 109 Of women's Flux. 149 An exposition of Feauers.
168 The table of Fevers. 170 Of one days Fever. 171 Of a diary Fever lasting
mo days 175 Of a rotten Fever called Synochus, 186 Of a continual Fever. 178
Of a burning Fever. 180 Of the evils called Formicae. 243
G
Of the gout in the feet and ioynctes. 164 Of the evil called Gangraena and
Sphacelus. 230 Of the cure of Gang. and Spha. 231 Of the diseases called
Glandulae, Nodi, and Strumae. 255
H
Of Headache. 1 Of Headache caused of heat. 2 Of Headache caused of cold. 4 Of
Headache caused by drines, or moisture. 5 Of Headache caused of blood. 6 Of
Headache caused of choler. 7 Of Headache caused of fleame. 8 Of headache caused of
windines. 9 Of Headache caused of the stomach. 10 Of Hedach caused by dro^knes.
11 O Headache caused by fevers. 11 Of inueterate Headache. 12 Of the
Haemorrhoides. 107 Of an Haemitryce fever. 197 Of herpes both miliaris and
exede^s which do associat Erysipelas. 239
I
Of Impostumes breeding in the ears. 50 Of Inflammation of the to^sils. 59 Of
Inflammatio^ of the lou^ges. 67 Of Infla^mation of the pappes. 79 Of
Infla^matio^ of the stomach. 84 Of the Iliaca Passio. 103 Of Inflammatio^ of
the liver. 113 Of Infla^mation of the spleen. 116 Of the laundyse. 113 Of
Infla^mation of the reins. 126 Of Infla^matio^ of the bladder. 134 Of
Infla^mation of the womb. 154 Of tumors above nature called Inflationes. 250
L
Of the Lithargie. 19 Of the weakness of the Liver. 11^ Of obstruction of the
Liver. 112
M
Of the Mygrime. 1^ Of Memory lost. 2^ Of the Maare. 34 Of Madness. 34 Of
Melancholy. 35 Of lack of Milcke. 76 Of abundance of Milk. 77 Of Milk that
is curded. 78 Of stopping of Menstruys. 145 Of flowing of Menstruis. 148 Of the
Mole in the Matryce. 153 Of straitnes of the Matryce. 150
O
Of Oedema, and other phlegmatic and flatuous tumors. 145 Of the cure Oedema.
247
P
Of the Palsy. 26 Of Panicles. 42 Of the Palsy in one membre. 30 Of Pustules
or bladders in the eyes. 44 Of Pain in the ears. 84 Of Pain in the teeth. 54
Of the Plurisie. 65 Of the Ptisicke. 71 Of Panting of the heart. 73 Of
unmeasurable pissing. 130 Of difficulty of Pissing. 138 Of the Pestilence. 192
Of a true Phlegmone, and of other tumors engendered of blood. 218 Of the causes,
signs, and judgments of Phlegmone. 219 Of the order of curing of Phlegmone.
221
Q
Of a Quartaine fever. 185 Of a Quodian fever. 188
R
Of Reins that send fo^^h bloody urine. 125 Of the stone in the Reins. 128
Against ulcers of the Reins. 131 Of bursting or Ruptures. 143
S
Of skin growing in the eyes. 43 Of sound or noise in the ears. 49 Of a
stinking mouth. 56 Of the Squinancie. 61 Of Spitting of blould. 68 Of Spitting
of matter. 60 Of Sounding. 74 Of the Syncope. 110 Of weakness of the Stomach. 79
Of pain of the Stomach. 83 Of windines of the Stomach 90 Of distempure of the
Spleen. 115 Of hardness of the Spleen. 117 Of obstruction of the Spleen. 118 Of
the strangurie. 137 Of sheading of Sperme. 147 Of the Sciatica. 162
T
Of trembling and shaking. 37 Of teeth that be black and lose. 55 Of malignant
ulcers of the Tonsills. 60 Of immoderate Thyrst. 82 Of Tenasmus. 100 Of the
faling out of the Tuel. 109 Of a pure intermitting Tertia^. 180 Of a bastardly
Tertian. 184 Of the differences of those Tumors which chance besides nature.
200 Of the causes of Tumors above nature. 206 Of the signs of Tumors besides
nature. 209 Of hard and Scirrhus Tumors engendered of melancholy. 267
V
Of Vertigo and sweaming of the head. 15 Of Ulcers in the nose. 51 Of Ulcers in
the mouth. 55 Of stopping of the Urine. 138 Of the judgments and cure of the
evils Verrucae. 144
W
Of a Web or Cataract. 39 Of Worms. 105 Of strangling of the Womb. 150 Of
falling out of the Womb. 151 Of windines in the Womb. 155
Y
Of Yelking and vomiting. 81 Of Yelking or hicket. 91 Of the continual
standing of the Yearde. 140
FINIS TABVLAE.
Of VVeightes. A brief declaration of the notes of all those kinds of
weightes, which are generally used and contained throughout this whole book,
and of the quantity of them.
FOrasmuch as the true and perfect knowledge in compounding of medicines cannot
be attained unto without the knowledge of the quantity of the weightes, which
are at this present day most commonly used in making of medicines: I will
therefore here briefly declare the use of them: for seeing that the weight of
some medicines be so justly and certainly ordained and made (that if any man
do chance rashly to err in the true quantity thereof, he does much hurt to
the body, and many times puts the life in ieoperdie: you must therefore
diligently endeavor and apply your mind to study and consider of the
medicines, that so you may have the more full and perfect knowledge thereof.
The notes which I (following the order of other Physicians) have used in this
my book in writing of weightes be these, as follows.

1. Grana. have this note. G. 2. Scrupuli. have this note.. 3. Drachmae. have
this note.. 4. Vnciz. have this note.. 5. Quar. have this note. qr. 6. Librae.
have this note. lb. 7. Semis. have this note. ss. 8. Manipuli. have this note.
M. 9. Pugilli. have this note. p. 10. Ana. have this note. ana.
A grain is a barely corn taken in the midst of the ear

A scruple is twenty barely corns.

Three scruples contain a drachme.

Eight drachmes contain an ounce.

Quart. signifies a quarte of any thing.

Libra is a pound.

Semiss. is the half of every weight.

Manipulus. is a great handful.

Pugillus. is a small handful.

Ana. signifies of every one alike much.

THE METHOD OF PHYSIC OF PHILIP BARROVGH CONTAINING THE CAUSES, SIGNS AND
Cures of inward diseases in man's body, from the head to the foot. THE FIRST
BOOK.
The first Chapter, Of headache.
GALEN the Prince of Physicians, affirms, Differences of pain in the head 3.
that there are only three sundry pains in the head: whereof the one is
called of the Greeks (...), Cephalalgiae, and of the Latins Capitis dolor,
the barbarous sort of Physicians call it Soda. In English it is called commonly
Cephalaea. In English it may be called a long continuing or inueterate headache.
The third is called of the Hemicrania also is the Latin name for it. English
it is called the migrime. Of the two last kinds shall mention be made
hereafter, for now we will entreat of the first kind, declaring only in this
chapter, what it is and what be the general causes thereof, and then in the
chapters next following, shall the signs and cures of each cause be declared.
Understand therefore first, What Cephalalgia or S^da is.
that Cephalgia is no thing else but a laboriouse and painful sense, and
feeling newly begone in the whole head, through some great mutation thereof,
this word newly is added to make it differ from Cephalaea, which is an old
pain that has long continued: and the whole head is added to make it differ
from Hemicrania, which occupies but the one half of the head. Note also that
by the head we mean so much as is covered with hear, wherein pain is
engendered, The diversity of places that pain is in.
sometime without the scull and sometime within, sometime in all the outward
parts, and sometime in all the inward parts, sometime not in all, but in one
part, as in the Arteries only, or the veins, or sinews, or the filmes, or
the skin, or in the brain it self, but these differences, Whether the
headache be with in the skull or without it.
as Galen testifies, be very hard to know. But this may easily be known
whether the pain be within the scull or without it, if you consider well the
headache: for if the pain be extended to the roots and bottom of the eyes,
the pain is within the scull, for unto the eyes are certain branches derived
from the brain, and from the filmes, and other vessels that are about it: so
that the pain will quickly come from them to the roots of the eyes, but if
the pain that is felt, do not extend to the eye roots, then is the ache
without the scull. Causes of headache general.
This pain of the head generally (as also all other pains) is caused of an
unequal distempure coming with humors, or without, especially when it is hot
or cold, or it is caused by solution of parts coherent, or of both. But as for
particular and special causes of the head, Causes of headache special.
there be very many. For sometime it comes only of a simple distempur without
any humors, and sometime it comes thorough the evil quality of humors,
sometime it comes through great abundance of humors, sometime through
humors, that stop the passage of the vapoures and moisture in the head:
sometime through windines engendered in some part of the head, being weak.
Also sometime headache is caused of some disease in the stomach: sometime of
an outward cause as of heat of the Sun, of great cold, of dronkennes, or of
some stripe, or wound. Hereby it appears that the headache is engendered of
seven sundry causes, which are to be known by there proper signs, whereof we
will speak more at large in the chapters following, for in this chapter they
shall be but briefly touched. Note therefore that the headache, Signs of each
cause of headache generally.
which is caused of a simple diste^pure without humors, is not easy to be
known, except a man be well excercised in Physic, and by much and diligent
looking of the grief: but that pain of the head is most vehement, which is
caused of a simple distempure being hot or cold. The headache, that is caused
of dryness, is moderate. As for a moist distempure alone does cause noe
headache, except it be joined with heat or cold, or with abundance of
humors, or sharpnes of the^. If pain of the head does come through abundance
of humors, contained in one part of the head, or in two, or in all parts,
the pain is more vehement, that comes of hot humors, or of cold, that
which comes of dry things is more moderate, if there be not manifest heat or
cold joined with them, as for moist things touching there quality, do cause
noe pain at all, but with there quantity they may fill the passages and so
cause pain. If abundance of all four humors equaly, or of blood alone do
cause headache without obstruction and stopping of the passages, it makes the
head heavy and full, as it were stretched out and swollen, but if the multitude
of humors be with obstruction, it causes moderate pain if the obstruction be
but little, but if the obstruction be great, there shall be very great pain.
Also if the multitude of humors have a sharp and biting quality, according
to that quality the pain will be pricking and shooting, if with the heaviness
or stretching of the head therbe beating, and as it were a pulse, it betokens
inflammacion in the head. But if the stretching be present without heaviness
or pulse, it declares abundance of windye Spirits, and in this kind of
headache, there will be noise in the ears. Those, that have headache coming of an
external cause, as of heat of the Sun, cold of the air, dronckennesse,
stripes, or of any hot savors, can easily tell them selfs the cause therofe.
Seek for signs more particular in the Chapters next following.

CAP. II. Of headache caused of heat.
Understand, that by heat, in this chapter, is meant, a hoate distempure
without any kind of humor. Causes.
It is engendered for the most part of the burning heat of the Sun in Summer,
when any body has tarried long in it. Also it is sometime caused of immoderate
moving or by hoate bathes, or by being long nigh the flame of the fire, or
through anger, or furiousnes, or last of all through hoate dyseases, or hoate
savors of outward things. The signs which declare headache by burning heat of
the Sun, Signs.
are that besides vehement pain, you shall feel their head hoate as soon as
you touch it, and there skin drier then it was wont to be, there eyes do
look read, and they are delyghted with the sprinckling, or annoynting of
cold things, and do feel great ease by them. As for the other causes, they
may be known by relation of the sick. Diet.
For the cure of this kind of headache you must first provide, that the air
and the chamber wherein the sick abides, Air.
be very cold of nature, or else it must be made so by your diligence, as by
strowing in the house, flowers, and branches of cold things (as roses,
violettes, water lilly flowers, and vine leaves, bryer bows, willowe and
such like.) Also it will cool the air well to sprinckle cold water in the
house, or to pour it out of one vessel into another. Sleep.
Great respect must be had to his sleeping, for he must sleep longer then he
wont to do, he must altogether eschew long watchinge, and keep him self
quiet: he must not retain his excreme^tes but avoid them by and by after
sleep if he can, or let nature be helped to expel them by a lenityue clister,
for there retention increase pain in the head. Let him eschew carnal
copulation, excercyses, and bathes. Let him eschew all perturbations of the
mind, especially anger and furye. Let him have but little meat, Meat.
of good digestion, and let it be cold in operation, as is bread dipped in
cold water, juice of plysan, letuse, endive, purselaine, flesh of chickens,
hens or pigeons, with veriuyce made of grapes. Fyshes are good that come out
of stony rivers, and that are tender. Also almo^d milk, pomegarnettes, raisons
and ripe pears may be given to him. He must abstain from milk, and meats,
that fume into the head, or that be hard of digestion. For his drink, Drink.
let him use water altogether, if his stomach will bear it, if not, seathe a
little Cynamon in it, or Coriander sead preparate, or mix with the water juice
of sower pomegarnettes, or syrup of Endyue, or Syrupus acetosus simplex, or
oxy saccharum: or if they cannot abide that, you may give them small wine well
alayed with water. The pain of the head caused of heat, is cured with such
things as do cool, without manifest restriction, Cure.
especially if they be of thin and percing substance. Therefore in the
beginning nothing is better then to pour upon the head good oil of roses,
made of unripe oil, Oil of roses.
and if a little vinegar be added to it, it will pearce the faster and the
deeper. The places that you must pour or annoint it on, is the fore part of
the head where the seame goes overthwart, for it is the thinnest place of the
skull, and the seames have pores in them, also you must use it on the top of
the forhead, where the hear leaves growing, and on the sides of the temples,
where the hear grows toward the ears. The best thing next oil of roses
is oil of cammomill to be used in likewise, especially in those bodies, Oil
of commomill.
that we would not cool to much, as weomens, eunuchs, children and other
that have soft flesh, and are white in color. If there be need of greater
cooling, you may add to the oil of roses juice of houselike, or purselaine,
or knotgrasse, or of unripe grapes, or night shade, or sorrel, or psillium, or
such like. Use not juice of poppye, or of mandrage in this cause, for they do
hurt: you may make medicynes of the former things, or such like in this
sort.. oil of roses..ij. rosewater..j. strong vinegar..ss. or juice of
houselike, or purselaine, or lettuse..j. and so commixt them. Or thus,
distilled water of houselyke, lettuse, and night shade. ana..ij. water of
cammomill..j.ss. vinegar..j. commixt them, and dippe a clothe in it, and lay
it all over the forhead, and the temples where the hear grows not. But let
not this medicyne touch the hinder part of the head, for that part cannot
suffer cooling without hurt, because the marrowe of the back bone begins
there. Those medicines which you will use for cooling, especially in Summer,
must stand a while in very cold water. This also is good for abundance or
humors, and vapoures, that be lifted up into the head. In like manner also you
may use other oils that have virtue to cool as oils of quinces, violettes,
water lillies, and gourdes. Nether will it be unprofitable to use a liniment
made in this sort.. Of the mucilage of the seades of quinces, Alyni^^ens.
and great mallows, or of psillium. ana..iij. juice of purslaine..j.ss. juice
of night shade..ss. Oil of roses..j. commixt them and make a linime^t: or by
putting to wax and other medicines make an ointment in this sort..
Vnguentipopuleon..j. oiles of violettes and roses of each..iij. dry flowers of
white water lillies and of redd roses. ana..j. wax as much as is sufficient,
Vnguent^^^.
and make an ointment, and annoint it upon the forhead and the temples. Yt
profitteth also to use embrocations (that is decoctions made of certain things
to pour upon any member by little and little, or to let it drop down) they
may be made of roses, violettes, Embrochae.
S^^^efaci^tis.
flowers of water lillies, willowe leaves, vine leaves, purcelaine, barley and
such like. You must not apply stupefactiue things to the grief, because they
cool not without hurt, and therefore opin, juice of poppye, and mandragora are
to be eschewed. Juice of night shade also because of his stupefaction is not to
be used at all, or very little of it at once, as we do use in the liniment
before said. Also those things, that have manifest astriction and binding with
there cooling are to be refused, except necessity require it, and therefore the
juices of sweet pomgarnettes, quinces, and meddlars are to be avoided, but
juice of sower pomgarnettes is good because it cools more. No^e.
Hitherto we have declared what medicines are to be used in the beginning of
this grief. Afterward you may use to mix with the medicynes that do cool
and drive back, such things as do mitygate and digest. Make therefore an
embrocation after this sort.. Flowers of roses and violettes. ana. M.ss.
leaves of willowe, Embrocha.
cammomil, and melilote. ana. M.j. seades of mallows..iij. barley husked..j.
sees these in two pound of water, till the third part be consumed, and make
an embrocation. Or thus,. mallowe leaves, ^
vyolets, roses. ana. pug. ss. the flowers of water lillies..iij. vine leaves,
or the wreathes, that they wind about things which all, purcelaine, or
houselyke of each. M.j. cammomil, melilote, and fenngreke. ana..ij. seath them
as is above said, and make an embrocha, adding to a little vinegar, especially
if the pain be within the skull. Last of all you may use most of the
discussiue medicines, withdrawing the aforsaid repelling things, such be
Althaea, dill, sothernwood, butter, cammomill, barley meal, fenngreke,
lynesead, lupines. etc. Of these and such like things you may make quiltes,
or embrocations, or oyntmentes, Inward (...).
as you list. For inward medicines (especially if the headache be caused of
excercyse, anger or such like) minister nilep of violetts or roses, or there
conserues, or manus Christi, or give the sick ij. or.iij. hours before meat
in the morning..j. and ss. of syrup of infusion of roses, Odours.
or of syrup of water lillies with..ij. or.iij. of water of borage, or
cichorye. Yt is good for the sick to smell rose water, mixed with a little
vinegar, also it is good to snuff it up in to the nose.

CAP. III. Of headache caused of cold.
BY cold is meant in this Chapter, a cold distempure simply without the flux
of any cold humor. Causae.
This pain in the head is caused of outward cold as when the air is very
cold, especially when any body tarrieth in it long time bare headed, as also
it may be caused by the sudden applying of any cold thing to the head. Signae.
The signs of headache caused or cold, are contrary to those signs that are
caused of hot distempure. For in this, though the pain be vehement, yet the
head when it is felt, is not hoate, nor the face and eyes do not look read,
nor there face is not dry and shruncke but contrarywyse full and pale, Victus
ratio.
and there eyes are swollen and swart. Also they neither desire cold things, nor
do feel ease by them. Concerning the diett of those, that have this kind of
headache, they must eschew cold air, and abide altogether in hot air. They
must sleep moderately, but not longer then they were wont. They must use
moving of the whole body, especially walking and ryding. Let there bodies be
soluble, rather then costiue, so that they may each day have a siege either by
nature, or by art, as by a suppositary or a clister. Let them eschew saddnes,
and deep cogitations, and other immoderat affections of the mind. Let them
eschew all meats and drinks that be cold in operation as milk, fish and
such like. Let them eat rear eggs, and flesh of hens, chicken,
partriche, and feasaunts and such like. For there drink let him use wine that
is thin of substance, for that does moderatlie extenuate and heat. For the
same cause also hot bathes are to be used, and generally for the cure hereof
you must use things that be hot in operation. Cur^.
But yet in applying medicines to the head you must diligently consider the
natural temperature of the brain, for it is such a thing, as cannot suffer
medicines vehement hot, nor it vehement cold. Therefore (as Galen affirms) if
oil of rewe be poured hot upon the fore part of the head, it heals the
patient perfittlie. But if there be need of greater heating, you may put
pepper, or euphorbium into the oil, or you may mix some oil of pepper, or
oil of euphorbium with the oil of rewe, or in steed of oil of rewe, you
may use oils of laurel, yreos, dill, or cammomill, of spikenarde, serpillum,
marioram, and such like. Herewith you may annoint the forhead also, and the
nosthriles and the holes of the ears. Of the before said medicines you may make
an ointment after this sort. Vnguentum.
. Oils of yreos, and rewe. ana..ss. mariorame, betony, pepper. ana..j. of
Euphorbium. gra. v. wax as much as is sufficient, and make an oyntement, and
annoint therewith the forehead, Aliud.
and the nosethrills. Or make an ointement thus.. of oil of rewe, cammomill,
and nardinum. ana..j. hysope, lauender, and flowers of staechas. ana..ss.
masticke and frankensence of each..j. wax a little, and make an ointment. You
may sometime add to it, Embrochae.
if you will, Castoreum..j. Also embrocations profit much, if they be made of
flowers, of melitote, and cammomil, marioram, origan, betony, sage, laurel
leaves, staechas, and such like, sodden in water. It is good for the sick to
draw up the vapors of such decoctions by his nosethrills. Also a quilt made
in this sort profits much.. leaves of laurel, serpillum, and marioram. ana.
M.ss. flowers of rosemary. M.j. Rue. M.ss. cloves and staechas. ana..j.
peniroyall and calamint. ana..j.ss. beat these to powder* and sew them in
silk, or fine linen clothe, and make a quilte, Sacculus.
which must be laid to the head warm, and first sprinkled with vinegar. It is
good also to use a pomander, Pomum odoriferum.
made in this sort.. of storax calamitae..ij. cloves, maces, wood of aloes.
ana..ss. lauender..ij. gallia moschata..j.ss. of musk and amber. ana. gra. iij.
powder them and serce them, and with water of marioram, and storax liquida, as
much as shall suffice, make pomanders.

CAP. IIII. Of headache caused by drynes or moisture.
BY drynes is meant in this place a dry distempure of the quality alone, and
by moisture, a moist distempure of the bare quality. Nether of these qualities
alone, except heat or cold be joined with them, do cause any headache at all
(as Galen teaches in the 5. Chap. of his first book de symptomatum causis.)
Therefore we do not make mention here of these distempures, as though headache
might be caused of them alone, but that the studious in physic might have
store of medicines, when headache comes of heat and drines, or moisture with
heat, or when cold mixed with drynes, or moisture causes headache. Causae.
Headache through drynes is caused through drines of the air, or by dry
medicines, by honger, excercyse, lechery and perturbatio^s of the mind. And
headache of moisture is caused by moistnes of the air, or by moistening
medicines, by bathes, hot waters, and other things that moisten overmuch.
Drynes is known by these signs, if there come few excrementes, Signa.
or none at all out of the nose, if the eyes be hollow, and the patient have
watched much before. These be signs of headache of drynes, also in it the
skin of the head is dryer when it is felt, then it is wonted to be, and some
dry diet has been used. Also in this kind dry medicines do not ease the
pain, but rather increase it. Moistnes is known by these signs, much filth
comes out at the nose, the eyes be puffed up and swollen, and the patient
sleapeth much: but of this distempure alone there does noe headache ensue.
Victus.
Those that have headache caused of drynes, let them remain in a moist air,
and let them eat meats, that do moiste^, and that be of good juice, as the
yolks of eggs, cocks stones, and the brothes of them, phesants, partriche,
and such like things, that do nourishe much and moisten. Let them drink
thin wine alayed with water. Let them sleep largely. Let them eschew motion
of the body and excercyse, and use quyetnes and rest. Let them eschew carnal
copulation, hunger, thirst, and all things that do dry. Let hem use bathes
of sweet waters that are warm. Let them be merry, and eschew all other
perturbations of the mind. If headache be caused of moisture, you must use the
contrary diet to this that is before praescribed (that is, al such things as
do dry, which you may easily know by that, which has been said before.)
For pain of the head caused of drynes, Curatio.
you must anoint the former seame of the head with oil of sweet almondes, or
with oil of gourdes, or with oils of vyolettes, and cammomill mixed together.
It is also good to drop some of these oils into the nosethrills. You may
also mix very well with the said oils goose grease, hens grease, calves
grease, or fresh butter after this sort.. oils of vyolets, and water lillies
of each..iij. calves suit, hens grease, Lini^en^um.
and fresh butter. ana..ij. commixe them and make a linyme^t and there with
annoint the head. Furthermore embrocations profit not a little, if they be made
of vyolettes, mallows, and other herbs that have virtue to moisten. Against
headache caused of moisture you must use medicines clean contrary to the before
named, which must differ according to the heat or cold which is joined to the
moisture. You may find sufficient store of such remedies out of the former
chapters.

CAP. V. Of headache caused of blood.
HITHERTO we have spoken of the Cure of headache, with comes through
alteration and distempure of the bare quality. But now we will speak of that
which is caused of fullnes, What is (...) by plemiend^ (...).
and abundance of blood, we call plenitude in this place that which the Greeks
call in there tongue plethora, it chances when all the four humors be
increased in there proportion, or when blood alone does abound. Causae.
This kind of headache is caused of all such things as do engendre great
abundance of humors in the body, as meats and drinckes of great nourishment
being plentifully taken, as also the neglecting and omitting of excercyses,
bathes, sweetings, and other natural and artificial vacuations be causes of
the said plenitude. The signs be these. Signa.
The face and the eyes be ruddie, the veins are swollen, so that the least, and
small est may easily be seen, the pulse is great and vehement, the urine
reddishe and thick, the veins of the temples beat, Victus ratio.
the pain in the head is a heaviness. Concerning diet, let the sick be in a
cold and dry air. Let him eschew flesh, rear eggs, and such things as
nourishe plentifully. Let him use ptisan made of Barlie, or alica made of
barley, let him use cold herbs, as endyue, scarioll, purcelaine, lettuce and
such like. Let him eschew wine, and let him drink water, wherein a little
Cinnamon or barley has been sodden. Let him use mean excercyse. Let him be
rubbed, let him also use bathing often, but so that his body be first emptied
and the patient free from a fever. Let his sleep be mean. Let him be merry and
joyful, Curatio.
and let him abstain from all other perturbations of the mind. The cure must
be begonn whith bloudlettinge as soon as can be. You must open the uttermost
vain, which in the arm is called humeralis, Ve^^ sectio.
or Cephalica, it must be on the arm which is of that side, that the grief
is most vehement. For this vain is so annexed to the head, that not only by
it, you shall pull back blood into a contrary part, but also you shall emptye
out that blood by it. As Hippocrates, and after him Galien, and Rhases do
teach. But if age or weakness do prohibyte bloudletting, Cucurbitae. Ventose.
Loca^a.
you must use boxing, not to the head it self, but to the parts adjoining as
the shoulders and breast, to the intent to pull back the blood. These being
done, you must apply to the head, medicines that be cold and astringent,
whereof we have made mention before sufficiently in the second chapitre, so
that they need not here to be repeated. Furthermore the Physician must have
special regard in this case, that the patient be kept soluble. Decoctum
purge^s.
Therefore if the patient be any thing costyue, you may minister this decoction
or some such like.. flowers of buglosse, borage, roses, and violettes. ana.
M.ss. the four great cold seades husked. ana..ij. sebesten, damask, proines,
of each in number 12. great raisons, tamarindes. ana..j. barks of mirabolanes,
citrinorum, indorum, chebulorum, emblicorum, belliricorum. ana..iij.
liquoryce..j. fumitory, maiden hear. ana. M.j. tamariscus, hartistonge.
ana..iij. seen, and polipodie of each..ss. agarick chosen..ij.ss. ginger..ss.
Seathe all these in a sufficient quantity of water, until half be consumed,
then strain it and press it hard. Add to that decoction sugar sufficient to
make it sweet, purify it whith the white of eggs, and make a potion, whereof
the patient shall drink each morning..iiij. fasting. And if so be that the
pacientes costyuenes require a stronger medicine, then you may add to four
ounces of the before said decoction..j.ss. of fine reubarbe beaten to powder,
and spycknard..ss. or you may dissolve in it casia fistula..j.ss. newly
drawn. or..j. of manna, or of diaphenicon..iij. for the same purpose also it
is good to minister unto the patient syrup of vyolettes, and acetosus simplex.
After this you must apply such medicines to the head, as be able to disperse
the remnaunt of the pain and disease. As is seades of mallows, Discutientia.
fenngreke, chammomil, and melilote flowers. Also oils of cammomill, dill, and
such like, whereof the Physician may at his choice make lynementes, ointments,
or emplaisters in manner aforesaid. Note here further that if much blood
abou^d after you have let blood of the Cephalica: you may also stryke the
vain in the forhead, as also for that purpose it is good to use clysters
sometime very strong, and you may use frictions and bindinges of the nether
parts to pull back the humors. Moreover gargarysing, and snesing may be
used in time convenient, and boxing in the hinder part of the head with
scarification at the discretion of the Physician, as occasion and time shall
serve.

CAP. VI. Of headache caused of choler.
HEADACHE coming of cholerike humors is caused of all such things as do heat
and dry the whole body and especially the head unnaturally, that is, Causae.
such things as do engender choler: (to wit, care, anger, pain, labor,
exercise, watching, abstinence, famine, and eating of meats that be
choleric, as garlic, oynions, and such like.) The signs be these the pain
is like there is, Signa.
that have headache caused of burning heat of the Su^ne, but they have a more
sharp and pricking pain, there head is moderately hot, there face is pale and
wane. Sometime there follows bitterness of the mouth, drines of the eyes,
nose and tongue. Moreover this evil chances most of all to flourishing years,
a hot complexion, and to them that take overmuch business in hand and such
like. Let the patient abide in a cold and moist air, Victus ratio.
which may be the rather procured by art as is taught before in the second
chap. by sprinkling the flower of the chamber continually with water, or by
strewing about of flowers and branches that are cold and moist in operation.
Let his whole diet be moist, let him eat moist meats that be of good juice,
give him lettuce, and purcelain, and small fishes of fresh waters. Let his
drink be water alone, or water wherein a little Cynamon has been sodden. Let
him altogether abstain from wine. Let him be quyete, and use long sleeps:
bathes that be temperate, unctions are good for him, let him be merry, and
refrain from all perturbatio^s of the mind. The cure must be begun with
purging of the choleric humor straigt way, Curatio.
because choler is thin and moveable, and therefore will easily purge out.
But if it chance, that the choleric humor does rest quyetly in some part of
the body, and so does wax hot, and burn that part, and by that means does
prohibit hot medicines (as purging things be) the^ before the purgatio^, you
must minister such things as do quench and concoct the heat and burning of
choler, that is such things as do alter it. For digestio^ that we speak of
now is no thing else but an alteration of the humor that causes the disease.
Therefore such medicines must be ministered each morning fasting before you do
purge until good co^coctio^ appear in the urine: For by this means choler
being co^coct, and as it were tamed and made myld is made so obedient unto
nature, that it will soon without any grief be drawn of the purging medecin
to convenient places, that it should avoid by. Zul^pium.
You shall therefore for a preparatiue use this or such like medicines.. Syrup
of Violettes..j. syrup of water Lillies..ss. distilled waters of Endyue,
succory and Roses. ana..j. commixe them, and let that be drunk in the morning
fasting. For this purpose also you may minister Iulep of Roses and Violettes,
or Syrupus acetosus, or the decoction of seades of Cucumbers, Gourdes,
Purcelayne, Endyue, roots also of Endyue and Succorye, Roses, Violettes, water
Lillies, Lettuce, Damask, Proynes, Sebesten, Iniubes and such like. Purgatio.
You may purge the cholerike humor either by infusion of wormwood, or of
Aloes, or with Hierapicra ministered alone, or a little sca^mony mixed with it,
or with Pills made of Aloes. Or you shall not do amiss to take of the
purging decoction prescribed in the former chapter..iiij. and to dissolve
therein..iij. of Electuarium de succo Rosarum, or as much of Electuarium de
Psillio, and so minister it. It is good also to minister infusion of rewbarbe
made after this sort. Dilutum Rhabarbari.
. fine Rewbarbe..ij. Spickenard..j. cut them small, and infuse them in
distilled waters of endyue, doddir, and buglosse. ana..j. pure wine..ss. the
space of 12 hours, then strain it hard, and put thereto of Electuaries de
succo Rosarum and Psillio. ana..j.ss. commixe them and make a purging potion.
Also you may use Pilula aurea, and Alephanginae, or Pills of Rewbarbe, or of
Hiera simplex and such like, or else Diacatholicon, or Diaprunes solutine. For
them that are delicate, you may use this bole.. of Diagridium..ss. of Maces,
Cynnamon, Bolus purga^s.
and Masticke. ana. gr. 2. conserve of Violettes and water Lillies. ana..j.
Sugar as much as suffices, and make a bole. Further it profits now and
then to use clysters made in this or like sort.. Mallows, Clyster.
Althea, Endyue, Succorye, Violettes, ana. M.ss. whole Barley..j. the four
common small cold seades (that is) Lettuce, Purcelayne, Endyue, and Scaryoll.
ana..iij. Seath all these in running water to the third part, strain them,
take of that decoction. lb.j. of the pulpe of Cassia fistula..j. of
Hierapicra..ss. of oil of Violettes..iij. of mel rosarum..j. of salt..j.ss.
commixt all together and make a clister. Loca^ia.
After purging of the cholerike humor you must apply medicines outwardly,
which can cool and strengthen the head, whereof you shall find store in the
second chapitre. Sleep.
If the sick can not sleep, anoint the fore part of the head with oil of
water lillies, and oil of poppye: to them you may for a need add a little
opium, that sleep thereby may be provoked. Note, that boxing without
scarification and frictions of the arms and legs may be well used in times
convenient.

CAP. VII. Of headache caused of fleume.
Causae.
HEADACHE coming of fleume, is caused of all such things as engendre fleume
in the head, as a cold and moist air, meats, that be cold and moist, as
fyshes, milk, raw herbs, fruit, idleness, and sleeping upon a full stomach
and such otherlyke. Signa.
The signs hereof be fullnes and heauynes of the head, whitenes, and moistnes
of the face, moreover the sick will easily fall asleep, he is slow, his
senses are dull, and his head abounds whith excrementes, as also the signs
declared in the.3. Chap. agree with this kind of headache. Victus r^ti^.
Let the sick remain in an air that is hot and dry by nature, or if that
cannot be had, let the air be made such by certain odoriferous things, as
with Cynamon, frankinscence, cloves, wood of Aloes, and such like. Let his
meat that he eats for the most part be roasted, and let him eat spyces with
it. For his drink let him use thin and small wine, let his excercyse be
mean, to be short, let him use such diet as is praescribed in the third
chap. of this book. The Cure must be begonn whith extenuation and digestion of
the flegmaticke humor. ^
Therefore you must minister such medicines as are able to extenuate, make
thin, cut, and deuy de humors, such be mel rosarum, oximel simplex and
compositum and scilliticum, syrup of slechades, distilled waters of hysope,
betony, mariorame, sage and such like, minister therefore unto him a medicine
made on this sort. ^
. Of oximel scylliticum..j. of syrup of sleehades..ss. of distilled waters of
hysope, percely and marioram. ana..j. commixe them and make a potion. Or if the
vseing of syrupes and distilled waters do not like you, you may minister this
or such like decoction. Decoctum exser^^^^ (...).
. of the roots of fenell, percely, and asparagus. ana..j. roots of piony..ij.
seades of annise, fennel, siler mo^tanum. ana..iij. stichados, origan,
serpillu^, maioram, calamint, betony, sage. ana. M.ss. fine Cynamon, macis.
ana..j.ss. Seathe all these in sufficient quantity of water until half be
consumed, then strain it, and add sugar sufficient to make it sweet, clarify
it with the whytes of eggs, then put thertoe syrup of hysope, and oximel
simplex. ana..iij. commixte them all together and make a poi^on. When the
humors are extenuate, and made thin and prepared to be purged, then must
such medicines be ministered, Purgatio.
as are able to purge fleume, for the which cause let the sick have these
pills ministered unto him. Pilula.
. pilularum co^luarum..j.ss. pilularum e hiera composita..j. pil.
alephanginarum..ss. agarike made into trochistes..ij. Mirabonalorum,
chebulorum..j. fine turbith..ss. stichados and ginger. ana. gr. v. mastycke.
gr. vij. seades of piony in number.iij. Castorei. g.iiij. with lauender water
make pills. It is good for them, that are thus affected to be purged not once
only, but twyse or thryse, because the gross and clammy humors will not
straight follow a sudden purgation, but they must be drawn out by little and
little with often purging. Also clisters are good, not only because they empty
out such things as are contained in the intestines, but also for that they pull
back such humors and vapors as ascend to the head. Clyster.
For clysters therefore the decoction before prescribed is good if you take
thereof..xij. and dissolve therein benedictae laxatinae..ss. Electuarij indi
maioris..iij. diaphaenicon..ij. mel rosarum..j. oils of laurel and rewe.
ana..j.ss. sal. gennie..j. commixt them together and make a clister. After the
whole body is purged, you must minister such medicynes as can purge the head,
as be Gargaryses made in this sort. long pepper and nuttmegs. ana..ss. sead of
stauisacre, Gargarise.
pelitory. ana..ij. mustard seade, origan. ana..j. beat them to powder, and
put thereof in a linen clothe, and chewe it, or with masticke or honye make
trochiskes like lupines, and let the sick chewe one of them almost half an
hour. Also the head may be purged by juice of maiorame, blitum, coleworts,
and such like. You may also for this purpose minister gagaryses made of the
distilled waters of hysope, betony, origan, with hierapicra, and oximel
compositum, or in this sort.. pellitorye, Gargarismus.
long pepper of each..j.ss. sead of stauisacre..ss. maiora^, peniroyall,
hysope, origan, betony. ana. M.ss. seath all these in sufficient quantity of
water unto the third part, strain it and add to the licour mel
rosarum..j.ss. oximell scilliticum..ss. co^mixe all and make a gargarise. Also
medicines to provoke sneasing are good in this case. S^ernutamentum.
You may make them after this sort.. maiora^..j. nigella..ss cloves, white
pepper, cubebes. ana..j. nutmegges, grains, castoreu^, heleborus albus.
ana..ss. beat them into very fine powder, and provoke, snesing therewith. For
them which are rich you may add musk and amber. ana. g.ij. It profits also
to hold hot and sweet odours to the nose of the patie^t, or a poma^der
artificially made, such a one as we praescribed in the end of the third
Chapter. Further you may take nasalia (as they call them) things to put into
the nose sharp at one end and great at the other like a steeple after this
sort.. stauisacre, Nasa^a.
pelitory, and whit pepper. ana..ss. nigelle, nutmegges. ana..ij. heleborus
albus..ss. powder them and with rosin and wax make nasales. After the purging
of the head you may use oyntmentes, embrocations, dry quiltes, Loca^a.
and such like other medicines to disperse the remnaunt of the humor
remaining in the head, whereof there be examples sufficient in the third Chapter
before. You may commodiously minister inwardly cubebes, condite, or diambra,
diamoscha, aromaticum rosaceum, diacuminum, dianthos, theriaca, mithridarum,
diacorum, conserve of maioram, rosemary, betony, with syrup of staechados.
Lo^^nges.
Or minister these lozenges which are specially good.. powder of Electuarium de
gemmis, dianthos. ana..j. cubebes, maces of each..ss. woods of Aloes, cloves,
and fennel sead. ana..ss. fine Cynamon..ij. staechados..ss. with sugar molten
in the distilled waters of piony flowers and lauender make lozenges. And thus
much for the cure of headache caused of flegmaticke humors. But if so be
that headache be caused of a melancholye humor, ^
then you must prescribe such diet, and use such cure as shall be declared in
the chaptre of melancholy, or maddnes. And therefore it should be superfluous to
entreat hereofe in this place, repayer therefore for cure of headache coming
of melancholy unto the Chapter in this book followinge.

CAP. VIII. Of headache caused of windynes.
IF headache be caused of windines, Causae.
the diet used before was such as did engendre wind besides the nature of the
body, and other circunsta^ces were such as were apt to enge^dre wind. The
signs be these, Signa.
if there be felt discention and stretching in the head without heaviness and
beating, and if there be a sound and noise in the ears, then does it betoken
windynes in the head. Victus ratio. Cura.
The diet of the patient must altogether be such as does not engender
windynes. For the cure, if the windynes be not only bredd in the head, but
does ascend from some part beneath: first of all you must use such
medicines, as do repel and drive back, such be vinegar, pomgarnet rindes and
flowers, wormwood, melilote, mintes, plantaine, walwort, bursa pastoris,
nutmegges, purcelaine, houslike, laurel leaves and such like. Which being
moderatly used a while, you must then add to those repulsyue things, some
such medicines as do mitigate concoct and digest, as be fenngreke, lynesead,
cammomil, yolks of eggs, saffron, hens grease, goose grease. etc. Last of
all add discussyue medicynes oils of dill, and rewe, barley meal, lupines,
lilly roots, nigella, etc. It is good therefore first of all to empty the bealy
with a strong clister, but that must be made of a decoction that does dissolve
windines, by seathing in water anyse seades, and caraway seades, fennel sead,
common, dry figs, C^^fier.
branne and such like: herein you must dissolve benedicta laxatina..iiij. or
Electu^trium ^idum in like quantity, or Diaphenicon..iiij. or Diacatholicon. or
hierepicre..vij. Such kind of clysters do not only purge the intestynes, and
the parts about the liver, but do also pull back such things as ascend to
the head. Afterward you must strengthen the affected member, that it do
engender wind noe more, whither it be the stomach, the liver, the spleen, the
intestynes, or any other member: which being done, if heat abound in the head
together with the windines then apply oil of roses, which is both repulsiue,
digestive, and discussiue, Localia.
and add to it vinegar which is both repulsyue and discussyue also, and does
extenuate besides. Also rose water or juice of purcelaine, knotgrasse, or
nightshade may be used and applied whith a little vinegar. If there be cold in
the head with the wyndines, then use oils of cammomill or dill, mixed with a
little vinegar, or if the greyse increase apply the juice of rewe with vinegar
and oil mixed together, or apply the juice of the root of flower de luce
whith vinegre, or juice of laurel bearyes and rewe mixed with vinegar is good
to be applied. Likewise bitter almondes beaten whith vinegar and oil, and
applied to the forhead in a linen clothe, are very good, when the greyse does
first begin to increase. And if you had rather use dry quiltes, you may make
them at the first of milium, roses, willowe leaves, knotgrasse, nightshade, and
purcelaine, and so apply them to the forhead, and fore part of the head.
Afterward you may add to the before said maiorame, serpillu^, hysope, rewe,
tender leaves of laurel, ciperns and such like. It is good also to use odours
and smelles, as Castoreum, musk, amber, and such like. To provoke sneasing,
and to minister inwardly to the sick is good, either Diacuminum, or
Dianisum..j. or as much triacle, or Mithridatum proffiteth. But if the
wyndines be caused through imbecillitye of some parts of the head it self,
then you shall not need to use repulsyue medicines, but rather concoctiue and
discussiue medicines such as are before declared. As for inward medicines
they avail or profit little in this case.

CAP. IX. Of headache caused of the stomach.
HITHERTO we have declared the causes, signs, and Cures of headache caused
principally in it self, now it remains that we entreat of pain in the
head, which comes by consent. And first of that headache which comes through
evil affection of the stomach. Causae.
And that is caused most commonly when some sharp humor aboduneth in the
stomach especially in the mouth of it, from whence corrupt vapors arysing do
ascend to the head. It may be known by the gnawing and biting pain that they
feel which have that headache, Signa.
and by the desire to vomit, that the patient has. Especially if the mouth of
the stomach be affected. Moreover in this kind of headache, if the sick
fast, and suffer hunger long, the pain is more vehement, for through long
abstinence the malice of the humuor increases. Curatio.
You must Cure those, that are thus grieved, not by applying remedies to the
head, but to the humors in the stomach, which raise up vapors to trouble the
head. Therefore you must with speed purge the noisome humors that are in the
mouth of the stomach. They may be purged out by drinking of warm water, if so
be the patient can easily vomit, if not, he must thrust his finger or a fether
into his throat, and so provoke the stomach to vomit. Note that yelowe, or pale
choler, because of his natural lightness, does readily ascend to the mouth
of the stomach. But the humors that be flegmatique, or sour, or salt, do
rather remain in the midst of the stomach, then in the mouth of it. It is
best when such humors are in the bottom of the stomach, for then they will
easily avoid the stomach and pass into the guts. It is worst of all when
noisome humors do cleave so fast to the filmes and runicles of the stomach,
and does so furre them, that they can scarcely be scoured out. Hierapicra.
Therefore if any humor does furre the tunicles of the stomach, minister
Hierapicra, which is a sovereign medicine therefore. And after purging let the
patient have good meats easy of digestion, and wholesome for the stomach. And
forasmuch as lack of good digestion, and weakness of the mouth of the stomach,
be the greatest causes of increase of noisome humors in the Stomach, it must
be provided that good digestion be procured, and that the mouth of the stomach
may be strengthened by such medicynes, as be astrictiue, and have virtue to
strengthen. Whereof you shall find plenty herafter in the third Book, and
therefore it were superfluous to recyte them here. Note.
As we have in this Chap. spoken of headache caused of the stomach, and
referred the cure to the third book, so understand lykwyse if headache be
caused of the disease of the liver or spleen, or any other membre: for the
affectes of those members being cured cease the headache.

CAP. X. Of headache caused by drunkenness.
THE causes and signs of drunkenness are evident enough, chiefly hot wynes,
Causae.
and strong drinckes are causes thereof, for that they fill the brain with
vapors, and that so much the more (as Galen said) if the brain be hot by
nature, sometime also hot humors ascending to the head do cause dronkennes.
The cure of dronkennes generally consists in two points: that is, Curatio.
in euacuation, and refrigeration. Therefore if the wine be yet vndigest, and
do flow in the stomach, cause him that has the headache to vomit by
drinking of hot water. VVarme water, and (...) ace^^^e co^m^^ed causes (...).
But and if the headache do remain after digestion, you must use medicynes,
that do refrigerate, and drive back vapors which ascend to the head. As is
oil of roses alone, or mixed with vinegar, or with juice of juice, or
colewortes. Also the leaves of Colewortes steyped in warm water, and bound
about the head do naturally resist dronkennes. Moreover the brothe of
Colewortes being eaten, is good for that purpose. Praeseruatio.
To preserve one from dronkennes (as Aetius says) let him eat v. or vij.
bitter almondes fasting, or let him drink wormwood wine first of all. But to
take away drunkenness, that is present, give the decoction of centory the
less, to drink, or hearts horn, or the seade of veruaine boiled in water. You
must have a special regard and procure that the patient do sleep, and rest,
which being done all day at night bathe him in a bathe of sweet water, and
when thou have washed him, let him eat meats of good juice, but not over
hot. Let therefore his food be ptisan brothe, Victus ratio.
souppings made of alica, bread dipped in water, rear eggs and such like.
For pot herbs lettuce is of good juice and cools, and colewortes dries up
vapors. For drink let him use water only, if he has been accustomed thertoe,
and can well bear it, otherwise give him small drink, or a little small whit
wine. After his meat give unto him of a pomegarnet, or a pear, or a quince,
or raisons. To conclud let all his diet be meats of good juice, pleasant to
the stomach, and that drive away vapors. Let him abstain from dates, for there
property is to cause headache. And if it chance that of the vapors and
humors ascending to the head, Dates.
there remain part of them impact and stuffed in the thin pores, and so do
cause headache after two or three days: then leave oil of roses, and use first
in stead of it oil of ca^momill moderatelye warm. Afterward apply oil of
yreos. After that if nead require, Iriu^. Nardi^^^.
you may apply things, that heat more, co^mixing with the oil of ireos, oil
of narde, or oleum costinum: or other oils and ointmentes of that sort.

CAP XI. Of headache caused by fevers.
IF headache do molest those that have a fever: you must diligently examyne and
consider, whyther the same began at the first beginning of the fever, Causae.
or whither it sprung the fever encresing, for if the headache began not with
the first fit of the fever, but afterward* while the fever increased, and
came nighe to the Crisis: then seek not to remedy it, for it portendeth and
fortelleth that vomit, or a decretory flux of blood at the nose will follow
shortly, as Hippocrates declares in his book of predictions, and Gale^ in his
third book De Crisibus, and in his first book ad Glauconem Cap. vltimo: if
the headache begone at the first whith the fever, it comes of vapors or
humors dispersed abroad through the greatness of the fever, and as it were
boiling hot eleuate up to the head and partly also through weakness of the
brain. Therefore if the pain do come of abounda^ce of humors, Cura.
you must let him blood after the first or second fit (if nothing prohibit it)
especially in lusty bodies, and in such as abou^d with blood. Also you must
draw the humors a contrary way, and pull them back by sharp clysters,
such as shall be prescribed in the Chap. of Apoplexia, and by often binding and
much frication in the neither parts. Moreover you may set cupping glasses to
the hinder part of the head, or to the neck. You must apply to the head
irrigations and oyntmentes, that have virtue to repel and drive back from it,
and afterward you must use discussiue medicines, last of all such things as
do strengthen the brain. To repel and drive back, use oil of roses, and
other such like as are rehearsed before in the 2. Chap. use them in Summer
time, and in hot complexions, cold and mixed with a little vinegre, but in
winter season, and in cold complexions apply them blood warm. If the fever be
vehement, and over much watching do trouble the sick, use irrigations made of
poppy heads, housleeke and such like medicines as have virtue to cool and
provoke sleep in this sort.. flowers of violettes, Embrocha.
water lillies, and roses. ana. M.j. hulled barley..j. heads of poppy..ss.
housleeke. M.ss. seath all these in sufficient quantity of water, until the
third part be consumed, and make an embrocation. Or if the pain continue
vehement, take greane leaves of henbane, or poppie, with oil of roses, a little
vinegar and crommes of bread, commixe them and apply them to the forepart of
the head, and to the forehead. When the brain is sufficiently cooled, Note.
then apply those things which can heat the head again, and so avoid and
disperse the humors that remain. And therefore you may use oils of cammomill,
dill, or ireos, or decoctions of cammomill, or Althea, or such like. And if
the humors be gross, and tough, you may boil with thaforsaid things:
Serpillum, penyroiall, calamint, mintes, or such like. Last of all the head
must be strengthened by oil of roses, and such like (that is) betony,
cammomill, melilote, etc. The rest of the cure of headache caused through the
vehemence of the fever, is to be sought out in the treatise of fevers.

CAP. XII. Of inueterate headache.
CEPHALAEA both in Greek and Latin is the name of headache which is exceeding
painful, Signa.
continuing long, and hard to cease, which upon light occasions has very
great and sharp fittes, so that the patient can nether abide noise, nor loud
speech, nor clear light, nor drinking of wine, nor savors that fill the
brain, nor moving, but he desires for the greatness of the pain to sit or lie
quiet in the dark, supposing that his head were stricken with a hammer. Also
some of them do feel those things, that are about there head as though they
were bruised or racked. In many the pain proceeds unto the roots of the
eyes. This disease sometime does continue painful always, sometime it has
fittes and intermissions either ordinate or inordinate. For in some there is
intermissio^ in the fittes, as is in the falling sickness, so that for a time
they seem to be perfitelye hole. This disease does vex women more then men,
for because of there long hear. In some of them the filmes that cover the
brain are pained, but in some only the filme that covers the skul is
greaued. It is caused of abundance of blood and other humors, Causae.
or by the sharpnes of humors or vapors contained within or without the
skull, and inflaming the head, or it is caused through weakness of the head. The
pain that inuadeth the sick with graulty and heaviness, declares plenitude
and abundance of humors: Signa.
if it come with pricking, gnawing and shooting, it betokens sharpnes of
humors or vapors* if it beat like the pulses, it betokens inflammacion: if
there be felt distension and bo^n^ng in the head without heaviness or beating it
declares windines. But if there be beating with it, there is inflammacion in the
filmes of the head: and if there be heaviness with the distension, then it
declares abundance of humors within the filmes. And if the pain be felt
superficially, as it were outward, then it betokens that the filme which
covers the skull is greaued. But if it be felt deep within, the filmes of
the brain are vexed. Note that those, that have pain within the skull, Note.
they feel grief at the roots of there eyes, because that the tunicles of the
eyes have there beginning of the filmes of the brain. And if so be that a
putrified humor in the head do wax hoter and hoter, then there is a fever
joined with the headache. They also are vexed with a fever, which have headache
caused by inflammation. As for diet to be used in this grief, Victus ratio.
you may easily prescribe it out of the former Chapters, according to the
diuersitye of the causes therofe: and therefore I omit it here willingly lest I
should use a fond repetition of one thing often. The Cure does differ according
to the diversity of the cause. Curatio.
For if you find abundance of humors or vapors to be the cause, if it be
engendered of plenitude of the whole body, you must beginn with euacuation of
the whole body. Venae sectio.
And therefore you must let him blood on the Caephalica on the same side, if his
strength will suffer it, and noe other thing let it. But if the head does
receive the humors and vapors that do ascend, for that it is weak: then you
must pull back the matter into the whole body, and so remedy the part
affected. Therefore you must use very sharp Clisters, and bindinges of the
arms and legs, Remi^si^.
and many frictions of the nether parts, and sometime also in this case you
may let blood in the arm. And if after that blood do seem still to abound,
you may open a vain in the nosethrills, and draw blood from thence, as much
as shall be requisite. Shortly after you must purge the body with Hierapicra, or
other things that are praescribed in the former Chapters. After purging of the
whole body, you may safely come to purging of the head, and in the end use
medicines to strengthen it. The head is to be purged with Gargarismes, ^
and with medicines put into the nose, as juice of leekes or of Cyclaminus, or
such like which be rehearsed before in the.vij. Chapter. To the head it self
you must first apply things, that do repel and drive back, (such be) oil
made of unripe olyues, and oil of roses alone, or applied with vinegar, also
oil made of poppie heads and of iuye bearyes, and of grene mintes, and such
like, whereof we have spoken before. But note, Note.
if the humors that abound in the head be cold and crude, then apply the
former medicines warm, but if the humors abounding be hot and choleric,
then apply those medicines cold. Afterward you must apply those medicines that
do discuss and disperse humors, as be oils of cammomill and dill, and such
like before rehearsed, but if the humors abounding be thick and tough, boil
serpillum, or peniroyall, or calamint, or mintes in oil, and thou shall
extenuate them by applying thereof. Besides these things do strengthen the
part affected, and therefore they are to be used until the cure be finished.
Verbe^a^a re^ta.
Above all other things veruaine does disperse humors, and mightily
corroborate the head, especially being green. Also being dry, and boiled in
ale, roots and all together, with serpillum, it does the like, if the head be
anointed therewith. Moreover if you boil veruaine alone in oil, and do
sprinkle the head therewith, it helps all pain of the head of long
continuance, if it were caused of cold, or of gross and viscous humors (as
Galen witnesses. Lib. 2. de comp. medicam. secundu^ Locos. Also for the same
it profits much to use oil, wherein sowes, called in Latin Millipede be
boiled. And thus much of the cure of Caephalea coming of plenitude. As for the
cure thereof coming of other causes, you may gather it out of the former
Chapters.

CAP. XIII. Of the Migrime.
HEMICRANIA is a painful evil remaining in the one half of the head, either
on the right half or on the left, and is distinguished by the seame that
runs along in the skull, from the midde forehead to the hinder part of the
head, this grief in English is called the Migrime. This pain comes often by
fittes, and in some the grief is felt without the skull, in some within deep
in the brain, and in some other nigh to the temples in the muscles there.
Causae.
This pain is caused by ascending and flowing of many vapors or humors
either hot or cold, either by the veins, or by the arteries, or by both.
Sometime they only procead from the parts contained in the skull, that is,
from the brain and his filmes, which thrust out their excrementes and
superfluityes from them, and sometime from the parts of the body beneth the
head, which send up corrupt vapors and humors from them selfs to the brain.
Signa.
The signs whereby you should know whither vapors or humors do abou^d, and
whither they be hot, or cold, are to be gathered out of the former chapters. As
also to know in what part of the head the grief is, whither within the skull
or without, read the former chapter of Cephalaa. Only this I add here, that
if in this disease, the filme that covers the skull be affected, then is there
pain so vehement, that they cannot suffer to be touched with ones hand, so
that it seems the skin it self is affected in this evil. As for there diet
what they should use, and what they should eschew, may readily be gathered
and prescribed out of the former Chapters, according to the diuersitye of
causes: but specially let the patient refrain from such things as do send
abundance of sharp vapors up to the head, Curatio.
as be garlic, oynions, mustard, raddishe roots, and such like. The cure is
diverse according to the diversity of causes. And therefore when you will cure
the migrime, consider diligently first whither the patie^t neadeth bloudletting
or purging. For if the grief com through plenitude and abounda^ce of blood and
humors, then cut the Caephalica in the arm on the same side that the grief
is: but if the migrime be caused of abundance of one humor, then purge that
humor by convenient medicines, which are prescribed in the former chapters.
Localia.
The hole body being purged, you may come to local and outward medicines, and
first cause the patient either with his own fingers, or with a linen cloth,
to rub and chafe the half of his forehead which is grieved, and specially
about the muscles of his temples, until it be red and hot, and this must be
done before the fit of pain comes. After the fit (as Galen teaches in the
end of his second book, De compositione medicamentorum secundum locos) you must
apply medicines which of the old Physicians were called Hemicrania, for that
they were used for the migrime: noting this always, that if with the pain
there were much heat felt, then you ought to apply such things as would
somewhat cool. But if there were noe evident heat felt, then use those things
that are very hot. But you must commixe with either of these, somewhat that is
restrictyue, and has virtue to corroborate and strengthen. Vnguentum.
This ointment following is a very good remedy in a cold affecte.. Of oils of
dill and Ireos. ana..ss. of whit pepper, and serpillum. ana..j.ss. of
Castoreum..j. of Euphorbium.ss. of wax.q.ss. and make an ointment to be
applied upon the half of the forehead and the muscle of the Temples. Also in
this case it profits much to pour this oil following into the ear. Ole^^.
. Sweet oil olyue..j. Euphorbium..j. commixe them and drop one drop into
the ear warm. You may put in more Euphorbium or less, according as the body
is quick or dull in sense: but beware you use not this medicine in those that
have the migrime engendered of hot vapors or humors. AEtius says that
euphorbium dissolved in vinegar, and applied to the left side of the head, if
the right side be greaued, or contrarywyse on the right side when the pain is
on the left side, does of a certain hid property help the migrime. The same
Author also says, that earth worms beaten to powder, and applied to the
grief, as also the flesh of snails bruised and applied does proffit much. The
kernells of peaches bruised and applied upon the grief (as report has been)
does proffit much. Marcellus says that the doung of a goat stamped and
commixed with vinegar squilliticke, if the forehead and temples be anointed
therewith, it cease the pain of the mygrime for ever. Also his counsel is,
if there be sudden pain of the migryme, take frankincense, mirrhe, and a egg,
beat them together, and apply that to the forehead and temples. Note.
If the migrime be caused of hot humors or vapors, then use those remedies
which we prescribed before in the cure of headache coming of heat or of
choleric humors. Here I think it requisite to praescribe certain pills,
good to be used against inuerate headache, Pilula.
and the migrime. First it choler abound.. powder of Hiera simplex Galeni..ij.
pilularu^ ar abicarum..iij. trochiskes of mirabola^s citrine..j.ss.
reubarbe..j. spicknard..j. commixe them with syrup of violettes, and reserve
the composition. When need requires minister..j. or..4.v. or vj. hours after
supper, and let the patient sleep upon it. This you may do once in tenn days,
or once in fifteen days at all times (summer excepted). But if fleume
abounds, make your pills thus.. of Agaricke trochiscate..iiij. pilulae
arabica, and Hiera simplex. Gal. ana..j.ss. flowers of staechados, and
trochiskes of mirabolanes chebulorum. ana..j. with syrup of staechados and
oximel commixe them, and when occasion serves, minister..j. or..iiij. at each
time in form abouesaid. But if melancholy be cause of the migrime,. of the
aforesaid Pilulae arabica..ij. of powder of seen and Epithimu^. ana..ij.ss. of
Hiera simplex. Gal..j.ss. of trochiskes of Mirabolanes indorum..iiij. with
syrup of furnitory and balm water make pills, and when requires, minister
them in form aforsaid.

CAP. XIIII. Of Vertigo and swemming in the head.
THAT which the Latins call Vertigo, is a disease, wherein the patient does
imagine that his head is turned round about. There is another disease somewhat
like unto this, which in Latin is called, Tenebricosa Vertigo, and that is when
the patient does thinck that all that he sees turns about, and sodenlie with
it, his sight fails him, he supposing that he is compassed about with mist
and darkness. It is commonly of the Physicians called Scotomia. Fuschius does
thinck that they err greatly, that make a difference between the former
kinds, but it may be confirmed out of good Authors, Hippocrates, Galen and
others. Both the aforsaid kinds be inge^dred after one sort, and that is
through the inordinate moving of windy vapors and spirits, contained in
certain parts of the brain. Causae.
This disease is caused either of the brain it self being distempured and
evil affected, or of the mouth of the stomach offending the brain. The brain
it self is affected evil, when a gross and tough humor is contained in it,
from whence a vaporous and windy spirit being resolved by weak heat, is moved
inordinately about in the brain. The mouth of the stomach does affect the
brain, when through corrupt humors being gathered abundantly in it, vapors
and windy exhalations are carried up to the brain, and so turn about the
animal spirits contained in it. Signa.
Those that are troubled with this disease, a darkness and miste appears
before there eyes upon every light occasion, specially if they turn about. For
it chances to them by turning once about, as is does to other when they turn
often, and therefore the patient many times falls down. Also it does astony
him, if he see another man, or a wheel, or any such like thing turn about, as
also it he see whirle pooles in the water turn about, for the visuall spirits
beholding a wheel that turns about, or any such like thing, does also turn
about in like sort, and so the moving of the humor and the spirittes are
troubled unequal and inordinate. When this disease does procead of the brain
being evil affected, then there proceadeth sound of the ears, vehement pain
in the head, and heaviness therein. Also the smelling and the other senses
proceading from the head are hurt. There fit is then chiefly when the Sun
does heat them, or when there head is hot by some other means, and so the
humors being dissolved, do turn about in the brain. When the disease
proceadeth from the mouth of the stomach, then they feel before it, a gnawing
in the stomach, as it were the heart burn, and a disposition to vomit. This
disease may be discerned from the falling sickness, for that this does nether
take away the senses from the patient, nor it causes not the crampe and
writhing of members in the fit. Prognostica.
This disease is not to be lightly esteemed, for the Vertigo (as Galen says)
is nigh to the falling sickness, and the Apoplexy. And therefore it would be well
looked to. For the Vertigo and scotoma will quickly be changed into pernicious
diseases, for that they are very nigh to them, specially to the falling
sickness and the Apoplexy. And if those things that the patient does imagyne to
see before his eyes, appear bloudye and reddishe, he is apt to fall into
madness, but those that seem to see purple colors, are disposed to the falling
sickness. The Scotoma or dark vertigo becomes most vehement in winter, or in
the beginning of the spring. Besides in many it is a sign that the falling
sickness will follow. And many do use to call it a little Epilepsie. As
concerning diet: Victus ratio.
let the patient remain in an air, that is temperate, pure, bright, and
clear, and let him eschew gross and cloudie air. Let him eschew winds,
especially south winds, let him also avoid the beams of the sun and the
moon: as also let him not behold things that move swiftly, as running waters,
or things that turn about, as wheels, and such like, or to look into deep
pittes is evil for him. Let him eat meats of good juice, and of easy
digestion, and such as engendre no windines, as partrich, capon, phesant,
chicken, veale, scaly fishes and such like, that be easy of digestion. And
let him use to eat but moderately of them, for satiety, as also long fasting
is not good for him. He must eschew all things that cause vapors to ascend
into the head as oynions, garlic, leekes and such like. And therefore if he
drink wine, let it not be very old, small whit wine may be permitted him.
After meat it is good for him to eat some restrictiue thing to stop the
vapors that they ascend not to the head, and that specially if the stomach be
cause of this disease. Let his excercyse be moderate, let him eschew sleep of
the day, nether let him sleep within two hours aftermeate. Let not the place
be to hot where he sleeps, nor let him not keep his head to hot. In his
excercyses let him not stir his head much. And therefore it is good for him
to use frictions often, especially in the morning before he ryseth, begin at
the upper parts, and end with the nether. He must refrain from perturbations
and affections of the mind, specially from anger, fear, and sadness, as also
from loud crying, and singing. Carnal copulation is not good for him. If he
has not a stool once in a day, Curatio.
you must help nature either by clyster or suppositary. For the Cure if the
fit be present, you must reuyue the patient again with sweet and odoriferous
smells, and with frictions and such like. At which time also if need be, you
may use a suppositary or a clister. Afterward if the party be strong, and noe
other impedyment present, let him blood on the Caphalica vain, Ven^ sectio.
whither it be the beginning of the disease or otherwise. But take heed that
you draw not much blood at once, for the patient will quickly fall through
every light occasion. Therefore you must draw away the blood at sundry times
until you have sufficient. But if any thing do hinder you from blood letting,
first you must purge him with a sharp clister, whereof you shall have example
afterward in the Chapter of Apoplexye. Afterward minister a purgation according
as the humor abounding does require. But forget not first to use a
preparatiue, Localia.
when the whole body is sufficiently purged, you must use local things to the
head, and first apply cupping glasses to the hinder part of the head with
scatification. Afterward use to minister gargarismes, and sternutations to draw
rewme from the head. Pour into the nose juice of chickweed, betes or
cyclaminus. Also nitrum beaten with nigella and mixed with old oil, purges
well by the nosethrills. Also odours made of the decoction of maiorame, hysope,
and flowers of staechados, a little castoreum, musk, and vinegre being added is
good. After that let the patient enter into a bath, specially a natural bath
that is of alome, and if his head be over hot in the bathe, you must cool it
often with oil of roses and vinegre applied in clothes to it specially on the
fore part of the head, and about the forehead and the tempels. And if the
disease do cease by these remedies, then use noe other. But if it continue
still, you must cut the arteryes that be nigh the temples above the ears,
specially if the disease come of hot vapors asce^ding to the brain by the
arteries. And this is not only the praecept of Galen, but also of Aetius, and
Paulus Aegineta. How the arteries should be cut you shall learn of the said
AEgineta in his. 6. book and 4. Chap. Albeyt Galen affirms, that some have
not been helped by cutting of the arteries, partly for that the hot and
vaporours spirits does sometime ascend by deeper arteries into the brain, and
partly for that a windy spirit may be engendered by an inequall distempure of
the brain. And therefore if the disease be caused by any of these means before
rehearsed, the patient shall feel small ease or none by cutting of the
arteries. And therefore be dilligent to enquire of the aforsaid causes, before you
cut the arteries. C^^teri^^.
It profits much to apply this cautery behind the ears.. of cantarides there
heads, wings, and legs being cast away..j. sharp leaven..ss. with vinegre
and aqua vita co^mixe them and apply them. Cure of the vertigo that comes of
the stomach. V^^itus.
If the vertigo be caused by the consent of the stomach (that is) if humors
contained in the mouth of the stomach, do send up vapors to the brain, and so
cause the vertigo: it must be cured by vomit, which you shall provoke in this
sort.. Of dill a handful, seades of radish and rapes. ana..ij. roots of
radishe..ss. boil them in sufficient quantity of water, until the third part
be consumed, then strain it and put thereto oximel scilliticu^..j.ss. co^mixe
them and make a porio^, and minister it blood warm after meat immediately. And
if this suffyse not, it is good to purge him with Hierapicra Galeni. Or with
pills that be good for the stomach, called stomachicae for that cause, or with
decoction of mirabolanes citrine or chebuli, or with manna, or with syrup of
roses solutiue, according to the diversity of the humor abounding. Let the
patient use commonly after meat to eat some restrictiue thing that will close
the mouth of the stomach, and hinder the ascending of vapors up to the head,
as is Diacotoneon sine speciebus, and quinces, or restrictiue pears, or such
like. Marcellus says, the juice of black beats anointed upon the tempels
helps the Vertigo. Also if sothernwood be boiled in wine, or in oximell, and
drunk warm, it is a most effectual remedy to cure it perfectly.

CAP. XV. Of the frenisie.
PHRENITIS in Greek and in Latin is a disease, wherein the mind is hurt, and
does differ only from madness, which is called in Greek and Latin Melancholia,
or Mania. For that a fever is joined with the phrenisy, and therefore the frenisy
may be called a continual madness and fury joined with a sharp fever. Galen
says that the frenisy is an inflammacion of the brain or of the filmes
thereof. Aetius says that it is an inflammacio^ of the filmes of the brain
with an acute fever, causing raging and vexation of the mind. Three ^^ndes of
fren^sie^.
There be three kinds of frenisies (as Galen does witness in his fourth Book
de Locis affectis. cap. 40.) according to the internal senses, which be three
in number, that is imagination, cogitation and memory, which may severally be
hurt. Two of those kinds be simple, and the third is compounded of those two.
For some be frenetick, which can judge rightly of those things that they see as
touching common sense and imagination, and yet in cogitatio^ and fantasy they
err from natural judgment. Some other being frenetick are not deceived in
cogitation and reason, but only in imagination they err. There be other some
frentick which do err both in sense and cogitatio^ (that is) both in
imagination and reason, and do there with also lose there memory. Causae.
The frenesy is caused either of abou^dance of blood, or of choler, occupying
the brain or the filmes thereof. And if the choler whereof the disease
enge^dreth be burnt, then the frenzy is most vehement and more pernicious then
any other. Those that be frentick have a continual fever, and be mad, for
the most part they cannot sleep. Sometime they have troublesome sleeps, so
that they rise up, and leap, Signa.
and cry out furiously, they babble words without order or sense, being asked
a question, they aunsctere not directly, or at the least rashly, and that with
loud voice, especially if you speak gently to them. There eyes be bloudshotten
and bleared, they rub them often, sometime they are dry, and sometime full
of sharp teeres. There tongue is rough, and blood will often drop out at
there nose. Moreover they pull motes and flocks from the bedding and clothes
about them. There pulses be small and weak, and somewhat hard and senowy, they
fetch there breath but seeldom. Note that they which have the frenesy, caused of
blood, they laugh in there madness. But those that be frentick through choler
they rage furiously, so that they can not be ruled without bands, and such do
use to forget all things that they do or say, so that some of them, when they
require the chamberpot, do forthwith forget to make urine, or when they have
done it, they remember not to restore the vessel again. Prognostica.
As touching the prognostication of this disease: Galen and all other learned
Physicians do confess that it is most sharp and most perilous, and is in
deed incurable and deadly for the most part. Hippocrates says in the 72.
aphorism of his fourth book that urine white and clear in those that do rave,
is a very evil and deadly token. Concerning diet let the sick be used in this
sort. Victus ratio.
If it be winter, let him lie in a warm place, if it be summer, let his
lodging be in a cool place, let the air and the light be moderate, and let
there not be diverse pictures in the place. And for that some be troubled with
the light, and some with darkness, it is best to try them in both, and to lay
him in the light, which is afraid of darkness, and contrary he that is
offended at the light, let him be in a dark place. But if the sick person do
find noe difference in the places, then, if he be strong, let him have light,
if weak, keep him in a dark place. Let his dearest frindes come to him, and
let them sometime speak gently and softely unto him, and sometime rebuke him
sharply. Let his meat at the first be ptisan broth, or husked barley boiled,
or the crume of bread dipped often in aqua mulsa (that is) water and honey
sodden together, or in honey of roses. Boil in his brothes, endive, succory,
lettuse, mallows, and such like, which have virtue to cool and moisten. When
the disease decreaseth, you may give him scaly fishes, such as lived in
grauelly ryuers. If he be very hot within, you may give him pomegarnettes, and
cheryes. Let his drink be water, wherein a little Cynamon or barley has been
boiled, you may commixe with it syrup of violettes, or of roses, or of water
lillies. But beware you give them not much at once, nor oftentimes, but
seldomee, and a little at once. When signs of co^coction appear in the urine,
and the vehemence of the fever is slaked, if then the sick lack strength, you
may give him small white wine allaied with water. Moreover let the sick be
kept quiet without moving as much as is possible, if he be rich let servants
hold him, if poor, bind him, for inordinate moving deminisheth strength. Also
a bath of sweet water is good for him, if the body be dry and rimpled, but he
must use it blood warm. For so it cools and moisteneth, and by that means
it cures the drynes and ouermuche watching, but take heed you use not bathing
before the body be purged. Moreover perturbations of the mind do hurt
frantic persons excedingly, and therefore you must suffer them to use nothing,
Curatio.
that will make them sad, or engender choler in them. For the cure, if the
strength of the patie^t will suffer, let him bleed forthwith for there is none
so present a help. You must cut the uttermost vain of the arm called
Caephalica, Ven^ sectio.
and if that appear not, take the middle vain, and draw out as much blood as
strength will suffer. But take heed you let him not bleed until he sound, as
many rashely do, for it is better to take less then you should do, the body
being much weakened by vehement motion. You must take good heed, least the
sick do privily take away the band of his arm, or loose it. Afterward also
you may stryke the vain in the midst of the forehead. But if age or strength
do forbid bloudletting, then use cupping with scarification, behind in the
neck and on the back bone, which be profitable for that they draw back the
humors that flow to the brain. For that purpose also clisters are specially
to be used made in this sort. Clyster.
. Mallowe leaves, violet leaves, endyue, and lettuce. ana. M.j. of Barley
decorticate..j. sebesten. number. 11. seades of gourdes, melons and cucu^bers.
ana..iij. sees all these in sufficient quantity of water, until the third
part be consumed, then strain it and take of the decoction..xij. of casia
fistula newly drawn..j.ss. of mel rosarum..j. of oil of violettes..iij. of
salt..j.ss. commixe them all and make a clister. If you will have it to purge
more strongly, put to it of Hierapicra, or of Elcium de succo rosarum..ss.
binding of the extreme parts of the body profit much to divert the humors
from the head. Also Mathiolus does greatly commend stubium with the conserues
of roses, A purging potion.
and I my self have proved it in this order to be most excellent as
follows.. g.12. made in very fine powder and put it into clarret wine..iiij.
and let it stand hours.30. and every 6. or.7. hour shake it. And at the.30.
hours end, pour it from the powder, and let him drink it with a little sugar.
This does mightily purge the superfluous humors from the head, as also to rub
the feet with salt and vinegar and such like. You must sprinckle the head
with oil of roses, Localia.
or vinegre of roses being blood warm. For the brain or his filmes being
enflamed, can not safely abide actual cold, nor vehement heat. For the same
purpose also you may use juice of nightshade, and of plantaine, or the
distilled waters of them, or such like herbs. If the evil be very vehement,
moisten his face continually with oil or water, wherein the tops of poppye
have been sodden. You may also use odours to his nose, of roses, violettes,
water lillies, and such like. Also anoint his nosethrills within, and his
forhead with the juice of the before said herbs. For you must endeavor to
astonye and dull the brain, which burns extremely by cooling it. If the
sick watch overmuch, then you must apply such things as do provoke sleep,
Vnguentum.
as this ointement following, or such like.. Vnguenti populeon..ij. oil of
violettes..iij. sead of henbane, and bark of mandrake roots. ana..ss. of
opium gra. ij. of saffron. g.iij. vinegre a little, whit wax as much as is
sufficient, make an ointment, and anoint the tempels therewith. Also this
embrocation may be used blood warm to the head. Embrocha.
. flowers of violettes, redd roses, and water lillies. ana. M.j. Barley
decorticate..j. seades of whit poppy..ij. seades of lettuce..iij. sees them in
sufficient quantity of water unto the third part, and make an embrocation. You
shall make the decoction of more force, if you add to it leaves of henban,
nightshade, poppy heads, mandrake appels, or roots, and a little vinegar. You
may also lay under his pillowe, poppie heads, or mandrake appels. You may
also for the same purpose, give him to drink water wherein poppy or henban
seed has been sodden, or some somnoriferous compounde as is regines Nicolai,
or philonium, or such like, in ministering whereof you must observe, that you
give them not in the vehemency of the fit, but in the declining thereof.
Besides note that you must eschew continual use of stupefactiue medicines
as well inwardly as outwardly also. For in this disease, by overmuch cooling you
may turn the frenesy into a litargy, whereby you may cause him to sleep so,
that you can awake him noe more. Also if the patient be weak beware how you
minister stupefactiue things to provoke sleep, for in such as be weak (as
Trallianus says) somnoriferous potions do noe small hurt, and sometime they
kill. At the last when the disease is assuaged, and waxes more gentle, which
for the most part, chances the third day: Discutienti^.
you may apply discussiue medicines which have virtue to disperse the remnaunt
of the disease. And for that purpose you may apply the aforsaid embrocation,
adding to it before, flowers of cammomil, dill, melilote, marshe mallows, and
such like. There be some that at this time (the disease declining) do apply to
the head, hens or whelps cut in the mids, or the loungs of a wether hot.
But take good heed, that noe such thing be applied in the beginning of the
disease, or in the vehemency thereof, for so you should increase the
inflammation and the fever, and make the sick in more peril. Moreover if the
evil continue long, you may boil in the embrocatio^ serpillum, that is, wild
time or sauerie. Also in the declination of the inflammation (as Galen
teaches) you may use Castoreum, for that it is of subtle substance, and will
work his force through the skull. When the frenticke person is recovered, let
him eschew drunkenness, idleness, variety and corruptions of meats, and
especially the burning heat of the sun. Hereby you may learn not only, the
cure of the frenesy, but also remedy against immoderate watching, and rauing in
any sort engendered by feauers, when the patient is so vexed by them, (although
they come by consent and be but accide^tes of the feauers) that it is
necessary to remedy them lest the brain in time be thereby affected.

CAP. XVI. Of the Lethargy.
LETHARGVS in Greek and in Latin also, is a disease contrary to the frenesy
for it causes sluggishnesse and an inexpugnable desire of sleeping, some call
this disease, in Latin Veternus. They that be taken with this disease, do
forget al things, where upon it has that name. For Lethe in Greek is
forgetfullnes, (...). Causae.
and Arges is slothful or dull, so that Lethargus is nothing else but a dull
obliuio^, and therefore may be called in Latin Obliuio iners. It is caused of
fleume, which cools the brain overmuch, and moisteneth it, and thereby
provoke sleep. The fleume does putrify in the brain, Signa.
and thereby causes a fever which is always annexed with this disease (as
Galen testifies in his. 13. book de Methodo medendi. Also they have always a
profound and dead sleep. There pulse is great, and stryketh seeldome, and is
watery (that is) it beats as it were full of water. They fetch there breath
seldom and weakly they are continually sluggishe and sleepy, and can scarcely
by any means be compelled to answer. They will sometime open there eyes, if
you cry loud to them, and shut them again forthwith, they are forgetful and
do rave. They gape and gasp often, and sometime keep there mouth open still,
as though they had forgotten to shut it. Oftentimes being required to make
water, and taking the chamber vessel, they forget to make vryne. For the most
part their egestions be liquide: but contrary wise many are costiue. There
urine is like beasts urine. Some of them do tremble, and sweat all over. Let
the chamber wherein the sick do lie be light and warm. Victus ratio.
Let his meats be such as do extenuate, cut, and dry, and let them be
seasoned with apium, anyse, commin, pepper, cynamon, cloves, and such like. Let
the sick eat birds that live upon mountains, and chickens, partriche, thrush,
and such like. For pot herbs let him use Asparagus, fennel, percely, and such
like. Also give him broth made with Barley or oatmeele, or alica, with oximell,
or peniroyall. Let his drink be hidromel (that is) water and honey sodden
together, mead or watery, thin whit wine being astringe^t, after he has
eaten it is not amiss to bind the extreme parts for a certain space, that
the vapors do not ascend to the head. For the cure (if strength permit,
Curatio.
and nothing else do let) it is good forthwith to let blood. You must cut the
middle vain or the inward vain of the arm, and draw out so much blood, as
strength will permit. But if you may not safely let blood then must the bowels
be scoured with sharp Clisters, whereof you shall find examples in the
Chapter of Apoplexia. Afterward the humor abounding must be prepared with
decoction of hysope in honey and water, or with time, peniroyall, mel rosarum,
or oximell commixed with syrup of borage, or infusion of roses, and waters of
hysope, betony, maiorame, and borage. And afterward purge him with some medicine
that will expel fleume, whereof you shall find examples in the next Chapter
following. Localia.
In the mean season apply to the head oxyrhodium, (that is) vinegar of roses,
and that in the beginning, for the humor is to be repelled, and driven back
from the head, what soever it be. For the which purpose also, it is good to use
frictions with pellitory, pepper, salt, and vinegar and bindinges of the
extreme parts. Moreover apply to his nosethrills odours which will awake him,
as be these, Castoreum, the snuff of a candle quenched, tar, galbanum,
sulphur, hearts horn, sothernwood, or gotes horns burnt a little, and holden
to the nosethrills. You may prick there legs, and there extreme parts, and
pull them by the hear violently to awake them. Also you may boil time,
peniroyall, and origan in vinegar, and hold that decoction to the nose of the
sick, that the fume ascending to the brain may cut, and divide the tough
humors. Also anoint the palate of the mouth with strong and sharp medicines,
as with mustard and honey, with mithridarum, theriaca, powder of pellitory. And
you must endeavor to pluck out the fleume that sticks there with your
fingers. Sometime also you may provoke snesing with Castoreum, or pepper, or
Eleborus, and if they can use it, let them gargaryse. And if by this means the
disease be not dissolved, then shave the head, and apply to it bags of salt,
or milium, or such like. Or make this decoction following, and let it run a
heigh upon the fore part of the head.. wild time, hysope, and sauery with a
little Castoreum, and boil them in oil and vinegar, and use it. Moreover it
profits to apply a sinapismus, made of figs, and mustard sead beaten
together with vinegar. Afterward you must apply to the hinder part of the head
cupping glasses with great flame, about the first and second joint of the
neck, partly easily and partly with scarification. Castoreum.
Also the head must be anointed with castoreum. (And as Tralli^nus says)
Castoreum drunk with oximell an hour before the fit, is exceeding good: for
(as he says) he has known many by that one medicine restored to life and
health. You may minister..j. therofe-with..j. of oximell, or with so much whit
wine astringent, or with aqua mulsa. Besides you must often provoke nature to
expel excrementes with clisters and such things that provoke urine. You must
anoint the share with oil of rewe, wherein a little Castoreu^ is mixed, you
must give him in drink such things as do extenuate and cut gross and clammy
humors, as be the decoctions of Apium, fennel, maidenheare and such like. You
must admonish the sick to swallowe down such potions often, and therefore you
may drop it into his mouth with a suckling box. In the lethargy it
continues long, if strength do permit you may minister Hiera ex colocyut
hide, and provoke him to sneese with the medicines aforenamed. At the last when
the disease begins to decline, gestation on horsback, or in a litter is
profitable, and bathing is exceeding good at that time, but the head of the
sick may not be wette by any means. And if the sick for lack of strength
can not abide the heat of the bathe: at the least let him be washed at home in
a vessel of warm water. Let him be scoured in the bathe with sharp soap, as
with wine lies burnt, with mustard seed, pellitory, pepper, laurel bearies,
quick lyme, adding double as much nitrum.

CAP. XVII. Of Memory lost.
MEMORIA deperdita, the loss of memory chances sometime alone* and sometime
reason is hurt with it. Caus^.
It is caused in the lethargy and other soporiferous diseases. It comes to
pass also that the soporiferous diseases being ended, there ensues
forgetfulness. Which when it chances, then a cold distempur is the cause that
the memory is perished or greuouslie hurt. This coldness has sometime moistnes
joined with it, and sometime drynes: sometime any one of the former distempures
may cause this disease alone. Therefore the Physician must diligently discern
the causes. The causes of this disease be either external or internal, if
they be internal, either abundance of fleume, or melancholy is cause of it.
If there be no signs of those humors abounding, then must it needs come of
some external cause, especially if it come not through extreme old age. The
external causes you may learn by relation of the sick, and those that are
about him, as if any disease be newly passed, and so turned into oblivion, or
if medicines were ministered inwardly, or applied outwardly to the head which
have virtue to cool extremely. Or if it came of immoderate labor with study
and watching or such like. If the memory be but a little hurt, it betokens
that the brain is but little cooled. If reason be lost together with the
memory, then the affect is called Fatuitas or stultitia, (that is) folishnes
or doltishnes, and both these do come of one disposition, but that it is more
vehement where both are hurt. As touching signs, Signa.
if only a dry distempure occupying the hinder part of the head do cause
this evil then overmuch watching troubles the sick. If only a moist
distempur be cause of it, then they are heavy and enclyned to sleep, and there
sleeps be long and troublesome. If cold be joined with moisture, it engenders
the lethargy and Carus whereof we will entreat in the next Chapter. Therefore in
them that have lost there memory you must observe there sleeps, whither they be
over sleepy, or in a mean, or sleep not at all, for so shall you find what
distempure does most abound. Besides you must mark whither they avoid any
thing at the nose, or whither any thing distill from the head by there mouth, or
whither those parts be altogether dry. For by them you may likewise
conjecture the distempure abounding. And if fleume be cause of the evil, you
shall perceue it not only by immoderate sleep, and abundance of excrementes
discending from the brain (as is before said) but also by the disposition of
the sick, by his age, and his complexion, by the time of the year, the region,
the state of the air, and by the diet that he used before. For all those or
the most part of them incline to cold and moisture. Likewise if melancholy
abounding be cause of the disease, you shall know it for that the sick is not
sleepy at all, nether does he avoid any excrementes at all from the brain,
besides the state of his body and all other circunstaunces above rehearsed
incline to cold and drines. His diet must be diverse according to the
diversity of the causes. But whatsouer the cause be, Victus ratio.
let the aier that the sick remains in, be inclining to heat, and let his
lodging be light, let not his windows be north nor south, for the one cools
and the other fills the head. Let him eschew much sleep specially in the
day time, and upon a full stomach. But note, if the disease be caused of a
cold and moist distempur, then the whole order of his diet must be hot and
dry. But if the cause be cold and dry, then must the diet be altogether such
as will heat and moisten. As touching the cure if loss of memory be caused by
vehement purgations, Curatio.
or other immoderate euacuations, or by soundings often, and so over much
drynes do hurt the memory, then minister noe medicines, but only restore the
body by good diet. For the body being corroborate, and strength renewed, the
memory will come again. If you require to know what things are requisite for
such a diet, you shall find it in the Chapter of the fever hectike. If the
memory be lost by extreme age, then physic will nothing auaill. But only they
must content them selfs with diet convenient, but if the memory fail
suddenly, the other members of the body being safe, then the falling sickness
is to be feared, or the palsy, or the Apoplexy. And therefore in such a case you
must provide diligently by all means that no such thing chance as is to be
feared. You may prevent those diseases by the same remedies that you would use
in the cure of them being present. And if the memory fail by means of other
diseases, as through the lethargy or pestilence, then medicines for cure
thereof are to be used. The whole scope of curing the disease, if it come only
of a cold distempure of the brain consists in heating. You must therefore
minister medicines that have virtue to heat as well inwardly as outwardly.
Outwardly you must anoint the head with warm oil, and that in summer. In
winter anoint it with oil of Ireos commixed with sharp vinegar, and sometime
boil wild time, and calamint, and such like in the oil, and so use it. Some do
add to it pepper, and laurel bearies. Also Castoreum is profitable being
commixed with oil, and anointed upon the hinder part of the head. Also this
ointme^t is very good.. of oil made of tyle stones, Vngu^^^^^.
called Oleum de Lateribus, and oil of Castoreum. ana..ss. roots af^corns,
and valerian. ana..j. pellitory and ^ewe of each..ss. with wax sufficient make
an ointment, and anoint the hinder part of the head therewith being shaven,
and apply this quilt upon it.. flowers of rosemary, Sac^^^u^.
balm, and lauender. ana. M.ss. flours of Elder. M.j. stechas..iij. nutmegges,
wood of aloes, and macis. ana..j. powder them, and stich them in silk, and
make a quilt. You may make many such like medicines by examples in other
Chapters. You may minister inwardly conserues of the flowers of betonie,
rosemarie, lauender, spicknard and baulme, adding to them pepper, cloves,
Cinnamon, and such like odoramentes. If memory be lost by cold, and moistnes
joined together minister Hierapicra, which will purge out nothing that is good,
but only that which is noisome. Afterward let him use gargarises,
sternutations, and whatsouer does purge by the mouth and the nose. Also a
sinapismus may profitablely be applied to the head. If oblivion be caused of
fleume abounding, then you must first prepare, and concoct that humor, with
mel rosarum, oximel, syrup of infusion of roses, with decoctions of betony,
maiorame, hysope, time, and such like, after the administration whereof, the
matter being concoct and prepared, you may purge it with decoction of
mirabolanes, chebulorum, and agaricke trochiscat, to the which you may add of
the syrup of infusion of roses, or Diacatholicon, or Diphenicon. And if the
matter through his grossenes, will not sufficiently purge at once, then you
must prepare it again, and after purge it with pills, arabicae, aurea, or
aggregatiua, commixing some of them with agaricke trochiscat, and so make
pills with honey of roses, or syrup of staechados. After you may particularly
purge the head with gargarises and sternutations. After purging it is good to
minister unto them Castoreum or shauing of iuorie..j. with aqua mulsa, or as
much Confectio anacardina, or aurea Alexandrina, or diambra, diamoschu dulce,
or mithridatum, or theriaca with aqua mulsa or whit wine. Afterward you may
use outwardly embrocations, and pour them down from a heigh upon the head
being shaven, specially nighe to the seame, where the bone is loosest or
thinnest. You may make your embrocation thus.. of hysope serpillum, and time.
ana. M.ss. betony, Embrocha.
maiorame, and flowers of cammomill. ana. pug. ss. flowers of stechados..iij.
make a decoction, and add thereto of Castoreum..j. of vinegar..j. and make an
embrocation. It is good also to anoint the first and second spondill in the
neck, and the hinder part of the head, whith Oleum nardi^um, oils of
nutmegges, of Castoreum, of pepper, or Oleum costiuum. Seccul^^.
And you may apply theruppon a quilt, made in this sort.. hysope, maiorame,
and flowers of staechados. ana..j. Castoreum, nutmegges, spicknard, macys.
ana..j. the barks of frankincense, masticke, and wood of aloes. ana..j.ss.
redd roses dried the weight of all beat them to powder, and make a quilt. And
if the evil cease not by this means, then last of all, use a sinapismus. If
memory be lost by abundance of melancholye, you must first prepare it to
expulsion, by syrup of borage, and fumitorie mixed together, and adding syrup
of infusion of roses, and waters of betony, hoppes and baulme and such like.
Afterward minister this potion following. Decoctio.
. Mirabolanorum, indorum..iij. seen, and epithimum. ana..ij. flowers of hoppes,
fumitory, and borage. ana..ij.ss. make a decoction in running water, and having
strained it, dissolve therein of fine mamia..ij. of Diacatholicon..vij. or
Diasene..ss. and make a potion. As touching outward medicines, let them rather
incline to moisture then drynes. As by adding to the ointmentes before
praescribed, oiles of cammomill, dill, and sweet almondes. Likwyse in making
embrocations and quiltes, you may withdraw such medicines as dry, and add
moist things in there stead. Hereby a circumspect Physician may not only have a
reasonable Method, to cure each kind of oblivion, but also to remedy any
dullnes or weakness of the memory. For that it comes of the same causes that
memory lost does come, allthough they be not so vehement, where the memory is
weakened.

CAP. XVIII. Of Carus or Subeth.
Carus.
CAROS in Greek, and Carus in Latin is a disease, in which both sense and
moving is altogether taken away, and yet there breathing remains safe. The
Arabians call this disease Subeth. Subet.
This disease differs from the lethargy, for that they will answer to a
question demanded, that have the lethargy, and do not lie altogether down.
But they that have Carus, are occupied with deep sleep, and if they be stirred
or pricked, although they feel, yet they will say nothing, nor once open there
eyes. Besides as Paulus Aegineta notes, a vehement fever does use to go before
Carus, and in the lethargy it follows rather. Also Carus uses to succead
other symptomats and accidents. For it comes often in the fittes of fevers,
and in the falling sickness, and in pressing of the brain, as well when the
brain pann is crushed together, as also if the filmes that cover the foremost
ventricle of the brain, be thrust down. But the lethargy has a certain
peculiar consistence of him self. Also Carus does differ from the Apoplexy,
for that in it the breathing is very straight, so that the sick can with much
a do scarce breath at all. But he that has Carus (as Gale^ witnesses in his
fourth Book de Locis affectis) has his breath at liberty. Carus is caused of
a cold, gross, and viscous phlegmatic humor filling the brain. Causae. Signa.
You may easily know the signs by that which has been rehearsed before. For
in this disease they are altogether in a dead sleep, and there eyes always
shut. As for the diet, and the cure of those that have Carus, it agrees
altogether with there is, that have the lethargy. Victus. Cura.
Whereof we spoke before (in the. 16. Chaptre) saving that in this disease you
must use things that be of greater force to extenuate, cut, and deuyde the
gross humors. Also you must apply emplasters, and other medicines to the
stomach, which have virtue to heat, and corroborate it, for because it is
stuffed with fleume which does cool it and moisten it. Whereof you shall find
examples in the beginning of the third Book.

CAP. XIX. Of Congelation or taking.
CATOCHE or Catalepsis in Greek, in Latin may be called Occupatio, Detentio,
and deprehensio. The new writers in physic do call it Congelatio, Conge^atis.
in English it may be called Congelation or taking. It is a sudden detention
and taking both of mind and body, both sense and moving being lost, the sick
remaining in the same figure of body wherein he was taken, whither he sit or
lie, or stand, or whither his eyes be open or shut. This disease is a mean
between the lethargy and the frenesy, for it comes of a melancholy humor for
the most part, as shall be declared afterward. Therefore in respect of coldness
it agrees with the lethargy, and in respect of drynes with the frenesy.
Hereupon it comes that they which have this disease, are nether like the
freneticke altogether, nor like them that have the lethargy. Causae.
This disease is caused sometime of abundance of blood flowing to the head and
replenishing it. But for the most part (as AEtius witnesses) it is caused of a
cold and dry melancholicke humor, troubling the hinder parts of the head and
brain. This disease inuadeth a man suddenly, and takes away speech and sense
from him, he hears nothing, Signa.
he answers nothing, his breathing is scarcely to be perceived, but he lies
as he were dead. His pulse is small and weak and very thick. His egestion and
urine are detained, or else they come forth in small quantity, and that is not
in respect of drynes, for the sick sometime does abound with much moistur, but
for lack of sense. There face is sometime redd, and that is when the evil is
engendered of blood, and sometime it is swart, and that is where melancholy
causes the disease. Moreover the eyes in this disease remain immovable, as
though they were frosen. This evil differs from Carus (as Galen says) for
that in it the eye liddes are ever shut, but in this disease they sometime
remain open. The diet in this evil must be diverse according to the diversity
of causes. Let his food be ptisan broth, and such like. Victus.
Let his drink be aqua mulsa well boiled, or thin white wine well alaied,
for such wine, seeing it does not fume into the head, does much good. It his
hurtful for them to drink water, for it causes windynes, swells the
spleen, and quenches not thirst. As concerning the cure if the face of the
sick be ruddy, and blood seem to abound, if strength permit and years, Curatio.
let him fourth with bleed on the outwardmost vain of the arm, and let him
bleed according to his strength. Afterward if the head be hot, apply those
things that cool. For that purpose you may boil the shelles of poppy heads
in oil, and anoint the head therewith. But in other, that have there face
swart, and so have tokens of melancholy abounding, you must first cleanse the
guts with clisters, made of flowers of borage, buglosse, fumitorye, time,
epithimum, roots of polipodie, leaves of seen, adding to it oiles of
cammomill, and dill, and casia, diacutholicon, diasena, or confectio ^amech in
convenient quantity. Whereof you shall find examples afterward in the Chaptre
of Melancholia. And if the belly become not soluble by this means, then is it
not amiss to boil in the former decoction roots of Eleborus ^^ger. The head
must be anointed with oil, wherein wild time is sodden, or with oil of
lillies or dill, or such like, and that you must do chiefly when the head
seems cold. Moreover if his urine appear gross and thick, you must give him
to drink the decoction of dill, apium, calamint, and such like, as have virtue
to extenuate. It profits also to anoint all there whole body with oil of
dill specially in winter. Also they that have trembling with this disease may
have..j. of Castoreum commixed with aqua mulsa, and powered into there mouth. The
rest that concern the cure of this disease may be gathered partly out of the
Chapters of the frenzy and lethargy before, and partly out of the Chaptre of
melancholy following.

CAP. XX. Of dead sleep.
COMA in Greek, sopor, or granis and profundus somnus in Latin. It may be
called in English dead sleep. Coma.
It is a disease wherein the sick cannot awake, nor keep open his eyes, but
does keep his eyes continually closse shut, and is in a sound sleep. But there
be two kinds hereof, the one whereof we have already spoken, and that is called
simply Coma or sopor, or else Coma somnolentum. The other is called Vigilans
sopor, and it is an evil wherein the sick cannot hold open his eyes, though he
be awake, but he winketh in hope to get sleep, and yet is altogether awake.
Therefore you must make a difference between these two kinds. The sleeping Coma
(as Galen witnesses) is sometime caused by overmuch moistening of the brain,
Causae.
as it chances to many dronken persons. Also in fevers only hot and moist
vapors ascending from the inferior parts, and moistening the brain do
cause this evil. Moreover sometime only cold, occupying the fore part of the
brain is cause of this evil. Sometime profound sleep is caused of coldness
and moistnes joined together. The other evil called Vigilans sopor, or Coma
(that is) the watching drowsynes, it is caused of fleume mixed with choler, and
for the most part it comes for lack of strength, that they are not able to
keep open there eye liddes. Signa.
The party that is vexed with the soporiferous and sleepy Coma, does sleep
with his nether iawe open, and as often as he is awaked, he falls into a new
sleep forthwith. They that have the watching Coma, they speak they wot not
what, and they lie with there whole body out of order, and they have partly such
signs as appear in the frenzy, and partly such as in the lethargy. Curatio.
The cure is of two sorts, according to the diversity of the evils. For in
the soporiferous and sleepy Coma, you must use those remedies that are
praescribed in the Chapters of Carus, and the Lethargy, and to speak briefly
after the whole body be purged, if the evil be caused of moistnes, then you
must apply such things as will dry the brain made with sharp vinegar and
roses, and cammomill commixed, and you may also let the fume thereof go up into
the nosethrills. If it be caused of cold, then apply oil of dill, and
cammomill warmed, and if the cold be great, you may sometime boil in oil,
peniroyall and dill and use it. But if the evil be caused of cold and moisture
joined together: then must it be cured, as the Lethargy. If it com of weakness
and lack of strength, then you must use restoratiues to recover it again.
Suppositaries are very good to be used in these kinds of diseases, for that
they stir and provoke nature. For the watching Coma, since it consists of
mixed and contrary causes, it must be cured by contrary medicines partly as the
frenzy, and partly as the lethargy. And to know which of them you must use
most, you may learn that by the humor most abounding. For if fleume abound mor
then choler, then you must use most the remedies against the lethargy: but if
contrariewyse choler do most abound, then must your remedies be for the most
part such as are good against the frenesy. And therefore you may seek
convenient remedies out of those Chapters, as occasion serves.

CAP. XXI. Of the Apoplexy.
APOPLEXIA in Greek and Latin is a disease wherein the fountain and original
of all the senewes being affected, every part of the body does suddenly loose
both moving and sense. Or it is a depryuing both of sense and moving through
out the whole body coming suddenly with let and hurt of all voluntary
functions. If this stopping of the brain come in on half of the body only then
it is called Paralysis in Greek: in English the palsy whereof we will speak in
the next Chapter. The Apoplexy is caused of a flegmaticke humor, that is
cold, gross and tough, Causae.
which does at one time abundantly fill the principal ventricles of the
brain, which humor overmuch crudities, and chiefly dronkennes does engender.
Also it is caused by a fall or a blow which shakes and bruiseth the brain,
and causes humors to flow thither. Also very cold air which does thick and
congele the humidities and excrements of the brain, does sometime cause this
disease: it may also be caused of a gross mela^choly humor. Concerning signs
there goes before this disease a full and sharp pain of the head, Signa.
and a swelling of the veins in the neck, the Vertigo, and brightness before
the eyes, also cold of the extreme parts without cause, panting of the whole
body, slownes to move, and gnashing of the teeth while they sleep. There urine
is little in quantity, black, like rust and canker in metal, and has a
residence like meal. They that fall into this disease do lack sense
altogether, they lie as they were a sleep with there eyes shut, and do snort.
The veheme^cie and greatness of this disease may be discerned by the
impediment that they have in breathing. For when it is very much differing from
natural order, it betokens vehemency of the disease, and that it is a great
and strong Apoplexy. But when there is a little impediment in the breathing,
then you may judge that there is but little hurt in the brain, and so you may
account it a small and weak Apoplexy. The worst and strongest Apoplexy is,
wherein the breathing is so deminished that it can very hardly be perceived, and
that is almost as evil, wherein the breath stops for a while, and then is
fetched with great violence. This disease for the most part does chance to old
men, which be of a flegmaticke complexion, and which do use such a diet as
increases fleume. But if so be it invade any young person, and that in summer
season, it is most perilous. This disease is incurable, or at the lest is
seeldome cured. And therefore Hippocrates writes in the.42. Apho. of his second
Book. Progn^^^^a.
It is impossible (says he) to cure a vehement Apoplexy, and not easy to
cure a weak one. For it threatens speady death. Besides if it chance by
medicines to be taken away, for the most part it departs leaving the palsy
behind it, either in the whole body, or in some part thereof. Often also it
corrupts the memory, whereupon we may conclude that remedies are not to be
used, against a strong Apoplexy, for that it is of nature deadly. But if it be
weak, which you may know by the signs before said, although there be small hope
to remedy it, yet (as Galen testifies) convenient remedies being ministered, it
may parhappes be cured, as experience has proved in some. Those therefore
whose cure is not altogether desperate, if there be signs of plenitude and
fullnes, and strength permit also, Curatio.
must be let blood on both the Caephalica veins. But you must fortell the
peril, for blood letting does either kill them, or deliver the^: so that if
after blood letting (as Aetius says) both moving and sense come not unto him
again, there is no more hope. You must not draw away much blood at ones, but
rather at sundry times, and you must have regard to his pulse, the color of
his face, and his breathing. Besides you must provoke him to the stole with
sharp clisters in this sort.. sage, origan* betony, C^^ster acris.
and rue. ana. M.j. calamint, hysope, and peniroyall. ana. M.ss. seades of
fenell, seselis. and ammi. ana..iij. centory the less. M.j. roots of
polipody..vj. fine agarick..iij. pulpe of coloquintida..ij. boil these in
sufficient quantity of water, until half be consumed: then take of that
decoction..xv. of Hierapicra, and Benedicta laxatiua. ana..ss. of Electuariu^
nidum..iij. of Diaphaenicon..ij. of mel rosarum clarified..j.ss. of oils of
laurel, rue, and Castoreu^. ana..j. of fall ge^me..j.ss. co^mix them all and
make a clister. Also the use of suppositaries in this disease is very
co^me^dable, made of Colloquintida, agarick, black hellebore* and such like,
after this sort.. of honey boiled to a height..ij. of Colloquintida, agaricke
and hellehore. ana..ij. of fall gemme..j. beat them into powder, commixe them
with the honey and make suppositaries vj. fingers long, and hang a thread in
them, that you may draw them out when you list. You may also put into the
suppositaries Hierapicra, or pills Cochia. Afterward anoint the whole body
with a good quantity of warm oil, wherein wild time, calamint, dill, and such
like has first been boiled. Also the extreme parts must be bound strongly and
vehemently chafed with the decoction of the root of flower deluce, many
cupping glasses must be fastened to the shoulders. The head must be shaven, and
anointed with oiles of cammomill, dill, and rue, or with oil, wherein the
aforenamed herbs have been boiled. You must apply to the nosethrills such
things as by there odor can stir and raise up the sick, as be opoponax,
castoreum, sagape^um, galbanum. Also you may use medicines to provoke sneasing
made of white hellebore, castoreum and such others rehearsed in the former
Chapters. Or it profits much to use embrocations, made of ca^momill,
melilote, sage, peniroyall, maiorame, origan, calamint, sauerie, and hysope
boiled in equal portions of wine and water. But yet it is better to use dry
medicines to the head, ^
as be sinapis^^ made after this sort.. Olei costiui..j. oiles of Castoreum
and Euphorbium. ana..iij. mustard seed..ij. Castoreum..j sagapenum..j.ss.
^uphorbium..j. vinegar..ij. with sufficient quantity of wax, make an
emplaister. Also you must open there mouth by force, and put into it your
finger, or a fether dipped in oil of Ireos to provoke vomit, Vomitus.
and to cause the gross humors that be in the mouth to be cast out. Also
there fondament must be anointed with such medicines as dissolve windines, as
be rewe, common, nitrum and honey. When the evil is assuaged, you must give him
meat of easy digestion, for the most mixed with honey. If his speech come not
yet again, so that strength permit, you may fasten cupping glasses to the
hinder part of the head with scarification. And in like sort under the short
ribs, if you may. Afterward let the sick be carried in a wagon or
horselitter. Victus.
Let his drink be mulsa, or oximell. Let him drink no wine. After. 21. days
be paste the sick may enter a bath, but as touching medicines requisite for
the rest of the cure, you shall find them aboundauntly in the Chapter
following. And this may suffice for the cure of the Apoplexy, if so be it be
curable.

CAP. XXII. Of the Palseye.
PARALYSIS in Greek, Resolutio in Latin: in English the Palseye. It is a
disease wherein the one half of the body either the right or the left does
loose both sense and moving. Also sometime the palsy chances in one member
only, (as for example) in the hand, the leg, or the tongue. But note here
that the palsy which follows the Apoplexy is particularly called in greek
(...). And therefore the word Paralysis is a more general name then Paraplegia.
But whereas in the palsy, sometime sense only is lost, and sometime moving
alone, and sometime both sense and moving: it is especially called resolution of
the senewes or palseye, when moving is lost. Why sometime feeling is lost only,
and sometime moving alone, and sometime both together, Galen declares at large
in his first Book de symptomatum causis, Cap. 4. and there for it need not be
here rehearsed, notwithstanding it shall not be amiss to answer briefly to
that question. Why in the palsy sometime sense alone, sometime moving alone,
and sometime both together perish.
First note that as well the faculty of moving as of sense flows from the
brain, as from a fountain, and is deryued from thence by and in the senewes
to the instruments of motion and sense, and therefore it must needs be, if that
faculty of the brain be hindered or stopped by any cause, that it cannot
descend to the instruments of moving or of sense: that they should loose moving
or sense according as the senewes be affected. And therefore in those members
that participate two kinds of senewes, as the eyes and the tongue do, the
former question is easy to be soluted, for that they have one kind of senewes
for motion, and another kind for sense, and so the one may be hurt, and the
other safe, or they may be both hurt, and so both sense and motion perish. But
in members, that have but one kind of synewe, the question is more obscure to
answer. In such members therefore, if (the skin being taken away) the muscle
lying naked cannot move at all, and yet feeling remains in it, you may know
that the hurt is not great. But if the senowes be much stopped, then has it
lost both sense and moving, for it is impossible that the sense of a muscle
should be lost, and the motion remain still. The reason is for that less of
the animal faculty is requisite for feeling, then for moving, so that there may
come sufficient quantity of that faculty to a muscle to cause feeling in it,
and yet not enough to cause it to move also, and therefore a naked muscle, which
has his faculty both of feeling and moving, of one kind of senowe, cannot
move and lack sense. But either it has sense, and lacks moving, and then his
hurt is but little, or it has lost both, and that is when the hurt is great,
and the senowe is altogether stopped. But where there is a member that has
senowes placed in the muscles to cause moving, and other senowes spread in the
skin to cause feeling (for the senowes that are dispersed in the muscles do
not send out branches to the skin as some suppose) I say it may come to pass
in that member, that sometime it may lose feeling alone, and sometime moving
alone, and sometime both together. For it may be that the skin which covers
the muscle may loose his sense of feeling, the senowe being affected which is
dispersed in it, and yet the senowe that runs in the muscle may be safe, and
therefore the muscle may move. But if the senowe which is spread in the muscle be
affected, and the senowe that comes to the skin remain safe, that member
cannot move, and yet it has sense and feeling left, and that comes to pass,
because the senowe of the one is hurt, and the other has his senowe safe:
although they spring both from one place, yet they are divided in the way as
they come to the member. And if both the senowes be affected as well that, that
comes to the muscle, as that which comes to the skin, then both sense of
feeling and moving also perish and ar lost, and that is when the common
fountain from whence they do both spring, is affected and hurt. You may
discern that, when you know exactly the common original and spring of every
senowe, in considering diligently whether the brain it self be affected, or
the backbone at the head of it, or in any of his spo^dils besides. This is to
be known by the Anatomy of Senowes, and therefore it behooves to be well
excercised therein, for in the palsy there is no: one certain place affected,
but diverse places. To know if the brain be affected.
If the brain it self be affected (I mean not the whole brain: for the^ is
the Apoplexy engendered) but if the right half or the left be affected, you
shall know it, for that the palsy or resolution will be as well on the right or
left side of the face, as on the right or left side of the body. But if the
face be safe, To ^nowe if the (...) cause the palsy.
and one half of the body be deprived of sense and moving, then you may know
that the place affected is the upper end and first spondils of the backbone,
but the one half only of the marow is affected, and that is it which is next to
the side taken with the palsy. But if all the inferior members, (the face
only excepted) be resolved and paraliticke, the^ is the backbone affected in
the same place, eue^ in the beginning and upper end of it, but the^ is the hurt
vehement, for the whole marowe is affected. But if it chance one only part to
be resolved, and taken with the palsy, you must search from whence the
senowes come that be contained in it, Of members part^ (...) taken with the
palsy.
which you may easily find, if you be well excercised in Anatomy. For if the
marrowe of the back be not affected above where his first beginning is, but
lower among the spondils, then if the affect and hurt be great, all the
inferior parts beneth those spondils affected, be resolved and taken with the
palsy, but if the hurt be but little, and the marrow but half affected, then
only the inferior parts of the one side be resolved. Therefore you must first
learn by Anatomy to find the place affected, having foreknowledge from what
part of the backbone, the members resolved have their senowes. Causae.
The palsy and resolution of members is engendered of abou^dance of gross and
clammie humors, which stop the senowes, and hinder the animal faculty, that
it cannot come from the fountain to the members. It may also be caused of
immoderat cold in snow or vehement frost. Also it may be caused by an
infla^mation, or a Scirrhus (which is a hard swelling without sense) chauncing
in the backbone, or in parts nigh adjoining or in other senowy parts, whereby
the senowes are crushed and pressed and so stopped that the animal faculty
cannot pass. As also the senowes may be crushed together by some external
cause, as by binding with a cord, or such like means, and so cause
resolution, also when there is luxation or fracture in any of the spo^dils of
the back, or in other iointes or bones, there may follow resolution by means
of compressio^ and crushing together of senowes. Also resolution or palsy may
be caused by means of a wound, or an ulcer, either in the brain, or in the
marrow of the back, or in any particular senowes. There need not many signs to
know this disease by: for any may judge easily, that part or member to have
the palsy which is destitute of moving: to know of what cause it proceeded,
you may partly learn by the relation of the sick, and partly by the signs
rehearsed before in the.7. Chaptre. fol. 8. where headache caused of fleume is
entreated of. Prognostica.
The palsy is noe acute and sharp disease, but of long continuance, and for
the most part curable. It chances for the most part in old folk, and in
the winter time. The palsy that comes by a synowe separate and cut a sunder
is (as AEgineta says) incurable, and so is that which comes by overthwart
incisions of the back or by great luxation of it. Moreover if the member
paraliticke do wax less, or change his color, it is hard to be cured, or
rather not curable. For it declares those parts not only to be destitute of
the animal faculty but also of the natural, and after a sort of the vital
also. There diet must be altogether extenuating and drying. Victus ratio.
Let the sick therefore remain in an air, that is hot and dry, and in the
first three days he may use altogether abstinence, or let him content him
self with aqua mulsa, or a little ptisan broth. Afterward give him meats of
good juice, light of digestion, and let them be roasted, let him eat chiefly
birds of the mountains, and partrich, rear eggs, almondes, and pyne nuttes.
For pot herbs let him use fennel, parcely, hisope, maiorame, sage and
sauorie. Let him eschew fish, fruit, and all things that be cold and moist.
Let him drink but little, for it is good for him to sustain as much thirst, as
he can possibly. Let him drink mulsa wherein sage or Cynamon has been boiled,
or let him use to drink, that which the barbarous Physicians at this day call
Hippocras: made after this sort. Ipp^^as.
. of chosen Cynamon..ij. of ginger..ss. of long pepper, grains, and galingale.
ana..j. of cardamomes..j.ss. of nutmegges, cloves, and mace. ana..j. boil them
all in three quartes of running water until a pint, and half be consumed,
then strain it hard, and with half a pound of sugar make it pleasant to
drink, he may drink no wine at all, until he be perfectly cured. But if
the patient can hardly be kept so long time from wine, give him but a little in
the declyning of the disease, and let it be thin and alaied. Moving and
exercise if he can use them, are very good for him. Let him eschew sleep on
the day. Let his night sleep be in a mean. Let him be merry and fly
perturbations of the mind. Curatio.
For the Cure, if age, state of the body, time of the year, and such like
permit, it is good to beginn with blood letting, specially if there be signs of
plenitude. But you must draw away blood moderatly, lest the body be cooled
overmuch, V^nae sectio.
and you must let blood on the whole and sound side. Then a few days after
blood letting, you may cleanse the intestines with clisters made thus.. of
mallows, holyhockes, Clyster.
mercury, cammomill, sage, and betonie. ana. M.j. of staechas..ss. of rewe, and
calamint. ana. M.ss. of seeds of fennel, and ammeos. ana..ij. boil these in
sufficient water until the third part be consumed, then take of that
decoction. lb.j. of Benedicta Laxatina..ss. of Ele^tuarium nidum..iij. of honey
of roses..ss. of oils of laurel, Ireos, and rewe. ana..j. of salt gemme..j.
commixe them together and make a clister. Afterward minister unto him
decoctions and syrupes, which have virtue to extenuate phlegmatic humors, and
make them apt to be purged, wheref you shall find examples before in the 7.
Chap. The humors being thus prepared minister medicines which do purge fleume,
beginning with gentle ones, and proceeding by little and little to stronger.
Besides those purgations which are rehearsed in the 7. Chap. aforsaid, you may
use pilulae azairet, arabicae, faetidae, with the which you must always co^mix
agarick. Neither does it suffice to purge the patie^t once, but you must do it
often, letting.4. or.5. days pass betwee^ each purging. The next day after he
is purged, Capitis purgatio.
it profits much to give unto him theriaca, or mithridatu^. The body being
welpurged, you must use sternutatio^s, gargarisms, odorame^ts, and such other
like, as ar rehearsed in the 7. cha. And that specially when the brain is
principally affected. For if the brain be not affected, you must rather
minister such medicines as may corroborat, and stre^gthen it, in this sort.. of
diambra, plicis, archoticon, and diamoschu dulce. ana..j. of powder of swallows
preparate..ss. of coriander seeds preparate..j. of sugar roset..iij. with
sugar dissolved in rose water make loze^ges, Lozeng^s.
and let the patie^t hold a little of one of the^ in his mouth often. It
profits also in this disease to take..j. of Castoreu^, or of opoponax, or
sagapenum, in aqua mulsa. Also diatrionpipereo^ is good for the^. If the brain
be chiefly affected, you must anoint the head with hot medicines, as with
Castoreum, mintes, laurel bearies, oil of Ireos boiled with a little vinegar,
and such like. Therefore if coldness of the wether do not let it, you may shave
the head, and anoint it all over to the forhead. If the marowe of the back be
affected at the upper end where he begins, then after the former purgation
you must in the nape of the neck where the marow of the back springs forth of
the brain use oiles and ointments, which have virtue to dissolve and discuss,
but you must begin with the weakest, as with oiles of ca^momill, dill, spike,
lillies, Ireos, narde, nutmegge, S. John's worte, and earthwormes, wherewith you
must anoint the nape of the neck, and the resolved side, specially the half
of the ridge bone: and you must wrappe the paralitick members in warm linen
clothes, or in a fox skin, to keep them warm* or you may bath them with the
decoction of sage, maiora^, cammomill, S. John's worte, staechas, and rosemary.
Afterward you may proceed to stronger medicines as be oiles costinum, vulpinum,
oils of rewe, and bays, oiles of Castoreum, Euphorbium, and oil of tyle
stones, called Oleum e lateribus, or Oleum Philosophorum. To these you may add
these ointmentes, vnguentum aregon, vnguentum agrippa, and vng. martiaton, and
hot simples may be added. Also if you will, as be betony, sage, rosemary,
galingale, cowslippes, rewe, calamint, pellitory, pepper, Castoreum, and
Euphorbium. Of these you may make an ointment after this sort.. of vng. aregon,
Vnguentum.
and martiaton. ana..j. of vnguentum agrippa..ss. of oiles costiuum and
vulpinum. ana..ss. of oil of earthwormes..ss. of oil of castor..j.ss. of
pouders of betony, pepper, sage. ana..j. of castoreum, and euphorbium. ana..ss.
of galingale or roots of acorns..ij. with wax as much as suffiseth, make an
ointment. Or thus. Aliud.
. of oleum costiuum..ij. of oil of pepper..j.ss. oil of euphorbium..ij. of
aqua vitae..ij.ss. of juice of sage, and coweslippes. ana..j.ss. of
galingale..iij. of staechas and rosemary. ana..ij. of pellitory and pepper.
ana..j. of Euphorbium..ss. bruise them and boil them until the aqua vitae and
iuyces be consumed, then strain out the oiles, and put to the wax and make a
lynement. By example of them you may make a Cerote also after this manner.. of
bay bearies, pellitory, Ceratum.
and pepper. ana..ij. of galingale..j. of staechas, betony, and elder.
ana..j.ss. of musterd seed and nigella. ana..j. of Euphorbium and Castoreum.
ana..j. of oleum costiuu^..j.ss. of oil of pepper..j. of oil of
euphorbium..iij. with wax and rosin sufficient make a cerote. Also you may
make a quilt thus.. hysope, maiorame, S. John's worte, sage, rue, and bay
leaves. ana..ij. spike, (...).
mastick, castoreum and staechas. ana..ij. cloves, maces, and nutmeggs.
ana..ss. red rose leaves dried M.ss. beat them all to powder, and make a quilt
with them. (...).
Also a fomentacion may conveniently be made thus.. Sage, rosemary, S. John's
wort, cowslippes, hysope, maioram, betony, peniroyall and calamint of each.
M.ss. boil them in white wine, and add to the decoction of Castoreum..ij. of
flowers of staechas, and lauender. ana..j.ss. wherewith you may often bath the
members affected, before you use the aforsaid ointme^ts or quilt. Moreover you
may set cupping glasses lightly without scarification to the members affected,
that they may draw thither blood, and heat, and spirits: and if the members
them selfs cannot aptly have cupping glasses applied to them: apply them at
the least to the parts next adjoining. After cupping you may use the aforesaid
ointments and cerates, so that the members affected be first rubbed and chafed.
And if the disease relent not by all these means (as Aetius does counsel) you
may use sinapismes or cauterizatio^ by fire where the original of the affect
is. Last of all a hot house or dry bath will profit much, or if they may
conveniently come to them natural baths, ^
which spring from brimstone, alome, and salt, such as be the bathes in Germany
called Badeniae, Feriuae, Cellenses, and ours in England at bath. Gofiatio.
But it is good for them to use before bathing to be carried up and down in a
wagon or horslitter. And this may suffice for the cure of the palsy, occupying
on whole side. But if nether the brain, nor the beginning of the ridge bone be
affected, but only some other parts of the marrow of the back, then you must
search out that part of the back that is affected. And apply such remedies to
it, as are before rehearsed. And in like sort if any particular senowe be
affected, you must find out his original where he springs, and there apply
the former medicines or there like. Yet remember you must never altogether
neglect the brain, allthough it be not principally affected. Of palsy coming
of cold.
If the palsy be caused of extreme cold without humors abounding in the
body, then the place affected being found out, and the medicines before
rehearsed being applied upon it, you shall cure it. But you may not altogether
neglect the brain, nor the member that is paraliticke, but use to them such
remedies as are before taught. Blood letting, purging, and all other euacuations
may be omitted, only use remedies to alter and strengthen the members. If the
palsy be caused by an inflammation or Scirrhus of any part, Cure of palsy
coming of other causes.
the same inflammation or hard swelling being cured, the resolution will be
cured also. If any pinching or binding of the synowes cause resolution, the
bond being removed, the cure will soon ensue. If the spondills of the ridge or
other bones being out of joint or broken do cause resolution, if the resolution
be curable, it will be remedied by there cure. Likewise if palsy ensue a wou^d
or ulcer in the head, or back, or in any particular synowe: it will be cured by
there Cure, except it be altogether incurable.

CAP. XXIII. Of Palsy in one member.
ALTHOUGH any expert man may easily gather out of the former Chap. the cure of
resolution chau^cing in any particular member, yet least those that have less
skill, should stand in doubt in some causes, it shall not be superfluous to
make discourse of certain particular resolutions. There is an affect of the
face called in Greek Spasmus Cynicus, and in Latin Connulsio canina, or of
some Torturae oris. Curatio.
The Cure of this is like the cure of the palsy that is rehearsed in the former
Chapter. For both blood letting if nothing be against it, and purging, and
clisters, and lynime^ts rehearsed in the former Chapter be good for this.
Furthermore for the particular cure of this disease you must let the patient
blood on the veins under the tongue, and fasten cupping glasses to the
shutting of the joints and give him Masticatoris made after this form..
seeds of stauisacre, masticke, the root of pellitory. ana..j. hysope, origan.
ana..j.ss. mustard seeds..ij. powder them and commixe them with turpintyne and
wax, and make trochiskes to chewe. Also it is good for the patient to look
often in a glass, that he seeing the writhing of his face, may with all his
power intend to amend it. Also to the grefe of the patient (that is) to the
synowes that be sprung you must apply the medicines that are in the former
Chaptre. Also this following is very good.. Olibanum, masticke. ana..ij. l^gi
aloes..j. cloves, galange, cynamon, zodoarie, nutmeggs, cubebibes. ana..vj.
mirrhe, aloes, labdanum, sarcocol castoreum. ana..ss. bay bearies, pyne nuttes.
ana..vj. Ireos, Aristolochiae rotunda dictamus co^solide maioris. ana..j. gum
elemni, opoponacis, beniomen. ana..ij. the juice of camepitius, and the juice
of coweslippes. ana..iiij. turpentine..j. pouderal that is to be poudred, and
put all in a limbecke of glass, and distill it with a soft fire. And that
which comes first will be like water which you shall keep, the next will be thick
like oil which keep also, and with this oil anoint the place, and let him
drink of the water three or four ounces at once with a little wine, Note.
this is very excellent good. But you must note in this place that the cheek
is not troubled with the palsy which shows perverse and overthwart but the
other. Palsy of the tongue.
When the tongue has the palsy, the body being first purged, you must cut
the veins under it, and apply a cupping glass to the chinne. Also let him use
Masticatoris, and collusions of mustard seeds and such like. Also let him not
neglect exercyses of the tongue. And the neck and the hinder part of the head
let them be anointed with sharp ointments and linements. Also the Physician
may apply Cerates and sinapismes, and such like as before. When the bladder
has the palsy, sometime the urine is withholden and sometime it goes away
against the patient his will. In this case you must apply remedies to the belly
and to the priuities, Palsy of the bladder.
oil of rewe, narde, spike, or oil in the which is sodden the root of
Eringium, rewe, common, or dill, or such like. All are very good: and you may
well commixe with them butter, Castoreum, Galbanum, Opoponax. And there can be
no better remedy, then to put these things into the bladder by the yard with a
s^reng. First therefore if the patient cannot make water, you must get out the
urine by a fine pype made of silver for that purpose called Cathetera.
Afterward take those medicines, that are rehearsed a little before, and pour
them into the bladder with a Serenge, this will do marvelous much good. Also
medicines provoking urine given in drink be good for it, and so is castoreum
likewise. Also plasters made of laxatiue things are profitable therefore.
Palsy of the yard.
The palsy of the yard does let and impedite the flowing of urine, and sparme,
and carnal copulation, therefore you must use the same remedies which are
rehearsed for the palsy in the bladder: but privately you must apply to the
loins, and to the iointes of the huckle bones things that will heat, and we
must use those medicines that have power to erect the yard. And Castoreum may
effectually be ministered, as well for this as for all other palseyes, the sick
must chiefly eschew meats and drinks that do cool. By these examples you
may easily find, how to cure other members, that be paraliticke.

CAP. XXIIII. Of the falling sickness. DE EPILEPSIA.
EPILEPSIA in Greek (as Galen says) is a conuulsion, drawing, and stretching
of all the whole parts of the body, not continually, but that which chances
at sundry times, with hurt of the mind and sense, it is so called because it
attachethe both the sense and feeling of the head, and also of the mind. Morbus
comitialis.
The Latins call this disease, Morbus comitialis. There be.iij. differences in
this sickness or disease. The first is caused, when this sickness comes only of
disease in the brain, as it chances of gross and clammy fleume, Causae.
or sharp choler does Signa.
There goes before this evil an unwise state of the body and mind, saddenesse,
forgetfullnes, troublesome dreams, ache of the head, and continual fullnes in
it, especially in anger, palenes of the face, inordinate moving of the tongue,
and many do byte it. As Soon as this evil takes them, the sick fall down,
and they are plucked up together, they snort, and sometime they cry out, many
do tremble, and turn round about. But the peculiar sign of this disease is
foming at the mouth. This disease chances most to children. Galen says, that
if it takes any parson after.25. years of age, he shall have it till he dye.
The perfume or smoke of Bitumen, or Lapis gagatis, or of Goats horn will
declare and show them that have the Epilepsie. Also the lyuour of an he goat
eaten, or the savor of the lyuour sodden will do the same. Victus ratio.
It is profitable for them that have this disease to use in their diet, things
that will attenuate, cut, and divide. Therefore let the air, in which the sick
remains in be hot and dry, specially if the evil be caused of fleume. He
must eschew all flesh, except birds that fly on mountains: also he must
avoid all kind of pulses, fish, and wine, especially if it be old and thick.
Let his drink be mulsa, or thin ale: the eating of capers does maruelously
proffit. Excercyse and frictions are good: but rub the head after all the
other members be rubbed. Let him not use to much lechery: let him sleep
measurablely on nights, and let him eschew exceeding sleeping on the day. He
must abstain from garlic, oynions, musterd, and such like fumous things. He
must eschew drinking straight after a bath. Cure of infantes
If a child have this disease you need not much to study for remedies, for
with a moderat diet oftentimes the disease ends by the own accord: you must
appoinct a diet for the infant and the nourse. Therefore if the child be not yet
weaned, let the nourse use meats of good juice, and let her use excercyse
before meat, let her eschew carnal copulation, and let her use for her diet
things that be hot and dry, that thereby the milk may be hotter and thinner.
Anoint the head of the infant continually with oil of dill and Ireos, putting
to them the powders of Cypress, Ireos, maiden hear, maioram and such like,
but never wash the head with water whither it be hot or cold. Also give the
child clarified honey to lick. Also this Ecligma is praised of many. Ecligma.
. fine white sugar..ij. oil of sweet almonds, as much as is sufficient to make
it of the substance of a lohoch, and give it to the child to lick. Also it is
good to commixe with it miscle of the oak, and unicorn. Also hang about the
childs neck the root of pionie being green, Cure of young folks.
for it helps marvelously. Moreover they that fall into this disease after
they be past childs age, you must anoint and make straight those members,
which are writhed, and plucked out of order in them. Afterward you must open
the mouth, putting a wedge between the teeth, and with a fether dipped in oil
of Ireos provoke vomit to bring out fleume. Also it is good to quicken the
senses with odoramentes. Also pencedanum, or dog fennel, rue, Bitumen, and
juice of silplinum. The matter continuing very sharply, put into there mouth
Castoreum, or laserpilium with oxymell. Also when they are raised, you must
cast in a sharp clister. They that beginn to recover, (their strength being
refreshed) purge them with Hiera Geleni, Cure of epilence in ^id folks.
or some other convenient medicine, and this the cure of a new and sharp
epilence. Therefore now we will treat, how to help that which is old. The
patient must drink water long time, or very small ale, and that in the
beginning of the cure, unless any thing do forbid it. Let blood in the vain
of the hamme, or the ring finger, and then.iij. or.iiij. days after you must
comfort the body, and it is good to minister preparatiues to extenuate, as
syrupes of wormwood, of hisope, of stechados, oximell scilliticum, decoction
of hisope, root of piony and others rehearsed before. Afterward purge with
purgations (that is) with pilula cochia, pilula de agarico and such as purge
fleume. A purging po^io^ of stubium.
Also I judge stubium to be of great force in this kind being used as is
declared before in the.xv. Chap. fol. 17. which does mightily purge the
superfluous humors from the head. And also I have known this to help many,
oil of excitore and with it anoint the hinder part of the head morning and
evening warm. Furthermore make a twilt with.iij. sheets of graie paper,
Sacc^lus.
and bast upon it cotton woll, and let the patient wear it day and night.vj.
days. Then take two frying pannes, make them red hot, and hold one of them
over his head, till it waxes cold, then take the other and do likewise, do
thus, till the patientes head be very hot. And if his grief take him in thy
presence, set the patient on his knees, and let his arms be holden cross over
his body as may be, and let his head be thus warmed many days together, and
every morning and evening let him take these things. The first day of the
powder of the skull of a man burned, on dram at once, and the next day of
the miscle of the oak, made in powder..j. and the third day of the powder of
piony roots..j. and after those.iij. days, take these pouders each day, till
the patient be healed which will be in 40. days. But if this evil be engendered
of melancholy, then seek medicines to purge it in the Chap. of Melancholia:
but it is lawful to take the barck of dry black hellebote, and beat it unto
fine powder, and to minister one dram at ones with mulsa, and a little pepper
to it, also you may make pills thereof, and give them. And when the sick is
purged enough, bring him to a bath, the third day fasten cupping glasses with
scarification to the sides and shoulders, and then many days after comfort the
body, and again purge him with Hiera Galeni. Hiera Galeni.
After that fasten cupping glasses to the nodle of the neck. The next day
apply to the head like a plaster, bread sodden in mulsa, adding to it bitter
almondes brayed, or serpillum, or calamint, or mints, or rue, and do that.iij.
days. Then shave the head, and anoint it with juice of pencedanum, infused in
vinegar, in which serpillum, or Ireos has been sodden. Then again the body
being refreshed purge the sick only with three drammes of Hiera, after those
things be done minister sternutaments, masticatories, and such things as do
purge by the nose, then afterward if you thinck good minister a clister. At
the last apply ointments, lynements, and emplaisters, which have virtue to
discuss and drive away, whereof you may find examples plenty in diverse places.

CAP. XXV. Of the Crampe. DE CONVVLSIONE.
Spasmos.
SPASMOS in Greek, in Latin Conuulsio, in English the Crampe, is a disease in
the which the synowes are drawn, and plucked up against ones will. There be of
Distentio. It is when the neck remains altogether immovable, and cannot be
turned any way, but must be holden right forth. The second is called in Latin
Tensio ad anteriora. Te^sio ad posteriora. Causae.
In this disease the head is drawn down backward to the back and the
shoulders. For the causes of this disease you must note that Hippocrates
appoints but only two (that is) fulness and emptines of the sinews in the
body, and sometime it comes with biting or stinging of some venomous beast.
If that the crampe does take one that is haild, or by and by as soon as the
disease comes or not long after, then is the disease caused of fulness, but
when the conuulsion comes after many sweates, vomittes, watchinges or drynes,
then is it caused of emptines. The diet of them that have conuulsion, Victus
ratio.
which comes of fulness must be hot and dry. But in them which have the
co^uulsion caused of emptines, the diet must be moist. Therefore, the patient
must be nourished with soupinges and fat brothes, and flesh easy to digest,
and that which nourishes well. For there drink let them use wine that is
thin and watery, which may quickly be dispersed into all parts of the body,
unless a fever be present: for then juice of ptisan is profitable or in steed of
wine minister decoction of Synamon. Also provoke sleep. Let them eschew
exercises and all things that may empty the body: to be short, let his diet be
like unto there is, which have the fever Ethicke. The cure of the crampe caussed
of fulness, Cures of fulness.
must straight begin with letting of blood, if no thing do prohibit it. It is
meet to take away much blood, but it may not be done all at once on heaps,
Bloud^etting.
but by little and little you must let blood on the middle vain on the arm.
If after blood letting it seems that the sick may suffer it, wash the womb
with a sharp clister. That part which is drawn, must be stronglye kept
together, Cl^ster.
and they must altogether eschew inordinate mouinges* and the place must be
chafed with oils of rewe, or ireos, or some other such like, or they must be
covered with woll dipped in the said oiles, or you must lay upon it a broad
bladder filled with oil. And if the conuulsion comes of fleume, then the
fleume must first be extenuat, and made thin, The cramp coming of fleume.
and be prepared that it may be apt to be purged: then by and by minister a
purgatio^ to purge fleume. Also apply cupping glasses with scarification, for
light ones hurt. If the legs have the cramp apply it to the haunches, and to
the latter knittings of the joints. If the hands be drawn, apply it to the
back and to the joints of the shoulders. Capi^is pr^gatis.
Moreover the head must be purged with Masticator^es, gargarizes, and such like
medicines. Time proceeding, it is good to bath him, and therefore every day
twyse or thrice let him descend into water of brimestone or alome, or salt
water, but let him not tarry in them, lest strength fail him: or if there can
not be using of natural bathes, it is lawful to use a hot house, or dry
bathe, Ba^ne^^^.
or water wherein is sodden laurel leaves, sothernwood, peniroyall, wormwood,
rewe, sage, S. Iohnsworte, maiora^ and betony, and the places that are drawn
ought to be covered with skins of wolves or foxes: also apply the ointments
which are rehearsed in the cure of the palsy of the using of cold things, but
minister often hot medecines, such as be Theriaca and mithridatios, and such
as be hot. But the surest and best of all other is the infusion of Castoreum
ministered the quantity of one dramm, truly not only the drinking of it but also
the anointing of it outwardly is good. The cramp coming of emptines and drynes
Moreover the conuulsion which comes of emptines and drynes is such an evil
disease, as it is almost incurable. Those which are so drawn, you must nourish
with hot oil or hidraleu^. Also it is good to bring him to a bathe, and soft
frictions which oil is good, and all there whole cure must always be like the
cure of Ethics. If the conuulsion chances by the stroke of some venomous
beast in the beginning of the cure: you must labor to draw out the poison,
which you may do by making the wound wyder, Cura ve^eni
and by scarifiing the place round about, setting upon it cupping glasses: also
you must anoint it with leeke seed, braied with salt, or garlic, or oynions,
and after the fall of the scurffe, you shall keep the wound xl. or lx. days
from a scarre: to the which if it make much haste, you shall open the sore
again with ashes of urine or of fig tree: and it is good to anoint it with
horehound or leaves of Anagallis. Also nourish the place with the decoction of
the root of Sorrel. Also Theriaca infused in oil of roses, and laid to the
wound is good, because it does draw out and purge the poison from the bottom.
Therefore they err much, which say that Theriaca, being outwardly applied, does
drive the poison inwards.

CAP. XXVI. Of the Mare. DE INCVBONE.
EPHIALTES in Greek, in latin Incubus and Incubo. It is a disease, where as
one thinks him self in the night to be oppressed with a great weight, and
believes that some thing comes upon him, and the pacient thinks him self
strangled in this disease. Causae.
It is called in English the Mare. This vice is caused of excess of drinking,
and continual rawnes of the stomach, from whence do ascend vapors gross and
cold, filling the ventricles of the brain, letting the faculties of the brain
to be dispersed by the senewes. Signa.
They that have this disease can scarce move, being astonished, and feeling in
sleep imagination of strangling, and as it were the holding of some thing,
that does violently invade him. In this the voice is suppressed, some have such
vain imagination, that they believe they hear the thing that does oppress
them. At the last with much trouble the vapors being attenuate and driven
away, and the passage of the spirits being opened, the sick is by and by
raised. It is good to remedy this evil at the first: for if it continewe, it
induces and shows before some grievous disease, Victus ratio.
as the Apoplexia, the falling sickness, or madness. Let there diet be thin,
and such as will not engender wyndines. Let him use no wine but that which is
mixed with water. Let him eschew sleeping in the day, and let him not go to
bed by and by after meat, and to be short, let his whole diet be such as is
described and set down for the falling sickness. Curatio.
For the cure if the whole body be full, you must begin with blood letting, and
you must cut the Coephalica vain. Venae sectio.
But if ill juice be gathered in the body, for the lack of perfect digestion,
then purge the body by purgations: and if fleume abound, you must first
minister preparatiues to extenuate the fleume, and then purge it. The whole
dody being purged, you must apply outward medicines, whereof you may find
examples before. Black seades of piony does chiefly help them, you may give
them fiftene seades brayed with water. And nourish the head with oil of Dill
made hot, and cover the head with a Cappe, when they go to bed. Minister
within the body those things which strengthen the head, as Aromaticum rosatum,
Diamoschu dulcis, Diamber, Dianthon, Phrisarcotion, and such other like.

CAP. XXVII. Of Madness. DE INSANIA ET FVRORE.
MANIA in Greek is a disease which the Latins do call Insania and furor. That
is madness and furiousnes. They that have this disease be wood and unruly like
wild beasts. It differs from the frenzy, because in that there is a fever.
Causae.
But Mania comes without a fever. It is caused of much blood, flowing up to
the brain, sometime the blood is temperate, and sometime only the abundance
of it does hurt, sometime of sharp and hot choleric humors, or of a hot
distempure of the brain. There goes before madness debility of the head,
tinckling of the ears, Signa.
and shinings come before there eyes, great watchings, thoughts, and strange
things approach his mind, and heaviness with trembling of the head. If time
proceed, there is raised in them a ravenous appetite, and a readiness to bodily
lust, the eyes wax hollow, and he do nether wincke nor becken. But madness
caused of blood only, there follows continual laughing, there comes before
the sight (as the sick thinks) things to laugh at. But when choler is mixed
with the blood, then the pricking and fervent moving in the brain makes them
irefull, moving, angry and bold. But if the choler do wax gross and does
prick and pull the brain and his other members, it make them wood, wild and
furious, and therefore they are the worste to cure. Victus ratio.
Let there diet be then, soupings liquide, making a good panch without fulness,
and such things as do engender no blood, and you must forbid him altogether
drinking of wine. Cure if it come of blood only.
Where this disease is caused of abundance of blood, you must begin the cure
with letting of blood, it is good to cut the uttermost vain of the arm, or if
that do not appear, then cut the middle vain. In weomen cut the vain on the
anckles, for that provoke menstrues, Blood letting.
you must draw out so much blood as strength will suffer. Therefore in letting
of blood you must continually feel the pulses. ^aternae medicine.
Moreover after the letting of blood, nourish the head with oils of roses and
vinegar, or juice of Poligonum, or oleum melinum, or vnguentum in frigdane
Galeni. Then apply moist woll, wett in oil to the hinder part of the head.
After blood letting at night provoke sleep, for if after blood letting,
watching do still continue, the sick will appear to be more outrageous.
Therefore minister boldly with juice of ptisan Diacodion, or mingle it with
water, for so sleep is ple^teously entised. And two days after that minister
Trochiscies de hestear with Diacodion. Also oil of violettes with woman's milk
is good. Embrocha.
Likewise an Embrocation made of dry violettes, water lillies, willowe leaves,
and roses, leaves of lettuce, seed of poppy, and such like, and other medicines
rehearsed in the chapter. Furthermore the belly must be made soluble with
convenient food and with clisters. These things being done, if there be need,
you must draw blood out of the midst of the forehead, set horseleaches round
about the head, and especially the fore part of the head. Cure of it coming of
choler mixed with blood.
For the cure of them which have madness caused of choler mixed with blood, you
must minister purgations of Hierapicra, and other medicines that will purge
choler. The juice of Eleborus niger does marvelous much profit in this grief,
so that you minister but 10. or 12. gra. at once. But if they doat and refuse
to drink a purging medicine, then that you may the easilier deceive them,
co^mixe the purgation with there meats, or with fatt figs, or dates. Also
the only root of wild fennel helps them, and the seed drunk with water.
The sickness declining, bring the sick into a bath, Balneum.
and apply discussiue medicines to drive away that which remains. He that
will have more, let him seek the chapter following De Melancholia.

CAP. XXVIII. Of Melancholy. DE MELANCHOLIA.
MELANCHOLY is an alienation of the mind troubling reason, and waxing foolish,
so that one is almost beside him self. It comes without a fever, and is
chiefly engendered of melancholy occupying the mind, Causae.
and changing the temperature of it. It is caused three kind of ways: for
sometime it is caused of the common vice of melancholy, blood being in all the
veins of Signa.
sadness, hatred, and also they that be melancholious, have strange
imaginations, for some think them selves brute beasts, and do counterfaite the
voice and noise, some think themselves vessels of earth, or earthen pottes, and
therefore they withdraw themselves from them that they meet, least they should
knock together. Moreover they desire death, and do very often behight and
determine to kill them selves, and some fear that they should be killed. Many
of them do always laugh, and many do weep, some thinck them selves inspired
with the holy Ghost, and do prophecy upon things to come. But these be the
peculiar signs of them that have melancholiousnes caused through consent of
the whole body: for in them the state of the body is slender, black, rough and
altogether melancholious caused naturally or through certain thoughts, or
watchinges or eatinges of wicked meats, or through Emeroides, or suppression
of menstruis. But they which have melancholia caused of vice in the sides, they
have rawenes, and much windines, sharp belkinges, burninges, and greuousnes of
the sides. Also the sides are plucked upward, and many times are troubled with
infla^matio^, especially about the beginning of the disease. Also there is
costiuenes of the womb, little sleep, troublous and naughty dreams, sweaming
of the head, and sound in the ears: Let his diet be such, as does not engender
melancholy. Therefore let him tarry in an air hot and moist, Victus ratio.
and let them use meats of good juice, that be moist and temperate, and let
there bread be well baked and wrought, let there flesh be capons, hens,
partriches, fesantes, stony fishes and such like. Let the sick use wine that
is white, thin, and not very old, and let them eschew wine that is thick and
black, let there excercises be mean, let them ride or walk by places pleasant
and green, (...).
or use sailing on water. Also a bath of sweet water with a moist diet let the
sick use often as one of his remedies, sleep is wonderful good for them, as
also moderate carnal copulation. Let them be merry as much as may be, and hear
musical instruments and singing. But when the whole body abound with
melancholic blood, Vena sectio.
it is best to begin the cure with letting of blood, and you must cut the liver
vain on the arm. But when the melancholic blood occupies only the brain,
the sick needs no blood letting, Cure of it come of (...) they blood.
unless there be very much blood, and therefore let the sick use often
bathinges, and moist diet of good juice, which is without windines, and let
them use delectations of the mind, and let them be cured by these without any
stronger remedies, but if the disease has endured long, it requires sundry
medicines that be strong. Therefore whether the melancholiousnes be caused
through vice of the whole body (as is said, the blood being first drawn out)
or through the only evil affect of the brain, you must minister medicines
that will purge downward. Purgatio.
And a few days after purging and blood letting, let the sick drinck daily
in the morning this decoction. ^
. flowers of Borage, Buglosse, violettes, ana. M.j. great Raisons the stones
picked out..j. hearts tongue. M.j. Fumetory. M.ss. Barck of the root of
Capers, Tamariscus. ana..iij. roots of fennel, percely, licotice. ana..j.
Time, Epithimum. ana..ss. sees all these in three pounds of water, until the
third part be consumed, then strain it, and make the juice of that decoction
sweet with sugar, and clarify it with the white of Eggs, and add thereto
sirupe of fumitory, and Epithimum. ana..ij. and make a potion. After that sort
at these days they minister sirupe of violettes, and Buglosse, putting to them
the water of hearts tongue, hoppes, endyue, and Borage. But seeing it appears
that the stomache cannot bear very much using of distilled waters, it is
better to use decoctions of the aforesaid herbs, P^^io.
commixed with sirupes after this sort.. Syrup of Borage..j. sirupe of
Epithimum..ss. decoction of hearts tongue, fumitory, and endyue..iij. commixe
them all and make a potion. After this purge the body with consectio hamech and
diasenae, pilula indae, pilulae lapide armenio, and such like. Also it is good
to use this purging decoction. Decoctu^ purg^ns Melancholiam.
. flours of Borage, violettes, roses. ana. M.j. Raisons the stones picked out.
Tamarindus. ana..j. Mirabolanes citrinae, nidos, emblicos, belliricos. ana..ss.
leaves of seen, polipodie, ana..vj. prunes damascene. numero.x. sees them in
just quantity of water unto the third part: then strain it and make the juice
of that decoction sweet with sugar, then minister..iiij. thereof in the morning.
If this do not sufficiently purge, you may dissolve therein..ij. of diasenae.
Also the infusion of Epithimum is maruelously good, being made thus..
Epithimum..ss. infuse it.24. hours in..iiij. of whay made of goats milk,
Dilutum Epithi^^i.
then strain it and wring it hard and minister it in the morning. Also the
infusion of the leaves of seen, is good which may be thus made.. leaves of
seen..ij. prunes damascene. in numero.xij. bray them and infuse them in whay of
goats milk 24. hours, the^ strain it and press it, and let it be drunk in
the morning. Puluis purgatorius.
Also it is lawful to use this powder.. Epithimum..ss. lapis armenius,
agaricke. ana..ij. scamony preparate..j. cloves in numero. 20. beat them all
into powder, and minister every week..j. or..j.ss. Also it is good to mollify
the belly with whay, but let it not be that which is strained out of chease:
for that is better which is separate from the milk by some decoction, and let
them use it, until the belly begin to be soluble, you may commixe it with
honey. Also it is good a few days after the purgation to use clisters, and let
them be such as this is. Clister.
. fumetory, hoppes, time. ana. M.j. Epithimum. M.ss. seen, polipody. ana..vj.
cartami..ss. seeds of Annise, fennel, ammeos, common. ana..ij, sees all in
water until the third part. Take of the Juice of that decoction lb. 1. Casia
fistularis newly drawn..j. diasena..ss. oiles of violettes and ca^momill.
ana..j.ss. common salt..j.ss. co^mixe the^ all and make a clister. Moreover if
the disease be caused through the stopping of Emeroides or menstruis, then we
must minister medicines which will drive away the heaviness of the mind,
restore strength, and engender gladdnesse, as is conserues of Borage, endyue,
violettes, roses, anthos, laetificans Galeni Dianthon, and such like. Also by
no means, you may forgett the using of Bathes of sweet water. Embrocha.
Also you must apply strong Embrochae to moisten the head as this.. mallows,
althae, vyolettes. ana. M.j.ss. ca^momill, staechados. ana. M.j. flowers of
water lillyes. M.ss. seades of lettuce..j. seeds of scarioll..j.ss. boil them
all in just quantity of water, and sprinckle the head being shaven with the
Juice of that decoction. After that sort it is good to use unctions of oiles,
of violettes, water lillies, and such like. Last of all the sick must labor
that the false and wicked imaginacions, and great sadness may be driven away by
all means that can be invented. Cure if it co^^ of disease in the sides.
But if the grief be caused through disease in the sides, they must
continually use to drink decoction of penyroiall, not only before purgations,
but also after them, and likewise decoction of centorye. Afterward also
minister continually decoction of wormwood, (...) decoctam.
for it is profitable to the stomach, and it lets ingendring of wind in the
belly, nor it does not assuage the belly extremely, but it provoke urine, and
causes good digestion, so that many be healed by this only remedy. Also you
must minister these things that provoke urine, as anyse, dancus, Dia^tica.
asarum, smirinon, the seed and root of wild fennel, and germaunder, let the
water of the decoction of these be ministered, and minister the powder of them
strewed in drink. Also it is good that the physician look to the cure of the
sides. Therefore nourish them with decoction of rewe, dill, wormwood,
penyroiall, seed of Agnus castus,, laurel bearies, sauerie, Fomenia.
mugwort and such like. These do case pain and drive away inflammation,
especially if they be sodden in oil and applied to the grief like a plaster.
Against windines in the stomach with pricking, nourish the stomach with common,
penyroiall and vinegar sodden together, ^
and make emplaisters of annyse seeds, apium, common, smirinum, and such like,
sodden in oil, and suffer the plaster to ly still a good while as well before
meat as after it. And when the plaster is taken away, cover the sides largely
with woll, or with a light lambs skin, the place being first anointed with
oleum nardinum. Also you must apply cupping glasses lightly without
scarification. To those with whom this disease has tarried long, (...).
purging by vomittes is a present remedy. But you may not use strong vomittes,
for they be malicious to the stomach, and cause grief in the belly. Therefore
provoke vomit with hot water commixed with oximell. But if the sick cannot
vomit by this means, the^ provoke it by putting a fether or there finger into
the mouth. Vomitus.
Also the only vomit made with Eleborus albus is good for the^ being made after
this sort.. Eleborus albus..j. cut in small pieces, and put them in a great
radish root, and after iij. days take out the Eleborus, and then stamp and
wring out the juice of the radish, take of that juice..vj. hot water..iiij.
oximell..j. commixe them and minister it all at once to the sick warm. This
has been proved to be very qood.. stibium, x. or xij. gra. made in fine powder
and put the powder into. 4. sponefull of muskedelle, or malmsey and let it
stand.ij. days, and let it be shaked. 3. times on the day, and when you will
minister it, pour it out softely, leaving the powder still in the bottom of
the glass, and give but the very wine: which is an excellnet thing for this
grief: there be diverse other which I will omit till time more meet and
convenient.

CAP. XXIX. Of trembling and shaking. DE TREMORE.
TREMOR in latin, in English trembling or shaking, it is a disease which is
accomplished with two sundry mouinges. One is while the member is constrained
through heaviness and grief to crepe downward. The other, is while the member is
carried upward from his natural course and faculty. Causa.
This evil is caused altogether through weakness of the senowes, which does
plainly declare old age: but pryuatly it comes of other causes, (that is) of
very cold temperature of nature, cold drink taken out of time or season,
specially in fevers. Moreover the abounda^ce of a cold gross and clammy
humor, and much using of wine that is unmixed and clear, old age, Signa.
and fear are causes thereof. There need no signs to know nether the evil nor
the causes of it, because it may be known partly by sight, and partly by the
paci^nts words, and the state of the body. Victus ratio.
Let the diet be so ordained that it may be cleen contrary to the causes of the
disease, and let his meat be such as will easily be distributed, first Brothes,
then Birds that fly, and tender fishes. Against abundance of gross and
clammy humors, it is good to use those things which have power to divide,
extenuate, and cut, but he must wholly eschew all things, which do hurt the
senowes, and chiefly the drinking of wine that is unmixed. He must drinck wine
alaied with water, Curatio.
or hidromell, or ale. For the cure they which do tremble or shake through some
manifest error, they must altogether abstain from things that be hurtful.
They therefore that tremble through drinking of wine, until they be clean
delivered of the disease, let them drinck in the mean while hidromell with the
decoction of sage, and Betony. If the shaking come of cold and gross humors,
then minister the cure which is ascribed for the palsy and the cramp coming
of fulness: (letting of blood only excepted). You must anoint the outward parts
of the body with oiles that will heat, and cover it with soft woll. Then fasten
cupping glasses without scarification from the first shutting of the iointes,
(...).
which may be drawn to the outward part of the skin, and so thereby humors may
the easilier be discussed and driven away. Also it is good for the sick to
drinck daily five grains of pepper with..j.ss. of Mulsa. There be moreover
certain other simple medicines, which being taken does help trembling, (that
is) Castoreum, root of Althea, decoction of Egrimony, Simplices medicine.
and the brain of an Hare. But what need many words, for the medicines and
specially the ointments which are prescribed in the cure of the palsy are to
be used as remedies against this disease.

CAP. XXX.
I THOUGHT it good in respect of the vvorthynes of the member, and the many
fold diseases to the which it is subject, to subnecte the discourse of the eye,
with the remedies of the infirmities, which by experience I have found
incident unto it: And the multiplicitie of it is so great, that the treatise
thereof stretches beyond the bounds of other ordinary Chapiters. But (as I
hope) the Reader will not account it as tedious, because of the pleasantnes and
necessity of the discourse, though it be somevvhat long: for God has as it
were packed and bestovved an infinite variety of maruels in one little round
subject, which if it be consumed and distributed into his parts, and
according to the dignity of every one sufficiently treated of, (I suppose) it
would fill a great volume, and require both an exquisite Philosopher to
conceive a right of it, and an excellent Orator, might seem also necessary to
lay abroad at length such secret and vvonder full notions. But the eye which
is wont with curious inspection to prye into all other things, and to find
out the nature and order of them, has been unable to unfold his own
vvonderfull constitution, and has been alvvaye blind in judging of it self,
and inforeseing the discommodities which attend upon it, or in curing them
when they have laid hold of it. For mine own part I will not promise any
absolute work, but as learned Physicians have thought of it, and (as I my
self have by experience learned) so I will frame and fasshion my Treatise. An
eye therefore is a member, round, whole and hard, as the Ball of a foot, as
the scoured nevve Basin, full of clear water, set in the well of the head to
minister light to the body by the influence of the visible Spirits, sent from
the fantastical Cell by a senovve, that is called Neruus opticus, with the
help of a greater light ministered from without, and very fitly is the place,
where the eye is set, called the Well of the head, for the abundance of
vvatery humors and tears, which often do issue out thereof, sometime of
sorrow and heaviness of the heart, sometime of joy and gladness, and sometime of
the abundance of vvaterie humors caused of frigiditie and coldness, and thus
have the Physicians described the Eye: It shall not be unnecessary also to
distribute it into his parts, and therefore (as Iohannicus says) the eye has
seven coats, which they call Tunicae, four colors, and three humors. But
his opinion concerning the tunicles by sundry Anathomistes have been euicted,
making but only six: yea and some there be, that (svvaruing from the most
received opinion) have made room for a conjecture of their own as they
thinck by reason excluding all those ouercurious divisions, (namely, Iris,
Cornea, Aranea, and Vuea, and the residue) and imagine but only two coats,
the one vvherof they term Saluatrix, because it saves and keeps the humors
and the second they term discolorata (that is, having no color) and they
maintain that in the eye it self there is no color, but that which is caused
of the Christalline humor, which if it be planted very near to the
tunicles, then the eye seems of no color, if it lie deep within, it
deferreth three visible colors unto the behoulder, and (as they say) the
diverse placing of this Christalline humor begets the variety of colors in
sundry eyes, which gave our Anathomistes matter to devise their
distributio^s, while they referred the color to the nature of the tunicle,
which (in deed) is to be imputed to the humors. For mine own judgment if
it be lavvfull to judge in so intricate a cause, (I think) I could very well
maintain, that the humors be the causers of the diversity of the colors,
though our blind Anathomistes do impugn in their common books. But I have
taken upon me, rather to cure the malady of the eye, then to define the nature
of it, although this little Praeludium will not seem altogether unnecessary.

CAP. XXXI. Of a Cataract.
A CATARACT is a corrupt water, congeled like a cord, engendered of the humors
of the eye, distempered betwixt the tunicles, and set before the sight of the
eye and the Christalline humor. Four kinds of Cataractes curable.
Of these manner of Cataractes be seven diverse spices or kinds, whereof four be
curable, and three be incurable. The first kind of the curable Cataract, is
light, right, bright, like white chalk, or as Alabaster well polished, and it
is caused by a stroke in the eye either with a stick or a Artem acuariam, the
Art of the Nedle: which, because it is unknown to many of our practicioners, I
will insert a discourse of it in this treatise. Nevertheless, before you use
the nedle, it is requisite that the brain should be purged with pilulae
lerosolymi ana, which you shall make thus.. Turbith..j. Aloes hepaticke..ss.
maces, quibibes, masticke, and saffron. ana..j. and beat them to powder
altogether, and confect them with the juice of Roses, and make pills thereof:
and this purgation must be ministered the day before you try with the needle.
And on the next day, while the diseased party is fasting, about nine of the
clock, cause him to sit ouerthwarte a stool in ryding fashion, and plant
your self likewise on the same stool face to face against him, and bid him,
hold his sound eye closle shut. Encourage him also, and exhort him to be
patient, for the tractabilitie of him makes much to the convenient dispatche
of your labor. Then with your left hand lift up the over eyelidde, and with
your other hand put in the needle made therefore, on the side furthest from
the nose: and subtillie thirle the tunicle saluatrice, writhing always your
fingers too and froe, till you touch the corrupt water (which is the cataract)
with the point of the needle; and the^ begin by little and little to remove that
water from before the sight to the corner of the eye, and there keep it with
the point of your needle, Cautio.
the space of three minutes of an hour, and then remove your needle easily
from it. And if it happen that it rises up again, bring it back the second
time. But this caution you must be sure to have, that when the needle has
touched the cataracte; you do not writh it about with your fingers too and
froe, till it be set in his place before named, but that you gently draw it
thither: and when you have brought it thither, thirle the needle about, till it
has gathered the water about it, and then pull it out. (this done) Cause him
to shut his eye, and apply thereto a plaster of flax and the white of an
egg, and cause him to lie in his bed nine days together, removing the
plaster three times on the day, and three times on the night without any
other stirring of it. Provided, that he lie in a very dark place, and let his
diet be thin, as rere eggs and white bread. And if he be young and lusty,
let his drink be water, but if his body be weak, let him drinck wine well
lymphate. For truly much nourishment would prejudice our cure by ingendring
much blood in the eye, which is very hurtful now in the beginning of the
healing it. (The nynth day being passed let him rise and wash his eye well
with faier cold water, and he shall enjoy his sight by the help of God, even
as he did before, although some one of the cataractes be fayrer healed then the
other, as namelye the second kind and the fourth kind: but that which is
caused by a strype, (though the water be with more ease extracted) yet the eye
never recouereth his clearnes of sight again, because it is greatly bruised
and troubled by the force of the stroke. And the third kind also, though it
be soon restored to his old perfection, yet it abides not long therein,
unless it be continued as well by good diet, as also by this electuarie,
which is called Diaolibanum solarimitanum, which is thus confected.. of
cloves..ij. nutmegges of India, and saffron. ana..j.ss. and of good
Castoreum..j. Let all these be beaten into powder and searced, and confect that
powder with clarified honye, and let the patient receive of this electuarie in
the morning fasting the quantity of a chestnutte, or walnutte, and at evening
to bedward as much. And let him use digestive nourishing meats, which
engender good blood, but let him beware of beif and goats flesh, and Eeles,
and raw onyons, for they are oftentimes used to rypen the cataract, which must
be done before you strive with it. In winter, let the patient drink hot
wines, in the which let him infuse Sage and Rewe. Let him also abstain from
the company of women, nether let him frequent common bathes, for every strong
fume hurts him greatly. The aforesaid electuarie of Diaolibanum is good to
dry tears. It avails also against all manner of pain of the migrime which
proceeds of fleume. After this sort are all the curable cataractes healed,
(I mean) by the needle, which must be made of gold, silver, or of clean
Spannishe lattine: for Iron, or Steel are britle and frangible. And if the
cataracte should prove hard in drawing down, the point might easily break,
which, if it should abide in the eye, it would in time consume the eye through
abundance of tears and greatness of pain.

CAP. XXXII. Of the three kinds of Cataractes incurable.
THE first kind of Cataracts incurable the Physicians call Gutta Serena, and
the sign of the knowing thereof is this, when the pupil of the eye is black
and clear, as though it had no spotte, and the eyes ar always moving, and
they-liddes do tremble as they were full of quicksiluer. This kind of
cataracte is caused of a corruption in the mothers womb, and therefore they
that have them, are for the most part borne blind, and therefore they bestow
their labor in vain, that assay to cure them, for the Nerves opticke be
oppilate and mortified, so that no medicines can prevail, although many that
have this kind, do see the light of the Sun, and the stature of a man even
to their lives end: we call it Gutta serena, because it is engendered of a water
that falls from the brain, of the which truly one little drop corrupts
and dissolueth all the humors of the eyes, and stops the hollow neruies and
senowes, so that the visible spirits may no more pass through them. The
second cataract incurable is that which appears in the eye of a green
color, like water standing in watery places, not much moved, nor removed: this
is the most dangerous kind of all, if there be any degrees in them, and it is
procured by the overmuch coldness of the brain, and with great buffeting and
beating about the head, with great fasting, and such other like. The third
incurable Cataract is, when the pupil of the eye is dilated and spread so
far, that no circles may be seen within the tunicles of the eyes, and the
eye seems all black, or else all white. And thus are the three kinds of
Cataractes incurable distinguished and known: which will forbid the
practicioners to deal with them.

CAP. XXXIII. Of diseases which chance to the eyes, by blood, choler, fleume,
or melancholy, and of their cures.
NOW after the descriptions of Cataracts, and the number of them which be
curable, and which be not, and the curing, and knowledge of the curable and the
causes of the incurable, I will speak of other maladies of the eyes caused and
occasioned of the four humors, as blood, fleume, choler, and melancoly. But
first I will treat of blood, through the abundance whereof oftentimes there
grows a rednes in the eye, with great burning, and after ward it turns to
great ytche: and this disease makes the hear of the eyeliddes to fall away
and of many it leaves not one hear, and if this malady be not cured within
one year, it will make the eyeliddes to turn up, and make the patient
bleareyed. But before it comes to that extremity, it may be cured by this
colliry, which they call Collirium Ierosolymitanum, which is made in this
wise.. Tu^ty of Alexander..j. and beat it into small powder, and temper it
well with two pounds of white wine, (that is) a quart, and put thereto..j. of
dry roses, and boil it with a soking fire, till the wine be half wasted, and
then cleanse it through a linen cloth, and keep it in a vial glass, and
morning and evening put some of it into the eye, and if it be taken betimes,
the patient shall be cured within a week or two at the most. Nevertheless
before you apply this colliry, it shall be good, if the patient be young, to let
him blood on the vein, that is on the midst of the forhead, or, if he be
aged, to purge his brain with these pills.. of the best aloes, red Sanders,
Esula, and rewbarbe. ana..ss. Turbith, Cataputia minor and Agaricke. ana..ij.
confect them with the juice of mugworte, and minister to the patient according
to his strength. And truly these pills are not only good for the ytche of the
eyes, but also for all manner of ytche or scabbe, of what humor soever it be
caused. There be other diseases also of the eye engendered of blood, as the
ophthalmy and pannicles; And these kinds of infirmities are tied to the season
of the year, for they commonly happen about the end of August, and so forth to
the end of September and the rather then, because they proceed of the eating of
the variety of fruictes. The Ophthalmy is thus described: An Ophthalmy is a
corrupt blood engendered of hot humors, and commonly, it stands and
appears in the white of the eyes, and round about the tunicles and blaknes of
the eye, and it proceeds of immoderat sorrow and burning, and of abou^da^ce of
tears, which causes the eyes to swell and make them so bolne, that from that
time, forth the patient may take no rest nor sleep, for ever it seems to
him, that his eyes are full of gravel, or of thorns, or of smoke. In this
kind of infirmity it is good to use this powder, which many, (in respect of
the notable virtue thereof) do call Puluis benedictus, which is thus made..
white sarcocall, and beat it to very fine powder, and fill the patientes eye
with it, and let him ly with it wide open till the powder be consumed, and in
the mean time make a plaster of flexenherdes, and wash it well in cold water,
which (when you have dreined out in your hand) lay it on the patient his eye,
which he shall still keep open, and it will procure him to take his rest very
well. Many ignorant practicioners, while they have endeavored to cure this
infirmity with many impertinent medicines, have added sorrow to sorrow, and
have brought the eye without his liddes, and so made it incurable, which by the
aforsaid powder might easily have been healed. And note that there be some
which by the occasion of the Ophthalmy are greatly troubled in their eyes, and
have them fumous and mistie, which proceeds of evil keeping, or because they
eat contrary meats. Now if such happen, the brain must be purged with
these pills.. polipody, Esulae, Mirabolani citrini, and rewbarbe. ana..j.
masticke Quybibes, Saffron, Spiknard, nux Indiae, Cynamon. ana..j. Confect them
with milk or juice of Quinces, and minister to the sick according to his
strength, and after this purgatio^ give him morning and evening of the
Electuarie of Diaolibanum solarimitanum as before. And morouer put into his eye
a powder called Puluis Nabetis, the making whereof, we will show in the cure of
the third Pannicle; But this must be done only in the morning and evening, put
in his eye the powder called Puluis Alexandrius as before, and this do till the
patient has recovered his health, keeping him in the mean time from hurtful
meats.

CAP. XXXIIII. Of Pannicles.
THE pannicles have the same cause that the Ophthalmy has, (that is to say)
superfluity of blood. Causae
Sometime they are engendered of evil keeping, and sometime by great pains in
the head, as the Migrime, where the extremity of pain ascending into the
temples and so into the brows, makes the veins to beat, There be four
kinds of p^nnicles.
by which painful beating the eyes are troubled. There are four kind of
pannacles: the first is, when upon the tunicle saluatrice there millium. The
second lb.ss. powder of fennel seed..ss. oil of Roses. lb.j. all these
incorporate well together, put into a new earthe^ pot with a quart of new white
wine, and to all these put..iiij. of dry flowers of cammomill, and of wax..j.
and then set the pot on the fire and let it boil with an easy fire, till the
wine be consumed, so far forth that it seems to frye in and then put thereto
the whits of six eggs, and all ways stir it well, till it be incorporated
together, and then strain it through a faier linne^ cloth: with this oyntme^t
thus made, anoint the temples of the patie^t, and the forhead down to the
brows, and it will cure this kind of pa^nicle. This ointment is not only tied,
to this care, but it has many virtues: some of the which, I will express,
though it be impertinent to this discourse. It is very good against a green
wound for it both purges and cleanses it. It is good against the tooth ache or
pain in the gummes, if the cheek be anointed therewith. It is good against
the pain in the matrice, if it be eaten like an electuarie. It is good for
them also who are molested in excess, if their stomach be anointed, and their
feet together with their hands. It avails against the migrime, and
generally for every pain of the eyes, if the patient be anointed therewith
upon the temples as before. The second pannicle must be cured at the very
beginning, for if it be incarnate and hardened upon the tunicle, it may not by
any subtilitie be removed (the tunicle saved) and therefore it is not safe to
adventure to cure it, when by continuance of time, it has united it self with
the saluatrice. But at the first you shall cure it thus: first make a cautery
in the temples with a round cautery, (as shall be showed afterward when I speak
of cauteries) For fire dissolueth and consumes the pannicle, and so keeps it
from uniting and incarnating with the tunicle, and makes the eye fit to be
clarified with this medicine following. When the eye is cauterized, put into
the eye some of the powder called Puluis Nabetus (which I will teach afterward)
and while he lies with this powder in his eye, take four crabbes, and roast
them under the Embres very well, and then take them, and being pilled and
cored, incorporate them with the white of an egg in manner of an ointment, and
lay it upon a clean flexin herd, and bind it to the eye with a linen band,
and so renew this plaster morning and evening till you have absolved your
cure. Like as blood begets many infirmities of the eye, as namely
Ophthalmies and Pannicles: Maladies coming of fleume.
So likewise many maladies are engendered of fleume, but the most notable are
four, the first is procured by over abundance of tears, whereby the over
eyeliddes are so softened and mollified, that within their grow hears, which
prick the ball of the eye continually, as though there were Hogs bristles:
which Puluis Nabetus put into the eye twyse a day, till such time, as they be
clarified and healed. And this powder is made of Sugar Candy of Alexandria,
which powder is very auailable against many sicknesses of the eye. The second
infirmity which happens to the eye by pannicu^ vitreu^ which is thus cured:
first cause his head to be shaue^, and the^ cauterise him with a round cautery
in the soft of his head, and with a long cautery in his temples, (which so
done,) put into his eyes the powder of Ca^dy once in the day, til that he has
received again his full sight, and twice in the month purge him with the
pills called Pillulae Ierosolomitanae, and at his going to bed let him receive
of the electuarie called Diaolibanum solarimitanum till he be hole. The third
infirmity Cardus benedictus, and stamp it well, and mingle it with half the
white of an egg, and so make a plaster with flexen herdes, and lay it upon
the eye, removing it twice on the day, and after three days leave all
plasters, and let the patiently with his eye open, and every day in the
morning put into his eye the powder called Puluis benedictus, and at evening
the powder of Candy till he be perfectly hole: in the mean time let him
abstain lb.j. and the aforsaid things being beaten and resolved in the said
juice, let it stand all night, and in the morning cleanse it, and let the
patient take thereof a good quantity, and the next day subtillie with your
Rasour pare away the aforsaid fatnes, even from the one lachrimall to the
other, (which done) lay on a plaster of herdes and the white of an egg 9.
days after (every day changing the plaster twice,) and then let the patient
ly with his eye open, and put into it of the Collirie called Collirium
Alexandrinum, which is taught before in the cure of the third pannicle, and
that will heal it very well. I have hard that women did rub away that fatnes
with sugar, but it returned again afterward, though for a time they were
eased. There is an Electuarie, very auailable against these tears: which is
thus made.. Olibanum castoreum, Nutmegges, Nux Indi^, Cloves, Quibbybes.
ana..j. leaves of Laurel, Spickenard, Saffron, and Cardamomum ana..ij. seades
of dill, Smaladge, basilicon, Alysaunder, anyse, fennel, four seades of
henbane, white poppy, musk, and Champher. ana..j. all these must be beaten
together to powder saving the olibanum, which must be boiled with clarified
honey till it be molten, and then pour it in to a faier large wodden platter
together with the powder before made, and incorporate them together by often
stirring, and let it abide in the platter still, and when you will minister it,
give as much as a Chestnutte at the patientes going to bed. It destroieth the
tears, together with the fleume, it warmeth the Brain, it drives away the
pain of the migrime, it opens the eyes, relieueth the eyeliddes, and
clarifieth the sight. It is good for them that have the gout and the palsy,
and for them that have an impediment in their speech.

CAP. XXXV. Of the maladies in the eye proceeding of choler.
TWo kinds of greifs are incident to the eyes by choler: the first whereof is
that which is caused by abundance of choler in the stomach, from whence
arises a corrupt fumositie into the brain, which annoyeth the brain, and
troubles the visible spirits, so that the party thus affected, shall imagine
an object planted between him and the light in manner of a dark shadow. We
cannot outwardly judge of this malady, for it has no evident mark either in
the eye, or without the eye, but the cause of it abides in the stomach, which
must be taken away by an electuarie mitigatiue and apparatiue, which will
aswage the pain, and open the oppilate nerves and senowes, where by the
visible spirits may have free passage: you shall make it thus:. Rewbarbe,
Esulae minoris, redd Saunders, mirabolani citrini. ana..iiij. the roots
fennel, spynache, bansci, persely, Apij Sicacellae, simory, and maiden hear.
ana. M.j. polipody of the Oak..ij. boil all these roots in faier water till
half the water be wasted, and then cleanse it, and take the aforesaid spices
well beaten, and put them into the aforesaid licour with two pounds of good
Sugar, and make thereof a Syrup laxatiue. But you shall boil it but little the
second time, for the spices will soon lose their virtue, and then cleanse it
again the second time, and let the patient take of this twice in the week.
The second infirmity arising of choler is, when there appears before the
tunicle as it were a thin cloud in a clear air, and this is brought by an
evil diet, but it happens but to those that be choleric. For the cure you
shall take a Sapphire, and break it in a mortar, and keep the powder in a
vessel of gold, and once in the day put of this powder into the patients eye,
and he shall be hole in short time. The same effect has the gall of a hare dried
and beaten into powder, and so put into the eye.

CAP. XXXVI. Of the infirmities of the eye caused of Melancholy.
OF the humor of Melancholy be engendered in sundry folks many and diverse
sicknesses by reason of the oppilation of the spirits visible, which comes by
the distemperature of the brain, which is disquieted by the abundance of
melancholy. In these diseases therefore it seems to the patient, that there
are flies flieng in the air, and that there are three or four Moons, and
three or four faces, when he beholds but one: but these infirmities happen
most commonly to aged persons, which are melancholy, superfluity of melanchoy
dimming their eyesight. There must not therefore any medicine be put into the
eye of the patient, but make this electuary mitigatiue and apparatiue, which
will open the opilations of the nerves, which did before forclose the way to
the visible spirits. The electuarie is thus confected.. the juice of lyquorace,
eyebright, sileris montani. ana. lb.ss. the seeds of Rue basilicon, Netles
that comes from beyond the Sea, or Cecilian, of fennel, of Alysaunder, of
Apium, and of Caraway seed. ana..ij. masticke, Cloves, Nutmegges, Cynnamon,
Quibybes, gummi, Almoundes, Cerache pomi gummorum Aragunton, and Saffron.
ana..ss. kernelles of Quince Apples..j. all these must be beaten together into
small powder well searced, and then you must confect them with good Sugar, and
make an electuarie of it, and of this let him receive morning and evening, till
he be healed. It avails also against that dimnes of the eyes which comes by
thought and of much heaviness, and makes them to see more clearly, and of that
effect it has his name (that is) clarificatum oculorum. There is also an other
infirmity which comes of melancholy, and that is, when the pain sodeinly
ascends into the eyes, and greeueth so extremely, that it seems to the
patient that his eyes would start out: they appear also most commonly very
bolne. Many which are troubled with this kind of malady, do loose their
sight altogether, and many (though there be some which do see) notwithstanding
but very feebly. But the seasonable applying of remedies preuenteth either
discomoditie. Afther this sort then, you shall encounter with this evil. You
shall first purge the stomach and the brain with these pills.. Aloes
mirabolani citrini, Turbith, Saunders citrine, and rewbarbe. ana..ss. Sca^mony,
mirrhe, saffron, balsamum, masticke, lignum Alo^s, olibanum, white Agaricke,
nux Indiae, Juice of lyquorace, seed of Apium, Lettuce, succory, basilicon.
ana..j. Beat all these to powder, and confect them with the juice of Roses,
and make pills of them, and give the patient after his power. The stomach and
the brain thus purged, lay upon the eye this plaster.. sour apples or
crabbes, and roast them under the Embres till they be soft, then core them and
pare them, and bruise them well in a mortar, and to four of them put half
the white of an egg, and so braye them together till they be well incorporate,
and so lay them upon flexen herds, and morning and evening apply it to the
eye, and you shall find that it will do him much good: for it both asswageth
the swelling, lesseneth the pain, refreshes the sight, and with all these
fixes also the eye in his place. There is another infirmity also which
proceeds by the abundance of melancholy, and that they call Vngula: for it
is much like the Nail of a finger, sometime it breeds in the corner of the
eye to the earewarde, and so spreads over the eye, if it be not hindered and
resisted betymes: sometime also it happens that another vngle arises in the
other corner, and if they meet, it makes the cure more uncertain, yet by
headfull skill and discretion it may be healed by the hand: Take therefore a
twiche of silver, and therewith lift up subtellie the vngle from the tunicle,
proceeding to the lachrimall where it grew, and there cut it away, and then lay
the white of an egg and flexe upon it.x. days together, removing it twice on
the day, and at the end of ten days wash his eye with hot water, and put into
it Puluis Nabetus before named, till the eye be sufficiently cleared. Let him
abstain from such meats as do feed melancholy. It happens also sometime,
that the superfluous abundance of melancholy, seated in the brain, begets
a drynes in the eye liddes, which afterward turns to ytching and burning. But
this disease is cured by letting the patient blood upon the middle vein in the
forehead, and after with using this collirye.. forty tender croppes of the
Bramble, and stamp them small, then put them in a new earthen vessel
together with a quarte of good white wine, and so boil them till the half be
consumed, and then cleanse it, and preserve it in a glass to your use, and
twice in the day put some of it into your patientes eye, till it be hole. Of
the like superfluity of melancholy grows sometime a corrupt humor without
the eye upon the lidde, which embolneth all the one side of the face with
extreme pain, but with no offense to the sight of the eye. The signs of this
disease are these: it makes the eyeliddes hard and red, and keeps the eye so
shut, that the patient may not open it. For the cure of it, you shall take
fine flower of old wheat, and yolks of eggs. ana..j. of saffron..j. and
stamp them well together with woman's milk, till it be as an ointment, then
make a plaster of it, and apply it, so that none enter into the eye. You may
also use this:. a lilly root and crabbes and roast them in the embres, till
they be soft, then, taking away the core and the pills of the crabbes, stamp
them both of like quantity with the whites of eggs, and so use it: On the
step of the wound, where the sore was, lay this ointment, that it may draw
the flesh together, so that no scarre may appear.. Aloes, hens grease,
oil of bitter Almondes, and white wax, and incorporate them together into an
ointment and apply it. It is very good in all the diseases of the eyes, to
annoint the temples of the patient, and the forehead with vnguentum Alabastrum
before named, for it asswageth the pain and helps the other medicines in
their operation. It happens many times in this infirmity that the patient
his eyeliddes, for want of provident skill do reuerse, which is a great
blemishe. In this case you must subtellie with the Rasour divide the eyelidde
from the wound, and part them with a little roll made of fine linen clothe
dipped in the white of an egg, which you shall lay betwixt the lidde and the
sore.xv. days together, chaungeing it daily, and then make the ointment of
hens grease and white wax, and lay of it upon the roll, and it will consume
the wound, so that there shall appear no Cicatrice. The like cure you shall
use, when the reuersement of the eyeliddes is caused of superfluity of blood.
Of the melancholic humor there is also engendered in many men a sickness, which
grows between the nose and the eye, and it appears like a piece of lung or
light. It is grauelly, and auoideth out always filth. This sore is called
vulgalpus. For the cure of it, you shall only take a twiche, and lift the sore
up subtelly, and with the point of a Rasour cut up the sore by the root, and
cauterize it with a hot iron, and use the ointment before rehearsed, which
they call vnguentum subtle, that is hens grease and white wax, and annoint
the place with it, till it be hole.

CAP. XXXVII. Of diseases happening to the eye by outward causes, as by blows,
with sticks, staves, or stones.
THE only thing generally, that you shall use when the eye is smitten, is the
white of an egg and flexen herdes to the which God has given three especial
properties. The first is to assuage the pain. The second to purify and
clear the sight. The third is to let and keep away all superfluous humors
which otherwise would fall into the eye. You shall remove it four times in the
day, and twice in the night, by the space of xv. days together, annoynting in
the mean time the temples of the patient with the ointment of Alabaster,
which, as I told you before, was an adiuuant and aid to all medicines. Now
after the xv. days be exspired, if you shall perceive the tunicle saluatrice
to be hurt and broken, you shall then take xij. streines of the new laid eggs
of white hens, and put them in a mortar, laboring them with the pestill,
till they be united in manner of an ointment, and so reserve it in a glass, and
twice in the day and once in the night put a little of it into the eye, and it
will knit together, and make so nude again the tunicle if it be broken or hurt:
after this manner I have cured many wounds in the eye which have seemed
dangerous, and incurable to the ignorant beholder. But sometime it will happen,
that through the force of the blow, there will grow a cataract, and then in
the beginning the tunicle must be saved by this forenamed prescript, and the
cataract must grow without let to his full perfection, and so be healed by the
needle. Some unskillful practicioners use to lay a plaster made of wax and
co^myn to the eye, if it be smitte^, and other some use olibanum and
woormewood, but both those and all such like hot ointments are passing evil
because they consume and wast the substance of the eye. It follows now that I
speak of watery eyes and of corrupt humors like tears, which the Physicians
call fistoles, to discern between the fistula and the watery profluence of
tears. You shall therefore use this skill: Lay your* forefinger between the
nose and the corner of the eye, and straining the place a little, if it be a
fistula, you shall see the matter of it run out at the points of the
eyeliddes; but if none appear, then judge it to be a watery humor. Many
boisterus fellows, (seeing the place of the issue of the fistula) have used to
cauterize it with a hot iron, thinking by that means to have dried up the
matter, which in deed they have done, but they have destroyed the sight, and
deformed also the place. This therefore is the surest way or course that you
can take, to cure the fistula. First purge the pacie^t his stomak with Pills
of Jerusalem, and then with the point of a rasour you shall make a little
incision betwixt the nether eyelidde and the nose so discretely that the lidde
be not touched: and this Incision shall be throughout the skin in long wise,
and into the same put in the grain of a fiche binding it on with a little
pillowe of linne^, and so let it lie till the next day: the^ remoueing the
fich, you shall in the hole where it lay, put in a little of some powder
Corrasiue. After the powder is put in, lay a plaster of flexe^ herdes, and the
white of an egg (the patie^t always shutting his eye for fear of the powder)
In the morning after, you shall apply nothing but clean swynes greece, till the
mortified flesh be raised, and when it is raised and removed put in a piece of
a spu^ge as much as the fich, in the hole which the powder made, and it will
purge the drines of the wou^d and when you shall perceive it thoroughly dried,
leave the sponge, and bind nothing to it else but fayer dry linte of linen
till the patient be hole. Now concerning the tears, they issue out of the
eyeliddes both the upper and the neither: but there is difference between the
causes of there issuing from both places: for they which procead from the nether
eye lidde, come from the heart, by reason of sorrow, dread, or smart, or they
be caused by some manner of violence but the tears which flow out of the hole
of the over eyelidde, procead from the brain by reason of corruption and
abundance of humors, and there course cease not, unless the matter be
purged with electuaries and cauteries, as I have showed before.

CAP. XXXVIII. Of diseases which come by skipping in of stones or chippes by
chance into the eyes.
THESE diseases happen especially unto Masons, Millers, Carpenters, Wrightes
and Smythes: for if any chyue, chippe or dust skippe into the eye, and through
negligence be left behind, it will incarnate upon the tunicle saluatrice, and
then can you not cure the eye, but by removing and drawing the said chiue,
which you shall do with your needle, dividing it cunningly from the tunicle.
And if it happens that there be any pit in the place, where it lay, by
reason that it abode long time therein: then put into the eye the streyns of
eggs, ordered, as I declared before, twice in the day and once in the night,
and upon the eye lay a plaster of flexe, and the white of an egg, and within
three days it will heal the party diseased. And after this sort you shall also
remove the hawe in the eye. But you shall in drawing out the hawe, bind two
needles fast together at the top, and so take the hawe between the two
points, and so easily rewling the needles, bring it away. Sometime it
happens that the eye is stung with the Bea or waspe, or some other venymous
thing, or blasted with an infected air: and if any of these happen, the eye is
much disquieted and grieved, so that the patient may take no rest, and it
bolneth up that he may not see. The only cure for such and the like accidents
is this, as I have by experience often tried. Take a handful of Cardus
benedictus, and stamp it small, and temper it well with half the white of an
egg, and therewith make a plaster laying it on flexen herdes, binding it hard
to the eye, where it shall lie till it be dried, and then apply another: and
so consequently use it till your patient be thoroughly hole. These qualities
this herb has: it asswageth swelling, and eases the pain, destroys the
venyme, and puts away blood from the eyes. This is also a present remedy for
the eyes that are bloodshed, when they burn as though there were gravel in
them. And thus much for the especial discourses of sundry diseases, which do
most commonly bend to that little member, the eye, together with their
particular cures.

CAP. XXXIX. Of pain in the ears. DE AVRIVM DOLOR.
PAIN in the ears is caused to some through cold taken in iourneying by cold
wyndes. C^^sae.
Also sometime it is caused of cold bathes and medicinable waters. Also it
chances to many through hot distempure. Sometime of inflammation. And like
as inflammation by stretching out the parts that be inflamed, engenders
pain: Even so a windy vapor, or a humor gross and clammy, for lack of
passage causes pain. Also humors that be biting, and like whay and matter,
do cause pain in the ears: Pain in the ears caused of cold, is soon known
by the patients words, and because that there is continually great pain
without heaviness, or, distension, Signae.
or burning. The pain which is caused of hot distempure is known, in that
there is felt pain and heat without heaviness of bolning. But if heaviness,
distension, and beating heat and pain be felt in the head, the^ the pain in
the ear is caused of infla^mation. Only distensio^ without heaviness declares
a windy vapor, which cannot find passage out. If there be heaviness in the head
and the hearing: the pain is caused of gross and cla^my humors. If the pain
be caused only of cold, Cure of cold.
it will soon be cured by hot remedies: that is, with oil of rewe, laurel,
Narde, Dill, lillies, of Euphorbium, and Spike. Also if you sees rewe, and
common oil or pepper, or Castoreum, it is a good remedy. Also oil in which
Garlic is sodden; or an onyon, dropped into the ears is maruellously good.
There be some that do cut out the core of a great oynion, the^ they fill it
with oil, and they heat it meanly in hot embers, and pour it into the
ears, when it is strongly strained. Also a very little Euphorbium commixed with
much old oil, Of water.
is much commended of Galene. Whatsoever you do minister, let it be ministered
hot. But when some medicinable water is continued in the passage of hearing,
you must continually pour in oil that is very thin that it may be washed:
then wype it with soft woll, and again pour in more. The white of an egg
mitigateth the pain very much. Also woman's milk. Also goose grease profits
much, likewise foxes grease. But to draw out plenty of water, nothing is
better then to suck and draw it out with a quill or hollow pipe holden in
the mouth. Of heat.
When pain is caused of hot distempure, then oil of Roses is maruellously
good for the head, if it be dropped into the ear, and vinegre and oil of
Roses is good, or the white of an egg, or woman's milk, or juice of
nightshade, or this.. oil of Roses..j. Juice of nightshade..ij. vinegre* of
Roses..j.ss. commix them. If the pain be caused of inflammation, or gross and
viscous humors, you must use medicines which do divide and take away
obstructions and stoppings: as be all bitter things which purge and cleanse
without Erosion, as is yrisillirica, all kinds of Aristolochia, bitter
Almoundes, the root of ^itisalba, Centory the less, polium, and Cynamon. Also
oil of Almoundes and other which do purge, cleanse, wype, and vnstoppe the
passages without grief. Therefore of those you may make medicines, and drop
thereof into the Ears. Among other also the juice of Leekes dropped into the
ear warm is good, or juice of leekes mixed with honey. If that the pain be
caused of inflammation, you must by and by let blood on the Caephalica vain,
that is on the same side: Venae sectio.
and with clisters you must pull back the humors, that do flow. Afterward
you must drop in oxyrhodinum warm, or gooses grease, or hens grease with
oil of roses. But if the inflammation be vehement: then to cease pain drop
warm into the ear the white of an egg with woman's milk. Also this medicine
is good.. Juice of seen green..ij. oil of roses..ss. vinegar..j.ss. commixe
them all and drop it into the sore ear. Apply those things outwardly which
cease pain, and do digest the matter heaped together. If the inflammation be
very vehement, it is necessary to use those things which do astony the sense
easily, and it is no small danger, least that the senowe by which the virtue
of hearing, is dispersed in the brain, be hurt thereby. But commixe a very
little Opium with woman's milk, and the white of an egg. Also temper Opium with
Castoreum: there must be of each a like quantity, or double as much Castoreum.
The licour in which the aforesaid medicines ought to be tempered, being first
finely beaten, must be Sapa: Sapa^
for it does cease the pain much more then sweet wine. Sapa is new wine
sodden till it come to the third part. There be some that commixe Opium with
oil of roses, or violettes, after this sort.. Opij..j. oil of roses and
violettes. ana..j.ss. Also the Antidote Philonium dissolved in woman's milk,
and dropped in, is good. Without you must nourishe the ear continually with
common oil, or with a hot foment, and you must dipp wool in it, and put it
into the ear: but in such wise that it may not touch the places that be
troubled with inflammation. But when the pain waxes old, and turns to
suppuration, and impostumacion, you shall drop into the ear a medicine of
the juice of line seed only with oil of roses or chammomill mixed with it.

CAP. XXXIX. Of sound or noise in the Ears. DE SONITV AVRIVM.
NOISE and tinckling in the ear, Causae.
for the most part is engendered of a windy vapor, or of gross and cla^my
humors. Also many times it is caused through an exquisite tardinesse of the
sense of hearing. It is also caused through weakness of the members, when as it
chances in the recovering of a disease, some humor is taken into the sinowes
of the ears. Also it is caused of outward thingS, as of cold, heat, or a blow
on the head. Signa.
If the evil chance through outward causes, it is sone known by the
patientes words: now because the noise comes by little and little, or at one
time, or suddenly on a heap, that is also convenient to know the disease by.
For if the soundinges do come, and then rest for a certain space; Of windy
vap^ur^
it is evident that a windy vapor is shut in, and can not get out, and so
causes sounding, and specially when the sick has eaten windy meats. But if
such sound in the ears do not come suddenly but by little and little, and
there is felt withal a heaviness like a weight: then it declares the evil to
be caused of gross and viscous humors. Of gross (...).

Cure if it come of gross humors or vapors.


For the cure if the sound in the ears be caused of gross and viscouse
humors, or of vapors: in the beginning purg the head with Pilulae Cochiae and
such like. But first minister before them potions and medicines which have
virtue to extenuat and divide. Then you must use masticatories and
sternutamentes. Moreover you must drop into the ears, oil of bitter almondes,
or oil in which Castoreum is brayed. Also let the ear be inclined to the
vapor of the water, in the which Stechas, wormwood, maioram, mintes, and
origan has been sodden. Juice of rewe, Sacculi.
sodden in the rind of a pomegranat is marvelous good. Also Sacculi made of
betonie, stechados, chammomill, maioram, and other things a little before
rehearsed ar very good, if they be applied to the ear warm. If the sound in
the ear be caused through sharpness of the sense of hearing, which is known,
if when the patient is hungry it increases, If it come of sharpnes of hearing.
and when he is full the noise is less. Then you must use those things which
do astony the senses, but you must take good head thereof and therefore begin
with the easiest, and if need be, proceed afterward to stronger. Oil of roses
is only commended with a grain or two of Opium put to it. Galen in this case
praises juice of Mandragora and poppy. But if noise in the ears chance in
feauers, there need no remedy for it, for commonly it goes away straight. But
if it remain after a disease or a pain in the head, then you must nourish the
ears with decoction of wormwood, pouring in vinegre and oil of roses, or
juice of raddish, with oil of roses, or the best aloe^s tempered with mulsa.
And if this help it not, use black helleboure braied with vinigre.

CAP XL. Of Deafnes, and slow hearing. SVRDITAS, ET GRAVIS AVDITVS.
THE ear is so afflicted, that it causes not only dulnes of hearing: but
also deafnes that one can hear nothing at all. Sometime deafnes begins at
ons birth Also sometime it chances after we be borne, which does chance,
either through colericke humors steing upward, Causae.
or through crude and gross humors stopping the hearing. If daefenes come of
cholerike humors specially after fevers, Signae.
then it is wont with sudden incursions to run to the brain. Also the face
and all the estate of the body will show a choleric temperature. But if it
come of gross humors there is heaviness of the head, and other tokens be
present which show flegmaticke humors. They which remain deaf from there
birth, or also sone after they be born, being perfectly deaf of a long time,
are incurable, neither does any of them ever speak. They that be not
alltogither deaf, If of cholerik humors. If of gross humors.
yet, if it has long continued, it is very hard to cure. Daefenes which is
caused through choleric humors steying upward, is sone driven away by
medicines, purging choler. If the deafness be engendered of crude and gross
humors, this dull hearing is cured by bloudletting* or only by purgation of
Hiera and Pilulae cochiae and other such like. But minister before Oximel, and
other medicinnes that have power to divide gross and clammy humors. The whole
body being purged, you must draw fleume out of the head by Masticatories,
sternutaments, and Errhinis. Furthermore they must be dried and by all means
strenghned. Also he must use a bath that flows of it self or salt water. You
must put into the ear medicines that divide and cut gross and viscous humors,
whereof there be many declared in the chapter against sound of the ears. But
privately juice of rue, with honey, or Castoreum with oil of dill is good. Also
you must use fomentes, and lean your ear upon a quill or reed, having one end
made fit for the ear, and the other for the hole in the cover of the pot being
every where fast stopped. Let there be in the pot, wormwood, mintes, maioram,
origan, stechas or such like sodden in water, that the vapor that comes from
thence, may pass into the course of hearing. Also this medicin dropped into
the ear is good.. oil or Castor..ss. comin seed..ij. the powder of
Castoreum..j. a great oynion, the core taken out, put in the pouders of Comin
and Castor, and put in the oil, and wind it up in wette papers, and put it in
under the hot embres, and when it is roasted, strain it hard, and let it be
dropped into the ear. Morouer the vapor of vinigre taken with a reed, as is
taught before is marvelously good. Victus ratio.
Let there diet be altogether thin, and meats of light digestion.

CAP. XLI. Of Jmpostumes breeding in the ears. DE PAROTIDIBVS.
PAROTIDES in greek be inflammation which are wont to issue out in the
kernelles, which be by the ears. It is caused of aboundaunt hot blood which
is either mixed with choler or fleume or melancholy. Causae
And sometime it is caused of humors compact in the head, and sometime of the
rest of the body by sickness, and specially by feauers. Parotides which are
caused through fullness and plenty of hot blood, Signa.
they do engender most vehement pain. They which are caused of choleric
blood, they seem much like Erisipela, and they vex the place that is
diseased, with no grief. That which is caused of melancholy blood, they be
not read, nor they do not vex with vehement pain, but they be hard. They
which be engendered of fleumatike blood, in the swelling they be raised sharp
upward. Let there diette be such in a manner, as is appointed in other
inflammations. Victus ratio. Cura^io.
The cure if age, and other things will suffer, it must be begone by letting
of blood: you must cut the Cephalica vain on the same side. Furthermore we use
not in (...), as we do in other inflammations, to apply in the beginning
things that repress, but contrary wise things that do draw. And if they be
not in effect, fasten cupping glases, or apply continually fomentes. To
mitigate the pain you must chose those things which have heat with moderate
moistness, mitigating and ceasing pain, meet to ripe, and digest, as is,
decoctions made of wheat or barely, or the meal of lin seed with mulsa, or
fenugrek, or althea, or ca^momill: for the same purpose anoint the place
continually with butter, putting to it the white of eggs. Also swines grease
with butter melted, with a little wax put to it, that it may be a soft Cerate,
may be well applied. Cure of them that be meek.
But in them that be meek, (that is) in gentle Parotides, in which there flow
not such plenty of humors that they cause vehement pain, nor there is no heat
of the humor, such are easily cured with fomentes of brine and plasters, and
medicinnes altogether discussiue, as is Diactrilon. If the parotides can not be
dissolved, you must use medicines to ripe, and bring the impostume to matter,
as is, wheat meal with the decoction of figgs and oil. Also the medicine that
is made of meal and flower and leaven. When the Parotides be riped, either cut
the skinn with a knife, that the matter may be let out, or the botche may be
broken with a sharp medicin, as that which is broken with garlic, and such
like, or to prove how to dissolve it by medicines which have virtue to draw and
extenuat, removing it twice daily, and nourishing it until the pain be some
what released, and the more part of the matter dissolved. And if there be
hardness, that also must be mollified. Therefore you must make medicines that
be of mixed qualities, so that you must commix drawing things with mollifiers,
as is calves suet, goats suet, the marrow of a heart, bdellium styrax,
ammoniacum, and such other like.

CAP. XLII. Of ulcers in the nose. DE OZAENIS.
OZAENAE in greek be ulcers in the nose that be deep and rotten, ou of thet
which is brethed an unkind and stinking savor. Through sharp and rotten
humors which flow to the nosethrills, filthiness is engendered, Causae.
which if they be only sharp, they engender ulcers hard to be cured, but yet
they stink not much, Therefore the cure of these ulcers consist cheiflie in
this, that in the beginning the head be dried and strenghned. Because ulcers
come through the flowing of corrupt humors, Curatio.
which flow out of the head to the noseterills: the whole head must be
strenghned and dried, that no superfluities do flow from the nosethrills. You
shall add strenght to the head after this sort, first you must clippe the
head, then straight you must lay on it things that do restrain and bind, as is
oil of roses, alom, unripe galls, willow leaves, vinegar and such like: this
must be continually laid and anointed on the head.ix. days. When with those
things the head is made strong, then go about to cure the nosethrills, that
you may dry up the matter, with medicines that be repulsiue and discussiue.
Therefore those things that repel and drive back be things sharp, and sower,
which also are reckned with restrictiue things, discussiue things must be hot
and dry of virtue. Therefore to cure Ozenae. you must drop in the juice of
calamint, or blow in the powder thereof being dried with a quill, or drop in
honey into the nosethrills. A while after minister sternutamettes to bring out
the scurfes, Ster^^tamentioni.
which will fall of in iij. or iiij. days. When they are fallen of, cure it
with goose grease and butter, and oil of roses. The ulcers in the nosethrils
may be anointed with juice of a pomegarnet boiled in a brazen vessel unto the
half or a whole pomegarnet sodden in sweet wine braied and dropped in. Also
this is good.. dry alome..j.ss. mirrhe..j. the rind of a pomegarnet, sumach
salt gemme, safron, frankensense. ana..ss. beat them and blow into the nose, of
the powder. If that after the ulcers there remain pain, Vnguent^^.
use this ointment.. oil of roses, mirtelles. ana..j. burnt lead, litarge.
ana..ij. Ceruse, bolearmeny. balaustium. ana..j. white wax as much as is
sufficient, and make an ointment and anoint the place.

CAP. XLIII. Of bleeding at the nose. DE SANGVINIS EX NARIBVS PROFLVVIO.
Flux of blood at the nose The causes be partly outward, Causes Externae
Internae Signae. Victus ratio.
and partly inuard Outward causes be falling from a heigh place, a stripe,
vehement exercise and tarcing in the sun. Inward causes is plenty of blood or
thinnes of the same. You may know if it come through plenty of blood by heavy
pain in the head much blood in the face, and rednes of the eyes. Let the diet
be such that it may cool and make thick, the blood, and the diet must be
thin. Therefore let the air be cold, and the meat of good juice, and easy to
digest. If the blood be very hot, let the sick eat lettuse, Po^^^.
endive, pears, quynces, chickens roasted or boiled with veriuice. Let him
drinck thick red wine mixed with water, or water cold, or decoction of
cinnamon, by which through out my book: I mean water, in which a li^le cynnamon
is sodden: lest water through his coldness might hurt a weak stomach. Let the
patient speak little, and let eschew moving, trouble of mind and chiefly anger.
Also it is good io have the lower parts of the head, highest. For the cure you
must take heed, that in bleeding at the nose, the lower parts lie highest,
Curatio
and the head downward. The cure must be begun with those remedies, which turn
the blood to other parts of the body. First therefore if the body be full, and
age will suffer it, and if the sick be not resolved, you must cut the vain in
the arm right against the flowing of blood at the nose. When you have draw
out a little then let it alone an hour then draw out some again, Venae sectio.
and afterward again and again, as the patientes strength will suffer it.
Moreover friction and rubbing of the inferior parts as the arms, hands,
thighs, share, and feet. It is maruelously good to put the feet into warm
water ever rubbing them up and down. Also strong bindinges of the extremities
is to be acounted among the remedies that pull back. Also great cupping glasses
fastened to the sides do retain blood breaking out at the nose. ^
If the blood flow from the the right nosethrill, fasten the cuppinge glass
upon the liver: If at the left nosethrille, upon the spleen. If the blood come
from both the nosethrilles, fasten cupping glasses to both places. Also fasten
them to the shoulders with scarification: Those bring done, minister both
within the body and without, things which cool and restrain. Epithema.
Outwardly apply to the forehead an Epithema of Juice of plantaine, lettuce,
sorell, sheperdes purse, knott grass, or make it with the waters of the^
distilled, A linen cloth wett in cold vinegar is marvelous good being applied
to the forehead and neck again and again. Also nourish the forehead with
spo^ges of cold water. Also it is good to use this Epithema applied to the
forehead and the liver.. water of roses, night shade, sorrel. ana..iij. pouders
of Diabrion sautalon, (...) Epithem^*
diarrhodon abbatis. ana..j. bolearmenie, yuory burnt, lapis hamatites.
ana..ss. commixe them all and make an Epithema. Also you must put into the
nose, An (...) medicin^ to stop b^ou^
medycines to stop blood, for the which this is very good.. frankensence..ij.
aloes..j. powder them and mix therewith the white of an egg until it be as
thick as honey, then commixe the sof^e hears of an hare, with it, and apply
it to the nose. Also you may wryth a linen clothe dipped, in the nosethriles.
Also mintes braied, and put into the nosethrilles is thought to be very good.
Also a sponge wette in strong and sharp vinegar may be put into the nose that
bleedeth. Also this medicine is good.. egg shells..ij. unripe galls..j. being
braied put them in a writhed linen cloth wett in water or vinegar, and put it
into the nosethrilles. Also it is good to stopp the ears strongly with linen
and wax, and to hold in the mouth cold rain water. Also juice of the leaves
of nettle, having linen dip: into it, and put into the nose, stops bleeding
at the nose, also juice of horsetayle, or the leaves brayed and applied, are
good. The flesh of snailes braied with vinegar, ar with there shells burnt and
braied are good being applied to the forehead and nose with vinegar. But above
all, the blood which comes out at the patientes nose is good, Op^ima
medicinae.
if it be burned in an earthen pott and then beaten, take of it..iij.
bolearmoniacke..j. Camphore..j. with the white of an egg and a little vinegar,
make it thick like honey, and lay it to the forehead, and put it into the
nose. Necessity requiring it is lawful to put to.ij. grains or.iij. nf opium.
Asses dounge dried and made in powder is wonderfully good, and also hoggs doung
has the like property. Within the body minister those things which do cool
and restrain, as be syrupes of roses, forrell and nympheae, Trochiskes of
terra lemnia, de succiuo and such like medicines. Morouer if in the mean
season any blood flow into the belly or other places of the body, if it be
much and plenteous, you must avoid it by medicines which will dissolve and
bring forth the clodder matter.

CAP. XLIIII. Of distillation, reume, and hoarcenes DE DISTILLATIONE,
GRAVEDINE, ET RAVCITATE.
CATARROS in greek is called Distillatio in latin, and in English Reume.
Distillatio. Grauedo. Raucedo.
It is whereas an humor falls down to the mouth, and the jaws. Grauedo is
when the humor falls into the nose, and causes the pose. Raucedo is when
the humor chances to distill to the sharp arterye. The cause of flowing of
the humor is the brain the which through could, Causae.
is brought to a could tempure, which chances specially to them, Cold.
which go suddenly about in the could bareheaded. But through heat the brain
is warmed and stuffed* the coldness of humors which be in the brain, Hea^.
wringing hard like as a sponge dipped in water is wrong with ones hand. It
causes the flowing of humors to the lower parts. So oftentimes heat going
about in the head dissoluing the humors in the brain. engenders
distillation. Moreover all things that replete the head without measure,
Repletion of the head.
do cause flowing of humors into the inferior parts. Also wine immoderatly
droncke, and hot bathes, raw meat remaynyng in the stomach, and vaporous
things in the head. Signa.
The signs of the flux of humors come of heat, then the head is hot, and a
sharp and thin humor distilleth as well by the nose, as by the mouth, also
the face and the nose is redd, Ca^or.
and for the most part there follows a fever. Contrarywyse they that have
the flux caused of could, there head and there forehead is stretched out every
wheare, the passages which be in the bones called, Ethmoidea, are shutt up, so
that the voice cannot pass downward by the nosethrills. Also a flegmatike and
thick humor distilleth out of the nose. Let the^ eschew air that is very
hot or very cold, especially from a has, and from Southe, Vict^s ratio.
and north wyndes, and all things that can bynd or dissolve humors in the
brain. Let him use meats of good juice, easy to be digested* let him eschew
those things that send plenty of vapors to the brain, as be oynions,
garlic, mustard seed, raddishe, and very hot adoramentes. Moreover they
which have the distillation must eat less at supper then at dinner. let there
drink be aqua mulsa, or decoction of cynnamon or barley. let them eschew
sleeping in the day, and lying upright in the night. Curatio.
For cure when the head is vexed with a hot distempure, you must use those
remedies, which are good for pain in the head engendered of such a cause. The
most present remedy of the head is to sprinckle and pour upon the head plenty
of whote water: this is able to drive out the hot vapors engendered in the
head. Moreover such must take comfort of warm bathes, of sweet water. They
which have there head vehemently hot and burning, and for that are troubled
with continual distillation, it is best for them, in summer to be anointed
with oil of roses. If a cold distempure vex the head, it must be anointed
with hot and thin oiles, as oiles of Ireos, Rewe, and such like: Oil of
Ireos is not only used, as an ointment, but dropped into the nose. Also other
things that be applied, which are spoken of in the chapter against pain of
the head caused of cold. If a hot humor distill from the head together with a
fever, and if there be fulness of the body, you must let blood out of the
Caephalica vain. Vene sectio.
But it any just cause be against yt, wash the belly with a clister, that yt
may draw the humors that do abound in the head, downward* or minister a
medycyne purging choler as is, pilulae aureae, alephanginae, azairet and such
like. Also you must turn the humors from the head by frictions, ligaturs, aod
fastening of cupping glasses to the shoulders. Minister within the body things
that have virtue to alter and quench the burning heat of choler, as is syrup
of violettes nympheae of poppye and there conserues. Also Embrocha and
odoraments rehearsed before in the cap. of headache may be applied. Also a
plaster of terra lemniae or bole armoniack and juice of plantaine, made and
laid upon the head being shaven. H^^er frigidus.
If it be a cold humor which distilleth, you shall empty with those things
which purge fleume, For which purpose a strong clister is good, which being
done, you must draw and turn away the humor from the head. Then when the
humors be digested, purge the head with Masticatories gargarismes, and such
like. Saccu^^.
Moreover apply to the head Sacculi made thus.. flowers of ca^momill, melilote,
be^onye, origan. ana. M.ss. cynnamon, cloves. ana..j. maces..j.ss.
nuttmegs,.ij. galla moschatae..j. powder them all and put them in silk, and
make a Sacculus, and lay it to the crown of the head. It is very good also to
annoint the head with hot oils, as is the oils of Ireos dill, and Rewe. All
things do stopp distillation, which have virtue to dry, To stopp
distillation.
specially nigella parched, and common burnt or parched, putt into a lynnen
clothe and knit is a present remedy, if the patient do smell to it. For the
same purpose it is good to minister suffuments, as is this.. frankensence,
masticke. ana..j. wood of aloes..j.ss. cynamon, cloves. ana..ij. Gallae
moschata..j.ss. laurel leaves, yelowe saunders. ana..j. musk ambre. ana.g.j.
being braied commixe them with storax liquidae, as much as suffiseth, and make
trochiskes. Trokiskes of perfu^e.
Whereof put one upon coals.. sage, maioram, rosemary. ana..j. maces, cloves,
cinnamon. ana..ij. wood of aloes..j. frankensence..j.ss. beat them all and
commixe them, and make a gross powder to strewe upon the coals. As for
hoarcenes, it is cured almost with the same medycynes, that the coughe is.

CAP. XLV. Of pain in the teeth. DE DENTIVM DOLOR.
TOOTHACHE (as Galene says,) amongst other pains that are not mortal, is
the most cruel and grievous of them all. It is caused sometime of hot or cold
distempure. Causae.
Also many times through flowing of humors out of the head unto the roots of
the teeth, which with there sharpnes either do gnaw about them, or else with
their abundance, they engender like grief in the teeth, as inflamacion is
about fleshie parts, pain in the teeth without inflamacion of the gummes,
sometym in the se^owe wherein the roots be planted. If the pain come through
distempure of the bare quality, Signa.
it will not be grievous. Hot distempure is known by the tempure of the whole
body, because that likewise is hot. Also the face is redd, and the diet used
before was hot. Cold is known by the contrary judgments. If the pain be
caused of flowing of some humor abundantly, then greauous pain is not only
felt in the teeth but also in other parts, which it passes by, A where humor
engenders vehement pain a cold humor more meeker. Victus ratio.
Let the diet be such as may defend that the pain come not, and let it be
such, as is not very hot nor cold. Also eschew all sharp, sower and viscous
things. Also often using of milk does marvelously hurt the teeth, labor
diligently to purify the teeth. Curatio.
The meats must be of good juice, and easy to digest. For the cure, if it
come of cold it is good to wash the teeth with warm wine. Let the cheeks be
anointed outward with warm oiles of cammomill, rewe, ireos, and such like.
Also to wash the mouth, sees in vinigre, If it come of heat.
origan, calamint, hysope, penyroyall, sauory, the root of veruaine and such
like. If the teeth does ache through heat, you must sees in vinigre, purslaine,
paretarie, singreene the less, and lycorice: But if the heat be intolerable,
you must use the seeds of lettuce, endive, and poppie sodden in vinigre.
Without you must anoint against the grief with cold oiles, of roses, water
lillies, and such like. Moreover if the pain be caused through flowing of
humors, If of flowing^ of humors.
if age, time of the year, and other things will suffer it, and if the body be
also full of blood, it is good to cut the Cephalica vain or mediae on the same
side, that there grief is. That done cut the vain under the tongue, or fasten
cupping glasses to the shoulders. If one on lie corrupt humor does abound,
then use convenient medicines to purg that humor. For the same purpose
clisters are very good. The whole body being emptied, you must minister those
medicines that do repress and stop, as juice of plaintain* roses, purcelain,
both the endiues, either take the decoction of the aforsaid things, or there
waters distilled and mixed with a little vinigre. It is only good to wash the
aching with hot sharp vinigre, with unripe gales. or this.. the root of
he^ban..j. pellitory..ss. staves acre..ij. galingale..ss. Ca^phore.ij.
alome..j. honey..ij. let all be bruised, and boil all in viniger. lb.j. Rose
water..vj wash the teeth with this e^h morning, and it will preserve the
teeth, and keep them from pain. But if it come of extreme cold, then use
specially this medciine.. Pepper, pellitorie, melilote. ana..j. staves
acre..ss. bruise them and put the powder into a linen cloth, If it come of cold.
and lay it on the aching teeth, and keep it there a quarter of an hour, and
it will cease the pain. Also (as is said before) to wash the teeth with warm
wine, is very good.

CAP. XLVI. Of teeth that be black and loose. DE DENTIBVS DENIGRATIS,
LIVENTIBVSQVE ET MOLLIBVS.
SOMETIME the teeth be swarte and black throughout there substance not unlike a
certain inflammation of the patientes, through flowing of vicious humors the
teeth be lose, sometime through a stripe or fall, Causae.
sometime through flowing of moistenes, which loses the senowes and
ligamentes, and makes the teeth loose, or else gnawing, and weakness of the
gummes in the which the teeth ar set, causes them to be loose. The cure of
vicious humors must be begone by purging. Curatio.
Afterward if the teeth be swart or rustie: you must divide the corrupt
humors, which flow to the teeth with drying medicinnes, as is licium,
frankensense, mintes, galls, mastick, mirrhe, nigella, and such like. Among
many other this is very good.. nigella, mirrhe, frankensense. ana..j. mastike,
white pepper. ana..ij. pistolochiae..j. roch alome..j. beat them into powder,
and rubb the teeth therewith: or commix them with venice Terebenthin and anoint
them therewith. The corrupt humors being consumed, ^
use dentrifices which have virtue to scour and dry, as this is.. nitrum, roch
alome, hearts horn burnt. ana..j. (...)..j. the root of trees illiricae,
frankensense, dry mints. ana,.j.ss. common salt burnt, pistolochi^. ana..j.
purnish (...) sepiae. ana..j.ss. pepper, pellitorre, dry penyroiall. ana..ss.
beat them (...) scarce them all and with this powder rub the teeth daily. For
teeth that be loose, you may apply such medicines, as restrain and strenghten
loose gummes, and fasten them. ^
Therefore collusions of the mouth of decoctions of restrictiue things do
perfitte, as is this.. redd ros^^ ^^^tes, plaintaine, ana. M.ss. the barks of
Cipresse nuttes..j. seed of mirtells sum^che. ana..ss. pomegranat rindes,
galls. ana..ij. accacia..ij. sees them all in read restrictiue wine, ^
and with that often wash the mouth. The mouth being washed it is laufull to
use this dentrisicium.. Galls, the rindes of sweet pomgranates. ana..j.
balaus^^um, sumache, Dentri^^^^um
mirhe. ana..j. red roses, sanguis draconis, calyculorum glandium. ana..j.
frankensense, hearts h^rn burnt ana..^.ss. powder all, and scarce them, and rub
the teeth therewith. or this is maruelouse good.. Balaustium. nutmegges. ana.,
iij., roch alome,.j.ss. powder them and mix them with honey..ij.ss. and
incorporate them well together. and with this anoint the teeth twice or thrice
in the day.

CAP XLVII. Of ulcers in the mouth. DE APHTHIS.
THE ulcers which are bredde, in the ouermost part of the mouth and have a
certain burning heat, in greek they are called Apthae and of the barbarous sort
alcola, Some be whitish, and some reddishe, and some blackish, (...).
and these be most perrilous of all other. They engender for the most part in
infants and sucking chilcren, when either the nurses milk is naught, or the
child cannot well dgiest it. Also they chance sometime to them that be of
perfect age, as well through great flux of vicious and corrupt humors to the
mouth, as also through sharpness of those things that are eaten and dronken,
The tokens ar easy, Signa.
because they be known by sight and feeling if you touch it, the places will
seem hoter then they ought to be, and there is swelling. They which be redd,
do show blood to have the mastery. Yealownes signifies bitter choler: whitnes,
fleume: blaknes, melancholy. They which cha^uce to children, Curatio infa^^^^.
may easily be cured by those things that do meanly restrain. And you must
give them chiefly in there meats, some quynces, and other sharp things,
pears, and mespilers, vid. medlers or open arses. Sometime also you must
commix with there meat some lettuce, endive, and purslain. If there be
inflammation of the ulcers, then take the juice of purcelain, lettuce and
nightshade, the powder of alome, and wash the mouth with a fine cloth, or with
a sering, and if the child ca^ take no meat, the^ the nurse must use the same
kind of diet. Also the decoction of galls balaustium, saunders, Sumache,
acacia, and such like, commixed with Roberibes or Diamoron applied, Cure of
them that be of perfect age.
as before is taught. In them that be of perfect age only the nature of the
body is to be considered, whether it be soft or moist, or hard or dry. For in
hard and strong bodies you must minister strong medycines. In weak and soft
bodies, gentle medicines. For the diet therefore in such ages, they must eschew
all things, that be sharp and salt, Victus ratio.
and that engender corrupt juice. For the cure in fulness of the body, if
nothing do let it, Curatio.
first cut the Caephalica vain, and then those veins under the tongue. If the
body be full of ill juice, you must minister a purgation against the corrupt
humors. the body being purged, apply medicines which have virtue to restrain
and stop. Moderate remedies against ulcers be these, as sumache, roses,
Balaustium dissolved in wine or mulsa. But if the exulcerations begin to
putrify, this decoction is very profitable.. fellerd leaves of sage, hysope,
rewe, penyroiall, chamomill, wood bind, knottgrasse, bursapastria, bryer
leaves. ana, M.ss. wash them cleene, and boil all in.ij. lb.ss. of good ale
or beer, and put therein three or four sponefull of honey, alome..ij. let it
sees to the consumption of half then strayn it, and wash the mouth there
with.4. or 5. times in a day. But if the ulcers be more running and gnawing,
annoint the place with vnguentum Aegiptiacum, mixed with mel rosarum or such
like.

CAP. XLVIII. Of a stinking mouth. DE FOETORE ORIS.
Causae.
THERE is grievous and stinking savor of the mouth caused for the most part
through putrefaction of the gummes or teeth, or through meat sticking still in
the teeth. Many times it comes through hot distempure of the skin of the
mouth: sometime also through corrupt and rotten humors, sticking in the mouth
of the stomach: It chances also many times that exulceration of the mouth or
lunges, Signa.
does hurt the breath of the mouth or lunges. If stinking of the mouth chance
through putrefactinon either of the gumms, or teeth, or of meat sticking in the
teeth: it is soon known either by sight or by the patients tale. If it be
caused of a hot distempure of the mouth, then heat is felt in the mouth, and
thirst troubles him. If through vice of the stomak, then the breath of the
mouth is more grievous, and stinking before meat then after meat, vlcerations
of the lunges are known by extenuacion of the body, and by coughing. Victus
ratio.
In the diet the patient must avoid all things that do readily engender
corruption in the mouth or stomache, as is, milk, fish, almost all fruits,
marowe, fat, naughty water, and such like. Let the meats therefore which they
use, be of good juice, and easy to digest: but they must use meats rather
roste then sodden: In the end of dinner and supper they may eat pears,
Curatio.
quinces, and such like, especially if the stinking savor come from the mouth
of the stomach. Let the^ eschew sleeping by and by after meat. If stincke of
the mouth come through corruption of the gummes or teeth, if there be fulness of
the body: First draw blood out of the Caephalica vain, and then fasten
cupping glasses to the neck. But if the body be full of evil juice, purge the
humor that does abound with a convenient medicine: the body being purged, use
out ward medicines specially collutions and washings, which in this case seem
to be maruelouse good as this is.. redd roses, plaintain, knotgrasse. ana.
M.j.ss. galls, pomegarnet flours, cipresse nuttes. ana..ij. rindes of
pomegarnetes..ss. roche alome..j. sees these in just quantity of water unto
the third part, and in the juice of the decoction being strained, comixe mel
rosarum, diacarion,.ana..ss. diamoron..iij. comixe them all and make a
collution, Collu^io oris.
with the which wash the gummes and the teeth every morning, and evening. Also
often washing with water mixed with viniger in the morning and by and by after
meat, is good. If the stinck in the mouth be without exulceratio^, minister
the root of ireos steeped in old odoriferous wine, and wash the teeth often
withal. Also it is good to hold it in the mouth. Also mirrhe steeped in pure
wine minister to wash the teeth. Also it is very good to chewe pellitorie,
Tamariscus and rewe. Likewise collution of vinegar squilliticke, or decoction
of sage, or only wine. Also decoction of mintes in vinegar and water helps,
if the mouth be often washed with it. This causes sweet breath, For sweet
breath.
and makes the teethe white.. white salt, pumises, origa^. ana..ij. root of
Ireos..j. flours of sqinnance..ss. beat them all and commix them and rub the
teeth therewith. If stink of the mouth come of a hot distempure cure it with
contrary medicines. But if it come of a corrupt humor in the mouth of the
stomach, it is healed by those things which do purge that humor. Those things
mhich be contained in the mouth of the stomach may well be brought out by a
vomit. How you shall provoke vomit, it is declared in many places before.
Vomitus.
After this minister medicines which do strenghthen the stomach, as is,
Axomaticum rosaceum, Diambar, hydromalum, and such like medicines, which be
good in all causes, as be cloves, Masticke, Mace, wood of Aloes, Cynamon,
roses, all the Saunders, Nutmegges, Quibibes, Yreos, and other of that like
sort.

THESE suffice. AND how many evils so ever there be of the head, whose cure
is not expressly named by me in this book: yet you may find out medicines to
cure them by that which is declared in this Book.

Libri primi finis.
The Second Book.
CAP I. Against the inflammation of the Columella. DE COLVMELLAE INFLAMMATIONE.
THERE chances in the throat many dangerous inflamacions (as Hippocrates
writes in his Prognosticis) and first of this Columella appears a certain
fleshie piece, hanging in the upper part of the mouth. If one do gape wide,
and hold down his tongue, it may be seen By old time it was called Gurgulio,
Gurgulio
now it is called Columella. It is often vexed with inflammations, which is
caused through blood, and other humors which descend out of the head. The
disease may be known by sight. Signa.
Also there chances in it, difficulty in swallowing pain, swelling, redness
of the Columella, and a fever. The diet in a manner must be such as is
ordained in other inflammations, Victus ratio*
and specially quietness, rest, silence, and hunger are good, and to eat little,
or nothing at supper. For the cure, if there be fulness of the body, you must
begin with bloudletting, Curatio. Venae sectio.
and first you must cut the Cephalica vain in the arm, and afterward the vain
under the tongue. Also the belly must be purged by clisters, so that by that
means not only the belly may be soluble, but also that the flowing of humors
to the grief may be taken away. Also for the same purpose you may fasten
cupping glastes to the shoulders. Cuturhi^ulae.
Neither must we let pass the remedies which are good to repress and stopp
flux of humors. For as they do in all other diseases caused of the flux of
humors; so in this behalf for there first remedy they stop the flux of
humors. Therefore such remedies must be of a restrictiue nature and faculty.
If that the flux of humors be moderate, minister things which restrain
moderatly, as these be which be called sour. But if it be more vehement, add
to it sharp things, for both be restrictiue, but sour be weak, and sharp
things strong, as Galen does say in his fourth book of the virtues of simple
medicines. cap. 6. and 7. Therefore use collutions made of those things, as if
they should be moderate, sees dates sometime in water alone, and sometime with
a little honey put to them. Likewise make decoctions of roses, wine buddes,
brambles, cipresse, the first buddes of pomgarnet flowers, siligna, roots of
mulbery, sour apples, and sorbus. Those be stronger then these, which be made
of the decoction of mittells, and there bearies. Also of sharp quinces, and
young buddes of oak, or the maste of oak, also of meddlers, and a fruit called
Cornus. The best collutions ar made of galls, Sumach acatia, and the flowers
of both the pomgarnettes, and their shelles. Among compound medicines this does
help wonderfully. Gargarismus.
. the distilled waters of roses, plantaine, sorrel, prunella, solani. ana..ij.
Diamoron succi medicati eribes. ana..ss. succi medicati ex exiochanta..ij.ss.
vinegar wherein sumach is steeped..j. juice of pomgarnettes..ss. comixe them
together, and with it wash the mouth Another of the same virtue. Alia.
. red roses, brambles. ana. M.j. pomegarnat flowers and the shells, galls,
maste of oak. ana..iij. sumach, hipocischidis, acatia. ana..ij. seeds of
sorrel, and quinces. ana,.j. sees them in. lb.j. of well water, until half
remain. the decoction being-strained, put to it of diamoron..j. succi medicati
eribes, diacarion. ana..ij.ss. vinegar..vj. co^mixe them all, and make a
gargarisme. You must use these medicines in the beginning of the disease, and
especially when the grief has not the greatest cause: nor when the body of
the sick is much stopped with humors, nor when the aggreaued place is weak
through the nature of the impostume. But if it chance so (as it does often in
the beginning, and often somewhat aftter) that is, the third day: you must
commixe some of the dicussiue medicines, as is line seeds, fenugreeke,
mallows, root of Ireos, and honey. Moreover of what sort so ever the medicines
be, minister them warm: for those that labor of inflammation, may suffer no
cold. After the vigor of it, you may safely minister discussiues, unless the
Columella begin to wax hard: for them you must minister mollefiing medicines
(that is) lineseed, fenugreeke, mallows, Altheae tragaganthum, and such like,
of the which you may make gargarismes. After that use discussiues (as is)
hisope, figs, licorice, decoct together. If it draw toward rotting, which may
be perceued by his color, and does not break alone by collutions of Mulsa,
and Oximel scilliticum, then open it with some instrument. After the breaking
and bursting out of the matter, let him use medicines clensing, abstersive and
glutinatiue, especially the juice of enpatorie, and such like.

CAP. II. Of a loose Columella DE LAXATA COLVMELLA.
OFtentimes it chances that a loose Columella does hang upon the roots of the
tou^g and iaws. Of some it is called the viula Wherefore in the beginning you must
use such kind of cure, as the inflammation thereof requires. In the beginning
the body and the head must be purged by medicines spoken of in the former
chapter. Which being done you must make collutions and gargarismes of such
things as do restrain and dry: after this sort.. red roses, sorrel,
enpatorie^ ana. M.j. gallacum..ij. Alome..j. mirrhe, frankensense. ana..ss.
flax seed..j.ss. sees them in water, to the third part, Gargarismus.
and add to the juice of that decoction strained of good..ss. and make a
gargarisme. Also pouders do profit being blown in with an instrument for the
purpose: as this is.. dry roses, galls, roch alome. ana..j.ss. pepper* ginger,
ana..ss. mirrhe..j. bray it and searce it, and put it up as before. Also take
green nuttes and dry them, and date stones burned sufficiently, take of each
of them equal portions, powder them and use them as the other. Also unripe
galls soliarmoniacke. ana..j. do likewise. If the Columella must needs be
cut, it is good to empty the belly first, lest the sick be strangled. When the
Columella is cut out, bow his head dounward, lest the blood run inward, And
afterward wash his mouth with the decoction of sumach acatia galls, putting to
it rosewater and vinegar. Afterward minister things to heal it up.

CAP III Of inflammacion of the tonsilles DE T0NSILLARVM INFLAMMATIONE.
TONSILLae be infla^mations of those things which lie between the mouth and
the throat, some do call them Amigdalae, (that is) Almondes. Those tonsils
oftentimes be inflamed: For their places be hot and moiste, Causae.
They are most vexed with this evil, which have abundance of blood, and
children and infants which do suck, through drawing of the milk. Also it
chances often to men and weomen through drinking of strong wines, and through
much greedy devouring of meat, specially if they be eagre and sharp. Signa.
They that be so afflicted have difficulty in swallowing, and pain, and also
sometime a fever. Therefore the inflammation beginning you must take away
meat, and minister to him water to drinck, Victus ratio^
or water wherein a little Cinnamon has been sodden, specially if there be a
fever. Let the whole diet be so ordered, as it it in other inflammations. Let
his meats be soupinges, for otherwise he cannot swallowe it. Curatio.
For the cure, if the inflammation be light, you must use gargarismes,
restrictiues, such as be taken in the beginning of an inflamed Columella. But
you must beware in the beginning, that you put no honey to the gargarismes, for
it has a sharpnes in it. If that the inflammation be vehement, so that he be
in peril of choking: you must cut the Caephalica vain in the arm on the same
side. Venesecti^.
And if the belly be not soluble enough, cast in a clyster. You must provoke
childrens bellies by putting in a suppositary, and by anointing the tuel.
After purging you must use restrictiue medicines, until the vigor of the
disease be ceased something. All these things (as we admonished before) must be
ministered warm. Outwardly it is best to nourishe it with sponges, laid gently
to it. Also lay to it plasters made of barley meal, seeds of flax, fenugreke,
and such like. The inflammation declining and waxing less: it is good to put
in honey into your gargarismes, which in the beginning and increasing you may
not do, least the sharpnes which is in it, do increase flux. Also at this time
hotter gargarismes do profit. Outwardly you must put about the neck, soft woll
dipped in oil, and if that by using of sharp collutions, or gargarismes, the
inflammations be incresed, and biting and gnawing come thereby: you must use
gentler, as is juice of ptisan: Also gargaryz warm milk. When the
inflammation and pain cease, anoint with the aforsaid remedies of the
mouth, putting it in with your finger: so that by gentle anointing, the parts
of the tonsilles which are swelled, may be thrusted, whereby they may put out
the matter contained in them. But yet you may not thrust hard, as many use to
do, whereby they cause the inflammation to be augmented. And therefore if by that
means any hurt do chance: we must be content with ministering gentle
gargarismes without any anointing. If that by ministering the remedies
aforesaid, Signs of suppuration.
the grief be not eased, then look for rotting of it, which you may know by
increasing of the inflammation, and by sharp exulcerations, exacerbations, and
gnawinges in the evening when you look for suppuration and rotting, you must
help that it may quickly come to pass: therefore then you must minister hotter
gargarismes, as is aqua mulsa, and decoction of figs, hysope, and seed of
Althaea. Outwardly lay plasters of barley meal and fengreeke, with decoction
of figs, Althaea, and honey. When it is perfectly rotten, the pain will
diminish, and the swelling and inflammation will be made softer, so that it will
give place to the finger. Then you must minister sharp collutions, that they
may break the botche. In meats he must take great gobbettes of bread steeped
in water, and likewise his meat must be eaten in lumpes: for vehement rouling
of it up and down about the tonsils will break the botches, as well as if
they were cut. But if the patient will not do it, then open it with some fine
instrument for the purpose. And after it is broken, let the sick bow his head
downward, that the matter may the better run out. And let him gargaryze aqua
mulsa alone, and afterward commixe with it decoction of lintels and roses. And
with these you must tarry, until it be healed.

CAP. IIII. Of malignant ulcers of the tonsilles. DE SERPENTIBVS ET MALIGNIS
TONSILLARVM VLCERIBVS.
THERE begin malignant ulcers of the tonsiles, sometime with a flux of them
going before: sometime they are caused of an accustomed inflammation being
augmented. Causae.
They chance often to children, and also to them of perfect age, especially to
those which abou^d with vicious humors. They chance to children after the
Apthis in the mouth. Signa.
In color they be like to skurfes, which are burnt with iron. Also there
chances to the sick drynes in swallowing, and often choking, especially when
rednes is under the chinne. If gnawing and sharpnes of humors has gone
before, there follows putrefaction. You must proceed in the cure speedely,
Curatio.
and if he be of perfect age, and no other thing forbidding it, it is good to
cut the Caephalica vein in the arm, or if that appear not, the middle vein.
If they be maids, whom, at perfect age, for lack of purgation of menstruis,
this disease does often infect: then in them you must cut the Saphena vain,
letting blood but once only, and yet at that time, not till the heart fail,
least after it, virtue be destroyed by over much flux of menstruis.
Furthermore the belly must be emptied by clysters, suppositaries, and by
anointing of the tuell. And you must labor by all means to turn the humor
from the aggreiued place: for the which purpose fasten cupping glasses nigh to
the loins, and use to bind the extremities as the hands and feet. Afterward
it is good to use gargarismes, declared before in the chapter of Columella, and
in the chapter following. After the beginning of the sickness, minister
Diamoron, or a collution mixed with Mulsa, then also decoction of Ireos, and
other things rehearsed in the abouesaid places. We must take heed, that we
touch not the vlcerate tonsils with our finger, not so much as to touch it
softly. For the unskillful, to whom with great error men do seek in doubtful
matters: they do annoy it vehemently, also they do thrust the aggreiued place,
and pull always the scabbe or roue, which they ought not to do, before they see
the rooue lifted up, and scarce cleaving to the sore. For if we intend to pull
away the scabbe, whils it sticks fast, the vlceration will pearce more deep,
and inflammation will follow, and the pain will increase, and they will come
to venomous ulcers. Therefore it is good to blow in dry remedies, and to
anoint liquid things with a feather. Dogs doung mixed with honey and
anointed, takes away the rooues maruellously, which will be the better, if the
dog be fed only with bones two days before. It helps greatly, nether has
it any vnsauorines being ministered in meats. Also the ashes of swallows
burnt, and the ashes of Centory minor burnt, with honey mixed is good. After the
irritations and chasinges made by medicines, you must appease it with decoction
of lycorice, and with a gargarisme, which is made of masticke, mirrhe,
Tracaganthum, amylum and saffron, Gargarisme
ministering also, while the ulcer feeds, milk mixed with terra lemnia to
gargarise. What need many words? You must be diligent and careful, specially
in clensing and purging the ulcers. Many infantes do suffer the crampe in
purging of the ulcers. Some be strangled, because the way of swallowing is
dried up. It is good to apply outwardly fomentes, and emplaisters, with taking
heed, least we do cool it. For the cure will prosper, if the matter, that is
holden within, can be drawn outward. Therefore always after the taking of the
plasters away, cover the parts that be about the chinn, by laying upon it
soft woll, sprincled with oleum nardinum. To conclude, when the skurfes are
loosened, and the ulcers purged, use this remedy following.. flours of red
roses..iij. saffron..j.ss. Balaustiae..ss. mirrhe..j. pyne nuttes made
clean..ij. Amyli..j. Sumach, roch alome, ana..j.ss. beat them, commixe them
with honey, and use to annoint it three times on the day.

CAP. V. Of the Squinnancie. DE ANGINA.
ANGINA in latin, squinancie in english, But in greek Sinanchi. Genesis 4.
It is properly an inflamacion which is in the throat, or in the jaws. There be
four kinds of squinances, one is, when the iaws be inflamed: (by the jaws, I
mean, the place, where the ends of the weasand, and the trachaea arteria do
agree). Another Causae. Signa.
It is known by these signs the breath is drawn very hardly, and not without
the neck be holden right, and there is difficulty in swallowing. Curatio.
Also in some, a fever, rednes of the face and neck. There chances also in
many, swelling: the sick yauneth with open mouth, and draws breath.
Therefore in the beginning every squynance requires a hasty and speedy
remedy. Wherefore you must by and by cut the outward vein on the same side of
the shoulders, Venae (...) sectio
except some greater peril do let it: but you must take away the blood by
little and little, at many times, and not all at once; for the blood being taken
away altogether on heaps, the heart soon fails and so the peril of choking
comes upon him. And moreover also the refrigeration and fainting of the heart,
the matter is quickly carried from the ^awes to the lunges, and so bring
inevitable peril. Take heed also that there be little diduction of the vein,
for thereof comes much failing of the mind, and yet it is not good to make a
narrow incision of the vain, lest the blood be as it were strained, and the
grosser part remains within still, which is the cause of this disease. It is
profitable to them to have the blood drawn out again the next day, unless
the swelling of the disease let it, or faintnes of the heart. If the sick be a
woman, cut the vain on the anckles, specially if the menstruis be stopped, and
the blood must be drawn out moderatlie. Venerum lingue sect^o. ^^y^ier.
If by these he be but little eased, then is it good to cut those veins which
be under the tongue and that by and by, at the first or the second day. And if
there be any thing that forbids blood letting, the belie must be emptied
with a sharp clister, such as is described in the chap. of apoplexia. After
vniuserall euacuations, you must fasten one cupping glasses; and if there be
swelling about the cheeks, or under the chinne, it is good to fasten cupping
glasses to the swelling, and with sacrification to draw out much blood. Also
to strew salt upon the scarrif^ing and to rubb it. Con^urbi^^^^.
And if there appear no swelling outward, you must fasten a cupping glass
behind in the neck, near to the shutting of the first joint, and you must use
it with constant attraction, pulling away the glass often. Also the humors
must be turned away, Aue^sio (...).
least they flow to the place which is agreaued and inflamed. For the which
purpose, you must bath the feet with hot water. Also bind and rubb the hands
and feet strongly. The neck must be covered with wool that is moist, or that
is dipped in warm oil. also by and by (at the beginning) you must use
gargarizes, which do neither vehemently drive back nor yet only discuss: For
those which do altogether repel, and drive back they bring peril of choking,
by thrusting humors to the lunges. Those which be only discussiue, they draw
more then is meet by reason of there heat. Therefore when the beginning is with
much inflammation, you must minister those things, which do restrain gently, as
is decoction of roses, lintels, and dates, or else restrictiue gargarismes
declared before in the cap. De Columellae inflamatione commixing some
discussiue medicines with it. of that sort ar roses or sumach sodden with aqua
mulsa, and decoction of Sebesten. When the disease is at his strength and
stands: you must use those things which have discussiue virtue only in them,
as is decoction of fenugreeke, figes, raisons, licorice or stronger things, as
the root of ireos hisope, nigella, sothernwood with oximel. Therefore it
shallbe lawful at this time to use a gargarisme made thus.. of licorice
scraped..j. raisons..ss. dry figes in number. 6. fenugreeke..ij. hisope,
sothernwood. ana. M.ss. sees them in one pound of well water, till half be
consumed: then put into the licour of that decoction being strained of mel
rosarum..j.ss. oximel simplex..j. commixe them all and make a gargarisme. Also
doges dounge, such as is found amongst herbs, Gargarismus.
and is very white in color, being beaten and finely searced, and mixed with
honey, is a most excellent medicine, being ministered like a lohoch, that they
may swallow it very softely. Likewise the ashes of swallows burnt, is very
effectual being so mixed with honey. Moreover to the neck without, you must
apply those plasters in them which be vexed with inflamacion which can concoct
and discuss, as this is.. the meal of line seed, Cataplasma^a.
fenugreeke, and barley. ana..j. seeds of althaea,.iij. mallows, flowers of
cammomill and melilote. ana. M.j. sees them in water until they wax soft,
then sta^p them in a mortar, and make a soft plaster. or put to it oiles of
cammomill, and lillies, ana.j.ss. and being boiled again, make an emplaister.
Neither shall it be unprofitable, if the neck be anointed with oiles of
cammomill, dill, and lillies, or fomented with decoction of fenugreeke,
melilote, and cammomill. They which are vexed with the squinancy, let the^
use.iij. days aqua mulsa for there drink. Po^us.
Afterward juice of ptisan by it self, or with some sweet potion, for that
juice has virtue to extenuate discuss, nourishe, and to cool. When the
inflammation is somewhat flaked, and the sick begins to swallowe better:
give to him the yolks of rere eggs, and soupings made of Alica. To conclude the
eating of the sick, Cibus.
and his meats must be according to his stre^ght: therefore he must eschew
overmuch feeding. Sleep must especially be eschewed as well in the squinancy as
in all other infla^mations. For in sleep (as Hippocrates says) the blood
creeps within, and the flowing of humors to the grieved place, does encrese
more

CAP VI Of the coughe. DE TVSSI.
THERE be diverse causes of the cough. For as Galen says. 1. lib. 2. de
simpt^. causis. Cold distempure of the instruments of brething causes the
cough. Causae.
Also a humor distilling from the head to the Trachaea arteria, and sharpness
only trachaea arteria going about within, does provoke the trachaea arteria.
Signa.
The signs of coughing caused only through cold distempure of the instruments
of respiration and breathing are that those which be so afflicted, they spitt
out nothing while they cough, nor the cough is not violent nor constraining:
but it is so small, that not only it may be suppressed by holding the breath:
but also unless it be very great, it maybe healed, because through stopping of
the breath, the parts vexed with cold, do wax hot. Moreover they which are
vexed with this kind of coughe, they are more provoked to it by often fetching
of there breath, because the cold thereby is increased, and made more stronger.
Therefore if they breath, and fetch there wind easily, and be also in a warm
house, they cough little or nothing at all. They be pale of face, and not
thirsty, they are grieved with cold things, and are best with hot things.
The coughes which chance with tikling of the parts on either side of the
palate, they do openly show a flowing humor, coming from the head to trachaea
arteria: and to the lunges which you may well know by difficulty of breathing
that follows. And if that they which be thus afflicted do spit out nothing,
it declares it to be a thin reume, which being cut of by expulsion of
breath, it is carried no further by reason o^ his thinnes, but the flowing of it
returns again. The diet is diverse, according to the diversity of causes: for
if the cough be caused of cold distempure, ocupying the instruments of
breathing: you must eschew, aier, wind, Victus ratio.
and also cold meat and drinck: but if the cough be caused through humors
distilling from the head: let the diet be such as is described before in the
cap. of distillation. But universally they which have the coughe, must eschew
salt things, sharp things, and whatsoever would exasperate the trachaea
arteria. The cough that is caused through cold of the instruments of
breathing, shall be cured by remedies that can make them hot. Cure of the cough
caused of cold distempure.
Therefore let the neck be wrapped about with warm woll, and let him breath
seeldome, because that stopping of the breath (as is said before) does not only
let the cough, but also ofte^tims it heleth it. Therefore it is good to have the
sick co^uersant in a hot house, and let him breath very softely. Also let the
breast be fomented with hot ointments, as is oiles of ireos, lillies and dill.
If a humor that is thin and sharp, Cure of the cough caused of thin and
sharp humors
flowing out of the head to the trachaea arteria and the breast, do cause a
cough: then it shall be healed specially by meats of good juice, and by
medicines which do cool, thicken, temper, and stop sharpness and inordacitie.
For which purpose it is good to minister strupes of violettes of Nimphaea, of
poppie, the antidote Diatragacantha, diapenidion sieve speicebus, pilula
^echicae, and such like. Among all other this loche is excellent good..
Diatragacantha, diapenidion sieve speciebus. ana..vj. juice of licorice..ij.
pilulae h^chicae..j. storax calamint..ss. mirrhe, dry roses. ana..j.
tragacanthe, Ecligma.
pine nutts. ana..ss. sirupe of violettes, as much as shall suffice to commix
them and make an Ecligma. Also for that purpose it is good to minister those
medicines which are spoken of before in the cap. of distillations. Cure of the
cough caused of gross and viscous humors. Decoctio.
But if a grievous and viscous humor be cause of the cough, we shall cure it
by those things which do divide and extenuat. Therefore then we must minister
to the sick sirupes of lycorice, hisope, horehound, calamint and such like, or
else this decoction.. roots, ireos, percely, lycorice. ana..j. roots of Ella
campana..ss. dry figs in number vij. of raisons the stones picked out..j.
seeds of nettell, annise and fennel. ana..ij. hisope, maide^-heare, scabias
and horehound. ana. M.j.ss. the best agarick..iij. Sees them all in well water
of just quantity, till the third part be consumed, then strain it, and to the
juice of that decoction put sirup, and hisope of horehound, ana..ij.ss. and
make a potion. Afterward if it seem convenient by the state of the patient,
you must empty the body with those medicines which do purge gross and clamme
humors. Purgatio.
And among other spoken of in the first book, Infusio agarici.
the infusion of Agaricke is very good: which is made after this sort.. of
elect agarick..ij. ginger..j. salt gemme..iij. beat them and infuse them one
night in.ij of odorife rous white wine, water of wormwood and fennel. ana..j.
In the morning strain it and wring it, and put to it Electuarium nidi
maioris..ij.ss. Oximel squilliticum..ss. and make a potion. The body being
purged, let him have a loch sometime commixed with other antidotes: Ecligma.
after this sort.. Loch, epino, loch saniet experti, Loch e scilla. ana..iij.
Diayreos Salomonis.j. powder of Diapenidion cum speciebus..j. powder of the
roots of Enula and ireos. ana..ij.ss. juice of Lycorice..j.ss. sirupe of
horehound, as much as shall suffice, to commixe them. Moreover the breast must
be anointed outwardly with hot oiles of lillies, Ireos and sweet Almondes,
putting to them grease and other things after this sort.. oiles of lillies and
sweet Almondes. ana..iij. of hens grease..j.ss. fresh butter..ij. the
muscelage of fenugreek and roots of Althaea. ana..j.ss. storax..ss. powder of
the roots of Enula and Ireos. ana..j. safrone.j. white wax as much as is
sufficient, Vnguentum.
make an ointment. The residue that is requisite for the cure of the cough, are
to be sought in the chapter of distillation.

CAP. VII. Of the Asthma. DE ASTHMATE.
Causae.
THE Asthma is caused when as gross and clammy humors be gotten in
abundantly into the gristells or lappetes of the loungs, or that there be
some swelling in it, like unto a botch. Also they do breath difficultlie,
weereby the Trachaea arteria is repleat and filled with distillations. Signa.
These evils are easy to be known a sunder. For distillation does also
chance in hailefolke by and by through as manifest a cause in a manner
altogether without a fever, having the tokens of a distillation following it.
If there be swelling of the loungs like a botche, there must needs follow a
fever, and so within few days after, the inflammation being rotted the
matter of it is cast out with the coughe. If there be a crude and raw tubercle
and botch engendered, such do not feel any great grief, nether are they much
troubled, with difficulty of breathing: but they are much troubled, when they
eat or drink, because they cannot swallowe but with much grief. Those which
be properly astamatickes, or orthopnickes, they have no fever at all, and
there chances to them heaviness of sense, and they do not spitt out matter
with their spittle. Let their diet be altogether hot and dry, therefore he
must eschew air cold and moist. Victus ratio.
He must eat the flesh of partriches, birds of the mountains, hens,
capons, and such like. He must eschew fishes, fruicte, pulse, and all other
things, that can engender gross and clammy humors. Let him use often hysope,
percely, and fennel. Universally let him drink a small quantity at once,
which have a botch risen, but much drink must be used of those, whose
gristles and flappes of the lunges are stopped with gross and clammy humors,
which are not easy to be cast out with the spittle because of there thickenes,
and therefore they have need of much moistening, that it may come out the
easilier. He must use exercise before meat, but not sudanely by and by because
many by these means are dead. Frictions and rubbinges of the breast do profit.
Perturbations of the mind, especially, wrath and lamentation are to be
eschewed. But for the cure of the aforsaid evils generally, you must labor
that the abundance of that humor, which engenders these evils, may be
abolished and consumed. Curatio.
But before the cure of the evils particularly, if the evil be engendered of
gross and clammy humors, you must cure it by extenuating and clensing
medicines. If it come of swelling like a botche, you must cure it by
extenuating and drying medicines. Against gross and viscous humors, those
medicines be good, which do extenuate and scour without heat vehement, Note.
for gross and viscous humors do vex more toughe and clammy as well with
vehement heat as they do with cold, so that afterward they can scarce be
deuidid and plucked away. Therefore Oximell squilliticum or squilla roasted and
brayed with honey is especially to be ministered unto them. Also Syrupes of
lycorace, horehound, and hysope; Also the decoction rehearsed in the last
chapter before is good for purging. If necessity require, before all things
cut the middle vain in the arm, or the inner vain, and draw out so much
blood as strength will suffer. But if the body be not full, (the humor being
preparate to purging by the premises) you must minister often stronger
medicines, which may drive out the gross and clammy humors. Therefore pills
of Agaricke, and pilulae cochiae, also Diaturbith with Rewbarbe, antidotum
indi, and diaphaenicon are good for this purpose. Also minister the infusion of
Agaricke described before in the last chapter. Also the belly must be washed
with strong clisters. Clyster.
Also he must vomit now and then, by taking of radish and other things which
provoke vomitte, of the which we have spoken in the first book of
melancholiousnes. But in the mean season while purgations be ministered, you
must minister medicines which can dissolve and extenuate humors contained in
the breast by little and little, and he must take Aristolochia rotunda, the
roots of Enula and Ireos, nettleseede, hysope, nigella, calamynt and such
like. Where with you may make decoctions or loches. For which purpose also
those Ecligmata,, which are rehearsed in the chapter of the coughe, are good.
Also Trochischi Becci^albi be most excellent. Outwardly you must lay to the
breast, plasters made of figs, barley meal, or rather meal of fitches,
having rosen, honey, and wax commixed with it. Also apply to the breast of
Ireos, Vnguentum.
dill, rewe, and such like, as is this.. oils of dill and rue. ana..ss. the
grease of hens and duckes. ana..ij. the roots of Ireos, Enula, and Dracontij
maioris. ana..j. seed of flax..ij. Storax..iij. wax as much as is
sufficient, make an ointment. But the breast must first of all be rubbed with a
rough linen cloth, that (the poores being opned and unlocked the strength of
the medicine may more readily pearce to the bottom. Also you must use those
medicines which can exulcerat the skin, and can draw out matter and watterye
humors: as those be which are named rubefacientia. Rubefacientia
For this purpose the breast must be rubbed with nettles, brayed or beaten. The
places that are blistered are to be cured with warm oil. But in an inueterat
evil, and where all medicines are ministered in vain, we must fly to burning,
as Aetius teaches in lib. 8. cap. 57. how it should be done. For the cure of
that which is like a botche, which has need of medicines to attenuate and dry,
(as is said before), Cure of Abse^^us.
you must note that it is cured with Aromaticke things, because they do
extenuate dry and heat. Therefore then you must give unto the Astmatickes
specially Antidotes, co^pounded of these things as is Theriaca, Mithridatum,
Antidotum e moscho dulce, Diambar Aromaticum rosaccum Diamargariton callidum,
and many such other like.

CAP. VIII. Of the Plurisie. DE PLEVRITIDE.
PLEVRISIE, to speak exquisitely and properly, is an inward inflammacion of
the upper skin girding the ribs and the sides. In latin it is called
lateralis dolor. Neither is it rashely added to speak exquisitely and
properly. For through many torments and through meats gross and flegmatike
there do engender humors that be could, crude, gross and viscous in the
body, which often times do place themselves by and by in the void place of
the breast, or in the lounges yt self, and by reason of there multitude, they
stretch out the upper skin, girding the sides within, Causae.
and cause pain. But of this we will speak nothing, because the cure of it
does differ little from the cure of asthma, rehearsed in the last chap. The
plurisie which is an inflammaiont of the upper skin, which girdeth the sides
within, is caused of abundance of hot blood, Signa.
flowing unnaturally to the aforesaid upper skin within. The signs hereof ar
difficulty of breathing, the coughe, a continual fever, vehement pricking
pain, a hard pulse, and sharp like a saw. And if his spittle be read and
bloody, it signifies blood to have dominion, if it be yellow and subpale,
choler has the mastery, if it be white and froathie, fleume rules, if it be
blackish, it betokens black choler to have the mastery or melancholy. The
first two days the sick must be content, with the juice of ptisan for his
meat. Victus ratio.
Afterward make him almonde milk with the decoction of ptisan, or the crummes
of fine bread mixed with the broth of a chicken or cock, specially if the
patient be weak. He must universally eschew all things that be sharp and
restrictiue. Let his drink be water wherein cinnamon is sodden, and let the
patient eschew cold water as a pernicious thing, because it makes the spittle
gross and thick. Also let him eschew wine altogether. Let him lie upon the
side, that is greaued. Let him avoid wrath, sorrow, and other perturbations of
the mind. Curatio.
In the beginning of the cure, the physician must diligently consider, whether
the body of the sick be greaued with abundance of humors or not, so that he
must know at the first, whither the pai^ne does mitigate and dissolve with
heating medicines, and when it does not. For if the body be not full of
humors, then in the beginning of the pleurisy and inflammation the pain must
be mitigated and discussed with fomentes and medicines that do heat. But if
the body do abound with evil humors or be full of blood you may not beginn
the cure with those things that do heat, for they move flux of humors to
the aggreued place, for the place, to the which things that do heat are
laid, draws more to it, then it sends out by vapors again. Therefore
then you must not use hot fomentes which can not dissolve the pain, but all
the body must be emptied by blood letting, Ven^ sectio.
and you must cut the inner vain of the arm, which they call the liuere
vain, or the spleen vain, on that arm which is right against the grief on
the same side. For blood letting on the same side, does not only draw blood
away from the aggreaued part, but also it purges it quickly, which is
greatly requisite in the pleurisite, and in other inward inflammationes. After
blood letting, if the womb do not cast out the excrementes of it self, as it
ought to do, then cast into the belly this easy clister.. mallows, leaves
of purple violetts, mercury, spinach, of both the garden endiues. ana. M.j.
whole barley..j. sees these in just quantity of water, Cl^s^er.
until the third part be consumed: then take of the juice of that decoction.
lb.j. of casia fistula newly drawn..j.ss. of the oiles of cammomill and
violettes ana..j.ss. fresh butter..ss. common salt..j. and commixe them all, to
make a clister. After the body is emptied you must apply outwardly fomentes
that do heat and mitigate pain, Sacculi.
such as sacculi be, which are made of the flowers of Cammomill, dill,
melilote, tapsus barbatus, seed of flax, fenugreeke, milium, and branne mixed
together, the decoctions of the herbs aforesaid being put into bladders, or
some other devises. Also you may well apply a great soft sponge, being dipped in
the aforesaid decoctions, and applied to the grief warm. You must cover the
foments with clothes, lest there strengh do vanishe away quickly. Also take an
aple, take out the core of it and fill the hole with Olibanum, and roast it till
it be soft, then take of the skin of the aple, and mix the soft of the aple
and the Olibanum together, and let the patient make bols of it, and swallow it
all at once, which does remove the pain very much. This plaster also is good
for this purpose.. flowers of Cammomill, Empl^sirum.
tapsus barbatus, and dill. ana. M.ss. line seed fenugreeke. ana..iij. Annise
seed..j. barley meal. M.ss. bray them and put them in water, till they be as
thick as honey, after put to oiles of Dill and cammomill. ana..j.ss. boil them
again and add to it the yolks of two eggs, Concurbi^^lae.
Of safron..j. and make an emplaister. After the 7. day if the pain do
continewe still after one sort: fasten a cupping glass to the side, and
scarrifie the skin, for a manifest comoditie does ensue to them that have
the Pleurisy, hy applying of cupping glasses. The cutts of the scarrified
places must be strewed with salt if the patient can abide it, if not, lay upon
it a linen cloth dipped in oil and sprinkled with salt. The next day after
the scarrefi^g is done, it is good to fasten on a cupping glass again, that
the matterie blood may be drawn out of the little wounds. This second
extraction is better then the first, for at the second time the blood is not
drawn away, but the matter. Also the Physician may not neglecte to minister to
the sick such medicines as are good to make the fleume come up easily (as is)
Diapenidion, Diatragacanthes, conserues of violettes, Trochisci pectorales,
putting to them other looches rehearsed before in the chapter of the cough.
Outwardly you must apply medicines that have virtue to discuss (as is)
fenugreeke, dill, melilote, hisope, and such like. And if there do appear
tokens that it will rotte, and turn into matter, you must further it with this
or the like ointment.. oils of chammomill, of sweet almoundes, and of
lillies. Vnguentum.
ana..iij. butter without salt, hens grease. ana..ij. the musculage of
fenugreke, linseed, and the roots of Althaea. ana..j. wax as much as is
sufficient, make an ointment. The botche being broke, you must minister those
things that do cleanse and purify matter and filthe, (as is) aqua mellis, or
decoction of bareley, or sugar roset. The filth being cleansed, you may minister
glutinatiue medicines, which shall be sufficiently declared in the chapter of the
Ptisicke afterward.

CAP. IX. Of the inflammation of the Lunges. DE PERIPNEVMONIA.
PERIPNEVMONIA is an inflammation of the lounges with a sharp fever. Causae.
This disease for the most part is caused of strong distillations falling to
the lounges, or else of the squinauncy, or the Asthma, or the Pleurisy, or of
other diseases. Also sometime only inflammation is the cause of this disease.
Signa.
They which have this evil, have difficult breathing, the lounges lying upon
the heart does bring choking, they have a sharp and burning fever, and also
fulness and stretching out of the breast without pain. But if the skins which
be joined all the length of the breast within be inflammate, then they feel
pain at the breast. All the face, and the aggreued place look red, the nose
is crooked in the top, the veins of the temples do beat, the eyes do swell,
the tongue is dry, the appetite is lost, the breath is hot, they covet cold
water, and rather cold air, they have a dry cough, it is froathy and
choleric, or bloody and red which be the worst tokens. If the sick shall die,
he shall watch much, and have fearful short sleaps, the hands and feet shall be
cold, the nails shall be crooked and swart, and he shall dye the fourth or the
seventh day at the furthest. But if the sick shall recover, there will follow
bleeding abundantly, or perturbation of the womb, by passing forth of many
cholerike and froathy humors, and sometime the inflammation is changed into
matter, and the matter being filthye is driven out either with egestion or with
the vryne, and the sick is delivered from all the grief by and by. And if it
do flow into the lounges and that abundantly, or do choke him, then it is
changed into a Ptisicke. For there diet you must minister to them soupinges
made of the juice of Ptisan, mixed with honey, origan, or hysope. Victus ratio.
They have more need of extenuatiue meats then those that have the Pleurisy.
Also Alica, or aqua mulsa is good for them. Let them drink little, for
moistnes hurts the lounges. You may minister for preserving of strength
(especially if choking constrains you) Mulsa alone, and with pine nuttes, or
mulsa wherein hysope is sodden, the powder of dry Ireos to aqua mulsa is good.
Generally the diet of those that have Peripneumonia must in a manner be the
same, which the pleurisy should have, specially if they begin to recover.
Curatio.
For the cure you must eschew letting of blood in such as have fallen to this
evil out of other diseases, especailly if they have been long in this case, or
if they were let blood before. You must mollify the belly with clisters, if he
be costiue, or apply cupping glasses to the breast and sides, if nothing do
let it, and that great boxinges and many, the skin being cut and scarified.
But if the peripneumonia began first without any other disease going before,
then let him blood, Venae sectio.
if strength and other things will suffer it, you must cut the inner vain of
the arm and if strength will suffer it draw blood on both the arms, and
first but a little, in no case, until his heart fail, so that some strength
may be kept for the blood letting of the next arm. But if any thing does
forbid blood letting, you may fasten cupping glasses to the whole breast, and
the sides. And you must get out as much blood as strength by them will suffer.
Also it is good to mollify the belly with sharp clisters, made of the
decoctions of hysope, yreos and rewe, putting to it the pulpe of Coloquintida,
Sal gemme, and other things necessary for such clysters. After this you must
labor and see, that the breast and the lounges be purged by much spitting,
which must be made swift and easy. For the which purpose you must use those
Ecligmaes, oyntmentes, and emplaisters, which are declared before in the
chapter against the pleurisy, excepting that in this case, you must minister
the most strong things, and those that have much strength and virtue in
extenuating. Therefore you must minister loch e scylla, loch e pulmone vulpis,
the decoction of the root of yreos and Enula. And you must make a cerate of
oil of rewe and nardinum, putting to it the marrow of a heart, of yreos,
hysope, and horehound beaten very fine, and commixed with Venyce turpentyne,
and lay it all over the breast, and the sides.

CAP. X. Of spitting blood. DE SANGVINIS REIECTATIONE.
SPITTING of blood is caused many times of an outward manifest cause, as of
falling from a high place, Causae.
or a stroke given to one outwardly, or with vehement striking, Externae.
or leaping, or if any heavy things have fallen upon the breast, either else
with great crying, or immoderat cold: for cold as Hippocrates witnesses
breketh veins. Also spitting of blood may be caused through heat. Also
sometime spitting of blood is caused of inward and secret causes as fulness and
abundance of naughty blood, Internae.
gnawing asunder the veins, and brusting open the heads of them. The gnawing
a sunder of those veins is caused of sharp humors either falling from the
head to the lounges, or else engendered in the lounges it self. Moreover the
blood, that is spit out, sometime comes from the breast and the lounges, or
from the Trachea arteria, and sometime from other places of the mouth or
gummes, or the jaws, or from the stomach, unto the which does fall blood out of
the veyns and members adjoining (that is to say) from the liver and the spleen.
The outward causes are known thus: If the spitting of blood be caused of
abundance of blood, Signa.
then the blood comes out gushing all at once, and after it is out, the sick
is better and lighter. But if it be caused through brusting of the mouths of
the veins, then hot perturbations have gone before it, as though the patient
had used many hot bathes, and had dwelt in a hot Region, using hot diet, in
a hot season. If spitting of blood be caused through gnawing and eating a
sunder the veins, then the blood is not spitted forth all on a heap, but by
little and little with the cough, and they are always worse. Also if the blood
which is spitted, be froathy and palish and comes forth now and then with the
coughe without any pain, it is a sure token, that the blood comes out of the
lounges. If flegmaticke blood be spitted out with easy coughinges and
reaching, then the blood comes from the Trachea arteria. If blood be spi^ted
forth being black and clodded together, having also the cough and pain in the
aggreaued place, the^ it is a token, that it comes from the breast. For the
diet let him use meats which have a moderat adstriction, as be Ryce, hulled
wheat, called Alica, Victus ratio.
and such other like mixing with them the yuices of pomegranates or pears. For
flesh let him eat wild doves, turtles, and partriches, if they be boiled with
veryuice, or yuice of sour grapes, or with Sumach. Also he must use quinces,
pears, restrictiue apples, medlers and mulberies and such like rehearsed before
in the chapter against bleeding at the nose. He must drink thick redd wine,
or in steed of it, water wherein steel is quenched. He must eschew great
noyses, Curatio.
often speaking, all moving of the body, and anger. As for the cure it
differs according to the diversity of causes: for if the blood come out of
the head, it needs but a simple and easy cure, for restrictiue things
applied cold to the palate of the mouth by collutions and gargarises do
perform the cure. What things they be, you may seek in the beginning of
this second Book the first chapter. But if there do flow much blood from the
head, then you must let him blood on some vain. Those which spit blood through
distillation, Venae sectio.
you must by and by in the beginning let him blood on some vein, unless a
sharp humor does distill vehemently. Also afterward minister a sharp clister,
and empty the womb, Also rub the hands, the arms, and the legs very much
with a medicine that will heat and extenuate, and bynd the outward parts.
After that, if the disease endure longer, shave the head, and apply thereto a
medicine which has virtue to dry, and discuss (as is) that, which is made of
the doung of wyld doves, and after three hours space, bring him into a bath,
so that the head be anointed with no fat thing. Afterward cover them meanly,
and nourish them with sour soupinges. When they go to sleep, minister to them
Theriaca. The next day all the whole body (the head being excepted only) being
rubbed; keep him in quiet: and again at night minister to him Theriaca. And if
through these the distillation be not stopped, then the third day in the
morning minister a little honey sodden, and rub all the body, and suffer him to
rest. The fourth day, after the taking of the Theriaca, minister again much
honey, and lay to the head a medicine of doves dounge. Concurbi^ula.
And if the evil do endure longer, fasten a cupping glass to the hinder part
of the head. Last of al minister those things which are able to purge the
humors that are flowen into the lounges. But if it be a very sharp humor,
which distilleth out of the head, you must beware of blood letting, and you
must rather use purgations, and you must use the nourishmentes and remedies
hereafter declared, and also before in the chapter against distillations. They
which do spitt blood coming from the lounges, by reason of breaking of some
veins in it, or by brusting open of there heads, those you must first of al
charge, least that they do breath much and make a noise, and that they speak
but little, and in a manner not at all. Let them sit in open air having a
steadfast bed, and of a good height. Cure of (...)
For such you must by and by cut the inner veyn of the arm: and you must draw
blood twice or thrice a little at once, for such have no need of much blood
letting. Also for the same purpose (that is to say) that the blood may be
drawn another way, you must rub the extremities, and use to bind them hard
with broadlinnen clothes. These so done, you must minister to him a drink,
made of vinegar and water infused and warmed, and let him drink it, so that
if any clodde of blood do cleave one the flesh, it may (being there by
dissolved) be cast out, ^
neither does any thing let, but that you may minister this potion twice or
thrice in three hours. After those you may minister both within the body and
without medicines, which be restrictiue, and have power to stop the poores.
For things taken inwardly it profits to eat purcelaine albeit that his
juice dronken is of more effect, the juice of knotgrasse, sharp grapes, ^
decoction of sumach, galls, the shells of acornes, the root of bremble,
balaustia, seed of sorrel, the roots of horsetaile and such like, which are
declared in the chapter against bleeding at the nose. But these are better and
of more effect, then the aforesaid things (that is to say) terra lemnia beaten
into very fine powder, and ministered with the juice of pomegarnettes, or of
knottgrasse, or lapis hematitis at once..j. in the like juice. Among
compoundes you must use this lohoch.. of old conserve of roses, Ecligma.
of roberibes. ana..j. of diatragacanthum frigdium, and diacotoneon simplex.
ana..ss. of the powders of coral, lapis hematitis and terra le^nia. ana..ij.
bole armoniacke..j. dragons blood..ss. pomgarnet flowers..j. frankense^ce the
root of consolida mayor. ana..j.ss. sirupe of mirtells, as much as is
sufficient to co^mixe them, and make an Ecligma. Afterward you must sprinckle
the breast outwardly with restrictiue wine, and the oiles of roses, quinces,
and myrtines. But if there be much eruption of blood (especially being summer)
and the spitting out there of coming without a coughe, and the sick not being
weak, but strong and fleshie; then you may take vinegar for wine, and apply
it to with sponges. It is good to put to the aforesaid oiles, bolearmoniacke,
terra lemnia, coral, and such like, and to make an ointment there of with
wax. Also apply there unto a soft plaster made of dates, Acatia, the root of
consolida mayor, the barckes of pomgarnettes; and the meal of lintles. Also a
cerate made of the meat of pomegarnettes, frankensence, red coral, balaustia,
bolearmony, terra lemnia, and such like is good of effect. But you must
specially take head, that by and by after the rupture of the vessels, it may
grow together again, before it take inflamacion: for if there come inflamacion,
before it be grown together; there is but little hope of the conglutinacion of
the womb, for it keeps it stretched out many days. For you must wash away
as well the matter, as the watery blood out of the ulcer; after that the
inflamacion is gone. But here the reader must be admonished, that he take heed
that he do not apply outwardly against that place, Note.
where the blood runs out, nether restrictiue things nor cold things
without restriction: unless matter be first turned another way, and drawn
from that place; for else it would drive the blood inward and stop the veins
full that be within. Therefore first always you must draw the blood to the
contrary part, Cure of spitting of blood caused of sharp humors
and after that apply restrictiue things outwardly. Those which spitt blood
through erosion and gnawing of sharp humors, you must first of all minister
those things unto them which have virtue to purge sharp humors, distilling
into the lounges, such; as be spoken of before in the chapter of distillation.
After that minister those things which can alter and make thick the thin
and sharp humors: and so have virtue to stop the distillation, as is sirupe
of violettes, roses, mirtines, hidromalon, ininacotoueorum and such like. For
the same purpose sometime minister sirupes of poppie and other somnoriferous
medicines. The distillation being ceased, you must restore the gnawen parts
with meats of good juice, Cure of (...) blood.
and with medicines that do engender fleashe. Moreover they which vomit blood
must use the same diet and cure, which is before rehearsed (that is) if the
blood flow from the liver, cut the vain on the arm. But if the blood be
carried from the spleen, into the belie; cut the vain on the left hand, which
is between the little finger, and the ringe finger, and minister to them
restrictiue meats and drinckes, adding this to the cure, that they do not
take meat and drink often: for they may easily be cured, if the remedies
which be received in, be applied to those parts that sheade blood. And for
blood congealed in the stomach like a hillocke, let him drink cream, and
specially of a heart, or let it be avoided with sauery mixed with vinegar or
with aloe^. Those, which spitt blood from the palate of there mouth, they must
gargarise with restrictiue things, and apply to the forehead, and to the
head, those things which are applied unto the nose, when it bledeth.
Furthermore to conclude, after that all things be done, and that the flux of
blood be stopped then the strength must be cherished and restored again. And
specially he must beware of the often using of bathes, of drincking of wine, of
wrath and of Venus.

CAP. XI. Of spitting of matter. DE EMPYEMATE.
Causae.
EMPIEMA In Greek signifies a mattery spitting. In latin it is called
Suppuratio It is caused when an impostume, or botch being in the upper skin of
them which girdeth the ribs inwardly, or else in some other upper skin of
the breast, broken all at once, and is shed and powered into the empty place
of the breaste, which is between the lounges and the upper skin that girdeth
in the ribs. It is caused sometime through brasting out of blood (an ulcer
not being brought to his scarre, and perfect shutting up). Also sometime
through flux of the head, and other upper parts falling thither, Signa.
which it wont often to change into the squinnancie. The signs be these,
heaviness is felt in the bottom of the breast, a strong cough and a dry without
pain. And also sometime with moistness, for the which they seem to be eased.
In the beginning there chances to them feauers faint, inordinat, and hard to
be judged. When the impostume draws near to a rupture, then they have a
fever more vehement with quaking, and they are trobled in there speech. Being
broken there appears somewhat to flow into the breasts bottom, according to
the often changing of there lying, and specially when they cha^geying from one
side to an other, then surely the multitude of matter is evident, and
oftentimes a certain noise of the flowing may perfectly be heard when they
turn them. Also the matter that comes out is sometimes clear, sometime
thick and dreggie. Some impostumes do brust out upward, that is, unto the
void place of the breast, and these be more perilous. Some impostumes do
flow out downward unto the paunche, and the bowels and also the blader. They
always labor of the fever ethicke, until all things be brought out upward.
Those that be vexed with this desease of spitting of matter, let them remain
in a dry air, Victus ratio.
let them use meats of good juice easy to digest, brothes of cocks, the
flesh of henns, chickens, birds of mountains. Also use decoctions and
brothes of cicers with herbs (as is) hisope, and parcely* let his drink be
aqua mulsa, and thin white win. Curatio.
For the cure in this disease, except diligent speed be made by and by, the
gathering together of matter causes the ptisicke, the lounges drawing
vlceration. Therefore first you must help the concoction of the impostume with
fomentes by sponges or bladders, with cataplasmes or emplaisters, made of the
meals of barley, fenugreeke, and line seeds, of figs, doves doung mallows,
Althaea, and a little rosen. Also you must apply to it cerates, made of butter,
ireos laurel bearyes, rewe, and other things, which can ripe and dissolve the
impostume, whereof thou shall find many in the chapter of Asthma before, and if
the evil be not dissolved, you must apply to it, things that will break the
botche. The breaking of the botch is procured by lying on the hole side eating
of salt meats, and these pills given unto him, when he intends to sleep..
of the powder of Hierapicrae Galeni..j. of the pulpe of Coloquintida..j with
the juice of wormwood as much as is sufficient to commixe them, and make
pills, whereof let him hold one at once in his mouth. By this means it shall
come to pass, that the sick shall covet to spit often, and so by overmuch
spitting the impostume may break. The rupture being made, you must take
diligent heed, whether the matter runs, for you must help his avoiding, for
if it creep into the belly, you must minister most of all mollifications. If
it fall to the bladder, you must minister most those things which provoke
vryne. If the matter comes out by a cough, then nothing is more meet to be
ministered then ptisan, mixed with good honey. Also abstersive and scouring
things do profit, which are partly declared in the chapter against the
plurisie, and part of them shall be spoken of in the next chapter. But you may
commodiously commixe with there meat, those things which provoke vryne,
howsoever the matter intends to flow. As for the purging and driving out of
the matter, aqua mulsa decoct with ireos, and much lycorice is marvelous
profitable. Moreover the decoction of hysope, ireos, horehound and such like is
good, whereof you may seek more in the chapter of asthma. The rest that seems
to be necessary for the cure of this disease, shall be spoken of in the next
chapter.

CAP. XII. Of the Ptisicke. DE TABE.
PTHISIS in Greek, Tabes in latin, It is properly an exulceration of the
loungs, till there follows spitting of blood withal. Causae.
It is caused for the most part through a sharp and gnawing humor, flowing
from the head into the lounges Also it is caused through the blood and matter
that remains, after the brusting out of it in them that have the pleurisy,
the Peripneumonia, or Empyema. Signa.
They which labor of this disease, they are known by wasting the whole body,
and the flesh. Also there nosethrilles be sharp, there temples be sliden
down, there eyes be holowe, and there shoulders stick out like birds wings.
Moreower they cough, and be vexed with the fever Ethicke, they breath
difficultly, there cheek balls wexe swart, there nails do crook and seem pale.
Also the evil ouercomming, the belly is troubled, and thirst does vex them
more, their here does shedd, and that which they do spitt out, is of a
vehement stinking savor. As for ulcers of the loungs, they are very hard to
be cured, because they cannot be purged and cleansed without the cough, and in
them that cough, Look Hippocrates in his apharip^e.5. the 14. and the 13. and
the 11 These causes why the cura is hard.
the ulcer is broken and so the evil returns as it were by a certain
circuit. Also the loungs among the other inward members, because of respiration
and breathing, are always in moving, and also are rent with coughing. But the
ulcers, which are to be healed, would require quiet and rest. Moreover strength
of the medicines cannot come to the ulcers, before it be altered in the
stomach, and in the body, in the liver. Nevertheless although causes before
rehearsed, make the cure to seem hard, yet we may go about to cure that
vlceration. Therefore in the beginning you must ascribe to those that be
ptisicke a convenient diet after this sort, Let him dwell in a dry air
temperat between heat and coldness, let there meat be ptysan almo^d milcke, reere
eggs, flesh of the birds of mountains, of partriche, of phesants, of owsils,
of black birds, of hens, of capons, of calves, of sucking kiddes. Also
scaly fishes in stony waters, crabbes of the fresh river. But among all
meats, milcke is best for them that be ptisicke, specially woman's milk, after
that asses milcke, and gootes milcke, which would he sucked out of the dugges,
if it might be, or let it be drunk by and by after the milcking of it, while
it is hot. But you must beware, that they take no meat by and by after their
milcke, and specially no wine, for then it would be corrupted with it in the
stomach. But if they be very much feuerous, specially of a rote^ fever, the^ it
is not good to take milk. Among fruits it is good to eat raysons, sweet
almoundes, pyne nuttes, figs, dates, pis^ay. Let them eschew exercises and
mouinges that be vehement. It is not unprofitable to walk easily before
meat, and after meat, they must altogether rest, let them use to sleep on
nights meanly. Let them esc^hw wrath and sadness, unmeasurable watchinges.
Hunger, thirst, lechery, hot houses, and whatsoever may emtie the body. Let
his drink be but small and thin, or if his fever be vehement, let him drink
water, wherein a little cynnamon is sodden, or the drink that is called
Hippocras, whose making is declared in the first book, in the chap. against
the palsy. If the evil be caused through the flowing of a sharp humor out
of the head, you must begine the cure by removing of the distillation, which we
have taught before, in his proper chapter. Therefore now we will show the
exulceration of the lounges, Curatio.
how it is to be cured. And first for the cure thereof, we must minister those
things which have an abstersive and scouring virtue, and that which will cause
that the matter may easily be brought upward, for the which purpose Hydromel is
specially good. And also decoction of barely with sugar and honey, also
decoctions of ireos, figes, maidenheare, hisope horehound and licorace. If
there come a fever, you may commixe with the aforesaid things the four great
cold sees. Outwardly you must apply emplasters, and Cataplasmes made of line
seed, fenugreeke and such like declared in the last chapter de Empiemate. Also
for the same purpose you may seek many remedies in the chapter against the
Asthma. The lounges being cleansed and purged from matter: you must minister
those medicines which will glutinate and heal up the ulcer. For this purpose
conserve of roses is commended almost of all Physicians, for this has not
only the virtue to glutinate, but also to cleanse and scour, but the newer it
is, the more it scoureth, and the older it is the more it glutinateth. Also
these are marvelous good, bolearmony, dragons blood, ambre, coral, purcelain
seed, and such like, which have virtue to scour and join together. Also these
things are good loch de pulmone vulpis, loch e pino, conserues of consolida
mayor, and maidenheare. Therefore of these you may make this compound
medicinne., conserues of Consolida mayor, and of maidenheare ana..ss. conserus
of roses..j, loch e pulmone vulpis..j.ss. loch e pino..ij. powder of Diatraga^
canthos hos frigidum., iij. bolearmoniacke..j.ss. sirupe of poppie as much as
will suffice to commix it, Ecl^gma.
and make a loch. Also this powder daily ministered causes much ease.. of the
seds of white poppie..ss. gum arabic, Amylum, and gum tragacant. ana..j,
ss. seeds of cucumbers, citrons gourds, melons, quinces. ana..iij. burnt
Iuory, juice of licorace. ana..j.ss. penidies, Puluis.
as much in weight as all the rest. Make a powder, of the which minister daily
every morning..ij with sirup of poppy or roses. Moreover at that time, that
the wounds be you must anoint the breast without, with oil of quinces,
mirtelles or roses, adding thereto sometime sumach, Hipocischidos, pomegarnet
rindes, acatia, gales and such like. In the end the body being extenuat and
wasted, it is good to restore with a convenient diet using all those meats
which be of good juice, easy to digest, and nourish much, at which time also
you may minister this medicine.. of the pulpe of a capon..j. cocks stone, pine
nuttes pistax, Morsuli refectori^.
sweet almonds. ana..ss. of the powder of the Antidoti de ge^mis..ss, powder of
Diarro don abbatis, dianthon, and arromaticum rosarum. ana..j. white saunders
and cinnamon. ana..ss. maces..j. white sugar of the finest. lb.j. dissolve, the
sugar in water of buglosse, and ro^es, and make lozenges, or an electuarie, of
the which minister every day.

CAP. XIII. Of panting of the heart. DE CORDIS PALPITATIONE.
PALPITATIO and tremor cordis in Latin, is in English panting and trembling of
the heart, it is a corrupt motion of the heart, or a stretching out of it
against nature. The new sort of Physicians do wrongfullie call it Cardiaca. It
is caused of all such things as do trouble and affect the heart above nature
(as is) every distempure, Causae.
or the multitude of an humor contained in the outward skin that goes about
the heart, or else of swelling contrary to nature and such like. The disease
is easily known by the words of the patient, who does easily feel the beating
and panting. Signa.
And also you may know it by the pulse: for in a hot distempure there comes
a fever, and the pulse is swift and great, in a cold distempure, the contrary.
If plenty of an humor contained in the upper skin of the heart do cause
beating thereof, then the pulse is soft and feeble. The diet must be ordained
diversely according to the diversity of causes: for in a hot distempure of
the heart, the air ought to be meanly cold, but in a cold distempure it ought
to be meanly warm: But universally whatsoever the cause be, Victus ratio.
you must eschew any thing that does trouble or resolve the vital spirits,
(as be) overmuch heat, anger, hunger, watching, lechery, unmeasurable cold,
meat of evil juice. If abundance of any humor contained in the upper
skin, that goes about the heart, do engender panting of the heart: let his
whole di^^ be extenuatiue, let their drink in a hot distempure be thin and
small, or a iulep of violets or roses, or decoction of Buglosse. In a cold
distempure they may drink pure wine, or other strong drink. Those, that be
vexed with beating of the heart caused of hot distempure, they must have remedy
by cold medicines, which can correct the hot distempure, Cure of (...).
and add strength to the heart. (As these be among simples) roses, violetts*
flours of water lillies, Saunders, Coral, Camphire, and such like. Among
compounds be these, Diamargariton frigidum, diarrodon abbatis, conserues of
roses, of violetts, of Buglosse, and their plants, juices and syrupes.
Therefore of the aforesaid things there may be made potions, electuaries, and
lozengs as you think good. Outwardly appoint ointments and emplaisters,
especially epithemes, sacculi and other like, whatsoever is able to alter the
hot distempure of the liver. Vnguentum.
And first among oyntmentes this is good,. the oiles of roses, violets, and
nimphea. ana..ij. of red coral, and red saunders, and red roses, ana..j.
Camphire, gr. ii. whit wax as much as is sufficient, and make an ointment,
wherewith anoint the region of the heart and the backebone. Among epithemes,
let this be especially laid to the heart.. the waters of roses, sorrel, and
buglosse. ana..iij. water of baume..j. powder of the cordial medicine..j. red
saunders, red coral. ana..ss. purcelaine. gr. iij. saffrron. gr. iiij. commixe
all together and make an epitheme. Epithema.
Also among the sorts of dry bages this is best.. flowers of buglosse,
violettes, red roses. ana. M.ss. all the saunders of each..j. red coral and
white of each..j.ss. of pearls..j. being first poudred, put them in silk and
make a Sacculus. Sacculus. Cure of distempure of the heart caused through cold
mak^ng it to beat and pa^^e. Vnguentum.
But those that be aggreaued with a cold distempure of the heart to such among
simple medicines, these be profitable (that is) ambre, musk, saffron, wood of
aloes, storax, cloves, maces, zedoary, baulmes, and such like, among compoundes
these are good: the electuary, plirisar ooticon, dianbar, dianthos, aromaticum
rosarum, and such like of the which may be made kinds of medicines, like as
we did against hot distempure of the heart. For ointementes may be made after
this sort.. the oiles of lillies of spike, and of saffron, ana..ij.ss. gallia
moschata, cloves. ana..j. wood of aloes..ss. maces..j. saffron. gr. iij. wax
as much as is sufficient, make an ointment. Epithemae.
Also you may make an epitheme thus.. waters of balm, maioram, buglosse.
ana..iiij. pouders of the electuares. diambar and diamosche; ana..ss. maces,
wood of aloes. ana..j. amber. gr. j. of the best wine..j. commixe them
together, and make a epithema. Sacculus.
An example of sacculus is thus.. flowers of balm, and buglose. ana. M.j.ss.
chosen sinamon, cloves, maces. ana..j. wood of aloes..j. bark of the citron
apple..j.ss. saffron..j. ambre. gr. j. braie all together, and make a sacculus
of silcke to lay to the heart. Cure of panting of the heart caused of an humor.
And if there be panting of the heart, engendered through some humor contained
in the upper skin that compasses the heart: it must be cured (as galene
witnesses) with a diet which will extenuate, and by cutting of a vain in the
arm, Therefore you must cut the inner vain of the arm, or the middle vein.
And afterward one must minister and apply as well inwardly as outwardly,
medicines, that have virtue to extenuate and strength the heart by applying of
ointments, and epithemes, and sacculi, and such like. Of the which things to
make private exemples, we think it in vain, seeing it is easy to any man
by examples now declared here, and in other places, to make medicines for his
purpose of whatsoever sort he will.

CAP XIIII. Of swounding. DE SINCOPE.
SINCOPE is a swift falling of the strength (as Galen says) it is caused
through much excretion and avoiding of blood or through unmeasurable emptying
of the belly, Causae.
or vehement moving, or through great pain, or much and often washinges. Also
through abundant swetts, and all other immoderate vacuations, also fear,
dread, and all such like perturbations of the mind. Moreover through abounding
of crude and raw humors, through great infla^macio^ or through vicious and
thin humors, or else by taken breath in a stinking air. The sincope is
known by these tokens, Signa.
the pulse is rare and obscure, the extreme parts, as the ha^d^ and feet be
cold, sweet about the face, the taking away of the brightness of the skin that
is in it, and as it wear a palsy of the whole body. Moreover to these there
comes desperation, vexation of the mind, and shaking of the body. And
moreover there chances sometime with the swounding of the heart, Syncope
c^rd^.
a vice (that is) when the heart is vehemently distempured. Also sometime it
chances to the stomach (that is) when humors abounding or heaped together or
crude, either else sharp and gnawing be in it: that kind of sincope is called
stomachica. Syncope stomachica.
They which fall in a swoun through plenty of raw humors contained in the
mouth of the stomach, in such the sides are inflate and puffed up, and the
whole body seems to be of a greater bigness then it should naturallye be, also
there color changes whyter then it was wont to do: and to conclude therbody
is like to them that have the dropsy; also to many there color waxes swarter
and blacker like lead, but the pulses of the senowes be least of all other,
moreover they be obscure and inequall. Those which are vexed with swou^ding
through abundance of sharp humors, they feel continual pulling, twitching
and gnawing in the mouth of the stomach. They which through thin vices which
do swiftly exhalate and stye up do suffer swou^ding, in them there face
appears by and by as though it were dead, there nose is sharp, there eyes be
hollow, and such like. The other causes of Sincope are known by the talk of
them that stand by without any great business. It is easy to know, Cure of
swounding through unmeasurable emptying.
that the cure must be diverse, according to the diversity of the causes. If
sou^ding does invade one through excretion and avoiding of blood, or through
any other unmeasurable or sudden empteing, you must sprincle there face with
cold things, or with rose water, which has a maruelouse good effect in this
case. The extreme parts of the body, must be bound vehemently with bands,
and must be rubbed a little with sharp linen clothes. If the empteing be
upward, you must rub the legs: if it be dounward, rub and bind the
hands. Also cupping glasses are to be fastened lightly, diversely, according to
the places where the euacuations, or where the blood brusteth out. Moreover the
mouth must be opened, by putting in your fingers, or a vedge, or some other
thing, but the passage of hearing, and of the noseterilles would be thrust
together, that the air that is breathed in, might stir and comfort the
spirits. Also it is good by and by for to consort the sprites with sundry
odoraments. For as Hypocrates says in his book de alimentis, there is
nothing that calls the strenght again sooner the^ odoures. Therefore it is
good to apply to the nose of the sick, chikens roasted, and parted a sunder in
the midst. Also roses, violettes, quinces citrons and such like be good. You
must minister wine to him that is thin, and alaied. Let the air of the
chamber be cold, but let not the chamber be very full of light, let there
counter points be taken away that ly upon them, and let the couerings
wherewith they be covered be soft, and strew the floor with leaves of
mirtells, vynes, oaks, briers, and roses the^ selves, and sprinckle it with
water. S^oppers of great sweties.
In vnmasurable swetes anoint the sweting parts with oil of mirtells, roses,
and quinces: but specially the neck, the breast, the places under the arm
holes and the share. For this purpose also, it is good to annointe amilum, and
pouders of frankensence, mixed with the white of an egg, and other restrictiue
medicines. Also you must hold to his nose diverse odoraments, as roses,
saunders, quinces, flours of water lillies, and campheir, but you may not then
bind the extreme parts of the body. Cure of swounding caused of pain.
If sounding be caused through pain, you must diligently enquire the cause:
for if it come of an outward cause, the ceasing of the pain cures the
swounding. But if the pain be caused of noe outward causet, hou must find out
some inward cause which causes pain, If fulness with retching and stretching
out do cause the pain by and by, if strength will suffer it, let him blood on
that vein, that is nighest to the aggreued part, but if strength be feeble,
then you must only pull it back, or you must drive it upward or downward or
both ways, or use frictions. But whereas the pain is caused of vicious
humors, you must rather purge it. If both the aforesaid causes come together,
then you must use euacuations both ways: but blood letting must first be used
before any of them. Afterward if the corrupt humors be fastened, and do stick
fast in some only place, you must begin your cure with dissoluing and
discussiue medicines. As for curing of other pains, they may be sought in
their own proper chapters, and especially in the chapter against the cholicke.
Those which do swound through great sorrow, fear, and other perturbations of
the mind, Cure of swounding by affections of the mind.

Cure of swounding through abundance of crude humors.


they are fully cured by using of there contraryes. Nether let pass to
minister unto them that do swound for great sorrow, odoriferous things, and
other things, which being taken inwardly may comfort the spirits. They which
be troubled with swounding through plenty of crude humors, they may nether
suffer letting of blood nor purging; Therefore you must cure such by frictions.
And you must by and by in the beginning of the evil begin, and you must rub
the legs first from the upper part, and so downward with linen clothes not
very soft, but somewhat sharp: afterward likewise the arms from the
shoulders to the fingers. And when all the arteries and veins be sufficiently
heat, and that ye doubt that some wearines will come to the senses through over
much rubbing: you must use oil solutiue and loosing, as is oil of dill, and
chammomill, and you must beware especially of restrictiue things. And when
thou haste anointed the parts of the body, and rubbed them well, then you
must come to the bone, and that you must likewise first rub with a linen
cloth, and then with oil: from that you, must go again to the legs, and
then to the arms, and so again to the back, and so you must do all, and that
in a bright chamber without moisture, whose air must be temperat. Moreover
mulsa, wherein hysope is sodden is most meet for them; and you must beware
that you minister not to them, nether meat, nor brothes, nor water, nor to
suffer him to drink liberally, but only mulsa the three first days, and to
rub him by course continually, granting him only but time to sleep, which
must be in a mean. But if there pulse be very small and feeble, or also
besides that wonderful inequall, you may know that there is extreme peril:
but yet you must do as it is taught before, and go about none other thing. But
if the pulse be indifferently strong and great, and be not cut of, nor thrust
together, then you must consider the state of the belly, and if it do not avoid
ordure sufficiently of it self, you may pour in somewhat boldly beneath. For
it chances after the taking of aqua mulsa, that the superfluities which are
wont to be gathered in the principal veins (that is) they which be about the
liver, and the bowell which joins with the midrife unto the back, by that
thing, they are well cast out. And if a heap of superfluities do violentlye
provoke the belly above reason, first you must sees your mulsa more higher,
for so it does make the belly less soluble, and it nourishes more. After
this, if the superfluities do descend more largely, the belly may not be
stopped so, but you must minister for aqua mulsa, the juice of ptisan. And if
they continue still to flow, nourish him with soupinges of alica, taking heed
to the working of the pulses in the mean season: for sometime they are
changed to imbecillitie, or vnequalnes or smalnes. At which time it is good to
minister bread infused in wine, and that, if nether the belly nor the liver be
troubled with an impostume; for if they be vexed with it, P^leg^e^.
(the body being stuffed with crude and raw iuyces) the sick is desperate of
al health. Therefore in such a case, of the sick, thou show thy self
without blame, if thou say before that he will dye, and use no better
medicines. But if there be at any time found abundance of clammy humors, by
and by minister Oximel in steed of mulsa. Therefore if it be Summer, and the
sick used to cold potions, give him the Oximel cold. but if it be winter,
minister it hot. Also these things are very evil for them, as well
bathinges, as also the open air, as often, Cure of swounding now present.

Phleg^^^.


as it is over hot or over cold. But if thou art called to them, which be
presently vexed with swounding, where the belly and the liver be without
impostumation, thou shall minister a little bread, and that with some wine,
because it causes swift distribution into other parts of the body, and thou
shall come straight to frictions and rubbinges, and thou shall do according to
the order before prescribed. Bu if it be Summer, or the Region naturally hot
and burning, or the state of the heaven vehemently hot: thou shall alay the
wine with cold water, but if there be no such thing, with hot. But the drink
that shall be given the second and third time, thou shall minister it altogether
hot. For in the whole cure, where we use frictions, heat is best, as a helper
of the concoction of crude humors. But to those which have swounding caused of
choler, which troubled the mouth of the stomach, to them you must minister cold
potions. But yet it is good to minister to all that have the syncope, wine,
that is hot by nature, yelowish in color, thin in substance, cold, and that
which provoke distribution in the body: for we would have the food that is
received, to be distributed about the body, and not to tarry in the stomach.
They that are vexed with swounding through vice of thin humors, Cure of
syncope caused of thin humors.
those you must empty by little and little, and continually, because that they
cannot suffer much emptying at once, those also we must nourish by little and
little, and often, the outward part of the skin must be thickened: and you must
make the air of the chamber cold and restrictiue. Also you must anoint them
with restrictiue medicines and oyntmentes. and you must give them meats, that
do not readily disperse and flow: therefore give nether aqua mulsa, nor ptisan,
but bread and soupinges of alica, and sour fruictes, which will not easily be
corrupted. You shall also give sometime to them eggs, specially there yolks,
for their whites be hard to digest. Moreover the stones of cocks, which be
nourished with milk. Also swynes brain, but let it either be diligently
roasted, or well sodden in water with leekes, and dill. To conclude you must
labor by all means, that you may make the substance of the juices more
thick, and thicken the skin, and to stop the exhalations. Watery wine is
necessary to them after meat in the beginning of sickness. And if all follow
your mind, you may also after other things give him nourishment by flesh,
specially after the fourth day, Cure of swounding through inflammation.
(the juices coming now to concoction.) If swounding come through vehement
inflammation, the members and parts of the body are to be rubbed and
nourished, and the hands and feet must be bound. You must commau^d him to
watch, because the blood in sleep crepeth to the inward members. You must drive
them clean from meat and drink. Cure of swounding through humors in the
stomach.
Whosoever have the syncope, through vicious humors gnawing the mouth of the
stomach, they must be cured by provoking of vomit: or if that take no place to
move the belly, do other things which be expounded in the chapter of pain in
the stomach. They that begin to swound in a Bath, you must bring them quickly
out, nor you may not moisten the^ with much pouring in of water. They that be
already in a swound, they must be carried out very quickly, and the rest of the
body must be covered with a light covering. Let the face be weat with a sponge,
dipped in cold water, or sprincle it with rose water. Also the face, the
stomach, the feet must be rubbed. Also the mouth must be opened by putting in
of quilles or ones finger. And you must go about by all means that the humors
that causes the swounding, may be vomyted out, by pouring in of warm water in
at the mouth. They that be of perfect age, pull of their hears, and the loud
calling of one is profitable, but many at once is hurtful.

CAP. XV. Of lack of milk. DE LACTIS DEFECTV.
THE want of milk, does chance through dry distempure of the pappes, or of
the whole body. Also through small quantity of good blood, Causae.
or because the child is so weak, that he can not suck well of the pappes:
for look, the more that he draws out by sucking of the^ the more draws to
the^ again. Signa.
The tokens whereby the diversities of causes are known, are evident enough by
things before spoken, but yet I will rehearse the^ again. A dry distempure is
known by the disposition of the whole body, and by leanness and drines of
the body and pappes and such like. Small quantity of good blood is known by the
ill state of the body, and by the evil color of it. Also unmeasurable
euacuations coming out of the body before, (that is to say) by menstruis, by
fluxes, by extreme exercyses, by hunger, and such like. For the cure of
lacking of milcke, Cure of lack of (...) in a dis^empure.
which is caused of a dry distempure, we will teach nothing in this place.
because it may easily be cured by that which is declared before in other
chapters, and shall also be declared afterward in the chapitre against the
fever Ethicke. Therefore here we will only treat of the cure of lack of
milcke, caused of the little quantity of good blood. ^
In this cure first you must behold the blood: for either there is less then
there ought to be, or it is worse then it should be. Therefore when there is
less then there should be, a diet must be assigned with moist and heat meanly,
for whatsoever does heat more then is convenient, Victus ratio.
either else do dry or cool those partly by corrupting the blood that remains,
and partly by diminishing of it, they do forbid the milk to come. Therefore it
is good to give them pure bread, milcke, veale, chickens, partriches, birds,
rere eggs, fishes scaly, and stony raysons, sweet almounds, lettuse, buglosse,
baulme, gourdes, and such like. They must drink wine, that is thin and
watery, they must eschew immoderate exercises, anger, sorrow, and all thing,
that may deminishe the blood. But if the blood be worse, (as if it be
choleric) first purging of the choleric humors is requisite, and then use
the diet before prescribed, but if it be flegmaticke blood, it requires
medicines that do heat in the first or second degree, but they may not dry up,
for such by heating of the flegmaticke humors do turn them into blood: but
among such the strongest be, which are not only medicines, but also
nourishments, (as is) rockat, fennel, dill, percely, and those things green
before they be dried for being dried, Evil blood.
they do heat, and dry more then they ought to do. And those things which do
dry, they make the humor which seedeth the blood, the more gross, and more
small in quantity. The blood ought to be meanly hot: and not gross, that the
milk may be engendered thereof. Moreover those things that do meanly heat, and
have no great drynes joined with it, they have virtue to engender milcke: among
which beside those which are spoken of before, is Sesamum boiled in wine. Also
fresh butter, the weight of one once droncke with wine. Also sweet almoundes,
pistax, pyne nuttes beaten, and eaten with butter. Also this thing is specially
praised.. Ryce, tenn times washed and dried again, and beat it to powder,
then sees it in good milcke upon burning coals, while it does seethe, put to
as much of white Sugar as is sufficient, and make a potage. It is made the
better, if you add to it sweet almounds, pistax, pyne nuttes, barely meal,
cycers, and such like: but you must labor also, that by gentle rubbing of the
breast, and by whote medicines, which have ane attractiue virtue, the milk may
be drawn, and entysed to the pappes.

CAP. XVI. Of abundance of milk. DE LACTIS REDVNDANTIA.
IT chances sometime that through abundance of milk, the pappes are so
filled and swollen, and so stretched out with it, that they are scarce able to
hold the abundance of it. Causae.
It is caused through abundance of good blood The evil is known by sight and
feeling. You must help this by and by, Signa.
for else it is to be feared; lest the pappes be taken with Inflammation.
Therefore a^ the beginning cut the vein of the arm, or the middell vein
which is in the arm. Curatio.
After that, use those things, which do lightly repress and drive back,
lest that the blood be thrust into the loungs by a certain violence. For this
purpose it is good to apply a soft spo^ge dipped in warm Posca, Posca is
vinegar and water mixed together and wine and water
and to bind it with bands to the pappes, or apply dates braied with bread and
Posca. Also it is good to apply an emplaister made of oil of roses, of
saunders, Corianders, Psillium, purcelain, bean meal, lintels, juice of
plantain, and of vinigre after this sort.. of bean meal and of lintells.
ana..j. seed of purcelain..j. seeds of flax and Althaea. ana..ij.ss. of
plaintain. M.j. seed of Coriander..ij. boil them altogether in water, until
it come to the thicknes of honey, after that, put to it oil of roses..j.ss.
boil the^ again and add thereto the yolks of two eggs, and make an
emplaister, or make a cerate after this sort. Emplastrum.
. of the oil of roses and mirtells. ana..j.ss. the meals of beans and
lintels. ana..j.ss. of mintes and rue. ana..ss. with wax, Cera^^^.
and venice turpenteine, as much as is sufficient, and make a cerate to apply
to the pappes. Also wild rapes do profit maruelously being anointed with water
and honey. Moreover the leaves of cherua anointed with the juice of green
parcely is very profitable. Moreover the stone pyrites poudred and applied with
oil of roses and vinegar, does show a marvelous effect against abundance of
milcke And let there whole diet be such, that thereby but little blood may be
engendered. Therefore hunger in this evil above other things is marvelous good.

CAP XVII. Of milk that is curded. DE LACTE IN GRVMOS CONVERSO.
MANY times the milk curdeth in the pappes, and turns into the form of
cheese curdes. Causae.
It is caused through abundance of milk (that is) when it is kept long time
together on heaps in the pappes, and is not sucked out. It is caused also of a
hoate distempure, when that, through overmuch heat, the thin part of the
milcke is digested and dissolved, and the rest grows together, and turns
into curdes. Also the like may chance of cold, which may cause milk to curde
and congeale as well as other licours. Also sometime milcke of his own nature
is gross and clammy enough, and for that cause does easily turn to curdes.
There need noe tokens to know this evil: Signa.
for it is known by and by, both by touching and by the patientes words.
Victus ratio.
The diet in this evil is diverse according to the diversities of causes. For
in a hoate distempure of the pappes, let the diet decline to cold things, but
in a cold distempure contrariwise to hoate things. If this evil come through
grossenes of the milk, she must use altogether an extenuate diet. Curatio.
For the cure, if there be abundance of milk, not being as yet curded in the
pappes in them that be of lawful age, and being skillful women, let it be
easily sucked out by little and little. Let the pappes be outwardly anointed
with juice of grene parcely, mintes, fenugreeke, and other things rehearsed
before in the chaptre of abundance of milcke. Also the cream of a hare beaten
with water, if it be anointed, is good against all swellings of the pappes,
specially caused of the corrupt abundance of milcke. Also lintels sodden in
bryne is marvelous good, if the pappes be washed with the decoction, and
anointed with the lintles being stamped. Also the decoction of fenugreeke and
althaea does great pleasure. But if overmuch heat does cause the milcke to
curd in the pappes: then anoint them with juice of purcelaine, and gardeyn
nightshade. Also apply oil of roses with vinegre. Also mouseare anointed is
of good effect. Also the earth called cimolia anointed with vinegre or with
water and oil of roses does good. Moreover lintels sodden in vinegre and
applied as is aforesaid, against cold distempure of the pappes. Use decoctions
of chammomill, fennel, dill, line seed, and fenugreeke, and there with foment
the pappes. Also anoint them with oiles of chammomill, dill, lillies, and such
like, but beware they touch not the nipple. Oxes gall anointed is good.
Crummes of bread are good with vinegre anointed, But you may put to it mintes
or parcely, and make the medicine the stronger. This plaster is excellent
good.. of honey..ss. of storax calamitae..iij. of oxes gall..ij. of oil of
chammomill..ij. mirrhe and frankensence, ana..ij.ss. commixe them together, and
make an emplaister to lay on the pappes.

CAP. XVIII. Of inflammacion of the pappes. DE INFLAMMATIONE MAMMARVM.
IT is caused sometime, (as other inflammations be) of plenty of hot blood
flowing to the pappes. Causae.
Also sometime through milk (that is) when it turns to suppuration and
matter. The aforesaid causes are easy to discern a sunder: For the first
cause of inflammation chances to them that be not with child, nor brought in
bed: the other cause chances only to such. For the cure in the first cause
you must see blood drawn from the inward vein of the arm, Curatio.
or the middle vein on the same side, unless the menstruis be stopped: for
then it were better to cut the vein of the hamme or anckle. After this you
must come to restrictiue medicines, Venae sectio.
which may not be strong, lest that the humors do violently thrust inwardly
to the noble parts of the body, or else you may mix with them some discussiue
things. Therefore for that purpose it is very good to take oil of roses, with
the juice or water af nightshade vinegar, and the decoction of chammomill. In
this dippe and wett linen clothes, and apply it to the pappes. Also an
emplaister made of Barely meal, linseed, Saunders, Bolearmoniake, grease and
oil of roses are good. Emplastrum.
And if the Physician does see that repercussiue medicines do not much good,
he must straight proceed to my Book of the cure of impostumes in the Breasts.
But if inflammation be caused of curded milk, in the beginning you must apply
a soft sponge dipped in warm posca, and bind it to it. Also apply dates brayd
with bread and posca. Also apply crummes of bread with mirrhe, saffron, and
mintes, and such like. But if the inflammation endure still, proceed to the
chapter of impostumes in the breasts, as hereafter shall proceed.

Libri Secundi Finis.
The Third Book.
CAP I. Of weakness of the stomach. DE IMBECILLITATE VENTRICVLI.
WEAKNESS of the stomache is sometime caused through distempure of the effectrix
and working qualities without any flowing of humors. For as Galene says in
lib. 3. de simplic. causis. cap. 10. Causae.
All vehement distempure does overthrow and cast down the strength. Also
sometime it is caused of an humor, being contained in the bosom, and large
space of the stomach, which has power and virtue either to heat, or cool, or
to moisten, or dry, or two of these qualities mixed together. sometime it is
caused of an humor, Signa.
stuffed and drowned, in the filmes, and cotes of the stomach. Vehement thirst,
abhorring of meat, and savoring belkinges do betoken distempure only of a hot
quality. Contrariwise little thirst, unmeasurable appetite, and sour belkings
betoken distempure of a cold quality. And to be short, if the stomach be
grieved with hot or cold distempure, it changes the meats that be eaten
into the nature of the distempure, so that the meats may be perceived to be
changed into the savor of rosting or sourenes without the commixing of any
humor. Moreover if the distempure be hot, you shall see the patient by and by
eased with taking of medicines, or meats, or drinckes that be cold. But if the
distempure be cold, the patient feels ease in hot meats or medicines, but
he feels hurt with cold things. In a moist distempure, the patient feels
no thirst, or very little, he has abundance of spitle, and does desire moist
meats. In a dry distempure there is drynes of the tongue, extenuation of the
body, little spitle, and vehement thirst. Moreover vomiting and desire thereto,
heaviness of the stomach, and belking specially after meat, betoken abundance
of naughty and corrupt humors. And if yelow color do abound, there follows
bitterness of the mouth. vomiting up of choler, thirst, belkinges, with savor
roasted, and gnawing of the stomach: but if fleume do abound, it does cause no
gnawing in the stomach, unless it be salt fleume: there are present sour
belkinges, no thirst and stretching out of the stomach. If melancholy abound,
it causes sadness and fear, stinking belkinges and spittinges, and savor of
fish, sleep with fittes of strange imaginations, contraction and pain of the
hammes, and calfes of the legs. Every distempure is corrected and amended by
his contrary. Curatio.
Therefore you must cool a hot distempure, and heat a cold distempure: also
moisten a dry, and dry a moist distempure: likewise must you do in compound
distempures, either heat and dry, or heat and moisten, or else cool and moisten,
Cure of a hot distempure.
or cool and dry. Those that be vexed with hot distempure of the stomach, are
cured with a cooling diet, but specially if they take cold things with
vinegar. Therefore let there bread be mixed or dipped in posca. For flesh let
him use chickens, partrich, Posca is a sauce made with vinegar and water.
veale sodden with vinegar or veriuyce. For potherbes, lettuce, and purcelaine
are very good. Also apples and sharp pears. The sick must drink small Ale
or Beer, if he has been used to it, bu^ if not, let him drink the decoction
of cinnamom, or wine, that is thin and watery. You must apply and lay upon
the stomach outwardly such medicines as do meanly restrain and cool. They
which be vexed with a cold distempure of the stomach, you must heal them with
the contraries to the oforesaid things, Cold distempure.
with the decoction of Anise seed, rewe, and percely seed. Let the meats
which they eat be condyte and dressed with Cynnamon, calamus aromaticus,
cloves, pepper, and such like adoramentes. Also give unto them
Diatrionpipercon, diacalaminthes, and theriaca. Anoint the stomach outwardlye
with those ointmentes, which have power to heat, and let them use to drink
that is old, and somewhat astringent. Moist distempure.

Dry distempure.

Cure of weakness of the stomach caused of an humor. Choler.


A moist distempure is helped with meats that do dry, without any strong heat
or coldness. Moreover using of less drinck then he is accustomed to do. A dry
distempure must be cured as the fever Ethicke is cured, of which we will treat
in the fourth book. But if some humor having power to heat, or cool, do
cause weakness of the stomach, you must mark and consider diligently whether
that humor do swim in the bosom, and largenes of the stomach, or whether it
be stuffed in the filmes and cotes of the stomach. If the humor be contained
in the bosom of the stomach, and be a choleric humor, it must be purped
straight by vomit, warm water or thin mulsa dronken does cause an easy
vomit. It will be better if you minister before it things that do moisten, as
is the broth of Ptisan, or else the yolke of an egg. But if the cholerike
humor be stuffed in the filmes of the stomach, purge him with Hierapicra, for
as Galene says, there can no better medicine be found against vicious humors,
being stuffed in the filmes of the stomach. The humor being purged, Victus
ratio.
let them use the same diet, that they do which are vexed with a hot
distempure, as is taught before. Minister within the body conserues, which have
virtue to cool and moist. Also minister electuaries having like virtues. Apply
outwardly to the stomach things that do cool, and meanly restrain, as is
oil of Roses, oil of Quinces, putting to saunders, balaustie, coral, and
purcelaine. But yet use things that do cool in a mean according to the
contrariety of the distempure. For ouermuche use of cold things does not
only not proffit, but also oftentimes it causes an incurable disease: because
of the great heat that is requisite for concoction and digestion. Fleume.
If humors being flegmaticke, gross and toughe, do swim in the breadth of
the stomache, he must use oximell, wherein has been sodden medicines which
have virtue to extenuat and cut (as is) hysope, the root of ireos, origan,
sauory and horehound. But if the flegmatike humors be drowned in the filmes
and cootes of the stomache, then first you must minister those things which do
cu^ and divide clammy humors and gross fleume, but afterward you must purge
him. If you will know what medicines do purge tough fleume, look before in the
first book. cap. 12. Also Hierapicra is no: unprofitable to purge gross
humors. Let him also use a diet which does extenuate: and let him use
electuaries that do heat, as diatrionpipereon, diagalanges, diacinnamomum,
diambar, Diet.
ginger condyte, diacorus, and such like. Apply outwardly to the stomach things
that do heat as is oil of nardinum, oil of myntes, oil of wormwood, and
oil of masticke, and other things having the like virtue. For this purpose
also Cerotes are commended, which the Physicians commonly do call scutum
stomachale, such as this is.. cinnamon chosen, cloves. Scutum stomachi.
long pepper. ana..j. galliae moschatae, maces, ana..ss. calamus aromaticus,
franckensence. ana..j.ss. wood of aloes,.j. sown mintes,.ij. masticke,
lapdanum, ana..ij. oiles of masticke, and narde. ana..ss. with wax and
turpentine, as much as will suffice, make a cerote to lay upon the stomach,
and cover it with purple silcke. Or use this medicine.. masticke beaten to
powder..j.ss. then strew it upon leather being cut like a buckler, Aliud.
and power upon it oleum nardinum, then hold it to the fire till it be molten
together, and strewe upon it chosen cinnamon, nutmegges, and cloves. ana..j.
beaten into powder, and apply it to the stomach. ^
To be short, these and other things, which do strengthen and heat the
stomach, are to be applied (as is) mintes, wormwood, franckensence, masticke,
cinnamon, galingale, ginger, maces, wood of aloes, calamus adoratus, and such
like rehearsed in our first book of making medicines, of which one may make
diverse kinds of remedies as he sees cause.

CAP II. Of yealking and vomiting. DE NAVSEA ET VOMITV.
DISPOSITION to vomit (called Nausea) which is a naughty and wicked motion of
the expulsive virtue of the stomach. Causae (...).
It is caused of a vicious humor contained in the stomach, being either hot or
cold, which humor either swimmeth in the concauity and hollownes of the
stomach, or it is stuffed in the filmes of the stomach, cleaving like birdlyme,
and can scarce be drawn away: or the humor being more watery, it is drowned
in the cotes of the stomach, like water in a sponge. And such humors are
oftentimes engendered through distempure of the stomach as well hot as cold:
sometime such humors do flow from the whole body, or from other parts (being
first evil affected) into the stomach as it were the excrementes: as from the
liver or the spleen, or the head, or from the whole body. If those humors be
engendrrd through the distempure, you may easily perceive it by the signs
declared in the last chapter before this. But whether that humor swim in the
hollownes of the stomach, Signa.
or be stuffed in his cotes, thus shall thou know it. If the vicious humor
does swim in the stomach, and cause nausea (that is) disposition to vomit,
then for the most part vomiting follows, and the stomach corupting the
meats, it does manifestly infect it with that humor, and changes it into
his nature: but if a tough humor be drowned in the cotes of the stomach, it
causes disposition to vomit, but yet such a disposition, as brings forth
nothing, although the patient does provoke and strain him self as though he
could vomit: but if that humor be watery and wheish, then it causes vomiting,
not only before meat, but also after meat, and specially if that humor swim
in the breadth of the stomach: for if it be stuffed and cleave to the top of
the stomache, it does move vomiting without bringing any thing up before
meat: but when other parts (from which do flow excrementes into the stomach)
be evil affected, the sick himself does first feel the grief of the
member that is diseased: for either he feels heat, or cold, or heaviness nigh
about the place that is diseased, or also he cannot suffer to let the place be
touched hard. But if the whole body be full of vicious humors, you may know
that by the color, and by breaking out of wheales and pushes in the skin,
Curatio Nausea.
and also by the vryne you may discern it. For the cure, you must diligently
consider which grief it is, whether it be a disease caused only of the stomach,
or of the whole body, or of some other member. For if humors do flow into the
stomach from some other member, or from the whole body; you must first take
care for the whole body, or for that member that is diseased, but yet you may
not neglect the stomach altogether. For unless the whole body be first purged
of vicious humors, he labors in vain that goes about to resist the
flowing of humors into some one place. So also he that does cure the member
that is first diseased, he cutteth of as it were the fountain of all flowinges
into the stomach. If you will know how those members are to be cured that do
send excrementes into the stomach, you must learn that in there proper chapters
before or after. But if humors be engendered in the stomach causing disposition
to vomit, you must mark whether those humors be thin, choleric and
wheyishe, and being contained in the hollownes of the stomach, for then you
must give him very thinn juice of ptisan, or hot water, and the sick must
provoke vomit with his finger, or with a feather being put down into his
throat. But if the humors be stuffed within upon the top of the stomach, you
must minister one drachme of aloes to drink being dissolved in water. For
against hot humors which be in the stomach, Aloes is the best medicine, so
that often it has healed evil stomaches in one day. After the humors be
purged and other medicines ministered, which do stop or make temperate the
sharpnes of Choler, then you must cure the hot distempure of the stomach, as
is taught in the last chapter before this. If they be flegmaticke, gross and
tough humors which do swim in the breadth of the stomach, you must cure them
after that sort that is taught of us in the former chapter, and then you must
get away the cold distempure of the stomach, Of vomyting.
as is before taught. Now, for vomiting you must note that in the beginning it
ought not to be stopped, 1. (...). 2.
if the sick be the better for it, according to Hippocrates saying. In
vomiting which comes by it self, if such things be purged as ought to be,
it is good and may be suffered, but if not, so then the contrariwise it is
evil. Therefore you may not stop that vomit which is decretory, or where
humors do flow from the whole body into the stomach, or when humors be
engendered in the stomach through distempure. But then you must rather help the
motion of the expulsive virtue in a hot cause by ministering hot water with
oil of violettes to drink: but in a cold cause minister oximell and other
things before rehearsed. Cure of immoderate vomyting.
But if the vomiting be immoderate and do begin to weaken the strength of the
sick, then you must go about to stop and resttaine it. Therefore first let
the sick ly upward in a convenient house, and contrary to the disease (that
is) let the house be cold, if the disease be hot, and contrariewyse let it be
hot, if the disease be cold, let the extreme parts of the body be rubbed, and
let them be fealt with warm hands, and also bynd them strongly with bands,
also put the feet and hands in luke warm water. Also hold adoramentes of
good savor to the nose for to smell, as roses, quinces, penyroyall, myntes,
fennel, spickenarde. Annoint the stomach outwardly with oils of wormwood and
roses. Emplaisters made of Dates, quinces, and wormwood be good. Also Cerates
made of them and such like as myntes, darnell meal, franckensence, masticke be
good being laid upon the stomach. Also you must stamp well dates that have
been steeped in old wine, afterward you must put to it masticke and
franckensence, each of them finely powdered by it self before, and then bray them
together. To this place also you must call the remedies, that are spoken of
hereafter, partly in the chapter of cholera, and partly in the chapter of the
flux dysemeria. Furthermore that evil continuing long, if the meat cannot
tarry in the stomach, you must fasten a cupping glass to the mouth of the
stomache with great flame, until the place wax red: and you must give the
patient meat, while the glass hangs on still.

CAP III. Of immoderate thirst. DE SITI IMMENSA:
THIRST, as Galene witnesses in lib. 1. de simpli. med. facultate, cap. 30. is
caused two manner of ways: partly through want of moisture, and partly through
abundance of heat. The stomach is heat many and sundry ways, Caus^.
that is either through hot distempure of the bare quality simple or compound,
or through hot and choleric humors engendered in the stomach, or else flowing
to it. Also through abundant drincking of old wine. The stomach is dried either
through the dry distempure that is in it, or through salt humors, or
drincking of salt water. Also often times it is dried through consent of the
whole body, as it chances in burning feauers and fever Ethickes. The
diversity of causes may easily be known by the patients words, Signa.
and by those signs which we have spoken of in the 2. chapter next before.
Therefore the cause being known, you must remedy each of them according to there
causes diversely. Curatio.
Therefore you must remedy thirst coming of heat, by ministering things that
do cool. Therefore both the drawing in of cold air, and water or watery wine
being droncken are good. Also Cucumberseed chewed, or if it be hulled and
beaten, and drunken with water, it helps greatly against thirst engendered
through heat of the stomach. Likewise lettuce seed chewed and droncke
profits. Also purcelaine seed likewise. The best thing to quench thirst is
this.. of the seeds of sown Cucumbers husked..j. tragacanthae..ss. bray
tragacantham and serce it, and beat the seeds, and put those pouders to the
whytes of eggs being raw, Pills to hold under the tongue.
and beating them altogether, make pills and dry them in the shadow. Of these
pills minister one at once to be hold under the tongue, that it may dissolve
by little and little, and so be swallowed. They that have had burning and heat
in the stomach long time, the juice of the sweet root being droncke, does
help them, and also the root it self with water and the juice of purselaine.
But those which are vexed with thirst caused of heat and drynes, as it
chances in all burning and very dry feauers, and to those which labor in
summer, or in great heat, Oxycratum seu pos^a.
such are best ^ealed with oxycratu^ (that is) a drink made with vinegar and
water sodden together. For vinegar does cool mightily, and does perce to every
place quickly, and the water besides the coolenes that it has, it is moistest
of any thing: for nothing (as Galen says in the place before rehearsed) is
moister then water. Also the thirst which enge^dreth in feauers, may be
mitigated in sprinckling the head with the coldest oils, as oil of roses
being sprinkled aloft on the fore part of the head. Also the best remedy for
drynes is sleep, where heat and moisture, ar commixt together, as it chances
in that kind of dropsy, in which plenty of salt humors be heaped in the
stomach and belly, or in those which have their stomach stuffed with salt
fleume, then vinegar is the best remedy. It is also good for them to soupe the
juice of quinces or pears, or veriuyce with water. If humors choleric or
salt swimming in the stomach, or drowned and stuffed in it do provoke thirst,
the^ you must minister medicines which can purge out those humors. Afterward
you must use medicines which do restrain and comfort the stomach and
strengthen it, Examples whereof you must seek before. They which thirst through
drincking of much old wine, are helped with drinking of cold water and other
things rehearsed in lib. 1. cap. 14.

CAP. IIII. Of pain in the stomache. DE DOLOR STOMACHI.
PAIN of the stomach is caused when naughty venomous and gnawing humors be
kept in the stomach, Causae. (...) Signa.
whereby it chances that through intolerable gnawing they cause swounding,
which they call stomachica. The disease is known by the continual pricking
and gnawing of the mouth of the stomach. In this evil you must give him meats
that do cool, and which may bring strength to the stomach (as is) lettuce and
purcelaine taken with vinegar. Diet.
Also pomegranates, and Orenges, pears, sharp grapes, and such like. Also
bread being steeped in very cold water is good. Also let his other meats be
such that will easily digest, and yet not easy to corrupt (as be) chickens,
partrich, birds of mountains, and such like sodden with veriuice. Also fishes
bred among stones, sodden with vinegar, limons, and the sharp juice of Cytrons.
Likewise let the sick drink water wherein has been sodden a little cynamon,
or give him thinn waterie wine. Curatio.
For the cure in the beginning you must provoke vomit by the remedies
aforesaid. Then after that also he must purge downward, by Hierapicra taking.
Which things being done, you must use remedies to strengthen the stomach both
inwardly and outwardly, as is taught in the 2. chap. and in other places also.

CAP. V. Of inflammation of the stomach. DE INFLAMMATIONE VENTRICVLI.
Causae.
INFLAMMATION of the stomach is caused no otherwise then the inflammation of
other parts of the body (that is to say) through the flowing together of
abundance of hot blood. Signa.
Signs hereof, is exceeding great pain continually, which cannot be mitigated
with any medicines that be applied to it. Moreover there is swelling and
burning which you may feel. Also a fever, Victus ratio.
heaviness, and appetite to meat. The diet (like as it is in other
inflammations) must be thin, small, and exquisite. Therefore he must use juice
of ptisan: and he must abstain from flesh, and wine, and from other hot
meats. Let the sick drink water, wherein has been sodden a little cynnamon,
or juice of sour pomegarnates, or of some other fruict that is cold and
restringent. Let him sleep little, and let him not talk much. Let him eschew
as much as he can sadness, Curatio.
and let him remain in an air meanly cold. You must begin the cure with
letting of blood, if there be fulness of the whole body, and strength of the
sick. You must cut the inward vein of the arm, and you must draw blood
according to the strength of the patient. After this you must apply outwardly
those things that do repress and restrain, specially upon the place where
the pain and swelling do most appear. For the stomach, specially the mouth
of it, has ever need of the commixing of those things that do restrain, but
most of all when it has an inflammation. Therefore those which do attempt the
cure with loosening remedies only, without the commixing of those things that
do strengthen the stomach, they cause peril of death. Therefore always
whether it be an oil that the inflamed member be nourished withal, or a soft
plaster laid upon that member, you must commixe some restringent thing with
them. Therefore for this purpose it is good to apply to it oil wherein
wormwood or quinces has been sodden, commixed together with masticke; Also
the juice of quinces, or pears, putting to it red roses, barley meal,
saunders, Ceramen.
bole armoniacke, and such like. Also you may use this cerate.. barley
meal..ss. white saunders, and red roses. ana..ij. bole armoniacke..j.ss.
aloes, masticke. ana..j. wormwood nutmegges, balaustiae. ana..ss. oiles of
masticke, and roses. ana..j.ss. with wax and turpentine as much as is
sufficient, make a cerot to lay upon the stomach. But if there be need of
great restriction (as it chances then, when the stomach is so weak that it
cannot hold and retain meat) you may commixe with the said things veriuice,
or juice of wormwood, or hipocischidos, and sumach, and such like. All these
things. if the inflammation be vehement, must be applied to the grief cold.
And if the belly does send forth nothing, you must provoke it with easy
clysters. Nor he works unwisely, that does minister..ss. of casia fistula
dissolved in endiue^ water, after that the burning heat is somewhat abated.
Also at that time you may commixe with the restrictiue medicines, which you
apply outwardly, many things that do discuss and dissolve (as is) fenugreeke
meal, flowers of chammomill, and Althee, and lineseed; you must never (as we
warned you before, noe not at that time, when there flows no more to the
grief, and that cannot be driven back, which is contained in the diseased
member) you must nor I say at that time, nether use only loosening medicines,
or only dissoluing medicines: but always you must commixe with them
restrictiue things which have power to preserve and keep the strength of the
stomach. Therefore at that time you must use this emplaister. Emplastri^^.
. the meal of lyneseed and fenugreeke. ana..ss, seed of dill..ij. flours of
cha^momill and melilote. ana..ss. wormwood, balaustie, red roses. ana..ij.
hypocischidis..ij. oils of Chammomill, lillies, roses, masticke, ana..ss.
hens grease, and goose grease, ana..ij. commixe them all together, and make
an emplaister. But before it be applied, it is not in vain to anoint the
stomach with this ointment.. oils of Cammomil, dill, and quinces, ana..iij.
powder of the root of Althoea, wormwood, Vnguentum.
lineseede. ana..j. wax sufficient, make an ointment.

CAP VI. Of abhorring of meat. DE CIBI FASTIDIO.
ABHORRING of meat, or loosing of appetite does chance either through
loosing of the sense of sucking of the veins, which is natural hunger, Causae.
as Galen witnesses libro primo, de sympt. causis. cap. 7. or because there is
no sucking out, or because the body is not emptied. Also sometime it chances
through some hot distempure, specially of the stomach, which distempure does
dissolve the hard and sound members by loosing of them, and makes them weaker
in drawing: but the moist members, it stretches out immeasurable by shedding.
Sometime it is caused through abundance of vicious humors contained in the
stomach: and through immoderate flux of the belly and bowelles: also through
overmuch bloudletting. Also the sick does abhor meat in continual and
vehement fevers, also in inflammacions of the stomach, the liver and the
matrice, and for many other causes which need not to be rehearsed here. The
signs which betoken a hot distempure, Signa.
are rehearsed before in the first chapter. Those which abhor meat, through
the vice of choleric humors, are troubled with gnawinge of the stomach, and
with appetite to vomit, and with thirst. Those that have humors that be
rotten, they have sometime a fever. But those which have lothinge of meat
thorough gross and clammie humors, they neither feel gnawinge of the stomach
nor thirst. But commonly to all there comes disposition to vomit. If
lothing of meat does come about the beginning of the disease, or about the
vigor and strength of it, which the pacientes strength may yet suffer, it
causes no peril, for the sick need but little nourishment. But if loss of
appetite do come in the declination of the whole disease, or in long
weakness, or in lack of strength, or of unmeasurable purging, it is not
without peril and danger. This evil is increased of age. For children are
vnluckely troubled with this disease (that is to say) such as are deuourers by
nature, and have need of continual nourishment. Therefore if children have
this disease, great excess above nature is signified by it. For cure of this
disease, Curatio.
if the loss of appetite be caused thorough weakness of the stomach, you
must mark what distempure does weaken the strength, and you must cure it by
contraries to that distempure, as is before taught. If the presence of vicious
humors do cause lothing of meat, if those humors be thin and gnawing: you
must first begin, before any other thing be ministered, to purge the humors
contained in the stomach by vomit. And if the pacient does vomit vneasilie,
minister unto him soupinges, and other nourishmentes which do moysten, that
they may drive those humors down into the belly, and drive them out beneath,
or purge the womb with hierapicra. Then we must bring the body to a good
temper, with such things as be meet for that purpose. Those that do abhor
meat thorough gross and clammie humors, you shall cure them by extenuatinge
and cutting the humors as well with Oxymell, as also with those medicines,
that are made of this and other sawces, as with Capares, Olyues,
musterde-seede, and such like declared in the first Chapter. If loathing of
meat happen thorough inflammation, or stoppinge of any other part of the
body, then you must go about the curinge of that member or part. And you must
go about to provoke appetite again, only by odoramentes, either by odor and
smelling of wine infused, or decoction of quinces, or pears. Also you shall go
about the same thing with soft annoyntinges with oils, as oils of roses,
masticke, and such like, and moderate frictio^s and rubbings of the body. Also
insessions to be applied to the loins and share. Also let meats be prepared of
diverse and sundry kinds, and after the daintiest fashion, that besides their
sweetness, they may entice and provoke their appetite, first of the best kind
of corn, Alica is made of who^^ (...) in water, beaten and dried in the sun,
and then broken grossly.
and such as does nourish much, as is Alica washed with the decoction of dates
and dam^scene prunes: reere eggs, birds of the mountains that be lean and
of no strong savor: swines feet much consumed in seething. For if he only
taste such meats, they nourish the body sufficiently. Whatsoever you minister,
ought to be of such sort, that it may easily be devoured and swallowed. For
those things that require much chewing, do cause unpleasantness, and put away
appetite. Nor you may not neglect to apply outwardly upon the stomach besides
the oyntmentes, emplaisters made of dates, quinces, wormwood, and such like.
Also Cerates made of the same things, examples whereof you must seek before.

CAP. VII. Of a doglike appetite. DE APPETENTIA CANINA.
A Doglike appetite is contrary to loss of appetite. For they that are thus
diseased, they desire much meat: and when they can not restrain their
appetite, they devour in meat without measure: then they being heavy with the
multitude of meat, and their stomach not being able to bear the meats, that
are in it, without hurt, they turn to vomiting. Then afterward they fill them
selves with meat, and again they return to vomiting like dogs. It is
caused through cold distempure of the stomach, or through vicious and sharp
humors which do gnaw and prick the mouth of the stomach. For cold vicious
humors do cause a gnawing much like the proportion of sucking, and do raise
appetite of meat. Also sometime it chances thorough unmeasurable dissipation
and spreading abroad of the whole body, which do follow either the violence
of heat, or the weakness of the virtue retentiue. Cold distempure of the
stomach is known by evil digestion, Signa.
windiness, romblinge, and many egestions or seiges, and by other tokens
declared before in the first Chapter. Sharp humors are known by sour
belkings, and much egestion, and very thin. If it be caused of unmeasurable
dissipation and spreading abroad, and that through heat which consumes the
meat like fire, and rarefieth the skin: then the egestions sent out by the
belly, be less in quantity, then the meat that is eaten, and also the
egestions be drier: But if that dissipation come through weakness of the
retentiue virtue, which cannot master the meats: Curat^^.
then there is much deiection, and casting out of those things that are eaten.
For the Cure, cold distempure must be healed, as is taught in the first
chapter of this book. If Doglike and unmeasurable appetite be caused of sharp
humors stuffed in the mouth of the stomach, Cure if it be of sharp humors.
and as it were, water soked into a sponge: you must minister in the
beginning, Hierapicra Galeni. For this does not only heat, but also it
does cut of and make clean, and draw out from the depth of the mouth of the
stomach, humors that be stuffed in it, and it causes them to avoid
downwarde. And yet it adds strength to the stomach, that afterward it will
not easily receive any hurtful humor. Therefore that is the best remedy for
vicious humors, stuffed in the stomach, to bring them forth. It is ministered
the weight of.iiij. with wine infused with warm water. If a child does labor
of this disease, which cannot drink the medicine for bitterness, make.j. or
ij. of it in pills, and anoint it outwardly with honey, and let them swallow
them down. Seeing that for the most part, this evil chances of sharp and
sour fleume, you must use such meats and medicines, as have power to cut,
divide, scour, and heat, as be, garlic, leekes, time, sauorie, origan,
penyroyall; and such like. Therefore the humors that be vicious being purged
in the beginning, Victus ratio.
you must let them use this diet. Let not their bread be new, nor well
leauenned, with the which also you must mix things that provoke vryne, as is,
Annise seed, Caraway seed, Commin, parsleye, and such like. Let his meats be
fat and oily. Also soupinges are good, that do destroy appetite, as be
pottage made with much honey, and much oil, or goose grease, hens grease, or
swines grease. Let his pot herbs be mallows. Also give him the brains and
fattest parts of birds, and of fishes likewise, and those things that do
altogether destroy appetite, and cause fulness, and that do nourish but
little, although they be eaten in great quantity. You may well give them
great plenty of wine, even as much as they can drink, and such wine that does
heat greatly, as those do that be yellowe in color, thin in substance,
sweet in smelling, and without restriction. For this does heat the stomach,
and destroy the sharpness of humors, so that often such wine with fat and
oily meats, suffiseth for the perfect cure. 2. Apho. 21.
As Hippocrates says, drinking of wine eases hunger. And you must give wine,
as well to them that be fasting, as to them also which have eaten meat,
although they be not yet a thirst. But you must give it to them that be
fasting, hoate, or warm at the least. He must abstain from all sower and
restrictiue meats and drinks, but specially from fruit. Let their
banqueting meats be pistacium, Almondes, pine nuttes, and olives with honey.
Minister also unto them milk, as well alone, as also with wine called Passum,
or with honey, so that nevertheless, you must take heed that you give it not
to those, that are wont to have it wax sour in their stomach, for to those it
does more hurt then good. But if it be well digested, it does not only stop
the appetite, but it softeneth the belly being stopped, and stops his
fluxes. Also you must make potions and fine cakes with milcke, and give them to
him, as be, marchpaines and Rise sodden with milk. Also he must wash now and
then, and make fat their skin largely. This kind of cure you must use as
long, as the sick is diseased, and till he be clean whole. If the doglike
appetite through unmeasurable scattring abroad, opening, and dissipation, then
in such a disease it is good to thicken the skin, Cure if it come of
immoderate dissipation.
and make it grosser with oil made of unripe Olives, or oils of roses, or of
mirtles, or any other wherein any restrictiue thing has been sodden with a
soft fire. Let the sick remain in an air, that is cold and perspirable. Let
him eschew hot air and hot bathes. Also let him eschew wine and all things
as well outwardly as inwardly that do heat. Let his drink be cold water or
decoction of Cynnamon. Put the sick in a cold bath if nothing do let it as
slenderness and leanness of the body, or the coldness of some member of the
body, as the breast or some other. You must give unto them meats that be
stable, durable, and hard to corrupt, as be periwincles, and all kinds of
shell fish, if they be sodden with water twice changed. Also swines flesh
being in full strength and specially the belly. Also fat bieffe, and all
things that be all fat, and that do swim in the stomach, and be hard to be
digested and distributed. For there be some, that have this disease, which by
reason of a sharp and biting heat, and as it were a feuerous heat in them
which do digest and consume bieffe and other things hard of digestion with
less labor then fishes of stony places, and such like things which be easy
of digestion. Of eggs those are good for them, which be sodden till they be
hard, or fried in a frying pan. Give them manchet made of fat broths without
honey. Also rice sodden with butter, and unleavened bread. Look how much the
evil is abated, and so much you must abate of the gross meats that you are
wont to give, and you must minish the restrictiue things also that you lay
without. For some time the vehemency of the appetite being abated, when the
body is filled with crude and gross humors, it turns into some other worse
disease. Among restrictiue medicines besides those things which are aforesaid
you must use this ointment.. oils of mirtles, Vnguentum adstringens.
and quinces. ana..ss. oil of roses..j. juice of plantaine..ij. red saunders,
masticke, bistorta, red roses. ana..j. bole armoniake..ij. Hipochistidos,
acatia, sanguis draconis. ana..j. wax as much as is sufficient, make an
ointment.

CAP VIII. Of great famine. DE BVLIMO.
BVLIMOS in Greek is nothing else, but great, and vehement famine or hunger.
It is caused through coldenesse of the stomach, (...). Causae.
and for want and wakenesse of strength, and in a man it takes his beginning
altogether of outward cold for long iourneyes, specially when there is snow
causes this disease. It is known thus. In the beginning there is felt much
hunger, Signa.
which for all that, does not long endure. For afterward the heart of the
patient begins to fail him with coldenesse of the extreme parts, and want
of spirit and breath. You must apply remedies for this disease by and by,
because there be that in desert places, Curatio.
or in bathes, being suddenly taken with this disease, do perish for lack of
help. Therefore they that are troubled with great hunger, in a journey without
a fever, or any other ways, you must recomfort them with vinegre, or
penyroyall, given them to smell unto, or earth whatsoever it be, sprinkled
with vinegre, or apples, or pears, or such other like fruit which is next
hand. Also new bread holden to the nose does help, and cheese of good
savor. Also porke roasted or sodden, and universally all that does nourish
much: but especially that which has savor of roasted meat, and is well
seasoned, and has a sufficient savor. For by such odoures and savors they
that have this disease, are for the most part refreshed, seeing there is
nothing (as we said before in the second book, the fourteenth chapter) that
does refresh and renew the strength sooner then odours. Moreover you must bind
the extreme parts of them with bands, and you must put the tippes of their
hands and feet in very hot water, and you must raise them and stir them,
as well by prickinge of the cheeks, as also by pullinge of the hear and
ears. And when he is somewhat come again to him self, you shall minister
unto him bread infused in wine, or some such thing, which does restore
strength very quickelye, (as be) rear eggs, Alica with wine. The next
remedy they must look for by meat, which if they can not take when it is
offered them, you must put it into the mouth violentlye, and compel them to
swallowe it, for by and by after that, they are delivered from their great
hunger, and from their fayntinge, and are raised quicklye. For this purpose are
good also the Antidotes, which are compounded of diverse sweet odoures (as is)
Aromaticum Rosarum, Diamber, Dianthon, diamoschi, Alipta moschata, and such
other like. And if this disease chance to come in fevers (which is seeldome
seen) and if it does rush in suddenly about the declination of fittes
belonging to feauers, you may minister meat without fear. But if it chance
in the beginning of the augmentacion or in the vigor and strength of the
fever, the sick must be refreshed by the odoraments aforesaid, and specially
by those things that have corn in them, as is Polenta, wet with water, Po^tia
is barely steeped in water the right, then dried, then fried and then ground.
or hot bread that sends forth a burning savor. Also you must use
frictions and rubbings of the extreme parts, and apply plasters made of
dates, or quinces sodden in wine* and this must you do until the declining of
the fit, that you may safely give him meat. And if the sick be never the
better through these things, you must venture to help him by giving of meat.
Therefore minister juice of Ptysan, or one morsel or other wet in wine that is
white and thin. For they being refreshed and as it were suddenly called
back, they afterward come to the declining of the fit. We must eschew
altogether in them that have this disease, long delay from meat, and hunger.
For you shall give him every hour very little meat, for it takes away
great famine, and the fainting whereby the sick is eased. And that it is lawful
to nourish and give meat to the sick in a fit, Galene teaches, libro decimo,
method. capite tertio.

CAP IX. Of evil digestion. DE CRVDITATE.
RAWNESSE of the stomach or ill digestion, is, when as the meat is not
altogether changed. Cruditas.
The causes of it, is distempure in the stomach, inflammacions, Causae.
hardenesse, impostumes, and such other like. Sometime the meats remain raw
and undigested, although the stomach be not diseased: either through immoderate
devouring of meats and drinks at one time, or through the evil and vicious
qualities of the meats them selves. Or through heating of them out of due
time, or thorough inordinate taking of them: or thorough some viciouse
superfluity growing: or through short sleeping as Galene says, libro tertio
de symptomatum causis capite primo. Signa.
The diversity of causes be known partly by the tale of the patient, and them
that be about them: and partlye by certain tokens. By the tale of the sick,
and of them that be about him, you may know whether meats and drinckes have
been taken immoderately, or out of due season, or inordinately. Also you may
know of them the shortness of sleeping: you may know if the meats their
selves were of evil qualities by his belkinges and savors, like things
roasted or burned. For in them that be hoate and choleric, the belkinges or
corruptions savor like meat roasted or burned. But in them, that be of a cold
nature and more fleugmatike, the corruptions are sour or sharp. Likewise you
must judge of excrementes that be fleugmatike and cold, they cause sour
corruptions, but those that be hot and mixed with bitter choler, do cause
savor like burned meat. Likewise judge of the stomach being* any otherwise
evil at ease, for if the disease be could, it causes sharp and sour
permutations, but if it be hot, it causes a burning savor. When perfect
cruditie and rawnesse is engendered without corruption, in such sort, that the
meats do remain altogether even as they were eaten: by this you may know
that the stomach is overcome, either thorough great quantity of meats, or
thorough vehement could taken in a hoate thirst. Therefore if you would not
have this cruditie and evil digestion, Victus ratio.
you must beware of all the aforesaid things (that is) that you neither offend
in the quantity, nor quality, nor order, nor due season of the taking of
your meat: and that you eat those things only, which you are able to
digest, and not that, which appetite requires. Therefore you must especially
take diligent heed to the measure, and quantity of your meat, and you must
refrain your appetite, and eat no more then your strength is able to suffer.
Also you must beware of evil order (that is) that you do not first eat
quinces, or pomegranates, or some such like thing: and afterward to eat pot
herbs out of oil of sauce made with salted fish, or other things which do
soften the belly. Also you must eschew eating out of due season (that is)
that you do not eat before some moderate exercise, or before yesterdayes meat
be well descended, and also not before your accustomed hour. Also you must
eschew all things that be hard by nature to digest: as is flesh that is hard
by nature, that is, bieffe and hearts flesh, also eschew all old flesh. Also
you must beware of meats that be fat, or that be poudred in salt, and stale
kept. Among pot-hearbes, those that be very hot, or very could, or also
those that engender wind, be hurtful. Eschew fishes, which are hard and dried
by long keeping. Also abstain from meats that be corrupt, or that do stink,
or smell ilfauouredlie. Refrain from sweet fruit, or that, which does
engender windiness, or that which is corrupt. Also eschew iunkets which be
hard of digestion. Also you must eschew meats that be strange and
unaccustomed, and that have the power of a medicine, as people use to commixe
in their tartes and fine cakes, but you must eat your meat in due time not
greedily nor in gobbets, nor swallow it not without chewing. Neither let your
drink interrupt and disturb your meat: for that does hinder the vnitinge
and knittinge together of the meat: and causes each piece to swim from
other. After meat eaten, you must eschew unequal and troubleouse motions.
Also eschew heat and could, for those things do stop the digestion of
meat. But calefaction and chaufing of the sides, and rubbinge of the feet do
help digestion. And if there be heaviness about the stomach, so that thorough
it a certain painfulness be spread thoroughout the whole body, then lay
your hand being stretched forth, upon the mouth of your stomach, or apply
to it a fleshie infant, for as Gallen says, it is much better and more
natural, then the heat which is procured by Fomentes. For which cause, some
do lay little whelps, while they rest upon their stomach, which does
increase the abundance of heat, that digesteth the meat. Also you must
procure sleep in the night equal and without disturbaunce. For this: you must
prepare to lie straight and let your head be boulstered up high, and in your
lyinge, you must incline toward the left side. And if you can not sleep, you
must lie without tourninge or stirring of your body, and keep it still in one
form of lying, for often stirringes and tossinges do disturb the meats, and
make the body windy and the bowels likewise. Curatio.
The cure must be diverse according to the diversity of the causes. For hot
distempure of the stomach requires one kind of curing, and cold distempure
requires another kind. Also inflammation of the stomach requires another kind
of cure, and hardness or impostumacions another kind, and all those cures you
shall seek out in the proper chapters. For here it suffiseth to say thus much.
When there comes an unpleasant belking, declaring manifestly that there is
corruption of meats: without prolonging you must provoke vomit, and by
drinkinge of warm water, you must constrain all that is corrupt to come
forth. For if they remain in the stomach, they cause tormentinge and
wrestlinge and heaviness of the head: and sometimes they send forth choler
upward and downewarde, Vomitus.
or they cause flux of the womb or feauers. Therefore such as can not digest
but hardly, we accustom them long time before, that they may vomit
easily, for that is best in many perilles. And if any be hard to vomit by
nature, and be ill disposed to drink could things, in any cause it is not
inconvenient to give him a cup of pure could water to drink, for the
stomach being strengthened, it soon thrusts out those things that stick
in it, and sends them down to the lower parts. Then the next day let the
sick be kept in quiet and rest, and use rubbinges of his feet, and chafing of
the sides, until the rumbling and windiness break out beneath, and until
the belkinges do come forth with a gentler quality. And then it is good to
rise up, that first the belly may send out the corrupt things by seege, and
afterward let the sick walk moderately, and let him be idle, because of the
troubled vapors, which be ascended into the head through corruption. After
this he must apply his mind to daily business without perturbation and
indignation. Then again the belly must be provoked to avoid those things
that remain yet. Afterward you must bid him rest, and you must power upon
and nourishe the feet with warm water: and the face being washed with pure
could water, let him rest in his bed, and procure him to sleep by all
means. After which let him use a little walkinge, and then a Bathe. After
bathinge let him take meat moderately, Long pepper helps digestion.
and that which the body is able to digest. But yet you may not ouerpasse
medicines that do help digestion, as is pepper, especially long pepper, which
does only help digestion. But if you have it not at that present, you may
use white pepper, and if you have not that neither, take black pepper. Also
for the same, Diacotoneon is good, and diospoliticum. Also there be other
things to be applied as well inwardly as outwardely both simples and
compoundes, to strengthen the stomach, which are rehearsed in the former
chapters. But all these medicines (especially such as do pierce quickly, as is
Caraway seeds, fennel seeds, Apium, louage seed, parsley seed, ammeos,
pepper, ginger and such like) must be given two hours before meat: but after
meat you must never take them: for then there is dispersed together with them
some of the crude meats, and causes obstructions. Therefore let them be used
most before meat after the rubbings in the morning, and two hours before
exercise.

CAP. X. Of windiness of the stomach. DE INFLATIONE VENTRICVLI.
Causae.
THe stomach is windy through the windiness that is engendered in it.
Windiness is engendered through fleugmaticke humors in the stomach, or else
thorough meats dissolved into vapors through want and debility of heat. For
cold only does cause no windiness, because it can neither extenuate nor
dissolve meat. Vehement heat for the most part, ouercomming those things that
it comprehends, it extenuateth and makes thin the meat, so that no
vapors can engender thereof: unless it be easy to turn into windines, of
the own nature. But the windiness that is so engendered is troublous and
cloudie: and also it is but little, and endures but a little while, so that at
one belkinge or other it vanishes away straight. The heat that woorketh in
the meats, if it be but of little force and strength, (that is) does
somewhat dissolve them, but not altogether consume them, thereof must needs
engender windines, (as Galen teaches lib. 30. de sympto causis. 70. They that
are thus diseased, have stretching out and heaviness of the stomach: Signa.
also sometime swelling, and a certain bowing out of the mouth of the stomach,
and of the stomach it self: also empty belkings do come, sometimes
lightening a little, and a stopping of the windines which is wont to break
downward. Also this evil sometimes is all over the breast, and sometime
behind, about the backbone and back, and rusheth among the iointes, and often
it occupies both places. Besides these things there is vehement pain in
drawing of breath, because of the pressing down together of the midriffe, so
that some do feel like as though they were choked. They are eased by the meat
going downewarde, and by windines breaking out either by belking, or by the
belly. Also rumbling and noise is hard within. Therefore if the windines of
the stomach be caused of flegmatique meats: Curatio.
you must minister an extenuating diet, and such medicines, as do divide and
purge fleume, which we taught in the first chapter of this book. But if the
windines be engendered through want and weakness of heat, he must use meats
easy of digestion, and of good juice. Also you must eat but little: for
fasting is very good for this disease. After all the meat you must minister
wine that is pure and vnwixed: but yet he must eschew much drink, as a deadly
enemy. Also let him eschew fruit and eating of moist oils. Also let him use
hot bathes in great vessels, for those do mitigate so often and dissolve
windines wheresoever it be, and provoke sleep. And when sleep comes, it
eases the pacient much because it helps digestion marvelously. And as for
medicines, let them use this decoption.. Calamint, mintes, wild mintes,
chamomill, origan, Decoctum.
peniroiall. ana. M.j. wormwood. M.ss. seeds of annyse, apium, comin, daucus,
parcely, fennel. ana..iij. seeds of nettles, carawayes. ana..ij. of the root
of Enula Campana..ij. seath these in just quantity of water, till the third
part be consumed: then strain them, and put to sufficient sugar to make the
iuce of that decoction sweet, and put to that licour, of syrop of
Calamint..iij and make a potion whereof let the sick drink every day, in the
morning..iiij. Or let him use this powder.. the pouders of Dianysum,
diacuninum, diacalum, inthes, ana..ij. seeds of Annyse, Tritura.
daucus and fennel. ana..j. quibbybes, cloves. ana..ij ginger.. pepper..j.
sugar lib. ss. commixe them altogether and make a powder. They which have
taken meat, but a little before, must first vomit. Also you must minister
suppositories made of things that entice windines. After this sort.. honey
sodden.ij. seeds of rue, comin, and fennel. ana..j. seeds of Careawayes and
anyse. ana..ss. salt..ij. commixt them altogether and make supposisitaries. If
the womb be very costiue, you must cast in a Clister made thus. Glandes.
. of the decoction above taught. lib. j. of benedicta laxatiua..vij. oils of
worewood, rue, and dil, Clyster.
ana..j. goose grease and hens grease without salt. ana..ij.ss. common
salt,.j. co^mixe altogether, and make a clyster. In this disease you must
anoint the stomach outwarly with the oils aforesaid or make a little bunch of
wool, and wet it in the aforesaid oils, being warmed, and apply it to the
stomach. And upon the buntch of wool being wound up together, strew comin
beaten, or seed of Apium or dill. If the disease endure long apply to it
plasters made of line seed, bareley meal, darnell meal, comin, dill seed,
or Apium, or fennel beaten, the tops of Centorie and such other like, or
apply this cerote. Ceratum.
oils of rue, dill, narde, and laurel. ana..j. meal of lineseede, and
fenugreeke ana..j.ss. seeds of Apium, careawayes, and Nigella Romana, ana..j.
laurel bearies, and Centorie ana..j.ss. gum ammoniacke, and opoponax
ana..ij. wax and rosen as much as is sufficient, make a Cerate. Also a great
cupping glass comprehending the navel every where, being applied with great
flame, is a remeady in this disease. Also Castoreum drunk with Posca, and also
applied outwardly with oil of dill, is good.

CAP. XI. Of yelking or hicket. DE SINGVLTV.
YELKING is motion of the stomach, and it is as it were a crampe of the stomach
raised of the expulsive virtue which goes about to thrust forth evil and
hurtful things. Causae. 6. Aph. 39.
This disease is caused for the most part, either of fulness or of emptines, as
Hippocrates Witnesses. Also sometimes it is caused through the biting and
gnawing of sharp humors. Also the meat being turned into a gnawing quality,
and so corrupted, causes some to yelke. Also coldness of the mouth of the
stomach, and corruption of the food causes yelking, which causes children
specially to have the hicket often. Also yelking engenders in feauers,
specially when the stomach or some other bowell is inflamed. Signa.
The outward causes are easily known by the telling of the sick and them that
be about him. Fulness is known by heaviness and emtines by those things that
went before. You may know if the meat be corrupt by the burnt savor of it.
But you shall know sharpnes by gnawing, pricking and pulling. Therefore when
yelking is engendered of coldness, you must lay upon the stomach, wool dipped in
the oil, Cure of priking of cold.
wherein has been sodden rue, comin and wormwood. Also oil of mastick, and
of Castoreum being anointed does profit. To children warm linen clothes
being applied to, do help often. They that be of full age, minister to them
to drink wine or Apium sodden in aqua mulsa, or comin beaten, or Asarum or
penyroyall, each of these by him self or else mixed with other. Also
squilliticke vinegre is good to soupe. Also give the^.j. of Castoreum with
Posca, as well against yelking caused of cold: as also, if it be caused through
multitude of humors. Also if it be applied outwardly to the stomach with old
oil, it is good for both the said griefs. Moreover holding of the breath
which does increase heat, Cure of yelking of ^u^nes.
is a present remedy for them that do yelke through cold. When yelking is
caused of fulness, vomiting is the best remedy. If there be gross humors,
they must be extenuate and cut with Oximel scylliticum, and calamint and
horehound their decoction, and such like before rehearsed. Auersion.
Afterward you must apply those things which may draws aboundannce of
humors a contrary way, and turn them clean aside. For which purpose are good
those things which do purge downward, and specially clisters, bindings and
rubbings of the extreme parts, and cupping glasses with much flame, fasted to
the breast, to the stomach and to the back. Also these things are good for
them, long and quick walking, 6 Aph. 13.
bearinges about and chiefly ryding. Also it is good for them to sneese as
Hippocrates says. For when the yelking is caused of fulness there is need of
violent moving. Also handsome calling loud, with much clamor, and with holding
of the breath is good for them. Moreover the stomach must be strengthened by
medicines ministered as well inwardly as outwardly. Inwardly by comforting
Electuaries, and outwardly by applying of ointmets, emplaisters and cerotes
before taught. Yelking, that is caused of emptines, is cured by giving to the
patient convenient food, Cure of hickes caused of ^^tines.
and by those things that do fill his wanting: which partly be before taught,
and abundantly spoken of hereafter in the cure of the fever Ethicke. It does
much good in this kind of yelking, to anoint the joints of the neck and the
back with moisting oil, Cure of yelking through inordina^^e.
(as is) oiles of violets and of sweet almondes. But if yelking be caused of
gnawing things, first we find that vomiting is a sufficient remedy for it:
than also stupefaction of feeling, and such things as do alter the gnawing.
The senses be astonyed and stupefact by cooling things, Pillulae de cyngi^sta.
for which purpose you must minister philonium, or pills of hounds tongue, which
do profit marvelously in this disease, you must use them thus. You must make
of one drachme, six pills, whereof let the sick take one before he go to bed.
The mordacitie and gnawing is altered and driven away by medicines which do
stop, attenuate, and dry. Stoppers of gnawing be these, juice of Endive
drunk, cowcumber seeds husked and beaten being drunk, lettuse seed likewise
taken. Also juice of purcelaine drunk, and purslaine it self taken in meat.
Also Sebesten dectoction taken in drink, but specially above all Asses milk
is good. Or if you have not that, cowes milk new milked is good being drunk.
For the same purpose minister conserve of roses, or of violets, or of water
lillies diarrhodon, diatrion fautalon. Iulep of violets of Nimpheae (that is)
water lillies and such like. P^stillus.
The Throchiskes do stop, extenuate and dry up.. Costus, saffron,
spikenard, green roses, masticke, ana..ss. asarum, aloes. ana..ij. opium..j.
with juice of psillium. make trochiskes, of the which give.ss. or.j. Note that
opium, and the roses, and the juice of psillium be of a cold operation. The
spiknard does discuss, dissolve and corroborate. The Asarum does bring out the
vicious humors by urine. The Aloes does purge out the vicious humors, and drive
them out beneth at the seege. The saffron digesteth and strengthens the
parts, for by his temperament of heat he causes digestion, and by his
restrictiue virtue which he has, he adds strength. The costus does
sufficiently heat, and moderatly restrain, which you may perceive by his
taste. Galen commends this medicine very much lib. 8. de comp. Med. secundum
locos. cap. 3.

CAP. XII. Of Choler. DE CHOLERA.
CHOLERA in Latin, is an immoderate perturbation of the stomach caused by
vomit both upward and downwarde. The barbarous sort call this disease,
Cholerica passio: they that have this disease be called of the Latins
Cholerici. Cholerici Sausae.
It is caused through much cruditie and rawnes of the stomach and ill
digestion, which many times engendereth of great wickedness of the meats and
sometime through abundance of vicious humors also. The signs whereby this
evil is known be very manifest: for they avoid both upward and downward:
also there follows thirst and swet, and short pulse and drawing up, Signa.
and stretching out of the muscles of the hands, and feet, and specially of
the calfe of the legs. Therefore seeing this evil is most sharp and does
cause very grievous soundings, if it endure long, you must do your diligence,
that you help it by and by without any tarying. Curatio.
No Physician, if he see this disease to be engendered through abundance of
vicious humors, will in the beginning all at once go about to stop that which
is sent forth, for seeing they be unprofitable and hurtful they have need of
purging. Therefore if the patient has disposition to vomit, and be troubled
with undigested meats remaining in the stomach, you must give him warm water,
and then he must vomit by his finger or a fether put into his mouth. But you
may not provoke vomit by ministering of Aqua mulsa, nor with water mixed with
oil: because these things do increase the fluxes, and cause mordacitie and
writhinges. Also you must help the matter that purges downewarde: for a
straung poison as it were being within does gnaw the stomach and the guts,
and draws the humors from the whole body, you must minister unto him the
easiest purging medicines as is Aloes, Casia fistularis, decoctions of
Mirabolanes and such like. After that the superfluous things be brought forth,
then he must rest, and it is good to nourish the sides with oils of Masticke,
or nard, or wormwood, and to cause sleep. You must commixe sometime with the
aforesaid other things which can strengthen the stomach, which be before
taught, and with them you must make oitmentes. When there appear exact and
perfect concoction and digestion, use bathes of sweet water, and meats of
good juice. Among which is brothe of chickens with veriuice, the flesh of small
birds of mountains, reere eggs and such like. In drink let him use juice of
Pomgranates, or syrup of roses, or water wherein burning steel has been
quenched three or four times. But when the evil has endured long, and has
caused slendernes and leanes throughout the body, and specially if the belly or
stomach do rest after the removing from his place, and that the pulse be
less, and thicker, then you must bind the extreme and uttermost parts by
bands, and you must make them fast by much oil. Also apply to the stomach
Cataplasmes, and emplaisters, made of restrictiue and strengthening things, as
those be which are made of dates, hypocischidos, Acatia, Sumach, bole
armomacke, franckensence, balaustiae, roses, and fruit of mirtles. Also it is
an effectious remeady, if a linen cloth wet in the juice of crabbes, be laid
upon the stomach, or this Cerate.. of the oils of Roses, mirtells, Scu^^^
stomachi.
and quinces ana..j masticke, franckensence, acatia. ana..ij.
hypocischidos..j.ss. saunders white and read. ana..j. balustiae, dragons
blood. ana..ss. bole armoniacke.j. wax and roson as much as is sufficient, make
a Cerate to lay upon the stomach covered with silk. In drincking give him the
measure of one Cyathe of cold water to soupe of (that is).j.ss. but you must
beware that it be not over cold, A Cyathe is,.j.ss.
for that being given suddenly is vomited up again, and sometime with his
stupor and coldness it hurts very extreemely the natural heat, or it
causes inflammation of the stomach, or of some of the bowels. And you may
sometime drop into the water, a little of the juice of sharp pomegranates, or
of roses, or of the decoction of vine branches. And if those things that be
voyded forth be very sharp; and that thirst and burning do trouble the
patient: then minister cucumber seeds with three Cyathes of water. Also you
may give it commodiouslie with Amylum. Then also minister endive or lettuse or
both sodden in Posca. Afterward procure sleep and rest by all means: but if
the flux will not be stopped, and the pulse decaie between this and that, and
that cold and swet do take him, and also sometime yelking, you must come to
wine that is meanly restrictiue, which is not very strong, but yet sweet and
not odoriferous. And put into it, warm if it may be, or else cold, crummes of
bread or Alica, and so by little and little at sundry times let them soupe it up.
But yet they must eschew much quantity of wine, and by all means you must go
about to bring them to sleep, by strewing the pauement of the house, with
roses, vine leaves, bryer, and such like before taught. Also apply odouraments
to the nose, as roses, quinces, and such like, also anoint soporiferous and
sleepy ointments about the temples and forehead. If he go to the stool still,
cast in by a clyster Amylum with decoction of poppy heads, for it does both
restrain and cool and cause sleep. To stop vomits, Constri^tion of vomites.
it is good to eat and devour the juice of meddlers, quinces, pomegranates
and pears. If with these remedies, and others that be taught before in the 2.
chapter of this book, the sick cannot keep and brook his meat: you must
apply without upon the stomach a very great cupping glass lightly. Against the
contractions and drawing up of the muscles, Against constriction in the muscles.
you must wind about the muscles, linen clothes sooked in warm oil, and
apply moist Cerates and ointmentes, wherein is put some Castoreum and oil of
ireos. You shall find examples enough of those in the chapter of the palsy
before in the first book. When the disease decreaseth, you must refresh and
restore the patient again, with good meats as chickens, doves, hens,
partriche, wood culuer, and ousills, or blackbirdes and such like.

CAP. XIII. Of the flux diarrhaea. DE DIARRHAEA.
DIARRHAEA in Latin, is a copious and great flux of the womb without
exulceration and inflammation. It is caused through weakness of the instruments
that be long, Causae.
and do serve to digestion: also through abundance of nourishment and meat
that is moist, and viscous, and through corrupting of the same meat. Moreover
gnawing and biting of those things that are contained in the belly: also
flowing of some things from above to the belly, and also wekenes of the
retentiue virtue. Signa.
The signs whereby the causes are known are very manifest. For if this flux
diarrhaea be caused through the weakness of the instruments that serve for
digestion (as is) the stomach, the bowels, the liver and the spleen: you must
seek the signs of these out of their own chapters. But if it be caused
through much devouring of evil meats and drinckes, you may know it partly by
the patients tale, and partly also by those things that come forth by seige.
For if they be choleric they be yellow of color, and they be not cast out
without feeling of gnawing and heat: also the patient feels bitterness of the
mouth, thirst, thin state of the body, and other tokens which signify
choler. If it be flegmaticke, those things which come out with the seige,
shall be contrary to that, which is said before of Choler. And if humors do
flow from the head to the belly, the egestions will appear frothy, and the
tempre of the brain will be very moist. If the flux be engendered through fulness
of the whole body, or if it be indicatorie, the signs are rehearsed in another
place, and of Galen lib. de plenitudine and crisibus. And if this flux of the
womb, be caused through weakness of the instruments, Curatio.
the distempure which is cause of this, must be cured and corrected by his
contraries, a^ is taught in the first chapter of this book. If this flux of
the womb be caused through other causes, Note.
and that nature does labor to drive out of the body superfluous and hurtful
matter by this means, and that you can easily suffer it, which be troubled
with it, then you must suffer and watch, till nature has bestowed all her care
and charge: or else also it is good to help natures motion, but for to go
about to strive with it, and to stop the flux, it causes a worse and
greater disease. For those humors which are stopped being carried upward do
cause pain in the head, or frenzy, or litargie, or impostumation behind the
ears not without danger. Therefore in the beginning you may not stop the
flux, which flows profitably for the health of the body. But after that the
flux has endured long, not only carrying forth superfluities, but also
melting as it were the state of the body and consuming the strength, then you
must labor to stop it, as well by things given in at the mouth, as also
cast in at the fou^dament, and also by things applied outwardly upon the
belly. Therefore if there come forth excreementes of clean choler, you must
change it into a better and more healthful state, but yet you may not cure
them by stopping of it straight ways. Cure of a Diarrhaea of choler.
For the choleric matter that is gathered together, and heaped in the
stomach, and in the bowell called ieiunum, if it be withholden and kept there
still, it hurts greatly. For it both ouerturneth the stomach, and causes
inflammations of the bowels, it kindles thirst and restores feauers, and
caused the evils aforesaid, and generally causes a worse disease. Therefore
if there be abundance of choleric humors in the body: nature must be
expelled with easy purging medicines, (as is infusion) of rewbarbe, casia
fistularis, the barks of mirabolanes, Citrine or manna. After that give cowes
milk or goats milk warm, being new milked: or sees it at the fire and
stir it continually, till it be consumed unto the third part: which you may
do by quenching of read hot iron, or steel gaddes in the milk often, but
while it seetheth you must take the scume or some of it. For surely you can
find noe quicker remedy against fluxes of choler. And because the milk that
is eaten of one that has a fever, is wont to turn into a burning savor, or
also sharp or sour, and so causes more hurt the^ good: therefore if the
patient has a fever together with this flux, you shall eschew ministering of
milk to him, dressed after rhat sort. But you must pour the fourth part of
water to the milcke, and sees it until half be consumed, and then minister
it unto him. If the choler be heaped up together in the bowels, you must cast
in clisters made of the decoction of barcley, with sugar, roset, oil of roses,
yolks of eggs and such like. At the length, when the choleric humors be
voided out, you must minister inwardly such medicines, as do restrain and
strengthen (as be) conserve of roses, diacotoneon without spyces, diatrion
santalon, trochiskes of spodium Hydromalon and such like. And what kind of
medicines they must be that ought to be applied outwardly, we will tell you a
little heareafter. Also the foundament must be fomented and nourished with a
decoction made of some restrictiue things. If the flux Diarrhaea be engendered
through flegmaticke humors that be gross and tough, or through corruption of
them, Cure of D^^arhaea of flegmaticke humors.
then you must begine your cure as you did before with easy purging. Therefore
then you must minister the infusion of Agaricke, with mirabolanes imbelitici:
or some such like medicine, which is able to bring forth the before said
humors. Also clysters are good, specially if there be abundance of clammy
humors heaped up in the bowels, let them be made of the decoction of Centory,
and oil of rue, and such like. Minister within the belly Diacotoneon with
spices, green ginger, and other medicines which have power to heat and dry.
Also apply outwardly those things which do add strength. If the flux
Diarrhaea be caused through the weakness of the virtue retentiue, you must
minister and apply those medicines, Cure of Diarrhaea of the weakness of the
virtue retentiue.
which are applied against other unmeasurable fluxes of the womb. Therefore
apply irrigations and sprincklinges of oil omphacine, or oil of roses, or
oil of the blossoms of apples with some sour or sharp wine, but oil of
mirtles is of more effect, if there be need of vehement restriction, having
the third or fourth part of wine added to it. And if their bodies be strong,
you may sees in that irrigation, gawles, pomegranate rindes, and Balustiae. If
the flux endure still: apply Cataplasmes, emplaisters, and cerates, made of
restrictiue and drying things, whereof we will make mention in the next
chapter. Also this Cerate is effectious to be made. Cera^^^.
Take seven mulberies, or blackberies which be sour and whytish for lack of
ripenes, bray them well and add to it oil of roses.ij. wax.j. and make a
cerate. After the voyding of superfluous and hurtful humors, these things
heal the flux of the womb being ministered in drink, (that is) comin,
decoction of maidenheare, the root of white thorn, likewise on drachme weight
of the seed of Apium ministered: for it provoke urine and turns the fluxes
that be in the bowels thither. Also unripe Mulberies being yet sour, if they
be dried many days in the Sun and so kept, if they be beaten and drunk when
need requires, they restrain and stop the womb maruelously. Also they may
be ^^aied and mixed with his meats, as they are wont to use Sumach, which
sometimes is sodden, the quantity of an ounce weight with a chicken: but yet
blackeberies of the brier being unripe and sharp, do bind the belly more, if
they be dried as is aforesaid and ministered in drink. Among compound
medicines these are marvelous good (that is) trochiskes of Spodium, of terra
le^^ia, diacotoneon, diatrion santalon, Triacle: and this compound made in
Lozenges is good. ^
. the powders of diatrion santalon, diarrhodon abbatis. ana..ij. red coral,
chosen franckensence, red roses. ana..ss. spodium,.j. seeds of sorrel,
sumuch. ana..j. balaustiae, acatiae, ana..ss. masticke.ss. bole armoniacke..j.
fine white sugar* lib. ss. dissolve it in the stilled waters of Plantaine, and
roses, and make lozenges. Also this loch is good: Eclig^^.
. of old conserve of roses, of diacotoneon without spices, rob e ribes, rob de
berberies ana..ss. hydromel..iij. diamoron..v. the powder of diatrion
santalon..ij. red coral,.j. spodium, balaustiae. ana..ss. bole armoniacke..j.
syrup of mirtles as much as shall suffice and make a loch. Moreover you shall
ever have this water ready made.. sumach, one quarter, A precious water.
rain water. lib. 3. in which steep the sumach a day and a night, then boil,
them, and strain the sumach well and strongly. And in that water, sees rice,
or milcke, or other meats, or at the least way, pour some portion of this
water to them. If the flux Diarrhaea be caused through flowing of humors from
some other member of the body you must seek the cure out of their proper
chapters. As for example, if the humors flow from the head into the stomach:
you must return to those things which are spoken of before in the chapter
against distillation or reume, and so do likewise with other parts of the
body.

CAP XIIII. Of the flux Lienteria. DE LIENTERIA.
LIENTERIA in Greek, is a certain lightness, or smoothnes of the bowels, even
like as there chances of a scarre without on the skin of the body. In this
disease the bowels do not hold the meat, but they let it slide away before it
be changed and perfitly digest, even in the same form and likeness that it was
eaten. Therefore in Latin, it may well be called leuitas, or leuor
intestinorum, Causae.
and in English, lightness or smothenes of the bowels. It is caused oftentimes
through a grievous flux disenteria by name going before, which causes deep
exulceration of the bowels, then scarres that be hard closed together and
smooth do follow: which scarres by reason of the hard closing, will not suffer
the meats to be distributed above the body, because the mouths of the veins,
which are wont to draw nowrishment from the bowelles to them selves, are now
stopped. And because of smoothnes (as is aforesaid) the bowels suffer the
meats to slide out, before they be perfitly digested. Also this disease is
caused many times through weakness and debilitie of the virtue, that should
keep and hold the meats in the stomach. For this virtue being weak and
sickly, the food or meats be neither digested nor distributed: but they are
cast forth crude, moist, and nothing changed, (the belly being always
soluble). Also sometime it engendereth after long flux of the womb. Also
sometime when dropsey water, auoideth by the belly, this flux Lienteria
follows. Therefore of what cause soever this flux is engendered, the sick
does taste or feel no meat, Signa.
and it causes evil state or plight of the body. Therefore there chances
to the patient continual seiges, crude and raw, in color pale or whitish,
unequal and very waterie without any commixinge of blood and choler. Also
he feels a burninge, which spreads all over the sides, loothinge of meat
follows it. 6. Aph. 1.
It is a good and a friendely sign in them, that have had this flux long, if
their chance to them sharp and sour belchinges, for it betokens that the
meat does abide some while in the stomache until it begin to be changed.
Victus ratio.
When this disease chaunceeth, it is easy to perceive, that you must refreshe
and recreate the virtues retentiue and digestive, as well of the stomache as of
the bowelles by all means, and that may chiefelye be done by mynistringe of
conueniente meats, and ordeyning of a dyette meet to restoore and refreshe
strength. Therefore the flesh of the birds of mountains are good, also
chickens roasted in whose bellies also must be put Sumache or masticke, and
other things which shall be rehearsed in the next chapter. Let the meat
which you give him, be little in quantity and easy of digestion. And if his
sieges be sharp and choleric, make him meat with rice and Alica and such
like, with the which sees some restrictiue things, pears, quinces, meddlars
and such other like. Also milcke sodden is good for them, but if their seige
be flegmaticke, you must minister unto them contrary meats. Also commixe
some what that is pleasant and acceptable to the stomache, as is Annyse
seed, common, or Daucus. In choleric seiges let their drink be wine that
is waterye and thin: but in flegmaticke let the wine be old and hot. And
generally let him drink but little, for much drink is not only in this
flux Lienteria, but also in all other fluxes of the womb, most hurtful. For
curinge of this disease, if the flux Lienteria be engendered through weakness
of the virtue of the stomache, Cure of Lienteria of weakness of the virtue of
the stomach.
you must turn to the chapter of weakeneesse of the stomache, and there seek
the cure. But to be short you must minister both within and without to the
body those things that do restrain, and that can strengthen as well the
stomache as also the bowelles. Therefore mynister syruppes of wormewoode, and
mintes and other electuaries which do strengthen the stomache. And you must
apply those things outwardely, which be rehearsed before in the chapter of
Diarrhaea, and shall be taught in the next chapter followinge. But this
medicine is specially good.. oils of Masticke, wormewoode, myntes, and
myrtles. ana..ij. pouders of cinnamon chosen, cloves, vnguentum.
and galingale. ana..j. Balaustiae and red roses. ana..ss. wax as much as is
sufficient, make an ointment, or use this cerote.. oils of masticke, of
wormewoode, and of quinces. ana..j. oil of myntes..ss. calamus aromaticus,
cloves, franckensence, Cera^^^.
ana..j. wood of Aloes..ss. red roses, white saunders and read. ana..ss.
masticke, common. ana..j. Hypochischidos, Acatia, Sumach. ana..j.ss. Gallia
moschata..j. with wax and turpentine as much as is sufficient, make a cerate.
If Lienteria be caused of a scarre.
Moreover to those that you conjecture have a scarre, to those the eating of
sharp things is profitable, for it causes a certain refrication and rubbing
open again of the scarre, also it reuyueth again the natural heat, and
does some what refresh the digestive virtue. Therefore in this case (as Galen
witnesses in chapter nientie five, Artis Medicae) they be good which do
scour, and wype away sufficiently, and restrain a little, therefore always
commixe scouring things with restrictiue medycines. In all other causes of
this flux Lienteria, you must use the same kind of cure, which you do use to
them that be afflicted with the fluxes Diarrhaea, or Dysenteria.

CAP. XV. Of the flux Dysenteria. DE DYSENTERIA.
DYSENTERIA in greek properly is nothing else then an exulceration of the
bowelles. The Latynes call this disease tormina, because through it, the
bowels are tormented and fretted very much with pain. We said before
properly, 4 Kinds of dysenteria.
because the greeks reckon four kinds of bloody Dysenteria, as witnesses
Galen lib. 30. de symptomatum causis. The first is, when Causae.
which sometime chances through outward causes, as of cold, heat, and
moystnesse. Also through drincking of pernicious and naughty medicines (as is
scammony and such like. Also through eating of fruicte, through cruditie and
rawnes, or through eating of sharp or sour meats, or through sharp and
gnawing humors, flowinge from the whole body to the belly, or engendered in
the belly it self. And this begins after Tenasmus sometime, and sometime
by it self. Signa.
The excremententes first are choleric, diverse and fattie^, by reason of the
fat that cleaves within in the bowels being melted. But when the
superficies of the bowelles is altogether bare, and exulceration does abide
about it, then the excrementes that come forth, be full of dregs and bloody.
And when the exulceration has pierced deeper, then also is sent forth
filthiness, having as it were little peaces of parchemente commixed with it. And
if it be not stopped, it eats and feeds in shortetime, the places nigh unto
it, and it sends forth matterie excrementes, S^gnes of exulceration of the
(...).
such as are wont to run from dead bodies. When the small guts are
exulcerate, there abides pain about the nauill, the excrementes are cholerike
having the color of a leeke, and altogether garnished with sundry colors,
commixed with much ordure or dounge. The patiente feels grief and
frettinges, and gnawinges and losening, so that the sick is not far from
faynting and failing of heart. Also they are troubled with thriste and be
feuerous, and the ordure comes forth crude and raw, and the bowell called
ieiunum is exulcerate, but that is very seldom: but if it do chance the
egestions do appear more crude and raw having black blood wrapped with it
vehemently and yelow choler, and much thirst, and also disposition to vomit do
trouble the sick. Also sometime they vomit and abhor meats. Also there
remains vehement pain above the nauill, and sometime also malignaunt feauers
do engender. And they that are so diseased be waxen ill coulored, and do
sweat out even till faynting and failing of heart. Their strength does
quickly fail them, Signs of exulceration of the great bowels.
and they be not far from death. But if the vlceration be engendered in the
great bowelles, then the ordure it comes forth is pure and much and heaped
together, and comes out with windines and frothenes sometime. Also fatness
is commixed with it, and blood swimmeth alofte: as Galen shows largely in
libro 60. de male affectis locis. For it helps greatly to the cure to know
this thing. For if the exulceration be in the upper and small bowelles, you
must go about to cure by medicines, given in at the mouth, but if it be in the
great and lower bowelles, it is more convenient to throw in clysters. The
beginning of the cure of them that have the flux Dysenteria, from whence
soever the flux proceeds, must be with quiet and rest, and little meat.
Therefore if a feauar do not let it, let him eat milcke new milcked, while it
is yet warm: Diet.
or it steed of it minister milcke sodden: as we taught before in the chapter
of diarrhea. For this first cleanses and purges downward, and tempereth
together those things which be in the body, and last of all it stops and
binds the womb. But you must give him moreover wet bread after the taking of
the milcke. Also pottage prepared of milcke, has both the nature of medicines,
and also they cause good nourishment, as is rice with milcke, amylum, and eggs
mixed with milcke. Also soupings or pottage made of alica, and milium, sumach,
being added to it, is good. Also you must prepare meats of dry bread, pouring
to it Posca, or juice of dates, or quinces, or of pears, or of sumach.
Lenticula.
Also minister chittes well roasted, with plantaine, or sodden with quinces,
brayed: thusing of oils is not necessary nor needful, but you shall minister
to taste upon endive, to both wild and tame sodden, and plantaine, and
colewortes twice sodden. Give him also the yolks of eggs roasted. Flesh is
not good to be given to them that have the flux dysenteria, because they be of
a stronger nourishment, and do strive against digestion: but yet you must give
it to them, that be troubled with this disease long. Among all kind of
flesh, you must specially choose birds, as is partrich, and wood culuers and
birds of mountains. Among four footed beasts, gotes flesh and hares
flesh are good. But you must forbid him the flesh of cattle that draw,
and of all other four footed beasts. Potus.
From the beginning let him use for his drink rain water which is not fallen
from houses covered with lead: For such water being droncke, even of them that
be whole, engendereth the Disenteria: and if good rain water be not present,
you must use running water, wherein burning steel has been quenched. But if
the stomach be diseased, or if his strength be cast down, give him wine, also
let it be restringent and not very old. Curatio.
Sleep is the best remeady for them that have the Disenteria. For this cure
you must use such remeadyes, that do restrain, stop, dry up, and provoke
vryne, and that do carry the flux some other way. Restrictiue things be
these: sorrel seed sumach, gauls, Ads^^^ngen^^^.
pomgranate ryndes dried, bryer root, lapdamum, acatia, hipocischis,
balaustium, willowe leaves, comferie roots leaves and seed, rheum ponticum,
if it may be gotten, root of Altheae, horsetaile, coral, masticke, hares
cream, dragons blood, the bark of franckensence, terra lemnia, root of
verbascus, plantayne seed, white daysies, a kind of mallows called alcea,
oxis, sanicula, ophrys, ophioglossum, knotgrasse, sheepeheardes purse,
walworte, pedelion, numularia, dragans the male, sharp mulberies, carnells of
grapes, the barcke of maces and such like. These things do stop and make
temperate the bytyng, gnawing and sharpness of humuors, as is Amylum,
tragacantha, gummes, Obtunde^^^.
tallowe of goats, kiddes, swyne, gease, and hens. These do dry up:
hares cream, Resiccant^a.
hearts horn burnt, the shelles of crabbes of running water and sage. Things
to provoke vryne, you shall find in his own place. Therefore if the
exulceration be in the great bowels, you must minister clysters first, such as
have power to scour and cleanse, Cure if it be in the great bowels.

Clyster abstergens.

Clyster glutinans.


as this is.. of the decoction of whole bareley lib. j. mel rosarum strayned.j.
sugar roset..ss. yolks of eggs in number ij. oil of roses..iij. commixt
altogether and make a clyster. Abstersion and cleansing being first done, cast
in those things that do glutinate and join together, as this is.. red roses, plantaine, leaves of comferie, knotgrasse primerose. ana. M.ss.
balaustiae..j. ryce burned.j. root of comferie..ss. sees altogether in
water, wherein steel has been quenched, until the third part be consumed,
then strain it, and take of the juice of that decoction..xij. juice of
plantayne..ij. acatia hipocischidos. ana..ij. bole armoniacke, sanguis
draconis. ana..j. gotes tallowe..j. oils of roses, mirtelles, quinces. ana..j.
commixe altogether and make a clyster. Sometime it does not only require
things to stop the vehemency of the pain, but also medicines that be
stupefactiue. Therefore then it is good to use this clyster. Clyster doloreus
leniens.
. of goats milcke, or of cowes milcke. lib. j. fresh butter..j. goats
grease..j.ss. tragacantha, gum. ana,.j. yolks of eggs in number iij. pills
of hounds tongue..j. oils of roses..iij. co^mix altogether and make a
clyster. If there be need of more stupefactio^ vehement: you must augment the
weight of the pills, or else you must add to the aforesaid weight of
pills.iij. or.iiij. grains of opiu^, or more or less, according to the
vehemence of the pain, and the state of the body. If the exulceration be in
the small and thin bowels, then it rather requires medicines that are given in
at the mouth. Therefore the decoction of restrictiue things, which is before
taught, is good, if you co^mixe with it syrup of roses and mirtles, and so
minister it, ^
and also other medicines which are taught in the chapter of Diarrhea, are
good. Also you may conveniently minister this potion.. of the decoction of the
root of comfery, or of some other restrictiue thing..iij. syrup of roses..j.
syrup of mirtles..ss. powder of the trochiskes of spodium, plantine seed,
boil armoniacke. ana..ij. commixe altogether and make a potion. Besides those
things that are rehearsed in the chapters of Diarrhea and Lienteria, you must
apply outwardly upon the belly this cerote.. of the oils of masticke,
Opti^^^ Cera^^^.
roses, mirtles, and quinces. ana..j. meal of barley and fenugreeke. ana..j.
of red roses, plantine. ana..j. balaustiae, sanguinis draconis, ana..ss. bole
armoniacke..j. hypocischidos, acatia, masticke. ana..ij. with wax and rosen as
much as is sufficient, make a cerote. By the examples aforesaid, you may make
many other remeadies, which we ouerpasse here.

CAP. XVI. Of Tenasmus. DE TENASMO.
TENASMVS, is a continual desire to go to the stole or seege, which the
patie^t cannot defer nor eschew, and yet he auoydeth nothing, except it be a
little blood, Causa.
or filthy matter like sneuell. It is caused oftentimes through outward
cold, or through humors sharp and choleric, or of salt fleume, or
impostumation, or of inflammation engendered in the straight gut. Also many
times, the stopping of hard dounge in the blind gut, may cause the Tenasmus.
Signa.
The Physician may easily know, if it be caused of outward cold, by the tale
of the sick, because either he has sitten upon cold things, or he has
taken much cold in winter, or he has tarried long in cold water, you may know
the humors by that which he auoydeth, which either be choleric or
flegmaticke. In a botch or byle his egestion is matter and corruption, and he
feels pricking in the foundament. Inflammation causes swelling of the right
bowell, and greauous pain together with a fever, abundance of doung causes
feeling of grievous distention, and stretching out about the bottom of the
belly. The cure is diverse according to the diversity of causes. Curatio.
Tenas^us of co^d.
Therefore if the Tenasmus be caused of cold, you must minister pure and
unmixed wine, hot, and you must sprinckle foment and nourish the share, and
the parts about the privy members with hot oils and foments: as are, oils of
rue and lillies: also branne sodden in wine, and put in a bag, may well be
applied to the fondament. Also it is good to throw in clysters made of the
decoction of wild mintes, origan, calamint, chammomill, sothernwood, seed of
annyse, fennel and such like, putting to it oils of dill, chammomill, and
lillies. Also it is marvelous good, if you take a very cold tyle which is
black with smooke, and bray it with the geere that is contained on it, then
commixe it together with seething vinegre, and bind it up in a cloth, and
apply it to the fondament by and by after he has avoided any thing. But if the
Tenasmus be caused through choleric humors withholden and remaining in the
bowels and fondame^t you must cast in clisters which have virtue and power to
scour, Tenasmus of choleric humors.

Clyster abstergens.


wash and cleanse. As this is of the licour of the decoction of barley lib. j.
sugar roset..j.ss. mel rosarum.j. yolks of eggs.ij. oil of roses..iij.
commixe them and make a clister, he must eschew all sharp things, and he must
use things meanly cold and moist, and all those things which do stop and
temperate the sharpnes of choler. If Tenasmus be caused of flegmaticke humors,
it shall be healed like that, Tenasmus of flegmaticke humors.
which is caused of cold, only adding to, and commixing with the clisters,
such medicines as have virtue to purge flume, as is Electuarium nidum, or
diaphaemicon, or benedicta laxatina. And if Tenasmus be engendered of
inflammation, cast in broth of Ptysan, wherein has been sodden a few red roses, Tenasnus of inflammation. Clyster.
or if vehement inflammation do trouble him, minister this clyster.. of the
licoure of the decoction plantine..v. oil of roses..ij. the white of one egg,
commixe them together and make a clyster. Outwardely you must sprinkle, and
annoynte the place between the pryuie member, and the fondament wiih oils of
rue, Fomentum.
and mirtles: or apply this foment. red roses, plantayne. ana. M.j.
balaustiae..iij. sidiorum..j. myrtle bearies..ij. leaves of bryer..j. sees
altogether in sufficient water, until the third part be consumed, then wet a
sponge in the licoure of that decoction, and apply it to the foundament.
Discussiues.
Moreover when there is need of suppuration, rotting or dissoluing, apply
fomentes made of the decoction of the root of Althaea, of fenugreeke,
chammomill, inolilote and branne. If the Tenasmus be caused of an ulcer or
botch, first cast in the things which have an abstersive and clensing virtue:
Cure of Tenasmus caused of an ulcer. Vnguentum.
and then afterward, things that do glutinate, and join together must be
used, even as you did in the flux Dysenteria. Also this ointment put into the
foundament is good.. oil of roses.j.ss. the muscilage of Tragacantha, and
gum. ana..iij. Ceruse, burnt lead, ana..ss. Aloes, franckensence. ana..j.
wax, as much, as is sufficient, make an ointment, wherein dippe linen
clothes, and put them into the tuell. If the pain be wonderful great, you may
add to the aforesaid things, opium..j. Tenasmus of multitude of dounge.
Clyster lenitiue.
If the Tenasmus be caused through multitude and abundance of donge, then in
the beginning the doung must be brought out by little and little with soluble and
gentle clysters, as this is.. Mallows, Althaea, mercury, beetes, leaves of
black violettes. ana. M.j. seeds of fenugreeke and lyneseede. ana..ss. boil
them all in sufficient quantity of water to the third part: then take of the
licour of that decoction. lib. j. medullae casiae fistularis..j.ss. common
oil..iij. salt beaten..j. and make a clyster. But of this one thing, you must
specially beware, Note.
that in this case you do minister no purgation at the mouth, for that would
bring great peril and destruction to the patient, by reason of drawing of mo
excrementes from the whole body thither.

CAP. XVII. Of the Cholicke. DE COLI DOLORIBVS.
THE Colic, or pain, which is bred in the gut called Colon of the Greeks is
caused many ways: but it has four special causes. Causae.
For sometime it is engendered through gross and flegmaticke humors fallen
down within the thin skin of the gut Colon. Also sometime through
windines, which has no room to get out. Also it is caused through
inflammation of the gross and thick gut stretching out and troubling or
vexing. Also it is wont to engender through sharp and gnawing humors, which
do afflict and vex the aforesaid bowell vehemently. Signs of a gross humor.
Those that have the colicke engendered of a gross and flegmaticke humor, they
be greaued and vexed aloft, all over the Abdomen, (that is) the place which is
under the mouth of the stomach: specially they are grieved, where the gut Colon
lies: for there they feel pain, as though the gut were braied or boored
through. Also they be fretted, and have disposition to vomit, belkings, sundry
and straung vomitings and specially of fleume. Also the womb is let and
stopped and sends forth nothing, not so much as wind. Also the dounge, which
are sometime comes forth, does look like oxes doung, and it is light and
full of wind. And there goes before these things continual using of meats
that be very cold and of a gross juice, also filling with meats, ill
digestio^, and crudity, idleness, and such as be adjoining to these. Those that
have the cholicke caused of windines they feel extension, Signs of windines.

Signs of inflammation.


stretching forth and bolning. They that have the Colicke caused through
inflammation, they feel inward burning and heat, and no small fever: also
retention both of the urine and ordure. Also they are troubled with thirst
burning heat, disposition to vomit, and vomiting specially of color without any
ceasing of the evil at al. And this is the most grievous and worst kind of
colic, Signs of sharp and gnawing humors.

Diet for the colicke caused of flegmaticke and tough humors.


which do threaten to turn into the pain of the Iliacapossio. They, that have
the colike engendered of sharp and gnawing humors, they be troubled and vexed
with burning thirst and watching, yea and small feauers, the urine is made
sharp, and choleric humors are thrown out oftentimes going to the stool
does raise greater pain and torment. Also meats and drinks that be hot,
being received, do prouooke it grieuouslie. The diet and cure of this disease
is diverse according to the diuers^e of the causes. Therefore when gross and
clammy humors do cause the colicke, the whole diet must be extenuate and made
thin. Therefore let the bread which the sick shall eat be new and well
baked in an oven or furnace. Flesh is good specially of birds, as hens,
partrich, wood culuers, turtles, black birds, and doves, he must eschew all
kind of souls which do swime or live in waters, as those things which do
abound with many superfluities. Among four footed beasts the flesh of calves
and kiddes are good. He must eschew all kind of pulse, which do marvelous hurt
in this disease. For pot herbs, you must use fennel, apium asperage and such
like. Also it will not hurt to take garlic and oynions raw. To be short, let
his food be easy of digestion and engendring good juice. Let him eschew fulness
and cruditie: he must drink wine that is somewhat restrictiue, white, thin,
shining, of mean age, temperatly alayed, and let him drink but little. For the
cure of the cholicke caused of gross humors: Cure of Colicke caused of gross
humors.
you must cure it so, that you do not heat vehemently with no medicines, for
such remeadies do spread abroad, puff up, and make windy all cold and gross
humors, which puffing up and spreading in the bowels does cause more vehement
pain. Therefore it is good to divide, cut, and digest those humors without
vehement pain or heat: and by using of those things which do not puff up and
make windy. Therefore in his sharp and extreme pain make irrigations of the
oils of rue, chamomill, and dill. Also make fomentes and sacculi of the
flowers of chamomill, dill, and melilote, seeds of flax, of fenugreke, of
Althaea, of mill and branne. Also clisters made with the oils aforesaid, and
with the decoction of the aforesaid herbs are marvelous good, or with the
decoction of the root of wild cucumbers, putting to it comin, or rue, with
goose grease, Clyster.
or hens grease after this sort:. mallows, Althaea, chamomill, Mercury, dill,
ana. M.j. origan, calamint, peniroiall. ana. M.ss. seeds of flax, fenugreeke,
comin, louage. ana..iij. sees altogether with well water, of just quantity
until the third part. Then take of the licour of that decoction being strained
lib. 1. Hierapicra..ss. benedicta laxatina..v. of Electuarium nidum..j.ss. of
melrosarum streined..ss. of oils of chamomill, dill and rue, ana..j. the
yolks of eggs in number two, common salt..j. commixe all together and make a
clyster. Also the putting in of suppositaries, and anointing of the foundament
made by juice of Cyclaminum, with honey and salt peter, or centorie with honey
and salt peter do profit. (...).
Example of a suppositorie is this.. of honey sodden..j.ss. powder of
hierapicra,.j. colochinthid^s..j sal gemme..ss. commixe them and make long
suppositories. Also vomiting before supper, Vomitus.
if the patient can vomit easily, does help above all other things. Moreover
after the purging, if the pain has been prolonged forth many days, let him
go into a great vessel of hot oil if it may be had. In^ession.
Also it is good to sit in the decoction of Athaea, peniroyall, laurel leaves,
fenugreeke, chamomill, mootherworte, dill and such like. (...) absynthytes.
The most convenient medicine against the cholicke, is wine wherein wormwood
has been infused or sodden, if they need drincking after a bathe: it is also
very profitable for them that they thirst not. Also decoction of the herb it
self, when it has once boiled being commixed with wine, may commodiouslie be
ministered after a bath. Also Castoreum continually drunk, Castoreum.
does destroy the disease utterly: and it is better then all medicines. It is
ministered to the sick..j. in three Ciathes, of Aqua mulsa. And if the pain
do not cease and rest, you must minister diatrion piperion or theriaca. If
that the pain be vehement, ^
it is good to use medicines, that do meanly ease, make soluble, and mitigate,
as well put in beneath as also given to drink. For you must eschew those
things that do stupefact and astony strongly, because they do somewhat ease
and mitigate, but they make the disease longer by making the humors more
gross, and thickning of the passages of the bowels. If the cholicke be caused
of windines, you must cast in clisters, that do dissolve wind, Cure of the
colicke caused (...) Clyster.
as is this,. sothernewood, origan, peniroyall, calamint, chammomill, ana. M.j.
rue, mints, wildemintes. ana. M.ss. seeds of annyse, fennel, carawayes,
comin, dil, louage, and daucus, an..ij. sees altogether unto the third
part. Then take of the licour of that decoction strained. lib. j. hierapicra,
benedicta laxatina. ana..ss. Castoreum..j. powder of diacuminum..ij. oils of
rue and dill, ana..j.ss. common salt..j.ss. commixe the^ altogether and make a
clister. ^
Also there may be added to the aforesaid things the confection of bay
bearyes: for there is nothing of more effect to dissolve and drive away
windiness. Also it is good to minister daily the quantity of an hasell nut of
the said decoction or electuarie of laurel beries in the decoction of some
cutting and extenuating medicine. Apply outwardly upon the belly aloft,
fomentes and irrrigations of such things as do disperse and scatter windiness,
as these be, besides the afornamed things nigella animi, parsley bitter
Almondes, black pepper, wild mints, bay beries, wormwood, nettleseede,
gladon, marioram, Cinnamon and others, of these therefore you may make
Cataplasmes, foments, and bags. Note.
But that which far excels all the rest (as Galene witnesses) is a great
cupping glass fastened lightly with abundant flame to the whole belly aloft,
which does marvelously as it were by inchauntment. Diet.
Let the sick beware of and eschew wine that is alayed, and drinking of cold
water, and also from using of milk and other things that do cool, and from
meats and drinks which engender windiness. And let him rather use to drink
wine that is unmingled and pure, and let him use a diet which does heat and
out or divide. If the collicke be caused of inflammation of the bowels, Cure of
colic caused of inflammation.
you must open the pain in the arm. But if difficulty and hardness of
making water, do rule and bear a sway, you must draw blood from the veins of
the anckle. Also you must use the aforesaid remedies, excepting sharp things,
and vehement purgers. And you must rather use clysters mitigating and easing
pain, also Cataplasmes and irrigations, and going down into oil. Also fasten
to them cupping glasses. Let his diet be thin, almost the diet of fevers,
Diet. Cure of colic caused of sharp and gnawing humors.
until the inflammation be slaked. And if the collicke be caused through sharp
and gnawing or fretting humors, it is good to pour in at the fundament those
things that can wash out and purge those humors without any mordacitie and
gnawing: as is broth of Ptisan, or the decoction of fenugreeke, lineseede,
chammomill, and Althaea, with fresh goose grease, or hens grease and oil of
roses. This clister is specially good.. leaves of violets, Clyster.
both the tame endiues, leaves of Althaea, chammomill. ana. M.j.ss. seeds of
fenugreeke, flax, ana..ss. boil these in just quantity of water, until the
third part be consumed. Then take of the licour of that decoction being
strayned,.xiij. casia fistula..j. hierapicra..vj. oil of roses..ij. oil of
dill..j. goose grease and hens grease. ana..iij. yolks of eggs in number
ij. commixe them all, and make a clister. Moreover you must not only purge the
hurtful and corrupt humors, but also you must temper and moderate them.
Therefore he must use bathes of sweet water, for they do mitigate and also
provoke sleep: for which purpose minister syrup of violets, and roses, and
such like, which are able to temperate, and stop the violence of the gnawing
humors. Also he must use souping meats as Ptysans, Victus ratio.
and brothes of fishes of stony places. He must abstain from all hot and
sharp things, whether they be meats or medicines, or cataphasmes or foments,
or irrigations that be hot: as also he must abstain from drinking of wine,
especially from old wine. And to be short, let his whole diet be cold and
moist. If the pain be not a whit released, but do rage more vehemently, then
you must come to the using of stupefactiue things. Stupefac^^tia.
For in this disease they do not only pleasure and profit by astonying of the
sense and feeling: but also because they make the thin humors more thick
and gross, and do quench the intolerable heat. Among stupefactiue things
Philonium is specially good, Philonium. Pilulae de Cynegloss^.
of the which you may minister for the most part one whole drachme. Also pills
of hounds tongue are marvelously good, if as is before taught you do make six
pills of,.j. and minister one of them to be swallowed before they go to bed.
But there be very many things which do help the colic with their whole
virtue and substance. Among the which white dong of a wolf taken with water,
or thin white wine is not the worst. That dong is better which hangs on
herbs or bushes, then that which touches the ground. Also the said dong of the
wolf, Lib. 9. cap. 31
easethe the collicke being bound to the Ilions. Green mintes as Aetius
affirms, sodden awhile and dronk iij. days heals Collickes.

CAP. XVIII. Of Iliaca passio. DE ILEO.
THE Iliaca passio, is a disease causinge most grievous and deadly pain in the
small guts. The Latins do call this disease, voluulus and connoluulus. The
barbarous do call it Iliaca passio. Causa.
This disease is caused through continual corruption and cruditie of meats,
but specially offat meats, which, if they be without corruption and being
withholden, they engender obstructions in the small guts. Also it is
engendered of certain stripes and blows in certain places in which the small
guts do lie. Also through vehement cold restrayning, and with holding of the
excrements. Moreover through abundant drinking of cold things, specially if
much be taken when they sweat. Also it chances to them, whose bowels be
fallen into the coddes togethr with the dong: and being violently thrust back
from thence again, and through that it is enflamed. Also it is caused through
drinking of deadly medicines, and through hard dong being impact about the
thin bowell. For the most part this disease is engendered either through
inflammation, or through obstruction of the dry dong. This disease is common
to children, but yet they escape it, through help of natural humiditie. It is
not wont to chance very often to old men: but if they chance to have it,
Signa.
they almost be never rid of it. They that have this disease have most vehement
pain, and some swelling of the thin and small gutts sticks out, that it
seems wounden together like a string called Chorda, whereupon many do call
this disease Chordapson, also there is over much moistness of the stomach,
looseness, vain and empty belkings, and doing no ease, rumbling and noise of
the bowelles, perfect stopping and letting of the dong and of windiness. If
the evil do increase and wax greater, he auoideth all upward, and therefore
he vomiteth up fleume and choler, he has coldness of the whole body, and
pain. Also to many there chances difficulty and hardness of breathing.
Moreover to them that shall die there chances cold sweat, difficulty and
hardness of making water, yea the foundament is so bound and close; that no
small instrument will enter in. And sometime dong is cast up by vomitting. For
the cure of this disease, you must cure children with irrigations, Curatio.
cataplasmes, clysters, suppositories and foments as is declared in the chapter
of the Collicke. But the cure of them that be of age must differ according to
the diversity of causes. Cure of it come of (...).
Therefore if Iliaca passio be caused of cruditie and ill digestion, and
thorough devouring and eating of many and diverse meats which yet remain in
the stomach: you must provoke vomit with things aforesaid. But if there do
remain no raw and vndigest meats in the stomach, you must go about by all
means, to draw out beneath, as well windiness as also the dong: and that must
be done by clisters, suppositories, and annointinges with great diligence in
each of them. Therefore you must cast in this clyster.. Mercury, Rewe, Clyster.
leaves of Althaea, centorie. ana. M.j. hysope, calamint, wormewoode, ana.
M.j.ss. root of Althaea,.j. root of wild cucumber..j.ss. seeds of flax and
faenugreeke. ana..iij. seeds of commin..ij. boil them in just quantity of
water, until the third part be consumed, then take of the liquor of that
decoction being strained..xiiij. of benedicta laxatina..j. fresh butter,
melrosarum strayned. ana..ss. oils of Rewe, and dill. ana..j.ss. common
salt..j. commixe them altogether and make a clyster, and cast it in before
meat: but if the evil be vehement, cast it in also after meat. And you must
warn the pacient, that he do hold it as long as he can. Also you must make
suppositories, as you do for the Colic, putting to them seeds of rue, Glandes.
comin, and stalks of colewortes, And you must make them the longer, (...)
Cataplasmae.
that they may pearce the deeper. Also you must anoint the fundament with
juice of Cyclaminum, or honey with nitrum or salt peter. The foments and
cataphasmes, wherewith this evil is cured, be almost such as are spoken of in
the chapter of the Collicke. Also fomentes made of wool wet in oil, wherein
commin, dill, rewe, and cresses has been sodden, be very good. Also
emplaisters made of lineseede, faenugreeke, barley meal, darnell meal, rewe,
co^min, seeds of dill and apium are good. Also it is good to descend into a
vessel filled with water and oil: but sees in the water Althaea, rewe, and
dill. After these, fasten on cupping glasses, Cucurbind^. Purgatio.
first lightly to places somewhat far of, and then also to the places that
are grieved, making deep scarifications. Also it is good to minister
purgations, specially if the dong be drawn out first by such things as are
before rehearsed. It is marvelous good if they vomit, by drinking dill sodden.
After drinking, cast bread into scalding water, and minister pieces of it to
eat by and by hot. They that have the Iliaca passio engendered through taking
of some venomous medicine, Cure of Iliaca passio caused of p^ison.
you must give them much warm water, and let them drink it, and constrain
them to vomit. After that you must give them hot oil in drink, or fat
broth, that they may vomit again. After, within a few days give him
theriaca dissolved in wine, and let him eat meats of good juice. And if the
obstruction do continue still empty the belly with milk, with a little
scammonie or Aloes, Cure if it be of inflammation.
or some other purging medicine. If the Iliaca passio be engendered through
inflammation, you must begin with blood letting: then you must fasten cupping
glasses about the inflamed parts scarifiing them. Also cast in clysters made
of the decoction of mallows, faenugreeke, lineseede, with oil and butter.
Also apply outwardly those things, that are good against inflammations, and do
ease pain, you must prescribe unto them a most thin diet. Cure if it be of
falling of the bowels into the coddest
If the Iliaca passio be caused through falling of the bowels into the coddes,
you must by and by labor (the patient lying upright) to thrust back again
the bowels that are fallen down to the share, and keep it up easily without
violence or pressinge of it together, with bands and trusses applied,
convenient for it.

CAP. XIX. Of worms. DE LVMBRICIS.
THERE be three kinds of worms. The first be round and long, named teretes.
The second be broad, called therefore Lati. The third: those be called
ascaridoes. The first kind of worms called teretes: Teretes.
according to their thickness they be round and a hand breadth in length, and
sometime longer, and they be commoner then other. They be often in the slender
and small guts, and they go into the stomach, and therefore they are voyded
often by the mouth, and to some also they come out at the nosthrilles. And this
kind of worms is peculiar to infants and children, and boys, and girls. The
second kind of worms called Lati, Lati.
be broad and long like a guard or band. They be of incredible length as
Pliny witnesses, lib. 2. cap. 3.3. Sometime they are seen three hundred
foot long, and sometime more. This kind of worm (as Paulus and Aetius
witness) is nothing else but a permutation and changing of the thin filmes
going about the small guts within, into a certain living body, that will
move and stir. The third kind of worms called Ascarides, be thin and
short like small worms. Ascarides.
They be found most commonly in the right gut, and in the end of the fundament.
All the before kinds be engendered and caused of crude, raw, gross, and
fleugmatike matter, Causae.
and through convenient rottenness, such as is gathered specially in children,
and in other great eaters. They that have round worms, do feel incredible
gnawing of the bowelles, Signs of round worms, teretes
and of the stomach, thin and small coughes, and oftentimes provoking and
dry. In many there follows yesking and sleep with moving of the stomach:
and also they do arise up vnreasonablie. Many do awake and leap up with noise
and crying out, and fall asleep again: but some do both put forth their
tongue, and shut their eyes and be quiet, and keep silence, and do fret and
fume with them which raise them, because they cannot watch they be so weak.
Some have their eyes sprinkled with blood, and a pulse that is unequal,
obscure, failing and running back. Also to many there chances loss of
appetite. Children, while they sleep do chewe their tongue, and also fashioning
of their mouth as though they sucked or received meat. Also to some there
chances gnashing of the teeth. But these things are done by little and little
and between whiles. To some they run forth into the stomach, and do cause
gnawing and disposition to vomit, and the pacients refuse meat: and if they be
compelled to eat, they scarce can swallowe that which they take, or they vomit
it up again. In many the belly does throw out corrupt meats, and is puffed
up like as it were a timpanie. The rest of the body it does consume and make
lean without reason, neither fasting going before, nor unmeasurable purging
being made. Also it chances sometime the face to be made very red, specially
about the balls of the cheeks: but this color turns again into
swartnesse. Some do speak foolish things in their sleep like frantic
persons. Some change the place that they lie down in, and tumble, and cast
them selves from place to place: they increase fevers in them without order
with vehement coldness of the extreme parts, having fittes the third or
fourth day without order. But also these signs and tokens altogether which we
have now rehearsed, must not every one of them be looked for in every body:
but the chiefest of them and sometime many. Broad worms do bring continual
gnawing of the stomach, and an impotent, and incorrigible appetite to meat.
For the worm that is in the guts, Signs of broad worms, Lati.
deuoureth the meat that is eaten, so that he has need of more straight way,
and except he eat straight way, the bowelles are gnawne: they that are thus
diseased there follows slenderness and weakness of the body with
inequality. The most sure and infallible sign is, if certain things like
cucumber seeds be avoided out with the egestion or excrements. Signs of
Ascarides.
Ascarides do raise a vehement itch in the fundament, and do provoke the
patient to go to the stool continually. And they that be troubled with this
disease, for the most part be the better after egestion and easing of
themselves. Let their diet be hot and dry, specially if the pacient lack a
fever, and let them use meats of good juice, and which will soon be
dispersed throughout the whole body: and such as do not increase the cause that
ingendreth worms. Therefore all meats are to be eschewed, which can engender
fleugmaticke humors. Moreover they that are troubled with worms, must be
nourished and fed liberally, and may not suffer hunger: because the worms,
except they have meat to feed on, they then by and by gnawe the hard parts
of the body: but give the^ meat at that time, specially when they are not
altogether empty. Let them drink watery wine. Curatio.
For the cure it is not to be spared: and sometime if there be a fever with it,
you must have respect to that, and to the worms also: and sometime you need to
be careful but a little for the fever, and you must be diligent notwitstanding
to get the worms out of the body. Therefore when many have not spied and
known this, it comes to pass for lack of heed taken to avoid the worms,
that they be gnawen and eaten of them, and so being pulled and gnawne, they
die. The cure as well of the round worms, as of the flat worms, consists in
this point, that you may drive them out of the body being first killed. They
are killed specially with bitter medicines, among which (if a fever be not
present) these simples are good: Simples to kill worms.
wormwood, Scryphium, which is a kind of wormwood growing in the sea,
sothernwood, calamint, horehound, dittaine, hysope, rue, leaves of persica,
coria^der seeds, hearts horn, lupins mints, penyroyall, origan, Centorie,
fern, gentian, aristolochia rotund^, garlike, seed of coleworts, and root of
enula campana. To these, if a fever be present, you must adioyne the seeds of
both the endiues and also the juice of there herbs, and myxaria. Al^es.
Among all other the most commendable remedy is aloes. Therefore if infants
will hardly take aloes because it is so bitter, you must keep them upright
with bands, and their mouth being opened and separated, you must cast it in
against their wills by a certain pipe strengthened with a long splent. Of these
aforsaid simples now rehearsed, there may be made diverse co^pounds, Co^p^sita.
as decoctions, powders, cataplasmes, emplaisters, and ointments. Among other
things this powder is only good. Puluis.
. of wormeseede..ij. of centorie, wormwood, hearts horn burnt. ana..j.
calamint, peniroyall, origan. ana..ss. sothernwood, mintes, lupines, leaves of
aristolochia rotunda. ana..j. aloes..ij. commix them altogether, and make a
powder, of the which, minister the weight of one drachme, or half a drachme,
according to the age and state of the body of the sick, in milk or honey or
syrup of liquorice: for those things, which do kill the worms, must be
ministered with sweet liquors, that thereby the worms may taste of the medicine
the sooner being allured by the sweetness of it, that is ministered with it.
Annoint the nauill you must outwardly with bulls gall, or with this ointment.
Vnguent^^.
. oils of bitter almondes, and of wormwood. ana..j. Bulls gall..ss.
Centorie, wormwood, lupines. ana..ij. leaves of persica, hearts horn burnt,
aloes, sothernwood, ana..j. wax as much as is sufficient and make an ointment.
Or apply all over the stomach this Cerate.. aloes, Caerat^^.
wormwood, meal of lupines. ana..ij. nigella, mintes, origan, penyroyall,
horehound. ana..j. centorie, calamint. ana..ss. oils of wormwood, and bitter
almonds. ana..ij. oleum costinum..j. bulls gall..ss. with wax and rosen, as
much as shall suffice, make a Cerote. By examples of these you may easily make
emplaisters and cataplasmes, so that I need not to rehearse here an example of
each of them. Moreover it is good to cast in beneath abundance of mulsa, that
thereby the worms being allured by the sweetness of the honey, may creep
downward. But when the worms were killed by the aforesaid medicines you must
drive them out without delay: for there proceeds a vicious exhalation from
them, which both destroys appetite and hurts digestion, and being lifted
upward it causes sweamiegs, and other euilles. The worms being killed are
driven out for the most part by suppositories and purgations, Pillulae. Rufi.

Cure if flux of the womb be joined with worms.


but specially by hierapicra and pillulae pestilentiales or rufi, which have a
marvelous efficacy in killing and bringing out of worms. But those that are
troubled with worms and with flux of the womb also: those you must cure by
thickening of the flux, and by changing the digestion into a better state,
as well with meats, as also with cataplasmes: for the more that the flux
prevails, so much the more the engendring of worms is increased: and again
the flux ceasing, the worms do rest and pause. Therefore you must diligently
labor to stop and restrain the womb, and to ad steadfastness and strength
unto it. Therefore minister juice of plantaine: or else let him take dried
plantaine: for both have like efficacy as well against the flux, as also
against worms. Also make cataplasmes, cerotes and ointments of raw barley
meal, pomegranate rindes, hypocischidos, and such like restrictiue things:
but add unto them those things which be good to kill worms. Restrictiue
medicines are good to be applied outwardly for this cause, because they do
corroborate and strengthen again the stomach, being hurt through often using
of bitter medicines. Also it is lawful in this case to minister earth worms
being dried, and beaten to powder with hydromel. The worms called Ascarides,
Cure of worms called Ascarides.
being in children that be infants, they must be brought out with suppositaries
made of honey and salt. In the^ that be elder they must be brought out which
clysters, made either with sharp brine, or with decoction of worm wood,
centorie, calamint, lupines, penyroyall, and other above rehearsed putting to
oils. After ministration of clisters, anoint the straight gut, or
foundadament with these simples, (that is) Acatia, hypocischidos, juice of
Sumache, or some other restrictiue medicine. For the flesh being constrained by
restrictiue things, it loses the ability, that engenders the worms, and
it excludes and shuts out the ascarides. But this that follows is good
both for children, and for those that be of greater age, and is most
effectuous. Take old flesh that is poudred, cut of the fat, and fashion it
long and round, like a suppositarie fit for the fundament and thrust it into
the tuell: applying a ligament or band, and let it alone within, as long as
they can suffer it, then losen it and draw it out together with the worms,
that stick on it. After that you shall pour in the things aforesaid, and also
anoint it as is aforesaid.

CAP. XX. Of the hemmorhoides. DE HEMMORHOIDIBVS.
THE Hemmorhoides is an unfolding and spreading abroad of the veins in the
tuell. Of these some be blind, which do swell and do send out none, Cocae.
Apertae.
or very little blood, some be open, which be set wide open abroad certain
times, and do send forth blood. Causae.
The hemmorhoides are caused through dreggie and melancholy blound, when there
is abundance thereof, which the liver sends to those veins. The signs
whereby this evil is known, need not to be required. Signa.
For the blind hemmerhoids may be seen with eyes, and they cause vehement
pain, specially in avoiding the dong. But the open hemmerhoides do bleed,
therefore the patient cannot be ignorant what they be. Therefore when blind
hemmerhoides appear, Curatio c^car^^.
and do raise great tormenting in the fundament, if the body be full of
humors, cut the vein of the hamme or of the anckle bones. Also you must make
the belly soluble abundantly, left the dry dong, while it is sent forth, do
engender pain. Also you must apply where vehement pain is, those things that
can and will mitigate. Among which are crummes of bread steeped in milk, and
sodden with yolks of eggs, and applied like a plaster. Also it profits to
sit in a bath made of the decoction of mallows, violet leaves, melilot,
faenugreeke, chammomill, leaves of althaea, lineseede, flowers of rose campion,
and such like. And if the patient cannot use that, wet woll or a sponge in the
said decoction, and apply it to the grief. And if these aforesaid things do
no good, you must get out blood of them. Therefore put into the evil, To open
the (...)
woll anointed with juice of cyclaminum, or with onions, or with ox gall. The
same effect also has the juice of centorie, doves dong, staves acre, fig
leaves: if they be rubbed with it, and also the pulpe of Colocynthidis steeped
in the oil of bitter almondes. Emplastrum.
Among many other, this emplaister is very good.. of doves dong..ss. seed of
staues^cre, lupines. ana..j.ss. bitter almonds..j. pulpe of coloquintida..ss.
juices of cycla^^inum, and onions. ana..j. commixe them altogether, and make it
like a plaster, putting to it if need be, oil of bitter almonds. But to take
away the pain presently, use this following.. elder leaves. M.j. boil them in
water, until they be very tender, then take a piece of scarlet, as much as a
man's hand or greater, and wet it in the decoction, and lay it to the place as
warm as may be suffered, and when it is cold lay it to again, being wet, in
the same decoction as before. Do thus v. or vj times together, then lay the
herbs upon the same skarlet, lay the herbs very hot also, this does
mollify the hemmorhoides, and seaseth the pains very quickly, which my self
have often proved. Also you may put long suppositaries in the foundament,
Glandes.
made of the root of Cyclaminum. Also bloudsuckers, or horse leaches, being
included in a reed, so that they can put forth, but only their head, are wont
to be put to the he^morhoids to open the^, and if you cannot pull them away
easily, strew ashes upon their heads, and you shall make them to fall of
alone. But if the hemmorhoides be open, Curatio aper^a^um.
and do avoid out blood meanly at certain times, they may not be stopped,
for the bursting out of such blood does cause men that have this disease, to be
free from many other diseases. Which thing Hypocrates witnesses, where he
says in Epidemys, these words. They which have the hemmorhoides, 6. Epid. par.
3. ^ph. 19
neither be vexed with pain of the sides, nor inflammation of the longs, nor a
feeding ulcer, nor with felons, or cattes hear, nor with terniuithis, nor with
the leprie, nor with morphue. But if the hemmorhoides do throw out blood
immoderately, or longer then they should do, so that the patient do consume and
wast away with this evil, and their strength decayed and thrown down, they
must be stopped by and by: but otherwise there is peril in stopping them, but
in this case it is to doubt, lest the dropsy should follow, the liver being
cooled through moderate vacuation and purging. Therefore let those that be so
emptied and purged out of measure, Diet.
use meats that have but little blood, and that do engender but little
superfluities or excrements, and which also do dry and restrain, as is Alica
and rice. Of potherbes, endive, succorie, purslane, and such like. Commix his
meat with sumach, and juice of unripe grapes. If his strength be much
weakened, you must nourish and feed the sick with meat thus, you must
strain out the juice that is in the meat, and commix with it juice of
quinces, and let him soupe that up, he must drink wine that is restrictiue.
Curatio.
For the cure if there be abundance of humors in the body, it profits to
cut the inner vein of the right hand in the arm: but if there be not, you
must study to auert and turn away the blood by fastening of cupping glasses
to the sides, and to the liver. For the which purpose it is good to bind the
hands and the feet with bands, and to use sharp and hard frictions and
rubbings. Morouer you must minister within the body those things which do
restrain, as are, syrupes of Roses, of mirtles, and of quinces, red coral,
bole armoniacke, trochistes of ambre, of spodium, of terra lemnia, and other
which be rehearsed in the Chapter of spitting of blood. Also apply those
things outwardly, which can stop blood that flows. Among which as Aetius
witnesses. lib. 14. cap. 5. is aloes laid on with Posca. The same effect also
has scales of iron or burnt lead. This medicine is notable good which is
described of Galen lib. 5. therap. method.. of frankensence one part, of Aloes
one part and a half, Medicamentu^ Gal^ni.
commixe them with the white of an egg, until all come to the thickness of
honey, and lay it upon the soft hayres of an hare, and apply it to the place
that bleedeth, being bound outwardly with bands of fine linen. Also
ointments, bathes, incessions, fomentes, and other such like medicines, made of
things having a restrictiue virtue do profit, whereof you shall find many
examples before in the Chapters of diarrhaea, lieuteria, Dysenteria and
tenafinus. ^^cculi.
And if you shall use little bags, it is best, before you apply them, to
boil them in wine that is red and restrictiue, or at the least to sprinkle
them with it. Examples of other medicines seek before.

CAP. XXI. Of the falling out of the tuell. DE PROCIDENTIA ANY.
IT chances sometime, that resolucion or weakness of the ouertwhart muscles
which do pluck the fundament upward, does cause the tuell to fall out. Causa.
Wherefore seeing it cannot be drawn backward again, nor pulled upward of the
aforesaid muscles, it has need of hands or medicines to put it up again.
When the tuell is fallen out, you must dilgently consider, Curatio.
whether it be free from inflammation or no, for if it be not enflamed at all,
it must by and by be thrust and put to his former place by compulsion. And
because it must not fall out again, after that it is thrust in, and put up into
his own place, you must apply restrictiue medicines outward to it. Therefore
first, you must anoint it about with oil of roses being warmed, or scour the
tuell with restrictiue wine, and then being put up again into his place, you
must bind him up. And that you must do by and by, as soon as the sick has bin
at the stool, least that, when necessity constrayneth them to go to the
stool again, the tuel should fall out again. You must apply a lineament of
acatia and hypocischidos with wine. Also you must sees in water till it be
red, gauls, balustiae, shelles of mast, pomegranate rindes, daisies, sumach,
shales of quinces and such like, and afterward of that decoction make
incessions and washing. But after that the tuell is washed with wine or with
some restrictiue decoction then it is lawful to strew upon it, and to apply to
it dry medicines. For which purpose you may apply bole armoniake,
frankensense, sanguis draconis, galls, acatia, mirrhe, hypoci^chidos, hearts
horn, and such other restrictiue medicines, as we have rehearsed often before.
But if the tuell thorough inflammation be so swollen, that it cannot be thrust
up again: if the body be full of humors, you must first cut a vein, and
provoke vomit. And also you must apply to the tuell by and by in the beginning,
those things that do restrain and stop or appease: but if there be no
abundance of humors in the body, let the sick use incessions of the decoction
of Chammomill, mallows, althaea, lineseede, fenugreek, and such like, or let
him descend into hot water, and tarry in it for a time. Also it is lawful to
apply a sponge or woll wet in the decoction. Moreover you must anoint the
tuell with oils of chammomill, and dill, until it may be put up: for they
because of their dissoluing virtue, do readily take away the swelling, and do
also cause, that it may be put up again, without any difficulty or pain. But
after it is put up again, then you must use the aforsaid restrictiue
medicines, that it fall not out again.

CAP. XXII. Of the clefts of the fundament. DE RIMIS ANY.
CLEFTES of the fundame^t be chaps which are made in the muscle that shuts
the fundament, or in the circle round about the fundament, they be like the
chaps, which are made through a north wind on the lips. Causae.
They are caused through flowing of sharp humors, or through infla^mation, or
through extentio^ of the swelling of the tuel. This evil is appare^t to the
eyes, Signa.
and therefore we need to show no signs to declare it by. For the cure, if the
clefts of the fundament be engendered of sharp humors, then they first of all
must be purged and te^pered. Curatio.
But if it be caused through swelling of the fundament caused of inflammation,
you must likewise use at the beginning purging, medicines. Also the belly all
the time of the cure must be kept soluble with meats that do moisten, and fat
meats, least dry dong should hinder, and tarry the conglutination. Of such
qualities be mallows, spinache, milcke of sweet Almondes, soft eggs, fat
broth, and such other like. But to the chappes them selves you must use this
ointment.. of the oils of roses and mirtles. ana..j. franckensence, Vnguentum.
masticke, litarge, sanguis draconis. ana..j. aloes, burnt lead, ceruse,
balaustiae, bole armoniake. ana..ss. white wax as much as is sufficient, make an
ointment. Or thus.. oil of Roses. Aliud.
.j.ss. galls, mirrhe, terra lemnia. ana..j. root of comferie, roch a lume,
burnt lead. ana..ss. the yolke of an egg being roasted, wax as much as is
sufficient, and make an ointme^t. With these ointments you must anoint the
cleftes, thrice on a day, but wash them first with decoction of roses, galls
and fidiorum. And if burning and inflammation do vex the diseased place, you
must anoint it with vnguentum album camphoratum.

CAP XXIII. Of the weakness of the liver. DE IMBECILLITATE IECINORIS.
Caus^.
WEAKNESS of the liver is caused of distempure either hot, cold, moist, or
dry. Hot distempure does roast, and as it were burn up as well the humors
which were before in the liver, as also those humors, which are carried to the
liver by the veins mesenterij. But cold distempure does make the flegmatike
and raw humor, which is already contained in the liver, gross and tough and
hard to be moved, and the humors that be carried to the liver, it leaves them
half digested. Dry distempure does make the humors drier and thicker. Moist
distempure does make the humors thin and more waterie. Therefore they which
have weak faculty and strength of the liver they are called hepatici, as
Galen says. Hot diste^pure vexing the liver, there are colliquations, Signa.
first of the humors, and after that of the liver it self: also choler that
is stinking and gross is avoided by the belly, and is abundantly colored:
also a fever vexes him, he abhors meat and casts up choler. Moreover
thirst does trouble the^, their urine is ruff, and the pulse is swift. When
there is cold distempure, they make not many excretions, nor much in quantity,
the evil endures long, and the belly flows certain days abundantly. But
the egestions be less stinking, then those which be melted through heat,
neither have they color also nor thickenesse, but are like putrifact blood
which is curded. And if you do diligently mark it, it is neither curded blood,
nor black blood, but as it were certain slime and dregs of gross blood
coming nigh to melancholy. And also diverse and many colors of the
excrementes do signify cold distempure. Also in it there appears a faint
fever. The face does not fall, and he has greater appetite of meats. To
either of these distempures, if there come dryness, the excrements will be
drier and l^sse and the sick will be more thirsty. But if moistness come to
either of them, the egestions will be more liquide and more abundant, Curatio.
and they shall be less troubled with thirst. For the cure the chief point is
to amend the grief by conrraries. Therefore you must cool a hoate distempure,
Note.
and heat a cold distempure. Likewise you must moisten a dry distempure, and
dry a moisture. But in the cure this only must also be considered that in all
medicines for the liver, that as well those which be taken by the mouth inward,
as also those that be applied to it outwardly, commixe some restrictiue things
with them, whereby the strength and stability of the liver may be conserved and
kept. Therefore in a hot distempure, for his diet, let him use broth of
Ptysan, Diet in a hot distempure.
and other meats that do meanly cool, as lettuse, endive, succorie,
sowthistle, and water and bread mixed together, or bread dipped in water. Also
chickens, partrich, birds of mountains, and veale, these being sodden in
veriuice or lymo^s. of fruits let the sick eat faisons, lymons, and sweet
almonds. He must eschew wine altogether, except some other cause let it, as
weakness of the stomach, for then you must minister thin and watery wine.
Let them drink, for wine, juice of pomegranates, and syrupus acetosus simplex.
Also oxysaccharum, with decoction of barley or endive. Also they must eschew
all meats and drinks dressed with honey, and that be very hot, and have
virtue to cut and divide. Cure of a hot d^stempure. Orbiculi.
For the cure minister unto him by the mouth, conserve of roses diarrhodo^
abbatis, diatrion santalon, and other such like antidotes. Also these lozenges
profit,. the powders of Diarrhodon abbatis, and of diatrion santalon.
ana..j.ss. seeds of both the tame endiues, red roses. ana..ij. raisons..j.
white saunders, withwind, flowers of squinaunt. ana..j. sugar..vj. dissolve it
in the stilled waters of withwind, and endive that has the broad leaves, and
make lozenges. And also the antidote Philoniu^, only once ministered, sometime
has marvelously healed all hot distempure of the liver. Apply outwardly
foments made of roses, cha^momil and quinces, or sees wormwood or dates in the
aforesaid oiles of roses, cha^momil and quinces, and then wet woll or a spong
in them, and lay that right against the liver. Also you may use this ointment..
oils of roses, of quinces, Vnguentum.
and of water lillies. ana..j. white saunders and red, red roses. ana..j.
scraping of iuorie..j.ss. seeds of both the tame endiues. ana..j.
vinegre..j.ss. purslayne seed. gra.ij. wax as much as is sufficient and make
an ointment. Also Epithemes in this disease are wont to profit not a little:
Epithema.
which may be made thus, or after this sort.. the distilled waters of sown
Endive, with the broad leaves of lettice, of sorell, of roses, of water
lillies. ana..iij. juice of sengreene,.j. vinegar..j. red roses, red saunders,
shauing of iuorie. ana..j. powders of Diarrhodon abbatis, diatrion santalon.
ana..ss. seed of purslayne..ss. Commixe them all, and make an Epitheme. You
must apply Epithemes in summer coldo, and in winter warm. When there is cold
distempure of the liver, you must use medicines that do heat, Cure of cold
distempure.
and add strength and stabilitie to the liver. In his diet he must use meats
easy of digestion, and heatinge. For pot herbs let him take sauorie, hysope,
fennel, parsley, sothernwoode, sage, and such like. And let his meats be
dressed with Aromaticke things, as Cynnamon, cloves, and such others. He must
drink wine that is thin, yellowe, and odoriferous. He must eschew eating
of fish, and cold fruictes, and idleness, and in conclusion what so ever
does make cold. Within the body he must take this decoction.. roots of
Apium, of fennel, and of parsley. ana..j. agrimonie, hysope, mintes, Decoctum.
wormwood, succorie, withwinde, origan, calamint, Asarum. ana. M.j. seeds of
Anise, fennel, daucus, commin, carawayes. ana..ij. squynaunt..j.ss.
masticke..j. flowers of Chammomill, red roses. ana. M.j. Cynnamon
chosen..j.ss. sees all these in a pound and half of wine, and one pound of
running-water unto the third part, then strain it, and put to the licour of
syrup of agrimonie..iij. syrup of wormwood..j. Commixe all together and make
a potion: of the which let him drink in the morning, and after dinner..iij.ss.
at a time, for the same purpose you may minister hoate antidotes, as
diacinnamomum, dianisum, conserve of sage, galingale condite, roots of
pimpernell covered with sugar, and such like. You must anoint him outwardly
with hot oils, as be, oils of Narde, Chammomill, wormewoode, and such like.
Also it is very good to use this ointment.. of the oils of wormwood, and
narde. ana..j.ss. Juice of Agrimonie..ij. cinnamon, cloves, wood of Aloes.
ana..ij. spicknarde, Vnguentum.
squynaunt and masticke. ana..j. wax, as much, as is sufficient, make an
ointment. You may also apply this Cerate.. of the meal of faenugreeke, and of
lupines. ana..ij. root of yreos, Cer^tum.
and Asarum. ana..j. of agrimonie, wormwood, melilotte, and squynaunt. ana.ss.
gallia moschata..j. seed of Annise and fennel. ana..ss. masticke..ij. mirrhe
and frankensence. ana..j. oils of masticke, narde, roses, and dill. ana..j.
wax and rosen, as much as is sufficient, and make a Cerote to apply to the
liver. Epitheme.
Also the using of this Epitheme is good.. seeds of anise, fennel, ammeos.
ana..j.ss. Cinnamon, cloves, squinaunt. ana..j. sees all in a pound and half
of malmesey, till half be consumed, then strain it and commixe with the
licour of that decoction, waters of wormwood and agrimony. ana..ij. pouders of
diacinnamomum, and diagalanges. ana..j. withwind..ij. vinegre..iij. commix
altogether and make an Epitheme. In a moist distempure of the liver, let him
use a diet that does dry, Cure of a moist distempure.
as flesh of birds roasted, thin wine: those things that do provoke sweat,
as dry bathes, or hoate houses, and also bathes coming of their own accord:
generally he must eat and drink but little. He must eschew all kind of
fishes, and fruits that have power to moisten. You must minister within the
body, syrup of wormwood, dialacchae and diacureuma. You must apply,
outwardly those things which do dry without any great heat: of the which we
will speak afterward in the Chapter of the dropsy anasarca. Cure of a dry
distempure.
Dry distempure of the liver must be cured like the other, by his contraries.
Therefore that we may comprehend the matter in few words: it is good for
him to use a diet that does moysten, and bathes of sweet water, and other
things which do moysten, whereof we will speak abundantly in their places.
But this must not be forgotten, which we also admonished you of before, to
commixe always with your moystening things, those things which ad strength to
the liver. L^pi^^ Ie^^^.
But among those things which seem to be good, by the property of their
whole substance, the best is wolves liver, if it be diligently dried and
beaten, and.j. thereof ministered with sweet wine alayed with water. For this,
by often proof is known to be good against all distempures of the liver. For
as we said, by the property of his whole substance, he has his efficacy, and
not by heating or cooling.

CAP XXIIII. Of obstructions of the liver. DE OBSTRVCTIONE IECINORIS.
Causae.
OBSTRVCTIONS of the liver are caused of vapors, windinsse, and gross and hard
to digest. But sometime it is caused of gross and viscous humors in the ends
of the veins, springing from the flat part of the liver, by the which veins
nourishment is sent to the liver from the stomach and the bowels. Signae.
If abundance of gross and vaporous windiness be heaped up together, which
can not find free passage out, and so does engender obstruction, there arises
then not only grief and heaviness about the right side, but also feeling and
perceauing of distension and stretching out. If obstruction be engendered
through gross and viscous humors, there follows heaviness with feeling of
pain, sometime easy, and sometime vehement: also sometime without a fever,
and sometime with a fever. For gross and viscous humors, being many, do cause
obstruction and stopping more then other, and specially when the pacient does
use vehement moving after meat. And if they be sharp and much in quantity,
which be taken in meats, the pain of the obstructio^ is made more vehement:
when the body is stopped, they suffer both stretching out, Victus ratio.
and also pricking. You must give unto them which have this disease, hot
meats, and that have virtue to take away obstruction and stopping, as be
leekes with oximel, sperage, fennel, parsley, capers, and other like things
either sodden in pottage and meats, or taken with some heating sauce, which
takes away obstructions. You must eschew all meats and nourishments engendring
gross juice. Also refrain bathes and exercises after meats. He must use for
drink, wine that is thin and old. Besides his diet it is requisite for him to
use very quickly medicines that do attenuate, Curatio.
and take away obstructions: for obstructions waxing old does not only
engender putrefaction in the liver, but also in all the whole body, Simples
taking a^ay obstructions of the liver.
and kindles a fever. Among simple medicines these that follow do take away
obstructio^s notably and without grief (that is) wolves liver, fumitorie,
agrimonie, chammomill, galingale, dragons root, asarum, anise, apium,
wormwood, casia, ireos, licorice, rhapontic^^^, lupines, capares, axini, with
wind parsley, pistacium, bitter almondes, spikenard, stichados, gentian, root
of plantaine, also the seed and leaves dried, juice of Anagallis the female,
succory, alkakengi, both the endiues, sperage and bruscus. Of these also you
may make diverse compound medicines, and specially decoctions, putting to it
Oximel simplex, scilliticum, syrup^s, acetosus compositus. Syrupes of
wormwood, of hysope, of calamint, of horehound, and such other like. For the
same purpose it is lawful to minister trochistes of Agrimonie, of wormwood,
of rubarb and such like. Also these Antidotes; diasaccha, diacurcunia are good
and such other like. Among other simples before rehearsed pistacium is notable
good to take away obstructions. Therefore it will not only be profitable but
also pleasant, if you steep pistacia ten or twelve hours by night in
malmesey, and minister them in the morning, the digestion being ended. You must
apply outwardly, Epithemes, ointmentes, emplaisters, and Ceroces, which be
declared in the former Chapter, of the cure of cold distempure of the liver.
And these aforesaid medicines do suffice, if the evil be not yet inueterate
and grown older for when the evil is im^eterate you must use both blood
letting and purgagations, if nothing do forbid it. You must purge him with
pills of Rubarb and of agaricke, and with other antidotes, which do purge
gross and thin humors by the belly. You must purge the^ specially by the
belly, when the hollow part of the liver is vexed. But you must purge by urine,
when the round embossed part of the liver is vexed. The body being purged by
bludlerting and purgatio^s the^ you must minister those medicines, which are
before rehearsed. And specially this Electuarie.. of the root of ireos,
chamoepityos, Antidotum liquidum.
of seeds of anise and apium. ana..ij. of asarum..ij.ss. of cinnamone, ginger,
carawayes, chammomill. ana..j. of staechadus, gentian, and horehounde. ana..ij.
with Oxymell scilliticum as much as is sufficient, make an electuarie. This
does marvelously take away obstructions, not so much those that be in the
hollow part of the liver, as those that stick in the out side of the liver.
For it purges out vehemently by urine.

CAP. XXV. Of inflammation of the liver. DE INFLAMMATIONE IECINORIS.
THERE is inflammation ingendered in the liver as well as in other members,
Causae.
and thorough the same causes that they be engendered of. If the liver be vexed
with inflammation, there is felt pain and heaviness all over the right side
coming up to the neck, and down to the bastard ribs. Signae.
Also there is swellinge of the right side, specially, if the outward part of
the liver be enflamed. He has a sharp fever, a small and dry cough, an
infaciable thirst, abhorringe of meats, hardness and difficulty of
breathinge, the color of the tongue first read and afterward black. Vomites
as well of pure choler, as also like yolks of eggs, and afterward also
rusty, the belly is costiue. Also the color of the body is changed, like as
in the yellowe iaundise, also he has the hicket. In the time of their fit
they are taken with a certain rauing, and do void forth sharp urine. The
inflammation that chances through causes in the crooked and hollow parts of
the liver, do cause abhorring of meat, disposition to vomit vomits of choler,
and unquenchable thirst. The inflammation, that ingendreth in the outward and
round parts of the liver, causes the patient to have greater pain in
drawinge of breath then the other, and do raise a greater cough, and it does
stretch out pain unto the right part of the neck, so that it seems to
pluck it of. Also it chances sometime, that the muscles leaning upon the
liver be enflamed: therefore many being deceived, do think it to be an
inflammation of the liver. Therefore it is necessary to tell the differences
between these. For if the liver be inflamed, there follows a round swelling,
fashioned like the liver, which will also be fashioned according to the laying
of the body. For it appears greater, when the body is turned down on the
left side, and again lesser, when it is turned to the right side. For the
liver going under the bastard ribs, it neither appears to the sight, nor to
the feeling. Again the thin skin, inclining to the inflammation of the
liver, it apperreth to have a natural fashion. If the muscles be enflamed, the
skin is stretched out round about, so that if one would pull it up with his
fingers, he can not easily. Moreover there appears a swelling according to
the placing of the muscles, that lie upon the liver, long in fashion and
manifest to sight and feeling. For the cure, when the liver begins to be
enflamed, Curatio. Venae sectio.
you must by and by let him blood, if age and strength will permit it.
Therefore as Galene witnesses you must both pull back and purge the blood,
that flows to the liver* by cutting the inward vein of the arm: because
that vein in the right arm is right against the liver, and has a large
passage: having society with the vein which is called Vena caua. If this
vein does not appear, you must cut the middle vein. And if that does not
appear neither, you must cut the upper vein, you must draw out aboundaunt,
and sufficient blood if his strength will suffer it. After bloodletting within
a little space, make the belly soluble, with a simple and easy clyster,
specially if it do not void by it self. Clyster.
The next day after the blood lettinge, fasten on a cupping glass, with
scarification, and again, likewise fasten it on, within a day after: for many
have felt more ease the second time of the applying: then at the first time.
Also you must use foments of woll wet in oil, cataplasmes, cerotes, F^ment^.
and epithemes. In the applying of the which, this only is to be observed,
that to the other medicines that be mollificatiue and discussiue, you always
commix some restrictiue medicines. Therefore make a foment of oils of quinces,
or of mastike, or roses, or mirtles, putting to it odoriferous wine: or apply
a sponge wette in the decoction of wormewoode, melilot, red roses, chammomill,
dill, plaintaine, tame endive, and other like. Also make Cataplasmes or
emplaisters of lineseede and faenugreeke, Cataplasmes.
barley meal, quinces, melilo^e, flowers, wormewoode and such like. Or this
emplaister.. barley meal..ss. meat of quinces beaten..iij. wormwood,
E^plastrum.
flowers of melilot, squinaunt. ana..ij. lineseede..j. oils of Roses, quinces,
chammomill, wormwood. ana..ss. vinegre..j. Commixe altogether, Cer^^^^.
and make an emplaister. Also this Cerote is good.. of the meat of Dates..iij.
of mirrhe, steeped in old restrictiue wine, storaxe, and mastick. ana..ij.
flowers of melilot, wormwood, chammomill. ana..j.ss. saffron..ss. oils of
quinces, of masticke, and of roses. ana..j. with wax and rosen as much as is
sufficient, and make a Cerote to apply to the liver. Epithe^^^a.
For the same purpose, you may make Epithemes of the decoction of Roses,
plantaine, wormwood, chammomill, or of their watets distilled. And in making
of all these things, you must take heed, that when there is vehement
inflammation, the restrictiue things may prevail, and exceed the things
that mollify and loosen. And contrariwise when the vehemency of the heat is
somewhat slaked, the mollifyinge things must exceed restrictiue things. Note.
Moreover you must beware, that you do not apply the aforesaid things when
they are cold, but first warm them a little. Moreover in inflammation of the
liver, when there is great and vehement pain, you must also minister drink
medicines, that do ease pain: but so, that you do eschew continual use of
them: you must use drinking of simples most. Therefore minister ground swell
sodden, as a thing very profitable, or juice of lycorice with hot water. Also
juice of endiues does profit no less then the other, putting to them a
little honey: for besides that it cools, and adds strength to the liver, it
also purges the mouths of the veins of the liver. But the belly must also
be provoked by eatinge of nettles or mercury sodden. Also in the declination
of the disease, the belly must be emptied by clisters, for which purpose
polibodie and Epithimum with mulsa are put in: and that specially, if the
inflammation be in the hollow part of the liver. For the hollow part of the
liver (as we said before) must be purged by the guts. But the round and
outward part of the liver, must be purged by urine. Moreover in inflammation of
the liver there is need of an exquisite diet (as Galen witnesses lib. 13.
Therap. method. The liver it self requires meat chiefly that can withstand
obstructions. Victus ratio.
Such be all those that be of thin substance, and which do scour without
gnawing, as is, ptysan, mulsa, and such like. Therefore the best food for them
that are thus diseased, is ptysan broth, wherein apium has been sodden. Also
you may minister broth of a chicken, wherein parsley has bin sodden: but drink
mulsa or barley broth, or decoction of the tame endiues. And if that
inflammation do begin to change to suppuration and rotting then all the
aforesaid signs will increase, Cure of inflammatio^ turning to suppuration.
as pains, fevers, rauings, carfulness, and abhorring of meat. Then you
must help the permutation, and rotting, that it may quickly be done, lest other
members in continuance of time do rot with it also. Therefore you shall help it
to rot with this cataplasme.. of the root of Althaea..j.ss. faenugreeke,
Casaplasma.
and lineseede. ana..ij. leaves of Althaea and mallows. ana. M.ij. dry figs
in number vj. boil these in water till they wax soft, then bruise them, and
make a Cataplasme. Neither shall you do amiss, if you apply an emplaister,
Emplastrum.
that can help it to change into matter. As this is.. of barley meal, and
faenugreke. ana..iij. of the root of Althaea..ss. of the root of white
lillies..j.ss. lineseede..j. flowers of cammomill, and melilote. ana. M.ss.
boil all in water unto a just thickness, then commix of oil of cammomill..j.
of oil of lillies..j.ss. boil them again, and make an emplaister. Of these
said things you may also make a cerote, by putting to them butter; ladanum,
rosen and wax. When the suppuration and rotting is fully come to a
perfection, then the pains do cease, and all the fittes do appear gentler and
meeker. In the time of the rupture or breaking, Ruptura,
the pain does increase more again, therefore then also you must help the
rupture or breaking of it, by using of goats dong and doves dong, nettleseede,
mustard seed, and other things that do draw to the superficies. And by
heating potions, as is decoction of poley, fumitorie, root of Chamaedrios, and
such like. When it is broken you must minister water of honey, or decoction of
cicers, and other like things, which have an abstersive and scouring virtue.
And if the matter does avoid by the veins, you must commix things that
provoke vryne: as be sium, asarum, casia, and cinamome. But if it avoid by the
belly, commix those things which do purge gently, as be goats wheye,
tamarindes, and casia sistularis. Also it is lawful then to use clysters made
of the decoction of bareley. When clensing and scouring of it is done minister
medicines, which can glutinate and join it up.

CAP. XXVI. Of distempure of the Spleen. DE INTEMPERIE LIENIS.
LIKE as other parts of the body have eight kinds of distempures, so many
has the spleen, and most often it suffers cold and moist distempure. Each
particular cause is not to be declared here: for there be some causes, Causae.
that be in other distempures of other members of the body, Signs of
distempure of the spleen in bare qualities. Cold distemper.
therefore you shall seek them in Galen ex capitibus primi, 2. and 3. lib. de
morborum causis. The surest and shortest signs of distempure of the spleen is
known by those signs that be eaten and droncken, and by those things which
are applied outwardly upon the skin, nigh to the skin, nigh to the left
side. For if cold distempure does vex the spleen, all meats and drinckes
which do cool notably, do soon and manifestly hurt the spleen. Also al
cold things applied outwardly do hurt it: and therefore they signify cold
distempure of it: but contrariwise all hot things do ease it. And if the
distempure of the spleen be hot, Hot distemper.
it is not vexed with cold meats or drinckes or with cold things being
applied outwardly. And if the heat increase there is not only no swelling in
it, but also it suffers contraction, and shrincking up, specially if a fever
be present. But meats and drinks that be hot, and those things that add
heat being applied outwardly do increase hot distempures, and make them
outrageous. Also all cooling things be joyful unto them. Dry distempure.
Likewise also you may ga^her the signs of dry distempure, specially when it
is not evident by the proper nature of it for lack of greatness. Also those
things that be applied outwardly to the body, and that be received inwardly,
if they have virtue and power of drying, they do dry up the spleen. When the
spleen is vexed with moist distempure* Moist distemper.
and so continuing a while, it causes it to increase so much, that it touches
both the stomache and the liver. Also the kind of pain together with these
aforesaid signs, do declare the distempure that vexes. For in a hot and cold
distempure, they have small pain or none at all, neither have they any also in
a moist distempure^ but least of all in a dry distempure. By these aforesaid
signs, you may make conjecture of compounde distempures of the spleen. For in
a manner altogether, when a hot distempure is vehement, a dry distempure
follows it: and to a cold distempure being inueterate, a moist distempure
follows. Signs of distempure of the spleen through humors. Choler.
But in so much as humors flowing into the spleen do cause swelling: you must
have diligent consideration to them. For if choler do flow thither, the whole
body appears hotter, although there be no fever present. Also the eyes and
the urine be colored by choler. The sick shall always accuse drines, and
complain of thirst, and choler troubling his mouth. He abhors meat, and is
troubled with watching, and desires cold things, and withal these his
tongue is yelowished. He has tertian fits, and the manners of the sick be
wrathful, and they will chause out of measure. If Melancholy does flow,
Melancholy.
his color does appear as well on the tongue, as in all the rest of the body,
and he has unnatural appetite to meat, the patient is sad and heavy, Fleume.
and other signs of choler be present with these. Also fits do vex him the
fourth day. When a flegmaticke humor flows into the spleen, his color shall be
like fleume. The sick does not thirst, he desires meat, unless the humor be
salt fleume: for the sick abhors meat, and be more desirous of drink, for
they are thirsty. Also fits vex them every day. And their vrines are white,
and they themselves be slow and sluggishe. Some of them that have cold
distempure with it, have a great and a hard spleen. And if it be a sanguine
humor, Blood.
that flows into spleen, it is possible for it to change the color both of
the tongue, and of the skin. As for the appetit or abhorring of meats, the
sick is in a mean between both, and they be more sick then the rest,
although they have not like swelling of the spleen. The veins of the whole
body do appear full of blood, and the vryne is yellowe. These signs we have
declared at large out of Aetius, Note.
because they are common, and may almost be applied to all distempures of other
medicines, caused through flowing of humors. Generally distempure of the bare
quality of the spleen is almost without swelling. Cure of distempure of the
bare quality of the spleen. Hot.
You must cure and correct them both by meats and drinckes, as also by simple
medicines and fomentes, oils and oyntmentes and such other like, which be
contrary to the distempure. Therefore you shall heal hot distempure of the
spleen, (as you did of the liver) by meats and drinks that do cool, and by
annoyntinges with oils of roses and olium molinum and other things which be
rehearsed before in the 23. chapter of this book. Likewise cold distempure of
the liver, Cold. Moist.
by those things which do moderatly heat. In a moist distempure of the
spleen, besides those things which are rehearsed before in the 23. chapter,
these things do profit: root of five leaued grass, dry plantaine, the
flower and some of salt, ammoxiacum, juice of willow and such like. If you make
of them an ointment or cerote by putting to sufficient vinegre, such as we will
a little after describe. Also frictions are most convenient for this, Dry.
which have a discussing virtue. Dry distempure of the spleen is cured by
sweet bathes and hot waters, also annointinges with sweet oil, and meats
moisting without coldness, Cure of distempure (...).
as is Ptysan juice. If distempure of the spleen be caused through flowing of
an humor, then if the humor be sanguine, you must let blood of the inner
vein of the left arm, called lienaris vena, or if that cannot be found, let
blood of the vein, which is between the ring finger, and the ear finger,
then apply both inwardely and outwardly medicines which do ad strength to the
spleen, as is, the barcke of the root of capers, of hearts tongue, Ceterach,
maydenheare Yreos, calamint and such like, which also are able to add strength
and stability to the liver: of which we will speak abundantly in the chapters
following. If other humors flow to the spleen, first you must avoid the
superfluous humors by purging them with medicines: then all the rest of the
time, you must correct the distempure that is left, and also apply things that
strengthen the spleen.

CAP. XXVII. Of inflammation of the Spleen. DE LIENIS INFLAMMATIONE
THE Spleen, like as other members is vexed with inflammation as often as hot
blood does flow thither unnaturally. Causae.
It is known by heauynes and swelling of the left side, Signa.
which will not give place to the feeling: also by pain and stretching out of
the place, by feauers and by burning heat. But if abundance of humors do
rush in thither, it is knowed by the greatness and swiftnes of the engendring of
the inflammation. Let the diet of them that be vexed with inflammation of the
spleen be simple, Dict.
and give them those things that will easily digest for their meat, as is
Ptysan juice, bread wet and other things which be often rehearsed of us before
in the inflammation of other members. And if the inflammation endure long, you
may also give them birds flesh, and fishes taken in grauellie places. Let the
drink of the pacient be decoction of cinnamome or waterie wine. Potus.
Let the cure be begun by cutting of the vein of the spleen, or that vein,
which is between the little finger, Curatio. Venae sectio. Clyster.
and the ring finger, if there be no cause to forbid it. Let the belly be
often washed with clisters, but specially, if you may not let him blood. Then
lay upon the spleen restrictiue medicines, which can appease the fury of
that, that flows: and keep the strength of the liver and spleen, but yet
you may not only apply restrictiue things, but you must commixe with them,
those things which do extenuate, cut and loosen without evident heat, least
gross matter be stopped in it, and do wax more vehemently hard. Therefore if
there be moderate inflammation, Fomenta.
you must apply moist woole wet in wine that is old, sharp and thin and
mixed with sweet oil. But if there be greater heat, take oil of roses, or
oleum melinum, or oil of chammomill with vinegre you may commix them together
after this sort.. oil of roses and quinces. ana..ij. oil of chamomill..j. the
best vinegre..ss. commix them altogether for a foment and irrigation. And if
the aforesaid oils be not at hand, sees bryer leaves and quinces in oil,
and add to also some extenuating things, as is wormwood and peniroiall. Note.
And you must beware also that you apply nothing upon the spleen cold, but
whatsoever medicine you apply to it outwardly, let it be warmed. After fomentes
and irrigatio^s, you must pass to cataplasmes: in the making of which you may
add the meal of darnell and barley with dry figs lineseede and oil,
wherein wormwood and penyroiall be sodden. But you must beware that the place
be not kept bare after irrigations, and cataplasmes, but as soon as those be
taken away, by and by apply such cerotes or emplaisters as be described in the
chapter of inflammation of the liver. For both the liver and the spleen require
one kind of medicines, but the spleen requires so much the stonger
medicines, as it is of grosser nourishment. Therefore you shall seek examples
of medicines meet for this place out of the chapter of inflammation of the
Liver: observing only this thing, that you always commixe vinegre, and
somewhat that is acceptable to the spleen, and that does peculiarly defend
his strength. And if the inflammation of the spleen tends toward
suppuration and rotting, which do seeldome chance, you must help to further
the suppuration, least other members putrify, by cataplasmes that bring it to
matter, whereof we have spoken in the inflammation of the liver.

CAP. XXVIII. Of hardness of the Spleen. DE LIENIS SCHIRRHO.
INFAMMATION of the spleen, if it be not rightly cured, it draws together a
hard swelling of the spleen. The cause of this disease is a certain humor,
which cleaves stubburnly to the spleen: Causae.
but it is when hardness engenders without inflammation into over much
swelling. Signa.
The evil is easily known by touching, of what cause soever it be. His diet
must be extenuating: therefore he must eat meat which is easy of digestion,
Victus ratio.
and does engender good juice and thine. He must eschew all hard flesh, which
does engender gross juice, and which do strive against digestion. He must
drink wine that is thin in substance, yelowish in color, not very old
and being without all restriction. Also he must put much trust in exercises,
which, it is good to use before meat, the body not abounding with
superfluities. Also it is manifest that vociferation, and crying out,
oportunatly done and in time, does greatly help in this evil. For the cure,
you must use very strong things as well outwardly as also inwardly. Therefore
with in the body minister most strong potions, Curatio.
for those they may suffer without grief. Among the which, the chief be, the
barks of the roots of capers, hartestongue, the root and herb of
Tamariscus, sodden in vinegre or oxymell. Also juice of centorie droncke, and
decoction of bitter lupines taken with rue and pepper. Anagallis the female..j.
with Posca or oximell, profits marvelously to drink it. Also the most
convenient remeady for the hardness of the spleen is iron quenched often in
water, or wine or Posca. For that water or wine or Posca ministered in the
beginning is pleasant, and most profitable, and is given many days orderly.
Therefore to them that have the fever, minister water or Posca: but to them
that have tender flesh, and lack a fever, minister wine. Let the iron that is
quenched in them be some instrument that is laid with steel. Also the scales
of iron may profitablie be ministered to strong and rude men. For, this does
melt the spleen notably, for it has a consuming virtue. But yet least it
should hurt the stomach, it is good to commix with it some strengthening
medicines, as is hartestongue, tops of wormwood, casia, annyse seed,
sepillum montanum, or such other like. Apply outwardly this foment.. centorie,
hartestongue, rue. ana. M.j. bark of the root of capers..j. sees all in
vinegre, and when they be sodden, Fomentum.
wet a sponge in the decoction, and apply it hot to the spleen. Vnguentum.
Moreover this ointment shows a marvelous effect.. of the oils of capers,
lillies and yreos. ana..j. marrow of oxes shankes..ij. muscilage of the root
of Althaea, fenugreeke, and lineseede. ana..j. badgers grease, hens grease,
goose grease. ana..ij. the bark of the root of capers, Tamariscus, costus,
centory. ana..j. gum ammoniacke, bdellium, galbanum. ana..ss. the gummes
being first dissolved in vinegar, with wax as much as is sufficient, make an
ointment. Also emplaisters and cerotes do profit much being made after this
sort.. of the oils of lillies, yreos, and of capers. ana..j. barley meal,
Cer^^u^.
fenugreeke, lineseede. ana..j. the bark of the root of capers, hartestongue.
ana..j.ss. root of Althaea.j. bdellium, ammoniacke, galbanum. ana..j.ss.
opop^^ax, mirrhe, fanckensence. ana..ss. with rosen, turpentine and wax, as
much as is sufficient make a cerote. Moreover the Physician must look
diligently to the disease, as he sees cause sometime add, and sometime take
away those things which do either mollify, or attenuate and dissolve, or
which adds strength. In conclusion cupping glasses fastened with
scarification, is not a little profitable.

CAP. XXIX. Of obstruction of the Spleen. DE LIENIS OBSTRVCTIONE.
IT chances sometime not only through weakness of attractiue virtue, which
is in the spleen, but also through stopping of the passage, by which the dreggy
humor of melancholy is derived from the liver unto the spleen there follows
obstruction. Afterward that vnpure and naughty blood is distributed all over
the whole body, which, if it chance, then the color of the body is corrupt,
and enclieneth to blackness. Also sometime they that are thus diseased, have
incurable ulcers. The causes may easily be known by those causes, Causae.
which we spoke of, in the chapter of the obstruction of the liver. This evil
is known by heaviness, Signa.
which is about the left side. If the whole body be corrupted with it besides,
it is easy to know specially by the color of the face, difficulty of
breathing, troublesome dreams, Dye^. Cure.
and other such like aforesaid. This disease is cured with an extenuating
diet, and by medicines which take away obstructions, whereof you may find
great plenty rehearsed in the chapter of obstructions of the liver: for both
these members have need of like medicines: But yet the spleen has need of
stronger medicines so much as it is nourished with grosser food. Therefore
against gross humors, that they may obey readily to be purged, Preparatio
(...).
there behooves preparatiues, which preparatiues shall be the same that are for
obstructions of the liver, (this only observed) that here all things be
stronger, and that they have things commixed with them, that do add strength
to the spleen, (the humor being preparate) then they must be purged by such
medicines, as do purge gross and dreggie humors, whereof we have spoken
often before. After this apply such medicines both inwardly and outwardly, as
are contained in the former chapter, and in the chapter of obstructio^ of the
liver. Therefore those places will show you medicines abundantly.

CAP. XXX. Of the Iaundes. DE ICTERO.
Ic^erus ^^igo (...) reg^^^. Causae.
THE Iaundies is nothing else but a shedding either of yelow choler, or of
melancholy all over the body. Sometime there chances shedding of choler to
the skin, the liver being safe, as in the Crisis of diseases. Many times the
iaundeis is caused, and does chance when the blood is corrupted without a
fever of some outward occasion, and is made choleric, as it chances by
biting of venomous beasts. So a certain man, when he was stong of a viper,
had all his body spotted like the color of leikes. Also it may chance that
through inflammation, or changing of the natural temperament of the liver,
such corruption of humor may happen that sometime all the body shall be
manifestly like herbs that be whitish with palenes. Also sometime it shall be
like the color of lead, as also such colors be blacker if they happen through
disease of the spleen. Also it is caused many times through weakness of the
bladder that receives the choler, which does not draw as it was wont to do
the choleric humor from the liver unto him, and therefore leaves the blood
vnpure. Also sometime it is caused through obstruction and debilitie of the
vessels; whose mouths are derived from the gall to the liver, and do not
therefore draw the choleric humor. Also many times through obstruction of
the passages, which goes to the bowelles. But that we may discern well the
causes of the iaundeis, Signa.
you must of necessity consider the figure of the excrementes, and the color,
seeing in some they appear much colored by yellow choler, as also in some the
urine does appear. Therefore in them that have choler burst out unto the
skin, by reason of a good crisis in feauers, their excrementes and urine
shall seem to be of natural color. But if with the fever choleric
derections do invade, and there be heaviness in the right side, it signifies
burning inflammation in the liver: by whose violence the blood is changed into
choler, and carried all over the body. But if there be burning without
heaviness, and grief, the evil engendered only through hot distempure of the
liver. But if without a fever, together with feeling of some heaviness about
the right side, white excrementes be avoided: in them you may judge, that there
is obstructio^ of the passages of the bladder that receive the choler. If such
egestions come forth without that heaviness, you may judge their strength to be
weak, either the attractiue virtue which fetches out the choleric humor
from the liver, or weakness of the expulsive virtue, which drives out to the
bowels. Also by and by after most choleric humors be sent out with the urine
abundantly. Black humors.
Those that have melancholy sent to the skin together with the the blood,
they be vexed together grieuouslie: for there follows it sadness without
reason, and gnawing of those things which be about the belly, difficulty of
breathing, abhorring of meat, and they avoid black vryne, but their dunge is
like the color the coperouse or shomakers bleache, and their womb is much
costiue. But those that have the iaundeis caused of yelow choler, have no
gnawing about the belly, nor also they do not so much abhor meats. They
avoid white egestions, their vrines be colored like saffron, but they remain
troubled, but commonly to all that have the iaundeis, there chances
sluggishnes to move, and a contrary mind to sweet meats. Also itch of the
whole body follows. The whytes of the eyes and the parts of the face nigh
the temples, and the balls of the cheeks do betoken it by their pale color.
Also the veins under the tongue are found full and signify an abundant
humor. The iaundeis that is caused by reason of a good crisis, when the fever
is parfectly ended, they are soon cured, Cure of iaundeis coming through
crisis of a fever.
if they use bathes of sweet water, and frictions or chafinges with discussiue
oils, and all things that ratify, the skin, (as be) oils or chammomill,
of dill, of yreos, or such like. Also rosemarie sodden in oil does discuss
and dissolve much. Let their whole diet be moiste, and extenuating gross
humors. Of venomous biting.

Cure of iaundeis of hot distempure of the liver or inflammation.

Cure of the iaundeis through obstruction.


They that have the iaundeis caused through biting of a venomous beast, they
are to be cured almost as those be, which be bitten with a mad dog of the
which we will speak in another place. Those that have the iaundes through hot
distempure of the liver, or through inflammation of it, you must minister the
cures which are rehearsed before in the diseases of the liver. Therefore that
which we have rehearsed there, must be referred hither. But if the iaundeis be
caused through obstruction of the bladder that receives the choler, then two
special remeadies must be used: blood letting and purging. In them therefore
that blood do much abound together with choler all over the body; and that
be troubled with heaviness or stretching out, about the liver or the spleen,
nothing can be done more profitably, then to let him blood, so there be not
cause that lets it. You must cut the innermost vein of the right arm, and
that if the liver be affected evil: but if the spleen be diseased, cut the
vein in the left arm, Venae s^cti^.
you must draw out the blood now and then, least if you should draw it out on
heaps, the strength of the sick should fail him. And if we be prohibited
from blood letting, we may conveniently minister a clyster. For a clyster may
well be cast in after blood letting, for by the avoiding out of the dounge, it
makes easy breath and by provoking and gnawing of the bowels it draws and
pulls back to it the humors that are sent out to the skin. Make it after
this sort.. both the endiues, Clyster.
horehounde, agrimonie, maidenheare, origan, wormewoode. ana. M.j. seeds of
annyse, fennel, percely, sperage. ana..ij.ss. licoryce, apium, fennel, the
roots of them. ana..j. boil them in sufficient water until the third part:
then strain them and take of the licour of that decoction..xiij. casia
fistula..j. hierapicra..ss. electuarium de succo rosarum..ij. oils of dill and
yreos. ana..j.ss. salt..j. commix them all and make a clister. But purgations
be most proper and familiar for this disease: but so that the humors be first
attenuated, and made thin by brothes, potions, and also medicines. Therefore
he must use meats of easy digestion and extenuating, Victus ratio.
birds of mountains, fishes of grauelly places, and potherbes provoking
urine: specially endiues, sperage, louage, fennel, and such like. Flesh of
wild beasts being tamed, are best, specially of goats. For his sauce vinegre
is good, wherein Aristolochia has been steeped. He must abstain from fruits,
but let his banquet be almoundes, a few at once, and cicer, a little tosted. Also
the decoction of it continually droncke profits not a little. Wine white and
thin and not very old, is good. For medicines let him have those, that be
taught in the chapter of obstruction of the liver, and also in the 1. book, the
11 chapter. Above other, specially, apium percely, maidenheare, calamint,
veruaine, root of chickweede, or mather, aristolochia, sepillum, S. John's
worte, being decoct, are good. The humors being preparate and extenuate at
length, Purgatio.
you must minister a medicine that purges choler. You must give strong
purgations to them that have the ianndeis: for through the drines of their
stomach, the medicines seem weaker, and less in effect in them. The best
purgation in this case, is infusio^ of rewbarbe, described in the first book
the 11. chapter. Also Hierapicra, electuarium de succo rosarum, de psyllio, and
diaphanicon. And if you profit him nothing with the first purgatio^, you must
return again to those things, which have virtue to take away obstructions
and stopping: and after three days you must purge him more vehemently again.
If the iaundeis be engendered through disease of the spleen, you must turn to
the chapter of Melancholiousnes, and the chapter of obstruction of the liver.
The belly being purged, you must again minister medicines, which do purge the
entrails. For which purpose the root of, Cyclaminum beaten and druncke is
only good: for this does not only purge again the intrailes, but also it is
most meet, to shut out the choler, by swet in the whole skin all over.
Therefore after it is druncke, you must help the exclusion of the swet by
coueringes, and warmings in bed. You may give of it..ij. or iij. with aqua
mulsa. Also juice of the barcke of radish does notably well, if it be mixed
with sweet wine vnalayed, or vinum mulsum, so that..ij. of the juice be
tempered with.j. of wine. Also earthwormes dry given.iij. days with vinum
mulsum, do send out the iaundeis by the urine. Also you may give very
profitably juice of endive and succorie to them that have feauers by itself,
and to them that lack feauers with wine. Also juice of cuscuta profits
marvelously. Also chammomill is most profitable, which is called leucanthemus,
and also buphthalmum. But all the medicines ministered in drink, let them be
ministered in a bath if it can be, when the patient sits in a great hot
vessel. Also you must be much diligent at this time to give him a diet, that
recomforteth and refreshes strength, by the which the virtue expulsive may be
repaired: and if any member be hurt, let it be strengthened, and let the
corruption of his color be purged away. Also it is good for him to use
exercises, gestations, annointinges and sweating out. For this purpose dry hot
houses are good: in the which anoint the body with oil, wherein sepillum or
rosemarie has been sodden. And if any of the iaundeis be left about the face
and the eyes, if the urine appear pure, and the belly avoiding after his
accustomed manner you must use infusions into the nose: for which purpose juice
of cyclaminum is poured in, also ^igella with vinegre, juice of the root of
beetes and anagallis. Also let the sick sitting in abathe draw into his
nosethrilles very sharp vinegre and let him keep it a while, pressing his
nosethrilles, together, and it will purge marvelously.

CAP. XXXI. Of evil state of the body. DE MALO CORPORIS HABITV.
CACHEXIA in greek is nothing else, (...).
but an evil and naughty state and disposition of the body. For it is in
such case that it is spredde abroad in waterynes, and all the whole body is
loose and waxes soft. Causae.
This disease for the most part is engendered of a long sickness. Also it
follows when some entraile is hardened specially after the hardenesse of the
liver and the spleen. Also it chances often in a continual Dysenteria, and
the disease called Caeliacus morbus. Also through letting of some accustomed
excretion. The whole body is made whitishe and weak, Signa.
so that his legs are scarce able to bear him: and in the beginning his
digestions be let, his appetite remaining it still: but afterward there
follows abhorring of meat, and their breathing is seeldome and weak. Also
their belly sends out unequal excrementes. Old men and children are
specially taken with this disease, which do soon perish through weakness of
the vital faculty, and because the juice does breath out of them readylie
through thinnes of the skin. But they that be of full age, do seeldome fall
into this disease, and do soon get it away again. If this disease do endure
long, it turns into the dropsy. Therefore his cure may not be differred.
Let his diet altogether be thin and dry: therefore let their meats be
simple, and which will easelie digest, and that can engender the best blood.
Diet.
Let them eschew all fruits also that engender gross and viscouse humors,
and that be hard to digest. Wine is good for them which is white, thin, and
odoriferous. For the cure if the disease happen by letting of accustomed
excretion you must stir up, Curatio.
and provoke the excretion. Therefore you must use blood letting, if nothing
do let it, which you must draw out by little and little at sundry times unto
the third or fourth day in them that fell into this disease through retention
of hemorhoides or menstruis. But in them that have it through abundance of
vicious humors, bloodletting is hurtful. Therefore rather purge them with
some convenient purgation. The body being purged, let him use chiefly waters
that spring by them selves of alome and salt peter, and afterward sulphurous
waters. Also let them exercise diverse deambulations, gestacions,
vociferations, frictions with linen, and other moderate exercises. After let
them use annointings with oil, wherein is put somewhat that dries up humors,
(as be) nitrum and saltes. To cure the wearines apply certain bathes between
whiles. Also potion of wormwood helps them marvelously, and dropaces
applied. Also if the liver be evil affected, or some other of the inward
members, it is good to cure them by their own remeadies before prescribed. If
the evil turn into the dropsy, you shall find it next.

CAP. XXXII. Of the dropsey DE AQVA INTER CVTEM.
THERE be three kinds of the dropsy. The first is called in Greek Ascites.
The second Tympanites, and the third Anasarca, Yposarca, Ascites.
Sarcites, and Leucophlegmatia. Ascites is, when much, waterie humor is heaped
up between the skin or fylme called peritoneum, and the bowels. Tympanites
is when much windynesse and superfluous breath is gathered in the aforesaid
places of the belly. Anasarca is, Timpanites. Anasarca.
when the humor is dispersed throughout the whole body, that all the flesh
appears altogether moist and wette like a sponge or paper. The dropsye is
caused through great coldness of the liver, or through other parts very
notably cooled, Causae.
which can bring the liver into the same effect. The liver is affecte by the
spleen being cold and by the stomach and the bowelles, also by the longes,
the reins, and the mydriffe. Also it chances through unmeasurable avoiding of
the hemorhoydes: or through woman's flux, or through retention of menstruis, or
through soul other great affection of the womb. For in all these the liver
has no unnatural swelling: and yet the body is taken with the dropsy, only
through refrigeration of the liver, affected in the beginning. But afterward
sometime it also waxes hard, which is evident to be seen in them, which
through untimely drincking of cold water, have their liver cooled on heaps,
so that the dropsy follows by and by, before the liver be lyfted up into a
knottie swelling. Many have fallen into the dropsy after the gout, and
through the vexing pain of the hucklebones. Most commonly those which feel
not their meat, and have evil state of the body, and also that be troubled
with the Iaundeis, the dropsy follows it. Also it follows Caeliacus
morbus, and Dysenteria. Commonly every dropsy causes difficulty of
breathing, Signa.
and swelling, and heaviness and naughty color. Also they abhor meat, and
desire drink largely, specially they that have Ascites. For the humor that
is holden and kept in the aforesaid places, is salt and rotten: therefore also
after for the most part, there is wont to follow a fever. Women are less
trobled with the dropsy then men. Children for the most part are taken with
the dropsy Anasarca. Among the said three kinds of dropsies, Tympanites is
the most perilous. Ascites less perilous then it, Diet.
and then Anasarca. One diet is common to all these kinds of dropsies: that
their meat be easy of digestion and sufficiently coact, and dry. For that
meat that is lose and moist, is apt to be turned into watrines. Therefore let
his bread be very well baked, Panis.
and let it have salt, ammi, fennel, annyse, or comin commixed with it. Also
it ought to be well leauened, for so it restrains and stops the less. Of
birds the driest are good, as partriches, turtles, blackbirdes, and thrushes
and such like. Of four footed beasts goats and hares. Also chickens, their
extreme parts, when they are roasted. Of fishes, crabbes of flouddes. Also
eggs roasted are good. Let him use pothearbes, but seldom. Let those things
that be ministered unto them be somewhat sharp, and that have virtue to
attenuate and heat: as is, Apium, percelie, Dancus, rocket, penyroiall,
colewortes, garlic sodden, onions and leikes. He must altogether abstain
from pulses. For sauce let him use vinegre with pepper, cinnamon and such like.
Let their salt be compound with fennel, Potu^.
hysope, rosemarie and Apium. You must give them so much drink only as shall
suffice somewhat to break their thirst: for over much drink does damage
them that be sick of the dropsy without measure. They must drink thin
wine, and that does provoke urine. But they must eschew sweet wines, and
mulsum: vinegre does marvelously quench their thirst. Moreover let them take
the greatest portion of meat at supper. Let them eschew much fruits and
second tables: but yet nuttes, almondes, pomgranades, pears sodden, and dry
figs are to be given unto them, but yet let them take all those moderately
and not every day. Let not their bed be very soft, specially them that
have Anasarca. Strew under them dry herbs, as be, penyroiall, calamint,
origan, and such like. For it is marvelous, how much those do dry up, while
they sleep: so that it has been proved that some being wrapped and hidden in a
heap of wheat, to have risen again after sleep strong and safe. Also let
them use exercises in the Sun, if it be summer and a saire day, but let
their head be covered: Exercitatio.
but if it be cold, let them use it in houses being warmed, and nigh a fire,
or at a fire^ Riding is expedient at the first, and to be carried hither and
thither in a chair. But if the strength of the patient may suffer it, it is
better to walk much on his feet, and sometime to run, then to be borne.
Also the patient must be wrapped in skins dried with the Sun, or dug
into hot sand. After exercises wipe of the swette with sharp linen clothes.
Also it is very good if you use daiely, thrice or four times, frictions: for
this does open the passages that are shut: and it dries up, extenuateth
and casts a sunder humors. Therefore it does very quickly provoke forth
much swette, and constrains the flesh. They must be rubbed with hrye hands,
or with salt beaten in water or hot oil. After this they must be washed with
alommewater, or sulphur water, or salt water. For many which have been
taken with the dropsy Anasarca, and have used such kind of bathes, they have
suffised to wear out the disease, and also to make a stronger state of the
body. And hitherto, we have rehearsed a common diet for all kind of dropsies.
For the cure, the remeadie that is common for all dropsies, is that by and by
in the beginning, Curatio.
you must purge the humor that does abound. That you may do both by blood
letting, and by purgations, and by those medicines that provoke urine. That
which is good particularly for this or that kind, we will teach in the
chapters following, in which we will follow the cures of them every one
particularly.

CAP. XXXIII. Of the dropsey Anasarca. DE ANASARCA.
IN the dropsy Anasarca, all the whole body, and the flesh appears loose,
and wet like a sponge as it is said: so that all the whole body swells up,
Signa.
and is like a dead body. In this disease you must begin the cure with
letting of blood, Curatio.
specially if the evil be engendered of suppression of hemorhoides or
menstruis, and if age and strength will suffer it. For by this means thea
boundaunce of humors that do hurt, are drawn out, and the feeble nature
being vnloden is swifter, and the cause of the disease is minished, and also
health comes again with less labor. The naughty humors being drawn out
and purged by blood letting, you must come to the remeady of purging medicines.
Purgatis.
But if there be need of extenuation and preparation of the humors before
their expulsion, you shall minister decoctions and other things which be
rehearsed before in the chapters of weakness of the liver, and obstruction of
the liver. For which purpose minister also syrups of wormwood, of tame endive
with the broad leaves, of Agrimony and bizantijs. Let the purging medicines be,
of simples, rubarbe, and agaricke, of compoundes pills of rubarbe, pilulae de
hiera simplici: and pills of agaricke and such like. Also hierapicra is good
in the beginning because it takes away obstruction, and adds strength to
the entrails. Therefore you must only beware, that you minister not purging
medicines that be strong, and which ad no strength to the liver: but you must
bring forth the hurtful humor with easy medicines by little and little. For if
you purge but once, and on heaps, you destroy the strength marvelously and
cool the liver. Therefore every week you must make the womb soluble, and
you must always pass from gentle remeadies, by little and little to stronger.
Therefore in this kind of dropsy the Antidotes, diaphanicon, and Electuarium
nidum be good. Also the root of Elder sodden in wine does purge notably. Also
the root of wolwort profits, for they be both of one virtue. Moreover the
rest of the time of the cure, while he abstaineth from purging medicines, you
must minister those things that add strength to the liver, whereof many be
recited before, where we taught the cure of obstruction and weakness of the
liver. Also minister those things which provoke urine. For which purpose, you
may well minister diarrhodon abbatis, aromaticum rosarum, dialacca diacurcuma,
trochiskes of agrimonie, of rubarbe, of wormwood, theriaca, and such lick.
And this medicine profits notably.. the pouders of diacurcuma, Tri^^^.
and of dialacca. ana..j. pouders of diatrion santalon, and of diarrhodon
abbatis. ana..ss. powder of aromaticum rosarum..j. rubarbe chosen.ss. seeds of
endive with the broad leaves, of melons, and fennel. ana..ij. of wormwood,
chammomill, and withwinde. ana..j. of nutmegges, squinaunt and spiknard.
ana..ss.j. of very white sugar..j. commixe them together, and make a powder.
Also this profits marvelously.. seeds of caraway, fennel, and annyse.
ana..ij. seeds of comin and S. John's worte. ana..j. seeds of (...); parcely,
Alia.
daucus and louage. ana..ss. of the roots yreos and of Asarum. ana..j.
wormewoode..j. of licorice..j. sugar, the weight of all the rest, commixe them
all and make a powder. And you must do your diligence, that in Anasarca, the
medicynes be more dry then moist, because the whole state of the body is so
waterie. Moreover you must apply those medicynes outwardelie, which can dry
up humors, as be cataplasmes* emplaisters, ointmentes, and other like
things that have drying virtue in them. Therefore a ^a^aplasme is good made of
barley and bean meal, ^
of fenugreeke, of the root of walworte, of laurel bearies, of wormwood, and
of origan sodden in wine, and laid over all the whole body. Also oxes doung
conveniently dried, may well be applied with posca or oxi^ell, having the
fourth part of brimston put to it. Also fresh cheese having much cream being
laid to, makes well against all swelling parts. Moreover doves dounge and
goats dounge, maieweede, and chammomill, by even portions bruised, sodden in
vinegre, and honey may be applied. Moreover you must use emplaisters of leaven,
dry figs, intrum, yreos, melilote, sage, peniroiall, cardamomum, sulphur
vinum, laurel bearies, staves acre, salt armoniacke, masticke, franckensence,
sothernwood, Aristolochia rotunda, doves doung, make it up with oximell. But
you must altogether eschew fat and rozennie cerotes, for they engender
windines and cause swellings. But yet the legs and the hands, and other
parts of the body being swollen, may often be anointed with this ointment in
the Sun or by a fire.. of vnguentum agrippa..j. of the meals of lineseede,
Vnguentum.
fenugreeke beans and bareley. ana..ij. seeds of Althaea, nigella, dancus.
ana..j.ss. Sulphur vinum..iij. bolearmoniacke..ij. root of yreos..ij.ss. roche
alome, fanckensence. ana..j.ss. Euphorbium..j. oils of yreos, white lillies
and chammomill. ana..j.ss. with wax as much as is sufficient, make an
ointment, wherewith annoint the swollen parts very often, it being melted on
the coals. For his diet you must seek it in the former chapter of the dropsy.

CAP. XXXIIII. Of the dropsy Ascites. DE ASCITE.
Signa.
IN the dropsy Ascites, all the whole belly is swollen up, and if it be
stricken, there is heard such a sound, as a bottle does make that is not full
of water, D^et.
but the other parts of the body, specially the upper parts* are not puffed
up nor swollen. Let his diet be, that has this dropsy, of birds of
mountain and other meats easy of digestion, and which do engender good
juice, Cure.
as is said before in the thirty two chapter. The cure must be begun by
using of purging medicines. Let them be such as we rehearsed in the former
chapter. Colewortes of the sea called soldana, and soldanella taken in drink
excels all the rest: for this shows a marvelous effect in bringing forth
the hidropicke water, so that many by the only using of it, have been restored
to health. Give of it in wine or wheye..ij. or more or less according to the
diversity of the body. Also pills of sagapanum are very good: and two
drachmes or three of the iuce of the root of yreos, putting to it..j. of
sugar. Also you must minister sharp clysters, unless the belly be soluble of
it self: Clyster.
for then it is more convenient to dry up. Among other this clyster is
specially commended.. floutes of laurel..ij. root of polipodie, agaricke.
ana..j.ss. dodder or cuscutha..iij. sees them in wine or water until the
third part be consumed. Then take of the licour of that decoction being
strainned. lib. 1. of benedicta laxatina..ss. of Electuarium nidum..ij.ss. mel
rosarum..j. oils of rewe, chammomill and yreos. ana..j. salt gemme..j.ss.
commix them all and make a clyster. For the same purpose, if you think good,
you may sees colocy^this* cartanus, laurel bearies, annyse seed, ammi, and
carawaie seeds, rewe, root of wild cucumber, and other like things out to
them. After the aforesaid remeadies you must lay upon the whole belly, some
of the prescribed cataplasmes and emplaisters. Also apply oyntmentes and
reamedies that provoke urine and swette: and let him use exercises of the which
we have spoken abundantly before.

CAP. XXXV. Of the dropsey Timpanites. DE TYMPANITE.
IN this kind of dropsy, the belly is puffed up and stretched out: Signa.
and being stricken, it makes a noise like a tabour or timbrell, but the other
parts of the body wax lean. It requires like diet, Victus ratio.
that the other kinds of dropsies have: but in this all windy things are
specially to be avoided. Also let their exercises be much, and great thirst do
help and succor the patient strongly. Let the cure be begune with purging
medicines, whereof you shall find examples before. Curatio. Clyster.
Also it is good to cast in clysters, which have virtue to dissolve and
discuss wind, as this is.. roots of apium, and fennel. ana..j. seeds of
Annyse, fennel, daucus, louage, parcely and comin. ana..ij. careaway
seed..iij. rue, asarum, leaves of waleworte, melilote, ana. M.j. boil them in
water unto the third part, and then take of the licour of that decoction
being strained..xij. hieropicra, benedicta laxatiua. ana..ss. Electuarium de
baccis lauri..iij. oils of rue and dill, ana..j.ss. salt..j.ss. co^mix them
together, and make a clyster. You must give also unto them things that do
provoke urine, and you must use as well inwardly as outwardly those things that
do dissolve and discuss windines, whereof you shall find plenty in the
chapter of the cholicke. Sac^^^.
The belly must daiely be nourished with Panicum mil^um, salt, branne, leaves
of rue, chammomill flowers, hot ashes sewed in bags. Also you may apply to
it this cerote.. flowers of chammomill and melilote. ana..j.ss. myntes,
sauorie, asarum. ana..j. seeds of Annyse, fennel, rue, Ceratum.
common, daucus. ana..j. cardamomum..ss. mirrhe, castoreum. ana..j. oil of
rue..iij. oil of dill..j.ss. rosen and wax as much as is sufficient, make a
cerote. Moreover cupping glasses fastened often to the whole belly lightly,
and with much flame do maruelously profit. Afterward the belly must be rubbed
with a sharp linen cloth, so long till it be read. Inwardly he must use
the antidotes, dianisum, diacuminum, and electuarium e baccis lauri, or these
lozenges.. the pouders of dianisum, and diacuminum. ana..j. the pouders of the
antidote of laurel bearies..j. the powder of diagalangae..ss. seeds of
annyse, Lozenges.
carawayes, dancus, and fennel. ana..ss. leaves of rue, seeds of Apium and
louage. ana..j. sugar..vj. dissolve it in the distilled waters of fennel and
Apium, and make lozenges. The other remeadies are to be sought in the chapter
of the cholicke.

CAP. XXXVI. Of raynes that sends forth bloody urine. DE RENIBVS CRVENTAM
VRINAM EXCERNENTIBVS
MANY times there happens a disease of the raynes, through the which thin
wheyish blood is pissed. It is caused through weakness of the reins, Causae.
which be not therefore able to divide the urine: or it is caused through
amplitude of the reins, which strain out the urine from Vena cana unto the
raines. For when the passages are wider and stronger, they also send out some
of the blood to the reins, and other gross matter. Also oftentimes the raines
do send out blood like wise as it is wo^t to do in the hemorhoides. Moreover
some do void out blood from the raines through breaking of a vain in the
raines: as it chances to those which have lift up a great weight or have
lept greatly, or have fallen out of an high place, or have suffered some such
other violent thing. Sometime it chances through gnawing of the veins of
sharp humors flowing from above. Signa.
If this disease be caused though weakness of the raines the blood is sent out
very wheyish. But if it be through amplitude and largnes of the veins, the^
they feel no pain. If the excretio^ of blood be by certain circuites, the^
either there is fulness of the whole body, or neglecting of accustomed
exercises, or resectio^ of some member that went before. And if it chance
through breaking of a vein, the^ blood is pissed forth most abondantly: but if
it be of gnawing, then blood is sent forth by little and little, and pain does
vex the reins. Cure of bloody urine by weakness of the reins.
Therefore you shall cure that excretio^ of bloody urine, which is caused
through weakness of the raines, or amplitude of the vessels that strain out
urine to the raines, by quiet and restrictue meats, drincking of black wine
and other things which are rehearsed, in the chap. of spitting of blood. You
must abstain from those things specially which provoke urine and from carnal
copulation. In drink besides those things that are rehearsed in the chapter
aforedaide, minister decoction of the root of comferie, and tragacantha
ministered, that is steeped in black wine, is good. Also..j. of heart shorn
with wine, juice of marigoolds does stop bruisinges out of blood from the
reins. Likewise leaves of willow braied with wine, lapis hematitis..j. root
of white thorn and decoction of knotgrasse. Moreover..j. of bolearmoniacke
ministered, is good. Siruppes of roses and of mirtles, trochiskes of ambre, of
terra lemnia and of spodium. Moreover sheep milcke is only praised being
ministered fasting..iiij. with.j. of bolearmoniacke co^mixed with it. Apply
outwardly to the reins and the loins those things which be described against
spitting of blood, and in the chapter of Dysenteria, and other eruptions of
blood. And whatsoever can together with his restraining and drying add
strength also: (as be) leaves of bryer and oak, mast, myrtle bearies,
pomegranate rindes, balaustiae and such like. After this the state of the body
must be refreshed and restored with meats of good juice, with milk and flesh
of birds, also with swines flesh that is lene. That thereby the whole body may
be brought to his former strength and the reins being strengthened also they
may fulfill their own proper office, and that they may divide, Cure of blood^
urine coming through circuites, or breaking of a vein, or gnawing.
and strain out the wheyish humor from the blood. But if the reins do send
out blood according to the circuites, or through breaking of a vein, or
through gnawing of sharp humors flowing from above, then by and by you must
cut a vein of the same side in the arm. To those that send out by circuites
blood, let them blood a little before the circuit, but let the other blood by
and by in the beginning: but it is better to part the drawing out of the
blood, that his pulling back and auersion may be done by little and little. Let
the places about the reins be covered with sponges wet in Posca, or moist
wool with oil of roses and vinegre. After this apply oyntmentes, emplaisters
and cerotes described in the places before rehearsed. Also a cupping glass may
commodiouslie be applied specially if you suspect inflammatio^ to be present in
them, which piss blood through breaking of a vain. Also potions are good
rehearsed before in the chapter of spitting of blood. In the mean season also,
the sick must be driven from all salt and sharp things. But when excretion of
blood cease, he must use a diet that does not engender much blood,
specially in those that void out blood by circuit. Also the upper parts of
the body must continualy be exercised. In those, which piss blood through
breaking of a vein, if the exulceration be left in the places you shall cure
them after the blood is stopped by those things that are spoken of in the
chapter of exulceration of the reins.

CAP. XXXVII. Of inflammation of the Reins. DE RENVM INFLAMMATIONE.
THE Raynes are vexed with inflammation for diverse causes. For both corrupt
humors, Causae.
and strypes, and rubbinges together, and drincking of medicines do engender
inflammation of the reins, and specially continual and vehement rydinges.
Signa.
There comes to the sick a beating pain behind about the first joint of
the back, a little above the bastard ribs: but the pain stretches upward,
even unto the liver, specially the right side rain being vexed, but downward
unto the bladder and privy members and the loins and hippes: and also to the
share and thighs. Also there follows astonishment of the leg that is near,
that it can neither be stretched out right, nor he cannnot go on his feet. And
whether sneesing or any other concussion do chance, they are vexed with moist
vehement pain, their extreme parts be cold and most the calfes of the legs,
and the feet. There is present difficulty in making of water, and they piss
continually and painefully. In the beginning their urine is thin and watery,
having no residence in it: but the inflammation waxes worse, it is more
rubicund. Also afterward it is gross and filthy, and there be vehement fevers
present. And if the inflammation increase still, all these signs wax more
vehement. To these comes disposition to vomit, and gnawing of the stomach,
and vomiting of choler. Many of them are vexed, and sweat until their hearts
fail them: their belly is stopped, so that they are puffed up with wind, and
do send out belkings continually. There follows vehement abhorring of meat,
and to some there are continual exacerbations, but to some between whiles.
And generally egestion of the womb, and much excretion of vryne do go before
those pains. The sick must ly in a very soft bed: and the first day he must
abstain from meat, but you may not extend his fasting to many days. For the
vrines being made more pure and sharp by fasting, do vex with most vehement
biting and gnawing. Victus ratio.
Therefore in the beginning you must nourish them with thin soupinges, that
do ease and cease gnawinge and bitinge, (as is) broth of Ptysan or alica of
barley. Also mallows for his pot herbs does much profit. Let his drink be
water, wherein a little cinnamon has been sodden. To be short let his diet be
thin, and such, as is in other inflammations. For the cure, in the beginning
you must by and by let him blood, and you must cut the vein that is in the
hamme or in the anckles, Curatio.
and that must be done one the leg that is right against the Reyne, that is
vexed. Also sometime (as Galen says) you may let blood of the arm (that is)
when the inflammation is new, and abundance of blood is present. After blood
letting you must come to outward medicines, as Cataplasmes, fomentes,
linimentes, emplaisters, and such like, Localia.
which have virtue to cool meanly, and to ease pain, made of the oils of
roses, quinces and chammomill, of barley meal, bean meal, fenugreeke,
lineseede, and such like, which be rehearsed in the Chapters of inflammation of
the liver and the spleen. And if the pain be not eased by those things that be
applied outwardly: apply a cupping glass to the loins, and the guts, and
scarification being made, you must draw out much blood. Then you must use
nourishment of sponges, and other things which can ease pain. You must only
beware all this time, that you give not such medicines to drink as provoke
urine, Note.
for they hurt vehemently by bringing in gnawing and biting humors to the
inflamed parts. This medicine I have proved to be singularly good.. the juice
of clary, and the juice of nightshade. ana..ij. dronk in.vj. of stale ale,
morning and evening vj. days together. Also you must beware in the beginning
of the inflammation of purging medicines. But yet you may use soft clysters
(specially if the belly be costiue) made of the decoction of mallows, or
lineseede, and fenugreke, or Ptysan broth, putting to it oil of violets, or
chammomill oil. But you must beware that you put not in great abundance of it,
for then the bowels being filled and stretched out with it will press together
the Reins. But when the inflammation is perfectly ceased and concoct, which
you may know by the ceasing of the pain, then also you may purge him by
medicines that provoke urine. For after inflammacions concoct, and digest, the
urine comes forth much in quantity and gross. And in those that have
residence, it is good, and so judges the best altogether. What medicines
provoke urine, we have taught in the second book of making of medicines the
seventh chapter, specially among pot herbs, fennel, apium, and parsneps well
sodden, are good. And if by the aforesaid medicines, the inflammation be not
driven away, and if neither the pain, nor the fever, Signa suppurationis.
nor the heaviness do rest by using of thaforesaid things, and also if
difficulty of pissing, and often dropping down of the urine, do vex the
patient, these betoken matter to be gathered in that part. Therefore as swiftly
as you can, you must help the suppuration, and breakinge out of the matter. For
the which purpose, a sponge continually wet in water and oil applied in steed
of a fome^t profits. For the same purpose also use cataplasmes, which are
made of barley meal, bran, figs, althaea, and such like, rehearsed before in
the Chapter of inflammation of the liver. Also it profits greatly to descend
into a bath made of mollifying herbs, as mallows, althaea lineseede,
fenugreeke. And if after perfect suppuration, the rupture and breaking be
delayed and tarried (which you may know if the fevers and pains wax less, Signa
perfectae suppurationis.
and sense of heaviness remain about the reyne that is affected) minister
those things in drink, which provoke urine, as is, decoction of fennel,
peniroyall, origan, and such like. For these sometime do break the
suppuration, and purge out the matter with the vryne. And if the using of them
do profit nothing, you must wash the belly with sharp clysters: as with root
of wild cucumber sodden and alayed, or decoction of garlike or radish. You
must steep those in brine and commix a little oil, whereby they may be made
slipperie to be poured in. These must be thrown in with a clyster pipe, and
the sick must be bidden to hold it long time: for they are wont often to
break that suppuration, together with that, that they mollify the belly.
Also if the rupture and breaking tarry, commin with wine called passum helps,
and rewe with vinum mulsum. Signa rupturae factae.
Moreover the rupture being made, little pieces af flesh being long, are sent
out with the urine. And if the ulcers be malignant, there be sent out homours
stinking, swart, and slimie, but if they be benign and gentle, the matter that
is pissed forth, is white, equal, light, and without grievous savor, and
little in quantity. After the eruptio^ and breaking out of the matter,
minister milk, with honey, and other things which shall be rehearsed in the
Chapter of ulcers of the Reins.

CAP XXXVIII. Of the stone in the reins. DE CALCVLO RENVM.
THE stone of the Raines happens oftener to men of perfect age, then to
children. Causae.
The cause of ingendring of such stones is continual cruditie and rawnesse of
the stomach, whereby in abundance of gross and earthly humors is heaped up
together, and burning of fiery heat about the reins, parcheth the humors,
and knites them together, and hardens them into a stone. The stones be in the
reins, nigh their ventricles either little or great, and sometime smaller,
Differences of (...).
sometime many, differing among them selves in greatness, figure, color and
sharpness: for they are found black, whitish and pale. There chances to the
sick grievous pain in the raines, Signa.
and he feels like as it were a bodkinne thrust in, and yet there appears
no swelling without. He can turn his back bone hardly. The leg that is right
against the rain, that is diseased, is astonished, there is present abhorring of
meat and vomitting. About the beginning of obcuration and stopping, the urine
is pissed forth little in quantity and waterie. Afterward there follows
perfect suppression of the urine, and the womb auoideth nothing, but it makes
many proffers to go to the stool. Sometime there is avoided forth blood,
through the violence of the stones, specially if they be sharp stones. Also the
urine has grauelly residence specially when the stone is removed from the
reins, which signs aforesaid Hyppocrates declares in lib. 6. Epid. par. 1.
Aphor. 5. Moreover things that be light and round, are easily sent out: but
not so, if they be of any other form or fashion: but specially if they be long
and sharp, they are hard to be sent out. When the stone, Curatio.
stopped in the raynes, does cause most vehement pains, lest abundance of
blood through the greatness of the pain should come down together to the
member diseased, in a body that is full of humors and strong, Venesectio.
you must by and by cut the vein in the ha^me of that leg that is astonished,
and is right against the reine that is diseased. But if those that labor of
ill digestion or uitious humors, Purgatio.
purging of the abundant humor is good for them. Neither may this caution be
omitted, except some other thing do forbid them: which also Hippocrates
bids, while he teaches that young men should be purged with hellebore. And
if it be not lawful to let blood, nor to minister purgation, you must wash the
womb by ministering of clysters, which you must do at that time specially, when
there is great plenty of excrements in the bowels. But you must only beware
that they be not strong clysters, and that they do not draw plenty of humors
from other places to the bowels, lest the passages of the urine should be
straightned and pressed together. But let them be such as are only able to
avoid the excrements contained in the bowels, Clyster.
as is this Clister.. Mallows, althaea, mercury, maidenhaire, parietarie.
ana. M.j. water cresses. M.j.ss. seeds of parsley, apium, fennel, and flax.
ana..iij. root of gladon..j.ss. branne..j. boil them in just quantity of
water unto the third part, and then take of the licour of that decoction being
strained..xj. of casia fistula..j. of hierapicra..ss. mel rosarum
strained..j.ss. oils of dill, rewe, and chammomill. ana..j. salt..ij. commix
them all and make a clyster. Note.
But we may in no case use continual clisters, and neglect almost all other
remedies, as many physicians do now adays, but use them twice or thrice, but
so that they be not kept above their accustomed time. For if they be holden
longer then they ought to be, they cause pressing together, and straightness
of the reins, and the conduites of the urine. When the belly is purged and
emptied of excrements, you must minister those medicines, which can loosen the
condui^s and passages. For which purpose the region of the reins, and the
loins must be anointed with this medicine.. oils of dill, Vnguentum.
and of sweet almondes. ana..ij. oil of cammomill..j.ss. hens grease, and
goose grease. ana..ij. butter without sale..j. wax as much as is sufficient,
make a soft ointment. Incessions.
Also he must use incessions of the decoctions of calamint, origan, water
cresses, cole wortes, leaves of althaea, mallows and such like, or the sick
must often be let down into a great vessel of warm sweet water. Also
foments of branne, with leaves of althaea, sodden, being applied to the grieved
place be very good. Also cataplasmes made of wheat meal, of lineseede and
fenugreeke, of lupines, Cataplas^^ta.
of the root of dog fennel beaten very small, and of cammomill. Also it is
good to lay bread sodden in wine called passum about the loins and the belly.
Neither shall he do rashly which applies cataplasmes, and other things before
rehearsed to the bladder and the share. But you must bring on heaps one
plaster after another, before the first do cool. For cold does draw together
and bind, and so does hold still the stone in the raines, and in the conduites
of the urine. And if you list not to use so many cataplasmes, you may cover it
with some heating thing upon it that it cool not. For these sometimes, and
that not seldom, are wont to suffice for to cast out the stone by the urine.
And if these drive not away the disease, you must minister in drink those
things, which provoke urine. These that follow draw much urine: gladon, S.
John's wort, parsley, orcoselinum, grommell, ammi, seed of daucus and fennel,
asarum, root of briony and mather, bark of the root of capares, sperage and
such like. With these commix those things that bring down urine unto the
Reins: as is root of pe^cedane, or dog fennel, briony, apium and raedicula.
Also commixe with them those things that break and tear the stone in the
reins, as is, sium, maidenhaire, bdellium, ^utsan feed, bruscus root,
saxifrage, betonie, root of damosonium, broth of cicers, root of Cypress,
gromell, lapis indiacus, xanthium, the seed and root of althaea, gum of
plomb tree, earth worms sodden, and stones and sponges of the sea. Every one
of these part of them sodden and part of them very finely poudred, minister
them to drink. But it is best to minister those things which provoke urine and
break the stone, at that time, when the vehement pains be released: which
chances when the stone is removed, and stirred out of his place. But if the
stones be established fast, and be vehemently compact in the Reins, he must
eschew much drink, and also those things that provoke urine. For seeing they
bring with the^ to the raines a great abundance of excrements, they cause the
passages of the urine to be stopped, and lets the passing of the stones out
of the raines. You must release and losen the rains, and the conduites of the
urine, with foments, cataplasmes and incessions, as is aforesaid. Also the
belly must be voided with light clysters, lest the passages of the urine be
stopped. After that the pain is a little released* you may also apply
profitaby to them a cuppinge glass, specially subtly fastened to, if
inflammation do not let it: for often times cuppinge glasses do so remove on
heaps those stones, that they cease the pains by and by (that is) the stones
being carried into the amplitude of the bladder. Wherefore in the beginning
fasten a cupping glass above from the reine, and then to the part about the
privy members, over thwartly according to the placinge of the conduites of the
urine. Moreover stones being brought from the raines to the bladder, and for
their greatness being holden still about the neck of the bladder; they do
often bring the sick into extraeme peril, as well thorough their pricking
pain, as also because they will not suffer the urine to come out. You must go
about to let the sick lie in such a fashion, that he may lie upright, and have
the ^oyntes of his ^^ickle bones lie very high. Then you must (...) them many
ways, that by all the means, that you can invent, you may make the stone to
fall out of the passage of the bladder. Afterward you must bid the sick to
put out the urine quickly* but when the stone is (...) blood or atter be pissed
out, it signifies exulceration either of the reins, or of the bladder. And by
and by after he says, if in a gross and thick urine, there appear little
pieces of flesh, or as it were hairs, Diet.
they are sent from the reins. Therefore when these appear, let the sick
eschew crudities, and sacietie or fullness. Therefore let him eat no raw
things in his meats, neither that which is hard of digestion, or that will
easily corrupt, or engender inflammations or windiness. Let him chiefly
abstain from those things, which do soon wax sour or sharp. Also from all
sharp and burning things, and whatsoever does breed and engender choler: as
is, much thirst, abstinence, hunger, labor, wrath, solitariness, exercise,
watching, and immoderate sauces. He must eschew above all things immoderate
riding, and all vehement moving and stirring: also he must avoid perpetual
idleness, and continual bathing. He must use new bread well wrought. And give
him flesh of birds of the mountains, and kids flesh, and such like tender
flesh. Also give him scaly fishes of grauelly places, roasted on a grediron.
Moreover river crabs, soupings of Ptysan and amylum sodden with milk, be
marvelous good. Give him also milk mixed with eggs, and the fat broth of an
hen. Also rere eggs ministered alone, are good. Of pot herbs, mallows,
endive, sorrel, purslaine, and lettuce are good: but all these must be sodden,
for the sick must eat nothing that is raw, as is aforesaid. Of fruicts,
raisons are not hurtful, and pine nuttes. Also almondes well blaunched are
good. Much drink and strong must be eschewed. And he must altogether abstain
from cold drink. For cold, as Hyppocrates says, 5. Aph. 20. is an enemy to
ulcers. For his drink let him use wine that is alayed, and somewhat
restrictiue: or let him drink goats milk, or sheep milk, or almond milk.
Carnal copulation is marvelous evil not only for ulcers, but also for all
other diseases of the reins, specially in old men, and in them that be weak
of nature. Such things must be eschewed, as do provoke urine. Also bathing let
be seeldome used, as is aforesaid. It is not unprofitable to use natural
Bathes, and waters spronge of themselves, and specially allome waters, and
brimstone waters, for it is commodious to wash cold places: It destroieth
ulcers that be hard to cure, as well outwardly as also inwardly. Also natural
waters drunk after the morning walk are good. Curatio.
The cure of ulcers of the reyns, when as they are caused through sharp and
gnawing humors, must be begun of purging of vicious and gnawing humors. They
that are thus affected, V^^i^e.
you must also purge them by vomit. For vomit is not good only for to avoid
vicious humors, but also if any man do vomit boldly every month, he shall
dissolve the ulcer of the reins, and what evil soever may chance there: for
it turns the moving of the humors into a contrary part. Medicines stopping
gnawing of humors.
Also in the mean season you must minister medicines which do stop the gnawing
of the sharp humors, as is, mallows, endive, sorrel, purslaine, seed of
melons, cucumbers, and gourdes, syrupes of violets, roses, and water lillies,
and the conserues of them. Purging of the ulcers.
But when the vicious humors be purged, he must drink aqua mulsa, or the
decoction of fenugreeke with honey, or of cucumbers, or of mallows, or of
melons seed with hydromell. Also minister milk with honey newly milked, and
hot, for it is good to purge the ulcers. Also goats whey, decoction of
barley, of raysons, and of licorice, is marvelous good, also the juice is
likewise. When that the ulcers be purged and cleansed: which you may know, if
there appear in the urine, neither pieces of the cover of the ulcer, nor yet
dreggie and filthy atter, but matter that is whitish, light, equal and little
in quantity: then minister such medicines, as do dry up and conglutinate. For
which purpose give him Bole armoniacke, Gl^^i^ati^et. Pul^is.
gum, tragacanth, amylum, terra lemnia, and such like before rehearsed. But
among other things, this powder a marvelous good.. Terrae lemniae, bole
armoniacke. ana. j.ss. Tragacanthae, spodium burnt. ana..j. amylum, pine nuttes
toasted. ana..ss. lineseede, cucumber seed blaunched, melons seed. ana..ij.
seed of Apium..ij. dragons blood..j. beat them altogether, and make a very
fine powder, of the which give the sick daily..ij. with milk new milked. To
dry and strength the reins.
Moreover outwardly you must apply such things as can dry and strength the
reins. Therefore minister emplaisters and cerotes, or oyntmentes made of the
oils of roses, and of mirtles, of barley meal, frankensence, masticke, red
roses and such like. Examples whereof you may seek before. As for other
remedies, we will rehearse hereafter in the chapter of ulcers of the bladder.

CAP. XLI. Of the stone in the bladder.
STONES in the bladder do engender oftenner in children, then in older folk.
Calculum vesicae. Causae.
When that urine gross and very thick is carried into the largeness of the
bladder, it setleth and stays there, like dregs of wine, or muddy water, and
afterward through the heat, that is in children, being dried and compact
together, it breeds a stone. Therefore there be two special causes of the
ingendring of the stone in the bladder (that is) thickness of the urine, and
heat of children. They that have the stone in the bladder, they itch often,
Signa.
and do handle his privy members, which also are swollen, and they are
constrained to make water continually, and they are vexed with the strangury,
or dropping out of urine. Curatio.
The cure of this disease is almost the same, that the cure of the stone in the
reins is. But they differ in this thing, because the stones of the bladder
require stronger medicines, and you must apply the medicines in another place
then you did in the cure of the reins. The stones that are engendered in the
bladder, are broken chiefly with these medicines (that is) the seed and root
of fennel, of louage, To break the stone in the bladder.
black piony seeds, motherwort, chammomill, the root and seed of althaea,
sium, maydenhaire, sorrel roots, the stones of sponges, the stone of
tecolithus, grommell, bruscus root and seed, the stones, which come out of
men (with their urine) brayed and drunk, the seed of little burs, the bark of
capers, sothern wood seed, iacint, white violets, smalach, parsley and other
such like, which do provoke urine, and which be rehearsed in the chapter of the
stone in the reins. To these you must conioyne the most laudable remedy (that
is) a hedge sparow being dressed in salt, and taken raw in meat, does heal
the disease perfectly. For it expels the stones that are already engendered
by the urine, and it lets them from ingendring any more. Also goats blood is
a present remedy, as well for the stone of the reins, as of the bladder: for it
dissolueth those that be engendered, and it drives them out with the urine, and
it prohibiteth other to engender any more, and it cease pain. Furthermore if
the stones of the bladder cannot come out by the passage of the urine, but that
they be there stopped, and compact together, and so do cause suppression of
urine: then the sick must be upward, so that his hippes must lie upward and
highest, and then you must move him hither and thither many ways, that thereby
the stone may fall out of the passage, and afterward bid him piss even as he
lies yet upward. But if he can not make water so neither, provoke the urine by
a cyring, and after that you must minister those medicines, which have virtue to
break the stone in the bladder. And if the cure come not to pass by this
means, you must come to cutting. The stone therefore being consumed by any of
the means aforesaid, such an order of diet must be appointed to the patient,
that the stone may not engender again, which we have prescribed in the Chapter
of the stone in the reins.

CAP. XLII. Of blood broken out of the bladder or curded in it.
IT chances sometime that a vein breaks in the bladder, Causae.
and then some of the blood is sent out, and some waxes thick and curdeth
within. When the blood is thickened and curded within, the patientes heart
fails him, Signa.
and he waxes pale, his pulses be small, dark, and thick, he is sorrowful,
he is cold, and his strength decays. And sometime when a clodde of blood,
chances to fall into the passage of the urine, the^ it stops the going out
of the urine. You must in this case, as also in other brustinges out of blood,
cause a very quick and speedy remedy. Curatio.
Therefore if nothing forbid it, it is good to cut the vein in the arm,
drawing out the blood by times, that by this means the blood may be drawn
back often, and by little and little. Let the pacient in his lying be laid
upward, and let his hips be lifted up, and apply sponges dipped in posca (that
is) water and vinegar sodden together to cool him. Also the extreme parts must
be bound, and the share must be covered with spo^ges dipped in posca. If the
evil increase cupping glasses fastened to the ilions, and to the loins profit
much. After irrigacio^s with the sponges dipped in posca, you must use
cataplasmes of knot grass, brambles, plantaine and pomegranate flowers. Also
use Cerotes made of hypocischis, acatia, bole armoniack and such like rehearsed
before in the Chapters of spitting of blood, and of the flux dysenteria. You
must pour into the bladder juice of knot grass, plantaine, or millefolie,
commixing with it acatia, bole annoniacke, trochiskes of spodium and such like.
Also incessions of such like things are good. For both Posca and decoction of
Lentiscus, and also of brambles and such like, To bring out blood.
are good. Also you must minister in drink, medicines apt to bring out blood,
as be rhaponticum finely beaten, and 12. red seeds of pionie, terra lemnia,
horse tail, the root of centory the great, To dissol^e curded blood.
the bark of frankensence and such like. But in them that blood is congealed
and curde^ in the bladder, first you must go about to dissolve and disperse
that blood with convenient medicines. Therefore you must minister in drink,
motherwort, stichados, citrine, wormwood, sothernwood, shauing of a vine,
radish seed, hares or goats creme, each of the^ with oxymell. Also oximell
ministered by it self does profit marvelously, for it dissolueth the curds,
that afterward they may come forth by little and little, with the urine. Apply
outwardly bathes, ointments, irrigations, and other things that have virtue to
loosen and release, which you must seek out of the chapter of the stone in the
reins. Ceratum.
Above other things this cerote is very good.. of the oils of roses and
chammomill. ana..j.ss. calamint, comin, leaves of elder. ana..iij. bitumen
iudaicum, gum ammoniak. ana..ij. hares cream..iij. sothernwood, meal of
fenugreeke. ana..ss. spermacety..j. with rosen and wax as much as is
sufficient, make a cerote to apply to the share. And if you profit nothing by
doing thus, but the urine is still stopped, you must of necessity use a ciring:
by the which when you have brought out the urine, you must again minister the
things aforesaid in drink, and apply those things outwardly, which do dissolve
congealed blood. And if the cloddes of blood will not yet be dissolved, you
must come to the cutting of it, likewise as you did in the stone of the bladder.

CAP. XLIII. Of inflammatian of the bladder.
Inflammatio ves^^ae.
OF diseases that be in the bladder, and engender there, the most grieuouse and
deadly is the inflammation thereof. The sick has these tokens following. They
are vexed with a sharp fever, they watch, they rave, and speak they wotte not
what: Signa.
they vomit pure choler, and they cannot make water. The share becomes hard
and has vehement pain, they have desire to the stool, as is wont in the
disease called Tenasmus. The ordure that comes forth is thin and has no
residence. Also sometime inflations follow, and the womb is costiue the right
gut being pressed together of the inflammation of the bladder. Curatio.
To them that have this disease, if nothing let it cut the vein of the hamme
without any tarying, or draw blood of the ankles. Also minister to him a thin
kind of diet, Diet.
as is prescribed in other inflammations. He must also abstain from wine, and
he must use water, wherein a little cinnamon has been sodden. Outwardly you
must apply those things, that have power to cease and mitigate pain.
Therefore the place of the bladder must be nourished with oil wherein has
been sodden dill, lineseede, and sometime rewe and althaea. Medicines that be
cold and restrictiue must altogether be forborne: and that chiefly because the
bladder is full of sinews. For cold as Hyppocrates witnesses 5. Aphoris. 28 is
an enemy to sinews. Moreover because cold things do shut up and bind, and so
do stop the urine (which thing chauncing in this evil by it self) it
increases it. And last of all because cold things do prohibit and let that the
humors causing inflammation, may be dissolved, consumed and digested.
Therefore medicines meanly hot are rather to be applied, which have virtue to
cease pain, to losen the pipe and passage of the urine, and to dissolve the
inflammation. Also let the guts be washed with soft and easy clisters, and
after the dong is comfoorth, Clyster.
cast in oil of dill, or such like thing to ease and cease the pain. It is
good to sees poppie shelles, together with oil, and to pour in goose grease,
or fresh henns grease sodden together in the same oil. In most vehement pain
you must pour in.j. of pills of hounds tongue dissolved in oil of dill: or
take opium with mirrhe and saffron, and anoint it upon woll, and put it up
into the fundament. Also let the sick sit in the decoction of lineseede,
fenugreeke, root of altheae, dancus seed, and such like, and bid the sick
piss as he sits in the water of the decoction. For the bladder is not
strong enough to receive and expel out the urine: therefore the patient or
some that be about him, must thrust and press the share easily and softly,
and that must not be done out of measure, lest that pain should be augmented
thereby. Also after clysters and incessions use foments by hot water, Fomenta.
Sacculi.
and apply oil in ox bladders, or other vessels, halfefull, or little bags
as is showed in the chapter of the plurisie. And if for all these things, the
evil cease not, fasten a cupping glass with scarification to the grieved
places. Moreover he must abstain from those things which provoke urine
vehemently, and he must eschew much drink, when there appears evident
declination of the disease, you must come to the use of those things that have
virtue to dissolve and mollify, whereof we have spoken often before. Catheter.
The putting in of a Cyring into him that is diseased with inflammation of the
bladder is not easy to use and specially in men: for seeing it can not be put
into them without pain, it sharpeneth the pain and increases the
inflammation: but in women it is no great hurt to use it. For the passage of
the urine in them is short and straight, so that they may suffer the doing of
it without pain. But if the peril through the stopping of urine do very much
constrain you, then you must of necessity use a ciring in men also: not
because it takes away the anguish of the disease, but rather because it should
amend the great suppression of urine, and deliver the patient from deadly
peril. After that you have entised out the urine, you must come again to the
remedies which do cease pain, until the inflammation be dissolved and rotted.
Oftentimes the inflammation is wont to be dissolved by and by thorough the
means of an Erisipela, rising outwardly upon the skin, and remaining there,
and not returning again inward. Yea and oftentimes much urine being cast out,
does judge the evil. Yet nevertheless although these things appear, you
must still use the remedies aforesaid: in as much as for the most part, perfect
tension and stretching out being risen, continual exacerbations and fittes are
caused, and long constitution of the evil. But when the perilous fittes are
ceased, and the constitution of the disease is now waxen old, you must come
to the using of ointments, which do call out and bring forth the humors from
within: and likewise emplaisters, which do rubifie and blister the skin, are to
be applied which you may find after.

CAP. XLIIII. Of ulcers of the bladder and his neck.
THE bladder is exulcerate either thorough some bile, or botch, or swelling,
Vlcera veficae
which has been before, or through some rupture, or by eating, and gnawing of
a flux, or through some such like cause. There follows this sickness sharp
pain of the bladder, at all times pissing and avoiding out matter. Signa.
And when the ulcers be foul and filthy, there comes forth dreggie and
slimie matter, and such as has a gross residence like branne. And sometime
thin skins like leaves, and woll are sent out with the urine. If the ulcers
do spread abroad and feed deep, there is sent out urine that is bloody,
atterie and stinking. To these signs may be added, difficulty of making water,
and rising up of the yard. There is pain not only, when the passage of the
urine is exulcerate, but also when the exulceratio^ is in the bottom or depth.
You may know whether the exulceration be in the bottom of the bladder, or
nigh the pipe and passage of the urine by this: for if it be in the depth of
the bladder, there follows pain about the share: but if the ulcers be nigh
the neck of the bladder, there is pain felt only at such time, as he makes
water, and specially at the beginning and ending of his pissing: and also his
pain is the greater if the urine be sharp. They that are vexed with this
evil, they either sit continually, or they can not stand upright, nor rest
lying along, and thorough great and continual pain they are killed with
fevers, Why the ulcers of the bladder be incurable.
watchings, and consumings, some sooner and some later. But the ulcers of the
bladder be incurarable, or at the least ways very hard to cure: as well
because the bladder is smowie, as also because the urine which is of nature
sharp does continually touch the ulcers, and so gnaweth them: and will not
suffer them to conglutinate and join together. For although much urine be sent
out, yet all the bladder can not be clean emptied, but always some of the
urine is left in it, which does continually touch the ulcers* Yea when the
abundance of urine is sent out, then the bladder shrinketh up and falls
together, so that the urine that is left in it, although it be very little,
yet it touches every part thereof. But seeing that oftentims some things
chance besides our expectation, you shall go about the cure, by the which, if
you bring nothing else to pass, Curatio.
yet you shall deminish the pains of the fits. First therefore, you must
persuade the patient to ly down and to rest in his bed: and that specially,
when that he has a fever. Then you must minister remedies for intermitting
fevers. The chief thing in this case has been drinking of milk, and this is
to be compared above all other medicines. For it makes smooth roughness, and
washes vlcerations, and scoureth the evil. Let the rest of his diet be such,
as that is, which is ministered in the exulceration of the reins. Also you must
comfort the sick by medicines, that will let the ingendring of sharp urine,
which does gnaw and fret the ulcers. And if there be infla^mation with the
exulceration, cataplasmes of lineseede, and fenugreeke, and other things, which
are rehearsed before in the chapter of inflammation of the bladder, are apt and
meet to be applied. Moreover, if the exulceration do spread brother and eat
deep, you must apply outwardly medicines somewhat restrictiue, and that such as
be hot when they are applied, that by their heat they might help the painful
places round about by mollifying them, and that through their virtue, they may
prohibit the places nigh adjoining to feed and eat. Restrictiue medicines.
Restrictiue medicines be these: galls, pomegranate rinds, alome, acatia,
hypocischis, and such like often rehearsed of us before. Also you must use to
minister to them, medicines cast in with a cyring. You must cast into the
exulcerate places, milk newly milked, or very good oil of roses warm. And if
none of these be at hand, you must cast in continually most sweet water
warmed: specially at such time as the gnawing is present. Also you must drive
in by the fundament the juice of Ptysan, or the decoction of lineseede, Note.
cucumber seed husked, fenugreeke, mallows, or milk with oil of roses.
Moreover when thou will minister a clister to him which is diseased in the
bladder, he may not ly upward, for the bladder then will not suffer the
infusion to enter in, because it lies upon the straight bowell: but the
patient must lie groueling upon his knees, and so you must cast in your
infusion. Also let the sick sit often in hoate water, and in dissoluing
decoctions, for these do cease pain somewhat. And when the ulcers do spread
abroad and feed, you must cast into the bladder by a Cyring such things as
can stop the feeding: as be acatia, hypocischis, terra lemnia, bole
armoniacke and other rehearsed a little before. But if the ulcers be foul and
filthy, you must pour in medicines, which have virtue to scour and cleanse
them, as is mulsa much watered, or milcke with a little honey, or with the
seed of Cucumbers cleansed. But if there follow sharpness and gnawing, cast
in milcke newlye milked, mixed with good amylum, or Tuttie washed and dried
with many waters, and then mixed with the milcke. When the ulcers be scoured
and purged clean, you must procure to bring them to a scarre, and to heal
them. And that must be done by restrictiue incessions, and by emplaisters,
fomentes, and irrigations, that be of like faculty and virtue. But if the
exulceration do endure long time, as it chances for the most part, then the
pacient has exacerbations and fittes sometime and intermission and space from
them at other times. Therefore in the painful fittes apply emplaisters and
irrigations, having power to cease and ease the pain, and in the time of the
intermission between the fittes, use such things as have virtue to destroy
the evil. Therefore apply to the share, Synapismes, and such things as will
rubifie and blister. And let the sick use a diet that is good to restore
strength. And if the evil does not wax gentler, you must make burnt scurfes
about the share, either by medicines or with iron, and to suffer the ulcers to
purge and cleanse them selves long time with matter flowinge out. To cease
pain.
You may also minister medicines to cease pain in drink, if vehement pains
vex him. For this purpose above other things, which we have rehearsed in
other places, the pills of Alkakengi with opium are good. Also these things
following do much mitigate the pains of exulceration (that is) cucumberseede,
mallows, white poppie, tragacanthe, amylum, pine nuttes and almondes.
Therefore this medicine may be ministered.. conserve of violets..iij. seed of
mallows..ij. of the four great cold seeds. ana..j. liquorace scraped..j.ss.
gum..ij. bole armoniake..ss. trochiskes of terra lemnia..j. make them up
altogether with syrup of liquorice. Minister of it daily in the morning the
quantity of an hasell nut. Moreover you must throw into the bladder medicines
that can cease pain, and heal the exulceration.

CAP. XLV. Of the strangurie. DE STILLICIDIO VRINAE.
STRANGVRIA in greek, stillicidium vrinae in Latin, is a disease whereas the
urine distilleth down by drops, (...)
or by little and little and causes a continual provoking and desire to
piss. This disease is caused through the sharpness of the urine, or by
exulceration of the bladder, Causae.
or by an impostume of the liver, or the reins, which being broken and sending
the filth and atter to the bladder, through the sharpness thereof, it causes
continual desire to piss. You shall judge that sharpness is the cause, if
his vrines be choleric, Signae.
and also all the state of the body, if the rest of the signs betoken
choler, and that gnawings do chance about the bladder. You may know the
exulceration of the bladder, as also an impostume or bile of the liver and the
reins, by the signs before rehearsed in their own proper chapters. Curatio.
If therefore the strangurie be caused through sharpnes of the urine, then you
must purge the vicious and naughty humor, that does abound, with all speed.
For the which purpose, besides those things which are often spoken of before,
whey with casia fistula, is maruelouse good, or some other medicine that
brings out choler. The cholerik humor being avoided and purged, the patient
must use meats that be temperate, and that can stop the sharpnes: as is, Victus
ratio.
juice of ptisan, mallows, purslaine, violets, cucumber seed and such like.
He must abstain from all things that be sharp or salt. Also let him eschew
wine, exercises, wrath, and slow eating: for all these things do heap up
choler in the body. Let them use stony fishes, and bathes of sweet water,
which is wont to make temperate vicious humors maruelously. In drink you must
minister much sweet water hot, or the decoction of barley with syrup of
violets, and roses. But you may not give him wine, as is said, except it be
sweet and alayed with water. Also milk drunk hot, is the best thing that can
be. To conclude for the order of his diet, he must use meats that do moisten,
and brothes that do make the womb soluble. But the sick must be compelled to
piss continually: for if the sharp dregs do tarry long in the bladder, it
gnaweth and exulcerateth it. Also to stop the sharpness of the humors,
minister the medicine which we have described in the end of the former chapter.
For the same purpose minister decoction of licorice, or this powder following..
of the seeds of melons husked, Puluis.
citrons, and cucumbers. ana..iij. seeds of gourds, purslaine, and lettuse.
ana..ij. of red roses..j. juice of licorice and of mast. ana..j.ss. beat them
all and make a fine powder: whereof give daily the weight of.j.ss. in the
morning with syrup of licorice, or inleps of violets or roses. Also venice
turpentine washed in rosewater or endive water, Terebinthina ves^^^.
and minister the quantity of a nut, or sometime two or three is marvelous
good for this (as Galen witnesses. lib. 5. detuenda sanitate) does not only
loosen the belly without hurt, and so by that means, turns away the sharp
humors from the passages of the urine: but also it scoureth and cleanses the
inward parts, and specially the reins. And there has bin some, that have
recovered health only by the use of this. Also clisters made of the decoction
of mallows, violettes, althaea, leaves of willowe, water lillies, and other
before rehearsed, putting to the^ casia fistula, sugar, Clyster.
and oil of violets, and roses do profit much. But if the sharpness do still
increase, you must also cast in by the yard into the bladder milk with
amylum. Also for the same purpose you may cast in the decoction of white
poppie, and you must annoint outwardly upon the share, and there aboutes oils
of violettes, and water lillyes, puttinge to them a very little of the juice
of purslaine. But if the Strangurie does chance through exulceration of the
bladder, or thorough some other part of the body being evil affected, and so
purging it self out by the urine, then it is manifest that those members ought
first to be cured, but yet so that this present evil be not neglected. The
cures of every part you may seek out of their proper places and chapters.

CAP. XLVI. Of difficulty of pissing. DE DIFFICVLTATE VRINAE.
DISVRIA in Greek, vrinae difficultas, it is a disease wherein the urine is
pissed hardly and difficultly. (...). Causae.
It is caused through weakness of the bladder, and through cold distempure of
it which hurts his actions. Also sometime it is caused of gross and
fleugmatike humors which stop the neck of the bladder. Signa.
You may know cold distempure if it come of an outward cause, by the patients
telling, and by the thinness and whiteness of the urine. But if besides the
whiteness there appear grosnesse in the urine, you may judge it a fleugmatike
humor, which has stopped the neck of the bladder, Cure of a cold distempure.
as is aforesaid. Cold diste^pure is cured by those things that do heat.
Therefore be must use heating meats, and wine that is hot and condite. Also
he must use medicines which provoke urine, as are parsneps well sodden, fennel,
apium, sperage, smalach and such like. Also crabs and hedgehogges do provoke
urine very well. You must dry their flesh and minister the weight of one. in
drink. Also minister in drink the decoctions of aromatique things, or
electuaries made of them, and so named of them. Above other things the
antidotes of diacalaminthes, dialactia, and diacurcuma, are very good. Also
triacle given in drink is marvelous good. You must nourish the share without,
with hot oils, as is, oils of rewe, dill, lillies, scorpions, and of
castoreum. Also you must apply foments, Foment^.
and little bags made of chammomill, sothernwood, betony, mugwort, rewe,
calamint, saucin and such like herbs. The sick must sit in the decoction of
the aforesaid herbs, and cover and make hot the bottom of the belly. Also
sometime it profits to cast in the decoction of the said herbs mixed with
hoate oils into the foundament. If a cold and fleugmatike humor do cause
difficulty of pissing, Cure of a fleugmati^ke humor that stops.
then the patient must use oxymell, and decoctions of hysope, penyroall,
origan, time, and such like often before rehearsed. Also let them use foments,
irrigations, and little bags made of hot things, whereof we spoke a little
before, and in the former chapters. Moreover whether a gross humor or the
stone, or a clod of blood, or any other thing of that kind through stopping do
let the passage of the urine, it is good to put in a Cyring, unless
infla^mation of the members do let it, which also we have ad monished before.

CAP. XLVII. Of stopping of the urine. DE SVPPRESSIONE VRINAE.
ISCVRIA in greek, suppressio urine in Latin, it is a disease, in the which
the urine of the pacient is altogether let and stopped. (...). Causae.
This disease is caused sometime through weakness of the bladder, not being able
to thrust out that which is contained in it. Also sometime it chances through
stopping of the nether passage of the bladder, or of gross humors, or of a
stone congealed. Also it is wont to come either of an inflammation, or of
hardness, or some swelling against nature, which makes the passages
straighter, or stops it altogether. Also sometime it comes by a little
piece of flesh, or a hard knob engendered in the passage of the urine. Also
blood congealed into cloddes in the bladder, is cause of the suppression and
stopping of urine. Also atter sent down to the bladder from the reins, or the
liver, or from some other upper part, causes stopping of the urine, even like
as a gross and clammie humor does. Also it chances sometime, that through
the dull sense of the bladder, that the urine is not made, and yet it is
without hurt of the virtue expulsive, when as his proper synowes be evil
affected: so in hail folk when the urine is holden long time, the bladder is
stretched out, and the urine is stopped. If stopping of the urine be caused
through weakness of the bladder, Signa.
it is known by those signs which declare the cold distempure of the bladder.
If it be caused of gross humors, it is known by the diet that went before.
As if one that lives idly, has used much meats which do engender gross
and clammie humors. If it be caused of the stone, you may know it by the
signs which are rehearsed before in the chapter of the stone. If it be caused
of inflammation or of any other swelling, it is known by pain by fever and
by sight. When suppression of the urine is caused through some piece of flesh,
or some knobbe, it may be known by the signs of ulcers aforesaid: and also
because that a cyring being put in, the urine commetn out. Also a cyring being
put into that part of the conduite or passage, where you coniectured the byle
to be before, it moves pain, and the flesh being broken with the cyring,
there follows out with the pissinge of the urine, both blood and fragments of
flesh. If clodded blood cause stopping of the urine, there went before it
excretion and pissing of blood, or flux thereof. When as attre has stopped
the urine, you may know it by things that chance before: for either the
bladder or the reins labored of some evil before, whereby such, and so much
atter might gather: or there has been an impostume in some member above the
reins, which being broken the attre is sent down into the reins, and so into
the bladder: the rest of the causes may be known by the patientes telling.
Curatio. Cure if it be of weakness of the bladder
The cure is diverse according to the diversity of causes. For if the stopping
of urine be caused through imbecillitie and weakness of the bladder, you must
minister and apply those things which do heat, as is said in the former
chapter. For you must altogether remove cold distempure, which lets the
actions of the bladder. If the withholding of urine be engendered of gross and
clammie humors, he must be cured by fomentes, incessions, Cure if it be of
gross humors.
and cataplasmes made of herbs that be hot, and that have virtue to cut and
divide the humors, and with a diet of such like things. Besides those things
which we have rehearsed in the former chapter of difficulty of pissing, this
ointment following is notably good, Vnguentum.
to take away the disease.. of the oil of scorpions, oil of narde, and of
lillies. ana..iij. gum serapine, bdellium, and oppoponax. ana..ij. goose
grease, duckes grease. ana..ss.. root of Enula campana..ij. penyroiall,
calamint. ana..ss. dissolve the gummes in wine, and with wax as much as is
sufficient, make an ointment. Also you must throw into the bladder with a
cyring, oil of scorpions, or lillies, or some other thing that can dissolve,
cut, and divide clammie humors. If the urine be stopped through the stone or
clodded blood: Cure if it be of the stone or clodded blood.
you must seek the cure out of their proper chapters. For the stone which has
stopped the passage of the urine must be removed out of his place as is taught
before in the 41. chapter: but the clodded blood must be dissolved, as is
taught in the 42. chapter. If the urine be stopped through inflammation, Cure
if it be of swellings.
or some other swelling against nature, the cure must also be sought out of
their own propre chapters. And if the urine be stopped through some little
piece of flesh or hard knobbe, Cure if it be of a piece of flesh or knobble.
apply bathinges and other dissoluing and loosening medicines and such as do
open and spread abroad the pype and conduit of the urine: examples whereof you
may seek out of the chapter of the stone of the reins. And if the urine do
not come out so, you must come to the using of a cyring, and by putting in of
the instrument you must entice out the urine. Cure if it be of the obtuse sense
of the bladder.
If the urine be suppressed through the dull sense of the bladder, you must
raise up his action, by provoking urine, and you must help it by incessions,
fomentes, and other hot medicines, which can take away his sleeping and
dulnes. But you must only eshue those things which provoke urine, least that
through plenty of it, the bladder be stretched out, and so the contractiue
virtue of it should be hurt. Moreover you must entice out urine with intrum, or
salt peter, or with a quick louse, or with some other thing, that can stir
up the virtue expulsive of the bladder. In healthful folk, when through some
great business the urine is holden to long, and so has made the bladder feeble,
that it cannot expel it out, Cure if it come in hail folk.
then he must help himself thus. He must stand, so that the neck of the
bladder may lean downward, and he must lay both his hands about his share,
and he must press it and thrust out the urine by little and little, and thus may
he do also in the dull sense, of the bladder aforesaid.

CAP. XLVIII. Of exulceration of the privy members. DE EXVLCERATIONE PVDENDI.
ULCERS engendered in the privy members without inflammation have need of
medicines, which do dry up vehemently: such as these be paper burned, Aloe
^rida.
dry dill burnt, and dry Aloes made into powder, for you can scarcely find a
more present remeadie. Also the root of Aristolochia rotunda does bring
present remeadie to the exulceration of the privy members. Also among
compounde medicines, P^^^is opti^^^.
that is the most effections and profitable.. Aloes epaticum..ij. gauls..j.
dragons blood, bole armoniacke, tuttie. ana..j. roots of Aristolochia
rotunda..ss. mirrhe..j. of gum arabicke..ij. alome burnt..ss. let all these
be beaten, Abstertion of the ulcers.
and make a fine powder, and strew it upon the exulcerate parts. But if the
ulcers be very moist and foul, first scour them and cleanse them with mulsa
well alaied, and then after with goats milk: which thing being done, use the
aforesaid powder, or lapis h^matites or frankensence or pomegranade ryndes, or
terra lemnia or such like beaten into powder. If there chance inflammation
together with the exulceration, you must first remove the inflammation with
linen clothes wet in roose water, or night shade, or purselaine water, or
housleeke water, putting to it the white of an egg, and applying it to the
diseased place. The rest of the remeadies, seek out of other chapters.

CAP. XLIX. Of the continual standing of the yearde. DE PRIAPISMO.
PRIAPISMVS (as Galen witnesses in lib. 6. de male affectis locis. cap. 6.) is
when the yeard is stretched out in length and in breadth, Priapismus.
nothing provoking the patient to lust and desire, nor no heat gotten. And if
there chance to the yeard panting or beating, then the evil is called
Satyriasis. This evil is caused (as Galen does witness in the place aforesaid)
either through immoderate opening of the mouth of the arteries, Satyriasis
Causae.
or of some vaporous spirit engendered in the hollow and fistulous sinow. But
it follows often after the gaping and opening of the mouths of the arteries.
For it is easier for them to stretch out wide, then for flatuous and windy air
to engender in the hollow sinow. For the loins being het, it is reason that
the arteries are made hotter, and that also other mouths should be wider
opened. Therefore at that time, they send out no small substance of spirit or
air into the hollow senew, which being a little filled, it stretches out the
yard, so that all his power does seem to consist in the holow sinow. Sometime
this evil chances to them which have abstained long time from carnal
copulation contrary to their custom. And this thing chances specially to
them, that do abound with much blood, and do not study to disperse the
abundance of blood with much exercise. They that labor of this disease be
grieved, as those be, which be taken with distention and stretching out of the
synewes: for the yard being puffed up, and stretched out, suffers as it were
a crampe. They that have this conuulsion or cra^pe, do quickly perish, unless
help be used to them by and by: and when they die their belly is puffed up,
Curatio.
and their swet is cold. The cure is diverse according to the diversity of
causes* for if the disease do chance through gaping of the mouths of the
arteries, and so through the heat of them, by and by it is good to let blood
by cutting of a vain which thing also you shall do, when this evil takes
them which abound with blood, and have abstained long time from carnal
copulation, contrary to their custom. And you must cut the black vein which
is called media or mediana, the middle vein of the arm. Also he must use a
thin diet, and abstain from wine. Give him but little meat made of corn,
and that which does engender no wind at all, and that causes thirst, and it is
good for him to use to drink water exercises and frictions or rubbings are
well applied and used, to dissolve and disperse the spirits or air. Also it
is good to go about emptying by vomiting. Also if the womb be costiue and
bound, you must make it soluble with a clyster, Clister.
that is not very sharp, as that is which is made of the decoction of beetes,
mallows and mercury. You must altogether abstain from purging medicines,
least that the humors should be drawn downwarde, for the same cause also, he
must eschew those things which have virtue to provoke urine. The sum of the
cure
To conclude you must altogether labor and study to minister those medicines
which can void and empty the abundance, and draw upward, and so turn the
humors from the privy members. And if the evil endure long, fasten cupping
glasses with scarification. And if there be fulness apply horse leaches. But you
must lay upon the loins, those things which do evidently cool, as is,
nightshade, purslane, henbane, and singreene. Also you must of necessity
anoint the yard, and the space between the fundament and the yard, with some
juice or water of herbs that do cool gently. If a cerote made of fine oil
of roses, washed often in cold water be applied as well to the yard, as also
to the loins, it does notably well. The making of this cerote which is called
ceratum liquidum, is taugh of Galen. lib. 1. de simplicium medicamentorum
facultate. cap. 6. Ceratum.
Also this cerote is good.. white wax washed tennetimes in cold water. quar.
j. purslane..ij. commix them together and bring them into the form of a
cerote. To be short, apply, and also minister in drink those medines which
can extinguish and quench seed: of the which we will speak abundantly in
the next chapter. Moreover it is hurtful for him to rest, lying upright, but
he must lie on his side. He must altogether be kept from sightes and stories,
and rehearsing of those things, which pertain unto lechery. If this disease
chance of a vaporous and windy spirit or air engendered in the hollow sinow,
all your whole cure must be turned to the dispersing and dissoluing of it.
Therefore you must turn back to the chapters of curing of inflammation, and
windines of the stomach, and to the cure of the windy cholicke: for there you
shall find plenty of remeadies.

CAP. L. Of shedding of sperme. DE SEMINIS PROFLVVIO.
GONORRHAEA in Greek, seminis proflunium in Latin, (...).
it is excretion and shedding of seed or sperme against the patientes will,
and without sickness of the yard. Causae.
It is caused through imbecillitie and weakness of the retentiue virtue in the
vessels, containing the sperme: or through some other disease, that moves the
parts of the vessels of sperme, after that sort, as the expulsive virtue does,
according to nature: as in the falling sickness it chances sometime, and in
other violent conuulsions and crampes. Also sometime it is caused through flux
of the spermaticke vessels. The seed that shedeth out, is waterie thin
without (...) petite of carnal copulation: and for the most part without
feeling of it, but sometime it comes out with certain pleasure. They that
have this disease, Signa.
their whole body corrupts by little and little, and waxes lean specially
about the loins. And (...) follows much weakness, not for the multitude of
seed, but for the principallitie (...). And if it come out (the yard not
standing) there follows imbecillitie and (...) the retentiue virtue in the
spermaticke vessels. But if it comes out (the yard (...) the grief is
somewhat like a conuulsion, or crampe. This disease chances not (...) men,
but also to women, and in women it is hard to cure. The cure of this disease is
(...) with those cures that are ministered in every flux. First therefore you
must keep (...) sick in quietness with little meat, and with drincking of
water. Then also you must ^^uer the places about the share and priuities, and
the loins with woll wet in oil of rose^ in wine, or in oil of blossoms of
apples, or of quinces. Also sponges wet in in Posca applied are not hurtful.
The days following you must use cataplasmes, emplaisters, and ointmentes, made
of vine branches, quinces, acatia hypocischis, sumach, and such like before
rehearsed. Also he must use restrictiue incessions made of the decoctions of
bryer, plaintaine, mirtles and such other like. These things must be sodden in
austere and sharp wine, or also in water. Let him use meats which are hard
to corrupt, and that are difficulty changed, and that have power to dry up.
Also you must give him with his meats and drink, the seed of Agnus castus,
and of hemp, specially roasted. Also the seed and leaves of rue, the seed and
stalk of lettuce, and the root of water lillies. In drink minister daiely,
in steed of common water, the water wherein iron has often be quenched. To be
short he must eschew the using of sharp things, and drincking of much wine,
and eating of pottage, and all his whole diet must be appointed of such things,
as do dry up and restrain. To extinguish seed.
And you must minister such medicines, as do extinguish and quench seed, as
is, tutsan seed tosted and rubbed, also the leaves and flowers of it are said
to restrain lechery, not only when they are eaten, but also when they are
taken in drinck, or strewed under one. Purslane eaten, and lettuce seed
drouncke, and the root and seed of waterlillies taken in meat, do
extinguish the seed by cooling of it. But rue eaten corrupts and destroys
the seed with his heat. They which eat calamint continually, do loose the
power of generation, and likewise the seed of white violettes does the same.
But smithes water, in which iron is often quenched, being continually droncke,
does diminish the seed without any grief. Moreover of these simples before
rehearsed, you may compound and make diverse remeadies. And specially this
powder is good.. of the pouders of diacuminum, Tri^^^^.
diacalaminthes. ana..j.ss. seed of tutsan and rue. ana..j. calamint..ij.
seed of luttuse and purslane. ana..j. sugre, the weight of them all: commixe
them together and make a fine powder, whereof minister..j. or.j.ss. infused in
sour wine. Lami^^ P^ubea.
Also it is counted notable, to lay a plate of lead upon the loins, for it is
wont to cool much. To those which cannot suffer the hardness of lead, you must
give counsel, that they strew under them some of the aforesaid herbs dried:
for the which purpose above other things, vine leaves, rue, calamint, and
roses are praised: for these profit, and besides that they hurt not the reins.
For vehement cold things being applied to the loins, do hurt the reins.
Also let not his bed be soft, and let him lie for the most part upon his side,
eschuing upright lying, least thereby the arteries of the loins should wax
hot. After that the disease has dured a while, you must commit the sick to
exercises, whereby the whole body, and specially the diseased parts, may be
confirmed and strengthened. Also it shall be good, if nothing else do let it,
to use cold bathing and washinges, which is wont to drive away all the grief
engendered of flux: and that specially if the water be indewed with any
medicinable quality. Also it is good at certain times to use those things
that do rubifie and blister, and that can fetch out from the depth and bottom,
unto the top of the skin. Moreover the patient must exclude all thought
belonging to carnal copulation.

CAP. LI. Of the loss of carnal copulation. DE IIS QVI RE VENEREA VTI NON
POSSVNT.
THEY which be married, and cannot use the act of generation, because of the
sluggish impotencie and weakness of their members: Causae.
coming of a cold distempure wherewith they be vexed, or of some other cause:
such ough to exercise the nether parts, and to use meats that do heat and
engender good humors: ^
as is the flesh of hens, capons, partrich, feasauntes, young (...) of
mountains, and specially sparrowes, cocks stones and such like. Not (...)
good nourishing meats, but also windy meats are good for him, as be chiche
(...) ^eanes, scalions, leekes, the root and seed of persneppes, pine nuttus,
sweet (...), rape roots and such other like. Also the eggs of partriches do
stir up car^^^^ lust. Let the patient sleep in a soft bed, and let him
read things that do stir up lust, Curatio.
or let him hear them read. Let his privy members be continually chafed and
rubbed with oils, ointmentes and other heating medicines. For which purpose
use this ointment following.. oil of lillies..j.ss. oil of castoreum..ss.
pepper, nigella, pellitorie. ana..j. mirrhe..ss. Euphorbium. gran. iij. wax as
much as is sufficient, and make an ointment. Vnguentum.
And also he must use medicines, which do engender plenty of sperme, and can
heat. Among simple medicines, these that follow do chiefly stir up carnal
lust, as be rocket, mustard seed, gardein cresses, nettleseede, root of Aron,
and pepper, satyrion, orminum, Simples to provoke carnal lust.
annyse, squill, orchis, called also testiculus canis, whose greatest round
root druncke with milk does provoke stiffenes of the yearde, but the the
less root thereof droncke with water does slake the stiffenes thereof, also
fennel and dill are good. The stones of a fox dried, beaten to powder and
droncke, does cause a stiffenes of the member: not hurtefull nor vain. Also
the parts of scinces which embrace the reins, are druncke to raise a
stiffenes of the yard. Moreover burn the dry pissell of an heart and
minister..j. of it with pure wine. Among compoundes it is good to use this
medicine.. Dianthos, Antidotum liquidum.
plirisarcoticon, diagalangae. ana..iij. diasatyrion..vj. pine nuttes, sweet
almondes, pistax. ana..ij. satyrium..j. root of Aron..j. seeds of rocket,
nettles, and gardein cresses. ana..j.ss. scincus..ss. nux indica..j. of long
pepper and ginger. ana..j.ss. powder of hearts pissle..j. syrup of mintes, and
sugar as much as is sufficient, and make an electuarie: where of minister
before supper or fasting the quantity of one drachme, or two alone, or in good
wine.

CAP. LII. Of bursting or ruptures. DE RAMICE.
CELE in Greek, ramex and hernia in Latin, the barbarous writers call it
rupura. It is caused diverse ways, and thereupon it has diverse names. (...).
^up^ura.
For if the Peritonaeum does break, and the bowelles fall down into the
coddes, it is called in Latin, ram^x intestinorum: that is, Ramex intest^norum.
the rupture of the bowelles. But when the bowelles do cleave or stay above
the privy members, it is called in Lataine ramex inguinis: that is, the
rupture above the privy members. Ramex inguinis.

Ramex aqnosus.

Ramex carnosus.


And if any quiet and waterie humor be gathered in any part of the filmes, or
skins of the coddes, it is called in latin, ramex aqnosus: that is waterie
rupture. When there grows hard flesh, within the coats and tunicles of the
stones, it is called in Lataine ramex carnosus, that is a fleshie rupture. To
be short, the kinds of ruptures ever take their names of the things that do
fill up the coddes. As if the call or filme that lappes in the bowelles, do
fall down into the coddes, it is called in Latin ramex ormenti: that is the
rupture of the filme. Ramex ormenti.

Ramex orme^ti intestinique. Ramex varicosus. Causae.


And if the bowelles do slip down also with it, it is called in Latin
ramex ormenti and intestini: that is the rupture of the filme and the bowelles.
So when the veins which nourish the stones be spread abroad, and swollen out
of measure on heaps, it is called ramex varicosus: that is the rupture of the
swollen veins. The rupture of the bowelles, and of the parts above the privy
members, are caused either because the Peritonaeum, is stretched out more then
it ought to be, or because it is broaken. Both these do chance through some
violent occasion going before, as a stroke, or leaping or crying, or by taking
up of a great weight. A waterie rupture is caused sometime of a secret cause,
and sometime of a manifest cause. Of a secret cause (...) the vessels that
are joined together be increased in the coddes, and then a (...) mixed with
blood is driven down to those parts, and rests there. Of a (...) cause, as
when through some blow or stroke, the vessels break and slide down^ (...)
then blood flowing down thither to nourish them, it is changed into a waterie
and (...) substance. A fleshie rupture is engendered of a secret cause, as
through the stone (...) without a flux and waxing hard, or of a stripe, or by
ill curing after the cutting of a rupture. The causes of the other ruptures are
evident by their descriptions. The signs, both of the rupture of the bowelles,
and the rupture about the privy members are common. Signa.
For there is a manifest swelling in the coddes, or about the privy members,
which appears greater, then it did before in exercises, iourneis, holding of
the breath and such like occasions: being thrusted together, it goes back
again slowly, and it rouleth down again quickly. The particular signs
whereby ruptures that come, when the Peritonaum is but stretched out, be these:
that the bowelles fall down not for a long time together, but for a short
space, and for very little cause, the swelling appears equal and deep, the
bowelles that fall down being stayed with the peritonaeum. The proper signs
of a rupture that comes when the peritonaeum is broken are, that the bowelles
fall down universally from the beginning of the rupture, and that only
through violent causes: the swelling is of a wonderful greatness, inequall, and
it shows straight way sticking out in the skin, because the bowelles are
fallen out of the peritoraum. The common signs of a waterie rupture be these:
swelling that is without pain, and firm, and permanent in the coddes, not
vanishing by noe occasion, but in them that have but a little of the humor, it
gives place, and in them that have not so much of it, not so. And when there
is a waterie humor in the coddes, the swelling shines of the same color:
that the humor is, as like dregs or blood, or rubicund, or swarte. And when
these signs appear in both sides of the coddes, it betokens that there is a
double rupture. There follows after a fleshie rupture, hardness, and a color
always like unto it. But if the swelling do increase into a hardness or
kernel, then there is nether color nor sense, nor feeling. But if the humor
be of a wicked nature, Cure of the ruptures of the bowelles and of the inguen.
then pricking pain does vex him. The rupture of the bowelles, and of the
parts about the privy members, be cured in this wise. You must lay the
patient upright and separate his legs, and then put up the bowelles by little
and little: and when they are put up, you must keep them up with convenient
trusses, and ligamentes. But if the places adjoining to the coddes, or to the
place about the privy members, be grieved with inflammation and most grievous
pains, and that there come with it frettinges and windines, and so thereby the
bowelles be made disobedient to go up again, then you must use and apply
fomentes, lynementes and bathes, which have virtue to mollify and to cease
pain and inflammation, and to disperse windines: as those things be which be
made of mallows, chammomill, dill, lineseede, fenugreeke, caraway seed,
annyseseede, comin and such like. Also nourish the places that be vexed with
pain, with woll that is moist, dipped in wine and oil. When the bowelles are
put up again into their places, you must go about, that they may be kept up
still, with convenient trusses and bands: apapplying to it first, Ceratum.
restrictiue or glutinatiue cerotes, or emplaisters, as this is.. ship pitch,
masticke. ana..iij. franckensence..ij. hypocischis, sarcocoll, acatia.
ana..j.ss. lapis hamatitis, dragons blood. ana..ij. bole armoniacke roots of
comforie, gales, pomegranate rindes. ana..iij. missle of the oak..j.ss. of
either Aristolochia..ij. sumache, pomegranade flowers. ana..j. goats
tallow..ij. turpentine and wax as much as is sufficient: dissolve the gummes
first in vinegre or wine, and make a cerote, and put it in a weathers skin, and
apply it binding it fast, and do not loose it before the seventh day. Also in
the mean season (...) the sick tarry thirty days in his bed, Diet.
and let him abstain from windy meats, (...) much drincking of wine, from
vehement moving, running, leaping, crying loud (...) other like. And in the
mean season let him drink this decoction.. both the kinds of sanicula, of
solidago saracenica, or consolida sar acenica, ophio glossum, pedelion,
agrimonie, A gluminati^^ decoction. Pr^^ella.
^^^laria. ana. M.j. knotgrasse, clematis daphnoides, great plantaine, burnet.
ana. M.ss. (...) of comfrey, hounds tongue. ana..ss. root of the sixth kind
of geranium.. (...) mirtles..iij. pomegranate flowers..ij. leaves of
laurel..j.ss. boil these in (...) water of just quantity till the third
part be consumed. Then strain it and (...) to it sugre, make the liquor of
the decoction sweet, and purify it, and make a ^^^^potion, whereof minister
daily in the morning..iiij. Also you must take very (...) ^ead, that the
belly wax not costiue: for if he be constreined to labor much, when ^^^^uld
go to the stool, the bowelles will slide down again. Also he must use apt
^^^onuenient deligatures and trusses, as be admonished before. And he must use
them specially, To cure a waterie rupture.
at such time as occasion and necessity of moving requires it. A waterie
rupture must be cured by such medicines, as do heat and dry up, as be bean
meal, laurel, bearies, lineseede, dancus, althaea, nigella, and such other
like, which we have rehearsed in the chapter of the dropsy Asciles, and other
dropsies. To conclude: as for the cure of these ruptures, or any other by
surgerie, let it be sought out of Paulus Aegineta. libro sexto, chapter
sixtietwo, where he treateath of it abundantly: for it is not our intent to
treat thereof in these books: therefore we will proceed to the diseases of
the womb.

CAP. LIII. Of stopping of menstruis. DE SVPPRESSIS MENSIBVS.
THE menstruis of women are suppressed and stopped in them either naturally or
against nature. Causae. In whom the flowers are naturally stopped.
If they be naturally stopped you shall know it chieflye by this: because the
woman thereby is vexed with noe grief of the whole body, nor yet of the
womb. Also you shall have a respect to the age, for in many the flowers
begin to flow the fourtenth year, and in very few before the thirtenth or
twelfth year. And to most women they burst out after the fourtenth year. For
the most part, the purging endures for two or three days, to many five
days, in some it endures unto the seventh day. The menstruis also do stop
in some the fifty year, or the fifty five year, and they flow not until
the sixty year, but in few women. Also barraine women and dauncers, are not
naturally purged: for whatsoever excrement is in them, it is consumed by the
vehemency of exercises. And to be short, women of a hot temperature, that be
wild, and do use strong exercises, they purge out little or nothing. But
many times the menstruis are wont to be suppressed and stopped against nature,
In whom the flowers are s^^pped against nature.
either through over much grossenes, or slendernes. For fat folk are more
without blood, then other folk, and they have less and streighter veins, and
that little blood which is in them, turns almost in fat. But they that are
lean and slender which be wasted with some continual sickness, they have no
superfluous blood in them. Moreover the mestruis do not flow in them, whose
blood is either gross or clammie, or if it be sent to some other part of the
body, and purged out, as for example, if it go out at the nose, or at the
fundament. Also in some that have cast out much blood from the breast, the
menstruis are stopped, and in some, because much blood has gone out of a
vein being cut. Also other kinds of emptyinges has often done the same
thing, as aboundaunt sweating, continual vomiting, fluxes of the belly: and
all kinds of pustules and wheales which budde out of the skin. Besides the
causes now rehearsed, oftentimes the menstruis are withholden through great
and sharp sickenesses, and through abundance or scarcity of food. For of
little food, that little does expirate and breath out straight, and of much
food the passages are stopped, and the excretion and voiding out of the
menstruis is prevented and let. And for those causes the menstruis are
specially suppressed and stopped, the whole body being evil affected. Also
they are in like manner withholden and stopped, when the womb it self is
afflicted with a particular disease or vice: which thing chances to the womb
sometime through hot or cold distempure of the same. Also many times the
purgation of the menstruis is let through hardenes engendered in the mouth of
the matryce, or through some excrescence and growing up of a piece of flesh,
or also through abundant fatness. Also to some by and by in the beginning,
certain filmes or thin skins engender about the neck or entry of the
matrice. To other some the scarres of ulcers, which have been before in the
womb, have stopped the mouths of the vessels, which carried blood into the
womb. To some after the aborsion of the womb, (the mouth of it being
exulcerate, and afterward healed and brought to a scarre) there comes
conioyning and compaction of it, which besides that, it lets all other
transpirations of the womb, it also stops the excretion and voiding out of
blood. Moreover stubburne carefulnes, immoderate fear and great sorrow do
stop the menstruis. There follows suppression and stopping of the
menstruis, heaviness of the whole body, Signa.
desire to vomit, abhorring of meat, and certain terrible discursions, such
as chance to those that have conceived. Moreover, there be pains about the
loins, thighs, neck, the hinder part of the eyes, and the foreparte of the
head. Also there follow continual feauers, and blackish vrines, with
certain red attre, and filth in them, even like as one should mix soote with
the water wherein new killed flesh has lately been washed. Also to many
either the urine does come forth difficultly or else it is stopped
altogether. The diversity of causes is known partly by the disposition of
the whole body, Cold distemper
and partly also and for the most part, by the telling of the patient. Women
may know a cold distempure in them selves, by these signs specially, because
they be more sleepie and slower to all kind of moving, and whiter of color,
and as it were of a leadie color. Moreover their urine is waterie and such
like signs appear, which are often rehearsed before. Hot distemper
The tokens of a hot distempure are clean contrary to these signs of a
cold distempure before rehearsed. Signs of fulness besides those that may be
gathered out of the former chapters, Plenitudo.
are wont specially to be these: that women, that are vexed therewith, are
grieved most in the time of the menstruis, and they feel vehement pain, about
the loins and the privy members, and their veins are swollen up very
great. Curatio. Cure of a cold distemper.
The cure is diverse according to the diversity of causes. For if a cold
distempure of the liver or womb do stop the flowing of mestruis, it must be
cured driven away with contraries: that is, with meat and medicines that do
heat. Therefore you must give unto them hot meats, and wine that it yellowe,
odoriferous and old. Also you must prescribe to them exercises and you must
minister other things which can help the body. Above other these things
that follow are good, peniroiall, time, calamint, sotherwood, diptaine, root
of yreos, casia, gladon, asarum, and saueyne: of which you may make decoctions
and fomentes. Also you must minister unto them fasting, after a bathe, pure
wine hot. Also the meet and convenient times to take these medicines be,
first, if the patient drink straight way, when the time of purgation is at
hand: secondarilie, if he drink straight after a bathe, fomentation, or
annoynting, that the medicine helping the body being yet hot and loose, may
show his strength and effect the more easily and effectually. Women that be
too hoate and use much evercise have no need of curing: Cure of hot distemper.
for it were better to the safegarde of their proper health, to prescribe them
such a diet, whereby their bodies should be so dried, that the mestruis
should not need to be purged: but this were against conception: for they do
not conceive which be not purged. Therefore for conceptions sake, and for
because that almost all women keep an indiscreet diet, purgations be
necessary. Therefore it is good also to adioyne the cure, whereby the
menstruis, that are stopped through hot distempure, may be brought out. Women
therefore, that be hot, and use many exercises, must chiefly be made moyster
by moist meats and drinckes taken in good quantity, as be soupinges of
ptysans, and of Alica, and meats that are made of lambs flesh, kiddes
flesh, and fishes that be tender, birds of mountains, milcke. Let their
potherbes be luttuse and gourdes, and their fruict, new figs. They must use
white wine, that is not very old, and let it be alaied. Also bathes of sweet
water are good, and to conclude, the diet ascribed to them that have the fever
Ethicke, Cure of fulness.
is to be prescribed to these. If the menstruis be withholden and stopped by
reason of the fulness that vexes the woman, and if nothing else do let it, you
must begin the cure with letting of blood. And you must cut the veins of the
anckles or of the hammes: and that not before the accustomed time of the
menstruis. Neither will it be unprofitable, if cupping glasses be fastened to
the legs. The blood being emptied, minister potions, which can provoke
menstruis, and apply fomentacions, bathes, and annointinges of other things,
which we will describe hereafter. But if there be no fulness, but only gross
and flegmaticke humors do stop the flowing of the menstruis: Cure of vici^^^
humors.
First you must minister medicines which can cut and divide the aforesaid
humors, and preparate them, and make them easier to be expelled and purged
out: Decoction.
as is this decoction.. the roots of gladon, yreos, parcely and sperage.
ana..j. of the seeds of apium, fennel, bruscus, annyse, daucus, ammi, and
nettles. ana..j. calamint, wormwood. ana. M.ss. origan, sothernwood, mugwort,
peniroiall, asaru^. ana. M.j. Isope. M.j.ss. chosen cynnamon..j. sees all
these in a convenient quantity of water, until the third part be consumed: then
streine it and make the licour of that decoction sweet with sugre, and
clarify it with the white of an egg, putting into it of the syrupes of
calamint, of hysope, and of horehounde. ana..j.ss. and make a potion, whereof
minister daiely in the morning the weight of.iiij. When that decoction is
droncke up, minister some purging medicine: as is, hierapicra, Purgatio.
diaphaenicon, and electuarium nidum, pills of agaricke, of benedicta, or such
like. Exercise.
After purging the patient must use exercises, and frictions of the nether
parts, and specially walkinges. Moreover apply fomentations, and bathinges
made of chammomill, Fomentes. Vnguen^^^.
motherworte, myntes, and other things rehearsed in the decoction abouesaide.
Also anoint the patient with this ointment. of the oils of lillyes, and rue.
ana..j. mootherworte with the thin leaves, penyroiall, calamint. ana..j.
root of yreos..ij. Isope, origan. ana..iij. with wax as much as is
sufficient, make an ointment. After this, for the cause abouesayde, minister
medicines, which can straight way provoke and bring forth the menstruis being
stopped, such as these be: mirrhe, castoreum, To provoke menstruis.
laurel bearies, madder, pepper, sage, rewe, sauine, casia, and such other,
which be rehearsed before of us. A notable medicine.
This medicine is not able good.. castoreum..j. wild myntes beaten into
powder..ss. old wine, or mulsa..iiij. commixe them together, and minister it
hot after a bathe. Also the decoction of penyroiall, mugworte, rewe, comin,
daucus, sage, dill, ammeos, fennel, enula campana, and such like are good.
Also calamint beaten into powder, the weight of.ij. or sauyne, the weight of.j.
droncke in wine or mulsa, is very good. Moreover trochiskes of myrrh, do
marvelously profitte. Also wine wherein wormewoode has been infused or
sodden, must be droncke all the time of the cure. Also you must use to put
pessaries into the womb, if that necessity so require it, such as this is..
of Triphera magna, that is without opium..j. of the meal of ernum, nigella,
mather, mugworte, Pessus.
penyroyall. ana..j.ss. juice of rewe..ij. commix them together and make a
pessarie, and put it in with woll or cotton. Or this pessarie.. mirrhe,
bdellium, storax. ana..j. calamint, sothernwood, A^us.
and wormwood. ana..j.ss. roots of gladon and mather. ana..j. seed of
nigella, dry rue, laurel bearies. ana..ij. saueyne..j. castoreum..ss. beat
all these to fine powder, and commixe them with honey or Triphera, or
mithridatum, and make pessaries to put into the woman's priuities. Also you must
cast into the womb hot oils, as is oils of yreos, lillies, laurel and such
like. Also it is good to use suffumigations made of Storax, galbartum,
franckensence, Su^^ius.
bdollium, the root of Aristolochia, mugworte, cloves, cynnamon and such like.
Examples whereof you shall find in our book of making of medicines. Moreover
the womb must be euaporated, and fomented with odiferous things, as with
maioram, sauorie, calamint, chammomill, penyroiall, mugworte, root of yreos
and such like sodden in a pot, which you must cover with a covering that has
a hole bored through it, wherein you must put a reed or some other pipe, and
you must anoint it round about aloft, that the woman sitting thereon, may be
fomented with it. Also it will profit, if the woman sit in this decoction up to
the navel, and after receive the pessaries before rehearsed. Cure of fat
women.
Fat women must be cured with a diet that can extenuate, and with swifte
exercises, and with other medicines which can make the body slender and lean:
as be continual deiection and solution of the belly* oyntmentes that have
virtue to euaporate and breath out, and such like, which be abundantly
entreated of by Galen lib. 14. there. meth. cap. 15. and lib. 6. de tuenda
sanitate. Those which are not purged of their menstruis, through leanes of the
body, whether it chance through sickness, or any other means, you must first
recreate, Cure of lean women.
and refresh them, and restore the flesh of their bodies by a convenient diet,
and by other medicines, which Galen rehearsed in the places aforesaid. And if
they wexe fleshie, there is good hope, that the menstruis will burst out by
their own accord, which if they do not come forth alone, then you shall
provoke them by potions, fomentes, and other medicines above rehearsed. If the
menstruis do not flow, because of some disease and vice of the womb, first
you must cure the evil, that is cause of the stopping of the menstruis: Cure
if it be of vice of the womb.
and after that, we must proceed to the provocation and purging of the
menstruis. The cure of the disease of the womb, must be sought out of their
proper places.

CAP. LIIII. Of flowing of menstruis. DE REDVNDANTIBVS MENSIBVS.
WE say, that menstruis do redound and ouerflow in women, when that great
plenty of them do flow out longer, then the accustomed time of their
purgation. There is no just or certain time of their purgation. For to most
women they flow ij. or iij. days to many v. days, and to some seven days.
The me^struis do chance to flow out of measure, Causae.
through great or small vessels opened wide, or broken. Also immoderate
purgations do engender in women, sometime through grievous travail in
childbirth, which also do cease oftentimes of themselves. Oftentimes after
aborsion, they labor of a vehement aborsion, and flux of menstruis, and
sometime it brings them into a dangerous peril. Signa.
If the greather vessels be broken or open, the blood flows out gusshing on
heaps: but if the lesser be open, it flows out by little and little, and not
in great quantity. If it be caused through eating or gnawing, it does not
only flow by little and little, but also it flows with very great pain.
Moreover when the menstruis flow immoderatly, there follow a filthy color,
the feet are puffed up with a light swelling, the strength of the body is
decayed, both the digestion and appetite of meat is corrupted. And in all
points such signs, as are wont to follow immoderate voyding of blood, either
by the hemorhoides, or by any other flux of blood do follow in this disease.
Curatio.
First therefore in the beginning of the cure, you must bind the places
between the joints, and the extreme parts of the body with bands,
beginning at the arm holles and the shares. Also you must fasten great cupping
glasses lightly under the pappes, as Hipocrates teaches. 5. Aph. 50. Also they
must use meats and drinckes, that be sharp and restrictiue, as is ryce and
such like: and let the sick rather eat roasted meats, then sodden. And
specially such flesh, as is of nature able to dry up, as be birds that live
in mountains, and wild beasts. They must abstain from moving, and wind,
and wine, and in steed of it they must use some restrictiue potion, or posca,
not cold but warm. Moreover you must minister restrictiue medicines in
drink, as these simples be following.. pomegranate flowers, hipocischis,
acatia, coral, To refrain menstruis.
Lycium, terra le^^nia, galls, knotgrasse, both the Consolidaes, the stone
haematites, shelles of maste, plantaine, barberies and such like. Compounde
medicines be these following, as syrupes of roses, mirtelles, trochiskes, of
ambre, and of terra lemnia. Also these pills following are marvelous good, to
stop and restrain the menstruis.. terra lemnia, Ca^^p^^ia.
bole armoniacke, franckensence, masticke, galls. ana..ij. dragons blood, the
stone haematites. ana..j. hearts tongue burnt..j. hypocischis, acatia, red,
coral. ana..ss. pomegranate flowers, red roses. ana..ij. Ambre..j. commixe
them with syrup of mirtles, and make pills whereof minister the weight of one
drachme or..ss. Also foment the place outwardly, with the oils of roses,
mirtles, quinces, and sharp wine. And apply ointmentes, emplaisters, and
cerotes, and restrictiue Epithemes, whereof you shall find many before in the
chapters of the fluxes, Dysenteria, Diarrhea, and Lienter^a. Also incissions
made of the decoctions of the aforesaid medicines be good. Insessus.
Also you must use such medicines, as are cast into the womb with an
instrument. For the which purpose juice of plantaine is marvelously commended,
wherewith Galen says, in four days, he stopped a flux of the womb, that
could be stopped with no other medicine. The quantity that must be thrown in,
should be the measure of one cyath. Of the same effect be the juices of
knotgrasse, or nightshade, or hypocischis, or atatia, or such like cast in.
Also the using of Pessaries is not to be despised: among which this is
specially praised.. of franckensense, pomegranate flowers, Pessulus.
and galls. ana..j. of gum arahicke, acatia, ambre, hearts horn burnt.
ana..ij. bole armoniacke..ij. beat all these to sine powder, and mix it with
woll dipped in oil of roses, and put it into the womb.

CAP. LV. Of woman's flux. DE FLVORE MVLIEBRI.
VTERI fluor, in Latin, flux of the matrice in English, is a continual
distillation, and flowing out for a long time, of the whole body, purging it
self. That which is voided out, does represent such form and color, Causae.
as the humor that does abound in the body. For some is red, as blood
putrified, or attre: some white, which comes of fleume, some is pale, which
signifies choler: and some is waterie which is, of a wheyeish matter. And if
pure blood come forth, as in the cutting of a vein, you must take good heed,
that some erosion and gnawing be not engendered in the womb. By these signs
following the flux is known. Signa.
The places are continually moist with the humors, being diverse in colourse.
The patient is ill colored, she sauoureth no meat but abhors it, in
walking she breaths difficultly her eyes be swollen, sometime with pain,
and sometime without pain, or with exulceration or without it, and either with
an inflammation, that is with the ulcer, or else it is filthy or pure. The
diversity of causes you may know by the color of that that flows forth as
is aforesaid. And if a woman be vexed with a red flux, in the beginning, Cure
of the red flux.
if age and other things will suffer it, you must come to letting of blood. For
many incommodities would follow, if you should first go about to repress and
stop the rage and violence of the blood that flows, as the dropsy, vice of
the sinowes, or of the mouth of the stomach, or of the head. You may part the
times of your blood letting, as you do in them, that spit blood, so that
thereby the auersion and turning away of the blood may be the longer a little.
You must cut a vein in the arm. After this you must bind the extreme parts
of the body with bands, and you must use and apply all such things, as can
turn the flux of the humor another way. Therefore all those remeadies that
be rehearsed of us in the former chapters be good. Let her whole diet be
restrictiue, and such as does engender grossenes and thicknes. Let her drink
be water, Victus ratio.
or if she be weak wine that is gross and restrictiue. But if the flux that
is white or wheyish do vex a woman, Cure of a (...) that is (...) and artery.
it may not be stopped at the beginning, that evil humors may be purged out
of the body. Nor also, it is not against reason, seeing that, that which is
flowed out, is engendered of fleume, if you do minister a medicine to her, which
does purge fleume. And you must minister, and apply to the whole body,
medicines and remeadies which do drive up, seeing that the disease it self is
moist. Therefore exercises specially of the upper parts, and frictions are
good. Also they must eat flesh which has virtue in it to dry, as birds of
the mountains, and wild beasts. Also in the beginning of the evil, such
medycines may be ministered, as do extenuate gross humors, and after that do
bring them out with the urine, as be asarum, fennel, apium, and such like,
often rehearsed before. The beginning being past, you must apply to the womb
things that be moderately restrictiue, as be oils of rooses and quinces, and
other rehearsed in the former chapter. Also you must use abstersive and
scouring medicines, least that vlceration be made with the humor that flows,
wherefore the wheyishe humor must continually be washed with hot water. After
the scouring and cleansing of the filth, you must anoint oil of roses, or of
quinces or of mirtles. Likewise, when a woman is diseased with pale flux, Cure
of a pale and choleric flux.
it may not be stopped at the beginning, but the body must be purged with a
medicine that purges choler. Then you must study how to pull back, and
turn away the humor, and you must use other restrictiue medicines, not
neglecting abstersive and scouring things, whereof you shall have special
need, because of the sharpenes of the humor. Moreover to conclude, when the
flux cease, they must long abstain from swifte goinges and walkinges, from
much frictions and rubbinges of the belly and the loins, also from eating of
sharp things, from things that heat, and from such things as do provoke
urine.

CAP. LVI. Of strangling of the womb. DE VTERI SVFFOCATIONE.
SVFFOCATION or strangling of the womb, is nothing else, but a drawing back
of it up to the upper parts. It is caused through stretching out of it, which
is engendered of fulness, Causae.
that follows after the retention and stopping of menstruis. For in women the
womb, when it is retched and stretched out, it runs not to an other place
like a wandering beast but is drawn back through the extention. Also it
chances oftentimes, through the seed that is restreined. Also many times it
chances through cold, which happened to the womb, at the time that the
purgation of the menstruis is ministered. Also sometime it comes through some
hard aborsion, or when as any has hasted to stop suddenly a flux of blood
flowing from the womb. Signa.
They that are vexed with this disease, when the fit is nigh, there follows
heauies of mind, slownes, weakness of the legs, palenes of face, and a
sorrowful countenance. But when the suffocation and strangling is now present
there follows disposition to sleep, doting, a withholding of the instruments
of the senses, the voice does wax domb, and the legs are drawn up together.
The pulses are small and weak. Also oftentimes they are altogether stopped.
Also in many the breath that should come out at the mouth and nosethrils, is
stopped altogether, and yet that which is in the arteries, does remain still.
When the evil does cease, the bals of the cheeks begin to wax red, and the
eyes be lifted up and opened. Also a certain humiditie and moistnes, that one
may by feeling perceive to run out of the womb of women, and the bowels do
make a noise: and also the womb it self is a little loosened, and so their
mind, senses, and moving comes to them again. This disease comes by
courses at certain times as the falling sickness does: and that chances when
the matrice (as is aforsaid) is filled with seed, or with some other matter that
putrifieth and rotteth, in it. When the womb it self is diseased with the
quantity and quality of any thing then me^struis, or seed, or other kind of
symptomates are engendered. If that which is able to cool the whole body, do
cause this disease, he body is so vehemently cooled, that both breathing and
arteries beating, cannot be perceived by the senses. Which humor, if it be
either gross or sharp, it causes co^uulsions and cramps: but if it have the
nature of the melancholy, it causes sorrow and sadness, and defection of the
mind, refrigeration, and pain of the stomach. This kind of disease engenders
in all seasons* but specially in winter and Autumn, and most commonly young
folk, and such as be prone to leacherie, and barren, specially if they be made
so by medicines be most taken with this disease. Many do recover from this
disease, and many again do perish suddenly in the very fit, or at the least
way within few hours after. That which chances, when the pulses be swifte
and inordinate, and then do leave of and vanish clean away. At the last a
cold humor in little quantity does bedewe and moisture the skin alofte. In
the fittes therefore you must bind the extreme parts, C^ratio. How to do in
fit.
and besides the bindinges, you must rub all the legs, and the hole body,
and do even as you would recover one that is founded. And you must. place the
sick with her neck and shoulders, bending, and rising upward, and with her
thighs and share leaning downewarde. You must apply to her nosethrilles,
stinking things, as the snuff of a candle newly put out, feathers specially
of partriches, burnte, or wool burnte, or sooles of shows, or shales of
garlic, or onions: also hears burnt, and specially if they be the hears of
the sick, or gotes horn burnt. Also pitch melted upon the coals, galbanum or
castoreum, or such like. Also you may hold a chamber vessel with old urine to
their nose, or old linen clothes dipped in brimstone and burned. And you
must perfume the priuities beneath with odiferous things, as be storox, wood
of Aloes, cinnamon, cloves, and such like. And it is good to fasten cupping
glasses with much flame, and lightly to the parts above the privy members;
and to the bottom of the belly. As soon as the fit does come, you must apply
fomentes, and little bags warmed, to the bottom of the belly and share,
Sa^^li.
for you shall scarcely find a more present remeadie in the coming of the fit
of this disease. And you shall make them of both the moother wortes, and with
origan, betonie, chammomill, calamint, wormwood,, penyroyall, lineseede,
louageseede and such like. And if the fit be prolonged, you must also ad to,
such things as are good to dissolve and bring out windiness: whereof you shall
find examples and names out of the Chapters of windiness of the stomach, and
pain of the collicke. Also then, you must pour into the womb, both ointments
and oils, that be very odoriferous, as is, oils of spike, and yreos, and
such like. Also let a midwife dippe her fingers in these oils, and then put
them into the mouth of the matrice, rubbing it, long and easily, that through
that provoking, the gross and clammy humor may be avoided out. Also let the
woman be raised with loud callings, and call her loud by her proper name. Also
at this time, you must minister those things that cause sneezing, as be
pepper, castoreum, struthium, and such like. There be some that think it good
to use incessions made of the decoction of laurel beries, and leaves,
peniroyall, calamint, motherwort, horehound, saueine, althaea, cammomill,
serpillum, yreos, aristolochia, and fenugreeke. But in the time of the
incessions, we may not omit the cure of the brain, but you must irrigate and
sprinkle the head, with oil of roses and vinegre. But I judge, that you must
rather use foments and little bags, then incessions, specially when as for
the most part, although thou would never so feign, thou can not use
incessions in this evil. When the fit rests and is ceased, compel the
patient to vomit: for all vomites do lighten, but specially such as are vexed
with meat. The third day after, What must be d^ne (...) after the (...)
you must apply cupping glasses with scarification to the loins, and the
ylions. After the seventh day minister the purgation of hiera colocy^thide, or
pills of agarick, and by and by come to the drinking of castoreum, which being
continually drunk, it delivers the patient straight way from this evil.
Also you must minister every day thereof..j. sometime with mulsa, sometime
with the decoction of motherwort, and sometime minister it with thin wine.
Therefore at this time, rather then in the time of the fit (as is said) it is
lawful for you to use incessions, and pessaries, that do mollify, made of
goose grease, storax, masticke, gum armoniacke, and such like. Also the womb
must be perfumed beneath with such things as do heat, and have virtue to
bring out wind. Trochiskes of parfume.
Therefore use this parfume specially.. of the Trochiskes of gallia and alipta
moschana. ana..j.ss. storax..iij. cloves, maces. ana..j. wood of aloes..ij.
cinnamon chosen, leaves of laurel. ana..ij. lapdanum..ij.ss. beat them into
powder, and commix them with storax liquida, and make trochiskes for perfumes.
In the mean season, let the woman be content with a very little meat and
drink, and let all their diet be exciccatorie and drying up. This cure
following is to be used in the fittes of this disease. Diet, Cure ^f the whole
body.
In restoring and recreating the whole body, specially if that the disease
has endured long, you must begin oftentimes with blood letting: specially if
the menstruis have been stopped, and let of their purging. Then you must come
to purging with hierapicra. The purging being done, you must fasten on cupping
glasses lightly, but with much flame, and you must draw them of violently.
Also sometime the places may be scarified, and strew upon the scarification,
salt, then you must heal it with convenient medicines. Also you may apply
very well Synapismes, and dropaces made of Euphorbium, pellitorie, pepper, and
mustard seed. Also a good diet does help much, as deambulations in the
morning, gestacions, Diet.
and caryinges in a cart or in a ship, or on a beast, be good. Also, after they
be moved with carrying about, crying out loud, distinct and apt reading is
convenient. Also anointing and frictions used now and then are good. Bathes
of sweet water are seeldome to be admitted, and not, but because it should
scour and cleanse the filth. It is very good to use natural bath^^, which
flow by nature, and this, as it were, the very last refuge. Above others
those bathes are good, which be in Badenia in the base Germany in Marchia.

CAP. LVII. Of falling out of the womb. D^ VTERI PROCIDENTIA.
WE say, that the matrice falls out, when it is so turned downward, that it
stic^eth out outwardly. And yet the whole matrice rowleth not down, being
losened from the bands and ligaments, as many unwise folk do think, for if it
should fall down so, it could not be restored again. Although the wo^b do fall
out but seldom, yet there be many causes of the falling out of it. For a woman
falling from an high place, Causae.
if she fall on her haunches, the pannicles and filmes, that hold up the womb,
and the members adjoining do break and cause this disease. Also it chances
many times that in a sore travel of child birth, the womb falls out because
of the drawing out of the secundine, which, the womb that joins to it does
follow. Also many times it chances through negligent and unskillful drawing
out of the child, specially if it be dead. Moreover it chances sometime
through a stripe, or lifting up of a great weight, or through vehement
perturbation of the mind, as death of children, or coming of enemies, or
thorough perilous sailing, or through some such like cause, all the body
being lousened, the womb falls out. Also sometime this evil chances (all
the whole being loosened) thorough resolution or weakness of the pannicles
and muscles, which thing chances specially to them that be old. Oftentimes
the womb falls out, through the flowing down of an humor much in quantity
and clammie. It falls out most commonly by the mouth of it, Signa.
and that which falls out, is like to the eggs of an ostrich, differing only
in that, that it is bigger, or less in quantity. There is no need of many
signs, because the diversity of causes may partly be known by the
constitution and state of the body, and partly also by the telling of the
sick, and them that be with them daily: when this disease is but newly
begun, Curatio.
you must endeavor to put up the womb again, and to restore him into his own
place, for in the beginning it will be obedient to be put up readily, and being
in his own place, it will tarry so still, specially if age agree unto it. For
in them that are well stricken in age, the womb being put up again, it
slideth out again through every light cause. It is good therefore, if there be
hard dong in the right gut, to bring it out with a clyster. Likewise if urine
be gathered in the bladder, let it be brought out with a cyring, that the
matrice may be at free liberty on each side. For otherwise it chances by
their stretching out, that the matrice, which is in the midst between them,
is pressed together, and pent in a strait place, and so when he is fallen out,
they let it and stop it, that it can not be put up again into his own place.
When you have thus done, you must lay the sick upright, so that her haunches
may lie highest, her hammes bowed, and her legs spread abroad: then you must
bath and nourish abundantly that part of the matrice which is fallen out, with
warm oil, or butter, or mallows sodden, or with the decoction of althaea,
fenugreeke, lineseede, or such like: and you must prepare wool together on a
heap, in figure and thickness, according to the proportion of the member, and
wind it about aloft with a fine and pure linen cloth: then dip it in the
juices of Acatia or of hypo^ischis infused in wine, and put it into the womb,
and you shall wrest and writh upward all that which is fallen down by little
and little, and without violence, until the matrice be put up into his own
proper place. Outwardly you must cover the parts about the privy members with
a sponge wroong out of Posca. The woman shall ly with her legs stretched out
and joined together, that the one may lean upon the other. But it is more
safeguard, to bind the feet together, bringing the band up to the knees. But if
that part of the matrice which is fallen out, be swollen through continuance of
time, and be stuffed up with plenty of humors, so that the swelling do let
the putting up of it, you shall nourish it with decoction of beetes, and then
you must cleanse it and wash it with vinegre, and strewe in it, salt finely
poudred, and when it leaves swelling then put it up, as is aforesaid. Then
faste^ cupping glasses with much flame to the nauel, and both the ilions or
small guts: and apply continually to the nose odoriferous things. The third
day (the woll being as yet still in the womb) let the woman sit in black sour
wine a little warmed, or in the decoction of mirtles, bramble leaves,
pomegranate rindes and such like. This being done let her lie upright again
with her haunches highest, then take the former woll out, and put in such
another in the stead of the first, dipped in the same medicine. Also apply
cataplasmes and emplaisters outwardly to the bottom of the belly, made of
dates, pomegranate rindes, lentilles and such like. Also Cerotes that are made
of masticke, wood of aloes, lapdanum, frankensence, squinant, acorus, nutmegs,
gum tragacanthe, and such like, are good to be applied. But let these things
be changed every third day, until the cure be ended perfectly. Also during the
whole time of the cure, let the woman eschew moving, and such things as provoke
sneezing. And the womb must be perfumed beneath with stinking things, but to
the nose you must apply most odoriferous things, for because the matrice
flies from stinking things, and it follows and embraces odoriferous
things. V^ctus ratio.
Let her meats be such as engender good juice, and give her odoriferous wines.
Also the belly must be made soft and soluble, lest if she should go to the
stool difficultly, the matrice should also fall out again. But yet you must
take good heed, that the belly be not to much loosened, for then the parts
adjoining are loosened, and so the matrice will fall out again. Moreover if
that part of the womb which is fallen out, has through continuance of time by
negligence been putrified and rotten, and through continual wetting of it with
urine, and filthiness sticking in it, it be exulcerated: you must cut of and
sear that which is unprofitable, or burn it without any fear of danger: for
it has been known (as Paulus testifies) that the whole matrice, because it
was rotted; has been taken away, and the woman lived still.

CAP. LVIII. Of the mole in the matrice. DE MOLA.
MOLA in Latin, is called of Aetius and Paulus, a swellinge that is hardened,
sometime in the mouth and entry of the matrice, and sometime it sticks out in
all the matrice, and in feeling it is almost like a stone. Galen in li. 14.
there met. defines Mola to be a piece of flesh without shape. This disease is
caused of woman's seed, and much menstruous blood flowing into the matrice,
Causae.
and there kept, retained and stopped, which immoderate heat does join
together, and changes it into the form and fashion of flesh. There follows
this evil, a hard swelling, with contraction and drawing up of the sides,
slenderness of the body, evil color, loss of appetite, Signa.
and suppression of the menstruis. Also in this evil the pappes do swell, so
that at the first it causes some to suspect that the woman is conceived with
child, but in process of time it may be discerned. For pain follows the
Mola, causing pricking, neither is there any moving perceived in this disease,
as is in conception. Many of them do make a suspection of the dropsy, but yet
there is a difference between them two: because the swelling is hard, and does
not give place to the thrusting of the hand or finger, as the dropsy does, nor
makes a noise as the timpanie does. But yet often in process of time, the
liver is cooled and the dropsy ingendreth. This evil for the most part is
incurable, except remedies be applied in the beginning. But howsoever it
chances, the cure may not be neglected, Curatio.
but you must apply and minister all things that seem to be good for it. But
first of all you must give her meats that engender good juice, and let her use
moderate drinking of wine. Let not the woman use vehement moving, for that will
cause the flux to the disease, but let her use gestations, and caryings, and
deambulations and bathes, and in her lying let her feet be highest In the
mean season if fullness be present, you must cut a vein of the arm, and then
you must purge her by pilulae foetidae. When the body is purged and emptied,
apply cataplasms, foments, incessions, pessaries, ointments and cerotes, which
have virtue and power to dissolve, and loosen, as they be that are made of
Althaea, mallows, cammomill, melilot, fenugreeke, lineseede, and such like.
For this purpose also it is good to apply vnguentum dialthaea or emplastrum
diachylon simplex, Vnguentum.
or apply this ointment.. of the oil of sweet almondes..iij. oil of
lillies..ij.ss. goose grease and hens grease. ana..j.ss. musculage of
lineseede and fenugreeke. ana..j. of the gummes ammoniacum, and bdellium.
ana..ij. root of althaea, nigella seeds, and daucus. ana..ij. dissolve the
guumes in wine, and with wax as much as is sufficient, make an ointment. Also
you must put in Pessaries made with butter, Poss^.
swines grease, hearts marrow, reisons, fat figs, lineseede and fenugreke.
After this you must minister such medicines, as can provoke menstruis: for
which purpose besides those things that we rehearsed in the Chapter of
stopping of menstruis, this medicine is good.. the pouders of diacinnamonum,
diagalanga, diacuminum. ana..ss. powder of diamber..j. powder of dialacha..ss.
Cinnamon chosen, Mors^li.
S. John's wort, calamus aromaticus, asarum, root of gladon, anise seed.
ana..j. seed of rewe, ginger, motherwort, horehound, dictemus, sage, ana..ss.
sugar dissolved in the waters of motherwort, and S. John's wort, as much as is
sufficient, and make lozenges, whereof minister daily the weight of two or
three.. Also it is good to put in this pessarie.. of the root of Asarum,
gladon, and madder. ana..ij. seed of rue, Possus.
nigella. ana..ss. maioram, nutmugs, cloves, laurellberies. ana..j. saueine..j.
castoreum, ^^phorbium. ana..ss. powder them and searce them that have need,
and with turpentine make a Pessarie. To conclude, you must use medicines that
can dissolve and losen congealed blood: for so there will follow excretion, and
voiding out of much black blood and clodded. Also it profits marvelously to
the taking away of this disease, specially if the evil has continued long,
to use natural bathes, and such as engender by them selves, which have virtue
to dissolve and discuss. Moreover many other remedies rehearsed in the
Chapters of the dropsy, may be used in this.

CAP. LIX. Of inflammation of the womb. DE INFLAMMATIONE VTERI.
THE womb is inflamed through many causes. As through a stripe or retentio^,
and stopping of menstruis, Causae.
also by oborsion, exulceration, unmeasurable lechery, sitting on a very hard
stole, very long and swift deambulation and walking. Also oftentimes it
chances through cold, prohibiting and letting the transpiration and breathing
out. The companions to inflammation of the matrice be these: Signa.
an acute fever, pain of the head, the share, the loins, and the roots of
the eyes. Conulsion and cramp of the arms, the fingers, and the neck, and
declining of them contrary. Also pain of the stomach, and shutting up of the
mouth of the matrice, and pulses that be small and often. If the inflammation
be feeble and small, the aforesaid signs will not be great and strong, and the
womb will be vexed with greater pain. But if the inflammation be vehement,
then all the whole womb is vexed with a panting pain, and all the signs will
be the more vehement. If all the womb be inflamed, it will be painful all
over, but if some part of it be vexed with an inflammation, then the pain is
greatest in that part. For if the hinder parts of it be vexed with
infla^mation, the pain will afflict the loins most, and hard dong is
withholden and stopped, because then the right gut is pressed together very
much. If the former part be inflamed, then there is pain about the priuities,
and the strangury or difficulty in pissing is engendered, because the bladder is
pressed together. If the sides of it be enflamed, the parts about the privy
members are stretched out, and the legs are grieved, and difficultly, moved.
When inflammation afflicts the mouth of the matrice, there is pain in the
Abdomen, and if you put in your finger, you shall feel the mouth hard,
unpleasant, Curatio.
shut up, and burning hot. In the beginning therefore of the cure, if neither
age, nor state of the body, nor time of the year do let it, you must cut the
vein of the hammes or of the ankles, (if the inflammation came not after
aborsion or great voiding of blood.) Afterward you shall place the sick in a
dark house, which is moderately warm, biddinge her to be quiet, and
prohibiting all moving from her legs. Then you must rub the space between
the joints, and also the extreme parts, that you may turn away the course
of the flux from the womb. Diet,
For her meat which must be little in quantity, you must use Ptysan broth
and rere eggs: but there must be a day between: she must abstain from drinking
of wine, and for that, she must use the decoction of Cinnamon, or hot water.
Also the belly if it be not soluble enough of it self, must be washed and
emptied by easy and mollifying clysters. Localia.
Outwardly you must apply upon the loins, and about the share woll wet in
vinegre, wherein roses has been sodden. Also dates or quinces sodden in wine,
and commixed with oil of roses, is good to be applied. Also you must apply
Cataplasmes made with the meal of lineseede, fenugreke, and with melilot,
plantaine, lentilles, knotgrasse, purslaine, singrene, and such like: and that
specially if the inflammation be of the nature of an crysipela. Moreover you
must put into the matrice, woll moistened with oil of roses, or quinces, or in
the juice of purslaine, or singrene. When the inflammation begins to decline
and cease, you must come to the using of those things, which have virtue to
release, dissolve and discuss. Therefore you shall bid the pacient sit up to
the loins, in fenugreeke sodden, or in the decoction of althaea, lineseede,
mallows, and sometime also motherwort, horehound, and sage. Also you shall
anoint about the priuities, and the loins, barley meal with fenugreeke and
lineseede sodden in mulsa, or the decoction of dry figs. Also put in
pessaries made of butter, hearts marrow, goose grease, hens grease, and such
like. When the cure has proceeded, sundry meats and light will be much
profitable. And when the declination of it, is manifest, bring the sick to
bathes, and give her wine that is waterie and thine.

CAP. LX. Of windiness in the womb. DE INFLATI0NE VTERI.
THE womb is puffed up through cold, or humors corrupt in it, Causae.
or through aborsion, or sore travel in child birth, the door of it being
shut, or a clod of blood being in it and stopping it. Oftentimes the windiness
ingendreth in the hollow bought and space of it, sometime in the bosom of it,
which is evident to the senses, and sometime in the thinner parts of the
sustbance of the womb, Signa.
not appearing to the senses. There follows this evil, swelling of the
bottom of the belly, with hardness and pain that pricketh, which goes up
to the midriffe and the stomach: and yet nevertheless it is stretched out on
both sides, sometime to the share, and sometime the pain is in the loins, and
at the navel, to whom also the head agrees. Also many times wind breaks out
of the priuities that the sick may feel it. If therefore windiness be
gathered in the hollownesse of the matrice, there is hard a certain rombling
and noise in the body, such as chances to the guts, which are vexed with
gripings, also if you beat your fingers of it, it makes a noise like a
timpanie. But when the windiness is contained in the thin and slender
passages of the matrice, then they are vexed with more vehement pain, and
harder to cure. This evil is cured first, if age, the region, Curatio.
and time of the year do not let it, by blood letting, fasting, and purging,
with hierapicra Galeni: which being done, you must use foments, and annointings
with oil of rewe, or with oil wherein dill has been sodden. Also let her use
incessions made of the decoction of rewe, peniroyall, calaminr, horehound,
motherwort, althaea, and such like. Also apply cataplasmes made of the seeds
apium, fennel, caraway, commin, louage, daucus, anise, fitches or darnell
meal and such like. Also you must pour into the womb such things as have
power to loosen and dissolve windiness: as is, oil of rewe, ammeos, origan,
and the decoction of things before rehearsed. And if windiness be included
and stopped through the means of a clodde of blood, after the using of the
aforesaid things, and specially incessions: Let the midwife put her finger
being first anointed, into the woman's priuities, and dissolve, and bring
forth the clod easily and by little and little. And if the evil has
continued long, you must come to more effectuous remedies. Therefore you must
use linimentes, emplaisters, and cerotes that be stronger as this is..
sothernwood, origan, Cera^um.
and calamint. ana..ij. seed of tutsan..ij. of centorie the less..j. Caraway
seeds, a^^mi. ana..ss. casia..j. bdellium, ammoniacke. ana. j.ss. oil of rewe
and dill. ana..j. with wax and turpentine as much as is sufficient, make a
Cerote and apply it to the womb. Also sometime you must proceed to the use
of Synapismes and Dropaces. Also cupping glasses may be fastened to the places
lightly in a circuit, and must be pulled away violently, for these do help as
it were a charm. Also sometime scarificatio^ must be made: and you must use
such things altogether, as have poer to draw out, and call forth from the
botto^ to the top. Also, Diet.
for her diet you must minister food that does attenuate and dissolve
windiness, and minister medicines also that have the same virtue, as diamson,
and diacuminum, and diacalaminthes, and such like.

CAP. LXI. Of exulceration of the womb. DE VTERI EXVLCERATIONE.
Causae.
THE matrice sometime is exulcerate, because of hard child birth, or drawinge
out of the child, or through corrupting of the matrice, or through sharp
medicines or fluxes, or through imposthumes or botches broken. They that have
this disease do feel a prickinge pain in the aggrieued part: Signa.
and at certain times stinking and atterie humors are sent out from the
filthy ulcer. And other signs proper to the diseases of the womb do follow,
as headache, and specially of the forepart of the head, of the great sinews in
the neck, and of the roots of the eyes, is felt pain, which also extends
unto the fingers ends, and other tokens declared before in the chapter of
infla^mation of it. Therefore if the ulcer may be seen, it may be known by an
instrument called specillum oriculariu^: but if it be deep within and hidden,
those things which come from it will declare it: for a diverse humor is sent
forth. If the ulcer be enflamed, the humor is little in quantity, bloody or
dredgie with great pain. If the ulcer be foul and filthy, the humor comes
out in more abundance, and is matter with less grief. If the ulcer does
eat and feed, Curatio.
the humor is stinking, black, and with vehement pain. For the Cure, when
the bile, or ulcer is enflamed, you must use blood letting and other medicines
that are good against inflammation, as is before taught. In other causes you
must use purging medicines, specially if the body does abound with vicious and
corrupt humors. Also apply such medicines, as do repress and stop the
flowing of humors, and correct their hot distempure, as is, the iuyces or
waters of purslaine, plantaine, bursa pastoris, and such like before rehearsed.
Then, if the ulcer be filthy, you must use scouring and cleansing medicines, as
is, Ptysan with honey, and mulsa, with the decoction of the root of Ireos,
aristolochia, wormwood, or agrimonie. Those ulcers which do eat and feed,
must, be washed with mares milk or Asses milk newly milked, you must mix
with the milk, honey, and root of yreos. These things, is the ulcers may be
seen, may be anointed: but if they be deep within, cast them in with an
instrument called metrenchita. When the ulcers be well purged and cleansed, you
must use such things, as will close them up: first gentle things: Cera^^^.
and then those that be of a more effect. The Cerote of Aetius does especially
please me, which is this.. of white wax..j. of fine oil of roses..iij. and
melt them together upon the coals, and when it is cooled, then put it into a
mortar, and put therinto woman's milk, or Asses milk, or goats milk newly
milked, and work them together with a pestle, until it be white, then pour
out the aforesaid milk, and put in new milk, and then work them again, and
then put to it about..j. of saffron. And if thou would have it to mitigate
pain more, ad to it oil of roses..ij. the grease and marrow of a goose.
ana..ss. Also you may put to oil of quinces, in steed of oil of roses. You
must apply this Cerote to the belly and the haunches. For the virtue of it is
sent into the womb by secret and hidden passages. Also you may cast into the
matrice of that faculty: as be, the decoction of pomegranate rindes, roses,
quinces, bremble, mirtles, sumache, acatia, hypocischis, with restrictiue wine.
To this place you may transfer and bring medicines out of the former Books,
and out of the chapters of ulcers of the reins, the bladder, and the yard.

CAP. LXII. Of straitness of the matrice. DE PHINOSI VTERI.
(...).
PHINOSIS in greek, obturatio, or coarctatio vteri in Latin, it is a stopping
or streightening in the mouth or neck of the matrice, whereby those places are
made so straight, that it will not admit nor suffer any seed: or if they do
receive it, they cannot hold it, for because of their knobby hardness, it can
not shut together. Sometime it receaueth seed, and it is kept and retained in
straight mouth of the womb, and thereof is a child conceived, but the
conception brings occasion of death to the woman: seeing, because of the great
straightness of the places, it can not be brought forth. This disease is
caused in the mouth of the matrice, Causae.
either of exulceration going before, or of an inflammation there hardened.
There is no need of signs to know this disease by: for by the telling of the
sick, and by touching of it, Signa.
you may easily know it. The cure of it must be wrought with fomentacions,
that can release, dissolve, and mollify. Also with cataplasmes and incessions,
that be of like power and virtue. Curatio.
Therefore you must apply foments made of the decoction of fenugreeke, and
hydrelaeon. Also you must use pessaries, that can mollify and dissolve, as
that is which is made of aesipum, that is, oil tried out of woll in sheep
flanks or necks, salt peter, and turpentine. To be short, to the cure of this
disease you must use mollifying medicines, as is mallows, althaea nigella,
fenugreeke, lineseede, ammoniake, bdellium, rozin, grease, and such l^ke, of
the which you may make cerotes, emplaisters, and all kind of outward medicines.
And if the evil be waxed old, you must use suffumigations, and euaporations
made of aromatique things. And when the places do seem to be softer to the
feeling, then you must put a dry sponge, that has a cord hanged at it, into
the straight place, to the intent to make it wider: which if it fall out, you
must put in another that is thicker. Therefore you must have many and sundry
dry sponges ready. Afterward you must anoint upon the sponges that you will
put in, some medicine made of alome, and claterium, mixed with honey, that
thereby the place may be made wider. And if, after the sponges be taken away,
the place do not seem open and wide enough, and inflammation be present
through the eating and gnawing of the medicines that were applied, then anoint
upon the sponge, that you will put in, this ointment. Vnguentum.
. oil of ireos..j. of fine turpentine..ij. of goose grease..j. root of ireos
and frankensensence. ana..ss. wax as much as is sufficient, and make an
ointment. But if the inflammation be vehement, take oil of roses, or violets
instead of oil of yreos. When the infla^mation is ceased and the place is
open, anoint upon a sponge a cerote made of oil of roses and goose grease, and
use that until it be healed, making the place a little sounder: but yet you
must always put in sponges until the end of the cure, lest that the mouth of
the womb do gather together again.

CAP. LXIII. To take away barainnesse. DE STERILITATE REMOVENDA.
STERILITAS in Latin, barennes in English. Causae.
It is caused of the woman's part or of the man's part. It is of the man's part,
when his seed is either hot, and as it were burned, or else cold, thin,
waterie and feeble, as is the seed of old and feeble men: or when it is sent
forth thicker then it ought to be: or because the men be half geldinges, and
have a very short yard, so that they can not cast their seed into the
innermost place of the matrice, which also sometime chances through much
fatness: for fat men have such great bellies, that they cannot cast the seed
into the deepest parts of the body. Also women of their part can not
conceive, that have their matrice either hot and fiery, or cold and moist, or
foul, filthy and dry. For (as Hippocrates faith) 5. Apho. 62. the seed is
corrupted or quenched in such. Also women that be very gross and fat, do not
conceive (as Hippocrates witnesses. 5. Apho. 46. Moreover women that be lean
and slender do not conceive, or if they do conceive, they do suffer aborsion
straight way, which also Hyppocrates witnesses. 5. Apho. 44. Also some do not
conceive, because their womb is weak or straight or short: or because the
vessels of it be stopped or shut up, or blinded and covered by reason of a
scarre, or because the neck of the womb is drawn crooked, or because the mouth
of the matrice is to straight or to wide open. Also unwilling carnal
copulation for the most part is vain and barren: for love causes conception,
and therefore loving women do conceive often. Also age to great, or to little,
does let conception. Therefore you must separate them that be young from
carnal copulation, so that the man may be 30. years old, and the woman 18.
But specially an uncomely and foolish shape and form of the woman's body, does
give an occasion to barennes. For a woman, that is fertile, ought to have a
moderate stature and height of the body, breadth of the loins and the share,
buttocks sticking out, a handsome and convenient greatness of the belly, a
straight breast and large pappes. The signs whereby the diversity of causes
be known be these. Signa. Hot dist^pure
The hot distempure of a man, is easily known by the abundance of hairs,
specially black hairs upon the genitalles, and the places adjoining, from
above unto the midde thighs. Also this distemperature is lascivious and ready
to carnal lust, but it is soon satiate and filled. Cold temperature.
A temperament that is to cold, is declared by the parts being about the
stones being bald and without hair. Also they that be of this temperature, be
not desirous and prone to carnal lust. Heat of the matrice is known by the
heat in the rest of the body, and because few menstruis are sent out and that
with pain, so that sometime the woman's priuities are exulcerate with it, and
that which is sent out, is blackish* Also there follows this temperature, an
instinction or tickling to lechery, and dryness of the whole body. A
temperature of the matrice, which is cold, is known by suppression and stopping
of the menstruis, and by astonishment engendered in the loins, the legs, and
the parts about the priuities. Also they that have this temperament, do
despise use of carnal lust, and have the mouth of the matrice drawn together.
If through to much moistness, barennesse be engendered, then in the act of
generation, they are very much bedewed with moistness and the menstruis
flows much in quantity and thin. Dryness is known by the contrary
signs to moistness. The rest of the causes may be known partly by sight, and
partly by the telling of the party, or other about her. For the cure commonly
to both, as well the man as the woman: Cure of both to men and woman common.
It is convenient for them to keep the whole body very temperate, and to
keep a mean and measure in laboring, eating, drinking, and bathing, and in
all other exercises. Men therefore that have their seed corrupted through
naughty and evil kind of diet, if they use a more ordinate diet and
healthful, their genitours will have fecunditie and fertility. Let the woman
neither weary her self with to much labor, nor let her not be altogether
idle: for idleness does fill and stuff the whole body with superfluous
humors, and excrementes: but great labor dries up the blood, and consumes
the menstruis. Let her use meats and drinks easy of digestion, and such as
the stomach may well comprehend and consume. And you must specially observe in
their order of good diet, that neither the man nor the woman be made fat. For
they that be fat, are unapt to procreate and beget children, because their
genitours can not touch together, and also because they send out little seed.
Moreover it is convenient that you give unto such as desire to get children,
some accustomed and pleasant thing to eat or drink before meat, which be most
apt to provoke carnal lust, and to engender seed: as those be that do heat
measurably, and puff up with wind. Therefore wine in this case measurably
drunk, is to be preferred before water. For as the proverb is sine Cerere and
Baccho friget Venus. (that is) If you have not bread and wine: carnal lust will
cool and pine. For potherbs they must use rocket, orminiu^, it is an herb like
unto horehound, erisymo, and other such like which we have rehearsed of them
that cannot use carnal copulatio^. Rue, calamint and mints must be eschewed
altogether: for calamint and mints, although they engender much sede, yet, that
which they engender, is feeble and weak: but rewe does altogether corrupt and
destroy seed. If a woman do not conceive through the vice and corruption of
certain humors, Cure of a woman full of corrupt humors.
it is good to empty her with a purging medicine, and to amend her with a good
diet. Particularly for women, it is good for them to take as good heed as can
be to those things that chance to the matrice, and that their menstruis may
flow without any, impediment. Therefore when the purgation of their menstruis
is nigh at hand, let them keep a measure in eating and drinking with all their
dilgence. And let them take some of those things, that can provoke and stir
up the purgacion of the menmenstruis, as be herbs that be odoriferous and
sharp, as is, Cerefolium, fennel, apium, louage and such like, whereof you
shall find plenty in the chapter of stopping of the menstruis. After the
purging of the menstruis, both the right side and the left side of the matrice
is open. If cold distempure does cause barennesse, you must correct and
amend it by foments, Cure of a cold temperature of the womb.
Cataplasmes, and suffumigations, and other medicines that have virtue to
heat: as those be which are made of motherwort, poniroyall, sage, rewe, anise
seed, commin, gladon and such like. Also it profits her to drink Castoreum,
and odoriferous seeds, comin, anise seed, and juniper fruict, and other
things that be rehearsed in the Chapter of stopping of menstruis. Cure of a
hot distempure.
You must amend and correct a hot distempure of the matrice causing
barennesse, with such things as do cool and moisten: as these herbs be,
letuse, mallows, gourdes, puslaine, and orach with such like. Also she must
drink wine that is thin, white and alayed. Also it profits her to sleep,
and to bath in sweet water. Also you must apply to the loins and about the
priuities such things as do cool, as juice of nightshade mixed with oil of
roses, which also being laid upon woll, may be put well into the matrice. They
which do not conceive through moistness of the matrice, it is good for them to
use a drier diet. Also they must exercise them selves much, Cure of a moist
distempure.
and they must be rubbed in the upper part of the body. Also to the intent to
purge out, and turn away humors, let them vomit sometime after dinner, and
sometime fasting, and you must dry them with scarcity of meat, and let them
eat flesh of middle aged beasts roasted, and give them pure wine, that is
mighty to drink, but give it them seldom. Also it profits to apply
restrictiue things to the matrice, as be roses, leaves of brier, galls,
sumach, mirtles, knotgrasse, pomegranate rinds, and such like sodden. But you
may not do this, unless the whole body be first purged. A dry matrice must be
cured by the contrary to that which is aforesaid, as with bathes of sweet
water, Cure of a dry distempure. Cure of gross humors.
annointings, and meats that do moisten, Let her use wine that is alayed,
being not very old. And if a woman's conception be impedited and stopped through
gross humors, if they be gnawing it is good to purge the woman well with
hierapicra in whey: and she must use a more exquisit diet, and meats that do
engender good juice: but you must consume the fleugmatike humors with much
labor, with sweating, vomiting or by purging by the nether parts: and all
other things which be rehearsed in the chapter of stopping of menstruis, which
it behooves not to rehearse here particularly. Also windiness engendered in the
womb, Cure of windiness.
does let the fertility of conception, and causes barennesse. Such women
therefore as have this, must first be amended with a straighter diet. Then you
must minister both outwardly, and inwardly to them, such medicines as can
dissolve, disperse, and consume windiness, as is comin, rue, dill, seed of
apium, and such like, which be rehearsed in the chapter of windiness of the
matrice, and in other places. If shutting up of the matrice does cause
barennesse, Cure of a matrice shut up.
you shall open it by casting in of odoriferous clisters, and by using of
foments, and incessions made of fenugreeke, lineseede, mallows, and such like
rehearsed in the chapter of straightness of the womb. And afterward you must
proceed to stronger medicines, as motherwort, calamint, peniroyall, and
maioram. They which have the mouth of the matrice gaping much, Cure of an ap^
matrice.
it is good for them to use a drying diet, and drying foments. And it is good
also to use restrictiue medicines, as be the decoction of galls, bremble
roots, mirtles, and such like rehearsed before in the cure of a moist
distempur. Last of all, if crookedness of the matrice do cause barennesse, you
shall direct and make straight the matrice with mollifying foments: for foments
can do that best: Cure of a writhed matrice.
but yet you may conveniently put in mollifying pessaries. But specially the
decoction of peniroyall, and motherwort, and castoreum drunk with posca, are
wont to be good for a writhed matrice. Paulus says, that then carnal lust
used backward is good to conceive. We here have generally comprehended the
cures, only by other chapters. For the particular cure of each cause, must be
sought out his proper chapter.

CAP. LXIIII. Of sore travail in child birth. DE DIFFICVLTATE PARTVS.
SORE travail in child birth does chance either through default of the parent,
Difficilis partus.
or of the child, or of the secundine, or through some outward cause. Of the
parent if she be gross and fat and faint hearted, and unskillful of pain, or if
the whole matrice be small, or if there be inflammation of the whole womb, or
of some part of it, or that it be vexed with some other diseases, or if she be
naturally weak, so that she can not drive out the child: or if that she do
labor before her time. Also if the neck of the mouth of the matrice be crooked,
or if there be some piece of flesh engendered there, by reason of a bile or ulcer
going before. But default of the child is, if it be of an unaccustomed
greatness, or small and of a little weight, or if it has a great head, or if
it be monstrouse, as having two heads, or three feet, or if it be dead, and
so does not labor to come forth, or if it swell, or being alive, if it be
weak, so that it can not proceed forth: or if they be two or mo, and do all
rush suddenly together into the neck of the matrice, or if the child be
fashioned contrary to nature. For the natural form of a child coming forth
is, first with his head, (his hands being stretched out upon the thighs) and
with his head declining to the neither parts, but straightly directed to the
mouth of the matrice. the best form in coming forth, next unto this, is,
first with his feet, having the hands stretched upon both the thighs, and so
descending straight up. All other forms in coming forth, except these two,
are contrary and abhorring to nature. The travail is made difficile through
the Secundine: if it be not pulled away, because of the grossnesse or
thickness of it, or if it break before it should do, because of the thinness
of it. For then, the humor that is gathered together in the matrice, is sent
out before the convenient time. Therefore the priuities be without moisture, and
be dry at the time of the travail, when moystnesse were necessary, which
should make a slipperie, and easy, going out of the child, and so through
dryness, the child slideth out hardly. Also difficulty in childe-birth is
engendered of outward causes: as of cold, which thickeneth the matrice, and
makes the passages straighter, or through a great heat, which dissolueth and
weakedeth the strength. But outward causes are known by the telling of the
pacient, or of them that sit by her. Weakness of the woman that labors,
Signa.
as fatness may be known by the state of the body. Also by diseases, that
she has had before, you may readily come to the knowledge of weakness, and
of many other euilles. Weakness of the child is known by feeble and slow
moving of it. Which if it be dead, it moves not, and there is coldness of the
belly, and great pain about the navel. Also a stinking breath is breathed
out, and a naughty color of the face. Greatness of the child may be
coniectured by the constitution of the parents body, and by greatness of the
woman's belly. Grossness and thickenesse of the secundine may be gathered and
known thus: if none of the aforesaid signs be present, and the woman strong
and lusty, and the child moves quickly and easily. As for the cure, it varieth
according to the diversity of causes. Cure of a fat woman.
Therefore you must place a fat woman downward in a little bed, that is, hanging
downwarde with her head, and her face toward the ground, bending and enclining
her knees to her thighs, that the womb stretching to the Abdomen, may be right
with his mouth. You must with your fingers anoint the mouth of the matrice,
with butter, oil, ducks grease, hens grease, and such like, and you must
spread it abroad, and open it wider by little and little. You must comfort and
encourage a fearful woman. And if she be unskillful of pains in travail,
Cure of a fear full woman.
admonish her to hold and stop her breath strongly, and let her thrust it out
to the ilions with all her might. If sore travail in childbirth be caused of
adstriction, and binding, or astonishment, or, as it were, adarctation and
pending in of the child, you must help it with dissoluing and releasing, by
pouring in largely sweet wine and hot. Also the decoction of fenugreeke, or
mallows, or lineseede, or also eggs are good, because they are of a losening
and mollifying virtue. Afterward you must nourish the parts about the privy
members, and the belly and loins with the aforesaid decoction, or with some
other losening and mollifying medicine. Also it profits to use hot
incessions and euaporations, and to have the air of the house enclining to
heat. Also it is good to use insusions and annointings, with oiles that be
hot in touching and virtue, and convenient cataplasmes be good. And if neither
a fever, nor any thing else do let it, she must use releasing and dissoluing
bathes, and you must move her, with bearing her in a chair, in an air that is
meanly hot. Many do use to such violent shaking of the body. And if any woman
be weak, and have sore travail in child birth thorough resolution of the
body, you must comfort and refresh the body, with medicines that do thicken,
and draw together, and with such meats and drinks, as do recreate, restore,
and ad strength to the body: as be incessions and sprinklings with mirtles,
vine leaves, pomegranates, roses, smelling to vinegre, and annointinges with
wine, mixed with cold oil of roses. When the infant is over great, you must
apply those things which can make wider, stretch out, and loosen the mouth of
the matrice. If sore travail do chance thorough an innaturall form of the
child in coming forth, you must bring him to a natural form and figure, as
much as is possible, partly by putting back, partly by drawing to you, partly
by turning, and partly by making it straight. And if the head or foot, be sent
out first, you may not draw out the child taking hold by that member: but
put your fingers to the shoulders or haunches of the child, and thrust up that
again, which is come forth into the conuenien place, if there be two or three,
or mo children, and do thrust altogether into the neck of the matrice, you
must drive back the rest into the bottom of the womb, and bring that out
first, which seems to be most ready: but if it do not come forth, because
the infant is dead, or has a very great head, or through some other cause, you
must come to drawing out of the child, or to cutting, which is taught
abundantly of Aetius, lib. 16. cap. 23. and of Paulus lib. 6. cap. 74. For it
is not our purpose to teach handy cure hear. Moreover if the tunicle or
secundine of the child be thicker and stronger, then that it may be broken,
you must cut it. Those that have the humor, which is contained in the tunicles
or secundine, flowing and running out before the convenient time, so that the
places be dried up, you shall wash it all about with whites of eggs, with the
decoction of mallows, and fenugreeke strained, or with juice of Ptisan warmed.
A medicine that does universally help all that have sore travel in child
birth, is this that follows.. Cinnamon chosen. Puluis optimus.
.ij. mirrhe, casia lignea. ana..j. white ambre..j.ss. beat them together and
make a fine powder, whereof minister in wine that is odoriferous, the weight of
one drachme. Moreover the child being borne, oftentimes it chances that the
Secundine does stick fast in the womb, which if it chauceth, then sometime
the mouth of the matrice is found open, and sometime shut, and the secundine
many times is still joined to the bottom of the womb, and many times it is
separate. If therefore the mouth of the matrice be open, and the secundine
which is left therein do cleave to some part of the womb, being wound up
together like a ball, it may easily be drawn out. To draw out the secundine.
You must draw out the secundine with your left hand being warmed, and
anointed with some fat thing, and put into the womb. If the secundine be
fastened and knit to the bottom of the womb, you shall likewise put in your
hand, warmed and anointed with grease, and take hold of the secundine, and
draw it out: but you may not draw it straight forth, lest the matrice come
out with it: nor pull it very vehemently, but softely and easily, first
pulling it crooked, bringing it this way and that way: then after that, you may
draw it somewhat harder, for by this means you shall loosen it from the
fastening. But if the mouth of the matrice be shut, you shall use perfusions,
and with the fingers of your left hand you shall labor to open it easily, and
to make it wider by little and little. Which if you cannot bring to pass, it
is good to apply about the priuities, fomentes, perfusions and ointmentes that
can mollify, dissolve and release. If she be strong, you must put into her
nosthrilles at that time also sneezing powder, made of Castoreum, pepper and
such like. For Hippocrates in 5. Apho. 49. writes thus: that the secundine may
come out, give her sneezing powder, and let her stop her nose and mouth. Also
you must minister unto her, potions that can provoke menstruis: which things
aforesaid, you must do the first and second day. Moreover she must use
suffumigations, seething in a pot, motherwort, yreos, saueine, peniroyall,
calamint, dictamus and such like. Then put the pot under a close chayr, upon
the which let the woman sit, being compassed in round about with clothes. After
that, if you find the mouth of the matrice opened, put in your hand and labor
to pull out the secundine, as is aforesayed, but if it will not obey to come
forth, you may not rent it, for within a few days after being rotten and
turned into atter, it will fall out. But because thorough the evil savor and
smell, when it is rotted, it fills the head and marreth the stomach. They
that are troubled with this evil, must be continually perfumed. For which
purpose these things are good: Cardamonies, bdellium, with saueyne,
frankensence, storax, lapdanum, wood of Aloes, and such like. Also a perfuming
with ^eate by a pipe, which is put into the mouth of the matrice, does profit
marvelously. Also simples, such as provoke menstruis, be good: as decoction of
mootherwort, and laurel bereies, with vinum mulsum. Also make Pessaries of
mirrhe and Cyclamminum commixed with oil.

CAP. LXV. Of the Sciatica. DE ISCHIADE.
(...).
ISCHIAS in Greek, properly is called a most grievous pain, which is wont to
chance about the joint, which the Greeks do call ischion, the Latins, Coxa,
in English the huckle bone. The Latins call this disease Ischias, and they
that are afflicted with this disease, are called Ischiadici. The barbarous sort
call this disease, Sciatica, and they call the^ that be diseased with it
Sciatici. It is caused through a gross and flegmatike humor, Causae.
which being co^gealed, abides in the joint of the huckle bones. Therefore
continual crudities and rawnesse, and unmeasurable using of venerious acts do
not a little help the ingendring of a Sciatica. Also sometime swift
deambulations and walkings, and suppression or stopping of the hemmorhides, and
custom of vomiting being omitted, and purgation of menstruis, or also other
familiar, and accustomed emptyings being impedited and stopped, and neglecting
of exercises. For each of these do engender abundance of flegmatike humors.
Signa.
There goes before this evil sometime pain of the muscles that be nigh unto
it, and specially of the loins, sometime the beginning is in the buckle bone it
self. Also sometime it chances (that the pain of the huckle bone being taken
away) there remains grief only about the hammes: and to some about the
ankles, but in some all the leg is equally vexed with pain. Also in many,
there is pain about the privy members, and then also the bladder being vexed,
does engender difficulty in pissing: and then chiefly the whole leg, Curatio.
from the haunches to the heels suffers pain. Let the cure be begun with
voiding and purging of the humor that does afflict the patient. And if the
body do equally abound with all humors, before all other remedies, cut a
vein in the ha^me, or the outward ankle, or also in the arm, on that side
that is diseased. For sometime the Sciatica is cured in one day, by this
emptying out of the legs. But if the body be stuffed with a fleugmatike and
gross humor, you must begin the cure with purging of that humor. For the
which purpose, you must minister Clysters often, made after this sort, or in
like manner.. of Centorie, Clys^er.
sage, Verbasculi odorati, rewe, chamaepityos. ana. M.j. roots of gladon..j.
stechados..iij. seeds of annise and fenuell. ana..ij.ss. agaricke of the
best..ij. root of polipodie..v. sees these in sufficient quantity of water,
until the third part. Then take of the licour of that decoction..xiij. of
hierapicra..ss. of electuarium nidum maius..ij. of oil of lillies..ij. oil of
rewe..j. the yolks of two eggs, salt..j.ss. commixe them all and make a
Clyster. Also vomitings does help them, that have the Sciatica, much more then
the purging downwarde by the belly, Vomitus.
for that does repel and put back the humor downward suddenly. Therefore you
must provoke vomites in the beginning by and by after meat. But afterward you
must minister vomiting medicines, beginning first with them that be easy. They
that have humors vehemently compact and thickened together, which can
difficultly be dissolved and loosened, caused thorough Physicians using sharp
medicines out of time, Cucurbita magna.
such be helped by fastenning on of a very great cupping glass with
scarifications. But in the Sciatica, we do not use such medicines as can
repress and stop the flux. For seeing the disease is placed in the bottom
of the huckle bone, blood is expelled from the veins and muscles that be nigh
adjoining to it, and is sent thither. Therefore in the beginning of this
disease, there is need of medicines that can mittigate and assuage which
neithr do cool much, nor that do heat vehemently. For as those things which
do cool, do thrust the humors violently to the ankle bone: so those things
that do vehemently heat, do draw more matter out of the members adjoining.
Moreover you may not come to the using of sharp medicines, till after blood
letting or emptying by purgacions. When sharp medicine may be used.
For if any man apply sharp medicines to the diseased member, before the
body be emptied or purged, he shall make the disease hard to cure, because of
a multitude of humors so thickened there, that they cannot be dissolved. For
besides other things it is made gross and viscous, and through the heat and
dryness of the sharp medicines, it suffers as it were rosting, or burning.
First therefore you must irrigate and sprinkle the aggrieued place with oil of
rue. After you must apply more effectuous medicines, which do heat and can
draw humors from the bottom to the top, as be oleum nulpinum, oil of pepper,
oleum costinum, oil of juniper, vnguentum aragon, martiatum, and agrippa. Also
sage, rue, Simples.
laurel leaves, elder, root of wallworte, peniroiall, sauine, opoponax,
bdellium, ammomacum and such like. Of the which you may make fomentes,
ointmentes, emplaisters and cerotes. But if the grief be extreemely painful,
then use this, which follows, for it is most excellent against this evil..
rosen of the pine tree lib. j.ss. Galbanum..v. melt them with a soft fire, and
then streine it through a cloth, Emplaistrum.
and put unto it of the powder of masticke..j. and then spread it warm upon
dogs leather, or lambs leather, and stricke it a good thicknes, and before
you apply this plaster to the pained place anoint the place with this
ointment following.. fresh hogs grease..j ss. and take sowes or monks
peason in number, twenty, and beat them both well in a mortar, till they be
well incorporate, Vnguentum.
and therewith anoint the place and the plaster, and warm the plaster
against the fire, till it be soft, and lay it to the agreeued place, and let
it lie nine days. If there be hears upon the place, you must shave them of
first, and roole it well, least it slippeth away, then every day, morning and
evening at each time, let the patient take..j. of this electuarie.. of the
roots of Acarus, or gladian, being made clean. lib. j. stamp them very
small, Electuarium.
(as possible you may do) then take of clarified honey. lib. iij. and put in
the roots by little and little, ever stirring it: and when it is well sodden,
put into it of cynnamome..j. made in very fine powder, which being well
incorporate, keep it to your use, and at the end of the nine days, if the
pain be not clean gone, lay to, the forenamed plaster, other nine days,
using the same electuarie, and procure vomit, as before, every sixte or
seventh day, for that does greatly reuert the humor. But in the beginning of
the grief, apply to the aggrieued place again and again, sponges wet in the
decoction of juniper, or sage, or elder leaves. Afterward, use this ointment..
of vnguentum martiaton..iij. oil of yreos, Aliud vngue^tu^.
and lillies. ana..ss. juice of rewe, and chamaepityos. ana..ij. honey..j.ss.
sage, peniroiall, pepper. ana..ss. pellitorie, stauesa^re. ana..j. wax as much
as is sufficient, make and an ointment. Also the using of this cerote
profits.. oleum costinu^, Cera^^^.
and vulpinum. ana..ij.ss. oil of pepper..ss. opoponax, bdellium, storax.
ana..iij. root of brionie, salt peter, leaves of elder. ana..ij. aristolochia
rotunda, rewe, ana..j.ss. Euphorbium..j. dissolve the gummes in very sharp
vinegre, and with turpentine and wax, as much as is sufficient make a cerote.
And if the evil do remain still, you must use clisters, again: and then
fasten a very great cupping glass with much flame to the huckle bone, making
good deep gashes with scarification. And if that the disease be not ended so,
you must use again purging vomites, and the other remeadies aforesaid, which
being done, you must ^ome to the using of Dropaces, and Synapismes, and so to
the use of burning medicines: amongst which, the root of the herb called
iberis, is not the worste, being new, dug up in summer, and diligently
braied, and mixed with a little old swines grease, being laid and bound to
the joint of the huckle bone, or to the whole shanke or leg. Also the leaves
of it will do the same thing. And being so applied, let it lie not past two
hours to women, but let it lie four hours to men, if it be possible for them
to suffer it: for it raises swelling with burning and rednes, as a Synapisme
is wont to do. Afterward bring the sick into a bath, in the which, when he
has swet a little, bid him sit down in the vessel, because of the biting
heat, and compel him to suffer it strongly. For in the beginning, it is wont
to bring biting and gnawing with burning heat, then bring him out: from which
always almost (as Aetius witnesses) although they be carried in of other, they
will go out alone upon their feet. After the bathing, commixe much oil with
a very little wine, and shake them together, and anoint it: then wipe of the
humor with a sharp cloth, and cover the leg it self with very soft
wool. And truly (this being done) it has been wont to need no other
remeadie for the cure. But if sometime it chance any part, or remembrance of
the evil to be left still, within a few days after, you may use again the
same remeadie. And certain days after, you may lay on the cerote, which is a
little before discribed. Moreover, among burning and blistring medicines, this
is good.. Mel anacardinum, leaven. ana..j. cantharides, (the wings cast
away).ij. vinegre, as much as is sufficient: Cansti^^^.
and commix them together. Aliud.
Or this is good.. Euphorbium, salt peter. ana..ij. soap, quick lime. ana..j.
mel anacardinum, as much as is sufficient, so that all being mixed together,
may be of the thicknes of honey. Vict^^ ratio.
Let his diet be such, that his meat may be meanly thin, and easy of
digestion. Let his exercise be walkinges, continual writhinges, leapinges, or
dauncinges and running. It is good always to have the body soluble. And if the
disease has endured long, and cannot be driven away with the aforesaid
medicines, you must use burning in three or four places, after that sort, as
Paulus teaches in lib. 6. cap. 76. and Aetius. lib. 12. cap. 30.

CAP. LXVI. Of the gout in the feet and joints. DE PODAGRA ET ARTHRITIDE.
PODAGRA and arthritis in Latin, be diseases of one kind. And therefore they
differ not, but in places diseased. For in both of them there is weakness of
the joints, and an unnatural humor flows to them. And if that the flux of
the humor do flow to the feate, that is called Podagra in Latin. But if the
humor flow to other joints, Podagra. Arthritis.
it is called in Greek Arthritis, in Latin, articularis morbus, the joint
sickness. Sometime, this evil does rushe in suddenly, being equally dispersed
throughout all the joints. But for the most part, the flux is wont to fall
in privily, and by little and little. For in some, pain does invade the
ioynte of the great toe, but in some the end of the heel is afflicted. Again
in some other, the hollownes of the foot is grieved, either through chafeing
of the shoe, or some such like thing. The gout takes his beginning at the
feet, whereupon it takes the name, and it proceeds upward by little and
little to the knees, and also to the joints of the huckle bones, and the
thighs. Afterward to the hands, every joint particularly being grieved. They
that are taken extremely with this disease, they have pain in the backbone
joints, and in the joints of the ribs, and eye liddes, and to some pain in
the throat also: neither is there any connection or knitting of boanes, Causae.
which is free from this evil. This disease is engendered of continual
crudities and drunckennes, and of immoderate using of lechery, through
vehement and swift deambulations and walkinges, through long standing or often
ryding, by suppression and stopping of accustomed excretions and fluxes, and
through intermission of familiar exercises. Sorrows, cares, watchinges, and
other perturbations of the mind do not only engender this evil, but also do
breed hurtefull and corrupt humors. Also many times the cholicke being
naughtely cured, is wont to be a cause, why the joint sickness should follow.
But, for the most part, a disposition to this kind of disease proceeds from
the parents to the children, and their posterity. Also universally
abundance, of all raw humors is the cause of this disease. The humors that
do abound, and do fasten them selves in the joints, either be sanguine, or
choleric, or flegmaticke, or melancholious. Signa.
Also sometime this evil is engendered of commixion of humors. The outward
causes may easily be known by the telling of the sick, or them that be about
him. The difference of humors you shall know by the signs following. The
humor of blood, if it be much in quantity, Signs if blood do flow.
it causes fulness, and great swelling, not only of the veins, but about the
skin of the whole member that is grieved, and makes it red in color. They
which are afflicted with this evil, cannot suffer remeadies to be applied that
be very cold, or very hot, and they are continually vexed with pain,
because the flowing of the blood does chance continually and equally. Their
vrines are yelowe and mean of substance. Also their veins do abound with
blood, and are puffed up and swollen. The convenient age for this evil, is
youth. Also meats that engender good juice, and nourish abundantly were eaten
before, and exercises were neglected. The time of the year in the which the
patient is most afflicted is spring time. Signs of choleric flux.
If the humor, that flows into the joints, be choleric, you may know it
by the yealowish color of the skin. Sometime rednes is mixed with the yealow
color, that is when choler is commixed with blood. Also there is sensible
heat and sharp pain like launcing. Also moystnes suddenly bursteth out of
the skin, without evident swelling. The patient is eased with cooling
medicines, and rejoices, but with hot things his pains augment. In the
state and strength of the fit, a fever takes him, and a very great thirst.
His urine is cytrine, and sometime also it is sharp. There is wont to go
before this disease, great cares, and wrath watchinges, and wermes, and a diet,
that was apt to engender choler. The age, complextion, and time of the year,
that is hot and dry, be apt to cause this choleric flux. And if the
humor, that flows into the joints be phlegmatic, Signs of flegmaticke
flux.
the swelling will give place to the thrusting of the finger, and it is loose
and moderate. The coler of the member afflicted, is white. Old age is most
afflicted with this humor, and a complexion cold and moist, and it chances
in the winter time. His urine is thin and waterie. There went before it
idleness, reast, and a diet that engenders flegmaticke humors. If it be salt
fleame, great ich, and gnawing, or biting does trouble the diseased members. If
the flux to the joints be of melancholy, which chances but seldom, Signs
of melancholy sto^ing.
the color of the swelling is blackish. The age, which does most engender this
flux, is the declination of middle age. Also the complexion is cold and dry,
and the time of the year, harvest, a country that is cold and dry, and like
state of the air, and a diet that engenders melancholy. When the humor that
flows into the joints, is blood, by and by you must let blood, not once
only, but often taking it away by little and little: for if you do omit
bloudletting, Cure of bl^ud fl^^ing.
and do use repercussiue medicines, you shall be an author of great evil. For
the blood being, driven back from the unnoble members, it rusheth up to the
principal members, and that be necessary to life. Therefore in fluxes of
blood, letting of blood is very necessary, specially in them that abound with
blood. You must cut a vein in the arm beneath, right against the leg that
is vexed with the flux. And if the right hand be vexed with pain of this
disease, cut a vein in the right leg, about the hamme, or the ankle, or the
sole of the feet: for a vein being cut right against the member that is
afflicted, is of great efficacy and strength. Then specially must bloudletting
be used, when this evil begins first to invade any man. For they that be
vexed often with this flux of blood, do feel more hurt, then help of
bloudletting, specially if their body be weak and cold. (...).
After blood letting, you must apply remeadies to the agrieued member, which
do neither cool greatly, least they should drive together, and thicken the
humors, nor heat vehemently, least they should draw mo humors unto the
diseased membre. Therefore you must sprinckle the grieved place with old
vinegre, and oil of roses mixed together, specially if the cause of the pain
do seem to be deep within. For vinegre of his own proper thinnes, going
into the deapth, makes a ready way for the oil of roses, which naturally can
ease pains. But if the pain be aloft, nigh the skin, you shall help it
geatly with oil and wine, applying it in summer warm, in winter hot.
Afterward also you must use cataplasmes, which can ease, and cease pain,
without any provoking of fluxes, Cataplasma^a.
made of the meal of fenugreeke, bareley, beans, lupynes, chammomill and such
like: and you must see that those things be ever hot, which may well be, if
they be continually changed, and covered over alofte with woll. Also this
medicine profits not a little.. goats milcke..v. the yolks of two eggs,
oil of roses..j. saffron..ss. crummes of bread as much as is sufficient, that
it may have the form of a cataplasme stamp these, till they be well commixed
together, and then apply thereof to the member that is grieved. Also you may
make an emplaister or cerote of oil of roses, vinegre, rozen, wax, galbanum,
gum ammoniacke, franckensence, saffron and such like. You must give him
meats, Victus ratio.
which do extenuate, and that do nourish but little, as be potherbes. Let him
abstain altogether from flesh, except it be birds of mountains. Let him use
fishes that breed in stony waters. Wine if the intemperaunce of the sick may
suffer it, must altogether be taken away: for it is almost the only reason,
whereby health should follow: which, seeing among a thousand, scarce one does
observe, it is not marvel, Why few be cured of the go^^e at these days.
though there be very few which be delivered from this disease at these days.
In steed of wine let him use water, wherein cinnamome, annyse seeds, or such
like has been sodden: or that drink, which is called folishly now adays
ypocras: the making whereof you may find before in the chapter of the Palsy.
Let the sick diligently avoid fruicte and carnal lust. Also he ought to have
a soluble belly always, that can avoid out the ordure readily alone: which,
if it do not well, Cure of a choleric flux.
wash it with some easy clyster. If through flowing of choler, the disease in
the ioints be caused, then your labor must be to void and purge out the
humor that does vex the patient, which you must do, as well by vomiting, as
by the belly down warn. Therefore you must surely purge them that be thus
afflicted, by medicines that draw out choler. After that, until the full state
of it, you must apply medicines that have virtue to cool and restrain, as be
those that are made of singreene, green roses, sharp sorrel, nightshade,
plantaine, and such like, often before rehearsed. In this kind of flux, many
times, because of the vehemency of the pain, you must use such medicine, as
can cause astonishment. S^^pefaecio^^^.
For the which purpose, it is good to apply the medicine which we described
before, of gotes milcke, crummes of bread, saffron, and yolks of eggs, with
the which, you must commixe poppie seeds..iij. or opium..ss. or more, or less
according to the pain. Also, for the same purpose, leaves of hemblocke and
henbane do profit, being applied and laid on. Not^.
But, you must note, and take head, that, when you be compelled to use
stupefactiue things in fervent, and vehement pains, that afterward you do
recreate and nourish those members by such things, as do heat. For unless
you do so, you shall make those members weak, and intemperant, and so they
shall be subject to a perpetual flux, and shall sone catch hurt in their
actions. Heating medicines be origan, sauorie, mustardseede pepper and such
like. Also you must help to provoke sweating with heating and rubbing of the
body: but so, that you touch not the aggreued member. Moreover, you must
minister in drink those things, that do provoke urine: for such do void
out choler by the urine. Also such things ministered, as do cause sleep, are
wont to do good, because the flux is stopped and dried up by them, specially,
if they be ministered after a purgation. You must give them meats, that do
cool, but not that do moisten: for moystnes increases the flux. Diet.
Let them not suffer hunger, for that makes choler sharper. Of fruits, let
them use restrictiue apples and meddlars, and other, that do cool, and stop,
or let the flux. Let them abstain altogether from wine, as is aforesaid.
They which are diseased through flowing of fleame, you must begin the cure of
them with purging of fleume. Cure of a flegmaticke flux.
The flegmaticke humor is avoided by vomiting, but nevertheless also downward
by the belly. But the best purging in this evil, is downward by the belly,
whither the disease stricke about the hands or the feet: and so much the
more, if the flux be in all the joints of the body. For the way, that is
most familiar, and least perilous for fleame, is to go out by the guts. For
if it were drawn by violence upward to the stomach, and not purged out, it
causes peril. Therefore it is more safe, and healthful to purge it
downward. But before you minister purging medicines, you must minister those
things, that have virtue to cut, extenuate and divide, that by this means the
gross humors may be preparate, and made apt to purge. If emptying may not be
done by purging, then they must use hungre and famine, Flegmaticke folk can
suffer hunger easily.
many days, for they, that be flegmaticke of nature can suffer hunger easily
and without hurt. Hereupon Hypocrates says, 7. Apho. 6. It is good for the
bodies, that have most flesh to use hungre: for the hunger dries the bodies.
Also they must use discussiue and dissoluing frictions, and strong clisters and
medicines that provoke urine: but you must apply outwardly such medicines, as
can ease, and cease pain, and which can dissolve and dry moderately, of which
we spoke a little before. But in the beginning of the disease, you must mix
with them some things, that have virtue to restrain and bind. After the
beginning, you must use only dissoluing and discussiue things. The gentlest
is this: of leaves althaea, sodden and beateh alone, or with flower, or bareley
meal applied to it. Also, the root of it sodden in aqua mulsa, and stamped
and applied, is good. And this ointment is good.. of the oils of laurel,
Vnguentum.
and yreos. ana..j. old swines grease, butter ana..iij. the warrow of a
heart..ij. fine turpentine..v. galbanum, dissolved in vinegre..j. Isope, root
of althaea, fenugreeke seed. ana..ij. wax as much as it sufficient, and make
an ointment. Victus ratio.
Moreover let the meats that you give to nourish him, be dry of nature, and
small of norishing, as is juice of rice, roots, and such like: but yet flesh
of the birds of the mountains roasted is not hurtful to them. Capers with
acetum mulsum. does marvelously profit. Give unto him wine, in very little
quantity, at certain times, and let it be thin yealow and old. They that
are diseased through flowing of melancholy, Cure of a melancholy flux
they must be emptied either with bloudletting, or by purgation. Use
boudletting, when the blood is infected with melancholy. And use purgations,
when the patient declineth to melancholy: but if both these abound together,
it is not sufficient for you to use one of the aforesaid things. But first,
cut a vein, and then use a purging medicine: which thing you must also do in
other evils that have need of dowble purging. In the beginning of the
disease, and in the very time of emptying and purging, you must use such
things as can repress, stop, and also heat sensibly. After purging, use
those things that can gently heat, attenuate and dissolve or discuss, as is
before taught. But because knobbes, Cure of knob^*
and hard swellings do engender afterward in the joints, as well, because of
the grossenes, and earthie hardness of the humor that has flowed thither, as
also through the using of immoderate discussiue, and drying medicines, without
mixing of such with them, as have a mollyfiyng virtue. Therefore to take those
knobbes away, you must use those medicines, which be declared of us before in
the chapter of hardness of the spleen. But specially very old and sharp
cheese, brayed in the decoction of very fat, and old swynes flesh, is good
to be applied. Also, for this evil, figs braied, and laid on, are good. Also
Althaea, twyse sodden, oats, nettles, briony root, round roots, dill,
sothernwoode, maieweede, horehounde leaves, mixed with pitch, sulphur and wine.
Also you must commixe fat, and greaces of swine, goats, calfes, and geese.
Also all marowes and other things, that have virtue to mollify and soften.
And also bathinges, Bathe^*
after the inflammation is ceased, is most commodious, and profitable to all
that have the gout. While they wash them, put sponges wet in vinegre, and salt
mixed together, round about the diseased places, that they may remain safe
from humors flowing to it. They must wash them selfs, not once only, but
often, in an air that is altogether mean and moderate. But they may not
tarry long in hot water. It is beast therefore, that they be sprinkled, and
wet with hot water, poured on them. Also it is profitable, that all the body
be rubbed with dry linen clothes. Moreover, they that be cured of the gout,
shall defend themselves afterward from it, by this means. First, twice in a
year, that is, A defense for the g^ute.
at spring time and autumn, if nothing do let it, let him blood largely.
Also about those times, and oftener, let him use purging medicines. Also it is
necessary for him to eat little meat, and to abstain from fulness. Also you
must use meats that be easy of digestion, and which readily be distributed
into the members of the body and be without excrementes. Let him abstain
altogether from wine, or let him use it very scarely. Let him use exercise
very often, and that before meat: for labor (as Hippocrates says) must go
before meat. And to conclude, they, that desire to be free from the gout, let
him remember this short, and most wholesome precept of Hypocrates: the way to
help and preserve health, is not to be filled with meats, and to be
vnslouthfull in laboring. Also let his sleeps, and venerous acts be in a
mean. As for remeadies in this case, let salt be brayed small in oil, and the
joints rubbed therewith, for it helps greatly all those, that will be free
from this evil, except they be of a wonderful dry temperature. And he must
use annoynting with that, morning, and evening all the days of his life

Libri tertij finis.
The fourth book teaching the cure of feauers.
CAP. I. An exposition of feauers. FEBRIVM EXPLICATIO.
Febris q^^^d.
FEBRIS in Latin a fever in english, it is an unnatural heat, which taking
his beginning at the heart, is spread by the arteries, and veins into the
whole body, and does hurt, and let the operation of it. For although a man be
whotter now, then ne was before: it follows not, that he has a fever,
unless, (the heat being immoderately increased, do offend the man, and hurt
his operations, and actions. Moreover, as there be three things, (Hyppocrates
witnessing) which do ordeine and constitute our body (that is to say)
things contained, things co^teining, and things, that flow about violenlie,
(that is) the hard and sound members in the body, Three principal kinds of
simple feauers.
the humor, and the spirit or air: so also, there be three kinds of simple
feauers. For if immoderate heat be kindled in the spirits, and air of man's
body, it is called in the Greek, Ephimera, and in Latin Diaria febris, and in
English it may be called one day fever. (...). Diaria.
This fever is like to hot air or wind, included in a bladder or bottle:
for, like as the air heateth the bottle, that it is in, even so, the spirits
of a man's body, being heat more then they should be, do heat all the whole
body. There chances in this kind of fever, but one fit, and for the most
part it endures but one day of his own proper nature; whereupon, it is
called Dairia febris, (that is) the one day fever. Note.
For they cease after the first fit, If they be rightly handled. But you must
note, that there be feauers called Diariae, which last until the third day,
as those be, which are engendered of thickening and stopping of the conduites
and passages. For although that this word, Diaria, be not of the very
substance of such feauers, yet because they lack a convenient name, to the
intent, that our teaching should be brief and evident, notwithstanding that
the word repugne against it, seeing that they be of the same nature, that true
diaries be of, they may most rightly be called Diariae, (as Galene shows
abou^danlie in lib. 9. therapentices cap. 1.) Hereupon it is evident, Diariae
simple^.

Diariae pluriu^ dierum.


that there be two kinds of diaries: Or, which is named Diari simply and
without adiection or putting to of any word, which fever does not extend above
the space of a natural day (that is) 24. hours. An other kind there is,
which is called Diaria plurium dierum, (that is) a diarie of many days. It is
called by an other name of Galen (that is) Synochus non putrida. The second
kind of simple feauers is, when as immoderate heat is kindled in the homours,
and it is called putrida (that is) rotted, Putrida.
only because the humors, in this kind of feauers do putrify and rotte. It
is like unto hot water: for as that does heat a cold vessel, that it is
poured into: So also humors, heat above nature, do heat the body. The
humors do putrify and rot either within the vessels or without. If they rot
within the vessels, then either all the humors do putrify together, or else
one alone. If all the humors do putrify equally and a little within all the
vessels or veins, or specially within the greatest: it causes a fever
called Synoca putrida, which, to the intent you may perceine what it maeneth:
(...).
you must note first that the Physicians of Greece do call that fever
Synochos, in the which one fit remaining still continually from the beginning
to the ending, extends and continues many days. Or, it is a fever which is
with out any great mutation until the end of it. This fever may be called of
the Latins continent febris, and is in English a constant or continual
fever. But although there be one form and likelihood of such feauers,
whereupon they name them Synocus, yet, there nature is not: all one. Two kinds
of Synochus.
For some of them have manifest signs and tokens of rottenness: and some
again have none at all, which (as we said a little before) be of the kinds
of Diaria. Synochus putrida non putrida.
We to the intent that our doctrine maybe the more evident, do call the first
Synochus putrida, and the last we call, Synochus non putrida. And in this place
you may not follow the barbarous sort, which call the last of them Synocha,
and the first Synochus: seeing the Greeks (as Galene witnesses, contains
them both under the name of Synochus. Of those feauers, which are named
Synochi, there be three sundry sorts or differences: Three sorts of Synochus.
for some of them do endure of an homotonos, and acmastic(...), (that is)
remaining still in the same force and vigoure. Some anabaticos, and
epacmaticos, (that is) increasing and augmenting more and more. Some do
decrease and paracmasticos, (that is) decreasing. Moreover, if one only humor
do putrify and rotte within the vessels: it kindles a fever, which the
Greeks do call Synechis, and the Latins, continua febris, (...). What a
continual fever is.
in English a continual fever, which is, when the fever does not leave the
patient, but it has a certain remission and slaking in every fit. Whereby
it is evident that the fever Synochus and Synechis (that is) a constaunt
fever and a continual fever do differ much a sunder. For in a fever
Synochus, there is no remission or slaking of the heat, Difference between
(...).

Three kinds of continual feauers.

Tertiana continua.

Quotidiana continua.

Quartana co^tinua.

Likeness between continual and intermitting feauers.


but in the fever Synechis, there is sensible remission and slaking in every
fit. Also the fever Synochus, has not one only fit: but in Synechis
there be many fittes. And they two agree in this, that neither of them does
leave the patient sometime. Of feauers, that are called Synechis, or else
continue febres, there be three kinds: for if choler do putrify and rotte
within the the vessels, it causes a continual tertian, or a burning fever,
which is called of the Greeks, causos. If fleame do putrify or rotte with
the vessels, there engenders a continual quotidian. But if melancholy do
putrify and rotte within the vessels, there engenders a continual
quartaine. And these continual feauers be somewhat like to the intermitting
feauers, of the which we will speak straight way. For a continual tertian,
agrees with a true intermitting tertian, in that, that it has a fit, as well
as it, every third day. And a continual quotidian agreeeth, with an
intermitting quotidian, because each of them has a fit every day. Also a
continual quartaine agrees with an intermitting quartaine, because both of
them causes a fit every fourth day. But yet these feauers do differ two
ways, notwithstanding that they agree in the humor, that causes them. First
they differ because in continual feauers, the putryfied humor is contained
within the veins, but in intermitting feauers, that humor is dispersed into
all the members of the body, whereupon it chances through vyolence of
spreading of humors, the feauers are purged out by them selves. Hereby also
they differ another way, Difference between continual and intermitting
feauers.
(that is) the intermitting feauers slake between the fittes, but the
continual feauers do not cease at all between the fittes. Heatherto we have
rehearsed what kinds of feauers humors putryfied within the vessels do
cause and engender. Now we will expound, what feauers humors putryfied
without the vessels do conceive, engender, and kindle. If therefore an
humor do putrify and rotte without the vessels, it causes an intermitting
fever, which is so called, Intermittens febris.
because the fit does not endure continually, but it has a slaking or
ceasing, and leaves of between the fittes. It may most aptly be called in
Lataine febris interpolata, (...).
beause the fittes come and renew at their times: some call it deficiens
febris. Of this fever there be three kinds, (that is) a Tertian, Tertiana
(...). Quotidiana exquisita.
a Quotidian, and a quartaine. A pure and exquisite Tertian is caused when
choler does putrify and rotte without the vessels. It is so called because it
cease one day, and comes again the third day. An equisite Quotidian,
which in Greek is called Amphymerimon, it is caused of sweet fleume being
putrified and rotten without the vessels, and it is so called because it
returns every day. We did not rashly say sweet steame: for if glasen
fleame do putrify and rotte a little, Epialos.
it causes a fever called Epialos. And this Epialos is a fever, in which the
patient is both feuerous, and fervently cold, and does feel both heat and
cold immoderate in all parts of his body, both at one, time together.
Lypiria.
To the aforesaid fever does belong a fever, in Greek called Lypiria. In
this fever there is heat fealt within, and in the bowelles and entrails: but
in all the outward parts, Quart^n^ intermittens.
there is cold fealt. An intermitting Quartaine is engendered of Melancnolie
putrified and rotted without the vessels. It is so named because it cease
two days, Hectica febris
Hectica febris, and in English the fever ethicke. This fever is like to a
hot vessel, for as the vessel does heat the water that is poured into it:
so also the fever Ethicke, which sticks in the sound and fleshie parts of
the body, and is infixed in them, is able to heat all the humors of the
body. And if this fever does so increase, that it does melt and consume the
whole body, and all the hard, Marasmus.
and sound parts of it: then it is called Hectica marasmodes, and marasmus.
And this (as Galene witnesses) is incurable. For although you might quench the
heat, yet the dryness which is left, being proper to old age, will kill the
pateint. Besides the feauers now of us rehearsed, there is an other fever
which is caused of breathing in of pestilent air. But seeing this fever (as
Galene witnesses libro primo de differentijs febrium, Pestilen^ fever.
capite quinto,) is engendered of rottenness, for the air about us, being
corrupted with a putrefying, and rotting euaporation, causes also the humors
of the body to rotte. Therefore it may be contained under the second
principal kind of fever called putrida. Moreover in this place, we may not
let pass to tell, that some feauers be engendered without disease or grief in
any member of the body, and some feauers be kindled through the inflammation
of some member. Therefore, Feauers engendered by inflammation of some member.
as the former feauers have their names: so also each of these that follow
have their proper names. For that fever, which is engendered through
inflammation of the filme or caull, that girdeth in the ribs, it is called
pleuretica febris. That which engenders through inflammation of the lounges is
called, peripneumonica febris. That which chances through inflammation of the
stomach, the liver, or the longes, is called in Greek typhodes (that is)
inflaming or burning. Likewise all other feauers, which engender through
inflammation of any member, have diverse names, according to the diversity of
the member. Therefore in every sick person you must diligently discern
feauers, which come without disease of other members, from those feauers which
engender through inflammation of some member. Of the aforesaid feauers, some
be Typicae, (that is) certain and ordinate: and some be, erraticae, (that is)
uncertain and inordinate. Typicae be such feauers, whose fittes and slakinges
from them do come justly at their appointed time. Erraticae are such feauers
as be contrary to these, for they keep no certain and just time, nor any
order of fittes, nor the intermission between them, as be those feauers, which
engender of melancholy, which is moved in cetaine members, and in some it
remains immovable, in other members it putrifieth, or begins to boil.
Hitherto we have rehearsed the kinds of simple feauers: it remains
therefore, that we declare briefly the kinds of compoundes and mixed feauers.
Therefore compound feauers are caused two ways: The kinds of compound feauers.
first, because these feauers aforesaid (that is) a Tertian, Quotidian, and
Quartain, may be mixed together without the disease of any member.
Secondarily, because these feauers, which be engendered through inflammation of
some member, may commixe together. The feauers that come without the
inflammation of any member, are sometime complicate and joined together, and
sometime they are altogether confounded. Complicatio^ (as Galen witnesses) is
when the feauers invade the patient at diverse hours. And confusion is, when
they begine at one time. There be four complications or joining together of
the fever Tertian and Quotidian (as Galene witnesses.) One, Complications of
Quotidians and Tertians.
when a Tertian and Quotidian are mixed together being both intermittig
feauers. Another is, when an intermitting Tertian is joined with a continual
Quotidian. This is called by a peculiar name of the greeks Hemitritaeus,
Hemitritaeus.
because all his nature has the half part of each of the said feauers. The
third is when an intermitting Quotidian is mixed with a continual Tertian.
The fourth is when a continual Quotidian is joined with a continual tertian.
To be short, feauers of one kind are complicate and joined with feauers of
the same kind, as continual with continual, and intermitting with
intermiting feauers, and tertians with other tertians, and one quartaine with
an other quartaine. Also it chances many times, that feauers of diverse kinds
are coupled together as quotidians with tertians and each of them with
quartaines, and sometime intermitting feauers are mixed with continual
feauers. Moreover after the same sort, feauers which are engendered with
inflammation of some members, are sometime mixed together, as if diverse
members do each of them kindle a fever, proper to them selves, or the
affection, where they engender be mixed. Seeing therefore, that feauers are
compounded and wixed many sundry ways: first the kinds of simple feauers
must be with great diligence perfectly learned of them, that study Physic:
for unless they know them very perfectly, it can not be that ever they should
know well compound feauers. Therefore seeing the knowledge of them is very
hard, in so much that often times cunning Physicians are deceived in judging
of them: you must seek the signs and tokens, whereby you may know them,
diligently out of Galene, who has taught this thing more exactly then any man.
We, to help the memory of the studious have comprehended all the kinds of
simple feauers in this table following.

TABVLA FEBRIVM.
Of simple fevers, there be three principal kinds. For unnatural heat is
kindled and engendered either in the etc. Spirits or breathe, and does cause
Ephemera, or diaria, whereof be two kinds, that is to say. Ephemera
simpliciter, or Diaria, one day fever. And Diaria, plurium dierum other wise
called Synochus non putrida, enduring three or four days.
Or in the humors, and causes putrida febris, a rotten fever, they do rot in
two places, either. Within the vessels and that two ways for either. All the
humors do putrify and rote equally, and cause a fever called Synochus
putrida. Or one only humor putrifieth, and so causes a continual fever and
if there be putrefaction of. Choler it causes a continual tertian or a
burning fever. If fleame do putrify it causes a continual quotidian. If
melancholy do putrify it causes a continual quartaine.

Or they putrify without the vessels, and cause an intermitting fever. For if
there be putrefaction of etc. Choler it causes an intermitting tertian. If
fleame that is sweet do rotte, it causes an intermitting quotidian.
Exquisite and pure.
Glasen, it causes Epialos.
If melancholy do rotte, it causes an intermitting fever quartaine.

Or in the fleshie parts, and causes either. Hectica febris. Or Marasmus.


CAP. I. Of one day fever. DE DIARIA.
DIARIA Febris in Lataine: Ephemera, in Greek: in English one day fever. It
is that which has one only fit, (...). q^^id.
finishing for the most in one day, at the most, of his own nature. For it
ends after the first fit, and does not exceed, nor pass a natural day, if
it be rightly used. And that, because of the matter, wherein it is, (that is)
the spirit or breath which is easily dissolved and dispersed. Therefore Galen
does most worthily call this, the most simple fever, because it is the
shortest, and the most gentle fever, being nothing malignant. Therefore if any
thing in this fever be committed either by ignorance of the Physicians, or
through intemperance of the sick, or by errors of the ministers and
assistants, whereby it turns into another kind of fever, Causae.
that does not chance through the nature of this fever. Diaria febris is
caused, when as the spirit or breath is inflamed and heat above nature without
any putrefaction or rottennes. And that chances many ways: sometime through
constipation binding or thickning of the skin, which stops and keeps in,
the vapors or spirits which were wo^t to flow out by the poores, which
because they be hot and sharp, therefore they engender a fever. Sometime it
is caused through wearines, and vehement defatigation. Also through watchinges,
crudities, and lack of digestion, sadness, fear, ire, vehement care of the
mind, burning of the Sun, cold, hungre, dronekennes, and swelling of the
carnelles in the throat, Signa.
and such like, which can heat the spirits and inflame them. The Signs
whereby diaries are known, are of two sorts: for some signs be common to all
diaries, and some be proper and peculiar to each cause. Common signs six.
The common signs be six in number, whereof the first is the pulse. For all
the diaries, as much as in them is do change the pulse in greatness A
natural urine.
is subrufe in color, mean in substance, having in it a residence, white,
light, and equal. The third token is the equality of heat which in all
diarie Diaria does differ from other, Particular signs of diaries.
be these that follow. They which have Diaria fever, caused through watching,
there chances to them a naughty color, and swelling of the face, heavy
motion of the eyes: Signs of watchinges.
for they scant lift up the eye liddes, there is moistnes of the hears of the
eye liddes, and small pulses. For watching (as Hippocrates says) seeing it
lets digestion, it engenders abundance of crude and raw humors and
vapors, it diminishes the natural heat, and vnlooseneth the body,
whereupon there follows the tokens aforesaid. To be short, watchinges do
revoke and pull back nature from digesting: therefore they cause great cruditie
and rawnes, as well in the brain, as in the rest of the body, whereupon also
does chance the tokens aforesaid. The signs of a diarie, caused of care and
sorrow be these, Signs of care and sorrows.
leannes of the body. If sorrow be the cause, it is clearer, if care, it is
darker. Also hollownesse, and drienes of the eyes does signify both the said
effects: but in thoughts and congitations it is least, because the spirits
and humors are less consumed. And it is most evident in sorrow. Also there
follow these effects, a certain unaccustomed palenes or swartnes, so that the
skin is destitute of her natural color. They which have a diarie through,
wrath or furious anger, they have neither hollownesse of eyes, Signs of anger.
nor evil color of the face, but rather their eyes seem to stick out
further and their face is read, and there is loftines of the pulses. So also
the signs of the rest of the diaries, being engendered through perturbation of
the mind may chiefly be known by the pulses. For in sadness the spirits are
carried inward, Signs of sadness.

Signs of fear


and therefore the pulses be small, feeble and rare. In fear new begone, the
blood and spirits run inward as it were to the spring head, and the mind
is troubled. For nature being vexed drives the spirits hither and thither,
which through moving are inflamed, whereby the pulses are made swifte,
necessity compelling them, and the mind being chafed makes them unequal and
sharp. In old fear (the spirits being dispersed and virtue being feeble), it
causes such pulses, as we spoke of before in sadness. They which have a Diaria
fever, Signs of Sun-burning.
through burning and heat of the Sun, their skin is hot and dry, their
head seems to them to burn, because of the spirits inflamed in it. Their
eyes wax redder, and sometime the veins in their eyes, temples and foreheade,
and in all their whole face are stretched and puffed up. They, that have this
fever through cold, they are taken with heavy distillations, and reumes,
because cold binds, Signs of co^d
and withholdeth and keeps the fumous excrementes within the skin. Moreover
the skin is less hot, and all the body shows to have a greater moisture,
because the wonted flux is restrained and stopped through cold. Moreover
there is no filthiness in the face for the same cause. They which have this
fever caused of wearines, their skin is made drier, Signs of werines.
then it is in other diaries, because exercise dries up the body, and
draws out the moisture of it: also their pulses be unlike: for they, that
have used great exercises, and be wearied above measure, they have small
pulses, because of imbecillitie and weakness of strength, but they that have
used but small labors, their pulses be great, because their strength is no^
deminished yet. Signs of dronkennes and hunger.

Signs of swelings about the throat.


They which be taken with a Diaria fever through dronckennes or hungre, they
need no signs to know the cause, for such causes may be known by telling of
the sick. They which have this fever through kernels, swellings, or
impostumations about the throat or mouth, or otherwhere: they have very great
pulses, and because of the feuerous heat, they be swift and often. Also there
is equallitie of their pulses because the instrument of moving is not let
neither by obstruction, nor through abundance of humors, nor of sharp
vapors, nor by pressing together, unless the inflammation be very great.
Their face is altogeater red and swollen, because of the abundance of heat.
And their urine appears pale, because the choler that should color the urine
is tranferred to the botch or impostumatio^. The cure of all diarie feauers is
brought to pass by diet, whose chief point in all diaries that be simple
consist in this: Victus ra^i^.
that you minister unto them meats that engender good humors, and that be
easy of digestion and apt to be distributed about the body. Give unto them
that are burnte in the Sun, and to them that be angered, a diet which does
cool and moiste. And unto them, that are cold, give a diet that nourishes
less, and that does heat moderately. Against watchinges or sadness, or
consuming with oner much care, use a diet which can both moisten and provoke
sleep, that it may deliver them from the drines that those evils have caused,
and also that it may recreate and refresh their strength. They that have a
fever of wearines, you must allow them to eat as much meat, as they can
digest: for you must always eschew cruditie and rawnes of the stomache. For
the substance of the body being dissolved and dispersed with labor, must be
repaired with much meat, being easy of digestion. You must measure the
quantity of taking of meat by the patientes strength, age, natural
temperament, and custom of the sick. Moreover by the time of the year the
region, and such other like. But those, whose temperature of the body is very
hot and dry, those you must feed with meat by and by at the first beginning
of the fit. For in them the diarie* fever will change very swiftelie into
an acute and rotten fever. Chiefelie above other, theie may be fed with a
thin diet, which have a diarie caused of a botche or impostumation, for in
them, the substance of the body is not dimynished. Wine good for diaries.
Wine that is white and thin is good almost for all diarie feauers, those,
which be properly named so, and do endure but twenty four hours. For
besides that, it helps digestion, it also provoke urine and swette (as
Galene says) But you may grant it more abundantly to the feauerous
through watchinges sorrow or care, because great abundance of spirits is
spent and consumed in them, which wine will easily and quickly restore in them
again. But to those that have headache, wheather they have watched, or be
feauerous by any other occasion, they must refrain from wine, because it
pearceth the head quickly. And they that have this fever engendered of great
anger and fury, unless they be altogether quiet from that perturbation, they
may have no wine given to them, for the spirits, and blood is marvelously
chafed, and boileth sore. Also you must drive from wine those that be
feauerous, through the swelling of botches or kernelles in the throat until it
be loosened: not, that it is so unprofitable for the fever, but that it
hinders the cure of the botch. For it increases the flowing of the humors
into the grieved place, and so causes inflammation, and thereby augmenteth the
fever. You must cure all simple feauers that be diaries (as Galen witnesses)
with bathes. Curatio.
Therefore whosoever has this fever, in the declination of the first fit,
you must bring them into a bath. But yet all may not be bathed alike, nor all
must use the same parts of a bathe. For they that have this fever caused of
botches, or impostumations they may profitablie tarry in the air or fume of
the bathe, because it both rarefieth and makes thin the skin, and also it
provoke and enticeth swette out of the body. Neither does it hurt those
patientes with drines, as it would do those, that have this fever engendered of
werines, watchinges, cares, and other perturbations of the mind. For seeing
their body is dried up altogether by those causes, they must be kept from the
air of the bathe, least it augment their grief. Therefore such may tarry the
longer in a bath of sweet water being made hot, that through the moisture of
it, they may recover the humiditie that is lost, and is decayed in them.
Afterward soft hands must rub them gently, with plenty of warm oils,
wherein there is no manner of restriction or binding. For this friction and
rubbing does moysten, loosen, and soften the hard and fleshie parts, and it
dissolueth and disperseth those things which are contained in the poores and
conduites of the body. They that have this fever caused through burning of
the Sun, you must cure them by and by in the beginning with cooling, and with
many bathinges of sweet water, and only with pouring on a little oil without
friction or rubbing of it, for it raises heat. Things that do cool the
head being applied to it, be oil of roses, and of unripe olives, and other
which be rehearsed in libro primo. These being first made cold, and then
received with wool, and holden up alofte, you must press it with your
hand, and let it drop down upon the foreparte of the head, and that
continually, while the fever does decline: then afterward bring the sick
into a bathe. If any person have this fever through cold he must also be
brought to a bathe in the remission of his fit, and his head must be
nourished both before and after the bathing with oil of yreos and oleum
nardinum, and such like. For they that have a fever through this cause, have
need of medicines that can heat, and remove constipation and bynding. They
that labor of a Diaria fever through hunger, in the inclination of the fit,
you must bring them straight unto a bathe, and pouring upon them much sweet
oil warmed, rub them softly, and you must keep them long in the water of
the warm bathe, that thereby the drienes, which hunger has caused in the
body, may be corrected and amended by the oil and the bath. When they be come
out of the bath you must recreate and refresh the strength with convenient
meats, and then you must bring them again to a bath, and when they come out
again, (the perturbation with their bathing being ceased) you must give them
hot water to drink, and by and by you must minister juice of ptisan, and
sometime they may take luttuse, and they may eat fishes taken out of grauellie
places, and being light meat sodden in a white broth, which, what it was in
old time, Galen shows in lib. 4. de sanitate tuenda. If the fever Diaria do
chance throught cruditie or rawnes of the stomach: you must first consider,
whither the womb be soluble, or else costiue. If it be soluble, and those
things only which be corrupt, do seem to void forth, then you must wash him
and nourish him in the remission of the fever. But not unless first you
diligently behold and foresee all things chauncing to the Stomache. For if
such aboundaunt emptying has been already, or does now continue, so that,
the virtue and strength of the sick is wearied, it is better to give him
meat, and wash him both together. But you must diligently behold first those
things that be about the stomach. You must use about the sick, if the emptying
do endure no longer irrigations and sprinklinges of the stomach with oil and
wormwood and other things which are rehearsed before in the third Book in the
Chapter of weakness of the stomach. Note.
But those things that be applied to the stomach, let them be well heat. For
those things that be applied blood warm, do dissolve and loosen the strength
of the stomach. If the belly be altogether costiue, handle, and feel the
sides, and then the whole belly, and consider, whether the meat is descended
into the small guts, or into the colon. And if the meat abide yet still in the
stomach, let the sick drink much warm water, and put his finger or a fether
down into his throat, and vomit up all that vexes and troubles him. Then you
must foment and nourish his hypocho^ders and sides, and let him rest. But when
the food is descended already into the bowels, you must bid them lie with
their face and stomach downward, and you must nourish the belly and provoke
sleep: for that digesteth cruditie marvelously. Sleep digesteth.
After sleep to bring out excrementes from the womb, you must put in a
suppositarie or cast an easy clister to loosen the womb. They which have a
fever caused through swelling of the kernells of the throat, in them you must
first cure the bile or botch that caused the inflammation, after that sort,
that Galene teaches in his books de medendi ratione. When the fit declineth,
they must be washed. Also they must be nourished with a thin and scarce diet,
because in them, the substance of their body is not lost. Also they must be
kept from wine, for the causes aforesaid. And this suffiseth for the Curing of
a Diaria Fever, being so called simpliciter, without any addition.

CAP. II. Of a Diarie lasting more days. DE DIARIA PLVRIVM DIERVM.
THERE is another kind of Diaries, which is named Diaria plurium dierum for no
other cause, but because it extends and continues unto the third day. Pi^^i^
pluriu^ dierum.

Synochus non putrida.


It is otherwise called Synochus non putrida. The ancient Authors have called
this fever Diaria, because it is of the same nature that right Diaries are of.
For it ends after the first fit, if it be rightly and well handled. This
fever is caused of thickning or stopping of the poores, and passages of the
skin. Causae.
That thickning (as Galen witnesses) does chance either because the small
poores are stopped up, or because they wax narrower, or also because the body
it self is moderately thicked, which is wont to change thorough cold, or
after a bath, or by a medicine that is very sharp and restrictiue: or
thorough burning of the Sun, and other such like which can dry the skin.
This fever may be known first by touching: for in them that have it, the
skin is felt harder, Signae.
and Curatio.
as the strength of the patient will suffer. And know this for a surety, that
unless you use this remedy to those, which by nature have their body unapt
to breath out vapoures because of abundance, it will come to pass that
either they shall be choked, or be in danger of often swounding, unless great
strength or much sweating, or large flux of blood do deliver them from death.
Abstersive medicines.
The body being emptied by blood letting, shortly after minister meats and
medicines, which can cleanse and scour. The meats which can do this in
fevers (as Galene witnesses) be Ptysan and mulsa. The medicines be Ptysan,
oxymell, and things sodden in mulsa, as be calamint, hisope, origan,
Serpillum, yreos and apium. But all these be hoater, then they ought to be, and
therefore they inflame and kindle fevers, Oxymell.
as also wine does. Oximell does only scour and cleanse strongly, and does
not inflame and kindle fevers, so that it does dissolve those things that be
glutinous, clammie, tough and gross, and it delivers the conduits, poores
and passages from obstructions and stoppings. Observe and watch how much of the
feuerous heat is diminished by this diet. For if the third day in the morning,
you see very little of the fever left, and if there be no signs of rottennes
of humors in the pulse nor cruditie or rawnesse in the urine: if the suspect
hour wherein the fever took the patient the first day be after noone, you may
boldly wash the patient quickly long before six of the clock, but it is
sufficient, if you end the washinge three hours before. Likewise if you
suspect the tenth hour, you may wash him until the seventh hour, for three
hours or four is space enough between the bathing and the fit. When the
body has been heat in the bath, being first anointed with sweet oil
warmed, and rubbed very moderately and easily, then by and by it must be
wiped without and washed. These things following do scour and cleanse most
moderately (that is) meal of Eruum, and of barley, and also of beans.
Moreover mulsa which is waterie does the same. Stronger things be yreos,
root of panax, and aristolochia, and mulsa, which is of a mean commixtion,
but that mulsa scoureth most of all, that is pure, which is when there is but a
little water mixed with the honey, so that the melted honey may easily enter into
the small pores of the skin. Stronger scourers then these, be the froth of
salt Peter, the salt Peter it self, and then aphonitrum, soap is one of them
that is able to scour most of all. Moreover after a bath, you must give the
patient no thing, but water, which has had a little apium sodden in it,
although there be three hours space between the bathing and the suspected
hours. But if the fit does invade the patient in the evening, or two hours
sooner, then you may wash him in the morning, and give him meat, but you must
give him only, juice of Prysan. Then if the suspected hours bring nothing
with them, then you may wash him again, if you will and give him meat, but
you must have respect to the urine and the pulse. But if there chance any
thing in the suspected hours, you must confer it with the fit, which you
had the first day, and then you must consider the urine, and also the pulses.
For all these will appear to be in a mean temperature, when there is left but
a little obstruction. Wherefore you shall wash him the fourth day, and give him
meat, having respect to the aforesaid consideracions: and you shall hope that
nothing will be left the fifth day. But if there be great obstruction caused,
that fever is not of the kind of Diarie Fevers.

CAP. III. Of a rotten Fever called Sinochus. DE SINOCHO PVTRIDA.
(...).
SYNOCHVS in Greek is a Fever, wherein one fit continuine perpetually from the
beginning to the ending, remains many days, or else it is a fever which is
without all great mutation until the end of it. Hereupon it is called in Latin
continens febris, Continens febris.
and in English it may be called a constant and stable fever. There be three
sundry differences of these constant fevers, as appears before in the
exposition of fevers. This fever Synochus putrida or contine^s febris is caused
when all the humors do putrify and rot equally together within all the
vessels, Causae.
and specially in the great vessels, which be about the armeholes, and the
share, which is wont to chance, when a feuerous heat is retained and kept in
of a vehement binding and stopping, which is within the body. For whatsoever
things be hot and moist, and may hardly breath or fume out, they putrify and
rot quickly and readily. Therefore this kind of fever is not engendered nor
kindled in folk that be lean and slender, nor in them that have a thin and
rare state of their body, nor in a cold temperament of the body, nor in a
cold age: but for the most part it ingendreth in them which do abound with
blood, and in those, that be hot as well by their age and nature, as by
exercises and diet, and specially it kindles in them that be fleshie, gross,
and thick bodied, Signa.
or else in them that be stuffed with hoate excrements. They which have this
fever, their pulse is very great, vehement, quick, frequent and equal. The
constitution or substance of the arteries is neither harder nor softer, then it
should be by nature: but the quickenesse and frequencie of it, is according to
the greatness of the fever, and these signs are common with the signs of the
Diaria plurium dierum. But particulerly in this fever, there is signs of
rottenness, and that as well in the urine, as in the pulse, and by the quality
of unkind heat. The Cure of this Fever must be begun with letting of blood.
Curatio.
And if virtue and nature be strong, and no other notable thing do stop it
or let it, you must draw blood till he do faint and swound. For if the patient
be strong, this is the chiefest remedy for this kind of fever (as Galene
says.) For first the body is turned into a contrary state, for it is cooled
quickelie through the fainting and swounding. As for cooling of the body,
nothing can be found that is more pleasant, nor more profitable, either for
the sick, or for nature. Moreover in such bodies there chances of
necessity, looseness of the belly, or a laske, And oftentimes also vomiting
of choler. Which things, moisture or sweates do gather from the whole body.
Therefore you shall do best by and by in these fevers, not to mark the number
of days past, but only to consider the strength of the patient. For if that
he be safe and strong, you may let blood not only the 6. or 7. day, but also
in the days following. But, and if you are compelled at any time to cure a
patient, to whom not only the remedy of bloudletting has bin pretetmitted and
kept back, but now also either through ignorance of Physicians, or through
fear of the sick or his assistents in process of time, you are forbidden to
let blood, you must come to the ministering of cold things. But you must
diligently discern and consider before, how much hurt may chance by it. For if
the hurt will be small or none, When cold thing (...) be ministered.
minister very cold drink, as much as the sick will drink. And you may be
the more bold to do it, if the patient has been used to drink cold drinks. But
if you fear that great disco^moditie would arise through it, you shall
abstain from it: and use other remedies whereby obstructions may be taken
away, and abundance avoided, and that, the burning heat of the fever may be
cooled and eased. disco^modities of cold drinks.
The discommodities and hurts which do follow cold drinks ministered
immoderatelie and out of time, be these: first because it prohibiteth and
lets gross and clammie humors to be attenuated and digested, whither they
have engendered obstructions or rottennes, or inflammation, or impostume, or
knobby hardness, or such like affects. As often therefore as a fever is
kindled of such humors cold things are not good for their avoiding: but to
this fever it brings much ease, because it quenches the fever that is
already kindled. But yet seeing the cause of the fever remains still, of
necessity another fever must be kindled new again, and many times a worse,
then that which went before, because that the body is thickened through cold.
And this is one discommodity not to be neglected. Another is, that cold things
hurt many weak members of the patient, whether they be weak by natural
distemperature, or by some vice that they have gotten. So in some, it has been
found that their throat has been so hurt, that they could not swallowe, in
some, the stomach, that they could scarce digest. In some the mouth of the
stomach, or the liver, or the gut colon, or the longs, or the midriffe, or the
reins, or the bladder, or some other such like member is so stricken with cold,
that it is made weak and unable to do his proper action and office. Many by
immoderate drinking of it out of time, have by and by been taken with
difficulty of breathing, and with cramp and trembling, and have had hurt in
all their sinews. Therefore to be short, in them that have any swelling of
fleume or blood, or any knobbie hardness: you may not give cold water unto
them, nor yet to them, Of cold water.
that a raw humor does hurt with obstruction of rottenness. But if there be
no such swelling as is aforesaid, and then you do perceive evident signs of
digestion and concoction in the urine, and if then there be no member so given
to a cold temperature, that it might take hurt: then you may boldly give cold
water. Also if the sick have used to drink cold water, you may the more
boldly minister it, for all the members have learned before by experience to
suffer it familiarly without hurt. The drinking of cold water is perilous in
them, that have but little blood and flesh. Contin^us febris has (...)
remedies chief^ie.
Therefore by these things before rehearsed, it is evident to all men, that
the chiefest remedies of these kinds of fevers called Synochus putrida, be
these two: blud letting, and drinking of cold water: but blood letting may be
used at any time, if the strength of the patient will suffer it, and drinking
of cold water must be used when evident signs of concoction are seen in the
urine, when the fever it greatest, and when you are compelled to leave blood
letting. You must note well the time, when you should let blood, and mark what
went before, You may not let blood on a full stomach.
and what follows. For if crudite and indigestion of meats do go before, you
must refrain so long time from blood letting, as will suffice as well to
digest the meat, as that the excrementes may descend down. But if there will
follow of necessity any flux or emptying, you must leave so much blood
still, as will void by that flux, Therefore if at the time of bloudletting,
the menstruis do chance to flow, or also that the hemmorhoides do open and
burst out, if you beholding the vehemency of the flux, shall think it to be
sufficient to purge and empty out that which you require without any help,
then you shall let nature work alone. But if you think it contrary, draw
out so much blood, that thereby under them both conjoined together, you may
bring to pass your request and expectation. Diet.
Let the diet in these fevers be chiefly this that follows. In them that
have been let blood, minister to them two hours after blood letting, juice of
Ptisan, and command quiet and rest. And when they are awaked out of sleep,
minister again Ptysan broth. In this diet the patient must persist and
continue until the third day. You must note, that in these fevers called
Synochi, When the sick should be fed.
the patientes must be fed at such time as hayle folk are wont to eat, and
when they feel most ease: for so they shall the easilier suffer and bear
their food. And if they be strong and lusty, and you look for the vigor and
state of the fever straight way, the patient must use a most thin and scarce
diet. But contrariwise if he be weak and feeble, you cannot minister a thin
diet to him without peril. Therefore in giving of meat to the patient, you
must diligently foresee, and ponder his strength and ability. He that
desires to know more of this kind of fever as touching the Cure of it, let
him read Galene in lib. 7. therapeut. meth. cap. 5.

CAP. IIII. Against continual Fevers. DE C0NTINVIS FEBRIBVS.
Febris co^tinua
FEBRIS continua in Latin, Synechis in Greek, in English it is called a
continual fever. It is a fever that leaves not of altogether between the
fits but it has a certain sensible slaking of heat between the fits. Causae.
A continual fever is caused, when one only humor does putrify and rot
within the vessels. And there be three differences of this fever according to
the diversity of the humor that putrifieth in the veins: Three differences
of continual fevers.
for if choler do putrify within the vessels, it ingendreth a continual
Tertian, which the Greeks call causos, in Latin it is called ardens febris,
in English a burning fever. If fleume do putrify and rot within the veins, it
ingendreth a continual Quotidian: but if melancholy do putrify within the
veins, it kindles a continual Quartaine. Signa.
There is not a more certain sign of a continual fever, then that, none of
them do come to intermission and slaking altogether between the fittes, until
the fever be quite ended and quenched. Their other signs are common with the
intermitting fevers: for an exquisite burning fever or continual Tertian,
has all the other signs of an exquisite intermitting Tertian: differing only
in this, that it does not invade and begin with vehement cold and stiffenesse,
neither does it end in quiet and rest. Likewise a continual Quotidian has all
the signs of an exquisite intermitting Quotidian, but it only differs from
it because it does not intermit and slake between the fits. In like manner the
continual Quartaines have the signs of intermitting Quartaines, but that they
come not to quiet and rest between the fits. Seeing it is evident by that which
we have said, that continual fevers be of the kind of rotten fevers. It is
necessary for him, A compendiu^ of curing in fevers.
that will cure them commodiouslie and rightly, first to stop and let the
putrefying and rotting: Therefore two things must be taken heed of at the
first, whereof one is the fever, another is the rottenness. And in the fever
you must also regard two things, the one that the portion of the fever, which
is now kindled and enflamed, may be cured and quenched: the other is, that the
portion of the fever which is not yet kindled may be let and stopped. Also
two things must be considered concerning the rottenness, one is, that the
rottenness already engendered, may be healed, the other is, to let and stop
that which is ready to engender putrefaction. That which is ready to
engender, is caused through perspiration and breathing out, if it be impedite
and let. So that of this other two considerations do spring: first that the
humor which is withholden, may be purged and emptied out: secondarily to
prohibit and keep in, that which is to be with holden and kept back. It will
be prohibited with those remedies, which do heal obstructions. Again note,
that the obstructions, which are engendered, must be cured, and they which are
to com must be let and driven back away. You shall cure that obstructio^,
which is already engendered, by those things that do loosen, deliver and open
obstructions. And you shall drive away and stop the obstructions, which are to
come, if you bridle and stop the flux of obstructiue and stopping humors,
whereby it appears evidently, that the last thing which we have found in
this Compendium of curing, that must be done first in the working of the cure.
There be five things to consider in feuer^.
Seeing that therefore (when we have examined the matter perticularlie) there
be five things in continual fevers, from the which, consideracions in curing
be gathered (that is) the fever, rottenness, perspiration impedite and let,
obstruction and abundance of obstructiue humors. Curatio.
You must begin the Cure with the last consideration. Therefore seeing that
the abundance of humors, that cause obstructions, does require purging and
emptying out: in the beginning, if virtue be strong in the patient, and if time
of the year, and his age, and other things do agree, you must let him blood.
Bloudletting.
You must then specially let him blood, when the whole body swellleth more
then it was wont to do, or when the veins be swollen up, or stretched out,
for that doe^h signify abundance of blood. When the multitude of humors are
voided and emptied out, you must next come to the curing of obstructions, and
you must minister medicines, whereby obstructions may be taken away. But
because most of those medicines be hoate, it is to be feared, lest they should
increase both the rottenness, and also the fever. How obstructions should be
healed. O^ymed.
Therefore you must use to minister those things that can deliver the patient
from obstructions without heat. What those things be, we have declared
before in the second Chapter of this Book. When those humors that caused the
obstructions be divided, cut and scoured, you must assay to void and empty
them out by the womb or guts, by the urine, and by sweattes. But seeing
those things, which should bring this to pass, be hot, of necessity the
rottenness and the fever must be increased by them. Therefore as much, as we
may, we must labor to choose such a thing, as does heat but little, or, if
we can find any, that does not heat at all, (as in this case a Bath,) you
must use that. Galene teaches in libro tertio de tuenda sanitate, capite
tertio, that a bath can do this. Bathing does cool.
For he says, that the strength of sweet waters made hoate, if they be
temperate, be hoate and moist, but if they be warmed, they be cold and moist.
And a litile after he says, A bath, if ir be discreetlie used, it mollifieth
the hard, and stretched parts, and it brings forth excrementes or
moltinges, if any stick within the skin. These things being done, and
those humors scoured out, which were compact together in the skin, so that
the obstruction and perspiration impedited be taken away, you must come to the
Cure of the rottenness. Cure of putrefaction.
Therefore at this time you must first corroborate and restore the strength,
whereby it may exuperate, and overcome the rottenness, and be able to digest
the humors. And you shall heal the putrefaction and rottenness, if you do
void and empty out by all means, that which is corrupted and putrified. That
which is left still within, you must bring it to an exqulsite mean by moderate
motions, and cool breathinges, and you shall work the emptying out of the
humors by urine, egestions, vomiting, and sweattes. Last of all you must
proceed to the curing of the fever, Cure of the fever.
which must be done by cooling things. For every fever, inasmuch as it is a
fever, must be remedied by cooling and moystening things. But to know, how
each of these things should be rightly done it is partly rehearsed before,
and partly it shall follow here after. In continual Fevers, whose state or
vigor of the disease will come at the furthest within seven days, if their
strength be lusty, and their age agreeing to it, you must ordeine them a very
exquisite and thin diet. Diet.
But in the continual fevers, whose vigor, force, and state is longer then
seven days after the beginning, or if virtue be weak and feeble, at the first
you must feed them liberally, when the vigor and state draws near, their
diet must be more scarce, but in the state and vigor of the disease you must
feed them most thinnely and scarslie. Afterward again, augment his diet, and
feed him most, increasing his diet, in like case as the vigor and state of
the fever does minish, as Hippocrates says in the first section of his
Aphorisms. Aphor. 10


CAP. V. Of a burning Fever. DE ARDENTE FEBRE.
Continua Tertiana.
ARDENS febris in Latin, Causos in Greek, in English it is called a continual
Tertian, or a burning fever. It is of the kind of continual fevers, as is
declared in the former Chapter. And it is caused when choler putrifieth and
rotteth within the veins. Therefore it agrees with an exquisite intermitting
Tertian, because it is engendered of the same humor that the other is. But yet
it differs from it in that, Difference between a burning fever and a Tertian.
that in an intermitting Tertian, the choler is carried all over the body: but
in a burning fever the choler is contained in the vessels together with the
blood. Hereupon it comes that the fittes in a burning fever do not intermit
nor slake. But when the choler in them is stirred more vehemently, and is
driven about, by nature waxing strong, then there is wont to come vehement
cold and rigor, and the fever ends. Which Hippocrates declares 4 Aphoris.
58. saying, he that is taken with a burning fever, if vehement cold and rigor
come upon it to him, he is delivered from the disease. Signa.
A burning fever is known by these signs, their tongue that have this fever is
dry, gross, rough and black, there is gnawing of the stomach, intolerable
thirst, watchinges, and also many times rauinge, and egestions of the womb be
liquide and pale, Diet.
which signs Hippocrates rehearses in libro quarto Vict. Acutorum. They which
have this fever let them lie in a cold place, and in a sweet air, from
whence pure wind comes. Also let them lie in a soft fetherbed, which must
be made often, let the coueringes be very thin and clean: which must be
continually changed, and let his bed be of a great wideness, that he may
easily move his members that be hoate to other cold places of the bed. And
if the air be quiet, stir it with a fan, or such like. You must give him
meats that have virtue to cool and moist, as is, lettuse, gourdes, sorrel,
ptisan broth and such like. Let his drink be water, wherein a little cinnamon
has been sodden, or veriuyce. If the sick have used it, or if no other thing
do let it, after meat give him cold water a spoonefull or two, or mix Iulep
of violetts, or some lulep of roses, or such like, with decoction of barley.
Moreover the stomach must be refreshed with juice of roses. And other coolinges
must be used, as strewinge of the floor with green vine leaves, and with the
leaves and flowers of roses, water lillies, and violets, and by sprinkling and
pouring often of cold water in the floor up and down. For the Cure in the
beginning straigh way, Curatio.
you must cut a vein, if age, time, virtue and strength will permit it.
Heruppon Hippocrates says in the Aphorisms thus. In great burning fevers, if
blood be drawn till the heart faint, by and by the state of the whole body is
cooled, and the fever is quenched. In many also a lape is caused, Outward
medicines.
and sweats flow forth. Afterward let the breast and stomach be nourished with
dates brayed with oil of roses, or of quinces, or of water lillies. Also other
cooling medicines be good, as be, vine buddes brayed, endive, succorie,
knotgrasse, lettuse, sorrel, vine leaves and such like. Also a fine napkin
folded together, and dipped in oil and water made hot, and applied to the
breast and stomach. It cease the burning of fevers marueilously. Also a
handful of woll sooked in water, and oil of roses bet greatly, and being
holden up aloft to drop upon the breast does easily quench the vehemency of
the burning heat. These things must be hot, for warm things do dissolve the
strength, and vigor of the members. Neither shall you rashly also commixe
vinegar against vehement burning fevers. You may not apply epithemes nor other
cooling medicines in the beginning and increasing of the fit: for at that time
the affect of the body is driven above, and the heat is in the inward members:
therefore cold things applied do drive the heat to the innermost parts, and
be an occasion of greater hurt, for fiery heat being oppressed and stopped
within, it raises a more vehement and burning heat again. Therefore in the
force, strength and vigor of the fittes, when the heat is already spread over
all the body, these cold things may well be applied for then the residue of
the unnatural heat which remains about the inward members may readily be
quenched. Hereupon the patie^t will begin to breath better, and shall be troubled
with an easier thirst. Also some by breathing out of a dewy vapor do fall on
sleep. Epithema.
The epithemes which you must use in this fever, is this, of rose water, and
lettuse water, ana..iij.ss. waters of endive and succotie, ana. j.ss. good
vinegre..j. all the three saunders of each..ss. sead of purcelaine. gra. iiij.
co^mixe altogether and make an epitheme. Moreover when the vigor and strength
of the sickness is at hand, you may safely minister pure cold water, When
cold water man be ministered.
if none of these things which be rehearsed in the third Chapter, do let it.
And if fear of any hurt, although it be very little, do let it, you shall
minister the first draught refrained after this sort. Take one cupfull of
temperate water, and commixe five cupsfull of pure cold water with it, and so
minister it to suspect bodies. To conclude in the curing of burning fevers, you
must needs bring to pass one of these things, that either the cholerike
humors may be voided and emptyed out, Not^.
or else that they may be quenched within. They may be voided and emptied out
by sweates, vomites and egestio^s. They may be quenched by drinking of cold
water wherewith very often great burning fevers have been cured quite and
clean. To whom a bathe is good.
A bathe of sweet water is good only to them which have a burning fever
without any swelling, tending to the nature of an inflammation or Erisipela.
But and if signs of concoction do appear in the urine, it is much more
convenient for the patient. Let the sick which in a vehement burning fever
desires to use a cold bathe be young and of a moderate state of the body, as
also Hyppocrates witnesses and monisheth. Neither let it be done to him in
Summer time, and in hot times of the year, and in the vigor and strength of
the fever, and let it be one, that has used to wash in cold water in his
health. But when the fever waxes more moderate, and virtue is stronger, and if
there be signs of concoction together with it. A bath of sweet and temperate
water is sufficient and does good. For annointinges, oil of chamomill does
good, specially if the weather be cold. Vncti^n^.
But the abundance of matter, whereon you should make competent remedies
against burning fevers, you shall find in the Chapiters following.

CAP. VI. Of a pure intermitting Tertian. DE EXQVISITA TERTIANA INTERMITTENTE.
EXQVISITA tertiana febris intermittens in Latin, an exquisite and pure
intermitting tertian fever in english. Causae.
It is caused of choler carried by the sensible parts of the body, and by the
proper nature of it, it remains pure, sincere and unmixed. Therefore seeing it
is engendered of choler that is sincere and pure, and not commixed with any
other humor, it is called of the Physicians exquisite. Signae.
This fever engenders in persons that be cholerike by nature and in their
flourishing age, in summer time, in hot and dry regions, and when the weather
is hot and dry, and in bodies oppressed with labors, watchings, cares, deep
thoughts and burning of the sun. Also this fever by and by in the beginning,
and in every fit causes a vehement cold, rigor, and stiffenesse, and by
this means it differs from a burning fever, as is before rehearsed. And the
cold in this fever differs from the cold in a quartaine fever thus,
Differences of coldness in a tertian and quartaine.
because in this fever the patient thinks his body were pricked, and as it
were vlcerated. But in a quartaine the cold seems to the patient like the
cold that hail folk feeele in winter time. Therefore a tertian fever does not
chance without vehement rigor and could, pricking and wounding in the flesh:
but a quartaine fever does not by and by the first day invade the patient with
vehement rigor and cold. For as it proceeds forward and increases: so also
the rigor and cold increases, and the patient does not feel pricking, but
rather feels great cold, and as it were nipped to the bone with it. There is
in a tertian fever an exact and perfect order and equality of the pulses: but
yet in the increasing of the fittes, the pulses are raised and provoked to
vehemency, greatness and fregnencie. Moreover in the vigor and force of the
fever, it causes thirst, and burns up the patient, so that he casts of the
clothes, to make him bare, and naked, and he breaths largely and often, and
he blows out as it were a flame of fire, and requires to drink cold water.
Afterward the heat spreads equally all over the body, so that the breast
is no hotter, then the extreme parts and members. And when you lay your hand
upon him, at the first touching you shall feel much gnawing, and biting heat,
brusting out as it were with a certain vapor and moisture: but not long after
your hand will vanquish it, if you do hold it still. Moreover there follows
this fever vomiting of choler, and the belly is laxatiue, and they piss urine
that is cholerike, subrufe, and somewhat yealow and moderately thick. Also
their urine has by and by a white cloud, or a laudable sublation in the
mids. If the urine be redder, and if in the first fit there do appear,
neither sublation in the mids, nor cloud, the fever will extend and remain
seven fittes. Moreover this fever leaves of till another fit, when the fit
has endured the space of xij. hours at the most. For this is the longest time
of a fit in true and pure tertians. But sometime the fit is shorter then
the aforesaid space of time, having difference more or less according to the
quantity and quality of choler within, or because of the strength of the
patient, or through the present affect of the patientes body at that present
time. Therefore we name that an exact and pure tertian fever, which ends his
fit within twelve hours: but that which has a longer fit, that is not
called an exquisite tertian, but an extended and stretched out tertian. And if
the fever does invade the patient daily with vehement rigor and cold, and with
the signs aforesaid of the urine and pulses, as also of other things before
rehearsed: then it is called duplex tertiana, Signs of a doub^e tertian.
a double tertian. But as for an exquisite tertian, because it is engendered of
pure choler moved about, you must moisten it and cool it, as much as you may
possibly by all means. For this humor (as Galen witnesses) is the hottest
and driest among all the other that be in the body. Let the sick lie therefore
in a cold place against a sweet and pleasant aier. Also you may not suffer
many to be in the house, because they should make it hot with their breath.
Let the floor be sprinkled often with cold water, and with rose water, violet
water and such like. And streue on the floor willow leaves, flowers of roses,
violettes, water lillies and such like. Victus ratio.
Let the patientes use meats that have virtue and power to cool, and moisten.
And you must give him so much of them, as he can very well digest. Let his
potherbes be orache, beats, spinache, mallows, lettuse, gourdes, sorrel,
endive, succorie, and such like. Also give him ptisan broathe, and soupinges
made with alica. Of fishes, let him eat such as live in grauelly places: for
such, besides that they do cool and moisten, they engender good juice, and are
easy to digest. Of fowls let him eat them that be soft of flesh, as be
chickens and partriche, doves, young sparrowes, feasauntes and such like: but of
those, that have not soft flesh, let him eat their wings, which are without
excrementes, because of their often exercises. Also he may eat cocks stones,
and sowes feet, for they be without excrementes, because they are exercised:
and their brains, specially if they be well sodden. Also, if you minister the
flesh of pigges well sodden, you shall not hurt, for so it may the easilier be
consumed of the stomache. Also rear eggs, which be but only hot through,
may be suffered specially the yolks of them: for they be easier to digest then
the whites, and they do cool meanly. You may suffer him to eat fiuictes,
which be not very hard to digest, as be chearies, proines, mulbearies. He must
abstain from honey, because it will easily turn into the choler, Potus.
and from mustard, salt meats, and all sharp things. Also you must keep
the sick altogether from wine, until the disease be digested, and let him
drink in the mean season, water, wherein a little cinnamon has been sodden. Or
let him use to drink this,. iulep of violettes..iiij. water wherein a little
cinnamon has been sodden. lb.j. commixe them together, and power them out of
one vessel into another, often. But when the disease begins to digest, you
must give him in the beginning a little wine, that is thin and alayed with
water, and give him more liberally of it, when the end of the disease is at
hand. This is the order of diet for many, but not for all men: for they that
are not deintily brought up, but do live hardly, and are strong of nature, you
must ordeine for them a thinner diet (that is) let them be contented with
ptisan brothe until the judgment of the fever. No sleep in fittes.
As for sleeping they may not sleep in their fittes, but rather let them
watch, that thereby the blood and spirits, and natural heat may be let,
and stopped from creeping to the inward members, and contrariwise may thereby be
drawn to the outward parts: for otherwise the fevers will scarce be
dissolved, and they will come very slowly to their state, and fluxes will
increase and be multiplied: when the fit is ended sleep is not hurtefull.
The patient must eschew exercises, and all other vehement motions. Also let him
ref^aine perturbations of the mind, specially, anger, fear, sorrow, and such
like. Curatio.
But you may not only use the diet before prescribed, bu^ also you must
minister medicines to the patient which can cool and moisten. In the beginning
to quench the boiling of choler, and to mitigate the cholerous heat, let him
use this decoction,. of flours of violettes, borage, and red roses, A decoction
to digest choler.
ana. Mj. flours of water lillies, M.ss. endive, succorie, lettuce, ana.
M.j.ss. of raisons picked..j. damascene proines, number.ij. seeds of endive,
succorie lettuce, purcelaine, gourdes, ana..iij. of the root of succorie,.vj.
sees altogether in lb.ij. of well water, until the third part be consumed,
then strain it and make the licour of that decoction sweet with sugar, and
purify it with the white of an egg, then add to it sirupe of endive, with
the broad leaves, and iulep of violettes, ana..ij.ss. commixe them together and
make a potion, and let the sick drink thereof every morning fasting..iiij.ss.
But and if the sick be more delicate, and do abhor potions, M^sturae.
let him take daily of this medicine,. of conserues of violettes, borage,
roses, water lillies, and succorie, ana..ss. electuarium de prunis damascenis
without diagredium..vij. diarrhodon abbatis..j. diatrion santalon in
powder..ij. of iulep of violettes as much as is sufficient to commixe them and
make a loche. Moreover you must remove the cause of the fever, Vacuation.
which you shall do, if you empty out the cholerike humor. Therefore you must
empty out the choler which is crept into the stomache by provoking vomit.
Vomiting.
By what means you may provoke vomit it is declared in the former books. The
choler which is carried downward, it is best to empty it out by a laske of the
womb: which also is wont to come sometime of it self in an exquisite tertian.
Vomiting should be provoked chiefly in the beginning of the fit, for at that
time, nature is wont to thrust in choler thither: as in the inclination and
slaking of the fit, nature thrusts it to the neither parts and to the skin.
Therefore at that time you must cast in an easly and soft clister, that they may
both bring out the choler easily, and that also by their gentleness, the
sharpnes of the choler which is wont to vex and gnaw the guts, may be
stopped and broken. Make therefore such a clister.. of mallows, leaves of
purple violettes, mercury, Clister.
endive and succorie. ana. M.j. sead of purcelaine and of melo^s. ana..ij.ss.
sees them all in sufficient quantity of water, till the third part be
consumed, strain it, and add to the licour of that decoction, the marow of
casia fistula newly drawn..j. oil of violettes..iij. common salt,.j.ss.
commixe them and make a clister. Also you must empt^^ out choler by provoking
of urine and sweattes specially, if it be carried thither by nature. This thing
you may well do by medicines that provoke urine, Prouokers of urine.
but not by all such, but by those that can do it without drying. Therefore you
must provoke urine with potions wherein apium or dill has been infused or wet.
And if signs of concoction do appear, then you may minister wormwood softly,
Absynthium.
which is a special remedy for the stomache, when it is vexed with choler:
specially if you take of the ^^ppes of it as much as is sufficient, and infuse
it in ^^^licratum, that is, wine and honey sodden together: for it purges
choler out of the womb and stomache by egestion, and out of the veins it
purges it by urine. You shall provoke sweating with this, and such like
medicine.. roots of apium, To provoke sweat.
sperage and succorie, ana..ss. of the seeds of percely, fennel, bruscus, and
louage, ana..ij. black cicers..iij. dill. M.ss. sees all in sufficient
quantity of water that runs unto the third part, then let it be strained,
and make it sweet with sugar, adding to it oxymel compositum..ij. and make a
potion. Or beat all the aforesaid things into powder, and minister of it
every time..j. or.j.ss. with.iij. of oxymel simplex. These medicines which
provoke sweat, must be ministered in the declination of the fit, or on that
day, that the sick has not his fever. For this purpose also annointinges
with oiles of chammomil, dill, and such like, are not a little profitable.
Moreover hot bathes of sweet and potable water do profit two ways, B^thes of
so^^ie water.
both because they provoke out some of the choler, as also because of their
qualities, they do much good: for such bathes do moisten and cool. But bathes
of Sea water, salt water, salt peter water, and brimstone water, they bring out
more choler, but they profit much less the^ potable waters. Therefore it is
best not to call them profitable, seeing they do more hurt by drying, then
they do good by emptying and voiding, for the remedies must have contrary,
qualities to the humors that have invaded against nature: for that does more
commodity, then the emptying by any means (as Galenus witnesses ad
glauconem,) by the which words it is evident that emptyinges and purginges in
an exquisite tertian does but little please Galene. Specially those emptyinges
that are done by blood letting, and by a vehement purging medicine, for all
such kind of purging medecines be of a hot faculty and quality. But seeing
this fever is the hotest of all other, therefore it rather desires to be
cooled and moistened, then to be vehemently purged. It rather permits and
requires emptyinges by other means, and specially when nature labors and
assayeth to drive out the humor. Also nature must be helped, if of it self it
be not able to perform her intent. As for a bathe this is the effect and scope
of it, thereby to have the body weat and moistened. Therefore you must strewe
in, neither salt peter, nor salt, nor mustard seed, but it is good to pour
much oil, being made hot, ^aintum.
upon the patient, and to bring him into the bathe and to wash him. And if he
will swim in it, you may suffer him to do it as long as he can. And they that
are delighted in bathing if you suffer them to wash twice in a day, you shall
not do amiss. But you must have this in memory, that it be opportunatly, and
done in due time, for if signs of concoction do now appear, then if you wash
him oftener, you shall not err from Galenes doctrine.

CAP. VII. Against a bastardly tertian. DE TERTIANA NOTHA.
A Bastardly tertian is caused, when choler is mixed for the most part with
fleume. Causae.
Hereupon it comes that all the signs of this fever, do not declare the
nature of pure and sincere choler, Signa.
as in an exquisite tertian they do. In this fever also the time of the fittes
does exceed 12. hours, neither is this judged in seven fittes, as an
exquisite tertian is. Moreover in this bastardly tertian, the signs of
concoction do appear more slowly, neither is there such great heat in the
vigor and state of this fever, as in the exquisite tertian. Besides all these,
it does not end with abundance of sweat, Diet.
as an exquisite tertian does. Therefore the diette in this fever must not be
altogether cooling and moistening, as it is in an exquisite tertian: but let it
have some power and virtue to heat, cut and divide: for the choler in this
fever is grosser, neither is it so hot. They therefore that have this fever,
may profitiblely take brothe of ptisan, wherein some pepper is put, and you
must give them mulsa to drink, wherein has been sodden hisope, origan, and
spikenard. Also you must give them soupinges and brothes easy to digest.
Moreover seeing the time of the fit is long, and so endures a whole day,
you may not give him meat daily but each other day: for by this means we
shall beware and take heed, that nature be not called away from her office
and work, and so the disease should be increased: for you must only take
heed that the disease does not increase, and that the strength of the sick,
which must strive and fight a great while, be not weakened, debilitate and cast
down. But it is hard to keep and save both, because hunger look how much it
profits to the digestion of the disease, and so much or more it hurts and
debilitateth the strength. And meats, look how much they increase the
patientes strength and so much they hinder, and let concoction and digestion.
To conclude therefore, you must use hunger to them that be strong and lusty,
and their disease hard to digest. And you must feed them more largly, whose
strength is debilitate and weak, and their disease not stubborn for to
digest. Potus.
Let their drink be water, in which a little cinnamon and some hysope, or
origan has been sodden. Quiet and rest is good for them, but exercises do
hurt them: for this does call fourth outwardly nature, and natural heat,
which should concoct and digest crude matter within. For the cure, if you may
let the patient blood, you may not fail to do it, Curatio.
but by and by in the beginning, if the age, time, region, and state of the
body will permit it, you must draw out so much blood, as the present state of
the body requires and will suffer. Blood letting.
By the present state, understand the state as well of the patient, as of the
disease: for the sick, if he be strong, may suffer blood letting, if not, the
contrary: if the disease remain, and be caused through abundance of humors,
it requires blood letting not a mean quantity, but according to the
abundance of them. But when the disease will endure long through cruditie, and
lack of digestion, you must draw out but a mean quantity of blood, that the
strength of the patient may be kept and endure until the end of the disease.
Also you must cast into the belly not very easy clisters, Clister.
that they may bring fourth the sluggish and hurtful matter, and make them
thus,. mallows, mercury, leaves of violettes, origan, and hysope, an. M.j.
seed of cardamum..iij. sees altogether in sufficient quantity of water, and
add to the licour of that decoction, benedicta laxatiua, hierapicra, an..iij.
mel rosarum..vj. oiles of violettes and chammomill, an..j.ss. common salt..ij.
and make a clister. Also you must minister to the patient decoctions made of
such things as can cut, and divide, Decoctum.
and also provoke urine without any great heating and drying. As this is,.
roots of apium, fennel, and succorie, an..j. endive, succorie, origan, and
hysope, an. M.j. lettuse. M.j.ss. the four common cold seeds, an..j. seeds
of fennel and apium, an..j.ss. sees all these in two pounds of water, until
the third part be consumed. Then strain it, and make the licour sweet with
sugre, and purify with whites of eggs the streined licour. Then add to it
^^rupus acetosus simplex, mel rosarum clarified, oxymel simplex, an..j.ss. and
make a potion, whereof minister daily every morning.iiij. After these you must
minister such medicines, Purgatio.
as do empty the belly gently, as is infusion or ruberbe, electuarium e
psillio, and diaphanicon and such like, which are able by themselves, or mixed
with other to bring and purge out choler together with fleume. Whereof we have
rehearsed many in our former books. After the seventh day you may minister
continually decoction of wormwood: ^
also oxymel ^ronke alone helps many. Also vomiting after meat is so
healthful, and profitable to these old and inueterate fevers* that many (as
Galene witnesses in lib. 1. ad glauconem) have been cured with this one
remedy. For a fever which has continued long, does engender and breed many
flegmatike excrementes in the stomache, which being cast out by vomiting, the
patient is delivered from the fever. Also the sides must be nourished with hot
medicines, that thereby the winds and bolning, which strecheth them out, may be
dissolved and dispersed. Among other this foment is very good,. flowers of
chammomill, melilote, and dill, Fomentum.
an. M.j. wormwood. M.ss. red roses. M.j. lineseede and fenugreeke, an..iij.
boil these in sufficient quantity of water, unto the third part, then dippe
a sponge in it, and nourish the sides therewith. Also it profits to anoint
the stomache with this, or such a like ointment, Vnguentum.
. oiles of masticke, roses and chammomill, an..iij. of cloves..j.ss. wax
as much as is sufficient, and make an ointment. Moreover bathing in this fever
is not healthful, before that, (...).
signs of co^coction do appear, because crude and raw humors, which should
be digested within, are brought out by it to the skin, and so it does
increase obstructions.

CAP. VIII. Of a quartaine fever. DE QVARTANA FEBRE.
AN exquisite quartaine is another kind of the intermitting fevers, Causae.
which is engendered only of a melancholy humor, putrefying and rotting
without the vessels. Signae.
This fever does not by and by in the beginning invade the patient with
vehement rigor and cold the first day, but it is like to them that are cold
in winter through vehement frost: but when the fever has continued and
proceeded forward and is increased, then also the rigor and cold increases
with it, and waxes greater and stronger daily, till the whole disease be come
to his full increase and force. And the cold does not seem to the patient as
it were pricking and vexing the skin, as it does in an exquisite tertian, but
there is caused vehement cold, and as it would break the bones. Their pulses
are very rare and slow in the beginning of the fittes, but when the fever is
in his full force, or also when it is increased, then of necessity the pulses
are swift and often: but yet they do keep their natural slownesse and
raritie, if you consider the swiftness and frequencie coming in the fittes.
But the moving of the heat, the increasing, and the vigor, and force of this
fever is clean contrary to that in tertian fevers. For in this fever the
mela^choly humor is kindled and inflamed by little and little, as it were a
stone, or a shell, or a bone, or some other such like cold and dry body. And
when that any flame or heat is kindled in it, then in the fit it leaves
nothing fumous or smokie, but it burns and consumes it. And therefore there
is longer ceasing and intermission of this humor, Cause of long intermission
^n quartaine fittes.
between the fittes, then there is in fleume. And the intermission and ceasing
between the fittes seems to be exquisite and pure without any grief at all:
because in this fever, look how much melancholy is kindled and inflamed, and
so much in the time of the fit is dispersed, consumed, and drawn out clean.
Moreover in a quartaine fever there follows not vomiting up of choler. Their
vrines are thin, white and waterie, and as it were strained from a grosser
matter. Also this fever begins specially in Autumn or Harvest, coming
after erratike fevers. But you must behold both the nature of the patient, and
his temperament, also his diet used before, his age, the region, and other such
like. For if those things de cold and dry, then you may look more surely,
that a quartaine fever will ensue, specially if at that time, quartaines be
rife among the people. They that have a quartaine fever, in the beginning they
must be handled and ordered moderately and gently, ^
neither may they be vexed with any vehement medecin, or by vehement emptying
and purging: for the humor which causes the quartaine, is stubburne to be
drawn and handled. Therefore in the beginning, and before it be digested, it
will hardly and scarcely follow the medicine that draws it: and that because
of his grossness and coldness, and also because it stops the narrow
ways, by the which it should pass out. Blood letting.
Yet if blood do seem to abound much, then you must take away that. And if
when you have stricken a vein, the blood that comes out, do appear black
and gross, as for the most part it does in diseases of the spleen, you may
then boldly draw it out. For great abundance of such blood being drawn out,
nature will get the upper hand in digesting the rest of the humor, and will
make the fever shorter. You must cut the innermost vein of the left arm,
which is called lienaris vena, the spleen vein, or mediana: for this vein
emptieth out the melancholy humor, specially from the spleen, which is wont
to be diseased in a quartaine fever: but if, when the vein is stricken, the
blood does appear thin, and yealowish, you must stop it by and by: for
such an humor is not unprofitable in a quartaine, but it corrects and
amendeth the gross and cold humor, as well because of his substance, Diet.
as also with his quality. You must ordeine for the patient a very good diet,
such one as is not windy, and ingendreth good juice. Therefore you must keep
the sick from swines flesh, and from all other meats that be gross, toughe
and clammie, and slow of digestion. Moreover, let him abstain from all things
which do cool and dry the body. He must eat birds that live upon
mountains, and do engender good juice: for those that do live in fennes and
marshes, they be unwholesome and full of execrementes, and do engender a
gross humor. He must use fishes of grauellie waters, which be soft and
without toughness, but in this fever salt things and mustard must be
ministered in meats, that they may extenuate, cut, and divide, the gross and
clammie humors, and that they may consume and feed up the superfluous
humiditie and moisture. (...).
They must use wine, that is white, thin, and meanly hot: for that by the
thinness of it does extenuate the grossness of the melancholy humor, and
by the mean heat that it has, it heateth the body by little and little, which
is cooled with the melancholious humor, and it helps digestion and also
provoke urine. They may not altogether be kept and refrain from frictions,
deambulations, and other occustomed exercises (that is to say) you must suffer
them to use exercises, but not so much as they did in their health. Neither
may they use frictions, deambulations, and other excercises of the body so
often, nor so vehemently as they did in their health, for that would cause
peril and danger of obstructions. But if exercises be used moderately, and
that in the time of intermission between the fittes, they will void out
excrementes and bring other commodities which Galene rehearses in lib. 2. de
tuenda sanitate. They must altogether abstain from bathing if they can,
Balneum.
and be content only with frictions and rubbinges: for although bathing,
because it does heat, does profit, yet, because it calls forth humors
outwardly, it brings peril of obstruction, specially when the body does
abound with excrementes. And if the quartaine be short, and not violent, it is
not hurtful in the intermission between the fittes, when the patientes hail
days be, if he use his wonted exercises. As for the belly if it can be by
any means it must be kept soluble, either with his accustomed meats, or with
medicines mixed with them, or with clisters first gentle and easy, and after
sharper: for you must increase their strength and sharpness by little and
little, as the matter of the fever does concoct and digest by little and little:
for at the beginning (as is said before) you must handle and order these fevers
gently and easily. You may seek examples of easy clisters out of the former
Chapiters. Clister.
A clister somewhat sharper is this that follows. mallows, chammomill,
mercury, leaves of black violettes. an. M.j. leaves of seen, the roots of
polipodie. an..v. hartistonge. M.j.ss. sees all these in sufficient quantity
of water until the third part. Then strain it and commixe with the licour of
that decoction, the marowe of casia fistula..j. diasena laxatiua..ss. common
oil..iij. mel rosarum..ss. salt gemme..j. and make a clister. Within certain
days, give to the patient diatrionpiperion: but because it does heat
vehemently, you may not minister it daily, whose making and virtue you must
seek out of Galene in lib. 4. de sanitate tuenda. Also (as Galene says) the
patient shall do rightly, if be drink daily, only pepper with water: P^per.
for it heateth and dissolueth the grossness of mindie spirits and vapors,
and it extenuateth and digesteth the crude and raw humors, which are heaped
and gathered up together in the hipochonders and sides. And these things must
be done from the beginning of the fever, until it come to the vigor, force,
and state. And if the sick seem now to be in the vigor and state of the
disease, then he must use a thinner diet, then he did before, or must do
afterward, and you must command long quiet and rest to the patient, least
nature being occupied about digesting of the matter of the disease, should be
called from her office and work. Afterward you must provide and forsee the
intrailes which are wont to be swollen and stretched out with viscons,
Prou^si^n f^r the mira^^es.
toughe and gross humors and also with abundance of windy spirits and
vapors, which being dissolved and emptied out, the bowels wax soft and are
loosened. Therefore you must anoint them with those things which can mollify
and loosen, as be ointmentes which are made of barlie meal, sead of apium,
roots of ireos, rewe and such like. Vnguentum.
Among other anoint the left side with this ointment.. of oil of
capers..iij. oil of ireos, and of sweet almondes, an..ij. seeds of apium,
and of comin, roots of ireos, an..j. wax as much as is sufficient, make an
ointment. After these things you must minister medecines, which have virtue
and power to provoke urine, and not before this time: for if you minister such
things before the inward members be free from obstructio^s, because those
medecines be hot, they carry the humors down with them, and do increase the
obstructions. For to provoke urine you must minister mulsa, wherein dill, or
rewe, Prouokers of urine.
or else apium has been sodden. If signs of concoction do appear, then you
must straight way use purging medecines, which can purge out melancholy,
Purgation of melancholy.
and you may not purge him once only, but oftener, if the matter seem to
require it: for that melancholy cannot be brought out all at once, seeing the
body is not able to suffer and bear so strong a purgation, as should purge
out all that stubburne humor at once. You may seek examples of such
medicines as do purge out melancholy, out of the first book in the Chapter
of Melancholiousnesse. But yet above other things Aetius praises sweet wine
infused in the inward part of coloquintida, but so that you commixe with it
some apium or daucus, to make it pleasant. After meat, Vomitus.
you must provoke vomit (if nothing let it) with white hellebore first
commixed with radishe as is declared in the other books, which if it work
little or nothing, you must minister hellebore by it self. And if any man
abhor from hellebore, let him use this or such like medicine.. juice of
radish, Vomit.
or distilled water of it..iij. oxymel simplex..ij. commixe them and make them
warm to drink, but they which cannot vomit, must be purged downward, such be
they that have a straight and slender breast. After purging you must give them
theriaca, or somewhat that is of like virtue, as is this.. Liquoris cyrenaici,
fine mirrhe, pepper of each a like much, beat them by them selves, and
commixe them with juice of rewe, and make pills thereof, and minister the
weight of..ss. They that minister any of these medicines at the beginning of
the sickness, or at all, before the vigor, state, and force thereof: they
make of a simple quartaine oftentimes a double quartaine, or without doubt they
make the single quartaine greater and more vehement: and of a double quartaine,
they make a triple quartaine or else the double one is made greater.

CAP. IX. Of a quotidian fever. DE QVOTIDIANA FEBRE.
QVOTIDIANA febris intermittens (that is) an intermitting quotidian fever. It
is engendered of putrified and rotten fleume being thrust of nature by the
sensible parts of the body. Causae.
It is called of the Greeks amphimerina, because it causes a fit every
day. (...).
But if glasen fleume which is the coldest of all other fleumes, do putrify by
it self the one half of it (that is) if the whole substance of it do not
putrify equally, but some parts of it do putrify and some do not, then it
ingendreth a fever called Epialos febris: Epialos febris.
in which the patient is feuerous, and vehemently cold together, and at one
present time he seeleth immoderate heat, and immoderate cold in all the parts
of the body together. For part of that humor, which is not putrified nor
rotten as yet, being spread by all the veins, or in the rest of the body,
ingendreth the rigor and cold, but, Signa.
the other rotten part of the humor ingendreth the fever. A quotidian fever
does not invade the patient with rigor and vehement cold by and by the first
day, but in process of time, it comes rather like a cooling, then like a
rigor. The pulse when the fit begins is inordinate and unequal, slow,
little, and weak. Neither also in the augmenting and increasing of the
quotidian, is there swiftness of moving of the pulses, nor greatness, nor
vehemency. The heat in this fever is not so sharp and vehement as it is in a
tertian: for it neither burns them, neither are they compelled to make naked
their bodies, and to throw of their clothes, neither does it compel them to
breath much and often, and to blow out of their mouths as it were a flame,
nor to desire to drink cold water, but it is moist and smoky, and commixed
with much vapor. Also it is hardly kindled, and it consumes a long time,
until that, by increasing, it come to the force and state. Moreover, they that
have this fever, do not thirst, because not only the tongue, but also the
whole body in this fever is most moist. The vrines in quotidian fevers either
be white, and thin, and waterie, or thick, and troubled. There brusteth out
no sweat at all in the first days, neither is there any exact and perfect
rest from being feuerous. For the fever remains each time almost the space of
18. hours. There chances also to them vomiting of fleume: and those things
which are sent out by egestion, are colder, moister, cruder, more waterie, and
more flegmatike. Also a quotidian fever does chiefly, vex them that be
moiste, and flegmatike of nature. Also it chances in a moist season,
specially in winter that is cold and moist, and in old folk and children.
Hereupon Galene writes, that he never saw a young man that was choletike and
dry by nature, taken with this fever: but they that be older, and most
flegmatike, having a gross substance of the body, and do live an idle life,
serving their belly and given to drounkennesse, using bathing often and
specially after meat, they are soon taken with this quotidian fever. Victus
ratio.
Let the diet in this fever be altogether extenuating, cutting and dividing.
Therefore you must now seek such places, wherein we have declared abundantly,
what kind of diet, it should be. In the first days (that is) when signs of
cruditie and indigestion do yet appear, the fleume must be divided and cut,
and the poores and passages that be stopped, Curatio.
must be scoured and cleansed. And therefore you must minister oxymell, because
it does scour mightly, it cutteth and deuideth the glutinous and clammie
humors, and it delivers the poores from obstructions. And you must minister
those things which provoke urine, that (the fleume being already extenuated
and divided) may the more readily pass by the conduites, and be emptied out.
Therefore it is good to minister decoction of the root of apium, percely,
ireos, fennel, and such other like often rehearsed before with sirupus
acetosus compositus, and mel rosarum, and sirupus e duabus radicibus, and other
that have the virtue and power to extenuate, cut, and divide. About the vigor
and force of the fever, you must take heed and have regard to the stomache, and
specially to the mouth of it. Therefore you must prepare those things, which
(being applied outwardly,) may add strength to the stomache, such as be,
masticke, spikenard, wormwood, and such other like. Vnguentum.
Therefore before meat use this ointment.. oiles of masticke, wormwood and
narde, ana..ij.ss. mastike, cloves, and wood of aloes, ana..v. cinnamon..j.
with wax as much as is sufficient, make an ointment, wherewith anoint the
region of the stomache. The stomach being strentgthened, you must compel
vomiting, first by ministering of radishe, then after, meats must be eaten for
so it lifts up the meats, and causes the easier vomit. After he must use
medicines, that do purge out fleume: for fleume vhen it is digest, may
conveniently be purged. What medicines those be that can purge out fleume, it
is evident in our other books, and this here suffiseth to cure a quotidian
fever.

CAP. X. Of a fever ethicke. DE HECTICA FEBRE.
HECTICA febris in Latin, the fever ethicke in English. Hectica febris.
It is a fever wherein an unnatural heat is not only kindled in the spirits
and humors, but now also it is kindled in the massy, sound, and fleshy
parts, and members. This fever knows no pain, and they that have it, do
think that they have no fever, neither do they perceive or feel any heat,
seeing all the members of their body be equally heat, (as Galene declares
abundantly in his book de inaequals intemperie. The fever ethicke is
engendered and caused two ways. First, Causae.
for the most part of burning fevers, which have continued so long, that in
process of time they consume the humiditie and moisture, that is contained in
the body of the heart, or also, if it resist more abundantly, then those
fevers are not only ethickes, but also marasmodes (that is) consuming and
melting fevers: for fevers being engendered, (the humiditie yet still remaining)
when they have caught and occupied the body of the heart, hereupon they are
specially kindled and inflamed like the flame of a candle with a match. And
this is one way of ingendring of the fever ethicke. Another way of ingendring
of them is this, when they begin of them selves by and by, being engendered as
diary fevers be, either of sorrow, or anger, or overmuch werynesse, together
with burning of the heat of the sun. The fevers that be thus engendered, be
not very hard to cure: but such fevers of these, as be turned into consuming
and wasting, which the Greeks do call marasmos, through the negligence and
ignorance of physicians, if those fevers be in their force and strength, and
not as it were beginning still, (...).
it is not only hard to cure these, but it is also impossible to remedy them.
For the nature of them is hot and dry, so that the heart is in like ease, as
the snafte of a candle, when it is very much burnt. For when it is much burnt,
it will break and dissolve, and through dryness fall a sounder, so that
although you power abundance of oil to ^t, yet you cannot cause a geater
flame to be kindled: for the flame being small and weak pants always up and
down in it, and waxes continually less and less, till it be altogether
quenched out. Even such is the fever which is altogether marasmodes (that is)
consuming. Signa.
The fever ethicke which turns into marasmus or a consumption, is very ready
and easy to know: for before you do consider the pulses and heat by touching
them, you may see the eyes wonderful hollow, as though they were hid in some
ditches or furrows, for then all the moist substance of them is exhaust and
consumed, so that you may see the bones of the eyebrowes stick out. Also
there hangs on the hairs of the eye liddes, dry gum and filth, and
uncleanly affectes, as is seen in them specially, that go a long journey in
the dust, when the sun burns hot. Also the vital flower in them
perishes, and the skin of their forehead is dry and retched out, and their
eye liddes wincke often as though they were sleapy, but their disease is not to
sleep, but is rather impotency and debility to watch. Also the flesh of their
temples is consumed, so that they seem hollow places, for what other thing
have they but skin and bone? for if you look upon their bare belly, it shall
appear to you, that neither bowell nor filme is left. The hypochonders and
sides are pulled upward to the breast. And if you touch their skin, it is
very dry, which if you take hold on with your fingers, and pull it up, it is
like the hide of a beast. The pulses be thin, hard, weak and often. The heat
when you lay your hands first on him does seem weak: but a little after it
brusteth out sharp and gnawing more and more, if you hold your hand long upon
him. Also this shall be a great and vndubitate sign to you: when you do give him
meat, the heat is inflamed and increased, and the pulses are augmented in
greatness and swiftness. Hectica febris.
It is called a fever Ethicke, so long as natural humiditie and moisture is
kept and reserved: but when it is to be doubted that there is left no more
humidity and moisture in the body then it is an absolute and perfect
consumption, which is called in Greek marasmos. (...).
For the cure of a fever ethicke before it come unto consumption, Curatio.
you must by all means cool it. And therefore the effect and sum of the
whole cure does consist in these points (that is) to cool and moisten as well
with those things that be outwardly applied, A^er.
as also by them that are ministered inwardly. Therefore let the air that the
patient does breath in be cold and moist. And if it be not so by nature, make
it so by art, as is taught before in the 6. Chapter, Diet.
in the cure of the tertian. He must also use meats, that do cool and
moisten, as broth of ptisan, bread steeped a little in cold water, the flesh of
kiddes, feasauntes, birds of the mountains, cocks stones, capons flesh,
rear eggs, new cheese without salt, and fishes of grauelly waters, lettuse,
endive, succory, gourdes, spinache, mallows and such like: cheries, proynes,
pomegranattes, melons, figs, and such like. He must also take milk, L^c.
for that profits him maruelously so that this fever be not compounded and
mixed with another fever, that is engendered of rottenesse of humors Let his
drink be cold water, Potus.
but specially if the sick have been used to it before. Let him drink thereof
moderately, or let him drink water wherein a little cinnamon has been sodden,
or wine that is watered and thin. Moreover it is good to them that have this
fever, to eat meat often in a day, that by that means they may beware and
take heed that they eat great abundance of meat at one meal, which virtue
being weak should not be able to overcome and digest. They must eschew
immoderate moving, and all things that can resolve and weaken the strength.
Note.
You may not minister any purging medicines to them that have a fever, ethicke:
for purgations are hotter and vehementer, then they are able well to suffer:
but if the belly be more bound, then it ought to be, you must loosen it with
easy clisters, that can cool and moisten, adding to them marow of casia
fistula. You must minister such things within the body, as have virtue and
power to cool and moisten. As among the compound medicines be these, sirupe of
violettes, of water lillyes and of tame endive, sirupus acetosus and such like.
Also diarrhodon abbatis, diatragacanthum frigidum, diapapauer and such like. Of
simples these be good, the juices, and distilled waters of lettuse, purselaine,
tame endive, and poppie. Among those things that are to be applied outwardly,
bathes at all times are convenient, B^lurum.
and profitable to them that have this fever. I mean bathes of sweet waters,
to the which the sick must be carried in a bed, or in a fine sheet, and let
there be four to carry the sheet, at each corner one. The water of the bathe
must be most temperate: and also the patient must tarry in it not long, least
any of his moisture within him should be drawn out by it, therefore in no case
must he sweat in it. There be some that use to sees in the water of the
bathe, herbs, as violettes, mallows, lettuce, flowers of water lillies and
such like: some other do sees calves feet, or lambs heads, until the flesh
be sodden from the bones. Also you must beware, least any thing be poured on
his head, seeing it is sufficient for it, to be dipped twice or thrice in the
water with the whole body, the sheet being let down easily, and then again
lifted up by four young men, which must carry him. Straight, when he is
brought from thence, he must be dipped all over once in cold water, and he may
not tarry in it any time at all. They that have this fever, and be brought into
a bathe, unless they be dipped in cold water, is helps them nothing (as
Galene says.) By and by, as soon as he is drawn out of the water, let another
sheet be ready, and cast him into that, and then into another. Then lay him in
his bed, and first wipe him with sponges, and after with soft linen clothes.
And let them not handle him violently, that do wipe him, but as easily, as they
can possibly. To conclude, after this, he must be anointed with cold oiles,
and with other moistening things. Among other this linime^t is good, Linimentum.
. oil of violettes..ss. oil of gourdes..iij. new butter without salt, swines
grease, ana..j.ss. commixe them, and make a liniment, wherewith anoint the
whole body. Or add to it musculage of tragacanthae..ij. marow of calves
shanckes..iij. wax as much as is sufficient, and make an ointment. Also oil of
water lillies, and of poppie, are good, and specially oil of roses, which (as
Galene says) does marueilously moisten dried bodies. When he is anointed and
clothed, you must bring him again upon a bed, or a sheet, into the place where
he is fed, and you must nourish him with meats. Also, it profits him to have
his heart cooled, and moistened with epithemes: as is this, Epithema cerdis.
. waters of violettes, water lillies, and lettuce, ana..iij. strong
vinegar..ss. red roses, all the saunders, ana..j. powder of diamargariton..ss.
seed of purcelaine. G.iij. ^affron..ss. commixe them and make an epitheme, and
apply it to the region of the heart cold. Epithema iccoris.
Likewise it is good to cool and moisten the liver thus,. water of
lettuce..ij. vinegre..j. diarrhodon abbatis..j.ss. scraping of iuorie,.ss.
purcelaine..ss. co^mixe them and make an epitheme and apply it to the liver.
Also for them that have the fever ethicke, medicines are good which ca^ cool
and moisten, with their odor and savor, as be flours of water lillies,
purcelaine, violettes, roses, Odorame^tum.
and such like. Also you may find more things, that are good for the cure of
the fever ethicke, in the second book, in the Chap. of the Ptisicke or
Consumption. And in curing of the fever ethicke this only must be your study
and labor, that the body may not only be cooled and moistened with those
things which be ministered inwardly, but also by things that be applied
outwardly, and specially by anointing with oil. How much oil applied and
anointed outwardly, specially does help to the conseruatio^ of the body, and
to the restoring of strength, We are taught by the notable example of Pollio
Romulus, Pollio Romulus.
who being above an hundred years old (as Pliny tells) diuus Augustus his
host asked him, by what means he kept that vigor, force, and strength of body
and mind: he answered thus: Intus mulso, foris oleo (that is) I keep me moist
with mulsa within, and oil I anoint upon my skin.

CAP. XI. Of an hemitrice fever. DE HAEMITRITAEO SEV SEMITERTIANA.
ALTHOUGH there be diverse kinds of compound fevers, as is declared in the
beginning of this book in the explication of fevers: yet in this place we will
only speak of that fever, which is compounded of an intermitting tertian, and
a continual quotidian. And it is called in Greek, haemitritaeus, and in
Latin semitertiana, in English half a tertian. Hemitritaeus quid.
It is so called because this whole fever has half the nature of the said
fevers, each of them: by the example of this compound fever, you may learn to
cure all other compound fevers. Causae.
Therefore an hemitrice fever is caused, when putrified fleume is commixed with
rotten choler. It is declared before that a tertian inuadeth the patient with
rigor and vehement cold, Signae.
and a quotidian comes with cooling of the extreme parts. Therefore the
fever which is compounded of them both causes horror and shaking for cold,
which is less, then the rigor of a tertian, and greater and more vehement
then the cooling of a quotidian: so that it is a mean between them both. It is
engendered two sundry ways: for either two fittes are joined together by and by
at the beginning, and do invade the patient together both at once, or else each
of them comes separate from the other. Therefore when the tertian does
exceed the other, it causes a more horrible fever, and also it has much
rigor and vehement cold in the augmenting of the fit, and there is present
greater heat and more burning, and choler is driven out either by vomiting, or
by egestion, or it breaths out a moist vapor, but when the quoditian
exceeds the tertian, then cold is in the extreme parts, and but a little
shaking, and neither burning nor thirst does vex him. But when the
intermitting tertian, and the continual quotidian be equal and of like force
and greatness, the fit does come with horror and shaking for cold. And when
the quotidian is of greatest force, the pulses and horror wax less and
gentler: but if the tertian prevail, by and by the pulses and horror increase
and wax greater. Note therefore, when a fever is engendered of an intermitting
tertian, and a continual quotidian being equal of like force, greatness and
strength, then it is called an exquisite hemitriteus ague: but if one fever do
exceed the other, Exquisitus haemitriteus. Non exquisitus hemitritaeus. Curatio.
the^ it is called an vnpure hemitrice. You may understand by the former
Chapters, how this fever should be cured. For seeing an exquisite hemitrice
fever is engendered of two fevers equally commixed (that is) a tertian and a
quotidian: you must also use a cure convenient and agreeing equally to a
tertian and a quotidian. But in an vnpure hemitrice, when there is most of
choler, or most of fleume: you must also vary and change the cure, according
to the humor and fever that abounds. For if choler have the upper hand, you
must chiefly use the remedies, which we have declared in the cure of the
tertian. But if fleume abound most, use the things most that be declared in
the cure of the quotidian. To conclude you must most covet the cure of that
which has most need, and does most abound, but so, that you do not
altogether neglect the other. Therefore we need not in this place rehearse the
remedies, whereby this fever should be destroyed and cured, seeing every man may
learn the cure of them, more readily according to the diversity and nature of
the humors out of the Chapters of curing of the tertian and quotidian.
Therefore if any man do first learn to know exactly and perfectly the curing of
simple fevers, he shall also know how to cure compound fevers without any more
labor: for the cures of simple fevers being known, and considered, it is most
ready to any man to cure compound fevers, so that here we shall not need to
write severally of the curing of compound fevers.

CAP. XII. Of the Pestilence. DE PESTILENTIA.
SEEING that at this present time and day, there be every where treatises of
the Pestilence made of diverse new Authors: I need not now long dispute here
of it: but it shall be sufficient, if we do briefly declare the causes, signs,
and curing of it, Causae.
as we have done in other diseases before. There be two especial causes of the
Pestilence (as Galene writes in lib. 1. de differentijs febrium. VVheren
rottenness begins.
The beginning of corrupted air, and of the rotten euaporation, is either a
multitude of dead bodies not burned or buried, as it chances in wars, or
the euaporation of some pooles, fennes or mareshes in the Summer time. It
chances also sometime to come before immoderate heat of the air, when the
temperature of the air is changed from his natural state, to immoderate
heat and moisture, of necessity the Pestilence must follow. Notae.
Hereupon Galene says, that of all temperamentes of the air, the worse is
that, which is hot and moist. Also oftentimes (as is before said) naughty and
corrupt diette ingendreth humors in the body, that be easy and ready to
putrify and rotte, and so is the cause why such bodies are infected with the
Pestilence. And then truly they specially have the Pestilence, which use a
naughty and corrupt diette, and so be full of all kinds of superfluities.
Therefore it need not seem marvelous, if sometime some one among many (which
yet does very seldom chance) be infected with this disease, the air yet not
being pestilent and corrupt. For they that keep a good and heathfull diet, and
be without superfluities in their bodies, they take no hurt at all, or else
very little hurt, although they be in the corrupt and pestilent air and may
easily return and be brought to their natural habit and state. Hereby it is
easy to answer them that ask, Note.
how it chances that all men are not taken equally with the Pestilence,
seeing every one is constrained to breath in the pestilent air. The first
cause why some remain unhurt, is because they be not full of superfluous
humiditie and moisture, but do use moderate diet and exercises, and have their
body easy to breath out vapors. Another cause is, because all men's bodies be
not of like disposition and affect. For dispositions of men's bodies are of
many sundry forms, for some bodies are quickly overcome and infected, and do
most readily suffer any cause: but some again be insuperable, and can not be
overcome, nor will at all suffer the infection, or else very hardly. And
therefore the greatest portion of ingendring of diseases, is the disposition of
the body of him that suffers the disease. For else all men, that tarried long
in the burning heat of the Sun, or that used overmuch moving, or that were
laden with wine or inflamed with anger, or affected with sadness, should fall
into a fever. Also we do not deny, Plagues from God.
but that sometime great plagues and Pestilence be sent of God for the grievous
sins and horrible offenses of men, wherewith he punishes the great offenses
of us: whereof there be many evident testimonies in the Prophets, and
specially in Ezechiell. cap. 5. The time of the year in the which chiefly by
nature the Pestilence is rife and flourishes, The time of the Plague.
is the end of Summer, and the beginning of harvest or Autumn: for then both
the air and men's bodies are most apt to putrify, corrupt, and rot for many
causes. Signs of the (...).
There be many and diverse signs of the Pestilence to come rehearsed of the
new Authors: among which signs: the first is the changing of the times of the
year. The second is often phenomenon in the air, Signe^ ^f ^he infected.
that declare when one is already infected with the Pestilence. The first is
if the outward members be cold, and the inward members burning hot. The second
is heaviness, weariness, and Signifying of botches.
For if they do appear in the neck, they do declare that the veins be chiefly
vexed: if under the armholes, the heart: but if they appear in the share the
liver is most affected. But seeing that botches do not always appear, (which
is most perilous and dangerous, for it betokens that nature is weak and
feeble, and is not able to expel and drive out the venomous humors) you must
have respect to other signs and tokens, which be rehearsed a little before.
Curatio. Venae sectio.
As for the Cure if the aforesayed signs do appear, then if nothing do let,
by and by you must cut a vein on that side, in which the pestilent botch does
appear. If the botch do appear behind the ears, or about the chinne, or in
other parts of the face and neck you must let blood out of the Cephalica
vein on the same side. If it appear and come out under the armehoales, you
must cut the innermost vein of the arm, on the same side, it is commonly
called basilica: or if that vein will not appear, take the middle vein. If
the botch do appear in the share, you must draw out blood from the ankles of
the same side. But if there do appear no hotch outwardie, you must draw out
blood from the same side, where there is felt greatest pain and heaviness.
But out of which vein you must let blood, the pain and grief of the members
afflicted, will declare to you well enough: for if the members above the breast
be grieved and afflicted most, cut the Cephalica vein. But if the parts
beneath the neck be most grieved and afflicted, cut the basilica or the
middle vein: and if the nether parts be most vexed you must cut the vein
of the hamme or ankles. And if nature be strong, and other things not
letting, you must draw out blood abundantly. But if through age or for
other causes, you may not use bloudlettinge, Cucurbita.
you must fasten cupping glasses to the neck and the shoulders, or to the
back, or to the legs. And if the Pestilence do invade any man at his
dinner time or supper time, Vomitus.
when the stomach is filled with meat, then, he must vomit straight way. At
the last, when the body and stomach is emptied, you must by and by minister
some medicine, Alexiteria.
that can resist poison, that it may draw the poison to it, and call it back
from the heart, for that is the property of such medicines. Among a great
number of the which, Electuariu^ de ouo.
this is praise worthy, which is called Electuarium de ouo, which once a good
and wise Emperor called Maximilianus did use. Why I do prefer this almost
before all other is, because of his marvelous effect, and virtues, which have
appeared often in diverse sick persons: and because it is easy to make,
except the root of white diptayne, which can not well be gotten, for the which
it is better to use the leaves of true diptayne, which may well be come by.
Minister of the aforesayed Electuarie to them that be of perfect age..j. and to
them that be younger sometime..ij. will suffice, you must dissolve it in water
of roses, or endive, or scabious: Also this medicine used is good to preserve a
man from the Pestilence, if he take thereof daily the weight of a grain or
two of barley, or the quantity of a pease. Also the taking of this Potion
does help much.. Theriaca Andromachi..ij. Mithridatum..j. Bole armorniacke
preparate..ss. waters of roses, Potis. Bolus armenius.
scabious and buglosse. ana..j. Commixe them. What power and strength is in
bole armoniacke to drive away the Pestilence, Galene teaches abundantly in
libro nono, de simplicium Medicamentorum facultatibus. Where he writes that
in a great Plague that was in Room, as many as droncke this medicine were
quickelie healed. Wherefore this medicine ought chiefly to be used in the
time of the Pestilence. Puluis optimus.
Moreover this powder does profit very much.. the leaves of true diptaine,
the root of turmentill, the root of pimpernell, zedoarie, gentian, root of
Betonica altilis, commonly called tunica. ana..ss. Bole armoniacke
preparate..j. terra lemnia..iij. Aloes epaticke, mirrhe. ana..ss. saffron..j.
masticke..ij. and beat them all to very fine powder, and make a Tritura.
Whereof minister to the sick..j. in rose water or sorrel water. When the
Patient has taken some of the aforesaid medicines, lay him in a warmed bed
being made with soft sheets, Sudor.
and well covered with clothes, that he may there sweat four or five hours,
or longer according to his strength. But and if by this means you can scarsly
provoke him to sweat, you must lay tiles being heatte at the fire, to the
feet of the Patient, for these by reason of their heat will readily provoke
sweatte. And in all the time that the sick does sweat, you must only take
heed, that he do neither sleep, eat, nor drink. After sweating you must
diligently wipe of the sweatte with very clean and fine lynnen clothes.
Then afterward let the sick rise from his bed, if he will or if he
can, and let him eschew the open air. Let the air of the chamber in which
the sick does lie, be corrected, anmended and purified with odoriferous
things, Acris correctio.
and with sweet smelling perfumes, daily four or five times. It is best for
the sick to change from one chamber to another. Because the air of one
chamber by the continual tarying of the sick in it, is much corrupted, and
can not easily be corrected and amended. Let the air of the chamber into the
which the sick shall remove, be first corrected and purged with perfumes.
What those things should be, we will declare afterward. Two or three hours
after the patient has sweatte, give vn-him the broth of a chicken, and, When
meat should be ministered.
that you must do often afterward according to his strength: for the sick
must be nourished and refreshed by little and little. Therefore it is good for
him to eat often, and but very little at once: for they that are thus fed,
will sooner recover again then other. Also he may use to eat the flesh of
chickens, sodden with sorrel, or with juice of lymons, or else veriuyce. Also
the sick must be kept altogether from sleep the first day by talk of the
assistauntes, Of sleep.
by rubbing of the extreme parts, by pulling of their ears, nose, and hair.
For the which purpose it is not unprofitable to dippe a sponge in very sharp
vinegre, and hold it to the nose. If the Patient have vehement thirst, Potio.
he may use this potion.. Iulep of violettes..iij. syrup of the sharp juice
of Cytrons..j.ss. syrup of sown Endive..ij. of the decoction of sorrel,
scabious, and flowers of buglosse.. ten, or so much of their distilled
waters, commixe them and make a potion. Also you must take the wa^er wherein
bareley has been sodden a little, and commixe with it juice of roses, or
sorrel, or lymons or of unripe grapes, and minister it in steed of drink.
And you must minister medicines (speciall^e if the strength be feeble) which
can strengthen and comfort the heart, and other principal members of the
body, as this is.. conserues of violettes, ^
roses and buglosse. ana..j.ss. Bole armoniacke preparate..j. read coral..j.
barks of the Citron apple..j.ss. Camphire..v. with syrup of the juice of
sharp Citrons, as much as is sufficient, make an Electuarie or liquide
antidote. Also you must lay upon the region of the heart, (specially if the
sick do yet feel heat about the breast) this Epitheme.. waters of roses,
buglosse and sorrel. ana..iiij. powder of Electuarium de g^mmis..j. wood of
Aloe^, Epithema.
red saunders, the barks of a citron apple, beaten to powder, the bone of the
Hearts heart. ana..v. saffron. gr. 6. commix them all and make an Epitheme. But
you must note that the Epithemes may not be applied, except they be made hot:
and as soon as they are cooled, you must take them away straight way: for then
they constrain and shut up the poores, and so do bring unto the patient no
small grief. Therefore it is better to use cordial baggs, as this is, (...).
. flowers of red roses, water lillies, and of violets. ana..ij. of all the
saunders, coral, white and red, spodium, pearls. ana..iij. cinnamon, cloves,
the bone of the hearts heart, wood of aloes, barks of the citron apple, saffron.
ana..j. seed of sorrel..ij. seed of purslaine. gra. iiij. beat all these
into a fine powder, and make two square bags of silk, and apply each after
other being heat. Moreover you must altogether covet and labor, that the
venomous humors may be entised and drawn to the place, where the botches
appear and burst out, and you must do it by setting to of cupping glasses, or
by medicines applied, Cure and medicines.
that have virtue and power to draw those humors, as this is.. fat figs in
number vj. great raisons..ss. salt gum..ij. honey..j. with oil of chammomill,
make it into the form of an emplaister, and apply it hot to the botch. Or
apply this plaster, Emplastrum.
which is much commended of all men.. a great onion, and cut of the head of it,
and pick out all the core within, then fill it with Theriacha Andromachi,
adding to it juice of rewe or sage, which done stop the hole fast that is in
the top of the onion with lute, and set the onion in the imbres to roast. And
when you do think that it is roasted enough, pull of the barks of it, and then
bray it in a mortar, until it be thick like an emplaister, and apply it hot
to the botch. You need not to be afraid to apply theriaca to the botches,
because of the authority of Gentilis and Valescus and some other authors. For
theriaca, and such like medicines against poison do not work their operation
by driving the poison from them (as they being in a wonderful error do
affirm) but rather they work by drawing the poison to them (as Galene
teaches, in his book de theriaca ad pisonem.) Also this emplaister is good,
Error of Ge^tilis and Valescus.
for it helps much to the rotting of the botch.. meal of fenugreeke, and
lineseede, Emplastrum suppuratorium
of flowers of chammomill. ana..ss. roots of althaea and white lillies.
ana..ss. figs in number six, leaves of true diptaine..iij. roots of
valerian..ij. mustarde seed..j.ss. doves dong..ss. oils of chammomill and
lillies. ana..j.ss. make them into the form of an emplayster or pultise. Aliud.
Also this is praised.. of emplastrum diachylon simplex..ij. of gum
armoniack, and galbanum. ana..j. bray them together, and bring them to the
form of an emplaister. But if the botch will not break of him self by
applying the aforsaid things, you must then lay upon it goose dong dissolved in
the common oil, or in oil of chammomill. And this is sufficient to speak of
here as touching the cure of them which be taken with the Pestilence.

A preservation from the pestilence.
Now we will briefly expound, by what means a man may preserve and defend him
self from the infection of the Pestilence, which vexes and infecteth in some
certain place or region. And seeing (as we have declared in the beginning of
this Chapter) it is evident that the pestilence is not caused, but through the
breathing in of pestilent and corrupt air: there can not be a more present
remedy to preserve one, Flight is the best remedy.
then flying from the corrupt air. For there is no other means to avoid the
pestilent air, because whether we will or no, we must draw in such air,
unless we get us away into some other place, where the air is not corrupted
nor infected, but pure and good. Which you must the rather and more quick- he
do if the evil be greatly infectiue. And you must flee far of into such a
place whereas the air is known to be pure and good, and destitute of
corruption, neither must you return home again from that place very soon.
Hereuppon it is not rashly said of the Common sort, that these three Aduerbes
Cito, long and tarde, in the time of the Pestilence, do more pleasure and
profit then three shoppes very well furnished. Therefore they, that may
conveniently for their business, flee away let them not suffer them selves to
be persuaded by any means, to tarry in the pestilentayre: which if they do,
they shall foolishlie put them selves in danger of Pestilent death: but if you
may not flee for urgent business, and just causes, then let your first care
be, that the house in which you must tarry, be without all kind of stink, and
kept clean from all filthiness and sluttishnesse. Let the windows of it be
just shut, specially in cloudie and rainie days, that the pestilent air
enter not in. But if you will open them, see that they open upon the east or
north quarter, and do it, when the Sun is risen above the earth some hours.
You must come abroad but seeledome, and not except the element be clear and
bright: neither come then, unless you have first taken some medicine, which is
able to preserve you from the infection. You must make fires daily in your
houses, with oken wood, Juniper, tamariscus, laurel or such like, that thereby
the corrupt air that is in the house, may be corrected and purged. For there
is a maruelouse virtue and strength in fire to amend and correct the
rottenness and corruption of the air. Also you must strewe often upon coals
this powder following. Suffi^en^a.
. rosemarie. M.ss. sage, betonie, wormwood, mergerome, origan. ana. M.j. braye
all finely and make a powder. Or use this powder.. of Juniper bearies..j.
mirrhe..iij. frankensence and masticke. ana..iij.ss. root of benedicta..j.
rewe..ss. Cipresse barks..j.ss. root of Angelica, lauender. ana..ij. beat
all together, and make a powder. Let poor folk lay upon quick coals, juniper
clefte in small sticks, or the bearies of Jupiter. Let richer folk use wood
of Aloes, or powder of Gallia moschata, cloves and such like. When necessity
constrayneth you to go abroad, A pomander.
carry this or such a like pomander with you.. Lapdanum..iij. storax
calamitae..ij. cinnamon, mace, cloves, nutmegges. ana..j. wood of Aloes..j.
spikenarde..ss. mirrhe, masticke, frankensence. ana..ss. musk and ambre. ana.
gra. iij. powder them, and searce them, and with storax liquida, and water of
mergerome, as much as is sufficient, commix them and make a pomum odoratum. In
summer time, let the air be purified and corrected with cold things, as with
flowers of roses, violets, water lillies, vine leaves, and branches, willow
leaves, and such other like. Also sprinkle the pauement or flower with water of
roses, sorell, and such like, or with cold water, wherewith some vinegre is
commixed, also it profits to smell roses, vinegre, camphire, saunders, and
such otherlike. Or to smell to this pomander. Pila odorata.
. Lapdanum..ss. storax calamitae..iij. flowers of water lillies, roses, and
violets. ana..j. barks of the citron apple..j.ss. all the saunders. ana..ss. of
maces and cinnamon. ana. j. mastik..j. white poppy..ss. camphire,.ss. ambre,
musk. ana. gra. ij. bray all and commix the^ with storax liquida and rose
water, and make a pomander. But seeing Galen says, that one of the chiefest
things, Diet.
which they that would be preserved from the pestilence, ought to regard and
take heed of, is that their body be for the most part without superfluities
and excrements, and may well breath out the vapors. Truly there is nothing
more to be eschewed at such a time, then overmuch devouring, and swalowing in
glotonously of meat and drink. Therefore let their meats be altogether easy
of digestion, and such as engender good blood, and be not ready to putrify
and rot. And always commix with the meats, that be eaten at that time some
vinegre, or some other sharp juice, as veriuice, or juice of citron apples, or
of lymons, or orenges. In summer time he must use for potherbs, buglosse,
endive, succorie, and lettuce, and in winter let him use sage, parsley, apium,
mergerome, balm, and hysope. He must abstain from all fruits, unless they be
sharp, as be pomegranates, citrons, lymons, orenges and such like, which are
good for him to use. Let his drink be wine, that is thin and waterie. Let
every man beware of strong wine, that is vnalayed and new. To conclude, let
his diet be altogether cooling and drying. Therefore he may not use exercises,
Exerciti^^n.
but in a mean and in a temperate place, and in an air being first purified,
amended, and corrected by medicines and perfumes. Therefore you must eschew
common dauncings openly and also runnings, leapings, and whatsoever such like
exercise there be that requires often breathing in of air. Therefore because
of this also in the time of the pestilence, he must eschew companies gathered,
together by magistrates, by some open commandment for matters of the common
wealth, as courts, sessions and such like. Let his sleep, watchinges and all
other things be moderate and in a mean. But he must sleep in a chamber that
is close, well stopped and shut, lest the pestilent air should enter into it:
the air of which chamber must be purified and corrected with some perfume
aforesaid, morning and evening. He must use sheets that be pure and clean,
and that have been laid up a while with odoriferous things. When he is awaked
from sleep, let this be his first care and work to empty the body of
superfluities and excrementes. Excretion.
And you must only take heed and beware that the body be not costiue at any
time. Therefore if it do not of it self void out excreme^ts daily, you shall
provoke them out with pilulae rufi, or with a soft clister, or with a
suppositary made for the purpose. When the body is emptied from superfluities
and excrements as well by the guts as by the bladder, he must take some
medicine, that can preserve him from the infection of the pestilence, for the
which there be many things before rehearsed. And if necessary business do
constrain you to go abroad openly, you may chew zedoarie, or root of
angelica, or pimpernell, or you shall smell to rue. For the savor of it does
marvelously resist the pestilent air. He must eschew all carnal lust,
specially immoderate using thereof. ^
After copulation, he must keep him out of the open and infectiue air. Bathes
must altogether be abhorred, as a most present poison, specially common bathes,
because when the poores of the body are opened by the heat of it, the
pestilent air does readily creep into the body. They that will use a private
bath, let them preserve and defend them selves most diligently from the
corrupted air, when they do go out of the bath. But it is better and more
wholesome to use frictions at home in a rectified air, and let bathes alone,
but yet you may wash the head weakly with lie, wherein has bin sodden asarum,
maioram, lauender, rosemarie, betony, sage, cammomill, and such other like, but
young men and such as abound with blood, must in the time of the pestilence use
bloudletting: and that, not only once, Bloudletting.
but (if nothing let to the contrary) bloudletting often does profit much to
preserve them in health: because it does much cool the state of the body, and
brings it to a moderate heat. Also you must purge the body (if need
require) with purging medicines, Purgatio.
and that specially in the spring time and Autumn. As for perturbations of the
mind, he must eschew sadness, anger, hatred, fear, great cares, and heavy
thoughts, and he must use joy and mirth in a mean. Now it remains,
Preservatives
that we describe medicines, which can keep and preserve us safe from the
infection of the Pestilence. Among which the pills that are called pilulae
rufi or pestilentiales, or else communes, pilulae communes.
are principal and chief.. aloes epatick, two parts, saffron oriental,
mirrhe. ana. one part, with white wine, or with water of scabious, make pills
of which minister daily..j. and more, or less according to the age and
strenghth of the patient. These pills because of the Aloes and mirrhe in them,
which do most resist putrefaction, they have a marvelous efficacy and virtue
against the infecting of Pestilent air. Pi^^le.
Also you may use these Pills followinge.. Aloes epaticke..iij. mirrhe..j.ss.
agaricke preparate..j. saffron oriental..ss. bole armoniacke preparate..j.
seed of Citron apples..ij. masticke..ss. root of pimpernell..ss. with rose
water make 13. pills of.j. of which minister one or two. Electuariu^ de
nucibus.
Also you may use that medicine, that is commonly called electuarium de
nucibus.. of walnuts in number 20. of fat figs in number 13. rewe. M.ij. of
wormwood, cotula foetida and scabious. ana. M.j. root of aristolochia
longae..ss. root of aristolochia rotunda..j.ss. of turmentill, petasitis, and
pimpernell. ana..ij.ss. leaves of true diptaine. M.j. of laurel bearies..iij.
of hearts horn burnt..ij.ss. maces, mirthe, bole armoniacke, true terra lemnia.
ana..iij. salt of the sea..j.ss. nux vamica..ij. flowers of buglosse. M.j.
beat them all, and commix them with lib. ij. of clarified honey, and make a
liquide medicine like a Loche. Also this powder is very good.. leaves of true
diptaine..ss. of the roots of zedoarie, Puluis.
tunica, pimpernell, and turmentill. ana..ss barks of the citron apple..iij.
terra lemnia..vj bole armoniocke..j. mirrhe chosen, aloes epatick. ana..ss.
saffron..ss. masticke..j.ss. lycorace,.j. scabious and sortell. ana..iij. red
saunders..j. scraping of Iuorie, and anthera. ana..ss. the bone of the Hearts
heart, red Coral. ana..ij. seed of purslaine. gran. 5. bray all finely, and
make a powder. If you will, you may make of these, lozenges, with sugar, and
waters of roses and scabious, and minister daily of them..j. or more, or less
according to age and strength. Also only bole armoniacke taken with vinegre,
is notably praised. Likewise theriaca, mithridatum, and such other are good,
whereof there is plenty named of them that have written of the Plague. We
therefore here will make an end of speaking of this kind of evil.

Libri quarti finis.
THE FIFTH BOOK CONTAINING THE CVRING OF TVMOVRES WHICH HAPPEN ABOVE NATVRE.
CAP. I. What that swelling is, which happens besides nature, which
commonly is called by his general name Apostema, and the sifting out of the
true definition, and of the division of the same, according to the opinion of
the Neoterickes.
THESE Tumors which have their being besides nature, the later sort both of
Physicians and Chirurgians, and not they only, but almost the uniform consent
of old writers have comprehended under this name Apostema: (...).
whereas indeed (...), both by Galene, and all other Grecians, has been
reputed, but as one kind of those swelling tumors, which commonly are said to
chance besides nature, which the Latins have very fitly termed abscessus,
Abscessus.
and the crewe of younger Physicians do call it exitura, deriuing the original
of the word from the interpreter of Auicene: of the which, and of all other
kinds we will entreat particularly in his several chapter. Although in deed
it has pleased some of the later sort to make Apostema as the species or
differentia of those tumors besides nature: appointing it to be diverse from
that which they call exitura, and also from that other kind pustula. For under
the name of Apostumes, they will conclude and place those tumors only, which
being lifted up into a great bigness, do fetch their procreation from the
influence of natural humors (as they term them) whereupon they call them
vera Apostemata. Therefore when Apostema is taken for the genus, comprehending
under it all the tumors besides nature by Auicene and his followers it is thus
commonly defined. An Aposteme is a disease compounded of three kinds of
maladies, all aggregated into one bigness, The common definition of Apostema.
which definition they do affirm to be essential, consisting (as they say)
of genus and differentia, which do very sufficiently explane the nature of
that, which is defined, appointing this word disease to be the genus, and the
other words which are annexed, do stand to manifest the difference of other
the like infirmities, which do happen by the composition and construction of
the instruments: All which distinctions and diversities, Galene does recite in
his book entitled de morbo and symptomate. But these three kinds of sores,
Three kinds of diseases appointing the essence of tumors besides nature.
which in that swelling besides nature commonly called Apostema, do concur
establishing the essence of one only disease, are these: intemperature, which
they also call an evil complexion: immoderation, whereby they intend a
synister composition, and the solution of that agreeing unity which nature
affords to every body. To which three kinds, the Greeks have assigned
three apposite and fit terms, calling the first, (...), the second (...),
the third (...): but they bring also many other discriptions rather then
definitions of this Apostema: for definitions I dare not term them, when as
they do not convert with that which is defined, neither do they serve either
to the sufficient explication of his nature, or the constitution of his
essence, which they very wel^ knowing, are content to let them go under the
name of accidental definitions. One of them they have desumed and taken out of
Galen his book which he wrote de tumoribus praeter naturam. An Aposteme or
tumor besides nature, Accidental definitions.
is one of those things which happening to the body, does inflate that part
which it occupies, to the extremest dimension. This definition they have
extorted out of Galene his words, which he set not down as an exquisite
definition, but as an ordinary assertion. You may fashion (if you please) many
such definitions, as this for one. Definitio prima.

Secunda.

Tertia.


An Aposteme is an increment exceeding natural constitution: or this: an
Aposteme is a tumor, in the which the parts have departed from their natural
state and habit in quantity, and bigness. Whereas Galen in his lib. 13. therap
meth. has these words: in this thirteth part of our whole work we will
begin to discourse of those tumors happening besides nature, in which the
parts have forsaken their natural constitution by becoming more big, so
that you seeing the sle^der weight of these definitions, you must annexe this
Particle, actiones laedeus, hurting the duties of the body, or thus, inducing
an evident detriment to the actions, or else they will not be absolute or
essential: for every tumor making distention or swelling in length, breadth
or profunditie, beyond the ordinary constitution of nature, other in all the
body, or in any part thereof: or every excrement or greatness exceeding
nature, must not according to the vulgar acception be named either Apostema, or
a swelling besides nature. For (as Galene says in his book de tumoribus
praeter naturam) such like augmentations may befall not only to the diseased,
but also to the healthful, as well in the whole body, as in any member of the
same. For gross men, although they be enlarged, A perfect definition besides
nature, taken out of the writings of Galen.

The division of a tumor besides nature into his species after the opinion of
the later sort.


and as it were distended both in breadth and profunditie: yet they have not
this distention besides nature, but (as he says) only not naturally: for they
have not yet passed the bounds of nature, neither are the actions and duities
of their part maimed or anoyed, which is the border of those increments which
are besides nature: and those tumors which abide in those parts, which are
yet sound and without the taste of grief, may well be said to be above and
beyond nature, but not besides nature, as for example: if both the teats, or
one of them only be marvelously increased, or inflated, yet so that his
substance be free from all annoiaunce, this cannot appositiuely be said to be
besides nature, but only beyond nature. Therefore if you desire on absolute
definition of this tumor, which happens besides nature, collected out of the
writings of Galene, you shall thus define it: A swelling besides nature is an
increment surpassing the ordinary habit of nature, bringing with it a maime
to the actions thereof. But such like tumors besides nature are wont to be
divided into three kinds by Guido, Apostemata.
and those of his age, into impostumes, abscessions, and pusshes or ulcers.
Impostumes they call great tumors, in which the matter, whereof it springs,
does offend in plenty or quantity: Pustulae.
pusshes are those little tumors (which they call bothor) in which, the
substance whereof they arise is troublesome rather in quality then in
quantity, yea and in them there lurketh a poisonous venyme (as they say) but
the abscessions are those tumors which the Latins call Abscessus, and of the
Greeks may well be named (...), as we proved before: Exiturae.
but let it be lawful for every man to impose what titles or names they will,
so that (as Galene says) they do not swerve or straie from the natural
meaning of the things them selves: but leaving all the scrupulous and
scholerlike contentio^s, which some do use in the entreaty of this subject,
as impertiment to our purpose. I will orderly set down the branches of all
the tumors or imposthumes, (if so you will term them) which happen besides
nature: and first we will begin with inflammation.

CAP. II. Of the differences of those tumors which happen besides nature. DE
DIFFERENTIIS TVMORVM, QVI PRAETER NATVRAM INCIDVNT.
THERE be many and sundry differences of tumors besides nature, which
commonly are called by this general name Apostumes: the difference whereof, The
division of a tumor in it his differences.

From whence the differences of tumors besides nature are taken of the latter
sort. S^^stantiae.


of the later Chyrurgians are observed to proceed, either from the substance of
the sore, or from the matter thereof, or from the Accidents, or from the
affected parts, or else from the efficient causes. The differences, which they
desume from the substance, are supposed by Auicene and his sect to be two,
either the greatness of the swelling, or the littlenes thereof. Amongst the
big tumors, they do reckon phlegmone (which appear commonly in fleshie
places, which are fit to be distended) and aedema, erysipelas, and schirrhus,
which all do grow up to a great bigness and quantity. Little tumors are
called of them little eminences or appearings, or breakings out called pusshes,
which are commonly seen in the skin, and the uttermost parts of the body,
as the Greeks leprosy, the scabbe, the ringworme, and such other like, of the
which we will speak more at larg hereafter. The matter of the aforesaid
tumors are the four humors, Materia.
as well natural, as not natural (that is to say) fleame, melancholy,
choler, and those humors which are altogeater besides nature, sometime the
soundnes of certain bodies, and sometime a yealowe or pale humor, the
handling of all which differences we will refer unto another place. The
symptomates or accidents, which are commonly incident to these tumors are,
Accidentia.
grief, heat, softnes, hardness and such like: from the which they will derive
some differences: but those which they take from the members and from the
affected parts, as ophthalmia, the inflammation of the eye, the squince, the
inflammation of the throat, Pars affecta.
phyma, phygethlum, and those inflammations which we term glandulae and
bubones. But the efficient causes from the which certain differences be
borrowed, Causae eff^cientes.
are congestion and flux, and crisis (that is to say) judgment thereof which
happens in diseases: there be also certain other causes both internal and
external, whereof we will dispute more copiouslie and earnestly in that which
follow. But yet truly all the diversities and differences of these kinds of
swellings chauncing above nature, From whence the difference of tumors above
nature do come and arise.
have their beginning from the nature and substance (which provoke the
swelling) of that which flows (as witnesses Galen in his book which he
wrote of Tumors happening above nature.) Likewise in his second book that he
wrote unto Gluco. cap. 13. meth. med. in which places he declares that the
variety of all swellings which are above nature, does arise of the nature of
that which flows: for when (says he) a flatuous matter has more free
access, then also the tumors are made more flatuous: but they are more like
unto phlegmone when as blood abounds: as likewise Erysipilas, when
melancholy has his course: and they be also more vexed with aedema, when
fleame or reume discending from the head does reign. Also they be grieved
with the disease Scirrhosis, when either a thick or too cold a humor is
settled in some part thereof. Therefore all tumors do chance (as Galene
affirms) besides nature which proceed either of humors, or of a flatuous
and windy spirit, which is gathered sometime under the skin, sometime under
the thin filmes that cover the bones, sometime in the belly, sometime in the
intrailes, oftentimes in the midst of these, and of the peritonaeum. The
Greeks call it Emphysema: Ephysema.
Auicene terms it a windy apostema. If such swellings happen of humors,
then they are either hot, or cold, or mingled together. Callidi tumores.
Hot tumors come of the best blood (that is to say) which is parfectly
ruddy, and of a mean soundnes and moderate quality, and then the Greeks call
it phlegmone, the Latins, inflammatio: or they proceed of yealowe choler or
of burning and thin blood, or else of those things which be hotter then
blood or choler. They term this evil Erysipelas, but these name it
Sacerignis. But cold swellings are provoked either through thin fleame, and
then the Greeks call it aedema, Tumores frigidi.
but our Physicians term it laxus tumor: the interpreter of Auicene vndimia,
or else it is caused through the humor of choler, or through thick, cold,
and clammie fleame. They call this Scirrhon, the Latins, durities, the
Arabians, sephirus. Tumores serosi.
Also swellings sometimes do chance by reason of a late taking away of
superfluous blood, as hereafter shall be declared. Tumors are said to be
mingled, when such kind of humors are tempred together, and if one
maistereth the other, from that which exceeds in the mixture, Tumores
complicati.

One evil seems to have some affinity with the other.


is the name given to the swelling, as in blood ruling choler, we will call
phlegmone the principal, to be Erysipelatodem, and also because of melancholy
governing, Erysipelas is said to be phlegmonodes. Now of other mixtures there
is the like interpretation, both Scirrhus phlegmonosus with phlehmone
scirrhosa: and aedema phlegmonosum with phlegmone aedematosa. And after this
example you shall name the other tumors, although there chances commixion
together of three or four humors at once. Moreover, if the humors be of
like force, and equally incorporate, so that the one can not overcome the
other, then we will name the tumors by the coupling together of those
humors, which they stir or raise up. As if blood be equally mingled with
choler, that evil may be called, by reason of their joining together
phlegmone and erysipelas, or (as Galen has it) it may be termed a mean in the
kind and nature of phlegmone and erysipelas. The chief tumors that are
caused of flowing of humors.
These truly be the chief swellings and tumors, which are recyted in Galene
by the flowing of humors: (that is to say) phlegmone, erysipelas, aedema,
scirrhus: unto the which innumerable other tumors, exceeding the measure and
bounds of nature are reduced, and comprehended under them, although they have
chosed to themselves diverse names according to their sundry causes.
Therefore, there partayneth unto a kind of phlegmone, phygethon, What tumors
do associate phlegmone.
which is called panus (Celsus being the author) but of our men phyma and
tuberculum, also it is named of the same Celsus terminthon of Oribatius, the
kinds or species of phyma, but of Aetius, phigethlum: also they be called
dothienes, which Celsus does call furunculi, felons. Likewise gangrena of some
member, (...) (that is to say) mortification but not absolute, and also
sphacelus, which is called of the Latins syderatio, and of Auicene ascachilos.
Carbunculus also called of the Greeks Anthrax: whereof Auicene writes in the
chapter de pruna and igne persico. But unto erysipelas are referred herpetes,
Erysipelatos^ tumores.
which in kind be two manner of ways (that is to say) miliares and exedentes,
biting and gnawing, which the Greeks do call (...). He which expounds
Auicene has called both the kinds formicae, (...).
but he being deceived with the likeness of the name, has mixed the^ in the
same chapter by great oversight, with those verrucae, which the Greeks call
mirmeciae, the Latins formicae. Celsus seems to have comprehended those
herpete under the name of ignis sacer: but the Chirurgians of later time have
numbered them among the choleric pustules (as they term them.) There comes
also of choler almost those diseases called of the Greeks phlyctaenae, and
therefore they belong unto erysipelas, O^dematos^ tumores.
whereof Auicene does entreat in his chapter de vesicis and inflammationibus.
Unto the tumors caused of fleame, that is, unto aedemata, are referred
certain tumors, comprehended of the Greeks under the name of apostema which
be called of Auicene nodi, of Haly abbas, selaa, and dubeleta phlegmatica, of
the Latins abscessus: whereof there be diverse kinds according to the diverse
matters contained in them. Moreover in Galene there be three such kinds of
abscessus chauncing very often whereof eueryone has borrowed his proper name
of the Greeks: those be, atheromata, steatomata, melicerides, which in deed
be called after the likeness of bodies contained in them, as we will hereafter
declare more at large. There is also a kind of apostema, that is, of
abscessus, wherein are other things contained, which do represent not only the
proprieties of humors: but also of certain sound bodies: but these (says
Galene) chance very seeldome. And of these also we will speak hereafter,
when we shall entreat of abscessions. But now unto the said kinds of
abscessus, there appertain certain names of tumors being devised of the
latter sort, Certain new names of tumors given of the latter sort of
Physicians. Testudo. Talpa. Nata. Ganglium.
and never as yet found out amongst ancient writers, as testudo, which is a
soft swelling cleaving to the whole head of a man, and talpa: the one seems
to belong unto atheroma the other unto melicerides. But unto stratomata does
belong a certain swelling without pain, which they call nata, or napta,
whereof we will speak in his place. Hitherto also do pertain the evils
called of the Greeks ganglia, of Auicene glandulae, which do differ from the
aforesaid nods. There comes also of fleame that which the common sort call
scrofula, and therefore they are reduced unto aedemata. These be called of the
Greeks charades, of the Latins, strume. Notwithstanding Galene in a certain
place amongst the diseases named scirrhi, Strumae.
does take it for durities. Also unto aedema is referred in Galene that kind
of Hydrops, which is named of the Greeks, leucopblegmatia, and hyposarca.
leucopblebmatia. Scirrb^si (...). Cancer. Carcinoma.
But the swellings or tumors which partaine unto choler, and which be
comprehended under the said schirrbus, are cancri, which of the Greeks be
called carnici, and carcinomata: Notwithstanding Celsus makes a difference
between cancer, and carcinoma, that he might say, that it did come and
proceed by little and little of those things which do chance outwardly, and
that it is engendered within (some member being corrupted). The same Celsus
deuideth cancer into many parts or kinds (that is to say) into erysipelas,
Elephantiasis.
gangrena and vlcus nigrum of this kind also is elephantus or, elephantia, or
elephantiasis, called of the common sort of Physicians lepra, and of some
sancti lazari morbus. Therefore the name of lepra signifies with Auicene and
with the unlearned company, a most grievous and deadly disease, when yet with
Gal. Paul. Aegineta, and with other grecians it is counted but a light grief
not much differing from that which we call scabies, which is called of the same
writers ps^ra. Among this hard swelling kind of tumors, are accounted the
diseases called in the Latin tongue of the interpreter of Auicene, verrucae,
which be swellings like unto little hillockes appearing in the skin,
Verrucae.
whereof they have this name, being called of the common sort porra. Porra.
Myrmeciae. Acrochordones. Clauus. (...). Thymion.
To this kind also may be referred myrmeciae, as if one should call them
formicula, and acrochordones, which of our countriemen are termed pensiles
verrucae and clauus also, which in form is like to a hard round pillar
called of the Greeks (...), of Auicene they are called almismar, Thymion, or
thymon representing the knobbie tops of the herb thyme. Auicene seems also
to have given it this name tusiu^, or (as another translation has it)
tarsecum. Also among the diverse kinds of verrucae, there be evils called of
Auicene cornua, so called, because they being very long, are turned again
crooked like unto horns. Cornua. Calli.
In like case also there be calli which the Greeks call (...), these are
engendered by means of the skin being obdurated and hardened through much
labor. Unto choler also there seems to partaine this evil, which the
grecians call dracontion, Dracunculi
the Latins dracunculus, according to the lively similitud or likeness of that
name, Auicene calls it vena medeni, Haly Abbas, vena saniosa. Whereof Paulus
Aegineta entreats cap. vltimo lib. 4. This disease is not great rife with us.
Besides these tumors which we now have rehearsed, there chance other also,
affecting oftentimes the superficial parts of the body (that is to say)
certain small appearings, Pustulae.
which they call pustulae, and bothor. Which although they differ both among
them selves, and also from those tumors, which we have above recited, yet they
are caused of the same humors, of the which also they are now called great
tumors. Therefore they only seem to differ from them in respect of their
greatness and smalnes. But that such little tumors (which truly a chyrurgion
ought not to be ignorant of) might appear more manifest, and easy to be
conceived of every man: I have thought it expedient, and a thing worthy the
labor, to set down in this place the names of them, both in Greek and
Lataine, and also their barbarous title, with a certain rude description
thereof, as we have already done in the greater. Therefore that we may enter
into the matter it self, there are of the kind of pustules or pushes, lepra,
so called of the Greeks and retayning the same title amongst the Latins, and
ps^ra called of the same writer scabies, being truly diseases very near of
affinity among them selves: for there is roughnes and sharpnes of the skin
with itching and pritching in the body, coming of the same humor (that is to
say) of choler. Notwithstanding they differ in this, Lepra. Ps^ra. Lichene.
because lepra does consume the skin with manifest scales somewhat deep, as
it were in a circle: but ps^ra does only hurt the outward part with diverse
forms and does unloose a cer^aine scurfe of the body. Hitherto also does
pertain that light infection of the skin, called of the Greeks licene, of
the Latins impetigo, in English the ringworme and commonly of some (as
Manardus reports) they be called volatica. This chances by reason of the
mingled putrefaction of wild blood being thin and sharp, with other that
be thick: and very often and easily it does turn it self (Galene affirming
the same) into the aforesaid evils (that is to say) into lepra and scabies,
which they call ps^ra. Yet there are some which think, that that, which the
Greeks call lepra, is called of Celsus impetigo. But truly, seeing he does
write specially of impetigo, appointing four kinds thereof lib. 5. suae
medicinae, it is evidently apparent, that he meant some other thing by this
word impetigo, then licene amongst the Greeks, Four kinds of impetigo.
seeing that truly we never read in any Greek author, that there were so
many kinds of licene ever agreed of or acknowledged. Therefore if we will with
Galen speak properly lepra and lichene or impetigo, cannot be one and the
same evil: Impetigo.
otherwise the same should be changed into it self. That I may therefore draw
the whole matter into few words: when the skin is lightly infected, with an
only roughnes and itching, that is called in Greek lichen, but in Latin
impetigo. But when the grief waxes worse, it changes the name together
with the form. But if lichene does cause manifest scales, and does pearce the
skin somewhat deeply, it is properly called lepra. But if it be stretched
out only by the outward superficies, and does cause brannie or scaly bodies
it is called ps^ra of the Greeks, Lepra. ps^ra Scabies.
of us it is called properly scabies. Although this word scabies does extend
very far commonly also among the Physicians of late time, who do name all
the evil of the skin to be scabies. But they speak very improperly, for
the pure and true scabies, so called of the Latins, is without all doubt that
disease which is called of the Greeks ps^ra, of Auicene also albara and
morphea, clean contrary to the opinion of some. For that which is said of
him and almost of all the Physicians of Afric to be albara, is named of the
Greeks and of Celsus also leuce. But mongest them it is called morphea, among
the Greeks alphon, Albara. Leuce.
in which disease the whole flesh is not affected, but only the external
parts of the body, even as though (as Galene says) it were set about with
certain scales. But these alphi (as it is in Galene) in their kind are of two
sorts (that is to say) white, Alphon is of two sorts.
which come of fleame: and black, which proceed from a melancholic humor.
But these things we now have spoken of being led by the consequence of
things. For neither leuce, nor alphi them selves are accounted amongst the
tumors besides nature, but rather among the euilles of the skin. Which
things although they hurt very little yet because they do dishonest and
bring shame, they are wont to be for the most part a greater heaviness and
werynes (especially unto women). then many other diseases which truly do
hurt, but yet they be secret. both these euilles (that is to say) rucae and
alphon, Celsus has comprehended under the name of vitiligo (making three
kinds thereof) although other students of Physic, turning Greek into
Latin, Vitiligo.
do convert lucae in all places into vitiligo, which would more aptly agree,
if it were put with his epithete or addition, as to say alba vitiligo. Vitiligo
therefore, if we will comprehend it under any certain head or kind, is a
filthy color of the skin, proceeding of an evil habit of some part of
the body, which could not well receive any nourishment to it self. For this
evil chances through the default of the nourishing faculty, whereof some
do constitute two kinds, the one, which does infect the skin only with
certain marks, which do cleave fast unto it like unto little scales, the
other which goes in some what deeper, so that it touches the very flesh,
and colors the hayres: for in it there aryseth gray hayres, like unto a
certain kind of moosynes: this is gathered together of viscous and
glutinatiue fleame, but both of them do defile and stain either with their
white, or especialy with their black color. The first species, which is aloft
and superficial, wheather it be white or black, it is called of the Greeks
alphu^s, by the same name (as before) because it changes the color of the
skin, for (...) (whereof (...) is derived) signifies amongst the ancient
Greeks to change. Auicene calls it morphea. But the other kind, which we
have declared to pearce somewhat deeper, is called of the Greeks, and of
Celsus also leuce, and of the rest of the Latins alba vitiligo, of Auicene
albara. Haly Abbas only among the Arabians calls lepra, a filthy disease,
which is hard to be cured, yet he does not declare it to be pernicious and
deadly, who has not accounted it altogether as a light thing (as the Greeks
affirm it) and little differing from a scabbe: neither (as Auicene thought)
pernicious and grievous, but only loathsome and filthy. Whereby we may
conjecture, that little credit is to be attributed to words or names, unless
the matter be thoroughly discovered. Small credit to be given to words of names.
For one and the self same word by variety of authors has enforced to
uphold many diverse and different significations, as in their commentaries does
every where appear. But we have spoken by the way of the euilles and
defedations of the skin, only that the confusion of things might be eschewed,
which happens by words misunderstood. Therefore omitting these things, we
will return unto out purpose, and with as much brevity as we can, we will
dispatch the discourse of the residew of swelling sores, amongst which,
besides those, which we have rehearsed and touched already, are reckened by
the Greeks ionthi, epinyctides, hidroa, psydraces, exanthemata, celsi papule,
and Plinij mentegra. Ionthi.
Ionthi are little swellings and those hard which arise in the outward skin
and superficies of the face (as Paulus and Galene thought) proceeding from a
gross humor, which are either resolved, or else rypened by a little matter
which springs with it. The Latins call them vari: Galene makes mention lib.
5. de medica. secundum locos, of an affect, which he calls ionthosus
affectus, which he says is the foundation and beginning of elephantiasis,
under the which disease he seems to comprehend the third and fourth kind of
that which Celsus names impetigo. Epinyctides.
Epinyctides, (as Celsus supposes) are pestilent pushes either of pale color,
or of a black color, or of a white hew, not exceeding the bigness of a bean
arysing either in the legs or in the fette. About them there is always a
very vehement inflammation, and when they are opened, there is found a very
thick and clammie exulceration within. His color is like unto his humor: but
the grief greatly surpasses the bigness of the sore, which in quantity
surmounteth not a bean. They borrowed their title from the night, Why they be
called epinyctides.
either (as Celsus thought) because that in the night time they pricked and
molested more grievously, or because they most commonly arise in the night.
Pliny terms the^ bluish pushes, disquieting specially in the night time.
The Arabians call them essere, sere, or saire, which words explane the
forenamed nature of the sore. Those which are called of the Greeks hidroa, the
Latins term sudamina, and Plynie papule sudorum. Sudamina. Planta noctis.
Auicene planta noctis, and almansorus, and alhasaphum: whereby it comes to
pass that epinyctis does much differ from Auicene his plantanoctis, although
the Greek word epinyctis does draw his original from the night. But these
sudamina (as Galene says) lib. 4. Apho. Aphor 21. are reckened among those
kind of pushes or whelkes, which sticking in the very superficies of the
body, do prick and shoot, not unlike to our common ulcers, and they come
(as their name does declare) by many bilious swettes, which byteth the skin
and makes it to itch and prick like ulcers. But this affect is common to
boys and young men, and to those which are choleric, but in the time of
heat: but it is so easy to be cured, that of it self without any aid it
will heal, rypening with a white top. But Auicene thinks that these
desudations, by their description, agree ratheir with Celsus his exanthemata,
then with Galene his sudamina. But he, who will observe the nature of the
words, Desudationes Auicene.
will think, that Auicene his desudations may well be the Greeks hidroa,
which the Latins call sudamina. But we must not follow the names so much
among the Barbarian and Arabian writers, but the genuyne and sincere
descripitons of the things them selves. Psydraces or psydracia, Psydraces.
are pushes which abiding in the very uttermost part of the skin, are
resembled to bladders excited by fire, which are called phlyctane. These rise
specially in the head. Psizacionis not truly read in Celsus for psydracion.
Those pushes, which grow in the skin first coming by thick humors stuffed
in the skin, which are commonly called morbili and variola, of Galene because
they swell, and wax big, as it were the bud of a flower they are called
exanthemata, but of Hippocrates, Morbili. Variolae. Exanthemata. Ecthymata
because they do break out of them selves, they are termed ecthymata. For
(...), whereof exanthema is derived, signyfieth a flower, and (...), whereof
ectyma comes, signifies to burste out. Plynie callet^ such pusshes, whelkes,
and the eruptions of fleame. But these are of two kinds: for some of them are
steipe, and some go out into breadth those which are steipe, do grow of a
more thin and hot humor and does excyte itche. But those which are broad,
do flow, and proceed from a more cold and thick humor, and do not a whit
procure itch. The first sort, of the common Physicians are known by the name
morbile: the second by this name variole. But the French men preposterouslie
abusing the names have called the low and broad kind rubeole, but the higher
sort variole. Hippocrates. lib. 3. Epi. does divide these kinds of pushes
into little and great ecthymata, in calling the steeper kind magni herpete,
either because (as Galene says) they occupy a great place, or else because
they happen with a vehement gnawing. For in deed these sometimes appear great
in heyght only, sometimes both in height and breadeth. Cornelius Celsus lib. 5.
medicinae suae in his treatise of impetigo remembers two kinds of whelkes:
the one some what small, Papulae C^lsi.
which if it be daily rubbed with fasting spittle, it waxes whole: the other
somewhat greater, wherein the skin is made more sharp, and is exulcerate,
and grows very vehemently, and looks red, and is hardly cured. He says,
that this is termed of the Greeks (...), in Latin fera. But in both these
kinds he confesses that there is less impediment or corruption then in
impetigo, so that he affirms, that that evil, whose cure is hard, except it
be taken away, does change and turn into impetigo. The Frenchmen (if I may
judge thereof) do call both these kinds, but especially the first, dartrae.
For that evil begins to be very round, and after the same manner it
comes (as it were) into a cyrcle, and creeps slowelie. Dartrae Galinae.
Which whelkes or pusshes do agree in all things to be those, which are said
of Celsus to be of the first kind. Some do constantly affirm that these
whelkes so named of Celsus do nothing differ from lychene among the Greacians,
or the impetigo among the Latins. And we have read that that only author
among the Latins has turned lychene into papulae. Mintagra a Latin word
used of Plynie, wherein he seemed in the beginning lib. 26. to have altogether
meant another thing from impetigo, Mentagra.
and that it was far a way a worse evil, then that which the Greeks
comprehend under the name of lichene, although in his Physic he has
interpreted sometime lichene among the Greeks to be impetigo, and the like
disease called mentegra, he terms also in the same place lichene. Furthermore
the same Pliny reports, Pliny lib. 26.
that this evil crept first into Italy in the reign of Tiberius Caesar,
which grief in all the time before was unknown to all Europe, much less unto
Italy. It was of so great filthiness and corruption, that any death was to be
preferred or wished before it, and also of so great infection, that by the
swifte passage thereof only by kissing one another it infected the people but
chiefly those that were gouerners and rulers among them. This evil began
almost at the chinne, for that it did chiefly affect and annoie, whereupon it
took this name mentagra. This perhaps is that scabbe, which certain of the
Frenchmen call mala dartra. Galene also seems to acknowledge this disease:
Galene acknowledges mentegra.
for in his first book de medicam. compos. secundum locos, he remembers a
most vile kind of impetigo of the chinne, which (as he rehearses, out of
Crito (provoke itcheing, it afflicts also the patientes, and bringeh them
into no small danger. For sometime (says he) it runs over the whole face,
and goes up to the very eyes, and it causes the greatest deformity of the
body almost that can be, which description of impetigo does consent in all
things with the mentagra of Pliny. But they do greatly err, which do
think that this most contagious lichene called of Pliny, mentagra, is that
disease which at this day commonly some do call Gallicum malum, M^rbus
Neapolitanu^, and venereum.
some Neapolitanum, other some not bearing any hate or injury to their
contries do call it venereum. For this infection was altogether unknown to
the ancient Physicians, and also of the former age, and first of all it crept
into Neapolis in the year after the incarnation of Christ. 1493. At which time
Charles the eight, that most invincible king of France did overcome and win
the Alps, going abount also to invade Italy: although not long before, it had
spread it self abroad through the countries of Spain (as some report).
Wherefor having as it were the original and beginning from thence, it began to
be called Hispanica lues, the spanish pestilence, which plague being sent upon
the earth as it were by the just reuengment of God (as we may think) for their
filthy and abominable whoredom forbidden of God, has corrupted and
overthrown with the co^tagion thereof a great part of humane kind. For the
same sickness the magistrates and officers tasted of, the prisoners and captives
felt, the heads of their countries sustained, and the common people also were
infected withal: so swift was the passage thereof from one to another, and now
also it straieth and wandreth through the countries of Spain, France, Italy
and all Europe to the great annoiance of the people. There are also certain
pusshes besides these, Pustulae glandosae.
rehearsed even now out of Auicene lib. 4. called glandosae, which do seem to
differ nothing from the disease called ganglion, but in respect only of the
lesser or the greater. There is mention also made by the same Auicene. lib. 3.
of certain whelkes, which he calls in the same place, bothores iuncturarum,
and in lib. 4. he calls them almatim, which, because he shows that they be
black, and resembling green corn, they must doubtless be those which the
Greeks call terminthi, Terminthi.
which a little before we accounted among the species of phyma. These Celsus
seems to compare unto vari, which be spots in the face, who also judges
them to be called of the Greeks helcodes, that is, vlcerosae, full of scabbes
or sores. Pustulae albae
These white and milkie pushes, so called of Rasis and Serapion, and of Auicene
lenis bothor if their descriptions be thoroughly considered, they will seem to
partaine unto the whelkes called of the Greeks Ionthi, which we in Latin have
named vari: although the self same remeadies, which Auicene has set down for
them, be taught of Dioscorides for the disease ephelide (that is to say) for
the roughnes and swartnes of the face, being caused by the heat of the Sun.
Hitherto have we entreated of the differences of tumors above nature, which
chiefly have their residence outwardly above the body. Now let us proceed to
declare the causes of them.

CAP. III. Of the causes of tumors above nature appearing universally on the
outside of the body.
THERE are two causes of tumors chauncing besides nature, agreed of among the
latter sort of Physicians and Chyrurgians: The causes of tumors besides nature.
that is to say, general and special causes. General causes are these, the
flux, which the Greeks call (...), and the congestion or heaping together of
humors. Again by the same writers there are appointed to be six causes in
number of this flux, Fluxionis causae.
that is to say. 1. the strength of the repulsiue member. 2. the weakness of
the retentiue. 3. the abundance and plenty of matter. 4. the loosenes or
fulness of the poores of the body, through the which the flux happens. 5.
the straighnes of the repulsiue parts. 6. and the lower situatio^ of the place
retayning the flux. But these may be reduced unto four heads, as unto the
repulsiue member, the part that reteineth, the state of the humor that
flows, Part propelleus.

Particula excipens.

(...) fluens.


and the place or course, through the which the flowing cha^ceth. But the flux
is provoked either by the means of the expulsive member, or because of the
fortitude of the expulsiuever tue, or by reason of the natural knitting
together that it has with the retentiue member, or because of the straitnes of
the particular poores, but some part receives the flux because it is either
painful, or hot, or somewhat weak, or seldom, and base, or settled in the
nether room. Furthermore by means of the humor there is a defluxion or
flowing down into some part of the body, because it is in abundance
superfluous, of nature troublsome, and of substance thin. But the space or
place is a cause of the flux by reason of the largnes of the passages, as of
the veins, arteries and poores. But of congestion, Spatium.
(which is the other general cause of tumors which chance above nature)
there are assigned two causes: (that is to say) the fault of the virtue
nutritive, Causes of congestion.
and the imbecillitie of the virtue expulsive. By the which things we gather,
that hot tumors happen for the most part through the defluxion of humors, but
cold tumors are rather provoked by their congestion. But after what manner a
hot flux excyteth the tumor, How a hot de fluxion provoke a tumor.
Galen does declare plainly and wittily, in that little book which he
entitled inaequalis intemperis, writing after this manner. A hot discending
of a flux (says he) as soon as it has once placed it self in the muscle,
first the greater arteries and veins are filled and stretched out, then by
their means the lesser are distended, and so it proceeds until it comes
to the least of all. In them, when a flux is strongly compact together, and
can no longer be contained, part thereof issues out through the extreme
parts of them, and part is strained out through the holes of the tunicles, and
is speadily sent forth, and then those void places are filled with the flux,
which are between the best and chiefest bodies. Thus all things proceeding of
the humor do wax hot in every place, and also are still poured forth. And
these are they the synewes, the bindinges or ligaments, the small silmes, the
very flesh, and besides these, the arteries and veins, which truly being the
principal, are diversely and many ways afflicted above the rest. For inwardly
by reason of the flux they are both made hot, and also are stretched out, and
torn and pulled a sunder. And outwardly also, they are not only made hot,
but also are suppressed and made heavy. But the other parts of the body, some
truly are only made hot or kept down, and some are affected with both. And
this disease is called phlegmone. Hitherto Galen. Therefore in such kind of
tumors chauncing besides nature, which are caused of the flowing of humors,
something already (at the least way at the beginning, and before the flux
did begin to strive) is made and engendered, and something is yet to come, and
rests in the generation. That which does happen as yet, is the matter which
went before, which as yet abides in the flux: but that which is engendered
already, is the joined matter, which has already flowed: and is compact in
the agrieued place. Hereupon therefore there must be used a dilligent care of the
Physician in such kinds of phlegmone which as yet remain in generation (as in
all other tumors also, and diseases, which are yet in begetting, neither as
yet have obtained perfection) as Galen lib. 13. meth. med. does declare the^ to
be known and perceived, both by that which foreseeth, There is a twofold
declaration, of all those evils which are yet in begetting. Special causes of
tumors above nature. Praegressae. Antecedentes. Which are said to be
natural humors.
and that which cures: but these things pertain to an other kind of study.
But it is convenient, that we set down the special causes of tumors which are
above nature, to the which these three are commonly appointed: Primitive
causes, which we call both praegressae and euidentes, and causes antecedent,
which we name antecedentes, and joined causes, which we term coniunctae or
continentes. These be called of the Greeks, (...). The primitive causes are
said to be these, which while they do work any disease are separated, as a
fall, a stripe, a blow, a bruise, a tumor, or a solution, or that evil which
is committed by admitting a dissolut diet. Antecedent causes are those, which
of themselves are fit and material to beget any disease or affect, as are four
humors both natural and not natural. Natural humors are those which serve
to nourish the body, and have their being with the bloods, and are comprehended
under the name of blood. Which if they be sent out from the veins and
arteries, they do suddenly congeale and gather together, wheather they flow
without the body, or do remain still in the place wherein they be contained.
But they call those unnatural humors, Which are said to be unnatural
humors.
which are found severed from the blood with the which the body is norished,
and by reason of their corruption and naughtines by their own nature, are not
nutritive, the which do sometime grow although they remain in the air which
compasses us. And these as it were by a certain kind of providence of
nature, being destyned and ordained for some use, are demitted and sent into
certain receptakles, either into the uttermost parts of the body, and so
engender unkind swellings called abscessus, or whelkes, scabbes, defedations
and alterations of the skin, and unnatural swettes: or sometime by an
insensible air inwardely infused they do excite sweatinges. Sometime also
they putrify within, and beget feauers. But such like (say they) are
improperly termed humors assuming to them selves the names of natural
humors. For they hold this opinion, What juices are properly termed natural
humors.
that only those iuyces, which come from the liver in the generation of
blood, and of nutrition and moisture, are properly to be termed natural
humors. Such are sincere and pure blood, choleric also, flegmaticke and
melancholicke, by the which four kinds all the parts of the body are
generally, nourished and maintained: some parts with a more pure, and (as I
may say) a more bloody humor: other with a humor more choleric, other
with a flegmaticke, and other with a melancholicke, as the nature of every
part requires. Therefore all the humors are contained in the veins and
arteries, the which may appear by their variety of color and consistencie
(as Galene has expressed in in libro de atra bile. Furthermore of those four
tumors which are called natural, Of the four natural humors: are engendered
four lawful and (...).

What tumors (...) of vnnatura^^ humors.


four especial tumors are engendered, which are commonly called apostemata.
In the which the swelling is very big, and the matter does offend rather in
quantity then in qualiltie. They are called by their proper names, phlegmone,
erisypelas, aedema, scirrhus. Of tumuors not natural (as it pleases the
latter Physicians) do proceed abscessus, which they also call exiture and
pustule, which they think cannot well be called apostemes. To the which they
will add and reduce two other kinds also, flatuous and waterie, which
proceed of a fluible substance, and are commonly called apostemata ventesa
and aquosa (that is) windy and waterish apostemes. There be therefore six
titles attributed unto simple tumors, (that is) phlegmonosi, erysipelatosi,
adematosi, scirrhosi, flatuosi, and aquosi. But the compounde tumors are not
all called according to the concourse of humors, (because a great many may
happen in one disease) but they are named by the predominant humor especially
as we have manifested heretofore, and will hereafter more plentifully in his
own place. But coniunctae causae or continentes of those tumors besides
nature, Coniunctae causae tum^ru^ prayer natural.
which they commonly call apostemata, pustule and exiture are matters and
several substances, which are found to be aggregated and stuffed together in
the affected part, and which do yet remain after they have excited the
swelling: and while they increase the tumors also do greatly augment, and
when they decrease, the tumors are deminished, and when their substance is
utterly spent and extinguished, the tumors also of them selves do fall away.
And this cause called coniucta or continens causa, of all the maladies and
sundry dispositions of the body, is after this manner by Auicene defined,
What it is which is called continens causa.
that, when it is present, his disease always accompanies him, and also when
it is taken away, his disease also vanishes. But for all this, some Physicians
of our age, and those very well learned, do contend that Galene would
admit but two causes (that is to say) an external, and an internal (or as
they say now) a primitive and an antecedent. Of the which that (he says)
does happen to the body outwardely, which alters and changes the same
greatly, the which always is separated, until it has established his
malady, as heat, cold, the biting of a Scorpion. But the internal has his
being within the body, and does presently procreate the malady, as are
humors affected besides nature. But they do constantly affirm, that he never
so much as dreamed of that, which they term causa coniuncta, when as according
to his opinion, every affect which lets and hinders the actions and
duities of the body, is a malady it self, and not the cause of a malady,
and that coniuncta causa, which Auicene and his sect have invented, according
to their own description, which they assign unto it, is nothing but a
certain kind of affect letting the execution those duties partayning to the
body: which is the very definition of a malady it self. And therefore they
prove that it nothing differs from a disease it self, which is wont to
prejudice those actions which agree with nature. Some think that coniuncta
causa nothing differs from the malady it self.
But because one, and the self same opinion has occupied all men's minds of
this latter age concerning this triple kind of the causes of all such
diseases, it shall not seem altogether absurd, if that I throughout all this
treatise of mine, for playnesse sake, shall divide and distinguishe these three
causes, into these three kinds and titles:: I mean primatiua, antecedens and
coniuncta. And thus much for the causes of tumors happening besides nature.
Now the course of our treatise does exact, that we should add the signs and
tokens of the same, if that before, we shall entreat somewhat of the nature and
generation of the abscessus. What abscessus Galene thinks to be.
Abscessus therefore, called of the Greeks (...), and of the common Physicians
exiture, are called of Galene (libro de tumoribus praeter naturam, and secundo
ad Glauconem) dispositions, in which the parts of the body do depart one
from another, which before did touch and meet: for the matter which does
excite these tumors, being thrust out without the flesh of the muscle, does
bring the parts out of their places, and makes them part and fever. Therefore
says Galene, there must of necessity be a place void in the midst, which
borrows either some flatuous moist, or tempered, or mixed substance from the
parts, which in length of time is altered, into many and sundry substaunces.
But there is a double kind of these abscessus, one is, when as the inflammation
being turned into matter, Two kinds of abscessus Gal. lib. 14. Thera. meth.
and lib. 2. ad Glauconem.
the matter it self is packed up together in a corner or hole: the other is,
when as no inflammatio^ proceeding or going before, a certain humor either
vaporous, or else a substance mixed of both parts, is in some part collected
together which also happens two ways: for either in the space lying between
the severed parts, such like substance is engendered, or else it runs into
the parts them selves, and that eitheir in the beginning, or else that way by
the which those diseases happen called (...): (...).
which (says Galene) then do chance, when as humors which before have
infested and greaued some one part, do thence remove, and are enforced into
another. And this substance, which begets this abscessus, works him self
a place between the skine and the flesh. And in time it does flea of all the
skin, either because it is very vehement, or else because the plenty of
matter does putrify, and so break the skin. But if those humors, with the
which, the space situated between the severed parts is filled, do continue
any time: they have (as I said before) many alterations, and are changed into
many substaunces, which do represent the proprieties not only of humors, but
even of solid and hard bodies. For you shall find sundry matters within
these spaces, some like unto stones, What things may be found in abs^essus.
some to gravel and sand, some to wood, some to coals, some to durte, some to
the foame of oils, some to the dregs of wine, the variety of substaunces,
some ignorant men have thought to proceed from the force of incantation.

CAP. IIII. Of the signs of tumors besides nature generally appearing
together with the judgments thereof.
TVMOVRS besides nature, being resyaunt in the extremest parts of the body
(the examining and speculation whereof does appartaine to the surgeon) being
surueyed by the judgment of the senses, General signs of tumors above
nature.
and the affected parts being touched and felt with the hands are easily
descried and known. For in every part of the body there appears a certain
kind of increasing exceeding the natural state, and distending above the
measure of nature that part which it affects, and it lets the duities or
actions thereof, because either some humor, or some such substance proceeding
of the humor, or which do favor somewhat of the nature of the humor, or a
vaporous spirit has excyted it, there also must needs happen a tumor
besides nature. But the tumors which they call true Apostemes, are discerned
by their swelling, by their pain, and by their heat, being stretched out more
or less. But they are not counted to be true apostemes in deed, which we have
termed pustule and abscessus, besides that tumor, which malady the Grecians
call cacoethia, and also in the greater or lesser sequestratio^, determinata.
But the signs of every particular difference, Particular signs.
and of their matters whereof they be engendered, shall be declared in their due
place, in that which follows. In the mean time we will handle the simple
differences of those tumors, which are above nature, by the which the
compounde differences shall also be easily known. But we must not come unto
particular things, before we have thoroughly discoursed of universal, for that
order is wont to be observed in the institutions of the Arts neither truly
unworthily or without cause. For those universal and common things are more
manifest unto us then particular, because these particular things are more
confused and more mixed one with an other (as Aristotle teaches lib. 1.
Physicorum cap. 1. Let no man therefore marvel, though every where in this
treatise of chyrurgie, we always begin of more common things, and of those
which comprehend many things under them. But let us return to our purpose,
Iudicia.
that all those tumors which they call true apostemes (if we will credit
Galene and Auicene) are greatly complicate and folded together, neither can
any of them be easily judged or found, out to be pure and sincere: for (as
Galene says) with phlegmone (that is) with an inflammation coming of blood,
Lib. de diffe. (...).
there is something chiefly mingled which does preserve the nature either of
erysipelas, or aedema, or scirrhus. But erysipelas, because it represents a
kind of phlegmone, or aedema, or scirrhus, and so likewise consider and mark
in all the rest of the tumors. But truly those tumors besides nature, which
they term not true apostemes, are very often found sincere and pure. But we
will handle the cures of simple and sincere tumors in those things which
follow, by the which the remeadies also of compound and intricate tumors
shall manifestly appear. For I think it good to discourse of all the kinds
of tumors, and also to dispose aright that which shall seem superfluous. For
if a man shall know all the simple tumors, and learn after what manner they
be compounded together, he shall be furnished sufficiently to exercise him
self particularly in the rest. But now let us set other opinions and
judgments generally concerning the tumors them selves. Periodi, paroxismi,
and the crises of tumors besides nature do follow the analogia of the
humors whereof they be conflated or engendered (Guido affirming the same) which
analogia, we here declare to be a property, or proportion, a nature, or a
likeness of substance, which they call forma specefica and occulia, a special
and hidden form. Such kind of tumors, especially they which be wholesome, and
which are caused of the flowing of humors, Four times of tumors besides
nature.
are distinguished by four times (that is to say) by their beginning, by their
increasing, by their state, and by their declination. The Principium.
but yet with small grief. We may also judge augmentation Augmentum.
and the symptomates, which are wont to follow every tumor, to be Status.
and the symptomates of the differences of every tumor, has his own proper
force and vigoure: neither can they any longer admit any increasing but the
Declinatis.
But their declination is then known to be present, when the pyle of the
tumor, and the proper symptomates thereof are decreased and diminished, or
when the matter which provoke the tumor begins to be transformed into
another substance. Therefore such kind of times do receive their differences
from three kinds especia^ly (that is to say) from the essence of the tumor it
self (that is) from the greatness or smallnes, The times of tumors do take
their difference from three things chiefly.
from the disposition of the matter, and from the accidents, which do very
much alter the declaration of the cure. But these four times, sometime do
seem to happen altogether, because of the short hardness of every one of them,
which almost cannot be perceived, (as it chances in venomous inflammations,)
yet not mortal or deadly, which straight way do flourish and increase.
Tumoures above nature are contained under 4 modes.
Furthermore these kind of tumors, which do chiefly happen through the
influxio^ of humors, except they be hindered by repressing the matter that
flows, or except they lurk secretly within, either of their own accord, or
without any manifest cause (the flux having recourse thither:) it is
necessary that they should be comprehended under one of these four either
under insensible exhalation or resolution, or under suppuration, or
putrefaction, or induration and hardening. But of all these ways the best and
the most to be desired is that which is made by an insensible dissolution, and
next to that, that which comes by suppuration or mattering. But that which is
caused by induration and hardening is said to be evil, and that which happens
by the corruption of the affected part is to be thought the worst of all, the
which Galen does insinuate in libello de inaequali intemperie, Gal. lib. de
inaequali intemtemperie.
writing on this manner. Therefore of the two, we must of necessity follow
the one, either that the body be putrified and corrupted, because fluxion is
predominant, or else we must grant, (that this putrefaction being resisted and
overcome) the musckle must return to his natural habit and constitution. Let
us therefore imagine that all fluxion is withstood and impeached, then you have
two means to cure it, either by digesting those humors which were in the
affected part, or by dissoluing or loosening them: of these the dissolution is
best. But in the concoction of the humors, these two things are specially
required: vi^^. the perfect generation of the matter, and also his abscession
into some space by it self. And a little beneath he adds also these words.
But if that fluxion do make the parts as it were subject to it, then they do
fall to so great an intemperature, that their ordinary action perishes and in
process of time they are corrupted and putrified. Thus far Galene. The
tokens of dissolution and loosening of the humors are these, Signs of
dissolution.

Signs of putrefaction.

Signs of induration.

Signs of the regression and lurking of a tumor.


the softness of the sore, and the little throbbing and beating thereof. But
the signs of predominant fluxio^, and of the putrefaction of the part it
self, are the black and blew color, to which also sometime happens an
odious stinch. But the tokens of a stony hardness of the tumor are, the
imminution of the tumor, and also the extreme hardness thereof. The notes and
signs also of the egestion and lurking of the tumor, are the sodeine
diminution thereof, which chances sometime by to much refrigeration and
coldness, sometime by reason of a secret venime, which lurketh in the place.
And this same sudden and often imminution of the tumor, succeeds commonly
some fever, and also other evil simptomates. And thus far of the signs and
tokens of these tumors. Which our common Physicians have comprehended under
this name Apostema. The tokens also of those tumors which we call pustulae,
shall not be forgotten, when we shall have occasion to handle them. But the
tokens and signs of the abscesse^, commonly called exiturae, either these
which do foreshew their coming, or else those which do manifest their presence
already, are these. When thou see (says Auicene) pulsation and beating, or
hardness to have continued a great time, Signs of Abscessio^ to come
and also that the grief together with much heat does augment, then you may
imagine that the next event that follows is, that the Aposteme will be turned
into matter and suppuration, and so consequently to be an Abscession. But when
thou find that the place is soft, Signs of Abcession already present.
and that the grief is somewhat assuaged, and the heat mitigated, and that
one place of the tumor is supereminent above the rest, and again if by
thrusting it with your finger, you shall perceive a waterish inundation to
subsist, and again that the color of his top shall wax white, then you may
well think that the tumor is mattered, and also that it is turned into
Abscession. And therefore it was very well judged of Hippocrates, that Fevers
did oftenner happen, Aph. 47. lib 2
when that the matter was in ripening, then when it was already come to his
maturitie. Moreover the marks and tokens as well of the present Abscession, as
also of the Abscession to come are comprehended in these common verses:
Durities longae, pulsus, dolor, and calor aucti,
Signant pus fieri: sed factum, dictae remissa.
Sub digitis vndans, albescens pars and acuta.
which may be thus Englished: By hardness long, by pulse and grief, and eke
by heat encreasd,
We know that matter does approach: but made we judge indeed,
If that it yealdes to finger weight, and whiteness does appear,
-- and painful be also.

But you must be very attentive and vigilaunt in discerning and judging of the
matter it self. For the manifest knowledge of the matter and suppuration is
sometime withholden from the Physician by reason of the thickenesse of the
skin in the which it is included, (as it is proved by this Aphorism of
Hippocrates. Aph. 41. lib. 6.
) Whosoever is ignorant of the suppuration which is in the body, his
ignorance proceeds of the thickenesse of the matter, or of the place, wherein
it is comprehended. And thus much for the signs of Abscessions. Now of the
judgments of them, these things are delivered unto us of Auicene and his
sect. Indicis abscessuum.
Abscessions which are planted near unto any strong member or unto any
iuncture or joint, and in those places where there are most veins and sinews,
and again in a weak part, having gathered his debilitie by the defect of
natural heat, being indurate also and covered with a thick skin,
containing also thick matter, and so the more slow in motion, the outward
place being plain also, and even, not ascending like a little hillocke, I say,
such a like sore is greatly suspected, and very hardly and slowly ripened,
and such a one as is every way by description opposite and contrary to this,
What abscessions may easily be digested.
is of good and laudable habit, for both soon and easily it mattereth, and
oftentimes also (no outward medicine aiding or assisting) of it self it
gapeth and opens. If therefore the abscession do grow up into a sharpness,
and the substance of the matter be thin, and the skin not thick or hard,
of his own nature and power it will expel and thrust forth the conceived
humor without any foreign aid, unless a man by making incision will
anteuert and prevent his voluntary opening. What abscession may soonest be
ended through resolution.
Such like Abscessions are digested sometime by breathing or wind (no solution
being made subject within the skin,) but that happens when the matter is
small in quantity, good, and thin, and not sticking very deep. But if
there be any emissarie, or way made into the tumor either by nature or by
Art, the humor conceived within does break forth oftener then digest. But
that opening or apertion which is made by nature, is a great deal safer, then
that which is made by the hand: but if it be so, that it must be mollified by
Art, Abscessions are saflier opened with a (...) then with ruptor^u^
medicamentu^
you shall saflier do it by a sharp pen knife, or other clear and bright
instrument of iron, then by that medicine which they call ruptorium
medicamentum. And therefore (as before I said) every apertion, which is made
and enforced by Art, is worse then that which nature affoordeth of it self,
because such like manuell openinges to make the matter rank, may perhaps
turn into Fistula. But when necessity urges, and when we can not use a
better remedy, we must boldly attempt that. And by this means you shall
eschew those discommodities, which before I named, if (when the matter so
requires) you do seasonablie make apertion, and by that means hasten the
ripening of the other baggadge which lurketh in the tumor. Hippocrates in his
last Oracle of his first book of Praedictions has expressed the very notes
and marks of the worst matter, The notes of the best and worst matter, out of
Hippoc.
and of the best, speaking after this manner. That matter it esteemed best,
which is of color white, and every way like it self, and soft, and gentle to
the toucher, and as little unpleasant to the nose as may be. And that which is
every way contrary to this, is the worst of all. But the tokens and signs
of all the other humors and solid substances also which are included in these
abscessions, shall be manifested and showed in their particular Chapters, as
they shall by consequence and order ensue.

CAP. V. Of the general method of curing of all tumors besides nature, but of
those especially which proceed from the influxion of humors, as Apostemes,
and Abscessions commonly called Exiturae.
OF all Tumoures above nature, as well those which are already engendered, as
those which are not yet in generation, The common order of curing of tumors
there is one common and principal order of curing (as it is in Galene lib.
13. and 14. method. Medic.) namely that that, which is above nature resident in
any member, and raises the same into a Tumor, The common method of curing of
tumors do change according to the difference of the tumor and the member
affected.
should altogether be emptied out. But those which are yet in begetting, in
them there is a certain obstruction of the humor that flows to the
aggrieued place, before the euacuation. In them therefore there is required a
diligent and singular care of the Physician, to declare the cure of them. But
these common manifestations, according to the difference of the Tumor it
self, and the nature of the affected membre, do very much differ and alter.
For truly in all Tumors already engendered, and in every part of the body,
the euacuation of that which annoyeth, and infesteth, is in no case to be used
and ministered, as Galene teaches libro 2. ad Glauconem, and in the places
above recited, which also shall manifestly appear in that which follows.
But we must not cure those tumors with such remedies, which are yet but
beginning and occupying every member, or empty, out that which is already
engendered in them, but we are enforced (if we intend to follow the right order
of curing) to use sometime one remedy, sometime another, which is of force to
stop the flux, and avoid out that which is engendered, so far forth, as the
kind of the tumoure and the nature of the affected member does require. The
order of curing of tumors is chiefly taken from two things.
Galene therefore chiefly draws the demonstrations of the cure of tumoures
above nature from these two things. vidz. from the disposition it self or
essence of the evil, and from the nature of the affected member. Moreover the
disposition of the evil (which we have now in hand, or the essence thereof
does comprehend three things in it, according to the judgment and consent of
the later sort (that is) the quantity, the quality, The essence of a tumor
does contain three things in it.
and the matter or substance which provoke the tumor. By the means whereof
that chief and common declaration is changed, and from them is taken also the
particular order of curing. For a great tumor is cured one way, and a small
tumor another way. For the difference of them is known by their greatness
and smallness (as some suppose.) And one way is a mighty phlegmone, and
another way a little herpes healed. Otherwise also is that Tumor remedied,
which is caused by flux, and is yet in begetting, then that which it
procreated through congestion, or is already engendered and congealed. Also a
hot tumor as Erysipela^ is otherwise cured then a cold, as is oedema and
schirrus. The quantity therefore which in a tumor above nature varieth the
cure is either great or small. The quality is the flux, or (as some term
it) the deriuation and congestion. The Matter thereof is the humor, be it
either hoate or cold. Four things to be considered chiefly in the nature of
affected members.
But in the nature of affected members four things chiefly are to be
considered. vidz. their temperature, their form or fashion, their situation or
place, and their power and strength. To the which also may be added a fifth
thing, which is the facility (as I may term it) and difficulty of the
senses. Except you will with Galene comprehend and contain it under the last
thing, which is the virtue and strength of the tumor. These things therefore
also do much alter that general order of curing, which is commonly observed
throughout all kind of tumors above nature. It is therefore requisite, that,
in curing those tumoures which chance besides nature, we remember all those
declarations which are taken from them. For Phlegmone, or any other tumor
which has his abode in the fleshie parts of the body, is otherwise cured then
those which are situated in the sinewie places: otherwise in the eye, then in
the knee or neck: and otherwise are the kernels in the throat cured, then those
which are resident in other parts of the body. But to be short, the
temperature, the fashion, the situation and the strength of the member that is
affected, and beset with the tumor, do change all those operations, which we
shall attempt and prove in their cure: reteyning still that general intention,
Libro 2. ad Glauconem. The order ^f handling that which follows.
which Galene has taught to be always taken from the disease. Therefore first
we have here decreed to set down a common and general method of curing of
tumors above nature* especially of those, which are caused through the
influxion of humors, taking their manifestation from the affect or evil it
self, nothing respecting the affected part. Afterward we will teach the
universal cure of them, but chiefly of inflammations, when as they shall
degenerate and change into abscessions. Then moreover we will declare the
particular order of curing all differences, especially of those which be
simple, by whose proportion or Analogy, the cure of compound tumors shall
easily be learned. And in the mean time, as the place shall require, we will
rehearse out of Galene certain things concerning the order of curing, which
have their assumption from the parts which are affected, and as it were
besieged with a tumor which things being rightly weighed and considered, it
shall be easy for any reasonable Physician or Chiruigian* by our certain
method and order, The finding out of the (...) is the beginning of the cure of
tumors above nature.
to cure all kind of tumors which are insident in any part of the body. We
therefore imitating Galene, will draw the beginning of the cure of tumors
which are said to be above nature from the flowing of engendered humors and from
the invention of the cause of the very evil, that so both the causes which
excite the same, may be prevented, and that which is already engendered in it
may be taken away. Therefore by the example and analogy of one difference of
tumors, which are caused thorough defluxion (for here we mind to entreat only
of them) we will understand also other differences, Phlegmone quod.
which do grow through the flowing of humors. And here we will set down a
brief and compendious curing of one kind of phlgemone, which chances very
often, and procures feauers and other very dangerous euilles and
simptomates. But in this place under the name of phlegmone, our intent is not
to comprehend every hot and flaming disposition* which the Greeks call
phlogosis, but that only which proceeds by the means of a bloody flux,
chiefly incident to fleshie and fat bodies, wherein is vehement pain, and
redness appearing in the outward parts, and as it were a burning heat, a
stretching out, and a striving or thrusting, and when the evil is increased,
there is sense of the pulses beating. For this inflammation with Galene and
other Greek writers, as Paulus, Aetius, and Oribasius, which do follow him as
their best guide, Gal. lib. 13. me^h. med. The common ingendring of every
phlegmone.
we properly call phlegmone. That we may therefore come to the matter it
self, these are the very words of Galene. The common ingendring of every
phlegmone comes by the influxion of blood, and that more abundantly then
was wont to happen to that member. For blood does flow very abundantly
(sometime one or other member sending it forth) and that part does entertain
and receive it, which begins to be affected with phlegmone: but sometime
that member which is afflicted does draw it unto it self. But the parts
which sends it forth do drive out the juice, being either superfluous by
reason of the plenty thereof, or grievous because of the quality, or else
because of both. But they which are attractiue, do draw or pull with a sickly
heat or grief. But to these also are adjoined certain helping causes. vidz.
the weakness and baseness of the member, the fullness of the conduites and
passages thorough which the flux passes, the straitness also and narrowness
of the poores and expulsive parts, and the inferior place, The helping causes
of flux. Three orders are set down for the cure of those tumors which are
caused, through the influxion of humors. Primus scopus.

P^ethora quod.


as we have already declared. Therefore of all these, there are three intentions
or orders of curing those tumors, which have their beginning of flowing,
collected and gathered of the later sort of Chirurgians. 1. The first is to
turn away the flux, and prevent it altogether. 2. The second is, to mitigate
the grief, and altogether to remove that cause, for the which, the member
intertaineth or also draws the flux unto it. 3. The third is to empty out all
that humor that has flowed to the aggrieued place. But how the first
intention should be finished, Galen has fitly taught li. 13. meth. med. where
he declares unto us all the ways to auert and turn away the flux, and the
means to stop and inhibite phlegmone, which as yet remains in generation,
writing after this manner: when humors are equally augmented amongst them
selves (which the Greeks call plethora) yea also when all the body is void of
excrements and does contain a mediocrity of iuicie humors, (pain and the
heat of that member also wherein phlegmone reigns raising the flux) through
the emission of blood we help and remedy phlegmone which now begins to
rule. Plethora also is cured both with often bathing and with exercise, and
also with much friction and rubbing. Furthermore it is cured by medicines that
will digest, so that a fever be not present, and besides all these it is helped
through hunger, and a good diet, although the sick be feuerous. But when the
body is stuffed either with melancholy, or choler, or fleume, or with other
clammie and viscous humors (which state of the body the Greeks call
cacochymia) the euacuation thereof must be labored by a purgation, Cacochymia.
which is a fit remedy for every humor that reigns. But of them we will
speak more at large in their particular Chapters. Antispasis.
Now Antispasis (that is) a reuulsion the contrary way, is a common remedy
against all these kind of tumors, while the flux does yet strongly
prevail, as in the beginning and increasing of the evil: but in the end of
the state, and in the declination thereof, while the flux now remains and
sticks in the member, and the whole body is sufficiently emptied, the
euacuation must be attempted and fetched either from the affected part, or from
that which is next adjoined thereunto. Secundus scopus.
The second intention contains remedies to provoke sleep. vidz. which do
mitigate pain, and also bind and prevent the flux. Morouer it teaches
remedies, which are able to loosen and dissolve the natural poores, by the
which the affected member is wo^t to be thoroughly purged. But the matter of all
these shall be abundantly described hereafter. Tertius scopus
But we will handle the third intention, which is perfited with such things as
do euacuate the matter that exciteth the tumor, from the affected place. And
that matter is euacuated not only by medicines which do euaporate and dissolve,
but also by such as do repel and repress such as the Greeks call (...). And
therefore in the beginning of these phlegmonous tumors, and other whatsoever do
derive their beginning from the influxion of humors, we may rather use
repressing medicines, then those which do euaporate: except in certain cases,
of the which (says Guido) Galene seemed to have appointed four. Cases in
which we may not use repelling or repressing remedies.
1. The first is, when that such tumors be in clean and pure members. 2. The
second is, when the subject thereof is venomous. 3. The third is when the matter
is thick, and not pliable to repulsion. 4. The fourth is, when it is very
vehemently packed together. Auicene excepteth only two causes, vidz. when it
happens in any clean or pure part, or in any other place, out of the which
it is to be feared that the matter will flow to some principal part of the
body. Some other appoint only one cause, other six, other ten, other
nineteen, other twenty three. But before we do establish any thing of this so
doubtful a cause, we must know that there be two kinds of repulsiues, both
amongst the late Physicians and also the Arabians (that is to say) common and
proper. Repellentia communi^.
Common repulsiues are such as do inhibite all flux keeping under and
repressing the same, and that is done either by cooling it, or by thickening
it, or else by stuffing it (that is) by reason of the thicknes of his
substance, by shutting and occluding the poores and ways whereby it would flow
out, or else by confirming the parts affected These things following do
repress flux by refrigeration and cold, sengreene, lettuce, psillium,
cotyledon (that is to say ( vmbilicus Veneris, lenticula palustris, caphura.
And these also do stuff and stop the passages farma called volatilis, the
white of an egg, amylum, gluten, and the kinds of gummes. To conclude all
such things as do refrigerate with ease and without biting. But those things
which do confirm and roborate (I mean such as do restore the natural
temperature to the part affected) as oil of roses, oleum omphacinum, oil of
mirtles, oil of chammomill, absynthium, horehound, nux cupressi, and such like
things, which being applied do strengthen the affected part, and so do free it
and defend it from all imminent flux. But proper repulsiues are such, as when
the humors do slide into some other part, Repellentia propried^^ia.
do meet with the same, and do enforce them to retire again. And these are
to be used then, when the member is grown thick, as attractiue medicines are
commonly applied to thin Tumoures. Of these many are of a cold quality,
and many of a hoate, but both sorts, (that is) both hot and cold are in
operation astringent, and binding. The medicines repressing which of nature are
cold, are these, vine leaves, plantaine, nightshade dipsacos, Frigida
rep^imen^^a.
vidz. virga pastoris, or bursapastoris, Glaucium, balaustium, omphacium,
sumach, terra c^^^lia, commonly so called, and terra sigillata, and others of
that kind. Those be the simples out of the which many compoundes are made, as
oxycratum, the ointment of bole, the ointment of Galene, and such like. But the
hot repulsiues are, allome, Cipresse nuttes, Callida repellentia.
called galbulae iuuens rotundus or odoratus, called of the Grecians (...),
called also blatta biz* intia, lupinorum farina, and certain austere and
sharp wines, and many other such like things. But we will set down the whole
order of applying of repelling medicines in the beginning of fluxions,
prescribed by Guido in two several prologues. In the beginning of all
tumoures, The first prologue of Guido in repressiue things.
which proceed from the influxe of humors, but especially of such humors
as are phlegmonous, it will be auailable to use repulsiues as they are called,
these ten causes only excepted, that is to say, when the tumor is in a fat
member, or when it proceeds of a venomous matter, or a substance which is
very thick, and so unfit to be repelled, or else, when the humor is
vehemently packed in the affected part, and deeply also, if the Tumor be
inclined to suppuration, or descending from a primitive cause, Gal. 2. ad
Glauconem.
if it be in a plethoricke or full body and very weak, if it be seated next
unto a principal member: to conclude, if it happens with vehement grief,
for in these cases, we may better use medicines, which will mitigate the tumor
and the pain thereof, rather then such as shall repel and resist the
humors. The second Prologue is after this manner. The second Prologue.
In the beginning of all tumoures, but chiefly of those which are phlegmonous,
common repulsiues are profitable: (three cases only excepted,) that is, if
the tumor happen in those parts which are called glandulose, if they be
inclined to suppuration, or if they proceed of a venimmous matter. And in all
these cases, but especially then, when the humor does stand, and when the
fluction consists, and is almost made a tumor, it is behouefull to dissolve
and scatter the matter, applying to the swollen place, diaphoretica, not biting
or sharp, but mild, Si ^umeri^^ factus est.
and gentle, being moderately hot and moist, but this must be done
principally in the three last remembered cases, in the which we must endeavor
to attract and draw the matter which is dispearsed, to the head, where the
tumor most appears, and we must increase the tumor as much as we can, and
so inhibite the course and fluxion of the mixed humors. Which truly we may
sometime do, by using attractiue emplaisters, and oftentimes by fastening
cupping glasses to the aggrieued place, Emplastri^^. C^c^^bicula. (...) canon
generalis.
(as Auicene teaches.) Let this therefore be a general rule or canon of art,
In the beginning of all tumors, which proceed of the influxion of humors,
(those three excepted which were named a little before) only pure repressiues
are to be used. But in their increasing we must mingle with these repulsiues,
some of those things which do dissolve and discuss. But in the state of
tumors, yea and somewhat before the state, we must commix repressiue
medicines equally with discussiue, and when there is declination present, or
the end of the state, we may lawfully use only resolving and releasing
remedies: to conclude, so long as the humor does yet abound, we must labor
to repel it, and drive it away: but if the flux does still remain, we must
seek to digest it. But if it depends upon both, (that is to say) that
partly something has already flowed, and cleaves fast to the place, and
partly some thing may yet abound and flow: then it shall be lawful to use
commixed remedies, (that is) partly those, which can resolve and unbind, and
partly those which are able to bring back, and repel. For (contrary diseases
being gathered into one place together, we must use also compound cures, as
Galene says. 13. Therap. Furthermore, al these things truly are to be
understood, as thus, if a tumor above nature is to be dispatched and cured by
resolving medicines, or (that I may speak generally) by the way of resolution.
But their cures, whereby we will finish all those intentions whereof we
entreated before, according to their diverse matter that exciteth the tumor
shall be described and declared in their particular Chapters, as by consequence
and order they shall follow.

CAP. VI. Of the cure of abscessions generally. DE CVRATIONE ABSCESSVVM IN
VNIVERSVM.
Of the cure of tumors which are turned into abscessions, which they call
Exit^ra.
BUT if Phlegmone, or any other Tumor does degenerate and turn into
Abscessus, the cure thereof in the beginning is finished and ended (as says
Galene lib. 2. ad Glauconem) by helps and remedies that do mitigate, which
the Greeks call chalastica, (that is) by resolving and remitting medicines: of
the which nature and force is that medicine, which is called of Galene
tetrapharmacum, being very soft, and provoking sleep: with the which
according to the opinion of the same Galene. lib. 13. Therap. there must be
commixed a little honey. Tetrapharmacum.
But Tetrapharmacum consists of four things, of the which there must be of
every one a little portion or quantity (that is to say) of wax, of rosen, of
the gum of the herb colophonia, which distilleth from the root thereof, and
of bulls tallow. But in process of time, we must pass over unto those
things, which are able to concoct and digest, or to ripen and bring to
suppuration. But those, which are turned into another kind (that is) into
another substance, and that altogether besides nature, they are to be removed
and cured by the Art of Chirurgie. Moreover in removing them according to the
counsel of Galene. 14. Therap. it shall be requisite to consider, that among all
the ways and means, whereby we intend to finish our purpose, we should
always make choice of the best of them. The best order of curing is declared
three ways.
The best means and ways are declared and manifested unto us, three manner of
ways: vidz. by the shortness of the time to cure in, by curing without pain,
and chiefly by curing saflie, and without danger. Again that thou may cure
saflie, there are three by the help of Chyrurgie, and when by the force of
medicines. But truly the study of Chyrurgie in these chiefly, which how we
do entreat of, (that is) in those tumors, which are altogether above nature,
does make and tend to the killing and destroying of them, and does wholly
declare, after what sort they may be taken away. But if it cannot bring this
to pass, the next counsel is, to transfer the evil, as we use to do in
those humors called Hypochyma^^, (that is to say) the web in the eye. But
that which is fetched from medicines, does first tend unto this end, that that
which is above naiure, may both turn into matter, and also into putrefaction:
but this he appoints in the second place. These things has Galene.
Therefore when the parts, which are troubled with phlegmone, do beat very
vehemently, so that now you begin to despair of their cure, (they being not
yet mattered:) all the ancient Chyrurgians (says Galene 4. Therap.) do
minister and apply such kind of medicines, Ex lib. 4. Therap. meth.
which do speedily procure matter: but before it be mattered, they use none at
all. And although those parts which are annoyed with phlegmone, be anointed
with a cataplasme, which may both heat them and moisten them, and bring them to
suppuration, yet the same does not appear by the first reason or way, that is,
as the remedy and help of the evil, but as the mitigating and easing of the
symptomate, that is, of the pain. For truly the remedies of phlegmone are of
a drying nature. And the same Galene adds moreover a little after, that a
short and compendious cure of those parts which are affected with phlegmone is
quickly ended and dispatched, by remedies which are able to dry and unbind,
which truly do altogether either remove the affect, or else, if they leave
behind them some little relict, which may turn to suppuration, it is needful
to use some other sharp medicine, which is able to bring out the matter, or if
the skin about the tumor be thin, and you willing, speedily to ease the
sick, you necessarily must use incision. And this truly is that, which
Auicene says, namly, Auicene.
that the cure of an Aposteme, (as it is an Aposteme) is the extraction and
drawing out of the straung matter which raises the Aposteme. But to declare
the remedies of them, wherewith it is expedient to draw and move the matter, and
to manifest other things also, which we spoke of a little before, they are to
be sought, out of their particular Chapters. Furthermore, When Abscessio^s are
chiefly to be cut and opened.
the Abscession being already come to Suppuration, or changed, or strongly
compact together, if the matter, or any other baggage therein contained, be not
discussed and dissolved, or if, in convenient season, and while the occasion is
offered, it be not opened without the labor of the hand, you must make an
issue by incision for that, which otherwise will not be digested. But this
thing chiefly is to be proved and interprised, if there be feared any erosion
or gnawing to ensue, A mattered tumor is more saf^^ opened with a knife, the^
with burning medicines.

Lib. 13. There. A section imitating the olive or myrtle leaf.

Great heart comes by wide incisions. Why ma^tered imposthumes about the
share must be ^ut overthwart.

Seven things to be diligently marked in the apertion of an abscession already
ma^tered.


or any other danger yea if necessity commands, it ought straight way to be
opened, and the matter to be drawn out, as speadily and safely as is possible,
for the cause before alleged. But Apertion is made more safely with a knife,
then with burning and scalding medicines, if nothing do hinder it, and commonly
such kind of phlegmonous tumors, being already turned into suppuration, are
opened with a penknife. Moreover Apertion, or the letting out of the matter
ought to be done, by reason, both of the abundance of matter there gathered
together, and also of the affected place. But if any part of the mattered
member, shall seem to be putrified and rotten, it is needful to cut it of, to
the form or liknesse of an olive or myrtle leaf, that it may heal the more
easily. But Galene commands to avoid and eschew always any great incisions,
who did heal such kind of mattered tumors, both in the parts about the privy
members, and also in the armeholes only by incision (as he used chiefly to do)
and by medicines that were of force to dry: Now if need sometime required to
cut of somewhat, by reason of the plenty not only of matter, but also of the
corrupted parts, he used no greater incision the^ the breath of a great myrtle
leaf. For by wide and large sections, when the member is brought unto a
scarre, besides that it is made most filthy, it also becomes very weak, and
unfit to move withal. But these kind of sections imitating the myrtle leaf
are used in those tumors especially, which do matter under the armeholes, and
about the share. And in those truly, the lenghtes of them must be drawn
ouerwart, and not by the straitness or rightnesse of the leg or body: for
when we bend the leg or the arm, the skin naturally does apply it self
with it. But in other places, we always almost do use simple incisions. Now in
this apertion or incision, seven things are especially to be marked, according
to the consent of the later Chyrurgians. First that incisio^ be made in that
place wherein the matter is contained. Two things considered of Galene in the
apertion of a (...).
and brought to a scarre after the manner of other ulcers. But Galene lib. 13.
Therap. warns us chiefly to mark two things in the incision of a suppurated
abscession, writing ofter this manner. 1. If at any time the abundance of
matter execeedeth and overcomes your medicines, neither do they seem unto
you to be able to digest all the corruption, it is requisite to make an issue
by incision for that matter which yields not to digestion, Detergentis.
which can dry it up without erosion or gnawing. But after the imposthume be
opened, you must use remedies that be of a scouring and cleansing nature, and
fit to purge the filthy ulcer, as are soft floxe or linte, and soft linen,
emplaistres, and ointmentes, which shall be spoken of in their particular
Chapters. At the first time, Guido did apply the yolke of an egg being
thickened with alume zuccharinum, which medicine Guilielmus a Saliceto did also
use. Ointments are to be (...) is opened.
But afterward you must come to the applying of mel rosatum, and
inundificati^^m ex ap^o: and last of all, to vnguentum Apostolorum, and
Aegyptiacum, if the matter so requires. But above without, you must minister
ointmentes, as basilicon, diachylon, and diaphoenicon so commonly called, and
other of that sort, which are appointed for ulcers. For when you have cut an
abscession, it must be cured after the manner of other ulcers. Galene lib. 13.
Therap. after the skin was cut in those phlegmonous tumors which chance
about the arm holes and privy members, The use of Ma^na and th^^ after the
incision, and the virtue of the^. The (...) be eased.

What things are to be laid to an ulcer.


did fill the affected place with that medicine, which the Greeks call Manna,
which is thuris purgamentum. For this has a light adstriction or binding. But
you must also (says he) first assuage the launced member, (as much as you see
cause,) first with fomentes, then with cataplasmes, and straight after with
some moisting medicine, or else with such as do not much dry (all these being
applied outwardly upon the ulcer.) For in the very ulcer, both of Manna (as
has been said) and also of those remedies which are taught and declared by
using of linte, those things truly are first to be laid on, which do move and
provoke the matter, and afterward those which do purge and cleanse. After the
applying of which things, if there remain any hollownesse, you must minister
those things which may fill the same: but if it fall out otherwise, you must
use things to bring it to a scarre. Moreover if the sick will not suffer
incision to be made either with some bright instrument, or with penknife, by
reason of the softness thereof, then the apertion is to be finished with
burning medicines. For this purpose Auicene prayseth the sead of line or flax,
Auicenn^^ in fine tract^. 1. ^e^. 3. lib. 4.
leven, and doves dounge, which you may make more excellent and forcible, if
you mingle them with a little soft soap, or with the filthiness that comes
of mustard sead. But that medicine which is called ruptorium or causticum,
which is made of lime, and soap, in this matter is most excellent, and
obteineth greatest fame. Hitherto have we spoken of Tumors above nature
generally, now it follows that we entreat of the particular differences of
them, as they follow in order.

CAP. VII. Of a true Phlegmone, and of other tumors inge^dred of blood.
HAVING spoken generally of those Tumors, which consist above nature, it is
convenient, that we entreat particularly of the differences or every one of
them, taking our Exordium from Phlegmone, as a tumor, which chances very
often, Phlegmone taken two ways.
and exciteth (as Galene says) very dangerous symptomates. Therefore Galene
lib. 1. de morbis and symptomatis, takes phlegmone two kind of ways. One way
generally ofter the manner of the Ancient writers which were before his time
(that is) for every kind of inflammation of any member, and for any heating or
burning, Phlegmone taken for phlogosit. 2.

Phlegmone also is taken for an inflammation coming of the best blood.
Phlegmone. 2. 1. Vera. 2. Non vera.


(that is) for every hot and flaming disposition, which the Greeks do
properly call (...). Another way, both with Galene and other late writers, it
is taken for a true and pure tumor engendered of blood, that is, the best, and
that also, which reteineth but mean thickenesse or grossness. And this
truly borrows his name of the kind thereof, and of the Latins it is called
diversely by reason of kind, Inflammatio, of the Greeks absolutely, Phlegmone.
But this, after the mind and consent of the later sort is two fold,
videlicet, Vera, and non vera. A true Phlegmone is caused of good blood, which
is the best both in quality, and substance or essence, but yet more abundant
then naturally should happen to the member. But phlegmone which is not a true
and lawful phlegmone, is caused of naughty and unnatural blood. For blood is
a hot and a moist humor proceeding from a more temperate part of the very
Chylus, which is a certain juice that comes of the meat in the first
digestio^. Sanguis quid.
And it is two ways: Natural and not natural. Natural blood is a hot and
moist humor, Sanguis quo^uple^.
slender and mean in substance, but of a very red color, in savor and taste
it is sweet, gentle and good. But that blood is said to be unnatural, which
differs or digresseth from the former description of blood: yet
notwithstanding containing it self within the bounds of his breath and
largnesse, which if it does once pass, it is no more to be called a blood, but
some other humor. But blood does chance to degenerat from his proper nature
two kind of ways. Blood (...) degenerate (...) proper nature two ways.
The first way is (as they term it) in it self, that is, in respect of it
self, (his proper substance being changed without any commixtion with an
other.) The second way is by an other, or in respect of an other. And yet it
consists two ways by it self, (that is to say) either because the substance
thereof is more thick, or more thin then it ought to be: or because it is
burnt, and that which is thinnest of it, is turned into melancholy, but that
which is thick into choler, and that without separation. But in respect of an
other, blood becomes not unnatural, whenas an other humor is mingled
withal. Which may happen many ways, according as the diverse kinds of
choler, fleume or mela^choly may be commixed with blood. By which things it is
manifest, that of blood, Four differences of tumors caused of blood.
there are engendered four kinds or differences of tumors above nature.
First, of natural and good blood, there is engendered a true phlegmone. But of
blood, which is corrupted through the admixtion of other humors, there do
grow three differences of that kind of phlegmone, which is neither true nor
lawful: because that the three other humors (that is to say) fleume, choler
and melancholy may be easily commixed with blood. Therefore if melancholy be
mixed with blood, it is called phlegmone Scirrhodes, if choler, (which then is
conflated of both kinds) it is called phlegmone Erysipelatodes, if fleume, is
is termed phlegmone Edematodes. But of blood, which is filthy and corrupted
through the adustion and corruption of his own proper substance, according to
the manner of the thinness or thickness thereof, there are engendered either
Carbuncles, which are called of the Greeks Anthraces, or else Gangraenae and
Sphacelus, which we call Cancres. Of the which diseases we will speak of
hereafter, in that which follows.

CAP. VIII. Of the causes, Signs, and Judgments of Phlegmone.
THERE are three causes of phlegmone: The causes of phlegmone.
as there are also of all other tumors besides nature, which do chance
through the defluxion of humors. videlicet. 1. Primitiua, which we call both
praegressa and euidens: 2. Antecedens: 3. and Coniuncta. Evident causes of
inflammation are outward causes: as, 1. Praegressa.
beating or belking, diruption, conuulsion, breaking or brusting, a wound, a
voluntary ulcer, a looseness, and other of that sort, which do provoke
flux, by exciting pain in the affected member. The Antecedent cause, as
abundance of blood, 2. Antecedens.
which is good and faultlesse, as when the veins touch much together to the
moderate repletion of the Arteries. For then is blood provoked (as a certain
superfluous thing,) to flow and descend to some member which is either weak,
or immoderatly hot, or affected with pain, where it is thrust, and abides
compact together, unless it be by and by repressed from the beginning, (as we
have said before in our general Chapter:) to the which we must therefore have
continual access, that we may attain to a more perfect knowledge of
particular tumors, whereof we now entreat. 3. Coniuncta.
The Coniunct or continent cause, is the blood it self, which is already
stuffed in the affected place. The marks or tokens of phlegmone are the
tumor, or the augmenting of the member above the natural habit, Signs of a
true phlegmone.
vehement heat, so that the member seems to burn. There appears redness
in the outward parts, such as is wont to come through bathes which are made
hot either with the fire, or by some other means. There is extreme pain,
unless the member has altogether a dull sense. There is also greiuous
beating, Lib. de Tumo. praeter natural. and 13. method.
and pulsation very vehement inwardly. There is also extension or streatching
out of the member, which not only we alone have found out, but also the
patient him self may perceive by his own feeling. There is furthermore
resistance of the member if it be touched, after the manner of extension. There
be also other such like signs, which do testify that abundance of blood is
present in some part of the body. Four times of phlegmone.
Phlegmone has four times, 1. the beginning, 2. the increasing, 3. the state,
4. and the declination: except at the least way, flux has recourse within,
or it be straight way repressed by repulsiue medicines. But when it shall
lightly pass over these four times, Iudicia.
it is needful, either to resolve and draw out the matter of it, or to bring
it to suppuration, or else to putrify and rotte it, or to turn it into a
scirrhous and stony hardness. And truly the signs of all these are to be
sought out of the Chapter that entreats generally of them: where the marks
of all times, and the means to finish tumors above nature, (which they
commonly call apostemata) be declared and expressed. Symptom^^es (...) hinder
(...) cure of phlegmone.
But phlegmone is accompanied with many other evil symptomates, which do altre
and change the order of his cure, as are, vehement pain, which does greatly
occupy the sensible part, recourse of the matter from the kernells (which the
Greeks call Adenae, and commonly they be called Emunctoria) to the internal
parts. Also mortification of the affected member (which they call corruption
esthiomenica) proceeding of too much refrigeration, and of a strong compacting
or stuffing of the matter, which did cause the inflammation. Also a stony and
almost an indissoluble hardness, commonly called Sclirotica, which proceeds
through a certain overthwart and untoward dissolution of the thinner humor.
Ca^. 5.
Wherefore in curing tumors, which consist above nature, we must diligently
oftentimes mark and consider, how far we mean to proceed in the matter, and
what accidents may change unlooked for, that so, we may chiefly insist, and
be occupied about that most, which appears, and is most urgent. Which Galene
has admonished us of very well lib. 2 ad Glauconem, and 13. Therape. speaking
after this sort: In diseases, whose resolution is difficult, and hard, it is
to be feared, least some remnaunt of them be left behind which is very hard.
Wherefore in every resolution, we must diligently consider, into what thing
every tumor, whose cure is once begone, may be changed. For that cure which is
attempted by medicines, that do mightily dry, does leave very hard knobbs,
which art hard to remove hitherto Galene. But the time requires, that we now
declare the cure of phlegmone.

CAP. IX. The order of curing Phlegmone caused of the defluxion of humors,
affecting the outvvard parts of the body.
The method of curing phlegmone which is yet in generation.
SEEING that inflammatio, which is called of the Greeks properly phlegmone,
does engender and grow through the influxion of blood, happening more
abundantly to some member then nature requires, and flux also ( phlegmone
being yet but beginning to reign) is partly in begetting, and partly begotten
already: there must needs truly be a double consideration in the cure of the
phlegmone being yet but beginning (that is to say) to empty out and avoid that
which has flowed already, and to hinder and stop that which is now a
flowing. Moreover, By what means flux is stayed.
we shall stop flux, if we shall draw back and repel the humor that
flows, if we shall add strength to the afflicted member, and if we shall
seek to remove that which causes the flux. We shall draw it back, 1.
Retractio.
and bring it into a contrary defluxion of other humors, by blood letting, if
strength and age will suffer it, but if not, we shall do it by applying cupping
glasses, or by using bindinges and frictions, or by heating those parts which
have a direct passage to the affected part. We shall bring back and repel
flux, 2. Repulsio.
by ministering those medicines, which are able to drive and turn the flux
another way. 3. Causae su^motio.
We shall also remove the causes that do bring or fetch defluxion to the member
already infested with phlegmone, by confirming and strengthening the member, if
it be weak, by using astriction if it be to loose, by cooling it if it be
hot, as it is wont to be, by easing the pain if it be vehement, and by
emptying the whole body with blood letting, if it does abound with blood, and
if it sends infection to the member: of all which things we will speak by
and by. But we do empty out and avoid that which is flowed already, Vacuation
of that which is flowed already.

Gal. There. 13.


and has gotten it self into the affect part, not only by those medicines
which do digest, that is, which do discuss and resolve, but also by those
remedies which do bind together and refrigerate. And truly in phlegmonous
tumors now beginning, we must rather use (says Galene) cooling and
astrictiue medicines, then those which do concoct and digest, and so much the
rather, if that, which flows be not of a thick substance. But if blood be
greatly compact together in that part which phlegmone has caught and taken
up, you must not apply any longer repercussiue remedies (as we said before) but
then it is convenient to use those which can digest. Also in an old and
inueterate inflammation, which after the euacuation of the whole body, and
other some fit cure, has left behind it a certain hardness and blackness
in the member: it is not unprofitable (Galene also affirming the same) to take
away the blood by scarification. Scarificatio.
And these things have we spoken briefly and by a general method concerning
the cure of inflammations that do happen through the defluction of humors,
which the Greeks properly are wont to call phlegmone: which things may be
sufficient to content a reasonable Physician, and one which is exercised in
this kind of study. But because we have taken in hand to write these things
for the practitioners of Chyrurgie, and not for the learned only, it shall not
be amiss, neither any thing from our purpose, if after this general and
compendious method, we set down more particularly those things which not
only the ancient Physicians, but also the later sort of Chyrurgians has
left behind them in writing. Four inte^tio^^ in the cure of phlegmone.
Therefore above the general rule (as they term it) the Chyrurgians of our age
are wont to reduce the order of curing phlegmone, into four branches or
particular intentions: that is to say, into a just observation of a good diet,
2. the stopping of flux, or the turning away of the matter materia coniuncta.)
4. and the correcting or amending of 1. The first intention is an order in diet.
The first intention therefore is made perfect by the due using or
administration of six things, commonly called unnatural things, and by the
using of those things also, which are said to be annexed unto them. And these
things, which are six in number, called of the Physicians res non naturales,
Res non naturales.
(as has been declared from the beginning of this treatise) are, the air,
meat and drink, moving and rest, sleep and watching, emptying and filling,
the affections of the mind or the accidents. All which things (because
phlegmone does commonly provoke fevers) ought to pertain unto coldness and
moderate moistness. For which causes we have thought good to set down these
precepts following. Let the sick be in a pure and clear air, and that
somewhat cold. Let him keep a thin diet, cold, Aer.
and moderatly moist. Let him drink small ale, or beer or other small
drinks. Cibus potus.
But if a vehement fever shall have any access (which is wont often to
happen) let him altogether abstain from wine. Let him not exercise, Mo^us.
Qui^s. Somnus. Repletio. In^^^ti^. Animi pathem^^^. Venus.
or move that member which is be set with phlegmone. Let him be quiet as much
as he can, especially if there be very great abundance of humors in the body.
Let him keep a measure in sleeping and watching: and let him shun sleeping
on the day time especially about none. Let him diligently beware of
drunkenness and gluttony. Let the belly be always kept soft and soluble, and
now and then let it be washed with clisters, if need require. Let him fly,
anger, cryinges out, and wrath, as deadly enemies. Let him abstain from
venereous acts, as a mortal foe.

The second order in curing Phlegmone, which is the turning away of the flux,
2. The (...) of the flux is the second intention.
is dispatched by letting of blood, if strength and age does suffer. But in
all members of the body, whether you intend to revel (that is) to draw back
among an other way, or to turn it from that place at the side, A vein is
always to be cut directly.
either straight over against the place, or directly forth (which is called in
Greek (...)) a vein must always be cut, although there be great abundance:
but directly, the right sides do answer to the right parts, and the left to
the left. Therefore if ophthalmia does annoy the right eye, or the squinancie
does affect the right side of the throat, the shoulder vein, or some other in
his place (if that does not appear) must be cut in the right arm, by and by
at the beginning of the flux. But if a humor does flow in the knee, you must
cut a vein in the elbow either the outward or the middle vein except you
mean to scarifie the other leg, or break the vein a sunder in it, as
Galene counseleth in a certain place. The choice of blood letting is declared
of the affected part.
Therefore the election of the cutting any vein, and the invention to turn
the humor another way, (which Hippocrates calls antispasis) is manifested
and declared by the affected part, and by the place or situation of the member
that is to be cured, as Galene 13. and 14. meth. med. and in other places,
does oftentimes teach. But that body, which phlegmone occupies, not only
when it is plethorike and full of humors, but also when the greatness of the
evil does exhort us to it, (though it be but meanly stuffed with humors,) we
must empty and euacuate by letting of blood, if we will follow the advice of
Galene, who lib. 13. meth. med. commands that, it should be so, thus writing.
Pain truly, and the heat of the member wherein phlegmone has settled him
self, (although the whole body be void of excrementes) do happen by reason of
the flux. But then it is expedient to do it but meanly. (that is) to draw
fourth blood and to make euacuation, no further then it shall best agree with
the age and nature of the patient. Further, you must have consideration both of
the time of the year, of the nature of the air wherein the sick remains,
and also of the former custom of the man. Also these do profit not a little to
draw back the blood that flows to the affected part, walkinges, frictions,
and binding of the apposite member, but first chiefly the detraction of blood,
(as has been said.) Therefore if phlegmone appears in the hands, the legs
are to be exercised, bound and rubbed, if in the legs, the hands must be
also so used. But these things belong more unto the Physician then the
Chyrurgian.

3. The third intention is the euacuation of the (...) or alread^ compact in
the member.
We now dispatch the third scope or intention, in the beginnings of phlegmone,
only by applying repulsiue things to that member which labors with the
inflammation (excepting these cases before rehearsed.) For that which is filled
with corrupted matter (as Galene says) is emptied out, not only by those
medicines which do digest, but also by those which do bind and refrigerate: as
be those, which are called repellentia and regerentia repulsiues, and
restrictiues. But in the increasing thereof at the present intention, (that is)
to empty out that, which is flowed, and also to stop, that no more does
abound, you must join digestive medicines with repressiues: Repressiues in the
increase, must exceed digestiues.
but yet so, that the abundance and strength of the one may yet prevail with
the other. But in the state they must be equally co^mixed together by even
portio^s, and somewhat more mild and mitigating remedies must be applied, if
pain be vehement. But in the end and declination of the state, it is
requisite to euacuate by digestiues only that which is compact together, if
that phlegmone must be ended by resolution or discussion. If truly it does
turn into abscession, If phlegmone does turn into abscession.
and that it cannot be, that the gathering together and erup^ion of the matter
should be let, it shall be lawful to use medicines which can both mattre,
open, and cleanse the ulcer. Furthermore those remedies which do dry, are
profitable in the end of both the evils (that is) of phlegmone and abscessus,
for they do altogether consume that which remains of the humor, but when
incision is made in the abscessio^ which is already come to suppuration, you
must lay on such a medicine as may dry without erosion or gnausing, Repulsiues
are to be used in the beginning of phlegmone. Oxycraton.
(as hereafter shall be said.) But in those phlegmonous tumors which now are but
in the beginning* the most apteremedy to repel and drive back, is oxycraton
in Galene, which the Latins call pusca aquosa. It is a mixture of water and
vinegar, so tempered together; that it may be drunk: and then (a sponge being
wet and laid in this oxycratu^, must be applied to that part, where phlegmone
is. But in stead of oxycratum, by the counsel of Galene; we may take sharp
wine, or apply cold things only, to the parts, which are about the sinews.
Lib. 13. Meth. (...).
These are the words of Galene. In those members which are about the sinews,
it shall be sufficient, in the beginning of phlegmone, to lay on a sponge dipped
either in cold water, wherewith a little vinegar is mingled* or in water only,
or in sharp and sour wine. For the same purpose also this cataplasme of the
same Galene very effectual, Galeni cataplasma, lib. 2. ad Glau.
made of sengreene and the rindes of pomegranates sodden in wine, of rh^, that
is, sumach, and polenta. This, by restraining does repel that which flows,
and by drying does empty out that which is contained in the tumor, and both
ways it does strengthen and corroborate the affected parts. This remedy has
been described of the later sort: of Auicene ofter this sort, Fen. 3. lib. 4.
trac. 1. cap. 3.
as follows,. of the juice of sengreene, lb.j. of wine, that is thick of
substance, and sharp in taste, lb.ss. of barley meal, one quarte, of the rind
of pomegranades, and sumach poudered, ana..ss. boil them and make a liniment.
There is also another, which greatly avails for the same purpose, invented of
Haly Abbas,. of santalum, white and red, Haly Abbas Linimeruum.
ana..iij. of memitha, which is called Glaucium..ij. of terra cimol^a, and bole
armoniacke, ana..j.ss. let all be brayed into very fine flower or powder, and
well searced, then dissolve them in the juice of sengreene, or purselaine, or
lettuce, and make a liniment. Aliud.
Another also in the beginning of phlegmonous inflammations, very common and
much used, which is very profitable for green wounds, and bruises taken
lately. It is made of the white of an egg, of oil of roses, and of the
distilled water of roses, (that is) of rose water, wherein you must wet fine
cloutes, and lay them to the inflamed member, and let them be changed often.
But there are many other medicines both simple and compound, which do profit in
the beginning of phlegmone to restreigne and repel flux, which are to be
sought out of other Authors, which have written of this thing. But these shall
content us for this time.

Amongst the remedies which in the increase of phlegmone, Remedies to be used
in the increasing of phlegmone.
being outwardly applied do greatly help, oil of roses is marueilously
effectual, (the Greeks call it rhodinon.) For this does partly draw back,
and partly does digest through the vapor: because it perfectly holds a
middle nature between the oil and the roses. Therefore in oil of roses there
is a certain astriction, which cannot (says Galene) ouergo the weak parts
of the tumor: Lib. 3. de (...) medic.
but when they have pierced somewhat deeper, it begins then to work
outwardly according to the strength, both to thrust together, to draw into one
place, and to thicken greatly, whereby it comes to pass that in the
augmenting of phlegmonous tumors, Oil of roses a present remedy in the
increase of phlegmone.
oil of roses, is a most excellent and ready help. In the augmenting of
phlegmone there is another in Auicene very profitable,. of the leaves of
mallows. M.j. of wormwood, roses, ana..ss, of barely meal..j. of oil of
chammomil. quart. ss. seath them, and braie them together, and bring them to
the fashion of a soft emplaistre. Another of the same,. of wine boiled either
to the half or the third part, (one we call sapa, the other defrutum.) quart.
j. rose water, and vinegar, ana. quart. ss. saffron..ij. let them be a little
het over a soft fire, then strain them, and dippe clouth in the liquour of
that decoction, which you must apply to the phlegmonous member after the manner
of an epitheme. Moreover such kind of remedies, which are used in the
increasing of the inflammation, and have their power and virtue commixed
together of repressiue and digestive medicines, ought seeldomer to be removed
and changed, then those which repel the matter, being ministered in the
beginning of phlegmone.

Actius, in the vigor or state of phlegmone, and when there is vehement pain
felt, What things do help in the state of phlegmone.
has set down these remedies: as mallows, mingled with a little bread and
with oil of roses. Also melilote boiled in the licour called passum, and
applied with a little bread, of the like virtue (says he) are dates sodden in
passum, and mingled with bread and oil of roses: Another also, which digesteth
through breathing, in the vigor of phlegmone very effectual,. pellitory of
the wall, mallows, ana. M.j. fine branne the flour of meal, ana. p.j.
fengreeke, dill, ana..ss. oil of chammomill. quart. ss. let them be boiled in
wine, and well braied together, till they be well incorporate, and make an
emplaistre. Another taken out of Galene, Emplastrum Galeni.
lib. 13. Therap.. of the crummes of bread made of corn. lb.j. steipe it in
hot water the space of one hour, then streigne it, and commixe therewith of
the best honey, quar.j. and make it to the form of a cataplasme. This does
dissolve and mitigate pain. Auicene counseleth to minister in the rigor of
phlegmone, vnguentum basilicon, and that which is made of the juices thereof
called diachylon: but the one is good to mollify, the other to ripen and bring
to matter: although notwithstanding both of them do carry with them a digesting
quality. But these and other such remedies, which are ministered to dissolve
that which is already flowed, and to ease pain, because they are of a very
moist nature, must be changed very seeldome. Furthermore, when as by the
remedies before mentioned, the humor which is falen into the member that is
troubled with phlegmone, is dissolved and discussed, and the tumor together
with the extension thereof is deminished, and the grief somewhat assuaged, then
it is to be judged that the declination of the inflammation is at hand, at
which time you must use only discussiue things, When remedies must be used
in the decla^ation of phlegmone.
as are wild mallows bruised anointed, raisons (the kernells being taken
out*) applied with bread and a little honey, and barely meal used also with
honey. Also moist wool, flax, a sponge, or some such like thing, wet in hot
wine, then streigned or wringed, you must minister it: for all these have an
excellent discussiue nature, and do not provoke pain. But if, by reason of
the stubburnesse and hardness of the disease, the affected place does contain
too great plenty of matter and that such as resists resolution, you must not
by and by (as some do) break forth unto Chyrurgie, that is, to make incision,
or to sealed it and burn it, but you must labor by all means possible, that
the humor collected together may be digested and dissolved by such medicines
as can work this effect. For it is convenient to attempt the digestion of the
humor by such medicines as can profit in that case, before you begin to cut
the inflammation. But if the tumor will not yield to digestive medicines, and
no further hope does remain to dissolve that which is compact in it, but the
matter seems rather to pertain unto suppuration, you must come unto those,
things which can ripen and procure matter. What resolution is to be hoped for.
And we hope that a tumor (although it degenerate into abseession) may through
the vapor be digested, if the matter which exciteth the same, be thin and
little, and fute to be resolved: or if it remains not any thing deeply within,
and the skin of the affected member be thin. But if the humor be
plentiful, and thick, and lurketh very deep, and the skin also thick,
exhalation or resolution is not to be hoped for. Put (...).
Therefore you must come unto those helps which can ripen and provoke matter,
of which force is this cataplasme, made of wheat meal, sodden moderatly in
water and oil: for this (Galene being our Author) does speedily bring to
suppuration those inflammations, Lib. 2. ad Gla^^^.
which will not yield to digestion, and it has also a heat like unto our
heat, that is, temperate and mean, and by reason of the meal and oil (which
have a certain clammy and glewish property, whereby in stopping the pores, they
hinder the natural heat of the member) it has the force of an emplaistre,
which two things are most required in medicines that do ripen and move matter.
There are some which do mingle with this cataplasme a little saffron to color
it. But if a tumor, by reason of the thick and viscous humors which are
stuffed in it, be hardly brought unto suppuration, this cataplasme does
notably help which is made of the decoction of the roots of althea, and of
figs that be sweet and fat, which do resemble the thickness of honey, Haly
Abbas remembers this cataplasme.
commixed with wheat meal, as follows,. of the aforsaid decoction, lb.j. of
wheat meal, lb.ss. boil them thoroughly together, and bring them into the
form of a cataplasme. But if in stead of wheat meal, you use barely meal or
crible bread, which the Greeks call (...), it more avails to discuss the
inflammation then to bring it to suppuration (as Galene has noted lib. secundo
ad Glauconem. Ali^d.
There is another also excellently profitable to provoke matter in the
declination of phlegmone, which is commonly used of the common Chyrurgians, A
common cataplasme.
. of the bark of the root of marsh mallows, that is, of althea, of the root
of lillies, grownswell, called in Greek ^rigeron, leaves of mallows, ana.
M.j. wheat meal, quar.j. of the meal of the sead of flax..j. fresh swines
grease, lb.ss. seath the herbs in sufficient quantity of water, and bray them
with the other things in a mortar, and make a cataplasme. But if, (when the
matter is gathered together and dispatched,) the abscession wherinto phlegmone
is turned, does not open of the own accord: (the members now being free from
the inflammation) you must go about to euacuate and empty out the matter which
cannot be digested, with a penknife, or some such instrument, or by some
drawing medicine. Then you must bring the ulcer unto a scarre, like unto other
ulcers, which you must do by cleansing the sore, by filling it with flesh, and
ioining it together, which at the last will cause a scarre. Moreover, if the
matter be thick, which brings fourth the tumor, and very disobedient to
resolution and digestion, and be exceedingly compact in the passages of the
flesh (as is wont to be in continual inflammations which be naughtely cured,
the thin part of the humor being resolved, and the thick part remaining
still in the passages, then you must not be afraid to use scarification,
especially (as Galene admonishes lib. 2. ad Glauconem) when hardness,
bluenesse or blackness do appear.

The fourth intention, Symptomatum correctio.
which in the cure of phlegmone was propounded to the Chyrurgian and Physician,
is the correction and removing of the symptomates, which do sodeinly come upon
the inflammation, and those are pain, recourse of the matter, whereof the
tumor is raised, to the inward parts, putrefaction and corruption of the
mattery member, and as it were a certain stony hardness remaining behind, by
reason of some mighty drying and digesting medicines. Therefore if vehement
pain shall happen to the tumor, Dolor.
you must labor by all means possible to mitigate and assuage the same,
because, (besides that it weakneth the strength, and hinders the lawful
duties of the body) it provoke flux and draws blood unto it. If pain
therefore does grievously torment in phlegmone, straight way you must lay on
those medicines, Lenifiers of pain in phlegmone.
which can lenifie and ease the vehemency of the pain without any hurt, as
is this of Galene, which is made of the licour called passum, of oil of roses,
and a little wax melted with them both: but this is to be taken in moist wool,
which has much oil in it, and to be ministered cold in Summer, and hot in
Winter, Therefore such a medicine being tempered and applied (as is said
before) does rarefie, extenuate, digest, and euacuate: it makes the humor
that is sharp, viscous, gross, or plentiful, and which cleaves to the
aggreaued parts, to be equal constant and moderate, and it discusseth the
thick vapor which can find no fit issue, and so it mitigateth pain: it
brings no hurt with his hear, for it makes dull or takes away the heat of
the oil of roses. Whereby it comes to pass, that this remedy does assuage
pain without doing any hurt, and disprofiteth not the evil, as hot water,
oil, and wheat meal, which things in an inflammation that happens with
pain, cannot be profitable (as Galene witnesses. Lib. 2. ad G^.
) For these do loosen and release through their heat and moisture, and do
resolve the strength of the member, whereby it is made more weak, and more
prone and apt to interteine flux. To the same use (that is to alay the pain
in phlegmone) you may apply affectually oil of roses, yolks of eggs, crummes
of white bread steiped in hot water, and then streigne them, and commixe them
with oil of roses. These also are a present remedy, mallows sodden in water,
and mingled with branne and oil of roses, or with oil of violettes. Cr^cum.
But Auicene in mitigating every pain uses saffron, which he profitably
commixeth with assuaging medicines. Furthermore if the sharpness of pain be
so great and vehement, that it cannot be eased with those things, which
because they mitigate and lenifie pain, (the succors of nature being
stretched out) are properly called Anodyna and paregorica (that is) prouokers
of sleep and helpers of pain: you must pass over unto those aides which we
call narcotia, (that is) stupefactiues. Amongst the which we have tried by
daily experience besides the authority of some writers, N^ta de s^.
that henbane has profits in this case marueilously, whose leaves you in
must take, and bake them in the hot embers, then mingle with them fresh swines
grease and apply them to the place. This does pacify vehement pain, and
brings plegmonous tumors unto suppuration. But, while you attempt this
thing, you must have a diligent care least you apply to much moisture, because
it is a thing, which in the beginninges of inflammations, when flux abounds
with great grief, is very pernicious (as we said a little before. Recursus
^ateriae ad interiora.
) But if you fear recourse of the matter, that exciteth phlegmone, to the
inward parts, and that chiefly toward the principal members: you must cause
him to come fourth by some drawing medicines, or else by applying cupping
glasses, which do draw vehemently from the inward parts. Durities relicta.
But if by reason of vehement drying and digesting medicines being rashly
applied to the inflammation, the relictes of the tumor do turn into Scirrhus:
you shall boil in water the roots of wild cucumber (which is commonly called
in herbaries and shoppes cucumer asininus) or of briony or of Asarum, seathing
them oftentimes alone by them selves (as Galene commands) and sometime
putting to them fat figs. Then commixe meal with water, Galens cataplasme
for hard tumors.
to the which also put a little suet, either of a goose or a cock, but if there
be not plenty of these at hand add swines grease and make a cataplasme. This
does notably heal that schirrhous affect which through mighty drying and
digesting medicines in the member which phlegmone occupied, does still remain
behind. Also the aforesaid herbs together with the roots of althaea, being,
after a moderate boiling well mingled with bread and suet, and then applied, do
discuss and dissolve such hardened tumors: as Galene does plainly teach lib.
2. ad Glauconem. Therefore if you fear, that plegmonous tumors, which are
scarely, digested through their vapor, neither yet are easily concocted, be
turned into Scirrhus: you must always commixe with digestiues those things
which can mollify and soften. Moreover if any part of the mattering member
shall putrify, you must straightway cut it out, or else seek to cure it by
many deep scatifications: Putrefactio.
afterward you must sprinkle on it salt water, and then lay on it an
emplaister made of the meal of beans or tares sodden in oxymel. There be
other things also to be proved in this case, which we will by and by set down
in the cure of Gangrena. But now it shall be more profitable, if we comprehend
the Chapters concerning the cure of such phlegmonous affectes, Galen. lib. 2.
ad G^anc.
in some short sentences. And first we will begin to declare the sum of the
cure of phlegmone, being yet but beginning, and not yet vexing with The sum
of the cure of phlegmone, when is (...) much pain.
4. Let the affected part, and those also which are about it, be strengthened
and fortified. Now follows the sum of the cure of the said phlegmone, when
it tormenteth with a more greiuous pain. 1. Whenas inflammation being caused
through the defluxion of humors, does vex with great pain, you must
mitigate the vehemency of the same without any hurt doing. 2. Then, you must
not minister those things, posca, that so you may prevent the passage of
chalcitis: then lay upon it pure wool dipped in sharp wine.

CAP. X. Of a Carbuncle, and a Cancre, and of the malady named Sphacelus, all
which they call sanguineae pustulae, 1. blood pushes.
De Carbuncul^.

(...). Gangrena and, Sphacelus do follow great phlegmones.


SEEING that we have entreated abundantly, as much as pertains to a
Chyrurgian, of Phlegmone, which is the first difference of inflammations, and
most incident to man's body: it now remains that we speak first of
Carbunculus, which is called in Greek (...): next of Gangrena, the Cancre, and
last, of Sphacelus, (which with the expounder of Auicene they commonly call
esthiomenon) for that has his beginning of a bloody flux, as phlegmone has,
and does provoke a most sharp fever, but these are wont oftentimes to
acompanie great phlegmones, as Galene libello de Tumoribus praeter naturam, and
in many other places has diligently noted. The generation and description of a
Carbu^cle.
A Carbuncle therefore proceeds of the flowing of blood, which is black,
thick, filthy, burning, and exceedingly hot, with the which if there be
mingled but certain thin humors: there are raised up on the out side of the
skin whelkes or pushes, like things that be burned or scalded, Carbunclus de
plex.

Signs of a Carbuncle.


and then this inflammation is called Carbunculus cum pustula, the Carbuncle
with the pushe, which evil truly does happen very often. In the mean time
notwithstanding it begins (although seeldome) without pushe or pushes: but
then is caused a crustie or hard ulcer: I say without pushe or pushes, 1.
Vlcus crustosum.
because sometime there arises with this evil one only pushe of some
greatness, which being broken, the ulcer is brought fourth with a scurse or
scabbe: 2. Some great whelkes, some small.
but oftentimes not one pushe alone does break out, but many little and
sclender ones, sticking thick in the member like unto the seades of hirse:
which being brust fourth, there does likewise arise a certain crustie ulcer,
such as hot iron does cause. But between their beginning, before that the
pushes do appear, they trouble the member thoroughly. 3. The color of the
c^ust either earthy or black.
Now these scales or scurfe do sometime receive an ashye or earthly color,
sometime blackness, and in that place the skin cannot be eased, but it is,
as it were fastened to the inner flesh. The flesh also about it, is brought
into an exceeding hot inflammation, which the Greeks call Phlogosis, and is
black in color, and shines after the manner of lime or pitche, 4. The flesh
black about it.
as though there were a little black commixed with a great quantity of read.
This color is caused altogether of melancholy. And these truly are the
signs and tokens of a Carbuncle drawn from the very affecte it self, 5.
Grievous pain.
to the which also may be added a very grievous and vehement pain of the
afflicted member, as though it were bound with strong chains. They also which
are thus affected do necessarily fall into a fever, and that sooner, then
they, 6. A vehement fever.
which are vexed with Phlegmone Erysipelatosa. But if any poison does lurk
within (as oftentimes it chances) the sick persons are miserably tormented
with perbraking and continual vomiting, 7. Nauseae.
together with a want of appetite and lothing of meat. 8. (...).
There are present also with them quaking of the heart, panting or moving of
the stomache, and an often fainting of courage. 9. Want of stomache.
This evil is called properly of the Chyrurgians of our age, Anthrax, 10.
Ca^dis tremor.
differing from Carbunculus, by reason of the malice and cruelty of the evil
(as they please.) Whenas in very deed (...) among the Greeks is the very
same, that Carbo, 11. (...).
or Carbunculus is among the Latins. Therefore it is superfluous to
distinguish, and to handle in diverse Chapters the signs and cure of them
(which all Chyrurgians almost do use at this time. Carbuncle (...).

1. VV^en a Carbunc^e ^s m^st deadly, (the judgment thereof being taken from
the affected p^ace.)

2. Another judgment taken from the affected place.

3. Judgment of the color.

4. Judgment of the accidents.


) But these Carbuncles do chiefly arise of violent causes killing the people
suddenly, and they follow a pestilent plague. Wherefore there is required a
diligent heed or care about them, neither in any case must they be neglected.
Moreover although (...) or every Carbuncle be a sharp disease, dangerous and
contagious: yet the worst of all and the most deadly is that of Auicene, which
does arise in the purest places and near to the principal members. For it is
to be feared, that this venomous matter which exciteth the Carbuncle, does
sodeinly return to the inward parts, and to some principal member: which if
it shall happen, the sick is in great danger of his life, especially if any
evil signs shall bewraye the same. But if the exhalation thereof be only
filthy and corrupted with abominable poison, it is enough to kill the man. If
a Carbuncle chances about the stomache, or about the cheeks or laws, it
sodeinly oftentimes (as Celsus says) bursteth out the stomache. And less
deadly is that Carbuncle in Auicene, which appears first read, and then
yelow or of orange color. But if it waxes blue or black, it kills almost
every man, and there is none that is judged more dangerous of the one nature
then it. If the Accidents, which are wont to accompany this disease, be very
much remitted or released there is some hope of recovery. But if they be still
more and more continually stretched out, and made more vehement, then truly
the matter is in great despair.

CAP. XI. Of the cure of a Carbuncle.
GALENE lib. method med. 14. and secundo ad Glanconem, The cure of a Carbu^cle
must be begun by blood letting.
commands that the cure of a Carbuncle (having set down a convenient order
of diette) must be begun with blood letting by and by at the beginning (if none
of those things do let it, which are wont to forbid the cutting of a
vein) who also wills to draw blood even to the fainting of the heart. For
it profits much those that be troubled with this evil: and this always is
to be marked, Ven^ e ^^^ecto secunda.
that the vein be strooken directly against the ulcer. But the choose of the
vein is manifested unto us of the affected member (as we have said in the cure
of Phlegmone.) Therefore in that matter, even a skilfulll Physician must take
counsel of the Chyrurgian, who has the knowledge to declare, from what place
and how much blood is to be drawn out. The vein (as it behooves) being cut,
if nothing (as I said) do hinder you, Deep scarification.
it shall not be amiss to scarifie the said tumor, using somewhat deep
cuttes or wounds by reason of the thickness of the malicious humor, (that
is) such cuttes as are somewhat deeper then ordinary (as it pleases Galene.)
There are some, which would have scarification made in the crustie or hard
ulcer only, and then they straight way sprinckle those incisions with hot
salt water, Sprinckling of hot salt water.

Arsonicum. Sanguisugae.


that blood might not meet together in them or increase, but that it might be
emptied out. Sometime also they apply some gnawing medicine, as is arsenike,
which in this case among the rest has the greatest virtue, but some do
minister to the scarified place horsleches or blood suckers. But strong
repulsiues are in no wise to be used or applied to the aggreaued member
(although refrigeration be needful which in deed does belong unto the
inflammation. Flux in a Caerbuncle cannot be turned away, neither ought it,
Lib. 14 There.
) For you cannot so turn away the flux or prevent the malice hereof, because
of the thickness of the humor. And if at any time you shall do it, you shall
find some other naughty humor (as Galene says) which is settled in the
deepth or inward parts of the body: but this humor must not be suffered to
flow abundantly (the same Galene being our Author.) Therefore such remedies
are to be sought for, as by a moderate repression can digest or dispearse the
humor. A Cataplasme good for a carbuncle.
Such truly is that cataplasme, both that which is made of plantaine, and also
that which is made of lintels twice sodden. But with this you must commixe
crummes of bread, which have been baked in an oven. Let the bread (after Galens
counsel) be neither altogether without branne, nor very full of it. But this
kind of cataplasme is called of the latter sort Emplastrum de Arnoglossa,
Cataplasm^ de Arnoglossa.
which they make after this sort,. of plantine, lintles, bread baked in the
oven, of each a like portion, let them be boiled in water. To these Auicene
puts gauls, who also for this purpose does allow the cataplasme which is
made of the two pomegranates sodden either in vinegar, A Cataplasme of
pomegranates. Pa^^^^.
or in sharp or tarte water, and these they apply both to the affected
member, and also to the parts about it. Of this mind also is Paulus Aegineta,
who says, that, if you will pluck up a Carbuncle as it were by the roots,
and disseuer it from having any society with the parts about it, you must
seath in vinegar a sharp pomegranate cut in small pieces: when the sore is
corrupted you must wipe it smoothe, and cleanse it with a linen clothe, and
when it waxes dry, Nux ^uellana.
you must moisten it with vinegar. Also the kernel of the old filberd nutte
or of the young does ripen and break Carbuncles. But the best remedy for the
parts lying about it, is the ointment made of Bole armoniacke, of oil of
roses or mirtles, and of vinegar: which is used, because the humor, which has
flowed already, should not return back again within. There are some which
do draw and allure the poison, Remedies to draw the poison in a Carbuncle.
and malicious humor in a pestilent Carbuncle with sucking or drawing it, with
cupping glasses, and with medicines that can bring the humor to the place
which is be set with Carbo. Which thing truly I would also counsel to do, if
(...) does occupy the arteries, and the parts about the lesser veins, and
if flux does move but slowly. But if it rusheth or breaks fourth strongly
and abundantly, the rage of the humor must be tamed and bridled by medicines
that can moderatly repress (as of late we recited out of Galene) least that
there be caused too vehement pain through the flux that flows so strongly
in the affected member, and so the evil be made more painful and angry. What
must be applied to a crustie ulcer.
But upon this hard or crustie ulcer, especially when the member is putrefied,
you must lay some strong medicine both which can greatly dry (but not that
which can concoct or digest) and also which can move the matter, (seeing that
so, you shall favor the putrefaction of the member, A Cataplasme of the meal
of Tares and oxymel.
) of this nature is that of Andron Musu, Pusro, or Polyida: and it must be
washed in some sweet wine, or in Sapa, by reason of the thickness of the
filthy humor. That cataplasme also which in Galene is made of the meal of
Tares and oxymell, is rightly applied, when as the ulcer is malignaunt and
corrupted. But commonly the ointment called Vnguentum Aegyptiacum is to be
applied. But if these things do little profit, you must come unto more
sharp remedies, Vnguentum Aegyptiacum.
which have even a fiery force. Of the which kind are these, the root, of
Dracunculus or Aristolochia broken and laid in vinegar, lime, arsenicke,
yellow oker, and other of this, sort, Adurentia medicamenia.
which do burn like fire. These do profit sufficiently, if they do thoroughly
resolve the corrupted member even from the quick. This being done, whatsoever
is corrupted and dead within, you must by and by pull away and pluck it up by
the roots. But when after these gnawing medicines there follows a scurfe or
scarre, which is drawn every way from the quick flesh, When adustio^ must
be used.
the wound truly, which is raised through them, must be diligently regarded,
as in other sores that be burned. But seeing in extreme diseases (as
Hippocrates says) extreme remedies are perfectly the best, we are constrained
sometime (our medicines not prevailing with the evil) to root out a malicious
carbuncle by actual or manuell instruments (as they call it) that is, with a
bright knife or some other such thing. But the end of burning is, Finis
adure^di.
while there is sense of pain every way, as Celsus has taught very well.
After these things the crust or scabbe, which is upon the ulcers must be
resolved by such medicines as are meet for that purpose. But if the sick
shall refuse to suffer adustion, the help of some poor and base fellow is to
be used, who by laying hold on the carbuncle with his teeth may quite
extinguish and pull up the same. As were in time past certain people in Italy
named Psilis, Psilis.
who did suck their wounds which they received by the stinging of Serpents,
and that without any harm taking thereby. Moreover the carbuncle being thus
taken away, or consumed any other way, the hollownesse thereof (the
inflammation now ceasing) must first be cleansed, and afterward being made
pure and clean it must be healed with filling medicines (which the Greeks
call Synulotica.) Which when it is thoroughly filled, neither does there remain
any hollow place at all in it, it is convenient to use those things which
can bring it to a scarre, as in other ulcers. But if the evil does not rage
very much, but shall seem to offer us truce and peace, Ma^urati^um Auicenne.
it is ripened and opened (as Auicene says) by applying figs commixed well
together with leaven and salt. And when this Cataplasme or the like is laid to
twice or thrice, the place is wont to appear altogether black and full of
chinckes or clyftes, and then the place is to be scoured and cleansed with
mundificatiues made of Apium. That medicine also, Mundifi^ati^um ex ap^^.
which is made of the yolks of eggs and of salt, if it be often applied, it
ripeneth and opens a Carbuncle, (as Theodaricus writes.) For the same
purpose we use commonly at this day that medicine, which is made of honey,
salt, wheat meal, and the yolks of eggs. Consolida mayor, A common
catapla^me used in Paris.

Co^solida mayor


(that is) comferie (which the the Greeks call symphyton) being brayed
between two stones, does heal Anthrax very marvelously (as they report) and
within the space of one day it quite destroys it, so that it needs no other
curing after any more, besides also it is a common help for other wounds. Some
also do declare wonderful things of Scabiosa: because that, Scabiosa.
(it being eaten or dronk in wine) it thrusts out internal tumoures to the
external places, and it does dissolve and discuss them without pain.

In the ulcers of a carbuncle these do resolve the crustes or scurfe, fresh
butter, What things do resolve the crusts of ulcers.
swines suet, and other fat things of that sort. For this purpose also this
emplaister followinge does marvelously profit: for besides that it resolves
the scarre, that is, the crust, more speedily, then the aforesaid things, it
also asswageth the pain that is caused either of the sharp and burning
medicines, or of the bright instrument, and it mightily discusseth the
malicious humor, which exciteth the Carkuncle.. of wheat and barley meal.
ana..iij. of the which make a solid emplaister with the decoction of mallows,
violettes, Emplastrum eschar^m resoluens.
and the roots of Althaea, and put thereunto of butter, and swines suet
melted. ana..ij. the yolks of two eggs, which must be put in, when they are
taken of the fire: and all these must be diligently commixed and incorporat
together with the aforsaid roots and herbs, which must be well beaten and
brayed together the one with the other, and then sifted through a scarce. As
concerning their diet, epithemes, cordials, and other of that kind, which are
made to strengthen the heart* also Euacuations, if they be needful, they do
altogether pertain unto that part of Physic, which cures with diet and
medicines. Wherefore in ministering them, you must ask the advice or counsel
of some learned Physician. But commonly all men almost do use theri^ca,
Theri^ce.
which is wont to be ministered to the greatness of a bean, made of the water of
scabeous, or if a very sharp and vehement fever be present, you must make it
of rose water, or water of buglosse: which the sick must take six hours after
meat. But because we have made mention before of the Trochiskes of Andr^^,
Polyida and Musa (which Galene so greatly used) it shall not be amiss to set
down here the description of them.

Andronis Troch^s^^^.
. of Cytines (that is) of the first flowers or buddes of a Pomegranate..x. of
alume that may be cut..iiij. of coperous or vittioll..xij. of mirrhe..iiij. of
frankensence, Aristolochia, and gauls. ana..viij. of salt ammoniacke..iiij.

Polyida Postill^s.
. of pomegranate rindes..vj. of mirrhe..viij. of Alume that may be cut..v. of
frankensence..iiij. of coperous..iij. of the gall of a bull..vj. let these be
taken in sweet wine.

Polyidae pas^^ctus (...).
. of cut or cloven alume..iij. frankensense..iiij. of mirrhe as much, of
coperous..ij. of the flowers of pomegranates..xij. of bulls gall..vj.
Aloes..viij. Take these in sharp wine.

Musae ^^^hisku^.
. of cut alume, aloes, mirrhe, coperous. ana..vj. of saffron, and of the
dregs of the oil of saffron..iij. of the flowers of pomegranates..iiij. Let
them be taken in mulsum made of Faler^^um.

CAP. XII. Of Gangrena and Sphacelus.
What a Canker is, and whence it has his beginning
GALENE lib. 2. au Glanconem, calls them Cankers, which by reason of the
greatness of the inflammation be made and changed into mortifications, yet
they be not thoroughly engendered and already confirmed. The force and tyranny
of this evil is so outrageous, that except it be remedied very speedily, the
affected member does easily represent the habit of death (that is) it does
very readily draw together the extinction and quenching both of life,
Gangrena pessimus tyra^nus
sense and moving. But when the member is so corrupted and so feeble, that it
is altogether without sense, and as it were dead, so that whether it be
stricken, or cut, or burned, the sick feels it not, then the Greeks call
this evil no longer Cangrena, but Sphacelus, the Latins Syderatio, the later
sort call it Esthiomenon: which name also they give unto Gangrena. Sphacelus.
But Auicene calls it Esthiomenon, when as the corruption thereof does pass
to the continual parts, which term the Grecians do use in an other order.
Some call this affect sometime Herpeta esthiomenon, Sydenatio oss^^^.
sometime very improperly, Cancer vlceratus. But this affect chances also to
the bones, when as the flesh being beset and compassed about with them,
bringing forth and engendring filthy and stinking corruption, does infect
them with this horrible poison and consumes them with most corruptible
rottenness. Therefore when as the member shall altogether appear void of
life, sense and moving, The benu^med member must straightway be p^^ed.
you must by and by pare it to the quick as near as you can to the sound
flesh. Sphacelus therefore differs from Gangrena, because the one does grow
up in the bones (as we have declared) and not in the flesh and vessels of the
body only, but the other comes not to the bones. Not withstanding it is one
kind of Sphacelus but it borrows a proper and singular name beside the
common term. This kind of corruption being perfect in the affected part, and
altogether deprived of sense, is called commonly in France Ignis Sancti
Antonij. In another place Ignis Sancti Martialis. But this mortification of the
members, Ignis Sancti Antonij.

Three causes of mortificatio^


or the extinguishing and destroying of the life in them, chances three
ways. One way, when as the member can no longer receive the life that is sent
to from the heart thorough the Arteries, by reason of the dissoluing of the
What things do dissolve the mixture of the member.
rash, and unadvised refrigeration of the inflammation, or else because of the
exceedinge, and vnmearable vehement heat, and poison of the inflammations, and
malignant ulcers (as they call them.) Another way Gangrena and Sphacelus are
caused, whenas the life being gotten into Gangrena and Syderatio, which the
Grecians call necrosis and sphacelus, do chance unto men's bodies, destroying
either the member, or the vital faculty, Signs of Gangrena and sphacelus.
or the natural heat and temperature of the body. But the signs of Gangrena
and Syderatio, Galene in his little treatise of Tumors above nature declares
to be these: First truly that flourishing color is extinguished in them,
which is wont to be in phlegmonous inflammations, Gangrena,) is of so great
cruelty and madness (as Paulus says) that except you presently seek a
remedy for it without all delay, the affected member soon perishes, Iudicia
lib. 4
and then it inuadeth the other parts that be next unto it, and kills the
man. Lib. 5
But if (as Celsus reports) it yet has but small power, but is now a
beginning, it is not very hard to cure, especially in a young man's body, and
so much the rather if the muscles be sound and whole, if the sinews be not
hurt, or smallie affected. But when this evil has taken deep root, and is
turned already into sphacelus, it it incurable, and very many do die of a
cold sweat.

CAP. XIII. Of the cure of Gangrena caused of great inflammations, and of the
destroying or curing of Sphacelus, which is engendered of Gangrena.
BECAUSE abundance of blood does engender a canker, Emptying of corrupted
blood.
the order of the cure thereof must be straight way attempted by a plentiful
and copious euacuation of the corrupt blood, which is packed together in the
affected member. But in the mean season, you must not neglect those things
which shall seem to belong unto diet, medicines, cutting of a vein (if need
require) and strengthenning of the heart, in which things the Chirurgian must
take the advice of some learned Physician, who knows how to enstruct him
therein (as the matter shall require.) But there must be great plenty of that
congealed blood (which causes mortifications) drawn out from the affected
part, either in the vein that is cut, if it appears any thing full, and
swollen about the same member, or in the whole skin of the part affected,
together with his substance either kept down and made obedient, or cut, or
divided by many deep scarifications. Some to this end do apply
horse-leaches, and they do open the little veins that be next the sore, but
those deep and often sections or scarifications are much more effectual to
cure that Evil. But because of the greatness of the Cankre, we use very
great sections, or often incisions (which we call Scarifications:) the one,
when the eueill is near rotten, the other when it only begins to rotte.
For the greater the evil is, the greater remedy it requires (as every man
may know. After scarificatio^ you must wash the place with salt water.

Medicines putrefactiues.


) But when you have drawn out blood abundantly by those deep slashes or cuts,
you must wash the place with salt water, that the thick blood which otherwise
would abound there, may be brought forth. Then you must apply some medicine,
that can let and dissolve putrefaction, as is the meal of tares or darnell,
(which the French men call yuraia, because it does provoke dronkenesse after
the manner of wine) or if there be scarcity of them, you must use the meal of
beans with oxymel and syrupus acetosus. It shall be profitable also to wash
the scarified place twice in a day with hoate vinegre, but especially with
mulsum. For these by reason of the dryness, do consume the filthiness and
corruption, and do cleanse it, but because of their coldness they do challenge
of putrefaction that, which is not yet defiled and corrupted. But when this
fervent heat is now abated, and the fury of the evil somewhat remitted and
slaked, you must lay above upon the sore that ointment which is commoly called
vnguentum Aegyptiacum, Vnguentum Aegyptiacum
made of verdigrease, alume, honey, and vinegre, of each a like quantity
commixed and boiled together. This does stop putrefaction and resolve it: and
it does disseuer also the putrified and corrupted humor from the sound and
whole parts, and it does cause it to fall and perish. Moreover it procures a
crust or scarre, and preserves and defends the whole parts from any
infection. But if you will apply a more strong and effectual medicine, mingle
salt with the aforesaid things: or if the evil shall increase yet more and
more, B^^ning Trochiskes.
minister some of the Trochiskes before mentioned, being thoroughly brayed and
beaten together, and then washed in vinegre and wine: as that either of Andron
or Polyida or Musa: or one of those which are called of the later sort,
calidicon, Aldaron, or that made of Asphodelus, which by reason of the burning
force do separate the corruption from the sound parts. In this matter before
all other things Arsenicon is praised and allowed of, which they call
sublimatum, Arsenicon sublimatum.
purum or correctum, which must be dissolved either in some powder or in wine,
and taken in linen or cotton (which the French men call Coton.) And so applied
between the sound and corrupted member. For this does straight way stay the
evil, and that truly without pain. But if necessity requires, you must
divide the good from the evil with a certain instrument called a probe, or
sklise. But in ministering such medicines: that the matter may be handled more
without care, you must be diligent to know the nature of the sick body, (as
Galene has well taught us saying.) If the body be rusticall and hard by
nature, Lib. 2. ad Glane.
it requires very vehement medicines: but if it be tender and soft, it
requires more gentle and mild medicines. Infantes also or children, and they
which love to live at their own pleasure in idleness, must have gentle
medicines ministered to the^. Moreover the nature of the parts which are evil
affected must be regarded as well as the whole body. When you do either cut
of, or cut about that which is putrified and corrupted. For there are some
sores, which very quickly do come to matter, and corruption, if they be
negligently cured: and some very slowly: some also do slowly feel the force
and benefit of medicines applied, and some very soon.

When adustio^ is to be used.
Furthermore if (notwithstanding these burning medicines) the evil shall yet
remain, you must burn that place which is beetweene the whole and corrupted
member. But all these remedies are wont sometime to profit nothing at all, and
then this is the only help, If the canker turns into sphacelus.
although (as Celsus says) it be a miserable help (that is) to cut of the
member, which by little and little waxes dead, that so the other parts of the
body may be without danger. For that which is once corrupted, even with
touching, it does infect and corrupt that part which is whole and sound after
the manner of poison. But if at any time you shall cut of this putrified and
dead member, or shall lance of that which is corrupted in any member even to
the sound flesh, Li. 2. ad Gla^^
then by the counsel of Galene for more quietness sake, you must sear or
burn with some bright instrument that member, which as a root, is joined to
the whole and sound body, for so you shall quickelie stay the flowing of
blood, and debar corruption. Lib. 4. Remedies that can losen the crusts from
the seared members.
Now adustion being done and ended, you must use the juice of leeks, or (as
Paulus says) you must apply salt with the leekes, or some of those remedies,
which we have spoken of a little before. For these do dry and bind the
corruption, and do also stop the flux of humors. But when by using these
remedies rottenrennesse or corruption shall seem to cease: that the crustes
and scurfe may soon fall away, you must use a Cataplasme made of bread, or
barley meal, or wheat meal boiled in hydraleon. Also that medicine, which
they call Cephalicum, anointed with honey. These through their cleansing or
scouring, do resolve the crust from the flesh which lies under it. Moreover
that medicine which is called Tetrapharmacum, and that also called macedonicum,
by moving and mollifying the matter do bring the scurfs from the parts that ly
under the^, as all other things do, which do bring the sores unto suppuration.
For these remedies do both mollify, and ripen or end the matter under the
crust, which matter does resolve it: (I mean that matter which lies between
the crust and the flesh. Bread also beaten and brayed with apiu^, or ocinium,
through their clensing does mightily draw the crustes from the whole parts
without erosion or gnawing, of the like virtue also is Iris, or the root of
panax, or of aristolochia, Butyrum.
or of acorus mixed with honey. But they are commonly wont to use butter or
some other anointing thing to resolve the crusts. But when the crust is fallen
of, they wash the place with vinegre, and then apply this plaster following,
which is rehearsed by Guilielmus de saliceto. Emplastrum Guilielmi a Saliceto.
. honey. lb.ss. raw yolks of eggs iij. or iiij. of barley meal. lb.ss. mingle
these together and bring them into the form of an emplaister. But two or
three days after, that the mundification or cleansing may be the better
accomplished, you may ad to this emplaister of chosen mirrhe..x. But in tender
and young bodies for the separation of the crust, and detersion of the filthy
corruption, the meal of tares mingled with honey, Lib. 2. ad Glauconem.

The sum of the cure of Gangrena and sphacellus.


or frankensence (which was used of Galene) does abundantly suffice. These
things being rightly ordered, such kind of ulcers must be brought unto some
soundness of health with such kind of medicines as can draw together the
flesh, and procure a scarre: the Grecians call them synulotica and epolotica.
1. Empty out abundantly the corrupted blood, which is stuffed in the affected
member. 2. After scarifications or sections, wash the affected place with salt
water. Then vnguentum Aegyptiacum. 4. If the evil will not yeald to these
remedies, Gangrena is changed into sphacelus, cut of that member very
speedily, which is so perished even to the whole, so that no filthiness
remain behind. 6. When you have cut of that which was putrified, you must
Apherisms 1^ pertaining 2. to a phisitio^


1. First appoint a thin and coling diet for them which are vexed with
Gangrena and sphacelus. 2. If nothing do let it, turn away the flux by
letting of blood: and draw it out aboundaunlie, if it flows plentifully. 3.
Purify the blood with the medicine which is called Catholicon, or with the
black pith of Casia fistularis, or with the decoction Tamarinds, of hoppes,
and fumitorie. 4. Let the sick take Theriaca, and other of that kind, which
are able to defend the heart, (which is the fountain and beginning

CAP. XIIII. Of Erysipelas and other tumoures caused of Choler.
ALthough fleume in the genration of humors, does follow next unto blood,
Fleume in the generation of humors is next unto blood
and there be greater abundance of that humor in the body next unto blood,
the^ of other humors, yet because tumors above nature proceeding of choler
(which they commonly call cholerike apostems) do in many things greatly
conspire and aagree with bloody humors, it follows (after the determination
of phlegmone, and of other tumoures consisting above nature, which proceed of
blood) that we now speak of those swellings, which are caused of choler, and
are called of the Greeks by this general name Erysipelata, Erysipel^^ q^^d.
but of the ancient Latins Ignes sacri. Erysipelus therefore is the branch
or bud of choleric flux, most abiding about both the skins, (that is) both
about that which outwardly covers all the parts of the body, and also
about that filmie and thin skin which inwardly compasses the internal
parts. But oftentimes also it occupies some of the flesh that lies under it,
as phlegmone (which is the issue of bloody flux most incident to fleshie
bodies) does also possess some of the skin. Therefore when very thin
choler, or hot blood which is thin also in substance, (called of the later
sort cholera naturalis, but of Galene (...)) is spread abroad over the skin
only, nothing molesting the flesh under it, and yet somewhat raising the
member into a tumor with a languishing inflammation and yellow redness, and
altogether does yield when it is touched. This affect is properly called of
Galene, Erysipelas exquis^^^.
a true and exquisite Erysipelas. But this is for one consideration, or (as
they say) it chances uniformly, and without vlceration. Auicene calls it
spina. Spina.
But when a humor of bitter choler shall be more thick and sharp, then that
it can return again naturally it does exulcerate or fetch of that little
outward skin, (which the Greeks call Epidermida) and sometime that
exulceration of the skin in process of time pierces somewhat deeply, so
that it touches the inner flesh under it, and then that affect is called also
Erysipelas but with vlceration, Erysepelas cu^ vlceratum.
which (as Galene says) is all one with Herpes. But if it be neither a
choleric flux, nor a bloody humor, but equally congealed of them both, it
is not then called Erysipelas only, but Galene terms it a disposition
thoroughly commixed with Erysipelas and the inflammation. Erysipelas non
legiti^^^.
But of that which is predominant in the mixture, is the title given to the
evil. For when blood rules, it is called phlegmone erysipelatosa: but when
choler reigns, we term it Erysipelas phlegmonosum. But when neither has
superiority, but the accidents of them both appear equal together in power,
Medium (...)
then that evil shall be called a mean between phlegmone and Erypelas. Now
also of other mixtures there shall be the like interpretation, that is, if much
choler be mingled with a thin and small humor, either of fleume or
melancholy, it shall be called Erisipelas oedemat^sum or schirrbosum. Moreover
when we speak simply of choler, or of a bilious humor, (...).
after the manner of Galene and other Physicians, we mean pale choler, yelow,
and bitter, and not that which is sour and black. And this is called of
others, naturalis and certa cholera, having his generation of blood that is
thin and hot. But melancholy we never absolutely do term choler, but
always with an adiection of the humor, which joins the color of the name.
Choler therefore, which is called of the Greeks (...), and commonly cholera,
is a hot and dry humor, proceeding of the thinner and hotter part of chylus,
or of thin and hot blood (as we said a late.) And this is two manner of
ways according to the division of the new Physicians, Bi^is flena duplex.
that is to say, natural and unnatural. Natural choler is a humor of power
hot and dry, in substance thin, of color yellow or red, declining unto a
certain color like orengetaunie, but in taste very bitter, and not sharp or
sour (as some untruly have affirmed. Not natural.
) Unnatural choler is said to be that, which does degenerate from the
aforesaid bilious humor, and yet it keeps it self within the bounds of his
circuit, which if it does once pass or go out of, it is now not to be
accounted choler, but rather some other humor. Choler does digress from his
own nature.
But this (I mean choler) does happen to transgress the limits of his
liberty or circuit two ways. 1. One way (as we may say) by it self, and in
it self. 2. The other way by admixtion with others. By it self and in it
self is also two fold. 1. one way, whenas that natural choler does putrify,
and is burned within, and that is called adustae per putrifactione^.i. burnt
through patrifaction. 2. The other way, whenas unnatural choler called
vitellina, Bilis vitellina Porr^acta. Prassina. A^^uginosa
is thoroughly concocted even with a fiery heat in the liver, or in the
stomach, or in the veins, and it is made of the color of leeks, which they
also call prassina, or it is caused to be rustie or cankred, which truly are
extreme griefs. But unnatural choler, or choler above nature, through
admixtion, is caused, when as another humor does come unto it extraordinarily.
And this truly happens many ways. For if thin and waterish fleume be mixed
with it it is made yellow and like unto saffron, if thick and viscous fleume be
commixed therewith, it is made like to the yolks of eggs: but if burned
melancholy be joined therewith, Crocea. Auicene. Haly.
it is made bilis adusta per admixtione^. And so after Auicenes mind and
judgment, there are six kinds of natural choler with: Halyabbas, four only,
for he makes no mention at all of the two kinds of adusted choler. But Gal.
lib. 2. de virtut. naturalibus says that there is no choler besides nature,
but that which is vitellina, very like both in color and thicknes to the
yolks of eggs: for he says that porracea and aerubinosa bilis are engendered
oftentimes in the stomach, of naughty and corrupted humors, by reason of the
cruditie or rawnes of meats and drinckes, as are, the herb called beete,
oynions, coolewortes. And also sometime, when these things are not well
digested, it is engendered in the very veins, by reason of sickness, or some
other evil disposition. By these things therefore it is gathered, that there
are four kinds or differences of inflammations engendered of choler (which
commonly are called choleric apostemes). That is to say. Of true sincere,
Four differences of inflammations coming of choler.

Verum erysipelas.

Three unlawful erysipelas.


and laudable choler (which we call thin and hot blood) is engendered that
kind of inflammation, which Galene lib. 2. ad Glauco. calls a true and
exquisite erysipelas, which is as it were a passion of the skin only: in
Greek it is called (...). But of unnatural choler, being mixed with other
humors, there do arise three other differences, as erysipelas phlegmonodes,
erysipelas aedematodes, and erysipelas scirrbodes. And of choler which besides
nature is caused of adustion, by reason of the thinnes or thickenes of the
substance thereof there are engendered either herpetes esthiomeni (that is)
excedentes, which are of the same kind with those erysipelata, Herpes exedens.

Phagedaena. Can^ri ^^erati.


which do chance with vlceration, or there are engendered phagedaene, which
do somewhat deeply gnaw the flesh together with the skin, and there are
caused exulcerat cankres, and other such gnawing evils, there are also
engendered cacoethe (that is) malignant ulcers, which are called of the late
chirurgians pustulaa corrosiuae. Therefore in such kind of humors, that is
truly the most thin, which raises the exulcerated herpes: and that most
thick, which provoke the cankre. Then that which parteineth unto thicknes,
occupies the next place, which does engendre phagedene, as Galene has noted
lib. 14. meth med. The causes of a true erysipelas as also of a true plegmone
are three. Praegressae, Causae very erisipelatis.
which are called also primative 2. antecedentes 3. and coniuncte. But
epysipelas is seeldome caused of any primitive cause: notwithstanding violent
frictions, the applying and ministering of attractiue medicines do oftentimes
excite or cause the same.

CAP. XV. Of the signs and tokens of a true erysipelas.
THE marks and tokens of a true and exquisite erypelas are gathered and known
by conferring the same with phlegmone according to the doctrine of Galene 14.
Therap. and 2. ad Glauconem: Signs of erysipelas.
whereby it plainly appears that a true and lawful erysipelas is a certain
species of plegmone (that is) of an inflammation, as it is generally taken. The
signs therefore of erysipelas are these, a red color to behold, declining
somewhat to yellow, A yealowish rednes ^eiding to the finger. a small (...)*
vehement heat.

Small pulse. Pricking pain. Indicia.


which yellowish color does easily yield to touching or handling of it, (that
is) by thrusting it down with the fingers, and then it slydeth in again, a
small tumor rather remaining in the skin, then descending deeply, vehement
heat causing a more vehement fever then that which is accended of phlegmone:
for erysipelas is far away more hot, then phlegmone No great or strong
breaking of the pulses, which is the proper simptomate of a great phlegmone. A
biting and pricking pain without any extension, as it chances in phlegmone,
and many other like signs which do signify the dominion and rule of choler.
But that which partayneth unto the judgments hereof, erysipelas does chiefly
lay hold one the face, and begins commonly in that part of the nose, which
is commonly called lepus. then straightwaie it spreads over the whole face,
and that through a double occasion, that is, for the thinnes of the skin, and
lightness of the choler. But in the uncovering or laying naked of any bone,
erysipelas is a sudden and marvelous disease, as Hypppocrates writes lib. 7.
Aporism. 19. that is to say, it is an evil symptomate, if the flesh lying
round about the naked bone does seem to be occupied of erysipelas, but this,
as Galene witnesses, chances very seeldome. Again the same Hippo. writes
in the Aphorism following, that of erysipelas there comes corruption,
suppuration, together with the disease, which things (says Galene) never do
chance unto erysipelata, except it be to them, Erys^pedas follows the order
of a tertia^ (...).
which are very malignaunt. A true and lawful erysipelas has four times or
seasons, as other tumors also above nature have: the signs whereof are to be
sought out of those things which went before. An exquisite erysipelas is
seeldome ended by suppuration, but chiefly through an insensible transpiration
or resolution. There happen sometime in erysipelas certain symptomates, which
oftentimes by reason of their greatness do exceed the very cause of the evil
it self and therefore they do hinder the order of the cure (that is) they do
change and pervert the method of curing (as has also been said before in
phlegmone). Moreover erysipelas follows the moving of a tertian fever, with
whose matter it has a certain analogy and proportion, for the matter of them
both, is a choleric humor. But it is not good to drive or turn erysipelas
from the outward parts to the inward, but contrariewise, from the inward
members to the outward parts, as Hippocrat. has written lib. 6. Aphoris. 25.
But those erysipelata, Erys^pelata above the head are very hard to be cured.
Erysipelas in the womb of a woman (...) the (...).
which do arise about the head do put us to more trouble, which (as Paulus
says) are wont to be so dangerous, that except they be helped with some
effectual remeadie, they sometime strangle and choke the sick. Hippo. also
writes that erysipelas is very mortal and deadly, if it chances in the
womb of a woman with child, for erisipelas being thus engendered in the womb,
the child of necessity dies. For truly a sharp fever (as Galen says in
his commentaries) oftentimes destroys it without inflammation.

CAP. XVI. Of the cure of erisipelas.
Two general orders in the cure of erysipelas.
SEEING that erysipelas (as is also phlegmone whereof we entreated a little
before) is a hot affect, and engendered of the defluxion of humors: the method
of the whole curing thereof shall also be two fould (: that is to say)
refrigeration, and euacuation. And as in plegmone the order of euacuation did
^urmount and overcome the method of refrigeration: so in erysipelas
refrigeration is more needful then euacuation. For the one does trouble and
molest in quantity, but the other (which is erysipelas) in quality. Therefore
erysipelas must be greatly cooled and little emptied, whereas contrariwise an
inflammation ought to be plentiefully euacuated, and little refrigerated.
Although there be a common chapter and sum of curing both affectes, as Galene
says, that is: the vacuation of the troublesome humor. And therefore after
that erysipelas has been cooled, we use those medicines which can digest or
discuss. Furthermore that we may attain unto this universal method which we
have said to be twofoulde (I mean refrigeration and euacuation of the noisome
humor): Four particular intentions of curing erysipelas
it shall not be amiss, if we declare this cure by four other particular
orders after the consent of the Chirurgians of our time. The first scope
consists in the antecedens materia. The third consists in materia
coniuncta. The fourth and the last is busied and occupied about the correction
and keeping back of the evil symptomates that may happen thereunto. Primus
scopus.
We shall easily dispatch the first scope, if the applying of all those
things, which they call res non naturales shall belong unto moistnes and
coldness, as in a fever tertian, seeing that erysipelas has his beginning of
choler, Air.
which is of a hot and dry temperature. Therefore choose and prepare an air as
near as you can, that is somewhat cold and moist. In summer let the sick be
in a very cold house somewhat within the ground, that is windy, and toward
the North. But if there be no such place to be had, and the air very hot,
make it ready for him your self by art. Pour cold water very often out of
one vessel into another sprinkle the pauementes of the house daily with water
that is altogether ye^e, and cold. spread upon the floor, roses, and
violettes, vine leaves and branches, fallow ^oughes, and other flowers and
buddes, which are of a cold and moist faculty. Let no great company of men
come into the parlour or place where the sick abides. Let him eschew all
fat, sweet, sour, and hot meats. Let him eat luttuse, gourdes, purslane,
sorrel, Cibus.
(which they call acetosa) ryce, and other things of that kind, which do
thicken and refrigerate blood. Let him altogether abstain from wine. Let his
drink be Ptysan broth, Potus.
or bareley water. Let him keep a temperate diet. Let his belly be always
soft and soluble. Let him abstain from all exercise, and moving, Motus. Animi
affectus. Venus.
especially that which is vehement and immoderate. Let him eschew anger,
contentions, and all vehement motions and perturbations of the mind as mortal
enemies. Let all things be clean and handsome about him. Let him refrain from
carnal copulation. And let these things suffice concerning the first scope.
But we shall also bring to pass out second intent about the cure of
erysipelas, Secundus scopus.
if by convenient euacuation we take away that humor which is left behind in
the body. Therefore in a true and lawful erysipelas not necessariely as in
phlegmone, we must draw blood out of a vein, but we must also purge the belly
downward with some medicine which can expel choler (called of the Greeks
cholagogon) if that the affect be great, and the body does seem to abound
with choler. Therefore when erysipelas does accend and kindle fevers, and those
more vehement then phlegmone, those medicines which are exceedingly hot and
the juice of scammonium, called of new Greece dacrydion) and that also which is
commonly called in the shoppes electuarium de succo rosarum, are in no wise
meet or convenient for this disease, and therefore you must use either
rubarbe, or that potion which of Rasis is called aqua tamarindorum, which is
made as follows.. damask prumes.24. tamarinds that be new..x. of broken
sugar. quar.ss. to the which things to make them more effectual, you may add
rubarbe that is well washed. But if the evil be very little and small, these
medicines called cholagoga shall not need, but it shall be sufficient to use
at that instaunt some sharp clyster, (as it pleases Galene. 2. ad Glan^. In a
Phlegmonous erysipelas it is good to let blood.
) But in a phlegmonous erysipelas your labor shall not be frusteate, if you
shall begin the cure with bloudletting (if nothing do let it). For that kind
of erysipelas does often lay hold on the face, whereupon Paulus commands
that by and by in the beginning you must cut a vein in the elbow especially
chosing in it the shoulder vein. But if that does not appear, you must take
that which is most object to the sight. And if any thing do hinder the
detraction of blood, he commands to use a purgation made of some medicine
which is dedicated and appointed to drive out choler, yet Paulus does not
contend with Galene: for whereas Paulus has commanded to cut a vein in that
erysipelas which does rise about the head or face, he meant that of a
phlegmonous erysipelas, which very often molesteth the face: but Galene
speaks of a lawful erysipelas, wherein he used no detraction of blood. But
in erysipelas aedematosum or scirrhosum, you must use a purgation which has a
mingled and manifold force, that is, which can purge, partly choler, partly
fleame, or a melancholy humor. And truly in all these things the advice of
some learned and wise Physician is to be asked, In phlebato^y and purging the
chirurgian must be taught by the Physician.
from whose counsel and decree the chirurgian out not in any wise to swerve
or digress. And let this be sufficient that once you have been admonished,
that the surgeon ought to attempt nothing at all in those things which
belong unto purging and bloodletting, without the counsel and warrant of some
cunning Physician, except sometime necessity shall compel him, and when no
Physician is ready at hand. The third intention is finished and performed
by cooling and repelling medicines in the beginning of the flux, Tertia
intentio.
excepting those causes which we have mentioned in our general discourse. But
the beginning being passed, and flux now remaining, you must empty that which
cleaves fast unto the member and is compacted therein, by applying outwardly
digestive or euaporatiue medicines, that is to say, through the transpiration
and breathing through to the sense. But of all these kind of tumors thus
consisting above nature, there is a double euacuation. Gal. lib. 14. Therap.
one truly of repulsiues to other parts, the other of outward digestiues,
through that vaporous breathing, which does fly the sense. But because
erysipelas does afflict and molest not only in quantity, but also in the
very quality by reason of the vehement inflammation: it does require a more
often and greater refrigeration then phlegmone, Hic Guido depra^^^e citat. Gal.
does. Therefore after the emptying of the whole body, as we have said a
little before, we will use repressiue remeadies, cooling it as it is
convenient) the afflicted member, or that part which susteyneth the skin:
especially when erysipelas is engendered without any manifest cause. But the
end of refrigeration is the mutation or change of the color: for that which
is a pure erysipelas does by and by rest and cease with this, How much
erysipelas is to be refrigerated.
but that which is not pure, but after a sort phlegmonous, if you shall
refrigerate it much, it makes the skin black and blew, but if you shall
desist from seaking to change the color, it waxes black, especially in an
aged body: so that some of those refrigerated tumors cannot parfectly be
healed, no truly not with digesting medicines, but that some scirrhous tumor
will remain behind in the member. It is far better therefore (says Galene)
when you see the color of the affected member altered, Lib. 14. There.
to pass over from refrigerating and moderating helps unto their contraries
(that is) unto dissoluing or digesting and drying remeadies, before that the
member be altogether blue or black. But you must always beware and take good
heed, that those things which be anointed, be very liquid and moist, and
that they be often changed, and that those things which be applied, be often
washed with sponges dipped in some cold liquor. For the great heat of the
member quickly brusting forth into a vapor, does dry up these things. But
amongst those things which carry with them a refrigerating and repelling
force very convenient for this affect. Auicene chiefly prayseth among simple
remeadies the sprinckling on of cold water. But Galene commends the juice of
nightshade, Materia refrigerantium ex Gal.
of sengreene, of purcelaine, of psyllium, of henbane, of lettuce, of vmbilicus
veneris (which herb is called of the Greeks cotyledon) of endive, and
succorie, of fenne lintles, of gourdes, and other of that sort. Also that
cerote made of very cold water, Ceratum.
which contains four times as much of oil of roses with white wax.. oil of
roses with oil of unripe grapes made without salt, which being made very soft
and pliable in a mortar, sprinckle on cold water, as much as you think good,
with the which if you commixe a little vinegre that is thin, and very
clear, you shall make the medicine more excellent and more effectual.
Moreover all these things must be ministered cold, and often changed, before
they be any thing dried or withered. It profits also very much and that
presently to anoint the member annoyed with Erysipelas with ceruse only, or
mingled with vinegre and lycium, or with terra cimolia, or with potters claye,
with nightshade, or with spuma argenti with oil of roses, and with acatia with
vinegre. To this purpose also this compound following helps much.. juice of
plantaine..j. oil of roses.iij, A compound medicine.
lithargyri nutriti..j. cerusae lota..iij. of woman's milcke..ss. let all be
commixed together and brayed in a leaden mortar, and make a lyniment. But
lythargyrum and cerusa ought first to be beaten, and then the oil and juice
aforesaid must be poured one them softly by litte and little, until they be
thoroughly incorporate together the one with the other. But if you desire
greater coolers, you may commix with these and other remeadies before recited
(according to Paulus mind) a little opium or cicuta, or mandrake. But I
think it good to abstain from applying either of them or the like, which are
of a stupefactiue nature, except great necessity does move you thereunto. But
when the infla^mation of the affected member is somewhat abated, and the heat
of erysipelas slaaked, Galene (before that any blewnes did appear through
refrigeration) did use to dissolve the humor gotten into the member (which
they call coniuncta materia) by laying one a cataplasme of bareley meal,
Euacuation of the joined ^atter by euaporatiues.
or of cruda polenta (called in Greek (...)) and of other things before
me^cioned in the order of curing phlegmone. For eue^ as the signs of
erysipelas were desumed and known by the annalogie of the tokens of phlegmone:
so also the remeadies of the cure of erysipelas are to be fetched from the
proportion of the remeadies of healing phlegmone. (...).
Furthermore of such kind of medicines, which have a dissoluing and breathing
quality very necessary in this evil, there are very many, both simples
and compoundes, rehearsed of Paulus Aegineta lib. 4. cap. 21. and of Aetius
lib. 14. de re medica. But now it shall be sufficient to rehearse among so
many, one only remeadie which of all the rest seems in my opinion to be most
excellent.. of the tender leaves of althea lib. j. boil the^ in hydreleum,
Hydreleum is a mixture of water and oil.
and being well boiled, braie them well together, putting thereunto of oil of
roses..iiij. of argenti spuma, and cerusae. ana..ij.ss. again plane or smoth
them with the juice of coriander, of sengreene, or nightshade, then put
thereunto a few crummes of bread and annoint them after the manner of an
emplayster. Silin^^ (...) locum occupari^.
But if paraduenture blewnes shall now occupy the place, (the skin being
cut before) you must lay a cataplasme above upon it, and sprinckle the place
abundantly, as Galene has commanded, with hot water: for it does digest and
wash the wounds: also water and salt brine in the mean season shall avail to
nourish or cherish the place, when it is somewhat thick, and gross, which
things do scour and cleanse the thicknes thereof. Quarta intentio.
The fourth intention of the cure of erysipelas, which is the correction of the
accidents, is perfited, (as we have said in the cure phlegmone) when as we
shall return and drive black the recourse of the matter, induration, and
corruption together with the pain and the heat. For these symptomates are
wont to happen as well unto erysipelas, as unto phlegmone. Moreover the best
remeadie to assuage pain and vehement heat, is made of the leaves and roots
of henbane, A remeadie to mitigate pain and heat.
which you must roll up in towe and seath them with prunes: then commixe them
with the ointment commonly called populeon, or with swynes grease (as is said
before in the cure of phlegmone). But if erysipelas shall chance to be
exulcerated, If erysipelas be exulcerated
you shall cure it with applying vnguentum album or vnguentu^ de lithargyro,
with the which if you shall commix a little scoria, which is the dross of lead
molten in the fire, you shall make the remeadie most excellent and effectual.
But it shall be more profitable to comprehend the whole order of the cure of
erysipelas in some short sentences, after the manner of an Epilogue, that those
things whereof we have spoken before somewhat at large, may take the deeper
root in our minds and memories. Seven Apho. out of Galene concerning the
whole cure of erysipelas.
For this cause therefore we have taken out of Galene these seven Aphorisms
following, which summarily do contain the whole cure of erysipelas. 1. In an
exquisite erysipelas make no detraction of blood. 2. If the body be full of
choler and the affect be great, purge the belly downward with the medicine
cholagogon. 3. If the disease be little and small and the body without choler,
use no medicine to purge choler, but erysipelas slaked, and erysipelata which
are caused of ulcers, and of other manifest causes you must first scarifie, and
afterward apply a cataplasme of barely meal. 7. If erysipelas be not
exquisite or true, but phlegmonous: you may let blood

CAP. XVII. Of Tumors which do associate Erysipelas as Herpes both Miliaris
and exedens, which are called of the late Chirurgians choleric pusshes.
THOSE tumors above nature, which have any society with the above mentioned
erysipelas, De herpet^.
or any way do seem to partaine thereunto (for that they have their
proceeding of unnatural, and hidden choler (that is) which is not mingled with
other humors, both the latter sort of Physicians and also of Chirurgians do
call mala cholericae pustulae: but the Grecians, as Hippo. Galene and Paulus
do call them herpetae, Pustulae cholericae vn^go appella^ae herpetes.
which word does almost sound and agree with the Latins, as malum quod
serpit, the creeping evil. For (...) in Greek is all one with serpo in
Latin, whereupon (...) is called serpens, yet herpes does not perfectly
signify among the Physicians malum quod serpit, but a certain kind of
disease whereof we now entreat, therefore the creeping evil extends and
stretcheh further then herpes for phagedene are also called serpentia vlcera,
creeping ulcers. But Auicene calls all these kinds of pusshes formica, and
Galene numbreth them among inflammations, Formica Auicennae.
but Celsus seems to comprehend them under the name of sacer ignis. lib. 5.
cap. 28. herpes therefore is caused when yelow choler, When herpes is caused.
unnatural, alone, and secret (that is to say) which is commixed with no
other humor, does flow into some member and there remains: whose substance
if it be any thing thick and sharp, Two kinds of herpes.
it exulcetateth the whole skin even to the flesh which lies under it, and
then this evil is called of Hippo. and other Greecians (...), but of herpetes
exedens or depascens, an eating or feeding herpes: and it is called 14. Therap.
of Galen by this absolute name, (...). 1. exedens vel depasce^^.
herpes. But if choler be some what thin and not so thick and hot, it
exciteth small whelkes outwardly in the superficies of the skin (for that it
does only as it were burn and scald) like unto the seeds of millet or hyrse:
thy reason of which similitude and likeness the affect is then termed of the
Latins miliaris herpes: but of certain of the Greecians after Hippocrates
time it was called for the same reason (...): milium with us. And this kind of
species of herpes (Galen witnessing the same lib. 2. ad Glauconem) does borrow
his name or title of the general word, (...), some herpes (...).
seeing that the same Galen calls it herpes simply and without addition. Not
withstanding in another place by the name of herpes, Galene calls it herpes
esthiomenus (that is) exedens, Lib. 14. therap.
as afterward shall be said. But this kind does not altogether cause the
ulcer, as the other does which is called exedens, but as it has been said, it
exciteth little small pusshes to the likeness of milium, which pushes in
process of time, when they are broken out, do turn unto an ulcer. Therefore
not without any great reason or cause did Oribasius and certain other also
before Galens time, judge and think, that in this kind of evil, Ex Paulo,
and Gal.
there was mixed with choler some thin fleame, which did bring forth those
little pusshes, whereupon it was called of some pustulosus herpes. But the
other which is called esthiomenos, Lib. de (...) praeter naturam.
is not so mixed with fleame, but seems to be a pure choler infected with no
other humor: and therefore it chances with erosion, which continually
affects the skin, whereupon this name is attributed unto it. For
esthiomenos is all one with erodens o^ exedeus. And truly this evil is of one
and the same kind with a pustulous and exulcerate erysipelas, from the which
notwithstanding it some what differs by reason of the thinnes of that bilious
humor (whereof both of them do take their beginning). That is that which
Galene testifies in these words. It is (says he) a very thin humor which
raises herpes, Lib. 14. meth. (...). The choleric humor, which causes
herpes as very thin.
and so thin truly, that it passes through not only all the inward
members, which are every where of a fleshie substance, but also through the
very skin even unto the outward little skin (which is called of the
Greeks epidermida) which only because it staieth there, it both gnaweth and
feeds on: but if it should also pearse through this, after the manner of a
sweat, it should in no wise excite any ulcer, for that is a common thing unto
ulcers which do arise of a biting humor, which ulcers they call spontanea,
because the humor which causes them, is stayed and tarieth still in their
going out or issue. Heatherto Galene. When he names herpes simply and without
any addition, he means herpes esthiomenus, as it is easy to be known by the
joining together thereof, by the signs and cure, and so in that place it
borrows his title of the general word, when it is simply and absolutely
called herpes, as in that little book de Tumeribus prater naturam, where the
same Galene writes thus of that kind of herpes word for word. Herpes also
feadeth and gnaweth upon those parts which are about it, Herpes exulcerateth
only the skin.
but the exulceration is of the skin only. But almost all the barbarous sort
of Chirurgians even they of late time do comprehe^d both these kinds of herpes
videl. miliaris and exedens, under this title formic^, to whom both in this
thing and in many other also Auicene first gave the occasion of error, who
being deceived by the likeness of the name, Auicen co^so^^deth myrmeciae with
herpetes.
because the Greeks call myrmecia, that is, formica, a certain kind of
verrucae has through a marvelous oversight eue^ in the same chapter confounded
those verrucae with herpetes. Guido notwitstanding makes a difference between
herpes and formica, and confounds the name of formica sometime with verrucae,
which the Greeks call mirmecia and acrochordonae sometime with herpes exedens,
which (I mean herpes comedens) is sometime named of the same Guido herpestes,
Herpes esthiomenus and erysipel vlerratum are not all one.
sometime absolutely herpes, who also thought this herpes to be nothing else,
but a pustulous and vlcerated erysipelas, when this notwitstanding, as we have
alleged out of Galene do differ from the other by reason of the thinnes of
the humor. For that choler which excitech herpes is thinner then that which
causes an vlcerate erysipelas. Furthermore erysipelas, which chances with
vlceration, does not only occupy the skin, but with it also, it annoyeth
some part of the flesh under it. But herpes, whereof we now entreat, lays
hold on the skin only, and exulcerateth it. Therefore although these
euilles are of one and the same kind (as Galene thought) yet they are not
altogether one, neither are they alike. Morbili sunt, ex herpetum genere.
Those whelkes also, which the interpreter of Auicene and the unlearned
company of Physicians do term morbili, Hippocrates libro tertio epidemiarum
has comprehended under herpes. But these morbili are caused of a more thin
and slender matter then those pushes which are commonly called variole.
Variole.
For these (as Auicene writes) proceed of blood, but the other are caused
through the admixion of choler and blood. But if any man does long or desire
to know what name the ancient Physicians did bequeath unto these pustulous
ulcers: we have declared that in Latin they were called of Pliny papula, and
sometime pituite eruptiones, fleumaticke eruptions: Papularum eruptiones.
Ecthymata. Exanthemata
but in Greek of Hippocrates libro tertio epydem ecthymata. Of Galene
exanthemata. But the signs, judgments, and causes of both kinds of herpes,
may sufficiently be known by those things which went before. It remains
therefore that we now declare the cure of them. In curing these euilles called
herpetes, Herpe tum curatio.

Three things to be marked in the cure of herpes.


(as in other such like voluntary ulcers, which have their original of a
biting and vehement humor) three intentions are to be observed and marked. The
first is, that the confluxion of the humor into the affected part be stopped
and let. The second is, to make euacuation, of that, whatsoever is flowen
already into the aggreued member and sticks fast in the same. The third is
to heal the ulcer. We do finish our first intent, by purging the whole body
Primus s^^pus.
and when the body is thoroughly emptied, by repressing and driving back the
humor that flows. Therefore in herpes exedens we must use some medicine,
which can provoke choler downewarde, Herpes requires the med^cine (...).
seeing (as we have said before) a pure and sincere biluous humor does
procreate this evil. It happens therefore that in respect of the emptying
of the whole body, comedentes herpetes must be cured like unto erysipelata.
Therefore because it is a thin and waterish humor which causes this evil,
Galen has sufficiently declared to moilifie and soften the belly gently, or
to provoke urine with those things, which can moderatlie cause the same. But
in the other kind of herpetes, Herpes (...) requires a remeadie which can
purge both choler and fleame.

Reprimendi tempus.


which by reason of the similitude which it has with milium, we have said to
be called in Greek miliaris and cenchria, there is required some remeadie
which is of a mixed faculty (that is) which can purge forth both choler and
fleame. For some have thought and that not without great reason (as Galene
says) that in this evil there is some fleame commixed with choler.
Furthermore that humor which abounds in the body, and causes the evil,
being emptyed out (as it is required) you must apply those medicines which can
repress and keep back the flowing of the humor, for then the ministering of
them shall be more without danger, and more convenient also, Lib. 14. Ther^p.
seeing that (as Galene says) if one do thrust back but a little portion of
the vicious humor, which after convenient purging, remains yet in the body,
to the bowelles and great veins, yet will not cause any sensible evil at all,
that can be felt. Repressi^es a^ not to be used if the humor be plentiful.
Repriment^^^^ materia.
But if the quantytie of the humor be great, it sometime coucheth it self in
some pryncipall member, whereas through the force of the purging nature the
whole body is not euacuated either by purging downewarde, or by the urine, or
by the skin, which includes the whole body. But repressiues and repulsiues
be not only those which do bind, but also those which can refrigerate
without any adstriction. Of the which nature are these, as lettuce,
bnottegrasse, fenne or ponde lintles, purcelayne, endive, sengreene, and other
of that sort, which were very convenient also for erysipelas. But those
medicines, Those remeadies which do cool and moysten are not meet for herpes
exedens.
which besides their cooling are also apt by nature to moysten, herpetes
especially depascentes do in no wise require, but they do only admit
those refrigeratiues, which can also greatly dry up. For those remeadies
which have but a mean and weak force to cool and dry as is nightshade, are
not sufficient for them. Therefore by Galenes counsel you must in the
beginning lay upon them the young tender buddes of the vine, Repress^^e^ meet
for herpes exedens.
bremble leaves, leaves of rubum caninum, and plantayne. After apply also with
these, lentles, sometime honey and bareley meal. Also minister that cataplasme
sine semper^ino, which is appointed for those phlegmonous tumors which
proceed of flux, for it does repel that which sloweth, and it dries up that
which is contained in the affected member, and it strengthens the parts about
it. The beginning of the evil being past, Cataplasma.
this remeadie avails greatly. Make a cataplasme of the ryndes of
pomgranades sodden in wine, and of rhu or rhoe (that is) of the seeds of the
shrub coriariu^ (which of the late Physicians is called sumach) and of the
meal of bareley. But by this cataplasme you shall very well accomplish the
second intention or scope of curing herpes, Sumach. These things do
accomplish the second intention.
because it is of sufficient power to digest that, which is flowen already
into the affected place, for it appears evidently, that those remeadies which
have a repressing faculty, ought to exceed in the generation of the ulcer,
but when the vicious humor does cease to flow any more into the affected part
then those medicines are requisite which do digest. As concerning our third
intent which declares the cure of the ulcer, The cure of the vlc^r in he^pes
(...) our (...) must be dried up.

Lib. 2^ ad Gla^. How exulcerated places must be looked to.


it behooves you briefly to know these things following: videl. that every
ulcer wheather it comes of the own accord, or be caused by some accidental
cause, does desire to be dried up by some medicine) as Hipp. says) that is not
sharp, biting, or vehemently provoking, except, when the ulcer be malicious
and full of corruption, for such evils (says Galen) require more sharp
medicines, and those which have even the power of fire, as is, mysos and
chalcitis, and arsenicum, and lyme, and saendaracha, and other things of that
kind, which burn as hot as fire. Those places therefore that are exulcerated
in herpes exedens, must be te^ded with pills, and trochisks, written for the
cure of herpes in those books, which are called pharmacentici: which remedies,
when necessity co^pelleth us to use them, must be thoroughly washed in passum
or in some other sweet wine, or if sweet wine be not ready at hand, in
thin and somewhat sharp wine, which is not to old (that is which for age has
no sharp taste) or else in posca aquosa (which they call oxycratum. P^s^ae.
Remeadies taken of Panius. Aliud. A^ herpetes depascentes.
Paulus in the cure of herpes, which annoyeth under the skin, uses these
remeadies the scouringes of lead steyped in the juice of smooth rue, or a
cerote of myrtles in stead of rue. Another, of old woll, washed and burnt
about a torch..xij.ss. of wax..xxv. of the scouringes of lead..j. of goats
tallow, trimmed and washed with water. xxv, of mirtles..v. But for those
herpetes, which do gnaw and byte vehemenly called depascentes, he charge to
use this remeadie:. of the ryndes of sweet pomegranates..vj. argenti
spume..vj. of washed wool cleaving to the torch or to some sweet wood, and
that burnt..iij. of wax.xij. of ceruse.viij. of frankensence, alume scissible,
ana..j. let them be steiped in wine or in oil of mirtles. But now the ulcers
being of long continuance, For inueterate ulcers.
those trochiskes abouesaid, and other such like medicines which are appointed
to cure herpetes, must be washed neither in sweet wine, nor in posca aquosa,
but rather in wine that is some what sharp, especially in that which is
black, and if that be not to be had, you must use white wine. But those
medicines which are most effectual and most meet at that time, when ulcers be
inueterate, are the pills of musa, andron, and polyida, whose descriptions are
set down in the end of the cure of carbunculus, and those trochiskes also,
which of Auicene and the latter sort of Physicians are called calidicon and
aldaron. But those herpetes, What is to be done in p^stulae miliares if they
turn into an ulcer. Lib secendo. ad Glaucon.
which do only exulcerate the outward skin, as they be, which we have called
miliares, must in no wise be enjoined to any of those medicines before hearsed
(if we will credit Galen) For they be very vehement, and do greatly dry. But
those medicines whatsoever they be, which have the nature and force of glaucium
(that is) of memytha, shall suffice these ulcers, and you must wash them with
this, but especially with water. But if these things shall nothing avail, you
must also commixe vinegre therewith. Also if you anoint it with juice of
nighshade, or plantaine, you shall help it greatly. Heatherto have we spoken
of herpes. Now because in that which we have said, we have not as yet touched
by the way any thing concerning the euilles called formice, which both the
Arabians, and the latter sort of physicians do erroniouslie, as we have said,
confound with herpetes: this present place does require, that we set down a
few words both of them and of other tumors and increasinges appearing in the
skin, which the Latins call verrucae.

CAP. XVIII. Of the evils called Formicae, and of other differences of verrucae.
THOSE little tumors, or low swellings, which are seen to appear in the
skin like little hillockes, the Latins have fittely called verrucae,
Verrucae. Porra.
for verruca signifies properly the highest part of a mountain or hill: but
the common sort call them porra, leekes, because sometime they have certain
threads lying between them not much unlike unto the roots of leekes. There be
diverse kinds of verrucae.
The Greeks have no name, wherein they may comprehend all those kinds of
verrucae, but they do call a certain kind thereof by proper names, which be
these, (...). Verrucae therefore of them be called myrmecia, which are of a
large foundation, and as it were sitting just to the ground, and when they be
touched, Myrmecia.
they are felt payneful like unto the biting or stinging of an ant, whereupon
their name is given unto them, for the Greeks do call (...), formica.
Wherefore the Latins applying the name thereof to the Greek word, have called
formicae, verrucae, and for their form and fashon, Sessiles verrucae.
sessiles verrucae. These evils says Celsus lib. 5. do grow either in the
palms of the hands or in the sooles of the feet: but these take deeper root,
and are lower and harder then a wart, and do cause greater pain: and they
send forth more store of blood, and they scarce at any time exceed the bigness
of a hoppe. But acrochordon is a verruca that is as it were hanging,
Acrochordon pensi^^^ verruca.
and of a more narrow foundation (that is) a certain round highness or growing
up in the skin, which has the foundation (that is) the nether part very
straight to the skin. It is so called because it seems to hang as though it
were tied with a string. The difference between acrochordones, and myrmecia.
By this difference therefore, acrochordones are distinguished from myrmecia,
because they are very small at the nether end next the skin, but at the
other end are very large and broad: contrariwise myrmecia, (as has been
said) are of a large foundation, but at the other end they are very small and
slender. But these oftentimes are equal altogether with the skin* and
acrochordones do always appear above the skin, (as Galene. 14. lib. de
morbis curandis has manifestly declared.) Besides these things,
acrochordones (as Celsus says) do grow up thick and many together, and do
most trouble children, and oftentimes they fall again suddenly: and sometime
they cause but mean inflammation, there are some also, which are turned into
corrupted matter, but they seeldome pass the greatness of a bean. They be
called of Auicene claui, but the Latins do term claui, verrucae albae, Claui.
because they be like to the round heads of nails. These do chiefly happen
in the fingers, and the soles of the feet, where they do cause great pain,
the Greeks call them (...), (...). Almismar. Thymion.
but Auicene almismar. These be often caused of a bruise, and sometime
otherwise. But thymion or thymon, in English a warte, is called of Celsus and
of the Greeks verruncula, a little hillocke, appearing above the body, which
at the nether part next the skin is very small (as acrochordon is) but
above it is more large: it is also somewhat hard, and very sharp in the
top, which does represent the color of the flower time, whereupon the name
is given unto it, and also it is easily spread abroad. Oftentimes it gives
forth some blood, and is almost as great as an Egyptian bean, seeldome
bigger, but sometime lesser: Thymij magnitudo.
sometime there grow up one alone, sometime many together, either in the
anckles of the feet, or in the hands, or in the sooles of the feet. Thymia
in obscaenis pessima
But the worst thymia of all are in the filthy parts of the body, where they
do commonly bleed. Auicene seems to have named this kind of verruca,
tusium, or (as another translation has) tarseum. Of the kind of verrucae be
those evils also, which Auicene calls cornna, not much differing from the
other sorts, Coruna.
but that they be somewhat long and are turned crooked again like unto horns.
The evils called calli, (called of the Greeks also (...), Calli. (...).
) do not much differ from the aforenamed claui, but that they be of themselves
without grief and nothing painful, and of the cholour of the skin wherein
they are resident, neither do they engender of themselves or of their own
accord, but of the hardness of the skin caused by labor.

CAP. XIX. The judgments and cure of verrucae.
AMONG all these euilles acrochordon and Thimion, are oftentimes (as Celsus
reports) ended and do heal of themselves, Acrochordon. Thymion. Lib. 5.
Myrmecia. Cla^^^.
and the lesser they be, the sooner they be ended. But myrmecia and claui do
scarce at any time cease without curing. If acrocordon be cut of, it leaves
noe root he hind it, and therefore it grows not again. But where thymeon
and clanus be cut of there ryseth up underneath a little round root,
which descends down somewhat deep into the flesh, and there abiding, it
does cause the aforesaid euilles to grow again. Myrmeciae do hold fast with
very broad roots, and therefore they cannot be cut of without great
vlceration. It is very profitable to cut of clanus and then sprinckle it
over with hot water, for so it does wax soft and tender without any more
ado, and if it does bleed, it oftentimes dies and cease. It is also taken
away, by clensing it round about, and by laying on it rosen mixed with the
beaten powder of lapis molaris. But the other kinds (as the same Celsus
affirms) must be cured with hot medicines. Now the fittest remeadie for the
other euilles is that, which is made of the dregs of wine, Myrmeciae.
and that medycine is good for myrmecia, which is made of alumme and yelow
oaker. Paulus Aegineta lib. 4. cap. 15. rehearses very many remeadies, The
cure of verrucae (...) of Paulus.
which do take away and utterly abandon these verrucae, especially those
which be sessiles and pensiles of the which kind are claterium (which is the
juice of wild cucumbers) rubbed on with salt, the bark of franckensence with
vinegre, rathe ripe figs, which are ripe before their time, with vinegre,
meal and nitrum. Also the juice or liquor of the aforesaid fig tree
anointed does greatly help, the juice of tythymalus, in English spurge, the
head of the fish smaras salted and burnte, the ruste of some metal with
quick brimestome, (that is) which is not thoroughly burnt in the fire, the
leaves of ocymum with shoemakers bleache, (which the Greeks call chancalthum,)
the water of the green twigges of the vine burnt in the fire) sheep dounge
with vinegar, Aqua ex sarmentis d^st^ll^^s.
goats gall anaointed, the fruit of the great herb heliotropium applied by
it self, or ministered with wine, rewe with nitrum and pepper, nitrum with the
urine of a young boy not yet accustomed with venerous acts, Stercus bului^^.
oxes dounge ministered in vinegre. But these, which we have mentioned as
remeadies for the extirpation of myrmecia and acrochordones, are greatly also
effectual for those evils called claus and thymia. They do use also the
head of a lysarde to take away myrmecia, acrochordones, and claui. There are
some which do boil the heads of salted fishes in that water, Lacertae cap^^.
which distilleth out of the green branches, while they be burning: which
they do declare to be a most excellent remeadie for the aforesaid evils.
Othersome to extinguish these diseases do make a lynament of the rust of
brass (which of the late Physicians is called virride aris and flos aris) of
brimstone, and of the distilled water of vine branches. And this is the only
methood of curing, which they are wont to use in racing out of verrucae, (that
is) by gnawing and scalding medycines. But this one thing is most diligently
to be observed in administering such kind of medicynes, which Celsus does
admonish us of in his fifte book: namely, that those parts, which are about
the euilles, ought to be covered with leaves, least they also be exulcerate,
for which cause some do annoint the places about the diseases, with ointment
of bole armoniacke, with terra sigillata, with rose water and vinegre.
Furthermore we abolish achrochordones, myrmecia, and thymia, not only with
these aforesaid burning medycines: but also with the flame of the fire, or
with some hot instrument rightly applied to them. Oftentimes also we cut
them of. But sometime we do take them away and utterly destroy them by a
lygature cunningly made and prepared for them, Other orders of curing.
(as it happens in that true disease called ficus) or else by setting to the
fore teeth, How verrucae are safely burned.
as some at Rome in Galenes time were wont to do. But if you shall apply fire
or some hot instrument to verruca, you must provide, that a plat of Iron or
some such thing being boored through be made ready for the burnt sore, the
hole whereof must so fittely comprehend the same, that none of the skin
about it may be seen Adustion being now made, you must resolve the crust with
butter, The cure of myrmecia being equal with the skine.

A new cure of myrmecia out of Galene.


or with some other annoynting medecin. Afterward you must cure the sore like
unto other ulcers. But how mirmecia, which do not appear out of the skin,
but are altogether, equal therewith, ought to be brought forth and cut of:
Gal. teaches very well lib. 14. method. med. where he makes mention of one
in his time at Rome, who devised a new order to cure these verruca, first he
brough out the euilles by applying his lips unto them or by sucking them, and
then (which did seem marvelous) he plucked them from the root, afterward,
setting to his foreteeth he utterly destroyed them. But acrochordones, Another
cure of myrmecia Lib. 14. meth. med.

Scalprion. Scolopomach^rion.

Another cure invented by a quill


appearing above the skin he straightway bote of with his teeth, and so
quickly dispatched them. Galene also sets down another double manner to
cure these evils, saying: but a Chirurgian being somewhat exercised in manuell
practice, may easily cut of these verrucae, both with that instrument made to
the form of a myrtle leaf, and with that also, which the Greeks can
scolopomacherion: (this always provided) that the sore be kept and separated
from the skin or parts about it. We also bring fort myrmecia, by laying some
strong and stiff quill about the compass or circle thereof, the hollownes of
which quill must be equal with the thicknes of myrmecia, that it may pinch it
round about in every place. Which being afterward turned about the sore and
enforced downward it will quickly bring forth the whole myrmecia together with
the very root, but you must mark, that the very end of the quill, which
shall cut it in a circle, ought to be not only thin and slender, but also
sharp and strong. The quill therefore of an old cock, Prima site radicem
versus abscind^^da.
or rather of an egle is very fit for this purpose. But you must cut it of,
only toward the root, seeing the hollownes of the other part of the quill
may easily comprehend myrmecia,. And truly by this abscession, if it be done
cunningly, you shall learn great art. Hitherto speaks Galene. But the ulcer
which remains, ( verruca being thus taken away) must be filled up and brought
unto a scarre, as other ulcers be.

CAP. XX. Of Oedama and other cold fleumaticke and flatuous tumors.
HAVING sufficiently entreated of those tumors, which are engendered through
hot humors: we are now again determined to handle those tumors which have
their original of a cold matter, taking our exordium from that evil, which
of the Greecia^s is called (...). For as erysipelas is caused of a choleric
flux: so adema proceeds of a fleumaticke humor. Oedema quid.
Oedema therefore (Galen defining the same) is a certain loose and vnpainefull
tumor, or it is a certain thin swelling without pain, rising of a
phlegmatic humor that flows into some member of the body, so that the same
Galene lib. 14. The. thought of adema, that it was a disease and no symptomate.
For truly we know (says he) that ademata does come otherwise then of the
flowing of a flegmaticke humor, (that is to wit) of a flegmaticke humor, or
vaporous spirit gathered into some member, and sometime engendered in the same,
as in the legs and feet, which are troubled with a corrupted water running
under the skin, and with the euilles called phthoe, and cachexia, which are
evil habites and deformities of the body. For in those dangerous
dispositions, Oedema est (...)
adema is an accidental symptomate of that affect which oppresses the man
(that is) an accident necessarily following, which requires no several or
proper cure, (as afterward it shall appear). Oedema (as phlegmone and
^ryspelas also) is decerned of the chirurgians by two differences (that is) by
the true, or untrue or unlawful adema. A true adema comes of natural
choler, Oedema duplex verum.
which truly is nothing else, but a raw blood not thoroughly digested, (...).
which is found in a lump of blood, very fit to nourish fleugmaticke
members. An untrue and unlawful edema proceeds of unnatural fleame. What
fleame is.
That we may not deal herein any thing obscurely, natural choler is cold and
moist humor, in substance crude or raw, in color enclyning to a certain
whiteness, but in ta^t, and (if I may speak it) in smell, it is sweet and
pleasant: unnatural fleame is that which does degenerate and differ from that
fleame before described, and yet it keeps it self within the bounds of his
circui^ and liberty, which if it shall once pass, it is then no more to be
called phlegma or fleame, but some other humor* But this fleame chances to
degenerate from his own proper nature two manner of ways. What and af^e^ wh^^
sort fleame d^^h (...) from his own (...).
One way is (as they say) in it self, when in his own natural and proper
substance it is changed without any admixion with any other humor, which
truly happens very often for it is turned either into a waterish substance,
or into a flatuous substance, or into a very thin matter, and then it is
called phlegma aqu^sum flatu^sum or ^enne: or it is turned into a thick and
viscous substance, which makes the fleame very gross and clammy, and
through a greater (or as we may say) through a further induration, it is caused
to look like a plaster or like glass, or it does putrify and is altered,
and then it is made both salt, nitrous, and corrosiue. The other way,
unnatural fleame is caused through admixion, that is, when as some other
humor does happen to come unto it extraordinarily, as for example, either
blood, or cholor of melancholy. If blood be commixed with fleame, it is made
sweet: if choler be mingled therewith, it is caused to be salt, if
melancholy, it is made sour and sharp. There are therefore eight kinds of
unnatural fleame after the opinion of Auicene. Haly Abbas appoints four
only. But Galen, says Guido, seems to assign unto it two only kinds,
Galene appoints two kinds of fleam
that is, salt and sower, although in his second book of the differences of
feauers, and in his second book de locis affectis, and in many other places
also, he makes mention of the flame called vitreum, which oftentimes does
join him self with sower fleame, by reason of that affinity and
acquaintance that it has with it. By these things therefore it is gathered,
that of fleame there are engendered eight species or differences of tumors
besides nature. 8. Differences of tumors besides nature coming of fleame.
For first of fleame that is natural, comes a true and lawful aedema.
Secondly of unnatural fleame by reason of admixion there proceed three other
differences of tumors, because that three other humors may be commixed
therewith and these be they: aedema phlegmon^dos, aedema crysipelatodes, and
aedema schirrhodes. Thirdly of unnatural fleame, through the alteration of
his proper substance, there arise four other differences of tumors. For
first of windy and vaporous fleame does come that tumor, which of the Latins
is properly called inflatio, but commonly among the Phitisitions it is termed
apostema ventosum, a windy aposteme, secondly, of waterish fleame there
proceeds a waterish Aposteme. Thirdly of raw, thick, and gross fleame
there are engendered those tumors, which some do call leaves nodi, and there
are also engendered flegmaticke abscessions, which they do commonly call
exiturae phlegmaticae. But these are called of the interpreter of Auicene
dubelet frigida, of which sort are these s^ea^om^^a, atheramata, and
melicerides, ganglia also, which be called of Auicene glandula, and other of
that kind, which shall be spoken of in that which follows. Now of hard or
rather of indurated, and (as I may say) of caked fleame, there do arise all
those hard knottes; which are most found in the joints, and those euilles
also called strumae, which are commonly called scrofule. Fourthly of corrupted
and putrified fleame, the do come fistulae and other vlsers which they call
scrufulosa.

Three causes of aedema.
The causes of aedema, as also of other tumors besides nature are threefolde.
1. Primitive causes are these, a fall from some high place, a stripe, a
naughty diet. 2. Antecedent, Coniunctae causae, is the very fleame, which is
already stuffed and heaped Signa ^dema i^.
The signs of aedema are these, a loose and soft tumor, which yealdeth to
the weight of the finger, and is hollow after the manner of a ca^e or defy,
it does not rise up again at the removing of the finger, but it does
retain the very footesteppe or mark of that which presses it. There is
felt very small pain, or almost none at all. Very little heat, a very
white color, or as some will have it) a mean between whiteness and
palenesse, and other such like signs, which do testify the dominion and
power of fleame. Iudicia.
Oedema (as other tumors also) has four times, the beginning the augmenting,
the state, and the declinatian of the tumor. This kind of tumor is most cured
by resolution, or exhalation, but seeldome by suppuration, very often by
turning and changing them into knottes or kernelles called nodi, or into other
increasing (as they call them) which are termed of the Graecians (...), but of
the Latins Abscessur. But the marks and tokens of the ending and finishing of
these kinds of tumors are handled before in our general discourse of
tumors. These oedomatous tumors are rather excited in the winter time, then
at other seasons, for then very much fleume is gathered together in men's
bodies. These tumors also do greatly and very often trouble old men, and
them which be given to gluttony.

CAP. XXI. Of the cure of Oedema caused of a fleugmatike humor flowing into
some member.
BECAUSE oedomata, after the manner of other tumors, Curandi oedematis scopus
duplex, cum ad huc gignitur.
are raised through the flux of humors into some member the scope and order of
their cure, shall also be two fould. 1. The one is to dissolve the substance of
these humors which now do occupy the member. 2. The other is, to withstand
and restrain the flux. And as the one scope does excel the other, so the
remedies of their cure must be commixed together, the one with the other,
either somewhat plentifully or somewhat sparingly. When therefore the order of
rastrayning shall overcome that, which counsels us to use euacuating and
digesting remedies, the force of restrictiues must be augmented. But when there
is more need of euacuation then of restriction, the nature and virtue of
digesting or discussiue and drying medicines, must of necessity excel in the
mixture. Morouer both the plentiful flux and the small deal of matter in the
affected part does tell us that in the mixture the virtue of restrictiue
medicines must be more effectual of greater force. Contrariwise you must use a
greater measure of drying and digesting remedies, when matter abounds in the
member very plentifully, and the flux very little. But in an old and
inueterate oedema, and that which is already engendered, The order of curing an
^^de oedema.
you shall not use any longer this order of curing which has a mingled power,
but you shall apply such things as can dispearse and divide the matter. Which
thing also is diligently to be observed in all other continual ulcers. But
oedema, Oedematis (...) symptoma est curatio.
which is an evil simptomat following other dangerous affects, as leanness
of the body, the dropsy and an evil habit of the body, which the Grecians
call cachexia) does desire no proper, peculiar or several cure (as we have
before mentioned) for it cannot be cured but by expelling that evil affect,
whereof it first grows. Yet somewhat is to be remitted out of it, if it does
debilitate the strength or increase the chief affect, or else hinder the cure.
It shall therefore be sufficient (if it shall need any cure) to rub diligently
the swelling place, sometime with oxyrhodinum, sometime wirh oil mingled with
salt, or else with oxyrhodinum with salt. For this kind of friction does slake
the tumor, and does mitigate pain, if it be provoked through to much
distention (as sometime it chances.) Oxyrhodinum does stay the flux, oil
with salt has power to digest and empty out that which is compact in the
member. But oxyrhodinum with salt, does partly digest and dry up, and partly
restrain and stop the affluxion of humors. But our general method being
before declared, let us turn our pen to declare the proper and particular
order of curing a lawful oedema, which has his beginning of the flowing of
thin fleume, which method according to the opinion of the Chirurgians of our
time, does consist of four things, Four particular orders to be kept in
curing a lawful oedema.
(as has been said of Phlegmone and Erysipelus) that is to say, 1. In a just
order of diet. 2. In preparing of the fleugmatike humor, which they call
aequatio, an equal division, and in purging the same. 3. In repressing,
dissoluing and drying up the humor that is flowed already and now does
occupy the member. 4. And last of all in correcting and removing the
simptomates or Accidents which do follow oedema. These therefore are the
four particular intentions, by the which we dispatch those two general orders
before mentioned. Prima inte^tio,
The first intention therefore is perfited or finished by the dew and just
usage of six unnatural things, which shall be well and fitly applied to the
sick body, if they shall all decline unto heat and dryness with a certain
attenuation or deminishing. Therefore choose and prepare a thin and dry
air. A^r. Po^^s.
Let him take for his drink wine that is fined and clean from dregs,
clear, white, or some what red, which they call claret wine, which in his kind
must be excellent good, and alayed a little with water. Let his bread be very
well baked, Cib^t.
and well handled. Let him eat the flesh of sheep, or the flesh of the birds
of mountains and of the plains, and those rather roasted, then sodden. Let him
use sparingly fat brothes, potherbes, and other fat meats. Let him abstain
from things that be unleavened, raw, and very moist. Let him not eat of
any kind of pulse or cheese, nor of untimely and unripe fruits, nor of fishes
(except they be those which live in grauellie places, and those also either
roasted, or boiled in wine.) Roasted meats generally are better then sodde^, and
better then those things also, Rep^^t^^. lu^^i^io. Mo^us.
which the industry of the baker can provide. Let him eat little, and drink
less. In all his diet let him eschew lechery, and gluttony. If the belly be
bound, loose it with figs or with Carthamus. Take therefore five or six dry
figs, and fill them with the pith of the seed of Carthamus, and eat them
either in the morning, or before dinner. Let the body be exercised moderately,
if so be, the affected member can permit the same without hurt. S^^^nu^.
Balne^^^. Secunda inte^tio.
Let his sleep be little and short. Let him altogether avoid bathing, and all
other moystening things. The second intention is accomplished by preparatiues,
or by remedies equally dividing (which they commonly call digestiues) and by
medicines which can euacuate that fleugmatike matter, wherewith the body of
the sick does abound. Therefore you must give him some kind of oxymell,
which can cut, divide, and purge forth the sleume thar lurketh in the body.
Afterward the matter going before the expulsion being thus prepared, at the
appointment of some cunning Physician, must be emptied out with some medicine,
that can purge fleume called phlegmagogon. But if (says Guido out of
Cauliacus) abundance be present in the body, you may safely open a vein,
but yet not without the advice of some expert Physician. But in a plethoricke
and full body there are scarce at any time seen any oedemeta, especially,
these which be lawful, for fleume does not abound in it more plentifully
then other humors do. Therefore it being simple and alone, not commixed with
other humors, it can seeldome flow into any part of a plentiful body,
wherefore letting of blood especially in a lawful oedema does seem to be
nothing profitable. Tertia inte^tio
The third intention is finished in the beginning by applying repercussiues,
and not by those remedies, which by binding vehemently with their natural
coldness do repel and drive back, but by those which have power to dry
greatly, and digest well, which they call prouokers of dryness and
resolution. But in the increase, by using discussiue remedies somewhat more
forcible. But in the state thereof, especially about the end, the flux being
already stayed, by pure medicines, and by those which do very strongly digest
and resolve. But in the declination by consuming and drying helps if the cure
be to be dispatched by resolution. But if it does degenerate and turn into
Abscessions, which they call Exitura, it shall be cured by ripening medicines
and by other helps, Remedies to be used in the beginning of oedema.
which are set down for the cure of Abscessions. Moreover repressing remedies
endued with a drying and digesting nature, which do profit in the beginning of
oedema coming of the influxion of a fleugmatike humor, are comprehended under
three special libr. 14. Therapeut. and secundo ad Glauconem, where he says,
that if Oedema does consist of a fleugmatike humor flowing into some member,
a sponge wet in water wherein is a little vinegre, shall sometime abundantly
suffice. But these must be so well tempered and commixed together, Posca aquosa.
that they may either be drunk, or that they may not have much vinegar upon
it. But you must bind the sponge to the place, beginning at the nether part,
and ending above. Let the sponge be very new. And if there be not a new to be
gotten, you shall cleanse and scour the old very diligently by washing it in
nitrum and aphonitrum, and in lie. Auicene commands that in steed of a
sponge, you sometime apply a double linen cloth, or some such like thing. The
second rule is mentioned Baurach of the decoction of water (that is) of salt
peter, or of Razi^ after this manner.. Aloes, mirrhe, lycium, acatia, sief,
memitha (that is) of Glaucium, Emplastrum Razi^.
of Cyperus, of crocus orientalis, of bole armoniacke, of each a little
quantity: powder them, and commixe them with the juice of colewortes called
Brassicae, and with vinegre: and make an emplaister. Furthermore those remedies
which were of late rehearsed, Remedies to be used in the time of increasing.
do also help much the increasing of this oedematous tumor, if you do put unto
them a good quantity of vinegre, and a little Alume, especially in strong
bodies, which have a hard skin, and when as aquosior posca shall not avail.
Therefore if oedoma does not cease or rest with these helps mentioned a little
before, when you bind it to again, you shall commixe a little more vinegar,
that the posca may be the stronger: or you shall lay on a little alume, and
apply a new sponge. For this does help as an excellent medicine, and does
long continue very effectual, and with his substance it does dry up the
affected member. If there be no plenty of new sponges, it is better (says
Galene) to use that which the common sort call, Lib. 14. There. and 2. ad. Glau.
elychnion. But above all things let it be soft, which kind is used at Tarsis,
whereof if there be any plenty, you may boldly use: for you shall try it to
be more profitable, then the using of sponges. But let it be wetted in Posca,
and a little alume therewith. Then (as it is set down already) let it be bound
to, and let the binding begin at the nether parts, and end aloft. Let the
binding be mean and small, as in the setting of a bone. But truly the first
casting about of the swathing band, which must begin beneath, ought to be tied
somewhat strait, but all the rest, must be slaked by little and little, but yet
not so, Remedies (...) the state and declination.
that any part of the binding be loose. Now the remedies which are to be
ministered after the vigor of the state, when the flux is stayed, and in an
universal declination (if oedema does require resolution) are wont also to be
described and contained under a three fold rule. 1. The first is of Auicene,
which is a S^^ng^a aqua (...)
for truly in them there is great power and virtue both to dry and to cleanse.
2. The second is of Brunus which Theodoricus also used.. of Alume, Lini^entum.
which yet does dry more strongly then the former remedy. 3. The third is of
Auicene likewise, whose description is this as follows.. of cowes lb.ss. of
olibanum, of styrax, of Vsnea (that is) of the moss of trees, E^^^^asirum
(...). Vsnea (...) seu (...)
which is called of the Grecians bryon, of calamus aromaticus, of spikenard, of
wormwood. ana..ss. apply all these with vinegar, and with the decoction of
coleworts, and make an emplaister. And this truly is the way to cure oedema,
which is finished by resolution. But if they do not yield unto digestion, but
do come unto suppuration, you may apply and that very profitably vnguentum e
succis called diachylon, and that ointment especially which Rogerius was wont
to make. To the same purpose also this emplaister following is very
effectual.. mallows, branke vrsine, or hircina, which is called Achantus and
achanta, root of Althaea, root of lilly, roasted onions, snailes, leaven,
lineseede, sodden and kneaded, and mingled with swines grease, or with butter,
bring them into the form of an emplaister, or rather of a cataplasma. Another
for the same purpose very effectual.. of the juice of elder, of walwort, of
sorrel (which our countrymen do call lapatium acutum) of leuisticu^ or
ligusticum, and of fennel: of each of the^, This is given to Theodoricus.
as much as you think good, yet of an equal weight, boil them with
dialthaea, with honey, oil, and butter, and of them make a cataplasme. The
Aposteme being ripe, do not tarry till it open of the own accord, for that
happens seldom, or peradventure never, but let apertion be made with some
hot iron, or some burning medicine, Apertio.
wherewith the matter may be purged out, according to the manner and form before
expressed. Then let the filthiness be cleansed out and wiped away with that
ointment commonly called vnguentum Apostolorum, or with a mundificatiue of
apium, and with the juice of wormwood, or with this ointme^t following which
does draw and cleanse the thick and gross matter.. of galbanum, A
mundificatiue ointment which is attributed to (...)
of Ammoniacum, of rosen, terebinthina, pitch, of bullocks tallow, of old oil.
ana. a like quantity: dissolve the gummes in vinegre, and let them melt or
boil upon the fire with the rest, and make an ointme^t. Afterward let it be
cured like unto other filthy ulcers. But we dispatch our fourth intention,
according to the nature and quality of the accidents that chance very
suddenly, Qu^rta intentio.
as if pain does happen, it must most especially be mitigated, by applying
moist oil of wol, (after the doctrine of Auicene) or by boiled wine, or by a
cerate made of the oil of cha^momil, of the oil of wormwood, of the oil of
speak and of wax. But if hardness be present it must be dissolved and
mollified with the marrow of the bones of bullocks, or with hearts marrow, or
with some such like thing, Li. 2. ad Gla^^ Oedemare (...). C^pi^a curatio (...).
as hereafter shall be said. But Galene in an inuerterate oedema did anoint
the sore with oil, and then ministered a sponge dipped in lie, and binding it
somewhat just or strait did perfectly cure the evil.

Now it remains that we set down the sum of the cure of oedema. 1. First
therefore unto oedema, which is a symptomate happening and coming sodeinly with
other diseases (as the dropsy, Oedema morbi accidens.
leanness of the body, and that evil called cachixia) apply such medicines
as can discuss and dry up without grief. 2. Therefore rub the swollen place
diligently with oxymel, oxyrhodinum, or with oil and salt, or else with
oxyrhodinum and salt: for by this frictio^ you shall both mitigate the pain
(if any be caused through distention) and remit the tumor oedema which comes
of the influxion of thin fleume, if flux does not yet cease apply those
medicines, Oedema morbus.
which can partly digest, and partly co^straine and restrain. 4. Therefore bind
to a new spong, or some other dipped in lie, or wetted first in alayed Posca,
especially posca. vidz. with oxycratum. 6. But if the affect shall be of any
continuance you must Oedema i^^eteratu^.
7. Therefore, the member being first anointed

CAP. XXII. Of Tumors above nature, which the Latins call inflationes, but
they are commonly called vvindie Apostemes, apostemata ventosa.
IT is now very requiesite for us to dispute of the tumors called
Inflationes, whose cure is diverse from the cure oedemata. The difference
between inflatio and oedemae.
For they (as Galene says lib. 14. Therap.) have their original of a
phlegmatic humor, and therefore do yield unto touching and handling, and our
fingers being laid thereon do descend somewhat deeply into them. But
Inflationes do come of a flatuous spirit gathered together, breeding sometime
under the skin, sometime under the thin filmes, which are compassed about with
the bones, or they do shut in and include the muscles, or else some part of
the bowelles. Furthermore sometime there is also not a little of this humor
gathered together in the belly and in the inward parts, and also in the middle
space of them, and of the peritonaeum, as in that kind of water (says Paulus)
under the skin (which evil we call a Timpanie. Lib. 4
These also differ from oedemata, because they being touched with the fingers
do not retain any mark, and they do give a sound like a tabour, and also
because sometime, they are contained in a sensible hollownesse, and that
oftentimes very great. The cause of these kinds of inflations, is the
weakness of the natural heat, which is placed in a flegmatike matter to
provoke windiness. Inflation^^ causae. Lib. 6. de morbis et sympto^a.
For truly heat may take up such a vapor of a moist substance, but it can
not divide nor discuss it. For even as (says Galen) we se in outward things,
that a very cold constitution (especially when the North wind blows) does
make the air very calm, and a very hot constitution in summer makes the
air pure and clear, but the middle constitutions do cause clouds, so it
happens in living creaturs. For heat, neither by extreme weakness, nor
yet by vehement strength can beget wind, but when it gets a mean between
these affections. For this vapor is holden in some place (as Auicene says)
either because of the thickness of the member, or for the grosnesse of the
vaporous spirit. Lib. 4.
Which thing also Paulus after the opinion of Galene witnesses in these
words: saying, that the thickenesse of the members, and the grossness of the
spirit or vapor does cause, that the same vapor is not dispearsed abroad.

The signs of inflation are these, a tumor not yelding to any touching or
handling, it appears very clear and bright, Inflationum notae.
and when it is beaten on, it gives a sound like unto a bottle, or timpany
Moreover there is felt oftentimes windiness throughout the whole body,
sometime running this way, Inflationum prognostica.
sometime that way, which causes extensiue pain. But concerning the
judgments and opinions hereof, a flatuous or vaporous spirit, which is not
dissolved and dspersed, does procure many discommodities. But a breathing and
windy vapor* coursing up and down within the body with pain and great
anguish, is greatly to be feared, because it does seem to be drawn from some
venomous matter. But now seeing these three things. vidz. the moist matter, the
imbecility of the natural heat, Inflationum curatio.
and the thickness of the poores of the body, do concur together to the
generation of inflatio (as has already been declared) the order therefore of
the cure thereof shall be this, first to strengthen the substance of the heat,
to extenuate the vapor and flatuous matter, and to prevent or open the
thickness of the poores of the body (wherein this vaporous spirit gathered
now together, is contained.) Now we make perfect and we finish the two later
things, that is, the raryfying of the thick body, and the extenuation of the
gross vapor, by one and the same kind of medicines, which is by vsinge those
remedies which do profit to the extenuation of the members and by applying
those helps, which can heat either more or less according to the inflation
of the afflicted members according to the thickenesse or thinness thereof, and
according also to the grosenesse or thinness of the vapors. For according to
the difference of these things, the power or faculty of those medicines, which
are ministered, ought to be intended and remitted. The thin parts therefore,
and the vapor or spirit which is not very thick, are but meanly to be dealt
withal: but the gross members, and that vapor which contains much thick
matter, do require medicines, which may greatly extenuate and heat them. But
if the substance of natural heat shall perish or deminish, it must be
repaired again, regarding the greatness of the loss thereof. But if it shall
be altered, you must bring it unto a certain mediocritie. But if grief
therewithal shall vex or molest the sick, you must hasten unto those helps
which can mitigate pain. Very well therefore have the Chirurgians of our age
declared, Three intent^^ns of (...) inflations.
that the cure of Inflationes (which they call Apostemata ventosa) is
dispatched by three intentions. The first consists of a just and due
observation of diet. The second of a good concoction or digestion, and the
third depends of the discussing and dispearsing of the windy spirit, which
is assembled in the member. Therefore let the institution of diet be after this
manner. Prima inte^tio
First of all you must abstain from all gross, viscouse, raw, fleugmatike,
and windy meats: Cibus.
as are, sweet meats, all kind of pulse, raw fruit, rape roots,
Chestnuttes, and other things of that sort, which do engender a flatuous
vapor. You must use hoate and dry things, and those remedies also, which can
attenuate, and dissolve windiness, as is bread made of barley with a little
salt and commin seed. Let the patient his drink be white wine, or claret
wine, or vinum Graecum. Potus.
Let him use the decoction of Cicers mixed with onions, let him take apium
hortense (which is commonly called petroselynum, parsley) calamint, rewe,
commin. Let the flesh which he eats on, be rather roasted then sodden, and
especially the flesh of birds (as has been said in the former Chapter.
Secunda intentio.
) But now that you may dispatch the second intention, you must strengthen and
corroborate the virtue concoctiue with some sweet and odoriferous savors, and
by confections, and by electuaries appointed for this purpose, as be these,
diacuminum, diacalaminthae, Aromaticum rosatum, and this confection following,
which they call Drageta.. of annise, Drageta helps digestion
of fennel, Caruus, daucus, commin, of laurel bearies, beaten together.
ana..j. of liquorice, galingale, white ginger. ana..ss. of Cloves, cubebs, of
long pepper, seed of rewe. ana..ij. of annise seed covered over with
sugar..iij. of sugar. lb.ss. make a powder. But outwardly let the stomach be
anointed with oil of speak, of Costum, and rewe: or make an Epitheme of those
things which can discuss wind, and which are appointed to help concoction,
and let it be applied to the stomach. But these things do rather pertain unto
Physic, then unto Chirurgie. Tertia intentio.
The third intention is accomplished by applying some medicine, which has a
double virtue (that is) which can both concoct, digest, and moderately bind,
neither will increase pain. But to the perfiting of these things, there are
appointed three manner of remedies. libr. 14. Therapent. The first is mentioned
of Galene in these words. In the arteries (says he) and in the muscles, which
are under the skin, or under the filmes which do cover the bones, when
Inflatio is risen, if it be without grief, some liquor applied to the thinnest
members shall profit greatly, of the which nature is lie ministered with a new
sponge. But if grief does also trouble him, you must anoint the member with
some oil, Inflatio comes of a bruise in the arteries, muscles, and filmes
which cover the bones.
which has power to mitigate and remit the same. These diseases happen through
a stripe or bruise, when as either the muscle, or the filme, which compasses
the bone, is bruised or hurt, upon which filme that goes about the bone, the
aforesaid sponge must be laid. 2. The second rule is described also in the
same place after this sort: but unto the muscles (for they sometime are
painful) you must apply some medicine which can mitigat pain in greater
measure, so that to them you must apply not only lie alone, Sapa.
but you must put into it both Sapa, and also a little oil. But it shall be
more profitable in the beginning not to apply lie, but to use Sapa with wine,
and a little vinegre, and to put to them a little oil, which things when they
are mingled together, Lana succida.
it is good to heat them, and lay on unwashed wool (which they call succida)
dipped in them. But if there be no plenty of such wool, then the oil of
wool is to be used with the former mixture, Oesipus
but if oil of wool be at hand neither, you shall commix very well some
Cerate, Ceratum e^t (...).
which is made of the oil of wool. For the bruised muscles must needs be
lenified with some medicine which has a double strength (that is) which can
both concoct, digest, and moderately bind. But if the medicine contains no
astriction, it increases sometime phlegmone, and especially in those bodies,
which are plethoricke and full of humors. Being mindful therefore of these
three indications already declared (that is, of concoction, digestion, and
moderate adstriction) in the muscles which are inflated by means of some bruise
or stripe, when great pain does afflict, you shall the rather use a more
mitigating remedy, and you shall greatly resist pain, by using more oil and
wine, whose force I know to be mighty, when as pain together with the
inflation does speedily have to an end. And truly the time is the shorter,
if you minister those things, which have a strong and mighty effect, as are
these, lie and vinegre, and next after them wine has a mighty operation. As
often therefore as you mind not to assuage pain, you shall cast into the
mixture a greater quantity of lie and vinegre. Again when you intend to
repel and drive back, you must put in more of wine then of other things,
which wine shall be the more effectual for this purpose if it be black and
sharp. But if you please to digest, you shall minister the greater quantity
of lie. But if you shall mingle vinegar with them, the mixture shall be
profitable both ways, because that vinegre has a double and mingled faculty.
But when the muscle is not pained, you may lawfully for want of lie use
Aphronitrum but it must not be grauellie, Proliximio Aphro^irum. Formnia tertia.
but rather foamie. The third rule is an emplaister made of the filthiness
which is wiped from the bodies of men that wrestle, and of unslaked lime,
boiled together in water and wine. These are the words of Galene lib. 14.
Therap. But those inflations (says he) which through negligence are inueterate
and of some antiquity, you shall apply to them those helps which are made of
lie (as has been said before) and secondly you shall minister some
emplaister. How an old inflation must be handled.
But I will declare also the example or order how to prepare these things.
First the filthiness that comes of men's bodies must be heat, and thoroughly
strained, that it may be clean and pure: then again take the lime, which must
be brayed as small as meal, and sprinkle it in the vessel where the
filthiness is, and tempter it together to the thickness of clay. That
medicine also is very good for these inflations, which is made of Sycomorus,
and other remedies of that sort do greatly help also. But if this flatuous
spirit, If the ^iddie vapor shall be venomous.
which causes the inflation, shall be smokie, wicked, corrupted, and excited
of a venomous matter, with intolerable pain, and vehement heat, running up
and down in the members of the body, no more safe or better counsel can be
given, then that (when it is resident in some particular member) that member be
straightway bound beneath and aloft, and in the midst the tumor be opened
with a rasour, or wi^h some hot instrument, so that the venomous vapor may
easily come forth. Afterward the gaping wound must be filled with Aloes, and
with bole armoniacke dissolved in oil of roses and vinegre. But within three
or four days after, Victus ratio. Theriaca. The sum of curing of a flatuos
tumor.
you must fill up the wound with flesh, and bring it to a scarre. But in such
venomous inflations, a very thin diet must be observed, and the body must
be emptied with some purging medicine. And if you minister Theriaca to the
sick, it will help him greatly. Now there remains the sum of the cure of
a flatuous tumor, the weak substance of heat that is in the affected
member, restore the same again, and when it is altered bring it into some
mediocritie. 2. Extenuate the vaporous and windy humor,

CAP. XXIII. Of a Tumor caused of a thin substance, which they call Aquosum
Apostema (that is) a waterish Aposteme.
IF fleame does universally abound throughout the whole body, that kind of
disease (which is a waterish humor running between the skin and the flesh,
called Leucophlegmatia) does accompany the same, Leu^o^^^^gmatia.
as Galene has noted in his sixte book de symptomatum causis. But when this
flegmaticke humor does flow in one only member, there is engendered oedema:
for so they call a loose tumor, which is without pain. But if waterish
excrementes do abound, ^
they are wont to bring the d^opsie (which they call ascites) which if they
shall couche them selves in one only member, they do raise in it phlyctaenae
(that is to say) pushes or whelkes. Furthermore the latter sort of Physicians
have been accustomed to call this kind of waterish tumors, Aquosum phlegma, as
also they do term that humor to be fleame, (...).
which flows in the feet and legs of them, that are troubled with the
dropsy, and abounds in the lean parts of the body, and in other members,
which do labor of an evil habit, (which the Grecians call Cachexia. And
these kinds of tumors which do proceed of waterish fleame, or of the
aforesaid serous increasing, they do also call unlawful and untrue oedemata.
But in those dangerous dispositions or diseases they call it Tabes, which name
Hydrope and Cachexia do require, Li. 2. ad Glau. (...). and 14. Therap.
but oedema (as has been already declared out or Galene) does not deserve the
name of a disease, but of a symptomate, for that truly it needs no
particular or several cure. For the only rubbing of it with oxyrrhodinum, or
sometime with salt and oil, or with salt and oxyrrhodinum does stop it, and
many other things or that kind do work the like effect. But the causes of
these tumors are these, the altering of the virtue or faculty of the members
through a cold and corrupted intemperature of the body, Causae.
and the naughtynesse of nourishment, declining to aquositie, as you may
easily gather out of the sixth book de symptomatum causis. Signae.
The signs and judgments are almost all one with a true oedema. Yet they
differ in this, because in the waterish tumors the tumor is more loose, then
in a lawful oedema: and therefore it does not so resist touching, neither does
it sound like wind, but rather as water, and it does seem to shine after a
sort, when one beholds it against the light. Now concerning the judgments
of this kind of tumor there is no doubt but that a waterish tumor proceeds
of a greater coldness then a flatuous tumor does, Indiciae. Ascites is caused
of more (...) then Timpani^e^

What parts these tumuors do most occupy.


as Galene declares in the eleventh commentary of his fourth book of
Aphorisms. But it seems (says he) that a waterish Hydrops, which they call
Ascites, is engendered of great coldness, but a Tympanie of less cold, which
disease is named of Hippocrates a dry water running between the skin. For a
moist substance cannot be changed into a flatuous vapor without some heat.
Moreover waterish tumors do happen oftener in the feet, in the stones, and
coddes, in the head, and in the joints, then in any other parts of the
body, both because such a kind of humor does readily rush into those parts,
and also, because heat is very mean and little in them: for because they be
far of from the hotest members. And as a flatuous vapor is seeldom found
without a waterish humor: so a waterish or serous humor is scarce contained
at any time in any member without a windy spirit. Hitherto have we spoken of
the generation, the causes, signs, and judgments of a waterish Tumor: now
we will set down the cure thereof. Seeing that these waterish tumoures are
caused (as we have said already) of the flowing of a serous humor, Aqu^si
in^oris c^^atio.
there needs no other means, especially no other general order to Cure
them, then that method, which we have expressed already in the Cure of other
tumoures, which are engendered of the influxion of humors into some member.
Curatio duplex.
The order therefore of remedying such kind of tumoures in the beginning shall
consist of two points (that is to say) 1. to empty out that which is flowed.
2. and to stop and inhibite the flux of the humor. Wherefore, as in all other
diseases, which are yet but a begetting, so also in these affectes, the
Physician must be careful and diligent, as well in curing them, as in
foreseeing the danger following. (that is) both to remedy the disease, and
provide for the flux. The first order therefore is subject to that part of the
art of Physic, which cures the diseases: but the second belongs to that
part, which preuenteth the disease to come. But that we may profit and dispatch
this doubt and general method, Five particular intentions in curing a
waterish tumor.
it is necessary to recite five other particular intentions, expressed of
Guido out of Cauliacus for the cure of a waterish tumor in this manner and
order, as follows. The first consists in a just institution and observation
of a good diet. The second in the helping and furthering of concoction. The
third in lib. 2. ad Glauconem, and lib. 14. method. medendi. which is made of
oxyrrhodinum oedemata: with the which helps (that they may dry up and
discuss the more strongly) you must commixe, Aphronitrum, alume, and
b^ymestone. The third rule is a certain emplayster described of Auicene for
the scrofule, which emplayster he attrybuted to Galene in libro suo de
compositione medicamentorum (...). But this emplayster (as he says) within one
week at the most, and oftentimes within three days does resolve all the
hardness of the evil. But although this emplaister cannot be found in the
book before rehearsed to belong unto Galen: notwithstanding we may use the
same very fitly to the dissolutio^ of a waterish and flatuous hardness: whose
description out of Auicene is this that follows.. of mustard seed, of nettle
seed, Auicennes emplaister to discuss waterish tumors.
brimstone, spuma maris, aristolochia rotunda, and bdellium ana..j. of
ammoniacke, old oil, and wax ana..ij. But if the hardness of the tumor be
not discussed by this emplayster, you can devise no other more excellent or
more present remedy, then to open it with some instrument, and then to cleanse
it and scour it, and afterward to cure it after the manner of other filthy
ulcers. Capita curationis aqu^si tumoris.
The sum of curing a waterish tumor is this. 1. Appoint such a diet to the
sick, as can attenuate, heat, and dry up. 2. Let him use a moderate exercise
of his body, let him eat and drinck little, let him not sleep much, let him
oftentimes provoke his belly and bladder to avoid some other hot instrument
into the tumor, if it occupies the arteries, and open it in that place where
it is most inclined downward, that so the humor may the more easily come
forth. 7. Euacuate the humor, which did cause the tumor by some emissarie,
and then

CAP. XXIIII. Of the diseases called Glandulae, Nodi, and Strumae, together
with other Abscessions, which they call Phlegmaticae Excrescentiae.
GANGLIA so called of the Grecians, Choerades (that is) Strumae, Enumeratio
abscessu^^m pitu^^os^rum.
which they also call Scrofule, Bronchocele, which they name Bocium, and Hernia
gutturis, Melicerides, Steatomata, and Atheromata: also Testudo, Talpa, Nacta
or Nap^a, which names given to Tumors were invented of the late Physicians,
and are not to be found amongst ancient writers: Those Tumors also which
Auicene calls Fugille, also Nodi, and vulgaris Bubo, together with many other
tumors of that kind, in what part soever of the body they do grow, they have
their generation of fleume, and for that cause they are justly referred unto
phlegmatike tumors. But although certain of the above named Abscessions do
degenerate into a stony hardness and into scirrhous diseases: yet the root
and the original beginning of them for the most part is fleume, (as Auicene
declares) yet we will not deny, but that some other humor may sometime be
commixed with fleume, whereof such kind of Abscessions do come, and so there do
grow up those Abscessions which are both compound and of an other kind. But our
intent is to speak here of simple Abscessions only, by whose proportion or
analogy the knowledge of compound tumors shall appear most evidently: ^
for the one must always be referred unto the other as it were unto certain
rules or canons (as we have said else where.) Therefore all the aforesaid
tumors are comprehended under the kind of phlegmatike Abscessions or (that I
may speak after the manner of the common Chyrurgians) under the Genus of
phlegmatike increasinges, which diseases have certain special differences
among them selves, (as it shall afterward appear.) For Glandula, (as Guido
thought) took his title of the liknesse of Glans, ^
an acorne, which form he does seem to understand in this place: This
Glandula, says he, is every where soft, one alone, moveable, and disseuered
from the other parts lying about it, oftentimes growing in the clean and pure
parts of the body. Auicen^ Gla^du^e are a^l (...) with Ganglia.
But Glandule in Auicene do breed either in the hand, or in the foot, or in
some other place joined to the sinews and cords of the body, and these
Glandule he would not have destroyed, least the sick thereby should fall into
Spasmos, the crampe. They do happen also in the palm of the hand, and in the
forehead, as Auicene says, who also calls them sometime Glandulosa
Apostemata, sometime Nodi: for he does entreat of these evils very rashly in
diverse Chapters, as in his Chapter de Nodis even unto the end, and in his
treatise de Glandulis. Therefore Auicens Glandulae do seem to be diverse from
Guido his Glandule, and Ganglia among the Grecians to be all one with Auicene
his Glandule which thing Paulus his words next following do plainly testify.
Ganglium (says he) is a gathering together of the sinowes, Cap. 16. lib. 4.
Ganglium quid.
which is caused of some stripe or of weariness, and that in many parts of
the body especially in those which are always moving, as in the midst of the
hand and in the feet. Ae^tius says, that it seeldome possesses the elbow
and the head, and it does seeldome also arise voluntarily. And again the same
Paulus lib. 6. cap. 39. declaring what Ganglium is, how it does grow, in what
members chiefly it does arise, and what signs or tokens does accompany it
confirms those very words which we spoke before saying: Gangliu^ is a
conuulsion of the sinews, caused of some blow or of labor, chau^cing for the
most part in the iointes of the hands, and of the arms, and in the ancles and
iointes of the feet, although also it arises in other parts of the body.
These are the signs of Ganglium, the tumor is all of one color, Signa Gan^^^.
resisting touching or handling, and without pain, but if you do thrust it
any thing violently, it is felt painful, being not deeply rooted, but lying
under the very skin next the sides: but again, if you provoke it by force it
does so neither before nor after. Hitherto speaks Paulus Aegineta de
Ganglijs. Now we will discourse of other fleugmatike tumors. Those Abscessions
which the common sort call Scrofula are nothing else, Scroful^.
but hard kernels contained within the little filmes, videlicet, Glandula
chiefly, appearing in the neck, the arm holes, and in the parts about the
privy members, where Glandula are placed by the vessels of the body that ly
under them: yet sometime (although seeldome) they are caused by means of the
flesh of the same places, which through a certain kind of affinity is turned
into the nature of Strumae, and is increased by the addition of matter (as it
pleased Laeonidas.) The Latins call them Strumae, Ch^rades Graec^rum.
but the Greeks, Choerades, either truly because of the stones called
Choerades growing in the Sea, or else because of those beasts called Sowes
that bring forth a great company of pigges at once (for these evils do rise
up many together) which beasts are often infected with that disease. Sues.
Struma. Cels^.
For Scrofa, that is to say, Sues have thick and glandulous necks and
commonly they be strumous and full of kernells. But Celsus says that Strumae
is a tumor, wherein under the congealed place there do arise certain things
like glandule of matter and blood. But these do not only possess the neck,
but also the nosethrills, the privy parts of the body, and the sides. The
Chyrurgian Meges declares also that he has found them in the pappes of women.
Lib. 6.
Paulus also speaks thus of them: Strumae, says he, do arise in the fore
part of the neck, or in one part or other both at once, either two or more:
But all are included within their filmes, Lupia.
as Steatomata, Atheromata, and Melicerides. Lupia, says Guido, is soft and
round like unto a hoppe, and chiefly choseth his place in hard and dry places
of the body, as in the eye liddes and in other sinowy members: the Frenchmen
call it commonly vne L^upe. Therefore if the description and cure of it, (which
shall be afterward handled) be conferred with the description and cure of
Ganglium amongst the Greeks: the diseases will appear not much different or
unlike: but they do greatly err* which do make this evil called Lupia, Lupus
morb^s.
to be all one with that disease called Lupus. For Lupus is a malignant ulcer
quickly consuming the neither parts, but specially annoying the thighs and
legs, and it is very hungry like unto a woulfe (whereof it seems to receive
this title) eating up the flesh that ly next unto it, which evil without doubt
is of the kind of Phaged^nae. Diseases therefore are far diverse among
themselves the one from the other, although in name they be somewhat
acquainted. Nodi.
Nodus, (as the knot of a rope) is said of the same Guido, to be round, hard,
and abiding in one and the same place, growing especially about the sinowy
places of the body. Auice^^ae nodi.
But Auicenne in a certain place defines Nodi to be dubeleta a frigida, and
he compa^eth this name with Steatomata, which are called adiposi and adipini
nodi, fat ^u^les, and with Melicerides, which are called melli^ij nodi, and
with Atheromata, which consist of a certain kind of matter like unto a pulse,
which the Greeks call Athera. But because these three kinds of Abscessions,
that is to say, Steatoma, Meliceris, and Atheroma, are most incident to men's
bodies, and Galen also makes mention of them in very many places: we think it
convenient (having here gotten so fit opportunity to entreat of them) plainly
to declare their nature and their marks whereby they may be known, and in what
things also they do differ and dissent, Atheroma.
and in what things they do also conspire and agree. Atheroma therefore is a
tumor of one and the same color and without pain, containing within the
filme or sinowy tunicle a soft humor like unto Athera, that is, a kind of
pulse, which is made of boiled meal. Sometime also in Atheromata together with
a soft humor, there are found certain stony and hard substances, and other
things like unto small pieces of brimstone, oftentimes there are found in them
certain things like unto the chewed bones of a hen, and like unto hears
wound up together. This tumor Atheroma, appears in form and figure very
long, and somewhat elevated in height, which being pressed with the fingers, by
reason of the clammishnesse and thickness of the humor, it does slowly yield
or go back, and the fingers being removed, it does slowly also return again.
But Meliceris is a tumor, Meliceris.
which is void of pain also, but yet it is round, wherein the humor, which is
also included in some sinowy tunicle, (which they call Cystis) is found
somewhat thin, representing the substance of honey: whereupon some of the
Latins do call it mellifanium, a honey comb. Meliceris therefore does differ
from Atheroma in fa^^^ion; and in the substance of the humor: for both the
form is more round, and the su^^^nce of the humor more sclender. This honey
tumor therefore is further extended the Atheroma, and by pressing it with the
fingers it does speadily give place, and when (...) are removed, it does with
the like celeritie return to the former place. But (...) is a tumor also
besides nature, all of one color, Stea^^^^.
and very gentle to be handled in the ^eginning truly it is very small, but in
process of time it increases and becomes (...), wherein is contained a
humor very like unto tallowe, which is also comprehend under the filmes of the
body. This is distinguished from Meliceris and from Atherom^ by reason of the
hardness thereof, for it is both full and plentyfull, and it does so resist^
aching, that it will in no wise yield to the thrusting of the fingers. But let
us now procee^ to declare other kinds of Apostemes, which are almost reduced
unto these three, whe^^^f we have now entreated. Testudo (says Guido) is a
great Abscession, Testudo.
very humorall, (...), and of abroad fashion, after the manner of a targette,
(whereupon it received the (...) which evil if it grows (says he) in the
head, it is called Talparia or Talpa: if in (...), it is called Bocium: if in
the stones, Hernia: but sometime it is found with matter, (...) with certain
scales, or with a fistula accompanying it. But Testudines and Talpae, amon^st
the ancient Physicians, had neither any proper name, nor yet once entreated
of. But (...) of our days do define Testudo to be a soft tumor, or not
greatly hard, yet some (...) big, in the which is contained a gross matter
lying hid in a certain tunicle, which ^loth so cleave unto the whole head of a
man (for it is a disease incident to the skin of the ^ead) that it oftentimes
corrupted the same. This evil (no doubt) is to be accounted a^^ng the number
of Abscessions, and comprehended under Meliceris, or Atheroma, but it there
seems to incline unto Meliceris: but Talpa, Talpa.
because it contains a white matte^ (...) rather referred unto Atheroma, then
unto Meliceris: Notwithstanding Guido affirmet^ that it is a kind of Testudo,
yea also that it is Testudo it self (as we said a late) as Hernia (...) and
Bocium, which he also names: but these affectes have barrowed there diverse
(...) according to the variety of the places, wherein they are found. But that
which the common sort call Bocium, Bocium.
the Greeks (fetching their title or name even from the very deep) do
properly call Brouchocele, but our country men call it Hernia gutturis,
whereupon they also call them Gutturosi, which do labor of that diease.
Broucho^l^e.
Brouchocele is a great (...) chauncing in the neck, very round between the
skin and the wind pipe, wherein ^^ere is included, sometime dead flesh,
sumetime a certain humor like unto honey, or (...), or sodden meal, or water.
Sometime also (as Celsus says) there are found in such t^mours certain
hears mingled with little bones. Nacta.
Nacta (as Guido writes) is a great tu^our, full of flesh, like unto the flesh
of a man's buttockes, of diverse forms and greatness: as are melons and
gourdes, and therefore it borrows sundry names according to the va^^etie of
the fashion and member wherein it is placed. Moreover this tumor which of the
lat^r sort is called Nacta or Napta, is void of pain, Nacta or Napta is
referred unto Steatomata.
except peradventure it be so great, that by the continual drawing of the
parts of that member, it brings some grief to the pa^es about it. This also
is of the number of Abscessions, and does parteine unto Steatomaa (as we said
before in the enumeration of tumors besides nature. Bubo.
Bubo (says Galene) is a disease of the loose members, or of Glandulae,
(which the Greeks call Adenae) that is to say, a simple inflammation. Wherefore
Guido has either unfitly here rehearsed it among the number of flegmatike
abscessions: or else he understands some other matter then Galene does. But
Bubones, which are caused through a fall from some place, or by other ulcers
and diseases, are without any danger: but those which are wont to happen in
pestilent fevers, are the worst of all, whether they invade the thighs, or the
nosethrills, or the neck. Fugilla (says the interpreter of Auicene) is of
the kind of glandulous Apostemes, and this term (says he) is appropriated
unto it, because it is a disease chauncing behind the ears. Fugillae.
By the which description it may easily be coniectured, that Fugille, so called
of Auicene, is that tumor, which is called of the Greeks Parotis, that is,
(...). What Bubo is with Guido and other late Physicians.
a glandulous disease growing underneath the ears. But some do think Fugille
to be all one with Bubo: but then Bubo is far otherwise taken of them, then
of Galene and Paulus, which is (as they say) a tumor that is deeply planted
and rooted, and oftentimes not compassed with any skin or filme, it is very
hard also after the manner of the evils called Scrofule, and in that
signification (as I iud^) is Bubo taken of Guido, because he does register
Fugillinus Bubo amongst the number of fle^matike abscessions. But there are now
found out very many titles given to these kin^ ^f phlegmatike abscessions. But
we ought not greatly to stand upon the names of them, so (...) we know and
understand the only differences of them, because it falls so out, that
ac^^ding to the diversity of their names, The differences of flegmatike
abscessions.
their cures and judgments do vary. Therefore of (...) kind of abscessions,
some truly are included within a certain skin or tunicle (which (...) call
Cystis) and some are deeply planted in the flesh: some have a sclender
foundation, or (...) root, and some again are very large and broad. Also some
are easy to be resolved, (...) some are far otherwise: some great, and some
little. Some also do come unto suppuran, and some do not. To conclude some
tumors are scaly, fistulous, and cancerous, but (...) do admit or suffer none
of these things. Of the causes signs and judgments of the aforesaid tumour^.

Causes of tumors which pertain unto fleume.

The matter of flegmatike abscessions.


The causes of these kinds of tumors are (...) fould: videlicet. 1. Primitive
causes, as a fall, a stripe, excessive or inordinate living, (...) an evil
diet. 2. Antecedentes causae, as are unnatural humors, especially those which
be ^^^gmatike, and true oedemata, which do degenerate into abscessions. 3.
Coniunctae causae, (...) are the diverse substances, and properly the matters
of every abscession, contained in (...) affected member. But in these kinds of
tumors there are contained certain humors, (...) be either serous or
waterish as is urine, or putrified and corrupt, or filthy, or dirtie, (...)
else humors, like unto honey, or sodden meal, or unto fat. But there are
sometime (...) within these abscessions phlegmatike, and waterish and
glandulous flesh, sometim^ also stones, sand, shelles, wood, coals, and other
such like solid substances. Notwithstanding these three kinds of tumors do
most frequent men's bodies (as we have said before) hereof every one has
borrowed in Greek his proper title: 14. Therap.
as Atheroma, Steatoma, and Meeris, which are thus called by reason of the
similitude of the substaunces contained in the^* For there is another tumor
amongst these, like unto tallowe, or some other fat thing, another like unto
honey, Signa.
another like unto a thin kind of meat, which they call Athera. The ^ignes
and judgments of such kinds of tumors, which belong unto fleume, may easily
bound out by their descriptions and differences before declared. But the mark,
whereby (...) may know whether they be covered with any vale or not, Notae
abscessu^ relament^ (...).
is this, there is mouablenesse (...) inconstancy of the filme or skin,
called Cystis, which the ancient Physicians have (...) tunica, and there is a
separation of the skin: but when they be surely fixed, that is, ^iding in one
place, and do cleave fast to the flesh, it is an evident token, that they are
garden about with no filme or tunicle at all. Indicia abscess^^^ pim^^s^^um.
Futhermore those tumors which are new and tr^ctable, may easily be discussed,
but they which be hard and inueterate can in no wise be r^^olued. Redness,
pain, and increasing of heat do declare that those abscessions will either
(...) to suppuration, or else degenerate into a fistula or a Cancre. Strumae
numerosae, which (...) affect the outward members, and do often change their
place, wandering here and there a^out the body, with a certain extraordinary
heat, do testify and declare very plainly, that ^^ey will beget and breed
those inward diseases called Chaerades, Arnaldus a villa (...).
as Arnaldus has noted in a ^ertaine place. Those remedies therefore, which are
outwardly applied to them, do profit li^e or nothing. But these diseases (as
Auicene thought) are increased and do multiply by so^e fall, or by some hurt
or bruise in the body. Auicema^.
Now these strumous tumors are greatly helped by using purging medicines,
diureticall potions, and electuaries, (as they call them) which can dry up.
Also the change of age does greatly avail in young children. In what ages
and bodies Strumae do reign.
But children, by reason of their excessive eating and immoderate diet, and the
sclendernesse of body, are very often annoyed with Strumae. But old men by
reason of the contrary causes, are seeldome troubled therewith. Moreover they
which have a narrow forehead, and straight temples, and great checkes, are
subject to Strumae. For in such, the matter is readely brought down to the
neck, as one Henricus among the number of the late Physicians, has noted very
well. But Strumae (as Celsus says) are wont commonly to weary Physicians,
Celsus.
because they procure feauers also, neither do they at anytime ripen easily,
and they are cured either with some hot instrument, or with medicines, and
oftentimes they do rise up again beside their scarres, and a long time after
they require medicines again, and moreover it so comes to pass that they
remain in the flesh along season. The inscision, and corrosiuing of such
tumors is greatly to be feared about the belly, the neck, and the iointes, by
reason of the affinity and knitting together of the veins, the arteries, and
the sinowes, and also of the internal capacity. In the incision also of great
Glandule, it behooves greatly to eschew that vein, which lies at the root of
them, and does bring nourishment unto them. For oftentimes it causes great
profusion of blood, whereupon there ensues straight way no small danger. These
evils called Strumae, do greatly differ amongst them selfs both in
greatness, nature, place, beginning, multitude, and ioining together of the
vessels (as Aetius has gathered out of Leonidas. Therefore little Strume are
sooner and more easily cured then the great, even as the gentle tumors are
more tractable then those which are enflamed. Noisome Strume cannot be
remedied. For seeing all such diseases called Strumae are cancerous, Magnitude
Strumae.
and do stuff up the vessels of the body, while they are curing, they must
needs bring the danger of profusion of blood, besides that also, Natura.
they are found very deep in the flesh and therefore they cannot any way be cut
of. For a malicious and hurtful Struma does possess the best vessels, (that
is) the greatest veins and arteries (which are called Carotides) even as
though it should hold by certain roots. Locus.
The superficial Strumae are more easy to be cured then the internal by
reason of their place, and those also are curable which do happen in the neck,
where yet you must, be very diligent to eschew the loud and great senowes: for
many by cutting Strumae about the windpipe, and by cutting other loud senowes
have caused the sick all the time of his life after to remain speachlesse.
For beside the excision of that senowe, the great vessels being laid bare, and
cooled in the cure, do hurt the duty of the tongue. For the multitude of
Strume, it appears, Multitude. Ortus.
that one alone may easilier be cured them many together. And concerning the
manner of their rising, it is manifest also, that they which hang downward are
a great deal sooner healed, then they which are planted in the flesh. Thus
much concerning Struma, which Aetius has recited out of Leonidas. The cure of
these kinds of Abscessions, which have their original of fleume, Duplex
abscessuu^ pituitosorum cura^di ratio.

1. Vniuersalis.


is of the late Chyrurgians appointed to be two fould (that is to say.) 1.
General, and universally common at all, 2. and particular, which is proper in
every difference. Therefore our general method of curing these tumors shall be,
to appoint such an ordinary and conuneient diet to the sick, as that the
matter, which causes such abscessions, be not heaped up together in the body,
and by all means to prevent and turn away the antecedent matter (as they call
it) which now is gathered together in the sick body, least at the lenght it
be united to the joined cause, that is, unto that matter, which now brings
the disease. But we shall accomplish the first intention of our general cure,
if the sick do diligently observe that kind of diet, which is prescribed in
our former Chapters (this one thing excepted) which is, Victus ratio.
that they ought to keep a very thin diet, and that, which is more
convenient to divide thick and clammie humors. Therefore if they will follow
the counsel of Auicene, let them eschew all those meats which are of a gross
juice, the drinking also of cold things, too much satietie and immoderate
fullness, and those things also which procure vomit and abhorring of meats.
But they must abide as much hunger as can be. They must chiefly procure good
digestion, and avoid a moist house, that is either situated in low vallyes,
or in fennes, or frequented with corrupted waters. Let his drink be wine that
is excellent and of the best, or else let it be water of alume, or of
brimstone. For such kind of mineral waters, Aquae ^l^^inosae vi^.
especially those which do represent in taste the dregs of wine, do not only
diminish and discuss these inward Strumours and flegmatike abscessions: but
those also which do outwardly affect the superficial parts of the body (as
Arnaldus affirms. Antecedenti^ materia euacuatio.
) But we do perfect the other part of our former proceeding (that is to say)
to turn away the antecedent matter, least it be mingled with coniuncta
materia, by four kinds of euacuations, that is, by some medicine to purge
fleume downward, and sometime by letting of blood, also by those things which
can provoke urine, and last of all by those remedies which can through their
vapor both resolve and digest the humor which is gathered together in the
inward parts of the body. Vacuantia pe^ alnum.

Puluis Turbith.


To purge the body downward, the powder of Turbith is greatly commended, which
is made thus in Auicene,. of Turbith, ginger, and sugar, of each a like
portion, but he takes thereof two drammes, and he affirms also, that (besides
that it does resolve gross fleume) it does neither heat, nor violently wrest
the inward members. But Razes, Razes.
who was very bold in declaring and using purging medicines, made this kind of
powder, in his ninth Chap. de doleribus ve^^ris ad Almansorem, of twenty parts
of Turbith, of ten of ginger, and thirty of sugar, Hierapicra.
and ministers of it at one time,.iij. Benedicta also and hierapicra, and
pillule de agaric^, and pillule maiores de hermodactylis do greatly help these
diseases. To provoke wrine, Guido out of Ca^liacus was went to use this potion
slollowing, Prouokers of urine.

Po^^ Guido^^ a Ca^liaco.


which (he says) he gathered out of the writings of many Physicians,. of
Scrofularia, parts iij. of phylipendula part.ij. of pimpernell, mouseare,
Tanacetum, of red coleworts (which of some are thought to be Brassica marucina)
of rubia mayor, ana. part.j. of the root of Aristolochia, of spathula satida,
of the root of radish, ana. part.ss. put them altogether, and boil them in
white wine and honey, until half be consumed, then streigne them, whereof every
third day in the morning let the sick take three onces, and let it be drunk
hot. But in the applying of all these remedies, (as also for blood letting, if
at any time it be required) the counsel of some learned Physician is to be
used, who may prescribe both the quality, quantity and use of them, But to
resolve through breathing, Quae per halitum dege^a^^.
and to digest the humor, which is gathered together in the deepth of the
body, and does excite inward Glandule, (which also are the causes of outward
diseases) Galene lib. 14. Therap. wills us to minister Theriaca, Athanasia,
Ambrosia, and that medicine also, which is made of cretica calaminthe: the
Greeks call it Diacalaminthe: whose composition is to be sought out of the
fourth book de Sanitate tuenda. Many other helps are appointed for the cure
of these abscessions, as potions, electuaries, and oiles, which are cast into
the ears. There are also very many remedies called Empirica, consisting in
practice described and celebrated of the ancient Physicians, the use whereof I
do not allow, and therefore I think it good to pretermit the declaration of
them in these our commentaries. Notwithstanding this one thing I steadfastly
affirm that the Christian king of France is endued as it were by inspiration
with so wonderful a gift, The kings of France do cure Strumae by applying
the hands.
that with the only laying on of the hands he can restore them which be
diseased with Struma or Scrofula, to their perfect health again. King Edoward
also (as Histories do report) was wont marueilously to cure Strumous persons
only by touching them which gift immortal, does come as it were by
inheritance to the kings that succeed. For the kings of England at this day,
by laying on of hands, and rehearsing certain ceremonial prayers, do heal
Struma. And these things truly are generally spoken in all the abscessions
before mentioned. Now those things which follow, What things do ^^^er the
particular cure of abscessions fleugmatike.

Tempus quid insa^e^.


do concern the particular and proper method of curing every difference:
which method is made not only diverse, but also it is changed, both by the
substance of matter, whereof they have their beginning, and by the quantity of
them, whether they be great or small, and by the nature also of the affected
member, and of the whole body. But the continuance of time, although it
declares not the cure, yet sometime it shows us and it does insinuate the
quality of the disposition thereof, (as Galene has set down. lib. 4. de
morbis curandis.) Therefore although many indications and intentions of their
cure may be gathered and learned by those things, which we have spoken before:
yet, for our present purpose, we have reduced them unto six points, which we
also have expressed Lupiae, and of the interpreter of Auicene, Glandule) if
they be feated in the strong parts of the body, and (because they are not yet
inueterate) have their thin Cystis, that is, their filme to cover Copress^o
and artritio.
according to Auicene his opinion is perfited after this manner, if, when you do
consume and suppress vehemently these soft and little abscessions, (which
Auicene does call Glandule, and the new Physicians Lupie) you do lay on a plate
of lead made fit for the tumor, and bind it very strongly in the mids,
lest it slide from the place. For this does digest these kinds of tumors.
First therefore let Lupia be softely rubbed with the hand, Lupia curatio.
until it wax somewhat hot, and until it be after a sort softer then it
self. Afterward let the affected member be surely laid hold on with the
hands, and let it be so often, and so vehemently stricken with the bottom of a
saucer, or with some other solid thing, that it may be disseuered and that the
inward Cystis thereof (which is the filme wherein it is included) may be rent and
broken, and so the matter therein contained may be dispersed. Which thing being
done, apply the plate of lead upon the place, Lamina plumbea.
and let it be bound very strongly with a swathing band that has two ends,
neither let it be removed for the space of nine or ten days, but let the plate
be of that greatness (as it was said a late) that it may answer to the
proportion of Lupia. But there are some, which before the application of any
plate of lead, do minister this ointment made of burnt lead, of the bark of
the elder tree, or of the fig tree, Vnguentum Rogerij.
with oil and vinegar. Other do first use an emplaister made of Aloes, acacia,
mirrhe, olibanum, scarcocolla putting to them a little vinegar, or the white of
an egg, as much as shall seem sufficient to commixe with the rest. Henricus
was wont to lay upon them little flakes (as he and other Chyrurgians of that
sect do call them) made of flax, dipped in the white liquor of an egg, with
salt and alume zuccharinum vnthicked. Ganglij curatio ex Philagrio.
Moreover Philagrius almost after the same manner was wont to cure Ganglia (as
it is in Aetius) which diseases are tumors unequal (as we said before)
speaking after this sort. We deny (says he) the labor of the Chyrurgian,
that is blood letting, in Ganglia, especially if they chance in the hands or
in the feet, but we must cure them only by medicines. For we anoint them by
the fire with ammoniak which must be made pliaunt to the thickness of an
emplaister: afterward we apply a plate of lead equal for the tumor and least
it should slide away from the place, we bind it in the midst with straight
bands. But a few days after, when we know that Ganglium is mollified, we take
away the bands, and (not saying any thing to the sick) while the place is yet
hot, we fasten the thumb of our right hand upon Ganglium, and laying fast
hold on the member with our other four fingers, we violently break it, and so
Ganglium is presently dissolved. Hitherto Philagrius. Therefore by this our
order of cure, it may easily be gathered, that Lupia amongst the late
Physicians, Auicene his Glandule, Lupia and Ga^glion is all on evil.

Archigenes lib. 4


and Ganglion among the Greeks, is all one disease, which, the former
descriptio^s of them do also manyfestly declare. Archigenes in this disease,
commends to lay our lime, with the fat of a goose, and with rosin
Terebenthina, which is the right turpentine. The same Archigenes also did
oftentimes use that medicine, which is made of the stone called Lapis achates,
as Paulus reports. But Oribasius used very often this medicine,. of cerusse,
resinae piceae. old oil, Oribasius his medicine to mollify Ganglia.
ana..j. of ammoniake Thymiama, and Galbanum, ana. alike quantity, of
wax..iiij. The same medicine is to be seem in Aetius, but the quantity do
vary in certain things, as thus,. of cerusse, old oil, and resina piceae,
ana. lb.j. of wax..ij. of ammoniacum Thymiama, and of Galbanum, ana..j. boil
the ceruse with oil, till it loses his staining faculty, then bray the
ammoniake, and cast it into the ceruse with the oil, afterward cast in the
resina picea, and the wax, and last of all the Galbanum, which first must be
made very soft and tender. Moreover that famous Physician of Greece, I mean
Oribasius, did not apply any plate of lead, as Philagrius, Auicene, and other
late Chyrurgians were accustomed, but he did lay and bind unto Ganglium, a
thick round piece of lead, like unto a wherue, Verticillum bl^^mbe^^.
which do hang upon women's spindles to make them turn round, which was more
large and ample for the disease. For truly, says he, with the weight thereof,
it does more speedily dissolve the evil. Therefore in the cure of Ganglia, it
is far better to use such mollifying and discussing medicines, then the
diligence of the Chyrurgian, (which is excision of the tumors) especially when
they do grow in the legs, or in the arms, or in the principal parts of
the body. For it is to be feared, that, if they be cut of, the member is made
lame and imperfect. But those diseases which do occupy the head or the
forehead, may safely be cured with the hand, that is, may be cut of, or plucked
up by the roots. Ganglierum per Chyrurgia^ curatio.
Therefore divide the outward skin with a penknife, and then, (if the
tumors be small) lay hold on the foundation of them with a pair of pinsers,
or some such like instrument, and cut them of from the root. But if they be
great, thrust them through with a hook, and lift them up, and wind them round
about, until you have plucked and drawn them forth; last of all, sow up the
sides, or brimes of them together, and use those medicines which are appointed
for bloody ulcers. But these things belong unto the fourth canon. Secundus
Canon.
The second Canon (because I will be silent in those medicines which are
appointed for fleugmatike and oedematous tumors, which we have described
already, and yet, together with these remedies following, they be very
profitable and expedient for these Abscessions whereof we now entreat, and also
for all kind of Hernia) is finished by the applying of a certain emplaister,
Discussion by digestiues.
which is described of Galene libro sexto de compositione medicamentorum (...):
which emplaister (as he himself testifies) does digest through breathing, and
does repel Phlegmone, and is affectuall against the diseases called Strume,
Taxi, and Parotides: it is auailable also against the gout, and it benefiteth
many other diseases. Emplastrum.
The emplaister is this,. of old oil..100. spumae argenti, picis sicce.
ana..50. of Ladanum..25. of aerugo rasa..8. of Galbanum..4. let Argenti spuma,
which they call Lithargirum, be brayed, and boiled in the oil, and when they
are somewhat thickened together, put in the pitche and the rust or scouringes
of brass, then the Ladanum, and Galbanum. Afterward power them out into a
mortar and bray them and mollify them, and reserve them to your use. Some, to
make it have a good color, and to look somewhat brown, do commixe with them
also the offall of brass..viij. for otherwise it would be very black. This
emplaister is found otherwise described in Guido his commentaries, under this
form,. of old oil..xij. of the scouringes of brass..xiiij. of dry
pitche..vj. of Ladanum..iij. of Lithargirum..xij. of Galbanum..iij. Diathyl^n
For the same purpose Diachylon also, which is called Com^^^^ and treatum,
does profit much, whereof you must take one pound, and commixe therewith of the
powder of the root of ireos..j. The same effect likewise has that Diachylon,
called magnum Mesnes, whose description shall afterward ensue. Some do counsel
us, for the digestion of these Abscessions, Siertus ^apri^um ve^u^.
to apply unto the aggreiued place, the old dounge of a goat with honey and
vinegar, which must be het over the fire until they be well incorporate
together and then brought to the form of an emplaister, also an emplaister
made of fenugreeke, of the seed of flax, and of coleworts, with the scrapinges
of the root of Althaea, which medicine, (if there be any hope of suppuration)
does ripen it notably. Haly Abbas emp^astrum.
Haly Abbas also for the same purpose does greatly commend this emplaister
following,. of bean meal, and of barely meal, ana..x. of the root of
liquorace, of the root of Althaea, and of pitche, ana..v. of white wax,
gooses suet, ana..x. Bray them, and mingle them together with old oil, and
with the urine of a child, that has not yet tried venus sportes, and over a
soft fire make an emplaister. Emplastrum Auicennae.
Another out of Auicene, which Guido used,. of oxes dounge..ij. of the root of
coleworts, of the root of capers, of the fish called a shrimpe, of fat figs,
ana..ss. of hoppes, and bdellium, ana..ij. of vinegar, honey, sowes tallowe, of
the dregs of old oil, of each as much as is sufficient, Brunni and
Theodorici emplastrum ad strumas.
whereof make an emplaister. Brunnus approves this remedy following, whose
opinion Theodoricus also does confirm,. of ammoniake, bdellium, Galbanum, of
each a like quantity. Steipe them three days in vinegar, whereto (when they be
dissolved) you may add of small branne, as much as shall suffice, and make an
emplaister. Rogerius was wont to use this remedy for Strume (which they
commonly call Scrofule). of the root of brakes, Rogeri emplastrum.
of daffadill, or of walworte (if you please) of each, as much as you think
good, let them be boiled in the best wine, and then brayed in a mortar, and
add to them a little quick brimstone, Emplastrum praeceptoris G^^d^nis ex
L^^^cibus.
and make an emplaister. Guido his master in monte Pessulano, has often tried
this emplaister to be most effectual, which, is made of xij. snailes (which
they also call Limaces) boiled in wine, or in lie made of ashes commonly called
clauelata. But (that which is more profitable) he did minister every day to the
sick to be eaten, one snaile either dry, or otherwise prepared, and as they
term it, made ready to chew. Paulus also was wont notably to discuss Strume
with unslaked lime, steiped in honey, or in the filthiness of men's bodies that
do arise either in exercising themselves or in bathes, or else in oil, or
sowes grease. The like virtue, says Aetius, has the filthiness of
exercising places, scraped from the walls, which must be well beaten together,
and spread upon a linen cloth, and applied after the manner of an emplaister.
For the same purpose, this helps effectually,. of lime, and nitrum. ana. a
like portion, of Cardamomum, and fenugreke, four times as much with honey, and
apply it after the manner of a mollifying plaster. Also the meal of bitter
hoppes boiled, and anointed with oxymel does discuss Strumae. For the same
purpose also oxes dounge boiled in vinegar, and anointed, does notably avail,
which being applied after the manner of a cataplasme, does marueilously dissolve
all hard and scirrhous tumors. Rathe ripe figs also, especially of the wild
fig tree, applied with hogs grease, do discuss all kinds of tumors.
Therefore by this our method in curing, you shall heal all kinds of Strumae,
which are but newly begone, and not yet inueterate, as well in children, as in
them which cannot abide manuell practice, even by the applying of such
medicines as can dissolve, digest, and discuss, But first you must labor to
mollify, and afterward to discuss, or else use some medicine of a double
quality, which can work both these effects together, of which kind are all
those remedies almost, which are before described. Now if digestive medicines
shall nothing prevail in these Abscessions, they must be either brought unto
suppuration, or consumed, or else cured by Chyrurgie, (as it shall be said
herafter.) But here we must not omit that thing, The using of vipers and
serpents does marueilously help them which are strumous.
which is recorded of some very diligently, (namely) that they which are
diseased with Strumae, and with any leprosy, are marueilously helped by the
using of vipers and serpents, and by the drinking of the gum called Laser,
every day fasting, to the quantity of a ciche pease. There fore cast the dead
serpent into a pot, and stop the mouth thereof very just with some
plaster, and set it in the fire, then take the ashes of the burned serpent,
and mingle them with the like quantity of fenugreeke, and use them in wine.
For this does excellently help them which be strumous. Also in them that
labor with Struma, you must provide that the belly be made soluble, and a
sclender diet observed: you must daily provoke vomiting, and endeavor to purge
fleume upward, you must also dry the head, and apply cataplasmes to the fore
part thereof, which can raise little pushes in the skin, as is the root of
capers with polenta, and other such like things. And you must also use purging
medicines, and fine powders, that be of the like virtue. We also do generally
dipatche the declaration of the third rule, by the Terta Canoris declaratio.
if they find any place or matter disobedient unto resolution, they doubtless
do ripen the same matter, and bring it to suppuration: especially if the said
matter be gentle and tractable, or commixed with blood. But Haly Abbas,
Suppurantia, ce^ mararantia.
that he might bring these kinds of abscessions unto maturitie, ministered a
plaster, made of barley meal, pitche, and olibanum, and of the urine of a
young child, all well incorporate together. But Auicene, to repress the
vehemency of the heat, wills to commixe the decoction of coriander with the
aforesaid urine. But if these things do nothing help, and there be required a
more effectual remedy: take of mirrhe, pars.j. of licium, part.ij. and mingle
them with the aforesaid decoction. This medicine under written does bring
Strumae unto suppuration, Pauli medicamentum ad strumas suppurandas.
Detergentia.
which medicine is recorded of Paulus Aegineta Lib. 4.. of mirrhe..x. of
ammoniacum Thymiama..vij. of viscus quercinum..viij. of Galbanum..iiij. of
propolis..j. beat them in a mortar. But when these abscessions be ripe, and
brought unto suppuration (which you shall easily perceive by the tokens of the
matter) they must be opened and cleansed within, which you shall do very well,
if you do cleanse them after their apertion with that ointment commonly called
vnguentum Apostolorum, Vnguentum Apostolerum.
which is an ointment of great efficacy in malignant and vlcerated Strumae. To
this purpose also the ointment called vnguentum Aegyptiacum is very profitable,
Vnguentum Aegyptiacum. Diachylon. Diapalma.
and the Emplastrum de succis (which they call Diachylon) and Diapalma, (which
the Greeks call (...)) whose descriptions are to be found in other places. But
if these Abscessions shall possess any member, wherein there subsisteth any
putrefaction, and corruption of the bones, or any evil symptomate shall have
access to them: they must be cured after the manner of ulcers, with the which
they have some affinity and acquaintance. Concerning our fouth Canon, you
shall cure, gentle, obedient, superficial, and curable Strumae, very cunningly
and shortly after this sort. First, The way to cure and destroy Strum^, one
of Albucasis and Leonidas.
command the sick to lie down: for that, when he sits, his heart will
quickly fail him. when he is thus laid, bind his legs surely together, and
tie them to the beadstead, and charge the servants about him to hold his
head very hard. Then cut the skin that compasses the tumor either with a
right or a little overthwart section, but that incision, which is drawn
ouertwhart in the neck, is altogether unprofitable, because in it the vessels
and sinews are extended right forth. But you shall not cut the whole
thickness of the skin hastily at one time without ceasing: for out mind is
to use no violent thing in this our work. And truly in little tumors, that
is, in small strumae, make but a simple incision, or divide them with a small
line; but in great abscessions cut the skin to the form of a myrtle leaf:
then those vessels which are uncovered (as the veins and arteries) put them
softely and easily aside. After these things, distend and stretch out the
sides of the section, or the edges of the divided skin, with pinsers, or with
other such instruments, and pluck out the filmes within, either with your
fingers, or with some other instrument appointed for that purpose, and so by
little and little pick out struma, where it appears bare and unfolded from
the tunicles. But if struma shall be wound about the vessels, you must handle
the cure with great attention, least through negligence, there follows a
copious profusion of blood. Therefore in dispatching this cure, draw one only
side of the section at once with the pynsers, and so by little and little
separate it with the point of a penknyfe from the other parts thereunto
adjoined, and when you have drawn and loosed the connection on the one side,
do the like also on the other side, and then cut out the whole foundation or
ground work because of the sinowes and vessels lying underneath. But in
those strumae, which do chance about the armeholes, and about the pryuie
members, you must make an overthwart incision by reason of the doubling of the
skin. Moreover in that section, which is made in strumae that possess the
neck, you must have a singular care, least either the arteries, which they
call carotides, or the quiuering sinowes be touched and hurt. But if by the
cutting of any vessel when you make incision, the profusion of blood does
delaie and hinder your work, either take up the vessel with a small cord, or
(if it be not very great) cut it quite of (as Paulus counsels) or else,
(if it bursteth not out with great violence) apply such remedies, as are
appointed to stench the blood. Afterward return again unto your enterprysed
labor. Therefore, when the foundation of struma is brought into a narrow
room, cut it clean of, cunningly and handesomlie, and then put in the
forefinger, and search the place diligently, wheather there be any other
strumae thereunto adjoined or not, which, (if there be any found) you must
also draw forth after that manner, which we have before expressed. Moreover
you shall easily repress a mean fluze of blood by applying those things
which have power to dry up, as flax, sponges, or lynamentes made of cotton,
infused in cold water, or in vinegar, or in a mixture of both, (which they
call oxycraton) and afterward wrong out. But if the section shall continue
without bloudeshead, fill it up with the powder of franckensence, and apply
linymentes, and for the longer preservation of the lynimentes, What is to be
done, of a vein be annexed unto struma.
bind to woll dipped in win. But if any full vein worthy the speaking of,
be connexed within the root or bottom of Glandula, or struma, or some such
like tumor, it is not convenient to cut it of at the very ground, but to take
it up and bind it with a small cord, that it may fall out of it own accord:
piece by piece without any danger. In which fall the cure must be followed
with lynimentes, But the cord must be of some matter, which will not easily
putrify, as are those threedes which are called serica, Cords made of silk.
or small lute stringes: for those bands which do quickly rotte, do sone
fall from those members whereunto they are tied. But if when the work is
finished, some of the skin that covers the matter of the former
abscessions, or some other strange thing shall remain behind, Albucasis.
Albucasis wills it to be drawn out, first by filling the wound with
cotton, or with some other like thing, dipped in salt water. But Guido, to
draw out those relickes which remained behind did fill up the gaping ulcer,
first with the white of an egg, and with Alume sprinkled over it, afterward
with vnguentum Aegyptiacum, or with some of those corrosiuing medicines which
are descrybed in the Antidotarie. Moreover in all these operations, you must
apply such medicines as can lenifie pain, but among all other things we do
commonly lay on flax dipped in the white of an egg, and in oil of roses. You
shall finish the scope of our fifth rule after this sort: break the skin
with some burning hot medycine according to the greatness of the Abscession,
C^^r^sio and ^^^^dificatio.
but while you attempt that thing, you must give diligent heed, least the
scalding medycine do touch the other parts lying about the tumors. You
shall notably dispatche this labor, Casticum ex calce and sap^ne.
by applying some hot medycine made of lyme, of soap, which things do
happily execute their effects with in the space of twelve hours, but though
they remain somewhat longer, yet there will ensue no danger or discommoditie
thereby. The skin therefore being thus broken by some burning medicine, and
crust procured in the place, you shall divide the tumor with a straight line
all a long through the midst of the crust (but you must make incision
somewhat deeply, almost to the very quick) and then lay upon the cut, or
gaping wound, a lyniment striked with some consuming or eating medicine, as
is, the powder of Asphodelus. Moreover although many do apply a great number
of medicines in these abscessions: Arsenicum.
yet Arsenicke in this case obtayneth the pre-eminence, so that a man know
how to use it aright. But the certain quantity of using the same can not be
described (as Galene has noted. lib. 3. Therapeut.) It is not therefore to be
used rashly, because it is a medicine vehement and violent without measure,
exciting fevers, and procuring many other vicious symptomates. Besides that
also the ministering of a small quantity does perform a marvelous and almost
an incredible effect, Quantit^s arsen^^^.
notwithstanding the common measure or quantity thereof is the medietie of one
grain of wheat, in a strong body, and in those members which are far of
from the principal parts: but in weak natures, and in those places which are
situated near unto the principal members, a less quantity must be applied.
But to be short, it is better, and more safe to minister a little at once, and
often, then at one time to apply an immoderate quantity. The operation or
effect of Arsenicke remains three whole days, in all which time the sick
must use the diet of them that are feuerous. But the affected member, and the
parts lying about the same, both for the own defense, and to stop the
flux, (which immoderate heat may cause) ought to be anointed and all to
washed with the ointment called populeon, with water also, or with the juice of
nightshade and with vinegar, and with other refrigerating remedies of the like
kind. But when you are certainly assured, that Glandula is destroyed and
wasted away (which you shall know by the hardness and swelling of the procured
crust) then the crust must be resolved even from the quick, by washing it with
butter, and by applying a little wheat meal thicked together, Qua^do (...)
or by some other fat and unctuous thing that is not salted, as swines grease
and such like. But when the crust is fallen from the tumor, if any thing
either of glandula, lupia, or struma do yet remain behind, it must be
fetched out with some gnawing medicine, as with the powder of Asphodelus, with
vnguentum Aegyptiacum, or with some such like thing. But if there remains
nothing behind it must be brought unto a scarre after the manner of other
ulcers. But now, that we may also accomplish the intention of our sixth
canon: L^ga^t^r^e and (...).
and they must be bound daily more and more, either with the former bands, or
with other new cords, until they appear very dry, and voluntarily do
fall away of their own accord, (as we have said of those Abscessions,
which are deeply planted, and foulded, about the great vessels.) But the
band must be aided with some consuming and drying medicine. The pain also
must be assuaged with the white of an egg, with oil of roses, with vnguentum
populeon, or with some other remedy that can mitigate pain. But when the
cords shall fall of alone of their own accord, the tumor must be cured
after that manner, which we have before expressed. And thus much generally
concerning those Abscessions which universally consist above nature,
especially of them that have their original of fleume. Now we have here
thought it convenient, to set down the proper and peculiar method of Curinge
Melicerides, Steatomata, and Atheromata, which diseases are always and often
incident to men's bodies, and do comprehend under them other certain kinds
and differences of tumoures besides nature, called of the late Physicians after
certain new titles and names, which among the ancient sort were never heard
of, as Talpa, Testudo, Nacta, and others of that kind, which we have
expressed in our former Chapters. In those three kinds of Abscessions, Curatio
Atherom^ti^, steatomatis and meliceridis.
which do most frequent men's bodies, (I mean in Steatomata, Atheroma, and
Meliceris) there is one general order of their Cure, namely, that that matter,
which is contained in that tunicle, which they call Cystis, may be discussed,
or that the whole tumoure together with the very tunicle, may be consumed by
medicines, or taken away by section. But some of those Tumors require a three
fold method of Curing, Ho^ many ways these abscession may be cured.
as these, which contain a more liquide humor as is meliceris. Some again
are cured two ways, as Atheroma, which is destroyed by section, and consumed
by medicines. But Steatoma can neither be discussed, nor consumed: but it is
cured by the only labor of the hand (that is) by section only. Moreover of
medicines, which in these affectes have power to discuss and dispearse, you
shall find plenty among those remedies, Lib. 4. Curatio per digerentis.
which we before have set down for the cure of strumae. But Paulus does
perticulerly and properly discuss melicerides with that medicine, which
contains, of pressed grapes (the kernels being taken out,) xx. of the
scourings of brass..iiij. which medicine must not be applied before the member
be nourished with foments. Another emplaister appointed for melicerides, Lib.
15.
which Aetius reported unto Leonidas.. of pressed grapes, (the kernels being
detracted. lb.j. of comin seed beaten very small..vj. of nitrum..iij. bray
all together in a mortar, and bind them to the tumor. Another discussiue
medicine expressed of the same writer, very profitable against melicerides..
salis ammoniaci, of the scourings of silver, and of Ceruse. ana. lb.j. of wax,
Terchinthina, chalbana, opoponax. ana..j. of rubrica sinopica..vj. of
vinegre..vij.ss. boil the scourings of silver, ceruse, and salt beaten very
small, altogether, then cast in the rubrica sinopica, which first must be
steeped in vinegre, and melt them together, last of all, when they be all
boiled together and cold, commix therewith op^ponax and chalbana, both
dissolved in vinegre, and conserve them to your use. But if in such kind of
Abscessions you mind to wast the humor by applying of gnawing medicines (which
the Grecians call Septica) it is expedient first to uncover them (as also in
struma) by hot burning medicines applied to the skin, Curatio per (...) 4
whereof (says Paulus) the best remedy is that, which consists of quick
lime (that is) which is not yet quenched with water of soap, and of the ashes
of lie that are made in a stillatorie. There is another more diverse remedy,
which may be kept a long time.. of unslaked lime..iiij. of sphecle, (that is)
of the burnt dregs of wine, of liquide nitrum parched in the fire. ana..ij.
of minium or rubrica sinopicae..j. Let them be brayed with the distilled ashes
of lie, and when you have brought them to the thickness of liquide honey,
heat them thrice over the fire, that it may be of a mean substance, and lay
on pixis plunubra, with the distilled lie above, left it dry up to soon.
Therefore first break the skin that is beset with such medicines, as can
procure a crust: but when the crust is fallen of, apply consuming remedies,
among which this remedy following does notably wast without gnawing and
biting.. of the offall of brass..iiij of Sandaracha (that is) of red
arsenicke, A medicine to wa^^ without biting.
and of Helleborus niger. ana..ij. apply them with oil of roses. Another
remedy very effectual for the same purpose.. of a burnt hedghog, of
Testasepia, and of orpine or arsenicke. ana. an equal portion. Commix them
with oil of roses. But the parts which lie about the tumor, and are adjacent
thereunto, let them be first anointed with ceruse and oil. Curatio per
Chirurgiam.
But if we purpose to cure these kinds of Abscessions by making incision (that
is) by Chirurgerie: truly in that method of curing (whether it be a mealie
humor, or a honey, or a fat humor, or of what substance soever it be, which is
contained in them) we must observe one only and perpetual intention, (namely,
to take away the tunicle wherein the humor is included.) But in enterprising
the same, we must be very attentive and wary (as we have said before of
strumae) that we rashly hurt not and tear in pieces the filme or tunicle,
whereupon the humor, which was contained therein, gushing out plentifully,
does both hinder our operation, and some portion thereof also remains still
behind. For if (when the tunicle is divided, and the humor issued) the tumor
shall sink down, the tunicle will hardly be plucked away and cured. But if
any remnaunt of the humor be left behind in the Abscession, it is to be
feared, that the disease will grow again (as does struma) when as any
portion thereof sticks behind. But if any such thing does happen, it is
not expedient to sow together the Abscession, but to draw out the relictes
thereof either with those consuming medicines, which we have before expressed,
or by some such like remedies. Now if steatoma has a very broad top, and
a very narrow and sclender foundation, then (setting aside all other
superfluous remedies) you must cut it up quite even by the very root, Aetius
lib 15.
for so the labor of the Chyrurgian shall quickly be ended, the ulcer made
plain and equal with the other parts, and the Cure shortly dispatched.

CAP. XXV. Of hard and Scirrhous tumoures, engendered of melancholy.
WE have hitherto discoursed of those tumoures which are caused of blood,
choler and fleume: of Verrucae also, and of those abscessions, which are
excited through a waterish humor and a flatuous vapor: of those Apostemes
also which have their beginning of a phlegmatic substance, and of other
tumoures generally consisting above nature. Now it remains that we
entreat of those Abscessions, which do proceed of a melancholic humor, as
are scirrhous, indurated and cancerous tumoures, which they call Cancerosi
apostemosi. To Scirrhus therefore (as also to phlegmone, Erysipelas, and
Oedema) there is assigned of the late Chirurgians a double difference, which
notwithstanding is comprehended under the same title, vidz. Scirrhus verus, and
Scirrhus non verus. Scirrhus duplex.
But a true and lawful Scirrhus is said to proceed of natural melancholy.
Also natural melancholy is the dregs of good blood, and as it were a
certain slimie superfluity, and very gross blood, whose color is black,
Melancholia naturales.
but the taste thereof sharp and sour (as it is not unknown to them that do
vomit the same) it is lodged in a certain bloody corner, wherein all the
humors are contained, and appointed of nature to nourish the melancholic
members. Scirrhus illeg^^mu^.

Melanchola non natura^is.


But an unlawful Scirrhus after the opinion of the late Chirurgians, is that
which is engendered of unnatural melancholy. And unnatural melancholy is
that, which differs from the former description of the natural humor, and
yet it keeps within the precinctes of his liberty, which if it shall once
pretergresse (they say) it is no longer to be called melancholy, but some
other humor. But melancholy (to enter into the general definition thereof)
is a cold and dry humor, proceeding (as Guido says) of a very gross
portion of that which we call Chylus. Differentiae 4. non natural^^
me^^ncho^^ae.
But of unnatural melancholy there are commonly appointed four differences.
The first is, when as that melancholic humor, which is called natural, and
does daily engender in the body, even when a man is in perfect health, is in
his own proper essence, burned, putrified and become exquisite melancholy.
B^is a^ra exquisite.
For that (as Galene says) is engendered of a black humor, that is
vehemently burnt, and it glistereth like unto lime and pitch. But this is
sour, and being powered on the ground, it is hoate like vinegre, and it rises
up like leaven. It is also very unpleasant unto all creatures living, so that
neither mice nor flies will taste thereof. It shows likewise, like unto
abundance of salt, wherein no living thing can uphold his life, as the sea
which is said to be dead. Furthermore this black kind of choler is then
engendered, when as that slimie blood, Gal. co^. 21.
(which we have said to be natural melancholy) does continue long in the
body, and is purged out neither by any sensible nor secret effluxion: but is
transformed, corrupted, and rotten. For truly this humor (says Galene) when
it waxes vehemently hoate, either because of the corruption thereof, or
because of a burning fever, it causes melancholy: Lib. 4. Apho. Lib. 14.
Therapeutices.
which truly is cold because it resembles the nature of the earth, but yet it
is not void of heat, as is ashes and vinegre, and when it is purged
downewarde (as it happens sometime to them which are diseased with
Dysenteria) it appears more glistering and more black then that thick and
black blood, which we do call a melancholious humor. 2. The second species
or difference of unnatural melancholy is that, Melancholy comes by the
adustion of other humors.
which comes through Com. 29. lib. 3 praed^ct. Hyp.
which is like unto the dreggs of wine in the bottom of a vessel, or in
proportion resembling the dregs of oil, for this is more gentle and mild,
yea and especially when as it tarieth not long within the body with any
aboundaunt heat exceeding nature. But before it be changed into exact
melancholy, it passes first into a yellowish form, secondly into a leekye
substance, and species of unnatural melancholy is that, which boroweth his
original of a certain stony concretion, ^
as when through the ignorance of unskillful Physicians or Chirurgians,
Erysipelas, and those inflammations (which the Grecians call phlegmone) or any
other tumors proceeding of natural humors, are too vehemently cooled and
bound by the applying of extraordinary remedies: or else when those medicines
which do mightily draw and digest, are ministered to the same tumors. For then
(the whole substance which was very small in them, being dispearsed) the
gross matter which remains, being exceedingly dried, will resemble the
hardness of a stone, and be converted into a Melancholy through (...) humors
(...)
which thing, while it happens, it is made sweet, and does wax mild, until
such time as one burnt choler or other be commixed therewith, for then it
waxes sharp, and bitter, and is made pertaker of immoderate gnawing. We may
gather therefore by our former words, that the four differences of tumors
above nature do proceed of melancholy: for first of natural melancholy (which
we have said to breed daily in found bodies) there is caused a true and
lawful scirrhus, called among the Arabians seph^ros, but of the Greeks (...)
and (...) (that is) scirrhus or scirrhus non exactus, seu non exquisitus, which
kind of tumor truly is very hard, and void of pain, but yet not altogether
insensible: Auicene calls it impurus. Yet Galene lib. 14. meth. med.
pardoning them which do contend about the names of tumors, calls it a tumor
conflated of a melancholious humor, and then properly scirrhus, whenas
notwithstanding it is expert of any feeling or sense, but if it be not yet made
altogether insensible, it is rather to be called a scirrhous tumor, Scirrhus
phlegmon^de^, oedema^^de^.

Erysipela^^des


then scirrhus it self. Secondly of unnatural melancholy through the
admixtion of other humors there do grow three other differences of tumoures
(that is to say) Scirrhus phlegmonodes, oedema^ode, and Erysipelatodes, which
diseases are here rehearsed for one only difference. Thirdly of unnatural
melancholy caused through a certain stony hardness, Scirrhus exquisit^^.
and concretion, there is engendered an exquisite Scirrhus, hard, and void ofe
sense and pain, it is called of Auicene purus, which evil admits no cure.
Fourthly, of unnatural melancholy thorough deustion, are all the kinds of
Cankers engendered, Scirrhus can^rosus.

Scirrhus prop^^^ quod.

Cause^ 3. scirrhi ^^g^^m^.


as well vlcerate, as not vlcerate: of the which kind is Scirrhus canerosus.
Scirrhus therefore properly is a Tumor very hard and without pain, but yet
not altogether without feeling, proceeding of a natural melancholy, and
vncorrupt humor, which definition the late Chirurgians have assigned
thereunto. The causes of Scirrhus, as of other tumors besides nature are
three. First Primitive, as is an evil diet, ingendring and gathering gross
and melancholic blood. Second Antecedent, as a melancholic humor collected
in the body, which is drawn from the spleen (whose duty it is to purge the
liver from that gross and muddie blood) and yet is not expelled without the
body (as it ought to be.) Third, Coniuncta causa, is the melancholic humor
it self, Signae.
compacted in the affected member. The signs of Scirrhus his presence (as
Guido reports) are these, a hard tumor, and mightily resisting, a middle
color between a red and a black, which is a brown color. This Scirrhus when
it happens in the parts of the body, 14. meth. med.
many of the Physicians (as Galen says) do call it pelidnon, that is to say,
black and blewe. Morouer if thaffected member has any manifest veins
appearing in it, you shall see them puffed up and swollen by the means of
thick and black blood, such as is sometime purged downward in them which
labor with the disease of the liver, but then it is called scirrhus impurus
and cancrosus. Guido n^tas Cancri tribuit scirrho.
For these signs which Guido does here ascribe unto scirrhus, do properly
agree with the signs of Cancer (as Galene writes decimo quarto methodi
medendi.) And truly they may very fitly be attributed unto Scirrhus, if this
one thing be excepted, namely, that Scirrhus has not such swelling and full
veins, as Cancer has, except Scirrhus (as we have said before) chance to
be cancrosus, for Scirrhus does oftentimes degenerate into Cancer, and that not
without great cause, seeing they both proceed of one matter (that is) of a
melancholic humor. The proper signs therefore of a lawful scirrhus are
these, a hard and stony tumor, very obstinate and resisting touching,
wherein there is present a very dull sense. There do also appear many other
signs which do testify the dominion of a melancholy humor in the body.
Iudicia scirrhi
Such tumoures as are truly scirrhi, in their beginning and first conception
are wont to appear very small, but in process of time, they increase by
little and little, and become great and mighty, whereof some do annoy one
only member, but some do leave that member, which they did first infest, and
afterward do pass over to the possession of another, which thing when it
happens, then Auicene calls the evil ferinos. Furthermore, Ferinos.
these kinds of melancholious tumoures, if they be rightly handled, they are
commonly cured by resolution, oftentimes they continue indurated and hard, and
many times (which is worst of all) they degenerate and change into Cancer.

But now we will prosequute the absolute cure of these kinds of hard
tumoures above nature, which are called true Scirrhi, and not exquisiti, by
three special intentions. The cure of a true and lawful scirrhus, yet not
exquisite, and grown into a stony hardness, altogether insensible Three
Intentions.

V^ctus ratio. Euchyma. Panis. Potus. O^a. Carnes. Olera.


The first prescribes a convenient order of diet. The second admonishes to
take away the antecedent matter, which is ready to procure the disease. The
third warns us to enterprise the vacuation of that coniunct matter (as they
call it) which now causes the evil. Therefore (to speak generally) you
must appoint to them which are diseased with scirrhus a sober and a moderate
diet, and such a one as declineth unto heat, and moisture in those things
(which they call res non naturales) as before. Give him therefore meats of
good juice, and which can engender good blood. Let his bread be made of wheat,
well knodden and baked in an oven with a soft fire, and let it have some
leaven, and salt, as much as shall suffice. Let his drink be thin, and
odoriferous wine, eschewing that which is thick and black. Give him rere eggs,
the flesh of chickens, capons, hens and the brothes of them. Let him also eat
the flesh of partriches, pheasaunts, quails, young kiddes, sucking calves, and
of weather of a year old. For potherbes, let him use that which the Arabians
call Aspa^ar, but we somewhat altering the name, do call it spinach, also
lettuse, hoppes, borrage, buglosse, and other herbs of that nature, which can
purge forth blood, and make it more pure. To conclude, let him fly and avoid
all those things, which naturally do engender melancholic blood, which
things Galene libro tertio de affectis capite sexto, has described unto us, as
are, the flesh of goats, and of oxen, and of bulls, Carner. Limacet.
but especially the flesh of Asses and of cammelles, of foxes and of dogs, of
hares also and of bores. Furthermore snayles, (if they be accustomed to be
eaten) and the flesh of all terrestrial creatures seasoned with salt. The
flesh also of fishes, as of the Tunie, of the fish called Balaena, the sea
calfe, the Dolphin, the dogge-fish, and of all kind of whales. But of
potherbes, Pisces. (...) is made of vinegar and salt.
Coolewortes is wont only to engender this kind of blood. The buddes also of
trees, when they are seasoned either with brine, or with oxalme, especially of
the tree called a mastixe tree, of the Terebinth, of the brier, and of the
wild eglantine brier which the Greeks call Cynosbatos.) But of all kind of
pulse lintles chiefly are accounted amongst the number of melancholic
meats. Bread also made of branne, Legu^inum panis. Typhae. Vinum.
and that which is made of Rye and of other corrupt and naughty seeds, which
other Countries do use in steed of corn. Moreover, thick and black wines
are very fit to engender a melancholious humor: especially if one drinking
them aboundauntly, does by occasion keep his body in great heat. Finally
old cheese, when as by chance it shall be exceedingly hoate in the body,
Caseus.
does easily breed this kind of humor. These things have we hitherto
recited out of Galene. Furthermore you must diligently beware of meats that
are burnt, roasted, Sanguinem adurentiae.
and fried, which do vehemently dry up, of salt meats also, and of those
which are sharp and sour (as onions, garlic, pepper, mustarde, and of other
things of that kind, which do burn the blood. You must also eschew, anger,
wrath, sadness, watchings, Animi (...).

Exercitatio.


heaviness, carfulness, and immoderate exercises. Quietness and
tranquillity of mind, with mirth and gladness is greatly to be desired: and
you must diligently endeavor, every day to empty the belly. Hitherto
concerning the first scope. 2. Now that we may accomplish that, Vacuatio
materia antecedemi^.
let us somewhat consider the precept of Auicene, who wills us to euacuate
the whole body both by bloudletting, if too black and gross blood shall
appear, and also by some purging medicine, which can expel melancholy as are
these which follow, out of Mesua, Epithyntum, Seen, polypodye, fumus terra
(which of the Grecians is called Capuos or Capuios, of the Latins fumaria)
lupulus, and the herb called volubilis. Also Casia fistula, myrobalani Indi,
lapis lazuli, which the Greeks call Cyaneus, the Romans Caeraleus, Diasene,
diacatholicon, hiera Ruphi, all which things do purge forth melancholic
humors. But these things, which pertain unto Physic do exceed the bounds
of Chirurgians. Omitting therefore the professors of the art of Physic, we
will hasten unto the third scope, which we shall very speedily dispatch, if we
labor to empty Vacuatio matr^^ae (...).
in which that leekie matter (as we have said before) is not yet engendered.
But this is the only and proper way to euacuate them, about the which the
Chirurgian ought to be very circumspect and attentive. For truly the matter
of such kind of tumors, is naturally so malignaunt and stubborn, that it
will turn into a stony hardness if it be rashly resolved. Materia (...).
Again, if it be mollified more then is requisite, it is greatly to be feared,
that it will putrify and corrupt, and that Schirrus will degenerate into
Cancer. We must therefore in this case follow the counsel of Galene and
Paulus (who wrote of this thing long before Auicene.) Namely, that in such
schirrous affectes, we must not apply any vehement, hoate, and drying
medicine, neither any thing else, which has the power only to mollify and
moysten. For that tumor, which has a superfluous humor, it does nothing at
all dissolve: but that which has a small flux, it does more dry up then
need requires. Hereupon Auicene did well admonish us, to apply to these
indurated tumoures by turns, sometime mollifying, Medicines (...) scirrhus.
and sometime digesting remedies. But because that order was very tedious, and
hard to be done, it pleased Galene to use for the cure of these euilles, such
medicines as h^d a mixed and a double faculty, which devise was more safe and
less dangerous. For by this means we shall both mollify and digest the
indurate and hard substance all at one time: yet in the beginning we must
commix something with them which can moderately repress. For this purpose,
Auicene has set down many kinds of remedies, which, because they are rather
appointed for those Schirri, which proceed of phlegmone and Erysipelas when
they be exceedingly cooled (as we will declare in the Chapter following) we
will omit them, (...) medica^^^^^^ ad (...) and di^.
making choice of that medicine which Razis libro septimo ad Almansorem has
described: using notwithstanding at the beginning some equal repression of the
flowing of humors (by applying some moderate repelling remedy.) The form of
the medicine is this.. of Bdellium, Ammoniacum, and Galbanum. Of each a like
quantity. Beat them in a mortar with oil de ben, which the Greeks call
balanum myrepfice, the Latins, Glaus vnguentaria,) or with oil of lillies.
Then take of the filth of fenugreeke, of lineseede, and of figs: the weight
of all the former things. Bray them altogether, till they be thoroughly
incorporate the one with the other. Galene for this cure both greatly
commends the bark of the root of Althea, Ga^eni catap^asma. T^^rap. 14
(which the common sort, says he, does call Anadendromalache, as though one
would say, arborescent malua) melted with the fat of a goose or of a cock,
and then beaten together, and brought into the form of a cataplasme. But if
the tumor does belong unto suppuration, you must be very wary, I^ scirrhus
will m^^ter.
lest the affected member be incended or stirred with hoate medicines, or by
any other means, for so Cancer should easily be procured. But if the tumor
be opened, and the substance thereof already turned into matter, you must
use the help of that ointment, which is called diachylon. Again, if it shall
degenerate into a stony hardenesse, you must straight way repare unto those
remedies which shall be described in the Chapter following. ^^rhus illegi (...)
and non (...).


But now when as thorough the unskillfulness and ignorance of Physicians,
those inflammations which, the Grecians call Phlegmonae) or Erysipelata are
exceedingly refrirated, or else rashly resolved thorough the ministering of
such medicines, as can vehemently draw, and digest by their vapor: then all
that substance which is any thing thin and sclender in them, if dissolved,
but that which remains behind, being as it were congealed together, and
maruelouslye dreyed up, does take unto it a stony hardness, and at the
last comes to that disease, The causes of hardness in the parts of the body.
which is called of the Greeks scirrhus. But it chances sometime that some
member is hardened thorough extension of the flesh, which comes by reason of
wine or by some other waterish humor (as we have said before in our treatise
of flatuous and waterish tumors.) Oftentimes also there aryseth up in certain
members a stony hardness, caused of the privation of the moisture of the
body and thorough too much dryness, as it happens in the hardness of the
joints, and in the poores of the body when the gout or such like diseases do
reign. But here we will only discourse of scirrhus, or of other hard
tumors, which have their original from phlegmone or erysipelas or else from
aedema, when as they be greatly refrigerate and cooled, which tumors we have
termed not without some reason scirrhi ex coincidentia procreati, (that is)
scirrhi proceeding of an unity, Scirrhi ex coincidentia procreati.

The signs of an unlawful scirrhus.


being as it were a double disease incident both at one time. The signs and
tokens of an unlawful scirrhus, which is not exquisite or perfect, are these,
a hard tumor, scarce sensible that is, as though it were with feeling and
pain, parfitlie representing the color of the body, drawing his beginning
from unnatural melancholy. This evil is not altogether incurable, and yet
it admits no easy cure, neither is it easily remedyed. For that humor,
whereupon this evil gathers his force is clammish, glewish and thick, or
(as Galen says) a partaker of both kinds, Iudicia.
which when it is stuffed in the hard members, it does obstinately withstand
resolution, and when the humiditie thereof is thoroughly resolved, then that
which remains behind, is dried up, and made as hard as a stone. But an
exquisite scirrhus, Scirrhus exquisitus curationem non ad (...).
and such a one as is altogether insensible, does not receive any cure. But if
it may be helped any way, it must be done by some moystening medicine. That
hardness also which comes through too much exciccation, and when the moisture
of the body is clean extinguished, is also incurable, for it is sufficient if
you stop it, that the drynes may proceed no further. But those scirrhi also,
wherein there do grow certain hears, and which are great, and very hard,
Scirrhi incurabiles.
and do resemble the color of the body are neither cured, not yet changed
at any time into any other disease (as Auicene has declared.

The common and general declaration of curing these tumors, is in this order
described (namely) to euacuate all that matter, which unnaturally is contained
in the member. Summa curandorum scirrhorum.
For the only way of euacuation (as Galen has noted lib. 14. meth. med.) is
this, even to cleanse and draw out that corruption, which stubburnely does
cleave to the humor. But if any man shall assaie to make euacuation by those
medicines which do vehemently draw and digest, neither shall mollify and
soften with any drying and moistning remeadies, the cure shall seem to him
within few days greatly to have prevailed, for scirrhus will manifestly
appear to be deminished. But that which remains of the disease, will be
incurable, for truly when the whole substance, which is very thin in the
tumor, is digested or dispersed, then that which remains behind, is turned
into a certain stony concretion. For this cause therefore there is no
medicine that do vehemently heat or dry up, meet and conueniet for these
hard and scirrhous affectes, but such remeadies only, Medulla sena
which can fitly both mollify, and also digest: as are these things following:
the marow of a heart and of a calfe, also goats suet, bulls suet, the tallow
of a lybard and of a lion. Among the fat of byrds, Adipes.
gooses grease is chiefly commended, next that the fat of a cock and of a
phesaunt. Also ammoniacum thymiama, (videl.) suffimen, perfume galbanum, and
bdellium of both kinds, Gal. 14. meth. med.

Anadendromalache.


but rather that which is called scithicum, because it is somewhat moist.
Styrax also, which is something moist and fat. Moreover the rote of althea, and
of the wild mallow, which grows almost every where, the leaves whereof must
be moderately boiled with gooses or cocks suet, or if there be none of those
at hand, you may use swynes greac, these remedies are greatly profitable for
this intention. But Auicene warns us not to commix any hogs tallow that is
salted, with the former things, and to use mastiche, ladanum, oil of wool,
strygmenta gymnasiorum, (which they call the filthiness of bathes) asses dounge,
and the dregs of oil of lillyes, of oil of alchanna which they call
cyprinum, and of cherna, which of the Greeks is called (...), but of the
Latins ricinium. Oleum reci^^^
But that cure which is administered by vinegar is profitable for this evil,
that is for scirrhus which is full grown, and when the member is prepared to
receive mollyfyng medicines, as Galene also has declared, for truly says he,
the force of vinegre, if it be used moderatly and in due time, is very wholesome
for these diseases, 14. Meth. med. (...) A^eti.
because it does divide and resolve the gross humors included in them: but if
it be applied immoderatly and out of a convenient season, it violently
consumes the thinner parts, and makes that, which remains behind, to
become very hard, also if it be used long, it will diminish and corrupt the
very substance of the sinowes. For this cause therefore, we must not very
often nor at the beginning, nor any long time, apply those medicines to the
great sinowes or cords of the body, which are compounded and made of vinegar.
Wherefore Galene did cure the child of one Cercilius, Historia. Lib. 2. ad
Glauconem. Oleum sabinum.
who through to much cooling, and vehement bynding of erysipelas, had a hard
and scirrhus tumor remaining in his thighe, after this manner. First he
anointed his thighe, with oleum sabinum, which of all oils is most thin, in
steed whereof they use in these days olenum sambucinum, oil of elder, which
the common sort call iasminum. When he had thus washed and anointed the
member, he applied amnoniacum thimiama, which must be gross and not very
old, (...).
commixed with the aforesaid suettes and marrowes. Afterward he anointed his
whole thigh round about with very fat ammoniacum, dissolved in exceeding
sharp vinegar, and commanded the child to hoppe on the other leg, that so
the more nourishment might be brought unto it. By such medicines therefore as
could release and mollify the tumor, and by digesting or resolving remeadies
also, and by the moderate and right use thereof, he perfectly cured the child.
But in those great sinews and ligamentes of the body, The cure of scirrh^us
si^^^es and veins, out of Ga^ene and Pae^lus.

Lapis milites. Lap^s pyrites.


which are drawn together and covered with scirrhus, you must use vinegar
after this sort, as Galene counsels us. Take a stone, and heat it very
hot in the fire, and quench it in very sharp vinegre, if it be possible, let
the stone be that, which we call pyrites, but if there be no plenty thereof,
take the stone called lapis molaris, which the Greeks call mylites, then let
the affected member be holden over the hot vapor that ryseth up from the
ston^ out of the vinegar, that it may receive the steeming vapor, which does
dissolve scirrhus: and afterward lay one again some mollyfying medicine: yet
the affected part must be every day even from the beginning thoroughly
anointed with oil and not with water, which oil must not be astrictiue in
any case, but of a thin substance, as is oil of sauin. But sometime you may
boil in oil the roots of althaea, and of the wild cucumber, Oleum sabi^u^.
and other things of that sort, by this method of curing, many men truly have
been perfitly healed in a short space, so that some have thought it (as Galene
says) to be done by the art of magic. 2. ad Glauconem.
By these things therefore it does plainly appear, that with that cure,
which is accomplished by mollifying remeadies, as well in the sinowes, as in the
ligamentes of the body, you must commixe some medicine that can cut,
dissolve and divide, Lib. 6.
among which number vinegar is chiefly the principal. Now as concerning other
medicines which can mollify the hardness of these tumors, we have spoken
nothing hoping that they may easily be gathered out of our former discourse.
Now follows the sum of the cure of scirrhous tumor, The sum of curing
scirrhous tumors.
which we have drawn into a compendious form hereafter ensuing. 1. That kind
of scirrhus, which having all his humiditie and moisture consumed and wasted,
is grown into a stony hardness, and is altogether destitute of exquisitus
scirrhus) of such a scirrhus, I say, attempt not the cure, but leave it as an
evil incurable. 2. To scirrhus non exquisitus (which is not scirrhus, minister
no remedies scirrhus scirrhous scirrhus, be holden over the hot vapor of
lapis molaris burnt in the fire and quenched in vinegre, with some thin oil,
wherein either the root of the wild cucumber, or of althaea, or green and
fresh dill, or some such like thing has been boiled and infused, 7. Apply
unto the aforesaid scirrhous members such medicines as can dry, divide, and
resolve the

CAP. XXVI. Of a Cancerous Tumor, which thy commonly call Cancer Apostematosus.
THE name and title of the disease called cancer, among the Physicians and
chyrurgians has diverse and sundry significations: Cancer partaineth unto two
kinds of diseases.
for the notifying or declaration thereof is extended unto two kinds of
diseases (that is to say) unto a cancerous tumor (which they commonly call
cancer apostematosus as well that which is evident and appears in the outward
members, as that which is Of (...) engendered. Cancer fine ulcers.
But both these evils are engendered of melancholy (that is to say) of such a
humor, as resembles the dregs of wine, and the filthiness of oil, which
thing Gal. libro decimo quarto therapeutices, and in his little book de
tumoribus praeter naturam does plainly testify. Now this aforesaid humor,
when it is quiet, mild, and gentle, it engenders a secret or an inward cancer
without any ulcer. But if it happens to be sharp, fierce, and malignant, it
gnaweth the skin, and causes a cancre with an ulcer. Cancer (...) vlcere.
But here we will only discourse of that kind of cancre which has his
residence in the outward parts of the body, and of that which is not yet
exulcerate, which also sometime (as Galen affirms,) is said to be a privy
cancre. That cancre therefore, whereof we here entreat, is a hard tumor,
unequal, round, having the veins round about it, swo^len and puffed up,
Cancre (...).
it is blue or browen, and (as Paulus says) it is more black in color then
in an inflammation, it is also hot, but yet not so vehement as inflammations
are, it suddenly increases, and greatly wearieth the sick, and afflicts
them almost with a continual grief: in greek it is called (...), and (...),
Can^ri nomen a ^ancro aqua ^ico.
which title as well the Latins as the Grecians have assigned to this disease
of the fish called a crabbe, because the veins about this evil are filled and
it stretched out, very like unto the feet of crabbes, descending from the
round compass of their bodies. But some have given it this name, because it is
very hardly pulled away from those members, which it does lay hold on, as
the sea crabbe does, who obstinately does cleave to that place which it once
has apprehended. Moreover this tumor does also represent the color of a
crabbe, whose hue is very black. But the first beginninges of these cancres
are sometime so confused and so small, Cancri notae per i^itia confuse, and
obscurae.

Lib. 14. Therap.


that the common sort may be ignorant thereof: for when they do begin, they
do scarce resemble the greatness of a pease or of a bean. Wherefore it is no
marvel (says Galene) though the common sort do not know them, for they be
like unto the little roots that arise out of the earth, which are not
discerned but of skillful husbandmen. But afterward they grow up into such a
huge greatness, and do bring with them so vehement, great, and manifest
symptomates, that a child may easily discern them. Let no man therefore doubt
of the name thereof, seeing all men with one consent do term this kind of
disease cancer, because (as we have said) the veins in this evil do swell
one every side, and are greatly stretched out, and they do represent the
form and likeness of a crabbe. Notae cancri ^urdentis non vlcerati.
A cancerous tumor (as we have said before) is hard and unequal, which by
the touching of it does plainly appear. It has a blue or brown color,
which is a mean between red and black, called of the Greeks (...). About
the place where cancre is lodged, there is felt a certain beating or pulse,
and as it were a pricking: sometime also (as Celsus says) the tumor is a
sleep, and as it were dead. It makes the veins round about it to swell and
rise up, like unto the cancre in the arms. Oftentimes also in some they are
secretly hidden, and when the place is touched, it is felt in some very
painful, but in other some it is contrary. This tumor also is marvelously
stout, and resists touching. Moreover it has in it a certain strange,
Iudicia. Lib. 14. There.
and extraordinary heat. Cancer or carcinoma generally is a grievous and
pernicious disease, for it can scarcely be healed any way by reason of the
grossnes of the humor, neither can it be repressed or discussed, neither will
it yeald to any purgatio^, though it be throughout the whole body. The malice
also of this disease is so great, that it contemns all gentle and easy
remeadies, putting forth but the middle finger to them (as the proverb is) but
it must be stirred and chafed, and overcome with very vehement remeadies (as
we wont to do in the evil called crabro. Celsus lib. 5.
) This disease is wont to happen in every part of the body, but especially in
the upper parts about the face, the nosethrills, the ears, the lips, and
about the pappes of women, and of those chiefly, which are not naturally
purged of menstruis. But cancres do also commonly haunt men, whose accustomed
purginges are suppressed through hemorrhoides growing in the fundament: Ga^.
lib. 2 ad. Glauconem.
for by them, that gross and thick blood (whereupon this evil takes his
first beginning) is wont naturally to be purged out. Moreover when this
melancholious humor resembling in proportion the dregs of wine, does descend
and flow into any member, and there abides compact together: it causes
sometime the disease called varices, and sometime it breeds a cancre, as when
the same is somewhat cooled. But when it is thrust out to the whole skin, it
causes that evil, which they call elephans. Cancer therefore is a certain
particular elephantiasis, which the common sort call lepra, the lepry. But the
thicker and the blacker the blood is whereof cancre proceeds the more
dangerous will the disease be. Now when cancre is full grown, as they say,
and inueterate, it admits not any cure, except it be plucked up by the
roots either by sectio^ or by adustion: but those cancres, which have their
constitution in the inward parts of the body, do not desire any such kind
of cure, as that ancient Hippocrates simply the prince of Physicians has
taught us very well in the Aphorism following: Apho. 38. Lib. 6.
saying that it is not good to cure all inward cancres: for when they are
cured, they do soon perish again, but when they are not cured they remain
a long time. For experience has taught us, as Galene witnesses in his
commentary upon this Aphorism, that they which enterprise the cure of these
cancres either by section or vstion, do rather increase their fury then abate
it, whereby they shortly destroy those men, who^ this evil has attached.
Those cancres therefore are only curable which do stick in the outward part
of the body, and which are exulcerate, and do so weary the sick, that they
willingly desire the diligence of the chyrurgian: and these tumors also do
consist in those parts, which a man may cut and sear of hard by the roots.
Now when I name the roots of cancer, What cancre must be rotted out, and
what not.
I mean as Galene affirms, those veins which are full of melancholic
blood, and which every way are extended toward the places lying about the
tumor. But of an vnulcerate cancre, there often proceeds an vlcerate tumor,
when as in process of time, the humor does putrify, and the disease is
couched in the vessels of the body, or else when it is stirred and made worse
by medicines unadvisedly ministered. This exulcerate cancre of all others is
thought to be most vile, An exulcerate cancre worst of all.
because it does altogether resist that true cure, which attempteth and
works all things to bring the sick member unto health, for this tumor, to
cure it perfitly and absolutely, does require gnawing, sharp, and vehement
medicines: howbeit by such remeadies, as we have said, it is the more provoked
and stirred to anger, and therefore it cannot be, that it should either be
lenified, or cured by them. It shall therefore be sufficient to hinder the
increasing of vnulcerate cancres, which as yet do occupy the outward parts
of the body, especially those which be great and inueterate, with drawing our
skill from any perfect cure, which thing Hippocrates also has admonished us of
in his former Aphorism. For those tumors which do weary the sick without
exulceration, What things do foretell exulceration.
Galene also has called them secret and inward cancres wherein both their
vehement heat, and their great pulse or beating do threaten or foretell
exulceration to ensue. The cure of a cancre which is not yet vlcerate, but
newly begone, has three principal intentions. 1. The first is to stop the
generation of the melancholic humor. Curatio cancri non vlcerati.
2. The second is to empty out the melancholious humor dispersed throughout
the whole body. 3. The third is to digest the humor which possesses the
affected member, and to strengthen, and confirm the diseased place. Primus
scopus.
The first intention is finished by a just and due observation of that kind of
diet, which is before prescribed in the chapter de scirrho legitimo. But among
other things this is chiefly and principally to be observed, (namely) that
such nourishment be given to the diseased, as have virtue to refrigerate and
moysten, Victus ratio tenuis sit and probi succi.
and which do engender good and slender juice: as are these the juice of
bareley steyped in water and pressed, fishes of grauelly places, birds of all
kinds, save those which live in fenny grou^des, the yolks of eggs, but
especially of rere eggs, (which the Grecians call (...)) and other things of
that sort. But if any extreme heat shall infest the aggreaued place, and yet
without a fever, you may safely give him bullockes milcke, from the which the
butter is taken, or else the whey of milk. Potherbes also, which have a cool
and moist nature, as mallows, orage, spinache, and when time serves gourdes:
citrons also and borage may be given him in meat. The second scope (which is
to purge the whole body from that melancholicke humor, Secundus s^opus.

Humoris melancholi^^^ ac^ratio.

Epithymum.


whereof this evil proceeds) is accomplished by the applying of purging
medicines which are appointed to euacuate melancholy, whereof you may find
plenty in the chapter of scirrhus: among the which epithymum (which the
Romans cal^ inuolucrum) as a present remedy does obtain the pre-eminence,
whereof you must take four drammes styeped in the whey of milk or in mulsa,
(as Galene commands lib. 14. meth. med. But this quantity of epithymum, or
somewhat more, must be offered every third day, that the melancholic
humor, which is gathered together in the veins, and causes the generation
of cancre, may by little and little be emptyed and purged out, because it is
impossible to euacuate all at one time. But we cannot always prohibit the
flux, least afterward the like humor be engendered in the body, and compact
together in the veins. The purging therefore of the antecedent matter must be
attempted at the beginning, as it were by turns, by the applying of some
simple medicine: afterward, (if the matter so requires and the ministering of
simples does little avail) you may use the help of some compound remedies, as
is that medicine of Galene dedicated for the purging of melancholy, which
consists of two and thirty simples, or hiera Ruffi, Hiera Ruffi Hiera
A^icennae.
or hiera A^icennae, which is made of black helleborus. But you must not
desist from those former rehearsed purgations, until the whole melancholious
humor which is stuffed in the veins, be brought out, and until the member
which is beset with this cancrous tumor, be thorowghly reduced to his natural
state. But if nothing do let it, as age and strength, it shall not be amiss
in these cancres to let blood, Sanguinis ^ussio.

Lib. 14. meth. medendi.


and then to purge (as we have said before:) and if they be women, you must
labor to purge menstruys, if they be not above fifty years old (as Galene
has taught us lib. 2. ad Glauconem.) This second indication (says Galene) is
the first and chief of all, for that which is put in the first place, does
rightly chaleng the second degree. The general manifestation therefore (says
he) of the cure of a cancre, consists in the spedie emptying out of that
humor whereof this evil grows, and in the prohibition and stopping thereof,
and to foresee, (if it be possible,) that this melancholious humor be not
collected in the veins by the means of another. But if that thing cannot be
brought to pass, you must euacuate the humor by turns now some and then
some, and you must also endeavor to strengthen the member, least the
abundance of the humors do plentifully flow unto it. 3. The third
intention, which is general to all such diseases coming of the flowing of
humors, T^rtius scopus.
does will us to digest the humor, which lurketh in the affected member, and
to roborate the same, least the humors abundantly have access thereunto:
moreover you must appoint a convenient time to repel that which is flowen, and
that truly in the beginning, as well in the very time of purging, as before,
but now, when the whole body is thoroughly purged, then may you lawfully
endeavor to digest, and if there went before but a small and mean purging,
then you must apply some remedy which has a mixed faculty, that is to say,
Quod (...) cancris.
which can both repress and digest. Now, that we may justly accomplish these
intentions, we must make choice of those medicines, which are of a mean force,
and of a gentle quality, for such remedies are most convenient for these
diseases. For those which carry with them a weak and feeble power do work no
effect (as Galen says) but are easily overcome: Lib. 14 There.
but such remedies as are strong and mighty, do vehemently either digest or
thrust back the thin blood which lies in the veins: but the gross and
melancholic parts, which we have likened before to the dregs of wine, they
neither purge forth nor repress: but rather do make them more obstinate and
more hard to be dissolved and discussed. Therefore to cure these cancres, but
yet beginning, you must use medicines of a mean and moderate strength, which
neither their imbecillitie can be vanquished, nor for the vehemency can
mightily thicken the blood. Furthermore you must apply (as it is said) such
medicines as are gentle and which do not gnaw or bite: because the malignitie
of the evil through such vehement medicines is stirred, and provoked, and made
more fierce and savage (as we commonly term it.) But when the matter, whereof
these cancres do come, is for the most part gross and thick and disobedient
to resolution, and partener also with many other vicious humors, we shall
deal sufficiently in this case (especially, when we fear the danger of
chirurgie, and that the evil cannot otherwise be cured) if we by the use of
the former remedies, which are made of burnt and washed metalles (as Galene
counsels) shall stop and hinder their growing and increasing, especially, if
they be great tumors: or else after the opinion of Auicene, if we seek to
defend them from vlceration. For the which intentions, Galene lib. 2. ad
Glaucon. does greatly commend the juice of nightshade, and that medicine which
is made of pompholygos, Su^^^s solani. Diaphompholygos.

(...) ^enicon s^^ ^ma Vnguentum (...)


or that which consists of chalcites commonly called diapalma. Therefore
Theodoriticus also for the same purpose, appointed the ointment named
diapompholygos, which is made of oil of roses, of white wax. ana..v. of the
juice of red pomegranates, and of nightshade. ana..iiij. of ceruse washed..ij.
of lead burnt and washed, of pompolygos, which is commonly called tuthia,
ana..j. of franckensence..ss. Galene also reports libro primo de compositione
pharmacorum secundum locos, which book is entitled of the ancient
interpreter myamis, a certain ointment invented of Apollonius for ulcers
appearing in the head, which the Greeks call achorae, which ointment he
affirms to be very effectual against these cancrous tumors. Arp^^^^
medicamentum.
The medicine is this.. of oil of roses, or of unripe olyues, hemina, which
the Greeks call cotyle vidz..vij.ss. which must be infused or put into a
leaden mortar, and stirred up and down with a leaden ladle, or else brayed
with a leaden pestill so long till it waxes thick and black, resembling the
very color of lead: then beat by the self alone, of lythargirum, lib. 1. of
ceruse as much, and commixe them with the oil, and make an ointment. Moreover
how great the force of lead is in all such cancrous dispositions, especially
that which is burnt and washed: The force of lead it marvelous in cancrous
tumors. Paulus lib. 4. (...) archigene.
all men may sufficiently know, which have had some experience thereof, and
which have studeouslie perused those things which Galene libro nono de
simplicium medicamentorum facultate does write of lead, which he himself
calls in Greek molybdos. For this cancrous disease Paulus and Auicene do
greatly commend the emplaister made of sea crabbes, especially if it be
mingled with an equal quantity of the scouringes of brass. Take therefore of
sea crabbes burned, and of the off all of brass an even portion, beat them to
flower, and straw them upon the tumor, or else lay on the ashes of the
crabbes with a searce cloth or cerate. But the same Auicene wills to pluck
up these little cancres hard by the roots, or else to cut them of, and then to
wring and crouse out the thick blood on every side, and afterward to sear
the place with some hot instrument. For this does dissipate the relictes of
the matter, and consumes them, it strengthens the member and stops the
flux of blood. Galene also before Auicene his time, did allow that cancres
might sometime be cured by chirurgie. Lib. 14. Meth. med.
But truly although Galene and Auicene do permit this manuell cure by
chirurgie: yet to avoid the danger of immoderate flux of blood, and of
vlceration, yea and of the life of the sick, omitting those things, we ought
to follow that prescript rule of curing, Surgery not rashly to be used in
cancres.
which is only accomplished by gentle and mild medicines, as a more safe way
and less troublesome, and to content our selves with that only method:
because that if such a cancrous tumor, which is grown to a mighty bigness,
should be cut round about in those places, which are joined to the whole parts,
the danger of immoderate profusion of blood would straightway follow, by
reason of the greatness of the vessels and wideness of the arteries, which
parts (says Galene) if you should take up and bind them with cords, the
other members by reason of their near acquaintance would be troubled and
greatly grieved. Moreover Celsus says, Lib. 5.
that although carcinomata be cut of, and brought to a scarre, yet they will
return again, and give occasion of death. But if you intend to sear of the
roots of this evil, yet truly you cannot do this neither without hurting of
the next parts, especially if you make exustion near unto the principal
members. Great cancres therefore, and those which are inueterate, must neither
rashly be burned with any instrument, nor cut of with a penknife, but rather
handled gently and mildly (as we have said before.) For many men not by the
applying of any forcible or vehement medicines to take away this evil, but by
the only ministering of easy and gentle remedies, which can as it were please
or delight, have so hindered these tumors, that they could not attain unto
any perfect age or rypenesse. Now follows the sum of the cure of Cancer non
vlceratus, which is yet but beginning, Capita curationis Cancri non vlcerati.
and does occupy the outward parts of the body, briefly in these words. 1.
Imprimis in a canker which is but newly begone, and which consists of noe
very thick humor, nor causes the veins to swell greatly: purge out the
melancholicke humor which causes Pompholygos, or that which consists of
Calcites, commonly called Diapalma, and oath remeadies of that sort. 9. But if
by the art of chyrurgie you dare enterprise the cure of Cancer, you must first

Libri quinti finis.
THE SIXTH BOOK TEACHES THE FORM AND RVLE OF MAKING REMEDIES AND MEDICINNES
WHICH OUR PHYSICIANS DO COMmonly use at this day, and to know after what sort
their proportion and quantity is distributed and noted with the names of each
Medicine.
CAP. I. Of Suppositaries.
A Suppositary is a remedy whole, long and round, which is put into the
fundament, that it may avoid the pricking, and move and provoke the virtue
expulsive to the avoiding of the excrements co^post, or ordure. We do use
Suppositaries especially for three causes: the first is for bringing out of the
ordure, which when it lies in the right bowell, it requires no clister: the
second cause is, when one or two clisters have been put into the body, and do
not come out again at the fundament, as it does chance in passions of the
colic, the^ it is very perilous to put in other clisters: the third cause is,
when the sick person is so weak, that he may better suffer a suppositary the^
a clister. A suppositary is made of honey that is boiled so long, til it does
wax thick and hard, oftentimes common salt is mixed with the honey: A
suppositarie to bring forth the ord^re.
but if you will make it more sharp and quick, take salt gemme, the dongue of
a mouse, agaricke, or else hiera simplex.. a Suppotary made of honey, which if
you think so weak that it will not move the compost or ordure, ad to these
following.. a common suppositary of sharp honey, ckmon salt..ss. or of salt
gemme..ss. or of mouse dongue..ss. or.j. or of hiera simplex..ss. Also make
suppositaries of white soap, tallow of beasts, fat of bacon, candles, the
stalks of beats or mercury, or their roots anointed with oil or honey, and
strewed with powder of salt specially for children and sucking babes, A
suppositarie against the ^urmes called L^^brici.
for whom one corn of salt put in is sufficient.. time, or cyclaminum, or
wormwood, or sothernwood, sta^ped in a mortar..j. or ss. of boiled honey so much
as suffiseth, and make a suppositary. Suppositaries are good against the Palsy
made of pellitory, pepper, napy (that is a kind of rapes called a nauew)
centorie, bitumen (that is a kind of of lime) the root of panax, hysope,
galbanum mixed with dry rosen, or pitch and wax. Let a suppositary be round
and 6.7. or 8. fingers in length. We do use no Suppositaries to them which have
the hemorhoides, or any other swellings in the fundament.

CAP. II. Of making Nodulus.
NODVL^ be those which are called of Aetius in Greek (...), they are good for
those which have clefts and swellings in the fundament. These do avoid and
take away the hardness of suppositaries, because sometime we are compelled to use
flocks in their steedes, their matter is the same that suppositaries be..
flocks mingled or beaten with honey, and put it into the tuell, and truly that
nodulus is best and sweetest which is made of salt and the white of an egg in
cloth or wol, made in the form of a bean, and put it into the tuel with a
thread hanged at the end, that it may be drawn out again.

CAP. III. Of mabing Pessaries.
A Pessarie is a medicine which is made of soft woll, or such like thing, and
it is put into the priuities of women. The figure or shape of it is like a
suppositary, but that it is longer and thicker, because it must be put into the
womb. It is made of wax, or of cloth or cotton, or of lint first dipped and
wet in oyntme^t, or in a medicine meet and convenient for the cure. Afterward
wind them in silk, and hang a thread thereon, that it may be drawn out the
more easily. It is put into the tuell and into the womb, to cease the
inflammations and ulcers of them both. Privately it is put into the womb to
provoke the menstruis and the secundine, or to stop immoderate flux of
menstruis or to mollify the hardness of the womb, or to cure other diseases of
the womb.. a pessarie dipped and wet in vnguentum rosatum, and put it into the
place. To cease inflammation.
To this sometime is added opium, that is, where the inflammation causes great
pain. Opiu^ by his coldness makes astonished, therefore his quantity ought to
be small, as from half a scruple to a scruple, and let it be holden a little
time, least through his coldness the parts which are senowy be not hurt. It
therefore may be holden half an hour.. a pessary dipped and wet in vnguentum
pompholygos, put it into the tuell, To dry ulcers.
or into the matrice that is grieved. Pessaries to bring forth menstruis are
made otherwise. The medicines are taken in silk cloth, that is as thin as
sindall, and let the form and fashion be thicker, To bring forth menstruis.
which may bring out with his power, as thus.. hierapicra composita..j. of
euphorbium, and the apple of coloquintida. ana..ss. mix them and make a
pessarie. Anoint it with oleum nardinum, or with the juice of herbs that
provoke menstruis. Such pessaries be made oftentimes of brayed herbs provoking
menstruis, as,. mercury, neppe, or mugworte or sothernewood. M.ss. braie them
and roll them in silk, and make a pessarie. If the menstruis have endured
with swelling and pain, first make a bath, for that does mollify and moist,
the paunch ought first to be emptied and the bladder to be vnloden, because the
matrice is in the mids between them: for these being filled, and pressing
the matrice, the menstruys for overmuch straitnes, may be retained, and made
slow in coming out. If immoderate menstruis do flow, do thus.. a pessarie wet
in vnguentum comitissae, and put it into the matrice, or thus.. of plantaine or
knotgrasse, or brere, or mirte, or other, To mollify the hardness of the womb.
that can stop menstruis. M.ss. braie them and role them in silcke and make a
pessarie. Pessaries mollifiyng may be made of the marrow of a calfe, and a
heart, of rosen, terebinthine, fatness of a gose, or porke, and of gum
armoniacke dissolved in water.

CAP. IIII. Of Clysters or Enema.
A Clyster or Enema, is a kind of medicine the which is cast and put into the
bowels by the fundament liquid and thin, and it is profitable for eight
things. 1. to mollify the womb restrained with hardness. 2. to provoke the
violence detestable and astonished. 3. To avoid any kind of humors. 4. To put
away ventosities. 5. To cease dolours and pains. 6. To bind and restrain the
belly. 7. To make clean ulcers of the guts or bowelles. 8. To make sound
the same. There may be also added to alter or change: as here follows.. of
lettuce, scarioll, restrum percinum, leaves of sallowe. ana. M.j. flowers of
violettes, and nenuphar. ana. p.j. make a decoction of one pound, in the
strayning let one ounce of Casia fistula be dissolved, oil of violettes and of
nenuphar. ana..j.ss. camphire..j. and make a clyster.. the four kinds of
remollitiues, or mollificatiues, A clyster mollificatiue.
pellitarie of the wall. ana. M.ss. the roots of the mallows called althea,
and white lillies. ana..j. seed of flax, fenugreke, and anyse. ana..ss. of
fat figs. 4. make a decoction of lb.j. in weight. In the strayning thereof
dissolve therein Casia fistula, mel violatum, and fresh butter. ana..j. oil of
violets..iij. and make a clister. If you will make a clister mollificatiue
lacking the things aforesaid do thus.. of oil made warm. lb.j. and make
thereof a clyster, or thus.. oil and fresh butter. ana. lb.ss. and make a
clyster.. the four remollitiues. ana. M.j. seed of Carthamum..j. of anyse, A
clyster provoking and making void the violence astonished.
fennel, and careum. ana..iij. and make a decoction of. lb.j. and in the
straining dissolve hiera simplex, or benedicta, or diaphenicon, or electuariu^
de succo, or electuariu^ Indi maioris..ss. of clarified honey, or juice of
squill..j. or common salt..ij. or salt ge^me. ^j. or..ss. Many do add to
clysters..j. of the juice of beetes, which do move and griue the belly, or
juice of beetes and coleworts. ana..ss. of common salt..ij. or.j. which bite
and gnaw the belly, or less, but the just weight, must be as you conjecture
to be easy or hard for the sick. Also such a clister expulsing the
detestable faculty or matter, may very well be made only of honey, or honey
with juice of squilla, or other things decoct. And if that the virtue
expulsive be astonyed and dull through the hardness of the ordure, then make a
clister partly of mollificatiues, and partly of expulsiues aforesaid. Clisters
which avoid humors are made so, A clister (...) humors.
that they vary according as the humors differ. For when the humor is gross
and cold, evil disposing the bowels, let it be made thus.. the four
remollitiues. ana. M.j. cammomill, the tops of dill, organ, calamint,
sothernwoode. ana. M.ss. anyse, careum, comin, ameos, seseleos. ana..ss.
bearies of laurel, seed of rue. ana..ij. make a decoction. In the strayning
dissolve catholicon, and diaphenicon. ana..ss. or diaphenicon, or
benedicta..vj. or of both..ss. of red sugar, and mel anthos. ana..iij. or..ss.
oil of dill and cammomill. ana. quar. ss. or oil of rue..j. oil of dill..ij.
or oil of lillies..ij. make a clister. If ventositie be present, add
carmmatiues, if pain be present, take a medicine releasing grief by provoking
sleep, as hereafter shall appear by axamples. If a choleric and gnawing
humor must be brought out with a clister, then let the clister be made of such
things as will avoid that humor, and mix it partly with such helps as do
cease inflammation, as thus.. mallows, bismallowes, violets, pellitorie of the
wall, endive, succorie, lettuce, purslaine. ana. M.j. and if there be so much
need of coldness, take the four great cold seeds bruised. ana..iij. or.ss. of
whole barley. p.j. make a decoction of one pound. In the straining dissolve
casia fistula, and common sugar. ana..j. the white of one egg or two, oil of
roses or of violets, or common oil. quar. j. make a clister. If such a passion
comes of a meladcholike humor, make it thus.. the four mollificatiues, the
leaves of buglosse and borage, the tops of dill, lupuli, and fumitorie. ana.
M.j. melilote and chammomill. ana. M.j. seed of charthamum, and polipodie of
the oak. ana..j. annise, and fennel. ana..ss. make a decoction. In the
strayning dissolve hiera ruffi, which is not in use, or confectio hamech.ss. or
catholicon..j. red sugar, or mel rosatum, or violets..j. oil of dill, lillies,
and violets ana..j. make a clister.. mallows, A cl^ster to put and drive away
vent^si^^es.
bismaluae, pellitorie of the wall, organie, calamint, ca^momill the tops of
dill. ana. M.j. of anyse, carecum, comin and fennill. ana..ss. or..vj. of
laurel bearies..ijj. or.ss. seed of rue..ij. or iij. and make a decoction. In
the strayning dissolve benedicta, or diaphenicon, or electuartum indi maioris
which we do not use here.ss. confection of laurel bearies..iij. or..ss. red
sugar..j. oil of dill, cammomil and rue ana..j. make a clister. Into these
clisters which put away ve^tosities, oiles of nuts is holsom to put in, and
also (as Galen says) vinum maluaticum cretense may well be mixed with such a
clister as is aforesaid. The signs of ventosities and wind contained in the
bowels, be often farting and noise in the guts, because it chances as often as
burbles are broken in the bowels. Bowels wherein be burbles (as Galene teaches
Particula 2. Aphorism. strangulati nondu^s moriui etc.) be caused of air shut
and enclosed with the humor. A clyster to cease pains.
Clisters to cease pains are made many ways, for if the cause be a hot
gnawing humor, the example is showed before by cold things, where he entreats
of a clyster to avoid humors, if the pain be of a cold cause, take the same
that is given against ventositie last before, if the pain do come of more
causes, make a clyster of many of those things, which are meet for the causes,
and when the cause of the pain is not known, make it thus:. flowers of
cha^momill, mellilote, the tops of dill, ana. p.ij. make a decoction in
milcke. In the strayning dissolve therein white sugar because the red is
biting and pricking..j.ss. whytes of eggs.ij. oil of dill and chammomill.
ana. quar. ss. and make a clyster, or thus:. oil of cammomill dill and
violettes. ana..iij. cast it in with a clyster, and when we want such oil, we
make it of quar. iij. or. lb.j. of oil olyue.. milk sodden. quar. iij. or.
lb.j. amylum sieve amydum..ss. or..j. at the most, A clyster restrayning.
gum arabicke or Tragacanch or both a little burnte. ana..ss. or..j. or..ij.
bole armoniacke and Sanguis Draconis. ana..ij. oil of roses and cammomill.
ana..j.ss. make a clyster.. the iuyces of plantayne, Arnoglossa, (that is) a
kind of plantaine, knottegrasse and purslayne: A clyster profitable against a
hot humor gnawing in the bowels.
let these iuyces be cleansed either by seething or residence, take of all
these, or of one of these, as much as suffices for a clyster adding of the
powder aforesaid, and with those oils make a clyster. Note, that when there
is need, then you may make clysters of those herbs sodden, or of the waters
distilled out of them adding rose water, as.. the water of Arnoglossa, of
plantayne, of roses, of purslayne, of knottegrasse, as much as suffiseth, and
dissolve some of the aforesaid things therein. It is to be noted that
sometime there are put into the aforesaid decoctions, seeds and fruictes
that be stypticke to make hard and to bind, so that they lack sharpness,
because else they would prick, provoke, and expulse, therefore we can mix
together, the seeds of mirte sorrel, of purslayne, plantayne, cypress,
cauda equina, horsetayle and such like. Moreover note, that oil must never be
put into clysters, if the bowelles be vlcerate, as they be in Dysenteria,
(which is a flux in the body) yet many do neglect that, not knowing that
oil is an enemy to ulcers (as Galene entreats 3. and 4. Methodi.) Truly
wine is a special friend, the cream or curde of a hare or goat in
weight..iij. Sorbus, prunes, meddlars, quinces, ana..ij. more or less do
restrain and bind.. whole bareley. p.ij. of red roses and commomill, A
cl^ster is secure and cleanse vlcer^ in the guts.
and of plantayne if pain be present. ana. p.j. make a decoction. In the
strayning dissolve therein Mel rosatum..j. the white of one egg or two, make a
clyster. Such a clyster is to be given always before clysters restrayning,
bynding and consolydating, by means whereof the thing is made prompte and
easy. A clyster consolidating is made when the filthynesse of the bowelles is
not purged and tried out, because that is deadly, A clyster ^nconsolidating
(that is) making ^^unde of vlcer^.
and therefore there needs no clyster, but that prognosticating is
sufficient.. juice of plantayne, Arnoglossa, and purceslayne. ana..iij. of bole
armoniacke, Sanguis Draconis, and Amylum. ana..j.ss. or the tallow of a male or
female goat..j. or.j.ss. and make a clyster. And because goats tallowe,
cannot well dissolve, but almost always it congealeth and hardens together
in the bowelles of the sick. Therefore it may be and ought to be dissolved
with a little oil of roses, and then it need not to be feared for ulcers.
Also oyntmentes consolidating (as is vnguentum album) sometime are made liquide
and mixed, and specially, when the ulcers be nigh, or in the great guts.
Sometime in the steed of iuyces may clysters be made of milcke very well for
his whey portion, which does restrain and consolydate. Oftentimes both in
these and in restraining clysters, the whites of eggs hard sodden are
dissolved. And thus finisheth the making and use of clysters or Enema.

CAP. V. Of making Syruppes.
A Syrup is of medicines, a juice with sugar or honey molten therein, decoct
and boiled unto the measure of that sagar. Practicioners do put a double
understanding in syrupes, (that is) simplex, which is called usual, and
compositum, which is called magistrall. Simples or vsualles be these, sirupes
of violettes, roses, of endive, of nenuphar, of maydenheare, of wormwood, of
mynts, oxymell squilliticum, syrup of eupatorie, of epithymum, and of
byzantijs. They are called simples, as well because they consist in one simple
medycine, as also because they are ordained for one sickness and one use.
Syrupus compositus which is called magistrall, is compounded of diverse
medicines, being good for sundry diseases, as in example: if any man compound
together Syrup of wormewoode and stechados being taken in even portion or
quantity, there would come thereof a Syrup good for the stomach, because of
the wormewoode, and good for the head because of the stechados. A Syrup is
good and profitable to digest humors before a purgation, that they may the
easier and better obey the purgation. Therefore they are used of many
Physicians to be given before medicines, although we have not read, that old
practisers did observe it, but they did commit the digestion of humors wholly
to nature. Look the comment. Aphorism. 9. lib. 2. when any man will purge the
body, it behooves to make it flowing. Truly Hippocrates would do thus,
saying, that the concoct and digest matter ought to be healed and moved, and
not the crude and raw matter. And Galene ad Glauconem. lib. 1. speaking of the
cure of Tertiana notha, would not have worm wood to be given till the
seventh day. Therefore it does appear for a truth, that syrupes ought rather
to be given for the humors left after a purgation, then for their digestion
and coction. But many do observe and use, that humors being gross, clammie,
and viscous, may by syrupes that do attenuate, cut and divide, be preparate
and made easy to avoiding and purging they call this digesting of humors.
Cold and cleaving humors are preparate with syrupes that be hot cutting and
scouring, as to digest reumie matter, such as is a fever Quotidian, and to
prepare it to the purging.. the five roots apperitiue, A syrup digesting of
re^^y matter.
made clean and tempered in vinegre four hours. ana..ss. or.iij or the
ryndes of the five roots, orygan calamint, hysope betonie and germander. ana.
M.ss. of anyse and fennel. ana..ss. of raysons the stones pulled out..iij both
the stechados. ana. p.j. make a decoction. In the strayning dissolve of good
honey. quar. iij. of white sugar..iiij. make a syrup perfectly sodden.
minister three sponfull, with double as much of water of liquorace or with
ptysan or withwater of raysons or anyse. Humors that be moveable and thin,
must be preparate to the avoiding and purging by syrupes that do make thick
and let the moving, A syrup against thin and moveable humors.
which humors if they be carried to the ways of expulsion, or be kept and
contained in the ways and conduytes by which an apt and ready expulsion may
be made of them, then they may be avoided without any preparatiue. But if those
humors be restrained and kept out of the places aforesaid, then they shall be
rectified and remedied with cold syrupes, the making whereof does follow..
syruppes of purcelaine, A syrup to make humors gross and thick. Iulep.
sorrel, endive, nenupharis, of rybes, of barberies, of agresta, of quinces,
of roses, take of one of these or more..vj. minister it with double as much of
well water sodden: there may also conveniently be made a iulep in this wise..
syrupes of roses, purcelayne and sorrel ana..j.ss. or.ij. water of roses,
Arnoglossa, succorie or endive, or purcelaine or sorrel. ana..ij. water sodden
or burnte, specially if flux of the belly be present..vj. make a iulep
clarified, and aromatized with.ij. of cynnamon elect. Furthermore if those
humors do not make and cause flux of the belly, Note.
but being inflamed do begin a fever, then neither syrupes stipticke, nor
waters are to be used, but rather cold syrupes lacking stipticitie, as be
syrupes of endive, purslaine, violettes, of nimphea called water lillies, of
maidenhaire. But if we do suppose that there ought to be a greater
extinguishing and quenching, that the rotten matter may be driven out the more
easily, we do use cold sharp syrupes, as be Syrupus acetosus simplex, which
is put in both causes as well hoate as cold. Also oxizaccharum simplex, and
Syrupus de acetositate citri, and of lymons, which if the flux diarrhaea be
present, being raised and caused of such hot humors, then syrupes that be
acetose and sharp are not to be ministered, because they excoriate, raze, and
slay, but syrupes of ribes, barberies, quinces, and juice of sorrel may be
suffered and given, because they have but mean sharpness and acetositie. But
against hot humors make potions or syrupes magistrall in this wise.. Endive
that is young or new set, and not grown long, wash it not, adiantum,
maidenhaire, succorie, puslaine, lettuce, singreene, scarioll, plantaine, of
all, or of some of them two or three. ana. M.ij. the four great cold seeds.
ana..iij. the root of succorie, the root of sorrel, of gramen and nightshade
(that is) the less morrell, called Solatrum. ana..ss. or.iij. make a
decoction, to which may be added the juice of the herbs before written,
cleansed so much, and half so much, or half as much more as the third part of
the decoction. In one pound of the strayning dissolve sugar taberzet..vj. of
wine of pomegranates..j.ss. or vinegre..ss. make a syrup clarified and
aromatised with..ij. of white saunders or red or both. ana..j. But if thou will
make the syrup perfectly concoct and sodden, ad to sugar, and let it be
sodden to the perfection that it may be kept. The use and ministration must be
with double as much of some licour as water sodden, water of lycorace, or the
water of some of the herbs aforesaid distilled, yet I do not much praise and
allow the use of distilled waters. But if the syrup be not perfectly boiled
(as is showed in the first example) it must be given by it self, and without
the administration of any thing else, neither shall the iuyces be put in, which
should be put in, A syrup for melancholy humors.
in a syrup perfectly sodden. Like forms and uses may be made of syrupes,
rectifying or digesting cold matter. Syrup of Epithimum, syrup of fumitarie,
which is made two ways: one way is of the only decoction or juice of
fumitorie, and then it is Syrupus de fumiterrae simplex: another way is
according to the description of Mesuae, and such a syrup has mirabolanes,
cassia, and many other things, which syrup is called compound, for that cause,
syrup of buglosse, syrup of borage, syrup of Hearts tongue, which opens and
loses the stoppinges of the spleen, and syrup of violets because it
moisteneth very much.

The simple medicines, wherewith these syrupes are compounded, be these, borage
and buglosse, fumitorie, lupulus, Epithimum, and such like, that do help and
aid the digestion of such an humor. Out of the aforesaid things, may be made
syrupes, potions, and Iuleps, decoct and boiled to the satisfying of these
intentions and meanings. Oftentimes there be made syrupes laxatiue for the
purging and avoiding of marter that is reumie and filthy, and also
melancholic matter, when long continuing diseases be bred of them, partly to
the digestion of raw matter or humors, and partly to the avoiding and purging
of humors, which be rotten or half rotten, as is in long feauers.

. the toote of Apium, fennel and parsley scraped and made clean, ana..iij, of
hysope, A s^rupe (...) matters, and fever: Nothae.
origan and calamint. ana. M.ss. of seed of Carthamum..iij. green polipodie
of the oak..ij. of annise, fennel and dill. ana..j.ss. of liquorace
scraped..iij. of raisons, the stones pulled out..ss. of the three cordial
flowers. ana. p.j. make a decoction strained to lb.j. or. lb.j.ss. in the which
infuse now trochiskes of Agaricke..j.ss. leaves of seane cleansed..ij. after
ten hours make a straining, wringing it strongly, whereto add syrup of
violets, syrupi de bizantijs, and white sugar. ana..iiij. make a syrup
perfectly sodden and aromizate with.j. of cinnamon elect, and with one
syrup..j. ^iloaloes. The dross of this syrup by means of the things that
are put into it, maybe..j.ss. which also the fourth or fifth day, may be given
with double as much of hydromell (that is) water and honey sodden together, or
aqua mulsa, or of some other docoction. By like means may the laxatiues
entering into this present syrup be increased or deminished by reason of the
quantity making of the syrup, for this present syrup is ordained for 6. or
7. or mo doses, therefore the form and fashion of the proportions being kept,
it may be made for 1.2.3. or more doses. Moreover by like reason, a syrup
laxatiue is made, for matter choleric and filthy (as one would say)
vitelline, the which causes fevers hard to be eradicate and taken away.

. the roots of Apium, and of fennel cleansed and scraped and tempered in
vinegre one nights space. ana..ss. of hysope, maidenhaire, adiantum,
politricum, A syrup laxatiue against filthy colerick matter.
some call it wall fern, Hearts tongue, endive, succorie. ana. M.ss. or M.j.
the four great cold seeds bruised. ana..ij. or.iij. Raisons the stones
pulled out..ss. the three cordial flowers. ana. p.j. make a decoction in the
which infuse agaricke newly made in Trochiskes..vj. the leaves of seen made
clean..j. in the straining dissolve syrup of maidenhaire and violets.
ana..iij. of white sugar..iiij. make a syrup perfectly boiled putting in, in
the end of the strayning of it..ss. of rewbarbe elect. infused as it ought to
be, which thing after it be strayned, let it boil on a soft fire without flame
or smoke unto the perfection of the decoction: the dos of it is..ij. or.j.ss,
with double as much of the decoction of endive, and succorie, or liquorice, or
with double as much of whey made of goats milk. This syrup is for 5. or.6.
Doses. And if the first dos will not satisfy your intent, then you must
dissolve somewhat therein that has power to purge the humor that thou would
have brought out: as in example.. of the syrupes aforsaid..j.ss. of whey made
of goats milk..iij. make a dose. And if thereof do not follow theffect that
you look for, ad thereto either of casia fistula..ss. or of diae pruuis
laxatine..j. or.ij. or diaphenicon..j.ss. or also some rewbarbe. You may also
do the same in the example of the syrup made to avoid Reume.

A syrup against melancholy.
the iuyces of lupuli (that is) hops, and of fumitorie, but it is unpleasant,
of buglosse, of borage, and of sweet apples cleansed. ana..iij. or ij. Let them
be twice cleansed, either by decoction and clarifying, or by residence of green
polipodie of the oak..ij. or.iij. of fat Tamarindes..j. of Epythimum Cretensis
put in the end of the decoction..ij. of adiantum, hartistongue, and the three
cordial flowers. ana. p.j. make a decoction strayned to quar. iij. in the
which infuse the leaves of seen made clean..iij. make a strayning, and mix it
with the aforesayed iuyces: afterward add thereto, syrup of violettes..vj.
syrupes of buglosse and sugar taberzet. ana..iij. make a syrup perfectly
sodden, and aromatizate with..j. of cinnamon, and.j. of white ginger scraped.
The dose is two ounces with water of buglosse, or hoppes, or fumitorie, or whey
made of milk.

CAP. VI. Of making Iuleps.
A IVLEP does not much differ from a syrup, but that it is less boiled then
a syrup is, and because also it is made without the permixtion of any other
decoction with it, as syrupes are wont to have when they be made. Iuleppes are
made either of water of infusion or distillation, or else of the juice of some
simple medicine, as thus.. of the water of infusion of roses, or the water of
infusion of violettes..v. sugar..iiij. boil it easily, and make a Iulep:
minister it with twice or thrice as much of sodden water made cold again. Or
thus,. water of roses..viij. of sugar..iiij. boil them easily and make a
Iulep: Or thus,. the juice of roses, or the juice of violettes..vj.
Sugar..iiij. boil them easily and make a Iulp. Likewise Iuleppes may be made
of other things, that do either make warm and hoate, or that do open and
loose, or that do restaine and bind. But yet Physicians commonly do call a
syrup, dissolved in sodden water, a Iulep, saying.. syrup of roses, or the
syrup of violettes, or syrup of maidenhaire, or of any other syrup..iij. of
sodden water. lb.ss. mix them together, and make a Iulep.

CAP. VII. Of Dolis, sieve Potio.
DOLIS otherwise called Potus, or Potio, is a medicine laxatiue dissolved in
some kind of licour and given in drink. There be of this many differences,
because of the diversity of humors that they void and purge. The simple
medicines do purge and bring forth rewme or fleume, as be these, Agaricke,
Turbyth, Carthamus, colocynthis, and other often sought out by Mesue. The
compoundes be Diaphaenicon, in forma opiatae, Diacarthami in the form of
lozenges, electuarium de Citro, Electuarium Indum maius and minus, Benedicta,
and Hiera simplex, Hiera composita, and such like. But these be compounded, not
that they avoid only one humor alone, but being mixed with another humor,
as choler mixed with fleume or melancholy. Medicines are ministered in diverse
fourmes and fashions. As first in the form of a Potion, for one only Dose,
or for one time, in the form of a Bole, whereof shall be spoken hereafter, in
the form of an Eletuarie liquide, as opiatae, whole in form, as lozenges,
in the form of syrupes or Iuleps. The form of a potion.
Also in the form of powder and pills.. Diaphanicon..ss. or.vj. if the sick
be strong, dissolve it with water of the decoction of liquorace, raisons and
annise, as much as suffiseth. Make a dose with syrup of violettes..vj. or.j.
or dissolve it with common strayning, and make a dose, or dissolve it with
Hydromell or dissolve it with certain distilled waters, as waters of hoppes,
Buglosse, succorie, or such like, or dissolve it with the decoction or broth of
a chicken, or with whay of milk, or thus:. the three cordial flowers. ana.
p.j. of prunes damascene, iniubarum, and Sebesten. ana. four in number,
liquorace scraped..j.ss. annise..j. make a decoction strayned for one dose: in
the which dissolve Diaphaenicon..ss. or.vj. syrup of violettes..j. and make a
dose. If you will add to it another Electuarie laxatiue, take of one a
quantity away, and add to as much of another, as where it is said, take of
Diaphaenicon..vj. you may say take of Diaphaenicon and Carthamum. ana..iij. and
so likewise of other.

. raisons the stones pulled out..ss. seed of Carthamum and polipodie of the
oak. ana..ss. or.vj. of annise, fennel, The form of a potion or dose, whose
decoction does avoid certain reume and fleume. Simples to avoid choler.
and liquorace scraped. ana..j.ss. leaves of hysope..j. make a decoction in the
which infuse Agaricke newly trochiscate..j. or.iiij. or.j.ss. In the straining
dissolve Diacarthamum or diaphaenicon, or Benedicta..iiij. or.ss. syrup of
violettes..j. and make a dose. These things avoid choler, juice of roses,
violettes, Tamarindes, manna, diagredion (that is) scammonie preparate,
Psillium, rewbarbe, and myrabolanes. Casia fistula purges as well choler as
reume, juice of roses and ireos do bring forth thin choler and yellowe
water. Compoundes to avoid choler be these Electuarium de succo rosarum,
diaprunis laxatiuum, diaprunis simplex, trochiskes of violettes, Compounds.
which be seeldome in use.

. offat Tamarindes..j. the three cordial flowers. ana. p.ss. liquorice
scraped..j.ss. of prunes damascene. numer.vj. make a decoction in a little
quantity of water, The form of a potio^ ^o sing and resolving choler.
in the which let the Tamarindes be strongly wrong out. In the straining
dissolve casia fistula that is new..j. or.x. make a dose. In the like decoction
you may dissolve..ss. or.vj. of diaprunis simplex with..j.ss. or.ij. of
diaprunis laxatiue. If it be feared that Diagredion will do hurt, and if the
sick be rich, in the steed of Diaprunis laxatiue may be dissolved..j.
or.iiij. or.j.ss. or rewbarbe. Take heed and note, that such a potion is good
in choleric fevers, and in those fevers, in which the frenzy is feared, and
truly it is excellent good, for by it, is eschewed the auersion, and also the
refrigeration and cooling. In the stead of this present decoction and colature,
medicines laxatiue may be dissolved in a common decoction, or with water of
fruits, or with hydromell, or with waters distilled, either with endive,
succorie, hops, or with the broth of a chicken, or with the whey of milk..
raisons, the stones picked out..iij. liquorace scraped, and anise seeds.
ana..j. proines damascene. number. vj. Tamarindes..ss. the three cordial flowers,
succorie, The form of a common (...) in the beginning of choleric fevers
specially in Tertian fevers
young set endive. ana. M.j. make a decoction boiled for one dose, in the which
dissolve new cassia fistula..j. or.vj. after the strayning infuse..j. or.iiij.
or.j.ss, of rubarb elect as it ought to be, of syrup of violets..ss. or.j.
make a dose. Let it be given in the morning before dinner 5. or 6. hours, on
that day that he is least afflicted. If choler be mixed with fleume, by reason
of that mixture, let such things as do loosen choler, and such things as
dissolve reume be mixed together. Spikenarde which is wont always to be joined
with rubarbe, is unpleasant to the belly, for it loseneth opilations and
stopping vehemently. Also it provoke vomit, and in women with child, it
provoke menstruis strongly. Therefore many do think that it ought not to be
mixed with rubarb in medicines, that are given to women with child, or to those
which be apt to vomit. For that cause, if it be mixed.. or 4. grains are
sufficient for.j. of rubarb. For delicate persons which do abhor all medicines,
A dose under the form of a syrup for delicate folk.
make a dose under the form of a syrup for two or three times, or for one
dose after this sort, specially for Tertians exquisite and deintie.. endive
young set, and succorie. ana. M.ss. the three cordial flowers. ana. p.ss.
liquorace scraped..i.ss. proynes damascene vj. in number, fat Tamarindes,.6.
anise..ss. make a decoction boiled to.iij. or else you may make a decoction for
one dose, in which dissolve syrup of violets and endive, ana..vj. or.ss. of
white sugar,.j. the wringing and straining of..ij. of rubarb elect, infused as
it ought to be without spiknard, make a long syrup, that is as it were in the
form of an Apozema (which is a decoction so called of the Greeks and used of
them in steed of our syrupes.) Let it be boiled upon the coals without any
smoke long time together, wringing the rubarb strongly, being bound in a piece
of lynnen cloth, clarify it, and aromizate it, and make a dose of..j.ss. it
may be multiplied for two or three doses (the proportion of all being kept and
observed.) But if you will make a syrup to last long, sees it to the
perfection, and of that syrup minister..j.ss. or.ij. with whey of milk, or
with the decoction that serves for thy purpose. Also you may add some Seen
in the infusion, specially if you do think that choler adust does reign, A
dose against bastardly fevers, specially Tertians.
or if you desire a more full and quick effect of the medicine.. of young set
endive, of succorie, of Adiantum, and of hearts tongue. ana. M.j. the four
great cold seeds. ana..iij. the seed of Carthamum..j.ss. polipodie of the
oak..ij. fat Tamarindes..j.ss. seed of endive, scarioll, and liquorace
scraped. ana..ij. of raisons, the stones plucked out..p. proynes damascene 12.
in number, the three cordial flowers. ana. p.j. make a decoction of lb.j.
or.viij. in the which infuse the leaves of seen cleansed..j.ss. agaricke
newly trochischate..j. In the strayning of the decoction dissolve syrup of
violettes, and maydenhaire syrup. ana..iij. white sugar..ij. make a syrup
boiled upon a leate fire, without smoke, putting into it the strayning of..vj.
of rewbarbe elect, infused as it ought to be, make a syrup perfectly boiled
and aromatizate, with..ss. of cinnamon, and..ij. of red saunders, reserve it in
an earthen or glassen vessel. The dose of the aforesaid syrup shall be the
fourth part of it (that is to say..ij.) the which may be dissolved with whay
of goats milk, or water of the decoction of the common colature, or with the
waters of the decoctions or distations of succorie or endive. But Igorreus,
does not allow distilled waters, And if the aforesaid dose do not
sufficiently move the belly and cause it to be soluble enough: an infusion may
conveniently be added to the second dose..ij. or.j. of rewbarb elect, or some
Diaprunis laxatiue, or Electuarium de succo Rosarum, as in example.. of the
aforesaid syrup..ij. the strayning of two scruples of rewbarbe elect, or
Diaprunis laxatiue..j.ss. or.ij. of whey made of milk..ij. or as much as is
sufficient, and make a dose. It is to be noted that the aforesayed syrup ought
rather to be given and ministered to those that have Tertianae Nothae (that is
bastardly Tertian Fevers) rather then to those that have fevers exquisite,
deintie, and lawful, for these be of fewer fits, and be ended in a short time.
The other be long and of more fittes, so that they remain many times and
often from one Equinoctial to another. To this also the Tertians that be
exquisite and pure, do come, and are caused of sincere and good choler: and
the fevers Nothae and bastardly do come of filthy and vile choler. Here note
also that Carthamus and Agaricke which do avoid and purge reume, the leaves of
seen which do purge melancholy, and also rewbarbe which does purge choler,
may be put together to the aforesaid syrup, whereby the matter that causes
fevers Nothae of long continuance, is avoided and purged. Also note that in
one day, or in the third or fourth day, one dose ought to be given, but more
days must be let pass according to the doctrine of Auicene de Cura
Tertianarum Notharum. Simples to purge the melancholic humor.
These do purge melancholy, hoppes, fumitorie, Epithimum Cretensis, polipodie
of the oak, the leaves of seen, lapis lazuls, myrabolani nigri or Indi, lapis
armenius, black hellebore, and a thousand other are to be sought out of Mesue.
The compoundes that do purge melancholy, be Catholicon or Diacatholicon,
diasenae, Catharticon imperiale, Hiera, Rufi, Confectio Hamech, pilulae de
fumitoriae, pills of lapis lazulus, pills of the v. kinds of myrabolanes, of
Epithimum, of Hellebore, pills, whereof the dose is..j. We can or do seeldome
use the other compound medicines, for the bitterness that they have in taste:
all electuaries (except catholicon) be evil in tasting, The form of a dose
against melancholy.
and therefore they are confect and made in form of potions.. fumitarie, and
the tops of hoppes. ana. M.j.ss. the three cordial flowers. ana. p.j. of
raysons, the stones picked out..iij. or.ss. of green polipodie of the
oak..iij. of cuscuta, and epythimum. ana..iij, of anyse and liquorace scraped.
ana..j.ss. make a decoction in the which infuse the leaves of Seen made
clean..ij. or.iij. In the strayning of the decoction dissolve
diacatholicon..j. or.x. syrup of violettes..j. make a dose. In this dose
syrup of violettes and the cordial flowers are put in, that they may
temperate the dryness of seen, and epithymum. If we will more diligently
purge melancholy, we do put in hiera rufi, whose dose is half an ounce, in
which Hellebore is entered, which is not in use at Paris, or else take confectio
hamech..ss. the which is exceeding bitter for the plenty of coloquintida that
is therein. Remember and note that medicines loosening and purging choler or
rather melancholic, may conuenientely be dissolved with the whey of goats
milk, or with the water of the decoction or infusion of the things aforsaid,
putting in the dose before written: as in example.. of all those or of part of
those good things which be written in the dose aforesaid, afterward make a
decoction in the whey of goats milk, and in the decoction infuse the leaves
of seen, etc. And with some of the aforesaid electuaries confect and make a
dose, according to the nature and strength of the sick person: or thus.. the
leaves of seen, made clean..iij. infuse them in the whay of goats milk, all
one night, and in the strayning of the decoction, dissolve catholicon..j.
or..x. or.j.ss. and make a potion. Note that epythimum does sustain and
maintain a decoction, and therefore we may write thus.. epythimum
cretensis..j. let it boil with wheie of goatrs milk, afterward strain it,
and wring it out strongly, and with.j. of syrup of violettes make a dose,
which if it seem not to be sufficient, add to it some catholicon. Galene
does counsel to take this potion lib. 13. Therapeu. in which place he
considers, that cankres, and all melancholic diseases ought to be taken
heed of before hand, and to be escheued, but he puts in, but..iiij. which
drachmes do show to be of none effect, because (as I think) we have not
the good epythimum, and therefore we take an ounce for the quantity, whereby
the working of it may be the quicker and the better. All authors do follow
this sentence, which in their books of practizes or abridgementes have
remembered this against the elephantia, which is commonly called the leprie, and
is now made for the cure of elephantiasis. The decoction of an old co^k.
Many do think and judge that the decoction of an old cock is very good
and wholesome for diseases grown and begone as well of melancholy, as also of
Rume and fleame. The chief use of it is against the pains of the colicke,
caused of rume, and partly of wind, and also against diseases of the breast,
as difficulty in breating, and moreover against diseases of the joints caused
of cold matter. It is prepared and made against the colicke, caused partly of
reume, and partly of ventositie and wind. It is this, as follows.. of
hysope, calaminte. ana. M.j. of raysons the stones picked out..j.ss. of anyse,
fennel, and carui. ana..vj. of the seed of carthamum..ij. of green polipodie
of the oak.j.ss. the three cordial flowers. ana. p.j. of the flowers of
cammomill. p.ss. and make a decoction, putting all together into the belly of
an old cock preparate as it ought to be, infuse in the end of the decoction
the leaves of Seane made clean..ij.ss. of agaricke newly trochiscate..x. make
a decoction of two pound, and reserve it to your use.. of the aforesaid
decoction..iiij. syrup of violettes..j.ss. make a dose. Note that if the sick
person be strong and stubburne, there may be put in the dissoluing of some
Diaphaenicon, as.j.ss. or..ij. or as much benedicta. Take heed also: for
agaricke (as many do think and judge) is suspected, and thought to be
hurtefull to those that have the colicke: because that if the substance of it
be thrown in with a clyster, the lightness of his substance cleaving to the
guts, does prick them and greaue them, and does provoke a flux also, and
oftentimes does cause one to desire to sit long on the siege, because that,
it has virtue and power to draw down humors from the far parts of the
body, and therefore Democritus (as Mesue does witness) called it medicinam
familiae, the medicine of his family or household. Therefore it may not well
be given to those that have pain in the bowelles, because it makes a flux,
that would not be, except that caused it, and therefore I counsel in such
cases, to take away agaricke. Furthermore note, that chammomill may aptly,
and well be put into these decoctions, although the use of it is rare, and
seeldome seen among Physicians, yet it is manifest, that the only decoction
of it in the broth of a chicken or chapon, is excellent profitable against all
inward griefs, and specially for those which have the cholicke and the
nefresie, (as many have proved it, to the great preservation of their health.)
The water of the distillation of cha^momill is ministered for the same purpose,
but yet the decoction thereof is of more and better effect, then the
distillation of it. The bitterness of the decoction may be mitigated with
sugar, if it be for delicate persons. Also the decoction of a cock may
conveniently be given for diseases in the breast and of dispuras, if medicines
pectorall be decoct with it: as. of hysope, and of caula campana. ana. M.j. the
third part of Sauerie. M.j. the fourth part, horsehofe called vngula caballina,
which is an herb called of some little clote, whereof you may take. M.j. seed
of carthanum, and green polipodie of the oak. ana..ij. of anyse and liquorace
scraped. ana..ss. roots of ireos and roots of enula. ana..iij. or.ss. of
fat figs not putrified four or six in number, of fat dates the skins
and filmes taken away, four in number, of Iuiubes and sebesten. ana.xij. in
number of raysons the stones picked out..j. the three cordial flowers, ana.
p.j. make a decoction in the belly of an old cock, that is hunted preparate
and dressed as it ought to be, putting into it at the end, of Agaricke and of
the leaves of Seane, as much as you think will be sufficient for your purpose:
but note that here agaricke may conveniently be used and ministered. There are
other medicines also which be made against all superfluities in other forms
(that is to say) in the form of liquid electuaries (that is) ad formam
opiatae: or in form whole, (that is) like an electuarie made in logenzes or
tables.

CAP. VIII. Of making Bolus.
BOLVS in English is called a morsel. It is a medicine laxatiue, in form and
fashion it is meanly whole, and it is swallowed by little gobbets. It is made
of diverse things by reason of avoiding and purging of diverse humors: but
the playnest and simplest way of making it, is of medulla, casiae fistulae,
new drawn out of a fat cane or reed.vj. or.j. of sugar so much as suffiseth:
and make a bole. But if it be feared that casia will do hurt, as if great pain
be in the bowels whereby many times is provoked sou^ding, as some do that have
but weak and tender bowels: to such casia is not to be ministered neither by
bole nor by clisters. And for that cause the sick person must be asked how he
feels him self before casia be ministered to him. Truly many authors do
think that this hurt which casia may bring, may be taken away if there be
added to it some grains of barberies or sugar roset: for they are of this
mind, that through their stipticitie the belly and the bowels are
strengthened, and the pain impedite and let, which casia does cause by his
clammines and mollifying softnes. There be other that do mix some laxatiue with
casia, that it may quicke^ the slownes of his operation, and that it descending
may the sooner slide away and be avoided. Boles chiefly are thus ordained and
made, being very profitable remedies against the diseases of the reins..
medulla casiae fistulae newly drawn..j. or.x. the grains (that is the
kernelles) of barbaries..ss. and with sugar roset make a bole. Other do
add..ij. or..j. or..ij. of diaprunis laxatiue, or electuarium de succo
rosarum: as in example following.. meduldae casia fistulae newly drawn..vj. of
diaprunis laxatiue..ij. of sugar roset tabulate as much as suffiseth make a
bole. Note that many, because of the ventositie which casia does engender in
the bowels, they add to the bole powder of anyse..j. or..ss. which avails
much. casiae fistulae newely drawn out of a fat cane or reed..iij. or..j.
the soft matter of fat Tamarindes..j.ss. of chosen rewbarbe..ss. or..ij.
or..j. sugar as much as suffiseth, The form of a bole purging choler.
make a bole. If the sick person be poor, in steed of rewberbe* make a bole
with..ss. or..vj. of casia, and.ij. of diaprunis laxatine, and with sugar..
catholicon..j. or..x. and with white sugar make a bole, or thus:.
catholicon..ss. or.vj. of confectio Hamech..j. or..j.ss. and with sugar make a
bole. The form of a bole against melancholy.


CAP. IX. Of making Pills.
PILLS are ministered for the avoiding of every humor: videl. against rume or
fleame rayning and also against Cholera Notha, which is vile and filthy choler
having dominion in man. Pilula aggregatiuae after the description of Mesue, de
agarico, de rhubarbaro, stomachicae, de hiera simplicli, de hiera compositae,
which respects the head. Cocciae or cocchiae which is so called of granis
cocci, and not of the head as some think. Pillulae aureae, Elephangina, sine
quibus, de Hermodactilis mayor and minor, de Serapina, de Sarcocolla. Truly
the four kinds of pylles last recyted are most appropriate and agreeing,
against corrupt and stinking humors, of the which virtue also be Arthretica
maiores and minores when reume reigns, but these when choler reigns in the
diseases of the ioinctes: then also the pills of Hermodactylis mayor and minor
are dedicate and ministered. Pills that do only void pure choler and purge
it, there are a thousand to be found, but many of them has more respect to the
avoiding of filthy and bastardly choler, or that which is greatly mixte with
reume: as, Pillulae de Rheubarbaro, de Hiera simplici, Aggregatiuae de Agarico,
Ante Cibum, Imperiales. In a manner the chief dose of pills is..j.ss. of which
make nine pills, and with some convenient syrup, as syrup of endive, syrup
of maidenheare, syrup of staechados, or also with Oxymel or Hydromel, or with
some other licour.

CAP. X. Of making Apozema.
AN APOZEMA is a decoction of medicines gently made for the concoction and
digestion of humors, or for preparation of them, and sometime for euacuation
and purging. It may be made diverse, and for diverse intentes and purposes: as
to make hot and to make cold, to make moist, and to make dry, to loosen and
open, to restrain and bind, to attenuate and make thin, to make gross and
thick, to provoke menstruis and urine. Of medicines particular and convenient,
and of their roots, fruictes, seeds, (and other, as it shall seem meet and
expedient for your purpose.) In effect an Apozema does not differ from a
syrup, but in boiling: for syrupes are wont to be boiled long and to the
perfection, but an Apozema is boiled easily and little. Therefore syrupes may be
long kept, and Apozemes may be kept but a few days.. of succorie, endive,
Cuscuta and Adiantum, ana. M.ss. of the roots of sorrel, The form of an
Apozeme against cholerike humors.
and of gramen, ana..ss. the four great cold seeds made clean, ana..j. of
the three cordial flours, ana. p.j. make a decoction of. lb.ss. In the
straining dissolve syrup of violettes, or Syrupus acetosus, or syrup of
Limmmons, or also of white sugar..iij. and make an Apozema, clarify it, and
aromatizate it with..ij. or.j. of cinnamon elect for two doses. Likewise
Apozema may be made against other humors, the matter and effect whereof must be
sought out of the head of the syrupes. Note that in the confection and making
of Apozema: for.ij. or at the most for.iij. of the decoction it is sufficient
to add..j. of sugar or syrup. Also there may be made Apozemes laxatiue, as
there be syrupes laxatiue, adding to laxatiue things in that decoction, or
infusing them in it after the decoction is made. Look in the title of syrupes
for the example, for they be like them, (this only excepted as we said before)
that an Apozema after the dissoluing of the sugar or syrup in it, ought not to
be boiled any longer.

CAP. XI. Of making Mulsio.
MVLSIO is made of seeds cleansed or of fruictes or of both sometime to quench
the thirst, and the inflammacion of the breast and lounges, and against
diseases of the reins and the bladder, or against Ischuria (that is) retention
and withholding of urine, and for the strangurie, (that is) the voiding of
humors by causing the urine to issue out by drops with burning in the
yard.. of the four great cold seeds new and clean, The form of Mulsio.
ana..iij. or.ss. of sweet almondes blaunched in cold water..j. beat all
together in a stone mortar, with well water first sodden, and make a decoction
of lb.j. and reserve it and keep it in a glasen vessel. The aforesaid Mulsio
is good against the burning of the urine, or the strangurie, if..iiij. or vj.
be given in the morning three or four hours before dinner and two or three
hours before supper, the same quantity of the premises, or a little less
with one Lozenge of Diatragacantum frigidum, in which are put in the
aforesaid seeds, and gummes, and many other things. But if in the aforesaid
cases we think that there be greater need of infrigidation and cooling: mix
with your Mulsio the seeds of pourcelaine, of lettuse, and of white poppie.
But in the diseases of the breast, add to new pine apples, sweet Almondes and
fresh figs that be not putrified, with one Lozenge of Electuarium Di^iris
simplicis, or Diairis Solemnie, let it be ministered straight way without delay.
Also with the aforesaid Mulsio, there n^^lye conveniently be mixed some
quantity of Sugar, or some Syrup apt and meet for the purpose: (as Ruellius
was wont to make against the filthy matter, and corrupt blood in the urine of
man:) as thus:. the seed of white poppie, and the four great cold seeds, or
sweet Almondes, ana..ss. stamp all these in a mortar with as much water of
the decoction of liquorace as suffiseth. In the straining dissolve of Syrup of
violettes, of maidenhea^e, and of mirtles, ana..j. make a Mulsio for two times,
and let the greiued person take it in the morning four hours before dinner.

CAP. XII. Of making Powders.
A POWDER is made of Seeds, Roots and mineralles powdered and beaten finely,
and sugar put to them, that they may be the more pleasant. Powders be
ministered for many causes and intentes, where of their most common ministration
is after meat to help digestion, or to stop and keep down vapors, which
ascend and are carried up into the brain, or else for both causes as it often
chances.. the seeds of anise and fennel, A powder to help digestio^.
ana..j. the seed of citron cinnamon, liquorace, and roses, ana..j. of chosen
pearls and the scraping of yuorie, ana..ss. of sugar rosate, as much as
suffiseth: make a fine Powder, whereof minister after meat, one sponefull: and
look what powder is so made to stop and keep down vapors, even the same
is good to help digestion: as is this that follows.. coriander
preparate..j.ss. the scraping of yuorie, red coral, the horn of a Heart
burned, ana..j. of cinnamon..ss. of sugar rosate as much as suffiseth: make a
powder which may be given after meat. Also they are good for many other
things as for worms in children, for binding, in the belly, and for strength,
and against the Plague coming of the own proper matter: These Powders are to
be ministered before meat, some alone, some with wine, or upon tostes of bread
weat in wine. Sometime they are given for the corroboration and strengthening
of all virtues, in malignant feauers, and in great imbecillitie and weakness
of strength.. the scraping of an unicorns horn, gra. 4.5. or 6. the scraping
of yuorie, of chosen pearls, and of hearts horn, ana. gra. 6. seed of
citron, and Cardus Benedictus, ana. gra. 4. and make a fine Powder, which may
be given with convenient liquour as with white wine, distillation restoratiue,
water of Scabious, or Buglosse, or of some other such like. And such Powders
for the most part are ministered about midnight, or early in the morning. There
may also be made Powders laxatiue (as is) Diasene, and Diaturbithe, and the
powder of Electuarium Diacarth^mi, to the which ought to be added three times
or four times as much sugar, and they may be ministered being dissolved in the
decoction of a chicken, or of liquorace or of ptysan. But yet these powders are
seeldom used among practicioners.

CAP. XIII. Of Electuaries, and Conserues: Of Lozenges, and Manus Christi.
AN ELECTVARIE is ordained and made two ways (that is) either liquide, as in
Forma^piatae, or whole as in tables or lozenges, or in fashion four square and
long which they call Manus Christi. Electuaries truly are ministered to
corroborate and strengthen, and for that cause they be called Ionica, as
afoording strength to the members (that is to say) they roborate and strengthen
the virtues natural, vital, and animal. If they be confect and made to
strengthen the natural faculties and virtues then they must be ministered to a
fasting stomach. lf the virtue digestive be weak through coldness, minister
them after meat. But if any matter arise through moistness, then minister one
hour or two before meat, that they may alter the temperature and dry up the
unwholesome substance. But if the virtue vital requires strengthening, you
may minister them very well in a manner at all hours. But if you intend to
strengthen the virtue animal, you may conveniently minister in the hour of
sleep or about midnight. An Electuarie strengthening the natural virtue.
The forms of Electuaries are in this order as follows, and first, of a
liquide Electuarie which is profitable to strengthen the natural virtue when
the substance of the belly is made feeble by coldness and moistness.. of the
powder of Electuarium Aromatici maioris (which Gabriell describes.).ij. powder
of Electuarium Diacalaminthi..j. of Diatrion piperion..ij. of Conserua Anthos
(that is) of flours of Rosemarie, and of roses, ana..ss. of sugar
taberzet..j.ss. of sirupe of mintes as much as suffiseth, make a liquide
Electuarie in Forma Opiatae, and minister it before dinner or breakefast an
hour or an hour and half, or two hours: the dose is..ss. or rather..ij.
Electuarium Aromaticum Rosatum, being ministered fasting takes away all
corrupt and rotten humidities, and being ministered after meat it strengthens
the virtue digestive. An Electuarie against hot distempure of the liver.
Now follows the form of a whole or hard Electuarie made in Lozenges, or
fashoned like Manus Christi, against hot distempre of the liver and against
obstructions of the same, as thus:. of the powder of Tria sandalorum..ij. the
powder of Diarrhodon Abbatis..j. of conserues of succorie and roses, ana..j.ss.
or sugar taberzet or white sugar dissolved in water of succorie or endive, as
much as suffiseth, make an Electuarie in Lozenges of the weight of..ij.
or.ij.ss. or.iij. minister one before meat. Many times conserues are not put
in, but only powders. The Apothecaries are wont for every drachme of powder,
to put to..j. of sugar. But if you will make the Electuarie more strong, you
may well take a drachme and a half of powder, for..j. of sugar. An Electuarie
against Melancholi^.
If the stomache be troubled with the presence of Melancholy abounding and
flowing to it, either through the vice of the liver that multiplieth it, or by
diseases of the spleen, as be stoppinges, which hinder the receipt thereof:
then make an hard Electuarie, or in Forma Optatae, with things following, as
in example,. of the powder of Electuarium latificans Galeni..iij. the powder of
Electuarium Diamargariton Calidum,.j. the powders of the Electuaries of
Aromatibus, or of Gemmis, or Diamusci dulcis, or Diambrae may be put in,
seeing that they have the same virtue: of conserues of Buglosse, and Borage,
and Violettes, ana..j.ss. the bark of Cytron seasoned..j. of as much white
sugar dissolved in water of Buglosse or Borage as suffiseth: Make an Electuarie
in Lozenges, or in little gobbettes, or like Manus Christi: in weight..iij.
or..ss. And if you will make it in the form of a liquide Electuarie, put to
it twice or thrice as much more of the conserues, and some powder of white
sugar or sugar rosate (that is to say).ij. as is showed in the example
aforesaid, with some syrup having respect to the Melancholye humor (as is)
syrup of Buglosse, of Borage, of Roses, of Hartistongue, of Epithimum, of
Fumitorie, of which, add to as much as suffiseth: My meaning is, that it may
be in a liquide form.

An Electuarie for the strong stopping of the liver or the spleen, wherein
there is danger of the Dropsey, or in breeding of Cachexia, (that is) a spice
of consumption: such an Electuarie (I say) is made of the powders of the
Electuaries Diagalangae, Diacucumeris, Diacapparis, Dialaccae, and of
conserues, which if you will commixe together, conserues of Succorie may
conveniently be mixed with them. Note also that Electuaries be made of
Trochiskes, or of powder of Trochiskes, having respect to the disease, as in a
hot cause take Trochisci Diarrhodon, trochiskes of Carolus, Trochiskes of Bole
armoniake, of terra sigillata (specially if we would restrain or bind)
trochiskes of Carabe, if we would stop the flux of blood. But if we would
open or loosen the obstructions of the liver or spleen, we must bring this to
pass with trochiskes of Reubarbe, or of Capparis. Electuaries respecting the
virtue vital, if it be aggreaued with cold, may be made of Electuarium
Diambrae, An Electuarie for the virtue vital.
Diamusci dulcis, Electuarium de Gemmis, and Aromaticum nardinum, Aromaticum
muscatum, Aromaticum Rosatum, mayor Gabrielis, Latificans Galeni or Rasis,
Electuarium Concialitoris, of Alkermes confection and making. Conserues for the
same intent be these, Conserues of Roses, Buglose, Borage, Anthos, barks of
Citron, ginger condite, orenges condite, and other of that sort. If the virtue
vital be wearied, and labors of heat, take the Electuarie Rosatanonella,
Electuarium trium Sandaloru^, and Diarrhodon Abbatis, Diamargariton frigidum,
and Trochiskes of Camphora, use them often. These be the Conserues that be
good, Conserues of Roses, of Violettes, of Buglosse, and of Borage, and also of
Nimphaeae or Nenuphar (that is) water lillies. If the coughe be present, and if
the humor contained in the breast be hot, flowing and thin, if you will
cause it to avoid and come forth, minister Diatragacanthum frigidum: if the
humor be clammish and thick, minister Diatragacanthum calidum, and Diaris
simplex or Diairis Salomonis. And if there be suspicion of any venomous
substance, then with the powders of Electuaries cold or hot, which do resist
poison* we do commixe maces, and musk, Zedoaria, saffron, Cinnamon, and
Xiloaloes in cold causes. But in hot causes there may conveniently be mixed
pearls, coral, crystal, roses and Camphora. In causes mingled one with an
other either hot or cold, by a certain property, these do corroborate and
strengthen, and defend, pearls, seed of Citron, root of Tormentill, Tunici,
and Dictamus, the bone of the Hearts heart one in number, or if you will weye
it..j. or.ss. as in this example following against a pestilentiall fever:. the
powder of the Electuarie of Diamargariton frigidum..j.ss. or white shining
pea^les, ^
elect and powdered in a marble mortar..j. of Camphora. G. ij. or else
trochiskes of Camphora..j. or.ss. the roots of Dictamus, of Tormentill, and of
Tunici, and the barks of Citron, ana..j. of conserues of Buglosse, Borage,
Nimpbeae, and Roses, take of these, one, two, or three, or all, to the
quantity of two or three drachmes: of white sugar dissolved in water of Roses,
or of Buglosse or Borage as much as suffices, make an Electuarie in Lozenges,
or make a liquide Electuarie in the form aforesaid.. the three kinds of
Saunders, An (...) virtue animal, in a hot cause.
and Diarrhodon Abbatis, ana..j. the bone of the Hearts heart one in number,
sugar Rosate tabulate, or white sugar dissolved in rose water as much as
suffiseth, make an Electuarie, gilte it with leaves of pure gold in
weight..ss. Also there be made Electuaries laxatiue against all superfluities
and diseases, that together with the purging, we may also strengthen as in
example, against long diseases coming of Reume, or of some clammish humor
breeding the coughe.. Cassia that is new..ij.ss. Diacarthami..vj. new Penidios,
An Electua^ against d^sea^es of the (...), and against the coughe.
and Diairis simplex, ana..ss. of conserues of Violettes..iij. of sweet anise
powdered, and powder of liquorace, ana..ss. sirupe of violettes as much as
suffiseth: make a liquide Electuarie, in forma Opiatae. The dose is..j. or..x.
or at the most..j ss. the which may be ministered an hour or an hour and
half, swallowing it, or he may take it four hours before dinner, because it
may not conveniently be given a little before meat, because of the
Diacarthamum which has Diagredium in it. Also you may dissolve it in the
brothe of a chicken, or in ptysan, or in a common pectorall decoction, and make
a potyon, and minister it four or five hours before meat. And this note,
that you must appoincte the ways and means of the ministration of Physic,
according as you see the nature and condition of the sick person. Such
Electuaries which may be brought into a powder, are made in Lozenges or Boles
of laxatiue medicines that be pleasant in taste, the form and fashion whereof
may be known in taking Diacarthamum, and Electuarium de Succo Rosarum, after
which fashion you may make other very meet and serving for your purpose.

CAP. XIIII. Of making Conditum, and Conserua.
CONDITA be made as Electuaries be made to strengthen the might and the
primitive and worthiest members. They rather have respect to the substance and
matter of breathing, then to the beauty and soundness of the flesh. But
forasmuch as the weakness of strength, causes sores and diseases to grow in
their instruments, therefore is it ministered to them that begin to recover and
wax strong, A Conditum to strengthen all virtues and powers.
. Conserua Authos (that is) of Rosemary, conserve of Borage, Buglosse, maiden
hear, and Succorie, ana..ij. the bark of citron condite..j.ss. the powder of
Electuarium plirisacroticon, the powder of Electuarium ducis, Diarrhodon
abbatis, and Tria sandall, ana..ss. the leaves of gold in number.vj. of white
sugar as much as suffiseth, make a Conditum. Of the same powders of Electuaries
is made a whole and a hard Conditum, as thus:. the powder of Electuarium
plirisarcoticon, the powder of Dianthos, the powder of Ducis, Diarrhodon
abbatis, and Tria sandali, ana..ij. conserues of Roses and Succorie, ana..j.ss.
white sugar dissolved in rose water, as much as suffiseth make an Electuarie in
lozenges or morsels, like unto manus Christi. of the weight of..ij. In like
proportion may condites or Electuaries be made to strengthen all kind of
virtues: as in example. If only the virtue vital be weak, then take
Electuaries and conserues either hot or cold, having respect to the virtue,
according as the own distempure or the cause of it desires: Hot Electuaries
respecting the virtues vital.

Cold Electuarie.

Condites respecting the virtue vita^^.


now there follows these hot Electuaries having respect to the virtue
vicall: as Electuarium Diambra, Diamargariton Calidum, Diamuscum amarum,
Diamuscum dulce, de Gemmis, latificans Galeni. Cold Electuaries, Electuarium
Diamargariton frigidum, Diarrhodon Abbatis which is temperate, Tria sandali.
Conserues respecting both the distempures (that is) hot and cold: as Conseruae
Rosarum, Boraginis, Buglossae, Violarum. Cold conserues, Conseruae Nimpheae,
Violarum. Hot Condita respecting the virtue vital, as Cortex Curi conditus,
which may be ministered in both causes, Confectio de Cinamoma, Confectio de
Xiloalo, Confectio Alkeruces, which is common to the Physicians of
Montispessulari, ginger condite, pears condite, apples condite, and so of
other. Hot Electuaries for the virtue animal, be these: Plirisarcoticon,
Dianthos, Hot Electuaries, for the virtue anima^.

Hot conserues.

Hot Electuaries, for the virtue natural.

Hot conserues respecting the virtue natural.

Cold (...). Cold conserues A Condit^^n against the hot distempre of all
kinds of veins.

Another for the (...) distempre.


Diamuscum dulce and amarum, Mithridatum and Triacle, which be opiatoe (that
is) liquid. Hot conserues respecting the virtue animal be these, Conserua
Anthos, Acori, Rosarum, which is temperate, almost all Opiatae (that is) liquid
things, as Mithridatum, Triacle, and aurea Alexandrina. Hot Electuaries for
the virtue natural be these, Diacalaminthum, Diacuminum, Diatrion pipereon,
Aromaticum rosatum maioris (which Gabriell describes) Diarrhodon Abbatis,
which is temperate, and necessary in both causes, Diairis Salomonis, or
simplex, Dialacea, and Diacucurma, the which are good against opilations of the
liver and against the dropsy. Hot conserues respecting mightily the virtue
natural, be these: Conserua Eringiorum, conserua Satyrij, Zinziber conditum,
Cortex Citri conditus, meat of quinces condite, pears condite, and such like.
Cold Electuaries, be these, Tria sandali, Diatragacanthum frigidum, Diarrhodon
Abbatis, Diamargariton frigidum, Cold conserues* be these: Conserua Violarum,
Cichoreae, Nimpheae. etc.

. the powder of Electuarium trium Sandolorum..ij. the powder of Diamargariton
frigidum, and Diarrhodon Abbatis, ana..ij. conserues of succorie and violettes,
ana..j.ss. white sugar dissolved in water of endive, or succorie, or roses as
much as suffiseth. Make a condite in lozenges in weight..ij. or.iij. or thus,.
conserues of succorie, of violettes, of Nimpheae, and of Buglosse, ana..ij.ss.
conserve of Roses..j.ss. powder of Tria sandali, and of Diamargariton frigidum.
ana..iiij. the leaves of gold.viij. numb. white sugar as much as suffiseth,
make a condite: the dose is one silver sponefull. Many in these condites, where
there is suspection of some venomous matter: as in pestilent feauers, or in
swounding, they do add to, the seed of Citron, the seed of Carduus
Benedictus, the root of Dictamus and Tormentill. And for rich folk of the
scraping of vnycornes horn (although there is no Author that makes mention
of it) but only the opinion of the common people: as in example, in the
aforesaid Conditum take away some portion of the aforesaid Electuaries (that
is to say) the third or fourth part, and then let it be in this order as
follows.. of the seed of Carduus Benedictus, of the seed of Citron, of the
root of Dictamus and Tormentill, ana..j. or.ss. two or three of these may be
added. Furthermore Trochiskes are added to Electuaries and condites, as in
example: To stop the flux take Trochiskes of Diacorallus, Diarrhodon, of
Terra sigillata, of bole Armoniacke, and of Carabe. And to keep the temperance
of the heart take Trochiskes of Camphora, of the which take as much in
quantity, as the powders of the Electuaries be, when there is no sugar put
into them.

CAP. XV. Of making Pasta Regia or Mazapane.
PASTA Regia is a confection, so called by the Physicians of late time, which
is specially ordained for diseases of the breast, or to drive away the causes
of leannes. The form and making whereof does follow being very effectual
against both the causes: (that is) the diseases of the breast, and the lounges,
and against leanness: as thus,. sweet almondes blaunched..iij. of new pines
cleansed, and tempered ten hours in water of scabious, or of Enula campana, or
in some other meet for this purpose..ss. of Pistacium, (that is) a kind of
nuttes, let them be new, cleansed, and tempered one day in some of the
aforesaid waters..j. of Amylum, Diaga^anthum, and of gum Arabicke, ana..ss.
of the meat of dates, proines damask, and sebesten, and raisons, one or else
more of these to the quantity of one ounce, white sugar dissolved in well
water, or in rose water, or in water of Enula, as much as suffiseth, make a
Tasia Regia, and cut it in fashion like a wafer, or else make it in little
gobbettes. Also sometime the great cold seades (the barks being picked of)
are put into them.

CAP. XVI. Of making a Lohoch or Ecligma.
A LOHOCH or Ecligma is a medicine that must not be eaten or chewed, but it
must melte in the mouth, and distill down to the stomache by little and little.
It is good against diseases of the breast and the lounges, (as is) Dispneas,
Apneas, short and hard breathinges, sighinges, and coaghes whether it comes
by heaping of matter together, or by falling down of some moist substance (as
be cat^rres, A Lohoch against ^eume congealed together, cl^^mish, hard, and
thick.
and reumes, which chance oftentimes.). Electuarium Diairis Salomonis, and
Diairis simplex, ana..vj. Lohoch de Pino..j. conserve of Enula Campana..ss.
oxymel Scilliticum, as much as suffiseth. Make a Lohoch and let the sick use
it with a liquorace stick, licking or swallowing a little at once. If there be
greater need of detersion and scouring, then there is of incision and cutting,
you must augment and increase the quantity of the scouring receiptes, and in
stead of oxymel Scilliticum put to sirupe of liquorace, or of Horehound called
Prassium, or of iuiubes, or else of hysope, many do think sirupe of Hisope to
be abstersive, only for the saying of Auicene, which ( Mesue declares) is
unlike to be true. Lohoch Compositum, Lohoch de Pino, Lohoch de caulibus sanum
and expertum, Lohoch de Scilla, these may conveniently be ministered by them
selves. But when a fever is present (as in the Plurisie) then to avoid and
bring out from the breast, the material cause that flows, and partly for
the matter that is already flowen, we may make a Lohoch after this sort and
fashion.. Electuarium Diatragacanthi frigidi..x. new penidies, A Lohoch in the
beginning of the (...) where the matter flows.
and white pills, ana..iij. sirupe of violettes, or of Iniubes, or of both as
much as suffiseth, make a Lohoch and use it with a liquorace stick, swallowing
it by little and little. If the ma^ter be partly flowed, and partly flowing,
you shall make a Lohoch to correct both after this fashion, R Electuarium
Diairis simplex..j. Diatragacanthum frigidum..vj. new Penidies..iij. sirupe of
Iniubes, or Isope, even as you think good, the more to enforce the matter now
flowed or flowing: and make a Lohoch. A Lohoch also may be made against
defluxions and flowinges of humors that be hot, and sharp, or gnawing,
causing the coughe: that the heat and gnawing of the humor may be stopped,
and also that the thinness and subtilitie thereof may be made thick and
gross, and the parts to which the flux comes being subject and obedient,
they may be made safe from any nocument or hurt (as in example,). Electuarium
Diatragacanthi frigidi..j. bole Armoniacke washed in rose water..ij. Trochiskes
of Terrae sigillata..ij. sirupe of poppy as much as suffiseth and make a
Lohoch. In the steed of Diatragacanthum may be taken Diapapauer, or of each
a like quantity. Also Trochiskes of Carabe in the which is put some opium, may
be added to them, if there be no cause that opium be suspected to do hurt.
These Lohoches are given against the Ptysicke in the hour of sleep,
Electuarium Diapapaueris, Lohot of Popie. All the pills of Mesue for this use
against diseases of Catarre and Reume, may be mixed and given the same hours,
and for the same intent.

CAP. XVII. Of making Balneum and Semicupium.
BALNEVM is a baine: the use whereof was common and often among old
practitioners, but now it is rare and seeldome, and not at all used almost,
except it be in certain diseases, as in an universal gout, in the palsy and
in consuming feauers. But against the gout and the palsy natural baines are
convenient, in the which, although there be pennurie and lack of things, yet
we may make things artificially, and cunningly, prepared, with boiling
together in water, herbs, roots, seeds, flours, and also many mettalles, as
it shall seem requisite for the disease. But Semicupium, which in Latin is
called Insessum, is a particular bathe, which is applied for pains of the
nefresie, for the cholicke, and for the iliacke, so that they come not by
reason of an impostume. It is profitable against diseases of the belly and
womb, for it is a convenient aid and defense to provoke menstruis, and to
amend the distempre of the womb. Now follows the form of a Semicupium, The
form of Semicupium.
when we would in the Nefreticke disease, have the poores and passages of the
body e^larged and made soft and plyaunt, and also to cease the pain, as
thus,. the roots of Alt^aea..iiij. the leaves of Maluae, Bismaluae, and
Parietarie, the flours of cammomill, and melilote, the tops of dill, ana.
M.ij. of origan, calamint, betonie, and sothernwood, ana. M.j. seeds of flax
and fennel, ana..ij. of lean branne. p.iiij. put all these in a little bag,
and make a boiling in sufficient water, for a Semicupium. Note also that one
that has the N^fresie may enter a Bathe before he has received a Clister. If
the pain of the cholicke or the Nefresie seem to come of much ventositie, or
of a cold humor, which seems to have need of calefaction, and attenuacion
or thinness with incision and cutting, Al^ud Semicupium.
make a Semicupium thus,. origan, calaminte, tops of dill, and of cammomill,
ana. M.iiij. fenugreeke, carawayes, anise and fennel, ana..ij. laurel
bearies..ss. And if there be more sicknesses and causes wrapped in with the
aforesaid griefs, you may add to such medicines as be meet for your purpose,
as if there be need of mollifying and making soft, the leaves of Maluae,
Bismaluae, Parietarie and violettes, will work that effect. If you judge it
necessary to make incision, or to open the poores and passages of the body,
add to, of the root of spinache, bruscus and Apium, knitte them in a little
bag and sees them for a Semicupium. Likewise to provoke menstruis, make
Insessus or Semicupia, putting in medicines meet and apt to provoke
menstruis, as Muggworte, Sauien, Horehounde, nex, cypress, and iunipper
bearies, of all these there may be put in. M.ij.

CAP. XVIII. Of Epithema or Fotus.
EPITHEMA is a medicine ordained, to lay to the heart or liver to cool it:
and Fotus is a medicine nourishing or keeping warm. They are made for many
intentes and purposes, but chiefly to correct the hot distempure of the liver,
the make whereof is this, as ensues,. the waters of endive, succory, roses,
Epitheme.
and petymorrell and night shade, ana..iij. of vinegar..j. the powder of
Electuarium tria sandali..ij. or.j.ss. mix them for an Epitheme of the liver
with a felt, or a piece of linen or woollen clothe, or a sponge, infused in
the aforesaid licour, and laid against the liver before meat an hour or an
hour and half. Also there is made for the same purpose the like decoction of
the herbs, as is of the aforesaid waters. If there be stoppinges of the liver,
together with his hot distempure, make an Epitheme after this sort,. succorie
booth the root and the herb, young set endive, a grimony (which is)
eupatorie, ana. M.j. flours of succorie. p.j. the four great cold seades, and
little cold seade, ana..ss. of cypress..ij. of lupines..iij. all the saunders,
ana..j. of squinaunt..ss. the tops of warmewood. M.ss. make a little bag,
and boil it in four parts of water, and one of wine, and a little vinegar,
with one only great heat in an earthen vessel, and make a fomentacion in the
manner aforesaid. Such an Epitheme is very good for diseases depending upon
opilation or stopping, and misfortune coming by opilation and stopping, as is
a flux, and for him that is diseased in the liver, and for those diseases for
the most part which come and go by courses. Also it is good against
consumptions, which cause distempres and stoppinges of the liver. Moreover
against the beginninges of knobbes and kernells, to which (if they be come
forth) there must be applied mollificatiues, and things that do loosen and
unbind. Also there be Epithemes that be made for many purposes of the
stomache: First to strengthen the stomache that it receive not the
superfluities coming from other places, and then the Epitheme is made of
stipticke things: Secondly to correct and amend the distempure of the
stomache: And thirdly they serve to cease the pains, that are caused by the
nature and condition of that grief: ministering duly to the contrariety of
the matter, as the cause shall require. The making of the first intent, that
the stomache may be delivered from flowinges of humors to it, and may be
preserved safely, that it shall not suffer inflammacion, or course of evil
humors.. red roses. p.ij. of Arnoglossa and plantine. ana. M.ss. the tops of
wormwood. M.j. the third part, all the saunders, ana. ij. red coral..iij.
put all these into a little bag, and make a decoction in sufficient quantity
of water, with a little vinegar, to which may be added a little rennish wine and
make a fomentacion. Coral (although it be Achymum) yet it is not put into the
decoction without great cause, for it profits naturally against all diseases
of the stomache, and therefore it ought rather to be beaten into powder.
Epithemes for all other intentes and purposes may be described by particular
and proper medicines, after the form of the late described Epitheme. There be
Epithemes good for the stomache made of oil, as oil of roses, cammonill,
wormwood, masticke and mirtles. Note that in all Epithemes, for what intent
soever they be ministered, you must mix some thing with them that may preserve
and keep the essence and strength of the member, that the Epitheme is laid to,
as Galene commands and teaches in many places, to be observed and done
likewise in medicines taken inwardly. But Epithema and Fotus be all one, yet
some do make a difference, saying that Epithema is only that, which is made of
distilled waters, and powders mixed together: and Fotus is a more general
thing, which is made of the decoction of any kind of herbs and roots.

CAP. XIX. Of making Sacculus.
SACCVLVS, videlicet, a little bag. It is ministered for the same causes that
Fotus be used for. It is made of herbs, flours, seades and other such like
things. They be laid to, either dry, or else weat in some liquor. The dry be
chiefly made of seeds and herbs: the weat must first be pressed, before it be
laid to the place.. milij vstulati. p.iiij. of orobum, A dry bag against the
windy cholick or Timpanites.
(which some think to be tares) and of lean branne, ana. p.ij. flours of
Cammomill, and tops of dill, ana. p.j. of commin and carawaye, ana..ij. of
laurel bearies..iij. make thereof two little bags, and sew them in, into two
linen clothes of a competent biggnesse, and bast them thoroughly. Let them be
so big, that they may cover the belly, and let one after another be laid hot
to the belly again and again. Now follows the form of a moist bag for
the digesting, A moist bag
mollifying, and dissoluing of raw humors as thus:. the flours of Cammomill.
p.ij. the tops of dill, melilote, and origan, ana. p.j. fenugreeke and flax
seed, ana..j. the leaves of maluae, bismaluae, and violettes, ana. M.ss. make
a little bag, or make two bags, and boil them in water or in cowes milk,
and of the decoction make a fomentacion with a sponge, or a felt, or woollen
clothes, or two bags, let them be laid to the greiued places one after
another. According to this form, you may make and apply bags, partly of
things that can mollify and partly of things that can remove and discuss,
and lay them to kdubbes, karnells, and hardness in the flesh. But if the
person be strong, take other remollitiues, or discussiues, even as you shall
find the matter, that causes the hardness, to require.

CAP. XX. Of making Scutum.
SCVTVM in English is a target or buckler. Scuta are ministered to the stomache,
and made for the same causes that ointmentes and Epithemes be. They are often
made of the dry powder of medicines, to correct some distempre of the
stomache, and to add strength to it. Furthermore they serve in the steed of
ointmentes or emplaistres, when the patientes do refuse and abhor them for
their tediousness. A Scutum against (...) distemp^re ^f the (...) with (...)
and (...) substance.
. mintes, maioram and wormwood dried, ana. p.j. or.j.ss. of cloves, galingale,
and Xiloaloes, ana..ij. of commin and red coral, ana..j. make a powder,
wherewith make a Scutum with a little cotton, sewed in between two little clothes
with stichinges between and bands as it ought to be, let it be bound to the
stomache. Powders to Scutum ought not to be past an ounce and a half at the
most, many times..j. or.vj. is enough.

CAP. XXI. Of making a Cataplasme.
CATAPLASMA is a plaster, etc. Cataplasmata be made of herbs, roots, seeds,
and meal sodden in water or milk, with some grease or oil added to them as
the matter requires. Cataplasmata be made for diverse intentes, sometime to
cease pains, sometime to resolve and unbind, sometime to make ripe, sometime
to mollify or make soft, sometime to consume, and sometime to dry up humors
and vapors. In commixed affectes and causes, diverse intentes and purposes are
mixed together in Cataplasma, as remollitiues with discussiues, and discussiues
with such things as cease pain, as the examples following shall declare. And
first of the form of a cataplasme for the cure of Oedema, (which is a botche
of fleugmaticke matter, or an impostume without grief,) in the which evil it
is necessary to have remollition with discussion, or (as they say) resolving,
loosening and ceasing of pain, as thus,. the leaves of maluae, bismaluae, and
violettes, ana. M.j. or M.ss. the root of Althaea, the root of white lillies,
and the root of ireos (that is) flour de luce, ana..ss. or.j. flours of
cammomill, melilote, and tops of dill, ana. p.j. seed of flax, and of
fenugreeke, (or rather) meal of flax seed, meal of fenugreeke, and meal of
barley, ana..ss. or.j. or you may measure it by little handfulls, comin..j.
laurel bearies..ij. saffron..j. or.ss. of duckes grease, goose grease, the
marow of calves shanckes, fresh butter, oil of lillies, and oil of ireos,
ana. as much as suffiseth: make a Cataplasme. In this plaistre are contained
three intentes and purposes (that is) mollifying, dissoluing, and ceasing of
pain, as may be known by the matters contained in it. The quantity of
mollificatiues ought to be most, if there be greatest need of mollifying, and
the quantity of dissolvers ought to be most, if there need to be great
dissoluing, and so likewise of ceasing of pain. Therefore in the beginning of
Oedema, is also in the beginning of every abscession or course of ill humors,
you must commixe together with mollificatiues some repercussiue remedy,
wherewith the member may be comforted. In the beginning of the augmenting, take
most remollitiues, and fewest discussiues. In the end of the augmenting and
state of the disease, take of both a like much. In the declination, take and
apply only dissoluers, and looseners. In the making of this present plaistre,
you must put into it no stipticke thing: but if you do put in any, put it in at
the beginning of the flowing of the humor. But what medicines they be that
have stipticke virtue, and which do comfort the member, and also which do
mollify, and dissolve, you must seek them in the tables of Authors, as
Arnoldus, and Sauanorolla, and such like. Also there be plasters made without
oil or grease, as is that common thing of crummes of bread steiped in cowes
milk, and a little sodden together, with whites of eggs, oftentimes mixed with
a little of saffron, as x. or xij. chiues. And this Cataplasme we often use for
the cure of the gout.

CAP. XXII. Of making Emplastrum.
EMPLAISTRES are ordained and made fot diverse purposes, and the making of them
is common as well to Physicians as Chyrurgians. They are made of gummes, oiles,
grease, and dry medicines, commixed with some sufficient quantity of wax, or
without wax, if that the materials can thicken, and gather together of them
selves. Emplaistres are applied to all parts of the body, but chiefly to the
stomache, for the same cause that ointmentes, Cataplasmes, and Scuta are
ordained. Now follows the form of an Emplaistre for the stomache when it is
afflicted with a cold distempure, by reason of the flowing of some cold
substance, as thus.. Ceratum stomachi canfortati^i Galeni..ij. of galingale,
cloves, and red coral, ana..ss. of wax dissolved, brayed all together, in a
mortar with oil of masticke, or of wormwood, as much as suffiseth. Commixe
them and make a Plaistre spread upon leather like a buckler with a double
linen cloth, well stitched and basted as it ought to be. Also an Emplaistre
may be made of simples for the aforesaid intentes, in this manner,. pure
Lapdanum..vj. masticke..ij. franckensence..j. coriander preparate, red coral,
dry mintes and galingale ana..ij Xilo aloes, and macies, ana..ss.
turpentine..ij. wax dissolved with oil of spikenard, or wormwood, or
masticke, or roses, or of two or three of these, as much as suffiseth. Make it
in a lump together, spread it upon leather, and make it like a Scutum of
double linen with stiches and bands, and lay it to the stomache as it is
requisite. Warn the Apothecarie to dissolve the gummes with wine and oil,
afterward let him commixe the rest without the use of any fire. Ceratum
stomachi confortatiuum Galeni is made of roses, wormwood, masticke, spicknard,
wax and oil of roses. In hot causes and choleric vomittes, you may
likewise make Scuta of cold simples, as is, mirtles, coriander, coral,
masticke, which is temperate, Psidiae, balaustia, also oiles, as of roses,
mirtles, quinces, A plaistre for the hot distempre of the liver.
and of masticke. There are made Emplaistres for the liver, for the alaying of
every distempore of it, to loosen the obstructions thereof, and to strengthen it
also, as in this example following, Ceratum sandalinum..ij. meat of
quinces..j. of masticke..ss. of coral..j. of wax dissolved with oil of roses
as much as suffiseth. Make it in a lump, and spread it upon leather, like a
moon when she is beginning to increase, with a double linen clothe, and with
bands, as it ought to be, and apply it to the liver. Emplaisters also are
made to cease pains, and partly to ripen Apostemes, and partly to resolve
them, as in example,. Muscilaginis of the seed of Althaea, fenugreeke, and
seed of flax, ana..iij. barley meal..iiij. oil of white lillies, and the
fatness of a hen, ana..ij.ss. butter..j. saffron..j. the whites of eggs in
number.ij. boil the Muscilagines with a soft fire, and with the meal, and
put in the whites of eggs id the end. It does soften and ripen all Apostemes
congealed of a hot and cold matter, and it cease their pain, in what part
soever of the body they be resident. If you will appropriate this Emplaistre to
all kinds of cold Apostemes, then add to it, Ammoniacum, Bdellum, storax
liquida, ana..j. and it will work a marvelous and profitable effect.

CAP. XXIII. Of making Vnguenta.
VNGVENTA in English, ointmentes: And those which pertain unto Physicians, are
made to lenifie and assuage pain, to represent, show, and assign alteration
and changing, to mollify and dissolve knobbes and kernells, specially in the
liver, in the spleen, and in the stomache. The virtue of ointments for other
purposes and for other members belongs to Surgerie, the form and making
whereof is to be sought out of the Antidotaries. An ointment for the stomache.
The form of an ointment to mitigate the pain of the stomache caused of cold,
or by the presence of some such like substance, is in this manner,. oil of
mastie, spicke, and wormwood, ana..ss. cloves, Xilo aloes, maces, and Calamus
Aromaticus, ana..j. gallia muschata..j. or.j.ss. if he be rich, because of the
dearness thereof, of new wax as much as suffices, make an ointme^t for the
stomache, and a Scutum with cotton, and with bands, as it ought to be, and
lay it upon the stomache after the anointing. But to cease the pain in the
stomache coming of a hot cause, Aliud.
as of the flowing of choler, which often chances in fevers, use this
ointment,. oil of roses..j. oil of mirtles or else of quinces..ss. white
saunders, and red, ana..ij. or.ss. new wax washed in endive water, or in rose
water, as much as suffiseth, and make an ointment for the stomache. Also make a
Scutum of cotton, and apply it to the stomache after the anointing. In
ointmentes we do not exceed or pass the quantity of..j. It is also to be
noted that some do wash oiles with the juice or the water of the distillation
of cold herbs in a hot cause, or in hot juices, in a cold cause or disease.
Moreover note, that many do think, that there should be no ointment nor
cerote applied to the stomache without galingale, neither to the heart without
mace or saffron, neither to the brain without Spica Arabica, nor to the liver
without Spodium, or saunders, or wormwood, or other such like things,
thinking verily, the nature of the member to be preserved with restrainers, but
yet not always in the before named medicines. For that law and method is to be
kept in all causes of contrariety, which should be broken in medicines, if
galingale were added to the aforesaid medicine, because galingale is hot. For
truly the nature of the stomache is strengthened sufficiently by the commixing
together or stipticke things which are put into the aforesaid ointment,
because truly they be temperate in heat, as it appears by their nature. Now
follows an ointme^t very profitable for hardness and knobbes of the liver or
spleen, wherewith these two members are most in danger, in this form,. the
roots of Althaea, and the roots of white lillies, Vnguentum.
ana..j. leaves of Maluae, Bismaluae, and violettes, ana. M.j. of the flours of
cammomill, melilote, and the tops of dill, ana. M.ss. meal of fenugreeke,
and meal of flax seed, ana..j. gum Ammoniaci, called Serapini..j. Bdellum
that is soft and whitish..ss. turpentine..iij. gum of pine tree..ss. Storax
liquida..ij. or.iij. the marow of calves or hearts shankes, if you can get it,
hens grease, and duckes grease, oiles of sweet almondes and of ireos, ana.
j.ss. or ana. as much as suffiseth. Dissolve the gummes with wine and a little
vinegar, and to the aforesaid oiles add to new wax as much as suffiseth, then
afterward take the said greaces and powders, or meals, or herbs first sodden
and brayed, and mix them altogether, and make an ointment: in this said
ointment there be more things that do mollify, then there be that dissolve,
because the matter of scirrhous knubbes does chiefly require the same. If you
will minister the aforesaid ointme^t for the hardness of the liver, you may
add to it of the branches of wormwood, of roses, of squinance, or of
spicknard to preserve the strength and nature of the member. If you will
minister it to the spleen, you may mixh with it some Tamariscus bark, the
root of caparres, or such like. If you minister to the hardness of the
stomache, add to wormwood, red roses, Calamus aromaticus, mintes and
galingale.

CAP. XXIIII. Of making a Liniment.
LINIMENTVM is an ointment that is soft and liquid, which has in it little
wax or none at all. It is also made for the same use that ointmentes be made
for. The form of a Liniment to cease pain, (as in the Pleurisy) is after
this manner,. oil of cammomill, and capons grease, ana..ss. fresh new butter
without salt. ij. a little wax washed, and make a Linimente.

CAP. XXV. Of making Frontale.
FRONTALE or Splenium be plaistres made to apply to the forehead, either to
cease pain in the foreparte of the head, or to cause and provoke sleep, or to
cease pain in the head caused of a hot distempre, as it oftentimes chances
in feauers. Against cold causes make a Frontale (as Galene teaches) of red
roses steiped and sooked in vinegar, laid between two linen clothes of three
fingers breath, and in length from one ear to another, or make it for the same
intent, after this fashion,. red roses. p.j.ss. flours of water lillies and
violettes, ana. p.j. betonie, and melilote, ana. p.ss. put all between two fine
linen clothes, (if the patient be rich) or between two course linen clothes,
if he be poor: and make a Frontale well sewed (as it ought to be) for the
forehead and the temples if you will provoke sleep, add to the aforesaid
Frontale, the leaves of lettuse, or of new white poppie, or of mandragoras in
the places and times, that you may have it, but there is but small store of
these cold things. At all times you may put in the seeds of white poppie, or
the barks of the heads of white poppie, or lettuse seed, or henbane seed*
as in example,. flours of water lillies, violettes, and melilote, ana. p.j.
flours of lettuce, or white poppie, ana. the third part of M.j. or of each of
them. M.ss. seed of white poppie..ij. lettuce seed, dill seed, and white
henbane seed, ana..ss. bray all together, and make a Frontale between the
course or fine linen clothes well sewed and baasted in right order. To the
former Frontale melilote and dill sead is added to comfort the brain, that it
be not hurt with cold things. In the diseases called Coephalalgiae coming of
a cold cause, make Frontalia, of hot herbs and flours, as sage, rosmary,
cammomill, betony, briony, mellilote and such like. Frontalia, before they be
laid to the forehead, are wont to have some licour powered upon them, or to be
ayered with some vapor, as in example,. the waters of roses, betony and bawme,
ana..j. of vinegar..ss. commixe them, and of the aforesaid waters, pour a
little portion upon a burning tyle, or some such like thing, and hold the
aforesaid Frontale over the steeme and smoke of the said waters. The foreheard
is oftentimes anointed with many ointmentes serving for the same use and
purpose, that Frontalia do serve for, as in a hot cause, vnguentum populeon,
rubea trochiscata dissolved in water, very meet for this purpose, and yet it
is seeldome in use with them at Paris. Many Physicians in the old time, in a
cold cause did anoint with Mithridatum, and Aurea Alexandrina, and such like.
In all causes (says Galene, 12. lib. Therapeutices) you may conveniently
anoint with Oxyrhodinum, which is made of oil of roses, and six times so
much vinegar, as in example: oil of roses..j. vinegar..ij. commixe them,
stirring them in a plate, or else thus in hoter causes, whenas without
foresight the frenzy will breed, then we commixe cold things, as thus, oil
of roses..j. oil of nenuphar..ss. oil of popie..iij. juice of Solatrum, or
lettuse, or white poppie, water of roses and of vinegar, ana..ss. commixe them
together, stirring them very long in some piece of plate: and anoint the fore
part of the head therewith, yea all the head, if there be inflammacion of the
brain.

CAP. XXVI. Of making Cucufa, and Semicucufa.
CVCVFA is made for the cure of the evil called Coephalalgia, which is a pain
in the head coming of cold, and many times also to stop reume, as in
example,. Sampsucus, (that is) marioram, rosemary, stechados both, of Araby,
and yeallow, ana. p.j. of red roses. p.j.ss. dry cytron barks, grains of
Alkermes, ana..iij. macis, long pepper, quybibes and cloves, ana..ss. Make a
powder, and make a Cucufa, between two fine linen clothes, with a little cotton
baasted between, or with flax, or scarlet scraped, and give it according to
the measure. And if the pain lies most in the fore part of the head, put
most of the powders or spices in that place: likewise if it be in the hinder
part, do so also, and if the Cephalagia be in all parts of the head, then
commixe them equally. But it is called Semicucufa, when we provide but for one
part of the head. If we will stop reumes, then we mix with it stipticke
things, or we make a Cucufa only of stipticke things, either cold or hot as
the cause requires. Therefore we make a cucufa with milium burned, or not
burned, mirtles, cipresse nuttes, and sandaracha (commonly called vernice) vdz,
yealow oker, the bark of franckensence, and such like stipticke things.

CAP. XXVII. Of making Suffitus.
SVFFITVS (in English a perfuming) is made of dry things to stop
distillations which fall from the brain into the lower parts, and it is made
of restraigning medicines, as thus for example,. red roses. p.j.
masticke..ss. vernic^s, that is yealow oker..j. mix them and make a perfuming
for the head, or thus,. Milium. p.j. red roses, p.ss. of vernice and Olibanum,
ana..ss. Commixe them and make a perfume for the head. Note that when the
distillation falls to the lounges, and thereof comes spittell, then take no
perfume by the mouth, because it shorteneth the breath, and lets the
spitting, and makes the humors gross and thick: but you must perfume the
covering of the head, or else perfume some woll, and apply it to the head.

CAP. XXVIII. Of making a Collirium.
COLLIRIVM is a medicine, that is ministered in a liquide form to heal the
^yes Wherefore, because there be diverse evils in the Eyes, the Colleries are
made of diverse fashions: for you must use one kind in the beginning of
Ophth^lmia: another in the state or it, and another in the declination thereof
as it is also commonly used in the inflammations of other members. Therefore in
the beginning you must make it of cold and stipticke repercussiues, as the
whites of eggges, the sap of quince seed, and Psyllium, and other things of
the like virtue: minister them alone, or else let them be first dissolved with
convenient waters, and afterward applied, as in this example following:. the
white of one egg, A Collirium in the beginn^ng (...) Ophthalmia.
and stir it with rose water, or plantaine water, or with water of bawme, or
with all these waters, make a Coll^rie, and put it into the eye that is pained.
Or thus:. the sap of quince seed drawn out with plantaine water, or rose
water..j. and mix them with the white of an egg, and stir it a long time
with a spater, and make a Collirium. But if there be no pain nor redness in
the eyes, but a certain uncleanness which ought to be dried up, then it is
good to make Colliries of Tuttie preparate, and of Aloes washed, and of Lapis
calaminaris, and other such like things, which ought to be taken with some
convenient licour, (except it rather likes you better) to put into the Eye the
powders of them: for so they dry up, and wipe away the filthiness the
cleaner.

CAP. XXIX. Of making Nasale or Erthinum.
NASALE and Erthinum be medicines which be cast into the Nose for many causes
and intentes, as to stop bleeding at the nose, to provoke sneesinges, to
cause child birth, or to bring forth the Secundine which is retained within
after the birthe, and furthermore it purges the brain. It may be made many
ways, as in dry powders, A Nasale to (...) bleeding at the Nose.
which must be snufted or blown up into the Nose, or it may be made liquide,
and then you must anoint the nosethrills within, or you may make it whole and
hard, and then it must be put up into the Nose.. the hears that be in a Hares
belly. p.ss. the saweduste, or moosynes of willow. p.ss. bole armoniacke and
Sanguis Draconis powdered, ana..j. cut the hears very small and mix them all
together, and blow them up into the Nose, or dissolve them all with some
stipticke water, or with the juice of some herb, or with the white of an
egg, and add to them also (if you please) Balaustia, or the rindes of
pomegranats, or Acacia, all powdered, and with a linen clothe make a Nasale,
and dippe it in the aforesaid medicines, and put it into the Nose. Sneesinges
are provoked by dry powders, snufted or blown into the Nose, A Nasale to
provoke sneesing.
which be sharp and biting, as be these, pepper, pellitorie* stauisacre, and
root of flour deluce powdered. You may commixe the said things with some
licour, and anoint the nosethrilles, or take clothe or silk wound up
together, and dippe it in the aforesaid licour, and put it into one nosethrill,
or into both.

CAP. XXX. Of making Apophlegmatismus.
APOPHLEGMATISMVS is a medicine which causes one to vomit up fleume: it
provoke reume out of the brain into the mouth, and it is good to purge the
brain. Masticke is commonly used in this case, which being long holden in the
mouth and chewed, it brings forth reume and fleume. Also Sage ^eaues holden
in the mouth does likewise purge reume by the mouth. Also make Noduli of
Pellitorie, pepper, stouisacre, root of Ireos, and Panax, and hold them in the
mouth. Furthermore make gargarismes of the same medicines. Also there are
ointmentes made of the same things, wherewith the roufe of the mouth must be
anointed, for they by reason of their heat and tartenesse, do draw fleume and
reume into the mouth.

CAP. XXXI. Of making Distillations Restoratiue.
DISTILLATIONS be made to sustain strength and might, when the sick is so
weak, that he cannot digest any hard nourishment. Distillations ar of a mixed
kind, (that is to say) they are partly food, and partly medicines. They are
made for many intentes and purposes: for some be made to restrain, as in the
flux of the belly, some to alter or change, as when they are ministered for
feauers to refrigerate, or in cold diseases to make hot, and some do resist
poison and malignant humors, A distillation restoratiue restreining.
as in pestilent feauers, and they are made after this manner.. conserues of
succorie, of roses, of Simphytum (that is) cumfrey, of Cornelus, of Miua, and
of quinces, ana..ij. powder of Electuaries, Diarrhodon Abbatis, and Tria
Sandalt, ana..ij. trochiskes of Carabe, of Berberies, and of Terra sigillata,
ana..ss. of red coral, and Lapis hematidis, ana..j. water of the decoction of
one capon or of two, altered with plantaine, knot grass, moley^e, lettuce,
seed of Berberies, Sumaach, and Omphacium, lb.vi^j. put all together in a
Limbecke with the flesh of two chickens, or of two partriches, or of two turtle
doves, or of one capon, or of more of these, and with the crummes of one white
loaf, or of two wette in rose water, Another.
and make a distillation in balneo Mariae with a soft fire.. of the aforesaid
distillation. lb.ss. juice of pomegranates..j. or.j.ss. sugar roset..ij.
cinnamon elect.. strain them (as Hypocrates teaches) through a sleaue, and
let the sick use it every hour. But if you will made a distillation to have a
cooling virtue, always observe the same order and portion that is spoken of
before, A distillation restoratiue cooling.
and for the restraigning conserues, add to such as do cool, as conserues of
water lillies, of violettes, of roses, succorie, and bawme, and likewise cold
Electuaries. as Diamargariton frigidum, and Trochiskes of Camphora, also alter
the decoction of the flesh with lettuce, Against malignant and pestilent
feauers.
sorrel, purcelaine, scarioll, and such like. Moreover you shall make a
distillation restoratiue against malignant and pestilent feauers in this
sort.. Conserues of violettes, water lillies, bawme, borage, and buglosse,
ana..ij. bark of citron condite..j. root of Dictamus and Tormentill, root of
Angelica, and root of gentian, ana..ss. powder of Electuarium Diamargariton
frigidum, all the Saunders, bole Armoniacke, trochiskes of Camphora, wood of
Aloes, ana..ij. scraping of yuorie, and hearts horn, maces, cinnamon, cloves,
and seed of Cardus Benedictus, ana..j. of old Triacle..iij. the water of the
decoction of two chickens, or of capons altered with sorrel, scabious lettuce,
borage, buglosse, quar. iij. put all together in a glassen Limbecke, with the
flesh of some things, and with the crummes of two white loaves infused in
white wine, and make a distillation with a lent and soft fire, in convenient
order as is requisite, Another.
or thus.. of the afosesaid distillation. lb.ss. Syrupus de acetositate
Citri..ij. commixe them together, and let the sick use it every hour.

Finis Libri Sexti.

