THE BLESSEDNESS OF BRYTAINE, OR A Celebration of the Queens Holyday.

Wherein is briefly discoursed the most happy Regiment of her Highness.

Newly set forth with a New Addition Containing the late Accidents and
Occurrents of this year 88. being the Thirtieth of her Majesty's Reign.

By M. Kyffin.

1. Pet. 2.17. Deum timete: Regem Honorate.

1. Tim. 2.2. Fiant preces pro Regibus and Principibus, vt tranquillam and
quietam vitam degamus cum omni pietate and honestate.

Published with Authority.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf. 1588.

TO THE RIGHT HONOrable Sir Robert Devreux Knight, Earl of Essex and Ewe,
Vicount Hereford, and Bourgchier, Lord Ferrers of Chartleigh, Bourgchier and
Lovain, and Master of her Majesty's Horse.
THE faithful love, and duty, (Right honorable) long since deservedly born,
by my deceased Father, both to your lordships Noble Graundfather, and likewise
to the famous and worthy Earl your Father, (unto whom for diverse respects,
he was much bounden being alive, and being dead, left the like Bond of duty,
in us his Children toward your Lordship) has the more emboldened me,
(presuming on your Lordships great Courtesies) to publish under your favorable
protection, these my unpolished verses, of her Majesty's: wherein, though I
have but showen my leaden skill, in a Golden Cause, yet has the same proceeded
from such ardent desire, and devotion in me, as thereby it may seem, in some
mean, to merit Tolleration, especially, since it carries a dutiful
remembrance, of her Majesty's most prosperous and peaceable reign over us:
which having run the full, and Blessed Course, of Nine and Twenty years; does
now, begin the Thirtieth, to the great joy, and inspeakeable comfort of this
her royal Kingdom; In reverend regard whereof, this poor Poem is most
chiefly intended: I humbly therefore, present it to the Courteous acceptance
of your most Honorable Lordship: Whom I beseech the Highest to bless, and
enriche, with increase of all perfect Honor, long life, and ever during
felicity.

Most humble at your good Lordships commandment. M. K.

D. P.

To the Reader.
TWo things make blisfull Realms, Religion pure and Peace:
Which Two our England has enjoyed, long time with large increase.
The God of peace be praisd, who graunts our Birth and Being.
In this same Realm, with this Rare Prince, these gladsome Seasons seeing.
And pray we God likewise, this State still to defend:
Preserving it in perfect Peace, til that the world take end.
The Author of this book, deserves a during fame,
Who chose a good Ground for his work, and wrought well on the same.
T. LL.

In praise of this book, and the Author.
WHo list to see her Noble deeds displaid,
Whose golden gifts, each creature does adore,
Whose Virtues Rare, have hauty hearts dismayed,
Whose Name, and Fame, increases more and more:
Let them peruse this Poem, with Advise,
By Kyffins pen, put down in perfect wise.
A work of worth, beseeming well his Art,
So fitly framd, and fraught with tried Truth,
As may Rejoice, each loyal subjects heart,
To hear, and see; which hidden had bin Ruthe.
Our Queens long Reign, to our still during joy,
The King of Kings, preserve free from Annoy.
I. H.

In commendation of this work, and the writer.
THe Persian Cyrus, Xenophons pen, Achilles, Homersfound:
King Alexanders valor great, did Curtius style resound,
Their worthy fame, those worthy wits, to skies aloft do send,
Those worthy wits, cake by their fame themselves to fame commend.
Though skillful Muses notes come short to sound this Princess praise,
Her Princely gifts, her Justice mylde, her Peaceful lasting days:
Yet Kyffins Muse in stately style, has shot: so near the same.
That by resounding worthy praise, himself deserves fame.
R. Cook.

In commendation of his friend M. Kyffin.
THe fruitful Muses seem, to have conspird, with full assent,
Vplifting Kyffins lore, with weighty words to work Content:
The subject of his Verse, is sacred, firm, and full of grace,
Whereon his Web is wrought, whose learned skill, none can deface,
Momus the carping God, to Cavil here can find no cause,
And Zoylus spiteful wretch, has here wherewith to stop his jaws.
THE BLESSEDNESS OF BRYTAINE.
PEarce Clio Muse, my weak, unworthy wit:
Caliope, set forth my style with strength,
Unfold her Fame (with words forth sounding fit,)
Whom Kings adore, and Lords in worldly length:
Whose Sacred Hands the Stately Scepters hold,
And Royal, Rules her Realms in Crowned gold.
A Monarch Maiden Queen adorned rare,
With Regal Heavenly dowres, of diverse kind:
In whom, who list dame Natures Works compare,
With those rich Thewes, and Virtues of her Mind,
Shall much admire, at such a Myrrour sheene,
At such a Prince, at such a Peereles Queen.
The Star of Women Sex, Grave Wisdoms store:
Sententious, speaking Tongs in filed phraze,
Profoundly learnd, and Perfect in each Lore,
Her Fame, no Rav'ning Time shall ever Raze:
Hater of Wrong, high Refuge eke for Right,
Concord, and Peace, continuing by her Might.
Besides that such manner of Reciting strange and Hethenish Names, were here
altogether inco^uenient. The author does also of very purpose, somewhat shun
that beaten high way, to fill paper with pestring Names of fained Gods,
Goddesses: Nymphs, Persians, Grecians, Romans, etc. Being a thing of some
sometimes used, too, too much and to little effect.
What should J Nymphs, or Goddesses Recount?
Or Egypt Queens, or Roman Ladies name?
Since as Supreme, our Sov'raigne does surmount,
In choice of Good, the chief of all those same?
For to compare the Great, with simple small,
Is thereby, not to praise the BEST at all.
Elizabeth, Large Light of Sov'raigne Seat,
Whose Justice, Prudence, Temprance, Fortitude,
Ingrafted young, are grown forth spreading Great,
Throughout the world, mong Nations wise and rude:
No land, but lauds this right Resplendant Rose,
Tutor to Friends, and Terror unto Foes.
As Shining Sun recleeres the darkened Sky, The reestablishing of the
Gospel, by her Majesty, a work of inestimable worth, everlastingly famous for
ever and ever. Primaria Principis Curia, Religio. David. 1. ^. 13. Asa. 2. par.
14 Icho. 2. P. 17 Ioash. 2. p. 23 Josias, 2. Reg. 22. Hez. 2. p. 29.

And forth recalles each thing, from shivering Shrowds,
So has our Second Sun, both far and nigh,
By brightning Beams, outcleerd erroneous Clouds:
A powerful Prop of Christ's Euangell pure,
On whose Support, it rests Reposed sure.
Our Current Coin, was Metal base and mean, Argentum tuu^ Scoria. Isaiah.
1.22.

Till her most princely Grace, the same put out,
By perfect Gold, and pured Silver clean, Base Coins abolished by her highness.

Which pass for common Coins, her Realms throughout.
A Deed, deserving her Perpetual Praise,
And Publik Profit, to this Land always.
Ad hereto Armor, and Artillery, The royal increase of Armor, and Artillery,
by her Majesty for the defense of the Realm. Foelix est ea Resp. quae te^ pore
pacis, Bella tractat. Laur. Grimal. de optimo Senatore. fol. 71.

Of her most Royal Charges cheefely found;
As store of Arming steel defensiuely,
And Roaring Gunnes, far rendering fired sound;
A furd'ring Strength for Peace, and safe Repose:
And Means, resisting Rage, of Warring foes.
J may not here omit in Silent sort, The incomparable Navy. Royal, built
and maintained by her Majesty. Pericles Athen, ait: Vna^ pecuniae para^dae
rationem puta^dam, Naues qua^plurimas ha bear, alias vero extra eam rations,
null lius mome^ti existima^das.

Her Royal Ships strong wrought for stearnfull war,
(Whereof all worldly Realms do raise Report)
Through raging Seas discovering Regions far:
A Scowre-sea Navy all bright and bravely burnisht,
Forth spowting fire, fair, huge, and fully furnished.
When floorisht Learning to such Type of hight?
Or purefull Preaching, Plentiful exercise of Religion: perfection in all Kind
of learning, and right wholesome laws, enjoyed by her Majesty's mostgratious
means.
when had It more place?
When was Gods word so known to every wight,
Which heretofore, did suffer such Deface?
When raignd Religion so deuoide of eryme?
Or Rightful Laws, as in her Royal time?
The Realm wonderfully enriched with Gold and Silver. The earth most
abundantly blessed with fertility. And every man quietly enjoying his own,
under her highness prosperous government.
When was this Realm so rich of glittring Gold,
Of plated Silver, pearl, and precious stones?
When was more Tillage on this fertile Mold?
Or more rich streaming Graces grown at ones?
Or more Concordant life, in Country and Town,
Then since her Regal Highness came to Crown?
The vigilant Care and incessant travel of her Majesty's most honorable priny
Council.
Her sacred Senate by their grave foresight,
Provide for Publik Good and Ev'ls prevent,
Conseruing Common weal, from Perils plight,
In Rightful Ruling, Concord, and Concent:
A Senate well besitting such a Charge;
Prudent, and prompt in Lore and Wisdom large.
The most blessed and peaceable state of her Majesty's subjects in comparison
of other Nations round about them. Strangers graciously received, and relieved
by her Highness. within her own kingdom.
From Wrathful War, her People rest in Peace:
From wasting Woes, her Subjects live Secure:
And yet our Neighbor Nations Wars not cease,
Their dire distress, and wailfull Woes still dure;
The Most of Might, eke makes her Realm a towr
Strangers to shield, from many a balefull Shower.
A Mighty Queen, pure with Compassion pressed, Her Majesty's gracious aidg unto
her distressed neighbors abroad. Regia (credemthi) res est succurrere lapsis,
Co^uenit vt tante quantus esipse viro. Ovid. lib. 2. de Pon.

Rendering Relief, to Neighbor friends forlorn:
Her helping Hand, holds up the weak distressed,
And has the haughty, dreadful, often downborn:
Whereof Records, full rife remaining store,
Note Scotland, Low Countries.
Belgia, and many places more.
Her Highness bountiful liberality. Her Mercy toward of fenders. Imperia du^
bus potissimu^ contine^tur, Nempe, Proemio and Paena, test Solone. Iusticia
sine Misericordia Crudelitas. Misericordia sine Iustitia fatuitas.
Lib'rall Rewarder of Heroical Acts;
Rich in Reward, large giving Gwerdons great;
Prone eke to pardon, many offending facts,
Yea though the same, concern her Regal Seat;
Rigor of Justice, in Revenging Laws,
Mylde by her Mercy, wreaks not each Cause.
A Blessed Branch of Brutus Royal Race;
Her Majesty Princess of Wales, where the Inhabitants enjoy Gods word in
their own language, through the mere grace and goodness of hirhighnesse.
To Brytish wightes a Blisfull worldly joy,
Puissant Princess of Their Native place,
To shield their Earthly lives from all annoy:
And to their Sickly Souls, a Sov'raigne Leche,
Granting Christ's Gospel, in their Country speech.
Princely Possessor of this Realm full Right,
And Heir apparent to the Heavenly Crown:
Assigned to serve Gods Truth, with Maine and Might
Vp-raising Virtue; Vice depressing down:
Fruitful in Faith, though frutelesse, wanting feere:
Such brings she A perpetual memory of her manifold goodness, in steed of
Sounes and daughters. Praeferre patriam liberis Rege^decet. Sense in Tr.
Fruit, insteade of Children here.
Omnis laus virtutis in Action consistit. Arist.
Such Rare, Renowned Deeds, our Queen has don
And more than my poor power may well express:
Violenta nemo Imperia co^tinuit diu. Sen. in Tr.
Long has her Reign, this Glorious Race forth run
Long may it last, forth bringing fruits no less:
Great is the Good, thus grown forth, from her Grace:
Great good shall grow, through her like le^gthned space
A reproof unto Traitors.
O wretched Wights, that would this Queen enharme,
By close contryuing of her Cruel Death;
They rewarded me Evil for Good: for they have privily laid their Net to
destroy me without cause. Psalm. 35.
What cursed Circes, could their minds so charm,
As not to recke, to reaue their Liege of breath?
Fell Raging Rome, all this is long of thee,
From whom, no Troubling Treasons, here are free.
Our kingly Rooted Rose, fresh flowring stands;
Guarded by Gods great Power, and Providence:
Amasing much, all Traitors trembling hands,
Which plye to pluck this Plant by violence:
Yea Mag^^s est veritas, and Praualet. Esdras. 3. c. 4.
Truth down treading Treason unto shame,
Victor suruiues, by vanquishing the same.
Thrice happy Land, whose Sov'raigne Ladies life,
The Lord enlengthning, saues from sodein haps;
Though Civil Bronds, and foreign Furies rife,
Conioyning erst, have threatened Thunder claps,
Yet Maugre Malice, Foes are put to foil, Si Deusnobiscum quit contra nos.
Pau. 8. To.

And safe remains, our Sov'raigne, and our Soil.
The Angel of the Lord tarieth about them that fear him, and that put their
trust in him. Psalm. 34. There is no king that can be saved by the multitude of
an Host. etc. Behold the Eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, and that
put their trust in his Mercy. Psalm. 33.
Thrice happy Queen, acknown of God so dear,
Against whom, what secret Mischeefs have bin sought,
But that the same, would presently appear,
By means Miraculous, as yet unwrought?
A Sured Sign, whom God protects to Joy,
No lurking Ev'l, can thereto work Annoy.
O Glorious Ruler of the glistring Heaven,
Prolong her Health, with Heaps of happy Years,
The prayer and wish of all good Subjects.
That as her Rule has Raignd twice Lev'n and Sev'n
So may she still, surpas all Potent Peers,
To live, and long time wield the Civil sword,
As far, as course of Nature can afford.
Far Foreign lands, bear witness of her Name;
Far surging Seas, have felt her warlik Ships;
Both Seas, and Lands, forth thunder out her Fame, Pama manet facti posito
velamine, currunt: Et memore^ Famam, qui been gessit habet. Ovid. lib. Fast.

Through force of flowring Acts, free from Ecclips:
Elizabeth's due praise shall never dye,
In Earth, nor Seas, nor in the starry Sky.
Right Reverend Princess, rare is thy Renown,
Though Spiteful Envy, spue forth poysned gall;
Naught shall it crase, thine Acts Eternal Crown,
Nor minish much, thy sound success at all:
No BEST may shun fell Enuies sowrfull stench, Arsprim^^ Regni, est posse
Inuidiam pati. Senec. in Herc. fur.

Whom Kezars, Kings, and Queens, have faild to quench.
As Highest Hills, bide fiercest force of VVeather,
And Tall Trees tops, bear greatest stresse of VVinde,
As finest Black, yields show of smallest feather,
And in pure White, the least black Mote we find:
So Envies shaft, is shot at Su^ma petit liuor, perflant altissima venti. Ovid.
Highest Mark;
And pries in Purest Things, whereat to bark.
No Ruler Such has weld this Realm of yore,
Few Realms have joyed, so long a Iniqua nunquam regna, perpetuo manent. Sen.
in Med.
Peaceful Rule:
No Realm is read, to have Rul'de bin heretofore,
By such a Queen, safe quelling Civil Brule;
Who reigning still, a Prince withouten peer;
Her highness now, holds on her Thirtieth year.
Adore Nouembers sacred More fit to be solemnized, then many other days noted
in the Kalinder.
Sev'nteenth Day,
Wherein our Second Sun began her Shine:
Ring out loud sounding Bells; on Organs play;
To Musiks Mirth, let all Estates incline:
Sound Dru^mes, and Tru^pets, renting Air and Ground
Stringd Jnstruments, strike with Melodious sound.
Ye Mighty Men of Mars ennobled Knights,
Advance your selves, on fiery foming steedes:
Revive This Times Remembrance, with all Rights,
Jn Armor bright, and gorgeous warlik weeds:
At Tylt, and Turnay, trying Martial Might;
And Battring strokes, at Barriers forcefull fight.
Ye Country folk, forth stalking in your feeldes,
Loud Carols sing, to celebrate This Time;
Show Signs of joy (as Country manner yeeldes,)
Jn Sporting Games, with Dance, and rural Ryme:
Each Swayne, and Shepherd, sound his piping Reed,
For joy, enjoying Feelds, and Flocks to feed.
Ye Bryttish Poets, Repeat in Royal Song,
(With weighty words, used in King Arthurs days)
The Imperial Stock, from whence your Queen has sprung
Enstall in verse your Princess lasting prays:
Masters in the Science of Music.
Pencerddiaid, play on Ancient Harp, and Crowd:
Expert men in singing.
Atceiniaid, sing her praises pearcing loud.
Let Hills, and Rocks, rebounding Echoes yield,
Of Queen Elizabeth's long lasting Fame;
Let woody Groaues, and Watery Streams be filled,
And Creekes, and Caves, with sounding of the same:
O Cambria, stretch, and strain thy utmost breath,
To praise, and pray for Queen Elyzabeth.
Her Third time Ten years Reign, we now possess;
Let every faithful subject say, Amen.
Thrice three times Ten, God grant her Grace may reign
To this her Realms long wished for wealfulnesse,
Whereby, each long erst Loss, it may Regain:
And so Redound, the happiest Realm for ay,
Vnturn'd from Truth, even till the Latter Day.
God preserve Queen Elizabeth.
ILLVSTRISSIMO CLARISSIMOQVE D. ROBERTO D'EVREVX, COMITI ESSEXIAE ET EWIAE,
VICECOMITI HEREFORDIAE AC BOVRCHIER, DOMINO DE FERRARIIS DE CHARTLEIGH,
BOVRCHIER ET LOVAIN.

GEORGIANI ORDINIS EQVITI AVRATO ALIISQVE MVLTIS NOMINIBVS HONORATISSIMO VIRO:

MAVRICIVS KYFFINVS ACCESSIONEM HANC SVI LIBRI FOELICITATIS BRYTANIAE, HONORIS
SVMMAEQVE OBSERVANTIAE ERGO DEDICAT.

blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

SEMPER EADEM



A CONTINVATION OF the Blessedness of Brytain, Comprehending the Thirtieth year
of her Majesty's Reign. 1588.
MOst sacred Muses, lend me of your light,
To drive forth darkness from my dull conceat:
Jmpart your Powrs, to sharp my dimned sight,
That perfect things, by pen I may repeat;
To honor her, with yearly Fames increase,
Who houlds the Helm, of our long lasting Iustitia Regis, Pax est Populorum.
Cypr.
Peace.
Who Rules by Right, and lives in love of all: Iustitia firmatur solium. Pro.
16.

Who wisely works the Sauegard of her Land:
Who both preuides, and eke preuents our fall:
Who gards, and guydes, her Realms from Hostile hand:
Who has the Inexpugnabile munimentum, Amor Giuium. Seneca.
hearts, of her leege folk in hold:
And whom Iehoue, has blessed ten Thousand fold.
Such is our Sacred Sov'raigne, and our Queen:
Such is her Care, to shield her Subjects still:
Such be their Faithful Hearts, to herwards seen;
Such are the gifts, Tuta est Co^ditio subiectoru^ vbi vi uitur sub Aequitate
Regna^tium. Cass. li. 3. Ep.
of Gods most gracious will:
Such is the Life we lead with her in bliss;
Such is the Queen we may by no means miss.
Adore we God who lends us still her life:
Adore we her, whom God has plas'd in Power:
Adore we him in her that Stints our Strife:
Adore we Both, Respectiuelie, each hour:
The one in Heaven Directs us by his Grace:
The other here on Earth, supplieth his place.
Time was when Popes through-pold this Royal Ream,
Plato asserit, Tyrannt de^ esse, cum vi compulsi Ciue^ Iugu^ seruitutis
violenter subeunt: Reg^
Reauing each Right, foul Might Misruling all:
And as stearn Rage of strong and sturdy stream,
Down-bearing Banks and Bridges forced to fall;
Even so by will they wrought the Peoples wrack,
Lust was their Law, the Ruefull land to Rack.
Time is, when Justice houlds the Regal Throne; Regnu^ au^t, cum vltro pare^t
pare^que Dime^sione^ Iustitiae and Officioru^ expectant. Fr. patr. De Regno and
Regis institutione. Firmabitur Iustitia Thronus. Pro. 15.

From whence as from a sure, and sacred Spring,
Forth flows the flood of Royal Right alone,
Which mastreth Might, and still withsta^ds his sting:
Compare Times past with this our present Age:
We Ruled by Right: They, wro^gd by Cruel Rage.
Time shall be, when our murding Malcontents, Qui contra supraposita^ sibi
potestate^ murmurat: Liquet quod illum redarguit qui ea^de^ Homini potestatem
dedit. Greg. in Mor.

Which Murmur, and Malign this shining State;
Shall, to their Shame, acknow with full Consents,
The Truth they tread in wrongful harbourd hate:
Then shall appear, in plain and public sight,
The diffrent works of wrong and eke of Right.
Nullatam modesta foelicitas est vt Malignitatis de^tes vitare possit. Senec.
Some muddy Minds no Cleernes can content,
But ever thickning thirst for Troubled Change:
Hanging their Hopes on future false event,
Whereby they seek some Alteration strange:
Huiusmodi Arts nugatoriae vel noxiae Superslitionis ex quada^ pestifera
societate hominum and Demonu^ co^stituta, pe nitus sunt Repudiandae and
sugienda Christiano. Aug.
Others do Calk, and cast Constellations;
And yet be deceyv'd by deep Diuinations.
The fatal year of fearful Eighty Eight,
Forethreatning falls of Empires, Realms, and Kings:
Out-breathing Bale, to every Earthly wight,
By pestring Plagues, and Dreadful drery things:
Is Now nigh spent, and yet our Realm and Queen,
Through Gods great Power, secure in Saftie seen.
Whereby appeeres, Men's prophesies be vain,
When God decrees a Contrary Success: That which the Lord of Hosts has
d^termined, who is able resist? Esaias. 14.

Fraud is the fruit of Man's unstable brain
Out-strayd from Truth, in Errors wide excess:
Who trusts Untroth must needs downslip and slide:
Men are but Men, God is the certain Guide.
This was the year, wherein by Fire and Sword,
Our Foes forethought, to woork this Kingdoms wrack:
Accipe nunc Dan^um Insidias and crimine ab vno. Disce omnes.
Against which Time, much Malice hid in hoord,
And now descride, discovreth all their Pack:
Long erst were laid foregrounds for our Regreete
Ere Fame was forth isprad of Spanish fleet.
Which hugie Fleet, full fraught with Murdring Minds
Such a fleet, as the like was never known or read of before.
Meaning Massacre to our Native Soil:
Being furnished forth with Ships of sundry kinds,
To give the Fall: Received them selves the Foil:
The Prays be His who still protects our Cause:
Foulding his Flock from Ravening Wooluish Jaws.
Strange was the Stroke wherewith they went to wrack,
On diverse Coasts of Countries round about: God scatters the Devices of the
Crasty: So that their hands cannot accomplish that which they do enterprise.
Job. 5.

Before which Fall, their Lives susteind much lack,
Of Needful things, unable to hold out:
Then drery Drowning, stopped their staruen breath,
By heaps of hundreds haald to dole full Death.
A Miracle of mighty Magnitude,
Don by the Dreadful Power of Gods Right hand: This was the Lords doing, And
it is marvelous in our eyes. Psalm. 118.

Wherein our Might and Means he did exclude,
That so himself most Gloriously may stand:
It is beyond the Reach of Humane thought,
To think the Things he for our sakes has wrought.
By hideous storms, their Ships constraynd to stray,
The Times when: The places where: And the manner how: Is particularly declared
in the late Aduertisments thereof sent from Ireland.
Rusht some on Rocks, and some on Sholles and Sands,
Betottred, torn, and Rent in Wrackt array:
Much of their me^, dead strowd on Shoares and Stra^ds:
Others Deuourd in Depth of Surging Seas,
Both Men and Ships, the waters wrath t'appeas.
So Pharaos host was drencht in Drowning fluds,
As he pursude poor Israel folk amayne,
From Pharaos stock, forth bloamd these balefull buds,
Which in like sort, for like Attempt are slain.
Fierce Pharao found Due guerdon for his guylt:
The like Due Doom, their Spanish Pomp has spilt.
The furious Foe enthralld in thirst of Blood,
Furor Tyra^noru^ mextinguibilis, quem Regni furiosa Cupido accendit.
Whose Ravenous Rore, outreacheth Seas and Lands,
Still Raging, seeks Subversion of the Good,
By Mighty Means of stearnfull Armed Bands:
But God Regarding his true Peoples plight;
Preue^ts their wrong, and makes preuail their Right
No Councels, or Complots of Men, may stand:
Or Stratagems, of strange invented Jll:
Or Strength by Sea, or Puissant Power by Land,
To strive with God, or strain beyond his will.
God fights for us, and shields our Lives from Thrall: If God be with us, who
can be against us? Paul. 8. Romans

What skills it than, who be our Foes at all?
The Prosperous plight, and Peace of this our Land: Acrius Diuitibus qua^
Pauperibus inuidetur: and non Inopes, sed Locupletes, inquietat Infestatio
saeua Latronum. Aug.

(A heavy hart-sore to our Fuming foes)
Vp-mooues their Minds, with grudging to gainstand:
VVishing our weal, were turned to wailing woes.
The Bronds of Envy, burn so in their breast,
As still they Rage to Reaue our Lives of Rest.
Fowl Tyranny, pursues with pearcing hate,
Such as abhor the Cruel shead of blood:
For herein chiefly stands the Tyran state, Tyrannus infensus est Omnibus qui
Virtuti student. Fr. Patr. de Reg. etc.

To shroud the Bad, and seek to shread the Good.
Lo here the sink of Machiauels lewd Lore;
Where Tyrants turn them selves to bloody gore.
Woe worth the wretch that wrote those Rules of Rage: N. Machiauel las Flore^t.
per niciosiss. Author: qui in suo Libro de principe nihil fere tradidit praeter
Tyra^: nidis instituendae Praecepta: quoru^ pauca sunt hac. viz. Principe^
Saeuitiae fama^ negligere debere. Vtilius esse Principt metui qua^ amari.
Crudelitate^ qua laudabi lem fine^ sibi propon^t, reprehe^di non deberi.
Principem Peierare, Fallere, and Dissimulare sine vlla dubitatione licere.
Principem prudente^ fidem seruare non debere, si da^no ei est Fidem,
Cleme^tiam, Liberalitatem Virtutes esse damnosas principi.

Woe worth the Peers, which practice them in life:
Vile Machiauell, thy pen depaints Outrage,
To plunge a Prince, in streams of bloody strife,
The Feends infernal, fraught thy Reaching brain
With wiles to work thy Follwers endless Pain.
Those be our Foes, whom Machiauel has schoold;
With whom are joined, falls Judas faith-lorn Crew:
But Jove the just Judge, their courage has coold,
Who made them drink the Draught they for us drew.
Thus Tyra^nie, and Treason, Trauaild with hate,
To seege and subvert this Peaceful Estate.
And Trans-pakt Traitors, bragging made their boast,
Of Lands, Magis Insidijs nostroru^ quam Aliorum periclitamur. Isid. Caueamus
igitur perfidum, Caueamus Prod^^orem. Ambr.
and Lordships, here to hold by Spoil:
But as they Reckend wide without their Oast,
So must they try much Terror, Teene, and Toil,
And loose their Lives, (Defilde with foul Defect)
Ere that their VVreakfull Wills do work effect.
Hi triformes Canes ora proterua habent intonancia ingenti Latratu.
These are the Treble Treason-headed whelps:
Their sire is Cerberus huge hound of Hell;
Whose threefold throat, still yields the^ yallping helps,
To Bark, and Bawle, with hideous sounding yell, Treble, Traitors. viz. To God:
To their Prince: To their Country.

Against God, their Prince, and Cuntry, at a breath:
Trusting by Treason, to see True men's death.
All Faithful Subjects, serve your Royal Queen, Nemo enim Bello lacessere
aut facere audet Iniuriam Regno vel populo, que^ expeditu^ and promptu^ ad
resiste^dum vindicandumque agnoscit. Veg. lib. 4. cap. 13.

With wonted Might, and Magnitude of Hearts:
Such let your power, and Puissance be seen,
As may forefaint your Foes with grisly smarts:
Even so besits it worthy warlik wights,
To Fight in Fe^ce of Queen and Cuntry Rights.
Who will not Fight against a Cruel Foe?
How can we Join in Iuster Cause of fight?
Than to Conserve our selves from slaughtring woe,
With Courage fierce, and forcefull Manly Might?
Lands Liberties, and Lives, lie on the stake;
Whereof each private person does partake.
For wicked Machiauel says: Principe^ in Prouincia nuper victa, oe^s quibus
mutatio graui damno est subuertere debere: Atque eoru^ qui prius in ea
dominabantur familiam ac sobelem ab stirpe tollere.
Where Tyrants triumph, Mischeefs must ensue:
No spare of hoary Age, or Infants small:
Matrons, and Mayds, their shameful Rape shall Rue:
Slaughter and Slavery, shall be servd on all:
Huge Storms, and streams, of wastful wrack and woe,
The Cities, Towns, and Fields, shall ouer-floe.
And again: Principem si quidin Religione falsi est, Id co^firmare debere
Besides their Rage, and Rancour, raught at full,
On Lim, and Life, where loss has wrought their gain;
And in another place preferring the Pagans Religion before Christ's, he says:
Religionem Ethnicorum Animos illis excelsos and ad magnas res
fortitersuscipiendas audaces fecisse: Christianoru^ vero Religione^ mentes in
nimiam humilitate^ deprimere: Indole^ oe^m debilitare, eosque Iniuriae ac
praedae opportunos facere.
The Pillars pure of faith, they will down pull,
Tra^pling Christ's truth, with monstrous might and main
Rightful Religion, shall to Ruin Run;
Against which, no foul Despite shall fail undone.
These be the Things, Diu adpa^ra^ dum est Bellum vt vincas celerius: quia
longa belli praeparatio celere^ facit Victoriam. Sen. in Epi. 15
our Enemies forethreat:
These be the fruits, and furies of our foes:
These be the Men, we must in Time back-beat.
These be the Clouds, whence all foul weather grows:
Then Arm, Plurimu^. n. Terroris Hostibus Armoru^ Splendour importat. Veg. lib.
2.
with Alarm, their slights we do see:
Once warnd, Ever Armd, henceforth we should be.
For though their Late Attempt Returned them Loss,
Whereas they weend to win and wreak their hate, Mala Meant, Malus Animus.

And thereby sore susteind a Deadly Cross:
Yet does their murdring Malice, naught abate;
But will Retrye their Trechrous Mischeefs meant;
Whom to Resist we must be Ready bent.
Conioyne all in strength of hearts, and strong hands; Quum te^pus
Necessitasque postulat, decertandum. est manu, and Mors Seruituti
Turpitudinique antepone^da. Cicero. Donabit Certanti Victoriam qui certandi
dedit Audaciam, Aug.

As warriors and wreakers, of vnbrooked wrongs:
In Ire, all on fire, like wild burning brands;
Skattring, and battring, our foes thickest throngs:
God will forth guide us with victory and Fame:
Downfelling our foes with Infamy and shame.
And thank we highly In so much as God has delivered us from great perrills,
we thank him highly. 2. Mackab. 1.11.
Him that held us up,
From plunging Pits, of grisly Perrils past,
Where others sank, and (sorrows forced to sup)
With huge consuming Cares were ouercast:
Our Nearest Neighbors, never Ioyd the Tale Bonu^ est bonum Pacis vt in rebus
creatis nil gratiosius soleat audiri: nil delectabilius co^cupisci: and nihil
vtilius possidert. Aug. d^^^iu. Det.
Rest
Which we whole Thirty years have here possessed.
No, nor this Land, had ever erst the like,
In all the Princes days that Ruled the same:
But often goard with Push of warring Pike,
It bare the brunt of Famine, Sword, and Flame:
Save in our Queens, bright shyning Days of Peace,
That Heavenly health, and worldly wealth increase.
Vaeduplici cord suo, partem faciunt Deo, and partem Diabolo. Aug.
Who than can Doubt, or deem in Double Heart,
But God has wroght great wonders by our Queen?
Whereof (All partial Censures, put a part:)
Abundant Proofs and Precedents be seen.
VVhereon, a sure Conclusion sound does sort,
That God will still her Royal State support.
Full Thirty years her Government has dur'de;
Whereby what precious Fruits her Realms have reapt
All Subjects in their Conscience are assur'de,
On whom the goulden grayn thereof is heapt:
The Eternal God prolong her Ruling days,
His Glorious Name, to further forth always.
Power Prayres, and Praises, to the King of Kings,
Who makes the world a witness of our weal, Who so offe^reth me prays and
thanks, he honoreth me. Psalm. 50.

By perfect Peace, and Plenty of all things:
Whose gift it is, our Foes to fore-reueale.
Else Lack, War, and wrack, would work al our woes:
Our Lives, Lands, and wives subjected to Foes.
Her Highness One and Thirtieth year succeedes,
Renewing Now, Nouembers Sev'nteenth day:
On which, she first time ware the Imperial weeds;
A Royal making to this Realm always.
Long may Her Grace Renew her Reigning years:
And Live a Pattern to all Princely Peers.
Psalm. 147. O Jerusalem praise the Lord: Praise thy God, o Sion. For he has
strengthened the Bars of thy Gates: And has blessed thy Children within thee.
He has made all thy Borders Peace: And with the good Nutriment of Wheat
does satisfy thee, etc. He has not don thus to every Nation else: Praise we
all the Lord therefore. Amen.


FINIS.
A Monsieur M. Kyffin Poet: Sonet.
O Que ie te connois, Poet digne d'vn Laurier,
Gentil Kyffin, chantre d'vn Heroique verse
Figure, court, lime, rich en langage diverse
Pour le parler Anglois, Poet bon-ouurier.
Ta Muse est arriuee a un august port,
La sacree Deess', a la Royalle Grace,
Fille d'vn Sire-Souuerain, la prudente Pallas,
ELIZABETH la Grande, Claire Perle du Nort.
Princess redoutee de toute la Machine ronde,
Aiant pour son Guidon le plus grand Roy des Rois
De^fiers Hespaignols rembarre lesfiers arrois,
Et combatte, guerriere, leur Armee vagabonde.
A beaux coups de Cannons l'enfonce, force au naufrage,
Fend l'Ost Hespaignol and le prent en pillage
Par son Armee Royalle, voyant que tell bagage
N'estoit vogue sur mer sinon en brigandage.
O que c'est un grand heur de viure sous tell Prince.
Heureux, Anglois heureux viuant ou droit and Loy
Venerable fleurit auec la blanch Foy
Sous la Royne Paisible, qui gouuerne ta Province.
Hola ma Muse, tay-toy. Kyffin a bien chante
De sa Justice, Bonte, Prudence and piete
Et ses autres vertus, don't il fait un meslange,
Donc mon gentil Kyffin Poet brave en ton langage.
Sois premier en honneur, bien que dernier en age,
Encor tu chanteras maint annees sa louange,
Servant d'vn Virgil a celle qui promet render
Egaux ses Laurien, aux Lauriers d' Alexandre,
ELIZABETH la Grande, terrestre Royne and Ange.
VIVE LA ROYNE ELIZABETH.
I. Eliote.


