A PROPHECY THAT HAS LAIN HID, ABOVE THESE 2000. years.

WHEREIN IS DECLARED ALL THE MOST PRINCIPAL matters that has fallen out, in,
and about the Civil and Ecclesiastical Monarchy of Rome, from the rising of
Julius Caesar, to this present: and which are to be done from hence to the
destruction of it, and what shall ensue after that.

AS The lives and deaths of the Emperors. The rising of the Ecclesiastical
Monarchy. The story of the greatest enemies of them both with many other
notable accurrences concerning GERMANY, FRANCE, and SPAIN. With the invasion
of the Kings of the EAST.


LONDON, Printed for NATHANIEL FOSBROOKE, and are to be sold at the West End
of Paul's Near to the Bishop of Londons gate, 1610.

To the Reader.
Dear Christian Reader, think it not strange I pray thee, that Esdras the
Scribe and Prophet of the Lord (in the principallest of his books) should be
so little regarded: Dani. 12.6.7.8 9.10.
for Daniel the Prophet, prophesying of these times, foretelling the wonders
that should come to pass in them, says, Esdras 12 37.38
That none of the wicked should have understanding, but the wise shall
understand: And therefore was Esdras commanded to wright those vision which he
saw in a Book and hide them, and teach them the wise of the people, whose
hearts he knew were able to comprehend the ways of the highest: for as god
himself does not show his secrets to the unwise, Psalm. 25.14.
so no more would he have the wise to whom he shows the^) to teach them but
to the wise, least the unwise, not being capable, should spurn and bark
against it: wherefore he says, Math. 7 6.
give not holy things to dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before the Swine.
etc.

And as wisdom is justified of her Children, Math. 11.19.
only because it is wisdom, and for no other respect, so the unwise resist
it, because their tongues cannot taste it, nor their stomachs digest it, 1.
Cor. 2 14.15.
it being heavenly and they earthly, who judge things by earthly reason.
Therefore has God seen it good to lock up, and hide his treasures and richest
jewels, in most secret places, that the dilligent searchers for wisdom might
only find them out, and that fools might be fools as they please to be,
Prou. 2.3.4.5.
though wise in their own conceits.

The Book of Wisdom which has it name according to it nature; who knows
not with what vehemence it is resisted, although it be the very flood of
Salomons wisdom. If John, The greatest that was borne of women, Math. 11
and Christ his Lord the bridegroom, were judged (of the unwise children) to
be possessed of devils, what marvel though Solomon and Esdras with other
prophets and righteous men, be blasphemously dealt withal?

But the principal cause pretended is, for that it was not found compiled with
other scriptures in the Hebrew tongue, for which cause they may as well exclude
some part of Daniel, and the greatest part of the new Testament: but they say
it is full of lies, and was never cannonized: dare thou say so? Because the
wisdom of the unwise never cannonis'd it, did the children of wisdom
therefore never approve it? If all be current that has been cannonized, Then
many devils shall go to heaven, and much falsehood shall stand for truth: and
if all be lies that is not cannonized, then much truth shall perish, and many
Saints go to hell: For some of the Epistles of the Apostles, As the second
Epistle of Peter, and the two last Epistles of John, James, and Iudes Epistles
were for a long time not received generally, and many hundred Saints were never
cannonized, By the Church of Rome.
whereas many unclean liars and murth erers were: and dare thou blaspheme the
truth and accuse it of lies for these causes? If Charity did rule thy heart,
and wisdom govern thy mind, thou would labor to reconcile it with the
other scriptures, which, if men be so disposed, they may also cavil against.
But let men take heed what they do, let them not condemn that they know not,
nor call that a lie which they understand not. If I should say Saint John spoke
unadvisedly, when he says, John 21.25.
(There are also many things that Jesus did, which if they had been all
written, I suppose the world could not contain the books) did I not belie the
holy Apostle? If time prove that to be of God which I in my ignorant boldness,
blaspheme and speak against, shall I escape unpunished by that truth? let me
therefore take heed and fear, and as I may not take upon me to affirm that I
know not, so let me take heed that I condemn not that which I conceive not;
especially such holy writings wherein such great wisdom does consist, least
for a words sake that I understand not, I deprive my self of a great benefit
that I might enjoy. For if time prove it to be of God (as sure it will) what
shall I then excuse my self withal? was not the Revelation of Saint John
doubted of (by many) a great while, and is it not now received as a most divine
Prophecy,? So shall it be f^^nd in time, that none of all the Prophets of old,
did excel this Prophet Esdras, nor see more secrets, nor prophecy more
plainly of Jesus Christ, and of the mysteries of the Gospel then he. And also
greater wisdom is not to be found in all Salomons writings, then is in the
book of Wisdom so much condemned, why should we not justify the truth for it
own sake, and not shake it off, and take it up, upon such cold and weak
occasions?

If the majesty and truth of the other Scriptures did not plead for it self,
Time also bringing forth all the Hebrews, Grecians, Latinists, and Cannonisers
in the world could never make it good therefore let truth speak, and wisdom
utter her voice, and let time bring forth as they have ever done, and forbid
them not, and if thou be one of wisdoms children, receive it.

And although there be too many that does take upon them to discover
prophecies, whose falsehoods time will discover, yet there is a work which is
of God, and that shall stand mauger the spite of all it enemies: and let them
that dare so boldly rage and rail against it, know, that when the day does
declare it, they shall be ashamed, and wish they had held their tongues.

Thus I thought good to advertise thee by the way, least at the first sight of
envied Esdras, thou should be dismayed: Envied (I say) by envious spirits,
but approved of God and of his holy ones. I will say no more for him at this
time, he is at hand, let him now speak for himself.

FINIS.
The contents of the Prophecy.
1 THe lives and deaths of the Emperors.

2. The rising of the Ecclesiastical Monarchy.

3. The story of the greatest enemies of them both, with their principal
actions, and of their overthrow and ends.

4. Of the three kingdoms, Germany, France and Spain, Rooms long approoned
trusty friends, and their several ends and destruction.

5. And how that Room shall be burnt with fire, and when:

6. The earth refreshed, and Israel restored to life.

7. The coming down of the Turk and his Army upon Christendom, till fire
come down from heaven upon them.

Ierem: 20.10. For I have heard the raylings of many, and how they watch for my
halting, saying, it may be that he is deceived.


A DISCOVERYE OF A PROPHECY.
Esdras 4. Chap 11. Then I saw a dream.


AFTER this, the Prophet saw a vision, concerning the beginning, continuance,
and fall of The Empire and supremacy of Rome. And this vision was showed him in
the days of Artaxerxes King of Persia, about 400. years before the first
stone of her Empire was laid. Iu. Caesar.


And behold, there arose from the Sea an Eagle. And there arose among the
Nations, the fierce and fearful Kingdom and Empire of Rome, seen in vision
by the Prophet Daniel, some few years before.

Which had 12. feathered wings. Wherein should arise and reign 12. Emperors,
which should spread their power like wings over all the earth, in great fear
sitting on it. And it seemed good unto the Prophet to touch by an intellection
these 12. only, both for they are a Iewrye sufficient to argue the whole suite
of Emperors which did arise and reign in her: as also because they only were
native Romans, descended of the Iulij, Seruij, Saluij, Flauij, etc. unlike
therein unto the rest, which were all (or almost all) like changeable stuff of
diverse colors, so of diverse Nations. Their rising, continuance, and end, is
touched in their proper place.

And three heads. Her three heads are three Kingdoms, foreordained to uphold
and maintain the power of her pride, when all her wings and feathers should
fail her. And are reserved to execute her last will, and finishe her funerals,
as shall be hereafter more at full declared.

By the winds, are meant her prosperous and happy success in all her
proceedings. And of necessity it must go well with her, whom every wind does
blow to good. Witness the limits of her territories, from Ganges to Gades, and
from the Scythian Sea unto the Cape of Hope: as testifies one of her own,
which says: that she extended her tents, to the borders of the Ocean, and the
fear of her name unto the heavens.

but they became little feathers and small. And the Prophet saw, that among the
Princes and governors which ruled in her, there arose and grew up certain
Kings, which were contrary unto her, marking such as intended to root up the
crown and dignity of her Empire, to plant themselves therein, and their house
for ever. But their thoughts prevailed not, for as the verse concludes, their
power waned, and they perished like the rest: what those contrary Kings were;
their number, names, attempts and end, shall be delivered in their place.

But the three kingdoms fore-apointed t'accomplish and finish the wickedness of
this great City, were quiet and at rest, as not yet (during the reign of her
feathers) conceived and brought forth. And the Prophet observed that th'oue of
those Kings was greater in power then both his fellows, yet rested it with
them. Concerning these three Kings, their names, their greatness, and all that
appertains, shall be spoken in due place.

And the Prophet beheld, that this proud city flew with her Emperors and
Legions over all her neighbors, subiecting all the dwellers on earth under her,
in such sort, as there was not a Nation or People to be found under heaven,
that was not either rooted out by her, or enforced to receive their Governors
from her.

to her feathers saying: And the Prophet observed, that this powerful City, in
the days wherein (ouergorged with pride) she stood upon terms of her counsel
and arms, took such order (for in evil she was very methodicall) that her
Kings and Kaysers, should neither sleep nor watch, that is neither perish nor
rule all at once, but rise in a successiue course, as in the verses following
is manifested. And she further commanded that the three last Kingdoms,
ordained to conclude the number of her sins, should take their ease and not
awake, till their time appointed.

As he that undertakes a dangerous leap does first retire, the better to
advance his strength: so to bound fairlye over the dacke understanding of these
words, we must of necessity look back and carry before us the true birth and
perfect nature of this Empire: which the Prophet Daniel in his vision designeth
under the form of a ten-horned beast, signifying thereby, that it should be a
power vpheld by a succession of many Kings: for the horns betoken Kings, and
the number of 10. comprehends all, be they never so many, as all numbers are
contained under 10. or made of their reduplication be they never so infinite.
And adds further, that his teeth were of iron, his nails of brass, inferring
thereby, the irresistable force of his legions and Leaders. And proceeding says,
that there arose amongst his Kings, one of an exceeding strange nature,
signifying by that one, a strange race and succession of Princes, far differing
in shape and form of regiment from al their predecessors, obtaining dominion
not by iron teeth and brazen nails, as did the Emperors which arose before
them, but by disceit and by a mouth which spoke presumptuous things against the
most High, blaspheming his name, his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven,
who by a hidden and unknown force, should subdue the third part of the world,
meaning, al Europe with her Princes. By which deliniation, it is evident, that
the Holy Ghost accounts the challenged prerogative and supremacy of Rome, all
one power, all one Empire, whether it obtain the spoil by force, or by fraud,
that is, by power of Emperors, or crast of Popes, Cha. 7.24
who should be far unlike them, as Daniel himself says: And he shall be
unlike to the first. Meaning in form of claiming, obteining and maintaining
Jurisdiction, not in pride, purpose and determination. So as we may behold
such an unlikely likeness between them, as was between the two Sisters, of
whom it is said, -- facies non omnibus vna,
nec diuersa tamen, qualem decet esse Sororum.


And thus much concerning the Prophet Daniels description of the Empire of
Rome: whence we note, that the same power which Daniel there describes by a
beast with horns, teeth and nails: our Prophet here does deliniate by an Eagle,
with wings, feathers and heads: whose imperial wings after they were so clipped,
as she could no longer fly over all in her proper colors, and style of Roma
triomfante: devised how by disceit she might uphold her throne (for to be high
was all her care) and found nothing so fit as to disguise her self, and
challenge prelation under the mask of Roma la Santa. And this is it which this
Verse teaches, that when the sinful City saw her feathers so plucked, as the
fear of her arms and forces, might no longer fly into al kingdoms,
commanding them under the pain of Imperium Romanum: Lying by means of this
distres, very weak and in danger of falling, her counsel and body
politic, devised by lies and witch-crafte (wherein was all her pleasure from
her youth) to restore the supremacye and honor of her name, under the color of
Ecclesia Dei.

Wherein this race of presumptuous horns excelled the sin of all the horns
that foretime ruled in her, for they, as in whom Satan dwelt but literally, did
but in open hostility fight against the highest, setting before him a god made
of a wicked man, whose fathers blood cries out for vengeance night and day,
whose bedfellow was and Soror and co^iux, and whose wife was id quod dicere
nolo. But this race of presumptuous and deceitful Kings, as in whom Satan
dwells spirituallye, in a hidden treasure of blasphemy, sets up the Highest
against himself, and under the visar of the Church, and the name of God,
blasphemeth his Sanctuary, and the Lord thereof. No marvel then, tho she and
Syon be at ods, for as gold can body it self with any metal liquifiable,
latten excepted, which notwithstanding in outward face and show of all metals
is most like unto it: so, no Church is more capital enemy to the true Church,
then she, who in outward gesture, grace and countenance, is likest like the
chaste and virgin spouse, and is indeed a whore.

In the third verse of this Chapter, the Prophet made mention of these contrary
feathers, which in their thoughts conspirde to raise their house with the ruins
of Rome. And here proceeds more perticularly to declare their number,
foretelling there should be eight of them, whom we will here call out by name
that if occasion serve, we may the better know them. Alaricus. The second
Hunns, Attalas. The third Vandals, Genserick. The fourth Odoacer. Theodorick.
The sixth Totilas, bred in Spain, with such followers as for those times that
Country yielded. Alboinus. The eight and last, a home conspiracy, more to be
feared (as all included diseases are most dangerous) then all the rest.

And although many others besides these, as Radagaise, the Alani now called
Almans, the Burgonians conducted by Gundibald, the Vngers, Saracens, etc. were
all in their time as costly enemies to the Empire as some of these, yet none
did humble the great City, the mother of wickedness but these eight only. And
therefore the rest may not be allowed to sit at this table, but may serve to
justify the judgment of the Beast, which was thus wounded again and stricken
of all, as she had wounded and stricken all.

And if in reading doubt arise, how these eight feathers may be contrary to the
Eagle, that is, resisters of her power and dominion, and yet be feathers of the
Eagle, that is, mainteiners of the same: The answer is, that they were
adversaries and contrary unto her, as she stood upon terms of Imperium orbis
terrae: but after she had changed her coppie, and claimed supremacy under the
cloak of Matter Ecclesia, they were for the most mainteiners of her pride, and
became drunk also with her worship, as other Kings and Princes of the earth.

And thus much for their number, and names, their several attempts, their
prosperities and end, shall be presented in their place.

This fether here described is the first of the twelve, namely Julius Caesar,
who (like an ill interpreter) translated Senatum Populumque Romanum, into
Caesarem Augustum. Whose Image, which in this verse is so lively resembled,
consists of 2. features: the first, shows the manner of his rising, in
these words.

And behold, upon the right side there arose one feather. Which serve in stead
of art, to discover the very true lines, and cast of his happiness.

For the house of Cornelij was as eloquent as he, and Marius doubtless as good a
leader as he, and Catilin as nobly borne as he, and all these arose t'inuade
the commonwealth, and to translate it into a Kingdom as well as he, but none
of them rose on the right side but he. And thus much for the manner of this
speech; so we take this with-all, that these words (right side) in their
natural and proper intent, do signify (as through all this Chapter) the
surest and strongest side.

The second feature in this resemblance to be observed, is his power, set forth
in these words. And he reigned over all the earth.

For after he had subdued France, broken the heart of Germany, made his name
known to England, be returned into Italy, overthrew the great Protector of
the liberty Sr. Pompey and his host, in the fields of Pharsalie. And like the
fire of heaven (as one of her Pocts says) with such celeritie drew after the
relics of that stricken faction, both in Africa and Spain, that in two
years space he brought to pas, that nether city nor creature durst open
against him: which done, he ascended into Italy, and took upon him as Lord
thereof, triumphing in the spoils of the world, and the blood of his Country.

And knowing that the name of a King (which he so much affected) was odious to
the quality and nature of that People: invaded the government under the mask
of a perpetual Dictator, preserving therunder (for he was wise above all the
feathers) some hope of recovering their late slain liberty, but indeed
establishing a kingdom from which it could never redeem it self again.

But this newborn prosperity (as is the nature of all this worlds
felicity) lasted but a while; for in the third year of his Dictatorship, he
was slain in the Senate, by the conspiration of 24. of whom the most both in
his own (so dangerous is the name of trust) and other men's opinions, were
thought his chiefest friends. And thus was this fether blown away, after it
had inioyed his pleasure 56. years, and reigned 3. A man for letters, arms
and counsel, famous far above all his succeeders, and in discreet bounty, and
Princely clemency (rare virtues in such a fortune) without controversy,
surpassing all Princes made of earth.

Next after him arose Octauius, the adopted son of Julius: otherwise also
near him in blood, as being the son of his niece Accia, who having taken
revenge upon the murderers of his father, and obtained in all his wars,
foreign and at home: triumphed Lord over all, adding to his fathers pomp
(which he had bought so deer) the honors of Parens Patriae, and Augustus.

And this fether continued (as the Prophet saw) a long time, for it reigned
Triumuir with Anthony and Lepidus two years, and as Duumuir with Anthony
alone ten year, and then devouring his fellow in a Sea Fight at Actium,
reigned all alone 44. years.

But after it had reigned, his end also came, and as the Prophet concludes) he
descended like the first, and appeered no more. For by the treason of Liuia his
wife, impatient to tarry th'inthronizing of her son (as is the nature of
ambition the nerer the goal, the faster it runs) his lingering soul was
taken from him at Nola, in the 70. and sixth year of his transgression, when
he had reigned 20. less.

earth so long, this I say unto thee, before thou beginst t'appeere no more.
That we may know there is no God like unto the Highest, who only holds the
measures and times of all things in his hand, the Prophet foresheweth, that
none of the twelve should continue like to Octauius, nor yet attain unto half
his time: which according to the word of the Lord was accomplisbed: for his
son Tiberius of all the rest reigned longest, and longer by eight years then
any of the rest, and yet could not attain to half the time of his father,
which descended before him.

That God only might be honored in all his works, and justified when he
speaks.

Then stepped up Tiberius, and reigned in great abomination, as did his fathers
before him, but after a while he descended also, and appeered no more. He all
his skill in sortilege and wisdom mathematical, whereunto he had sold himself
from his youth, could either foretell or fore-warne him of Caius his nephew, by
whom he was poisoned, in the 70. and 8. year of his mortality, and three and
twentieth of his reign.

And so came it to all the others, one after an other, so that every one
reigned, and then appeered no more.

In like sort (says the Prophet) did all the rest which of the 12. remained,
successively rise, reign, and perish.

Of whom the first, Caligula.
in blasphemy excelling, was murdered by the Captain of his guard, after he
had sat in the chair of the scornful 29. years, and in the throne of his
fathers almost 4.

The second, only wise in evil, Claudius.
was poisoned by his incestuous wife his niece Agrippina, in the 64. year of
his filthiness, and 14. of his reign.

The third, Nero.
a monster, deformed in life, in marriage, and end: his life scornful to the
height of his fathers, his marriage thrice more detestable, his end more
unnatural then any of theirs: for after he had reigned in sin fourteen
years, and sin in him eighteen more, fell by his own sword into the grave of
his fathers, and in him descended the house of the Iulij.

The fourth was of an other extraction, Galba.
but not of a better, descended of the ancient family of the Sulpitij, rose up
late, but perished early: for he was 60. and 3. years old before he tasted
the Empire, which he got and lost in 7. months.

The fifth likewise of a new house, Otho.
but of the old building, got possession by the blood of his Predecessor, and
by spilling his own in three months and od days, lost it again, after he
had walkte in the abomination of his fathers, eight and thirty years.

The sixth also, Vitellius.
was new and old, in nothing (save gluttony) excelling his fellows, in life
and death like filthy: descended in the eight month of his tyranny, after he
had wearied himself in the pleasures of Caprineum (where first his youth was
branded) 7. and 50. years.

After him arose the seventh, Vespatian.
who bought the crown with the blood of his M. and ware it in base covetousness
ten years, but then was likewise blown down, having fullfild the pleasures of
59. more.

The eight was he which executed the vengeance due to the great murderers,
Titus.
the earthly Jerusalem: who in the 40. year of his pleasure, after he had
reigned 2. years and so many months, was also blown down, not without the
suspected treason of his brother, and successor.

The ninth and last, Domitian
and (if it were possible) the worst of all, who after he had reigned in the
lust of his Fathers 15. years, and lived therein 30. more, was murdered by
the Gentlemen of his chamber, and beaten down after the rest which descended
before him. So that every one of them (as this verse Prophested) reigned, and
then appeered no more.

And the Prophet observed and saw (after the twelve were descended) the
Emperors that followed to rise, that they might rule also; and as many of them
as rose on the right side, that is: in the strength and power of the twelve,
did in their place (according to the proclamation published in the eight verse)
spread their wings and reign also, as Nerua. Traian. Adrian. Antoninus.
Marcus. Commodus. Pertinax. Julian. Seuerus. Caracalla. Macrinus. Heliogabalus.
Alexander. Maximinus. And the rest, to the third Valentinian.


In whose days, the power of the Eagle was so wounded, by th'incursion and
saccage of the two first contrary feathers, that she could never after recure
her self again but lay sick and kept the chamber some ten generations, which
also lasted but twice so many years, to the rising of Momillus in whom
descended all that was left of the Empire, name, and tittle for ever.

So that all the feathers which the Prophet beheld in process of time to follow
the 12. and in their strength, their sin and cruelty, to defile the earth:
namely from Domitian, to the third Valentinian, were 50. and 3. Kings. All
which in a while (as this verse concludes) vanished like the 12. and appeared
no more.

As,
Vindex. Piscenius Niger. Albinus. Diadumenus. Maximus. Balbinus. 30. Tirants.
Firmus. Saturninus. Proculus. Bonosus. Aper. Eugenius. Quintillus. Rufinus.
Constantinus non Magnus.
Heraclianus, and others, as in the description of times, may more plainly
appear.

Under the 12. wings or feathers (for both betoken one) are comprehended by an
intellection (as in the first verse) all, which in the strength of the twelve
followed, from Domitian to the third Valentinian, who perished in the year
455. after he had reigned 30. and lived 5. more.

And thus according to promise made in the first verse, is presented a
tragical succession of all the Eagles wings, from her first fether Iul.
Caesar, in whom the power of her pride began, to the third Valentinian, with
whom it ended: who after they had showed themselves, and trodden down the
earth 500. and 30. years, they departed for ever the stage of this world, and
all their pomp and glory descended, and appeered no more.

And here my pen like to the earth which being delivered from her oppressors,
did thirst to be refreshed: so having overcome this part of her task, did
think to and some ease, but in their hopes they are both deceived, for after
the Eagles feathers decended, the sorrows of the earth increased more and more,
and there arose (as seldom comes the better) a race of Sodomiticall, and
unnatural Kings, who under the visar of Successors to Peter, and vicars to the
Lamb, so far excelled the whordomes of their fathers the Emperors (whose Vicars
and Successors indeed they are) that they enforced the Highest, to pour his
determined vengeance, upon the children of men. Who according to the judgment
fore-denounced by his servant John, Revel. 16.
Poured out his wrath upon the Sea, that it became like to the blood of the
dead: that is to say, upon the great City and Empres of the world, by scourge
after scourge (as how often and grievous in the view of her contrary feathers may
appear) so at the the full auenging himself, that there was not a drop of
Roman blood to be found on earth, these many hundredth years.

And as the defection and uncleanness was general, so was the punishment: for
(as the Apostle in the same chapter prophesies) The wrath of the highest,
Revel. 16
was poured out upon the rivers and fountains likewise, and they were turned
into blood also, that is: upon all People and Nations whatsoever, in such sort,
as there is not a kingdom this day on earth to be found, that has not bin
(since the rising of the beast) cut down by sword, and yielded her stock to
strange griffes, as by the bloody Registers of every particular Nation does so
clearly appear, as if it were written with the beams of the Sun.

And as the days were evil above measure, so they exceeded in darkness and
ignorance: that my pen has no less trouble, to be delivered of the rest of
her labor, then had the then-dwellers on-earth, to endure the pains of their
oppression and travel: but to take into my way again, the Prophet adds. Nor
the two wings. Figuring by the two wings, the two first contrary feathers,
Alaricus, and Attalas.

The first arose in the 19. of Honorius, predecessor to the third Valentinian:
And was the first that slew the great City, the murderers of all the world,
measuring her by famine, sword, and fire: according to the square whereby she
had judged others almost 12. hundredth years. Which woeful end (or rather
beginning of her woeful end) made a certain ancient friend of hers, bewailing
the night wherein she was smitten, to cry, Hierom.
Nocte Moab capta est, nocte cecidit murus eius, quis cladem illius noctis,
quis funera fando explicet? And when this feather had thus trodden down the
pride of the Eagle, in the year 410. a 1157. years after Romulus had raised
her walls, with the blood of his brother: proceeded to rip up her bowels,
spoiling and burning her principal parts, Latium, Campania, Apulia, Lucania,
Calabria, where raging in his highest thoughts, devising now to spread his
glory over all, was by suddeine death blown away, and his place appeered no
more.

The Other arose in the 27. of the third Valentinian, in greater fear then did
the first, devouring at his entrance all that rest of Italy which Alaricus had
left uneaten, Aquileia, Verona, Mantua, Cremona, Brixia, Concordia, with all
the now territory of Venice: but by the cunning dealing of the deceitful
King, whose name was then Pope Leo, was entreated to sell the great City, and
to depart Italy, which he left as a wast, stinking in her fiery ruins, and so
repassing the Danube, returned into his Scythia again: where the year
following in top of his fulness, was in a night found strangled in his own
blood, whereinto he was disolued, by the intemperate use of a wedding feast,
and a new spouse.

And thus perished this son of Mundzuccus, the scourge of God, and terror of
men (for so he called himself) and which not only the fires of Italy, but his
very shape may well justify: for he is described a man of little stature,
square set, great head, little eyes, thin hair'd, thinner bearded, a nose great
and prominent, his color foul and gypson-like.

And there were no more triumphing feathers to be found on her, for all her
glorious power was decended to two weak and feeble heads, which for they
reigned not in the strength of their predecessors, the Prophet daineth not to
call ruling feathers, but resting heads.

Martian.
The One slept in the east at Constantinople, whom Genserick the third contrary
fether, not long before had dishonorably taken prisoner.

Valentin.
The Other in the west at Rauenna, taken with such a Lethargy, that he neither
heard nor felt the Massacre of Vngarie, committed by Hunns: nor the loud and
pitiful cry of his cheifest Provinces, Spain and Africa, devoured by Goths
and Vandals; nor the tears and deep lament of Gaul and Britanie, overflowed
with Franks and Angles, people from beyond the Rhene, who not only with their
blood and posterity, but with their name also have stained both kingdoms to
this day. So as the Prophet well concludes, there was no more to be found upon
the Eagles body, but these two drowsy heads, which refted, and six contrary
feathers, viz. Genserique. 1 Odoacer. 2 Theodorick. 3 Totilas. 4 The Longobards.
5 And the intestine faction. 6
of which, in the verses following.

And the Prophet saw, that two of the six divided the^-selues in counsel and
manner of proceeding, from the other four: for whereas the four sought to be
Lords of Rome in fee, resolving in their thoughts, t'extinguish the name and
majesty of her Empire for ever, these 2. were of an other mind, for they
agreed to remain under the countenance and favor of the Eagles right head,
contented to wear a crown tho with leave of it: meaning by the right head
the east Empire, so called, in regard it was far stronger in power then the
west: whose broad-spreading honor (as in the verse foregoing) was now become a
starueling, only his name and appellation continued some ten successions, viz.
1 Valentinian. 2 Maximus. 3 Auitus. 4 Maiorianus. 5 Seuerus. 6 Anthemius. 7
Olybrius. 8 Glycerius. 9 Julius Nepos. 10 Momyllus.


Which all also vanished (as before is touched) in 20. years. And the Eagles
pomp which was at full in Augustus, was enterred with Augustulus (for so was
Momyllus called) and with him descended the name and title of Imperium Romanum
for ever.

And the two wings thus divided in policy from the four, were Genserick and
Theodorick.

Of which the first, trained into Italy by treason of the Empres, entered Rome
43. years after she had bin humbled by the Goths, and led into captivity all
her treasor, and (as is the fatal reward of such offenders (the traitres also
her-selfe. And after 14. days thus laden, departed into his Africa again:
wher-ouer he reigned in peace and pleasure 51. years.

The Other, having obtained of th'Easthead the scepter of Italy, according to
his patent proceeded, and got it by Conquest from Odoacer. 30. years,
descended also, leaving his fame and kingdom to his posterity, having
fullfild his pleasures two and forty more.

But this counsel pleased not the other 4. for as the verse concludes, they
remained in other thoughts: drifting in their place to rise and reign, without
leave or license of any.

And as the Prophet beheld the four contrary feathers which were left, he saw
how they also strove in their hearts to establish themselves, but like a
dream their purpose vanished, in the next immediate verses following.

Then arose Odoacer, the first of the four: leading a people begotten in the
bowels and inmost parts of the North, who hearing of the divided and weak
estate of the Empire, was encouraged to move from beyond the Danube, Italy,
slew her last Lord and Emperor Momyllus Augustulus, destroyed the name of her
Consuler dignity, and blotted out for ever the memory of her holy Senate, the
murderer of Romulus their first King, and Julius their first Keyser: And not
daring as base begotten, to put on the presence and style of an Emperor (which
name this fether fatallie resisted) contented himself with the title of King
of Italy.

But his glory endured not, for after he had reigned eighteen years,
Theodorick (as in the 24. verse) took his kingdom from him by force, and his
life by fraud: and he descended, and appeered no more.

After him arose Totilas the second fether of the four, by birth a Spaniard,
by blood a West-gothe, (whose fearful fires burn in Rome to this day) but
these days were more in trouble, and (as the Prophet foresaw) in number fewer
then Odoacers: from his first rising always in arms, and after many hopes and
as many dispaires, was at last put to flight by Narses, whom the East head had
made governor of Italy, and flying was wounded so deadlye, that as soon as he
gat his Inn he lost his life, after he had worn the crown (if to fight for a
crown be to wear a crown) 11. years.

So as of all the eighth, there remained but the Longobards, and the intestine
faction: which thought also in themselves to reign.

The first inflamed by the letters of Narses, and with the goodness of Italy,
left their northern dens, and like a fearful storm fell down upon it, and
in two years overthrew it, Alboinus, King thereof at Milan: who after he had
spread himself over the great City, and over all her Italy three years and
a half, was murdered by the treason of Rosimond his wife, leaving his
kingdom but not his honor to his successors, who possessed it for 24.
generations.

The eight and last, and of all other the most dangerous, was a home
conspiracy, plotting to raise from the dead, the ancient long-before buried
government of Rome, te reedifie her S.P.Q.R. And to root out the Priestly
pre-eminence and Church-superiority, which had so cunningly eaten and destroyed
the seculer: Which faction after it had taken fire in the hearts of many, and
secretly burned a long time, at length brake out, like the fury and violence of
a risen stream, so as it might not be quenched, but with much blood and
exceeding labor, as in the one and thirteth verse appears.

heads that were at rest, which was in the midst, for that was greater then
the two And whilst they thus thought, behold there awaked one of the three
Kingdoms, appointed to finish and end the wickedness of the Eagle, figuring by
this resting head, the new West-Empire, which title of supremacy the Beast
bestowed (as has bin always his practice to run with the strongest) upon
Charles King of France, and son to Pepin the traiter. This head is said to be
awaked, when it was first raised, which was in the year 801. wherein it
received his augustal robe his crown, and style, viz. Carolo Augusto a Deo
coronato, magno and pijssimo Imperatori Romanorum, vita and victoria. And the
title of dignity Imperial, which had laien dead above 300. years, was in
this year on Christmas day, thus raised up to life again, to the end it might
defend the proceedings of the great adulteres and murtheres of the earth, as by
the form of oath exhibited at his consecration appears: In nomine Christi
spondeo, atque polliceor ego A. Imperator, coram Deo and beato Petro Apostolo,
me protectorem, ac defensorem fore huius Sanctae Romans Ecclesiae, in omnibus
vtilitatibus, quatinus diuino fultus fuero adiutorio, pro-ut sciero, poteroque.

In that this head is said to be in the midest, is meant, that it should be
chosen from among the Nations and Kingdoms of the earth, as by experience has
bin proved: first from France, then from diverse kingdoms and parts of Germany,
where it still remains.

And that the fear and power of this head has bin greater, then any other
Christian King or Kingdom whatsoever, is it not sufficiently read in the
particular registers of every Nation?

By the two heads, are shadowed the two Kingdoms of France and Spain, whose
unhallowed leage the Prophet foreseeing says: they should be joined with this
middle-head, and like three parts in one, accord and agree together, to humble
themselves, their authority, and power before the Beast, and for their
Idol-shepheard should fight against the Highest, till by the breath of his
mouth they be scattered, like the dust which the wind disperseth.

And these ar the 3. heads mentioned in the first, fourth, and ninth verses of
this chapter: and are therefore said to finish and determine the last end and
wickedness of the whore, because tho all other Kingdoms hate her and make her
desolate and naked, and eat her flesh, as England, and others have done: yet
these three heads shall love her still, and to their dying day shall burn in
delight with her, but when those three and every of them, shall also forsake
her, there shall not be found either kingdom or creature under heaven, that
shall fall down and worship her.

And the Prophet saw this middle head (the head of evil,) impart his fellowship
to all Princes and Kingdoms, which desired to be in leage with it. But my
task which hastes to an end, will not suffer me now, and here, to sound this
gulf of Santa Liega suffiseth that for Syons sake the Prophet passing by, does
point thereat.

And the Prophet beheld, that this middle head did devour and eat up the under
wings, namely, the power of the Longobards and the intestine faction, which
thought also to reign.

The first by the sword of Charles, surnamed (for his exceeding power) the
great, who at the command of Babylon his god, ascended into Italy, took her
King Desiderius prisoner, and led him capture into France, and gave his
Kingdom to an other. And thus vanished this seventh contrary feather, after
it had humbled the whore, and spread it self over all her quarters 200. and 4.
years, and the fear thereof descended, and it appeared no more.

The Other, first began in the days of Cono the Emperor, who having an action
of contrary opinion, against Gregory the second (for so the Beast was then
called) followed it so hotly, that he brought his holiness into such disgrace,
as that he kindled a desire in the hearts of many, to change their Prelat for a
Prince, and to edify their first and ancient form of government again. This
desire thus begun, by time (as naturally all conspiration does) gathered
strength, and adventured (but somewhat to young) to check the Beast, who by
reason he was so well guarded by his foresaid head and champion Charles, easily
neckt it. Notwithstanding some 100. and 50. years after, this vleer now grown
to a riper head, under the practice of one Alberique and Octauian his son,
brake out a new, and charged the Beast in so sharp a manner, as without dout he
had received the mate, had not his head in the midest avoided it once again,
whose name was now changed from Charles the great, to Otho the great: who as
being by oath devoted, came to Rome, banished her new risen Consuls, hanged her
Tribuns, and mounted her Prefectus vrbis, Mr. of misrule, naked on an Ass,
crouned and attended through the city with great derision: from thence
committed to prison, and there executed with exquisite torments. 7. years
after: Cincius) flamed out a new, in so furious a sort, as it had doutles fyr'd
the Beast out of all his holds: had not his middle head ( Otho the second)
hasted into Italy to quench the same: who (knowing how much it imported to
punish exemplarly so dangerous an evil) prepared in the Vatican a sumptuous
feast, invited thereto all the nobility and chief of the city: when all were
come, saluted and set: caused forthwith to be proclaimed, that no man on pain
of death, should either speak or move at any thing that should be seen or
heard: presently entered armed men and compassed the place round where the
guests were: whereat whilst every one amassed, doubting what this first course
meant, this middle head drew forth a paper, and whose names were therein
written, commanded to be drawn from the table, and in presence of all there to
be slain. The rest were courteously entertained, and were as merry as the
fear of so cruel a feast would give them leave. Ne yet for all this the
fever so left these patients, but that they fell some 162. Frederique the
first (for so was now this head called) with the blood of a 1000. and the
wounds and imprisonment of as many more, so branded this Hydra, which had bin
so often headed, as it could never after recover head again, but her breath
departed, and her purpose vanished, and appeered no more.

world more, then all the vvings that had bin. That this head and his
fellows, have more maintained and advanced the rage and blasphemy of the
Beast, then all the feathers that arose before them, and made more diligent and
cunning inquisition after the blood of Sion then they, is it not eternally
cronicled in the registers of every particular Nation? And therefore they are
called the heads of the Eagle, and who knows not that heads are more able in
evil then feathers? And the Prophet beheld that this head continued longer, and
held the government of the world more then all the feathers that had bin, for
from the rising of the first fether Julius Caesar, to the end and expiration of
Momyllus Augustulus the last, were not 560. years, whereas this head arose in
the year 801. and has already continued above 800. and yet still continues,
and shall, till he that now is be taken away.

In that the Prophet saw this middle head suddenly vanish, as did the wings, he
signifies that it shall not be rooted out by force or sword of any, but depart
quietlye, and die as it were in bed: but yet (as the truth fore-saith in the
chapter following) not without pain: meaning, that the Electors shall not
choose to the liking of the Beast, nor the Beast consecrate to the liken of
them. And in this difference this head shall die, ne shall this difference be
exempted from pain.

And when the power of this great head, (which is now so little) like a tale
that is told shall be clean ended: yet the fear of the other two shall still
remain, and have dominion over the earth, and those that dwell therein, till
the fulness of their malice and tyranny be accomplished also: which may not long
be vnfulfild, for behold, in the very next verse their destruction comes.

whilst the head on the right side, devoured that which was on the left. By the
right head is meant (as through all this prophecy) the strongest; so as the
Prophet implies, that the sword of Spain, shall divide the strength of
France, that her pride, by division made less, may at the last (as every
divided kingdom does) return to nothing. Nether shall the prosperity of this
right-head, be long free from like retaliation, but as the truth foresaith.
Esd. 4.12
He that deuideth with the sword, shall perish by the sword. For how may the
sword for ever escape him, whom heaven hates, and earth does persecute? and of
whom may be truly said, which was spoken of Ismael, Manus little contra omnes,
and omnium contra illos.

And thus shall these heads perish, and have the faster to their end, because
the judgment of the Beast is nigh, in the very next verses attending to come in.

The roaring of the Lion is the breath of the Highest, which shall rebuke
th'Egle for her unrighteousness, and cast before her al her spoils, and set her
alive in judgment, and with the spirit of his mouth rise up against her, and
lay unto her charge, as in the text follows.

has overcome all the Beasts that were past, and obtained power over the
world with great fearfulnes, and over the whole compass of the earth with
extreme oppression, and has possessed so long time, all the world, with
deceit. forth fruit, and have cast down the vvalls of such as did thee no
harm. as thy unjust dealing is ascended to the most High, and thy pride unto
the mighty. And if thou plead not guilty hereunto, behold, a thousand
witnesses shall rise up against thee, and prove th'inditement true: that the
just judgment which has so long attended for thee, may at the length be
pronounced against thee, in form as in the text follows.

And least in thy drunkenness thou may think, thy sin may ouer-shoot this
judgment to come, and in thy madness glorify thy self as thou have ever done,
persuading thy self thou shall ever be, because thou have bin king long, and
like a fool have not considered; the more thy years the nigher thy grave, and
behold, thus says the truth: in the year which shall be 1666. Revel. 13 18.
this judgment here pronounced shall lay hands on thee. And as all thy
fearful wings, and feathers, be already descended and blown down; so before
that day (which is so nigh at hand) the tyranny of thy malicious heads and
cruel claws, shall be consumed and brought to naught. And in that day, thy
vain body shall be burnt with fire, and shall so clean be cut of from the
land of the living, that neither son nor nephew (as the Prophet says) Esaias.
14.22.
nor branche nor remnant of thy name, shall be found upon the earth. For as it
is purposed, Esaias. 14.24.
so shall it come to pas: and as it is consulted, it shall stand. Go to now,
take counsel of thy Seers, and call thy inchanters about thee: build thy
devises as high as heaven, and lay their foundations low as hell, yet shall they
not deliver thee from the day appointed: but as Salmanazar. destroyed
Beth-arbel in the day of battle, wherein the mother with the children was
dashed in pieces: or like the millstone, which the mighty Angel did cast into
the Sea, with such violence shall thou be thrown down, and be found no more.

And all hell shall be moved at thy coming and prepare it self, and raise by
all her dead against that day to meet thee, and all the Princes and Kings of
Nations, whom thou have slain with the cup of thy fornication, shall rise out
of their torments against thy coming, and at thy sight shall wonder, and cry,
Esaias. 14.10.
and say unto thee. Art thou become weak also as we? art thou become like one
of us? Is thy pomp bowed down unto the grave? and are thy pleasures departed
like ours? and is the worm spread under thee, and do the worms cover thee
also? how art thou falen from heaven O Lucifer, son of the morning, which
have cast lots upon the Nations? and said in thine heart: I will ascend into
heaven, and exalt my throne above, besides the stars of God, and I will sit
upon the mount, even the holy mount of his Sanctuary, and Congregation: I will
ascend above the height of the clouds, and will be like the most High.

And all hell, which once did wonder, worship and kiss thy feet, beholding now
thy nakedness, thy shame and judgment, shall die for grief of mind, Esaias. 14.
and dying shall say. Is this the man that made the earth to tremble? and with
his word did shake the Kingdoms? that made the world a wilderness, and a wast
of the Cities thereof? Then shall thou lying in torment, death gnawing on thee,
answer Wisd. 5.
them and say. We have erred from the way of truth, and the light of
righteousness has not shined upon us, nor has the Son of understanding risen
over us. We have wearied our felues in the wates of wickedness, and we have gone
through dangerous paths, but the way of the Lord we have not known. What has
pride profited us? or what profit has the pomp of riches brought us? all
these things are vanished like a shadow and as a post that passes by. And
casting up thy eye to heaven, shall see the righteous stand in great boldness
before thee, and before the face of such as tormented the^, and took away
their labors, and thou shall ware exceedingly at the sight of them, and be
amassed at their wonderful deliverance, and die for grief of mind, and dying
shall say. Wisd. 5.
These are they whom we sometime had in derision, and in a parable of
reproach: we fools thought their life madness, and their end without honor,
But how are they counted among the children of God, and their portion among the
Saints?

judgment and mercy of him that made her. And thy death shall comfort and
refresh the earth, and deliver Syon from her great and violent oppression: but
their prosperities may not longendure, as testifies the Prophet Daniel. Chap.
12.12.
For may Israel dwell safe, and the Kings of the east not know it? Nay verily,
they shall arise, Ezec. 39.
and come down like a storm, and like a cloud shall cover the earth, and
compass round the tents of the Saints, Revel. 20.9.
and the beloved City, till fire disceud from God out of heaven (as it is
written) and devout them. And in those days shall be finished the mystery of
God, fore-declared to his servants the Prophets, and witnessed by the mighty
Angel which came down from heaven, and stood upon the Sea, and upon the
earth, and raised up his hand and voice to heaven, and swear by him that lives
for ever and ever. (...). Revel. 10.
Behold it is come, and it is done says the Lord, Ezec. 39.
this is the day whereof I have spoken.

For the hope of which day, the stones of Syon die day by day: tho little
esteeming seven thousand deaths, in regard of the preeious assurance engraven
in their breasts, that they shall then and in that day, behold the Lo^^ has so
mercifully gathered them from among the Nations: That has so wonderfully
preserved them, from the sorcerie of Babylon, which has destroyed all the
earth. That daily leads them in and out, before the scorners, the covetous,
and foolishwise of this world, so prudently, and so inuisibly, that they seeing
are not seen, and living are not known. That has bestowed on them, a
thousand treasures more then these, so secretly, as no man suspecteth but they
that have them. That has so surely and fully persuaded them, that tho they now
go on their way weeping, yet they shall then return again with joy, and
bring the sheafes with them: and all the earth shall then know, which now is
hid, how much the Lord their Redeemer loved them, and night and day, shall
praise and magnify the just judgment and mercy of him, that has done all
things for them.

Which day in due time, He that is Highest, shall manifest to all, He that is
Prince an(...) ^boue all, who only has immo^^^^ (...) ^elleth in the light,
which none (...), whom no man ever saw, nor can see: unto whom be all ho^^ur
and power everlasting.

Amen.
Zachar. Save thy self O Syon, thou that dwell with the daugher of Sebel.



