BABYLON IS FALLEN.

Ierimie. 20. 10.

For I heard their aylings of many, and how they wacht for my halting, saying:
It may he that he is deceived.

LONDON Printed by Edward Allde 1597.

TO THE RIGHT honorable Robert Lord Deuoreux, Earl of Essex.
REading of late (my Lord) a Chapter of Esdras, folding up in a mystical and
dark discours^, a living representation of a long time, whereof the most is
past, and so^e little to come: I thought it no lost labor to take my pen and
unfold the same: that ther^n we may behold (which naturally all desire to
see) as well the issues of things to come, as what is past, or is in being:
and thereafter to qualify and moderate our hopes, and call our troubled
thoughts (which otherwise run with raines on neck) within the circle and
l^mitation, bounded and drawn from above. And finding this prophecy written
by a man greatly beloved of God, and thereto (which rare is) a Princes
favorite, high in grace with a King of Persia: I presumed the rather to
commend my labor to your honorable L. as upon whom God has vouchsafed like
great and rare graces. Suffiseth that your. Honor read it, greater favor
Esdras seeks not. He labors not to praise, or please, which now a days finds
many friends, but to admonish and forewarne, which fataly finds none til be to
late. He fears not the learned and noble reprouer of supposed Predictions, for
he has heard him honor the Prophesies of Holy writ, wherein himself has no
less honor gotten, then given. His other enemies, has wild me to conceal, and
to reserne them to a more open hearing. But Esdras is at the next leaf (my
Lord) and craves your Honors patience for an hour.

BABYLON is fallen.
Esdras 4. Chap. II. Then I saw a dream. Verse. 1.

AFter this, the Prophet saw a vision, concerning the beginning, continuance,
and fall of The Empire and supremacye of Rome. And this vision was she wed him
in the days of Artaxerxes King of Persia, about 400. years before the first
stone of her Empire was laid. In. Caesar.


And behold, there arose from the Sea an Eagle,

And there arose among the Nations, the fierce and fearful Kingdom and
Empire of Rome, seen in vision by the Prophet Daniel, some few years before.

Which had 12. fethered wings.

Wherein should arise and reign 12. Emperors, which should spread their power
like wings over all the earth, in great fear sitting on it. And it seemed
good unto the Prophet to touch by an intellection these 12. only, both for they
are a Lewrye sufficient to argue the whole suite of Emperors which did arise
and reign in her; as also because they only were native Romans, descended of
the Iulii, Seruii, Saluii, Flauii, etc. unlike therein unto the rest, which
were all (or almost all) like changeable stuff of diverse colors, so of diverse
Nations, Their rising, continuance, and end, is touched in their proper place.

And three heads.

Her three heads are three Kingdoms, foreordained to uphold and maintain
the power of her pride, when al her wings and feathers should fail her. And
are reserved to execute her last will, and finishe her funerals, as shall be here
after more at full declared.

And I saw, and behold, she Verse 2.
spread her wings over all the earth, and all the winds of the air gathered
themselves and blew on her. By the winds, are meant, her prosperous and happy
success in all her proceedings. And of necessity it must go well with her,
whom every wind does blow to good. Witness the limits of her territories, from
Ganges to Gades; and from the Scithian sea unto the Cape of hope: as testifies
one of her own, which says: that she extended her tents, to the borders of the
Ocean, and the fear of her name unto the heavens.

And I saw, that out of her feathers Verse 3.
grew up other contrary feathers, but they became little feathers and small. And
the Prophet saw, that among the Princes and governors which ruled in her, there
arose and grew up certain Kings, which were contrary unto her, marking such as
intended to root up the crown and dignity of her Empire, to plant themselves
therein, and their house for ever. But their thoughts prevailed not, for as the
verse concludes, their power waned, and they perishedlike the rest what those
contrary Kings were? their number, names, attempts and end, shall be delivered in
their place.

But her heads rested, and the Verse 4.
head in the midst was greater then the other heads, yet rested it with them.
But the three kingdoms fore-apointed t'accomplish and finish the wickedness of
this great City, were quiet and at rest, as not yet (during the reign of her
feathers) conceived and brought forth. And the Prophet observed that the one of
those Kings was greater in power then both his fellows, yet rested it with
them. Concerning these three Kings, their names, their greatness, and all that
appertains, shall be spoken in due place.

Then I saw, and behold, the Verse 5.
Egle flew with her feathers, and reigned upon earth, and over them that dwelt
therein. And I saw that al things vender Verse 6.
heaven were subject unto her, and no man spoke against her, no not one
creature upon earth. And the Prophet beheld, that this proud city flew with her
Emperors and Legions over al her neighbors, fubiecting all the dwellers on earth
under her, in such sort, as there was not a Nation or People to be found under
heaven, that was not either rooted out by her, or enforced to receive their
Governors from her.

And I saw that the Egle stood Verse 7.
up upon her claws, and spoke to her feathers, saying: Watch not altogether,
sleep Verse 8.
every one in his own place, and watch by course. But let the heads be
preserved Verse 9.
for the last. And the Prophet observed, that this powerful City, in the days
wherein (ouergorged with pride) she stood upon terms ofher counsel and arms,
took such order (for in evil she was very methodicall) that her Kings and
Kaysers, should neither sleep nor watch, that is, neither perish nor rule all
at once, but rise in a successiue course, as in the verses following is
manifested. And she further commanded that the t^^ree last Kingdoms, ordained
to conclude the number of her sins, should take their ease and not awake,
till their time appointed.

Nevertheless, I saw that the Verse 10.
voice went not out of her heads but from the midst of her body. As he that
yndertakes a dangerous leap, does first retire the better t'aduance his
strength: so to bound fairlye over the dark understanding of these words, we
must of necessity look back and carrye before us the true birth and perfect
nature of this Empire: which the Prop het Daniel in his vision designeth under
the form of a ten-horned beast, signifying thereby, that it should be a power
vpheld by a succession of many Kings; for the horns betoken Kings, and the
number of 10. comprehends all be they never so many, as al numbers are
contained under 10. or made of their reduplication be they never so infinite.
And adds further, that his teeth were of iron, his nails of brass, inferring
thereby, th'unresistable force of his legions and Leaders. And proceeding says,
that there arose amongst his Kings, one of an exceeding strange nature,
signifying by that one, a strange race and succession of Princes, far differing
in shape and form of regiment from al their predecessors, obtaining dominion
not byiron teeth and brazen nails, as did th'Emperors which arose before them,
but by disceit and by a mouth which spoke presumptuous things against the most
High, blaspheming his name, his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven, who
by hidden and unknown force, should subdue the third part of the world,
meaning, al Europe with her Princes. By which deliniation, it is evident, that
the Holy Ghost accounts the challenged prerogative and supremacy of Rome, al
one power, al one Empire, whether it obtain the spoil by force, or by fraud,
that is, by power of Emperors, or craft of Popes, who should be far unlike
them, as Daniel himself says; And he shall be Chap. 7. 24
unlike to the first. Mening in form of claiming, obtaining, and mainteining
Jurisdiction, not in pride, purpose and determination. So as we may behold such
an unlikely likeness between them, as was between the two Sisters, of whom it
is said. -- facies non omnibusvna,
nec diuersatamen, quale^ decet esse Sororum.


And thus much concerning the Prophet Daniels description of The Empire of Rome;
whence we note, that the same power which Daniel there describes by a beast
with horns, teeth and nails: our Prophet here does deliniat by an Egle, with
wings, feathers and heads; whose imperial wings after they were so clipped, as she
could no longer fly over al in her proper colors, and style of Roma triomfante;
devised how by disceit she might uphold her throne (for to be high was al her
care) and found nothing so fit as to disguise her self, and challenge prelation
under the mask of Roma la Santa. And this is it which this Verse teaches,
that when the sinful City saw her feathers so plucked, as the fear of her
arms and forces, might no longer fly into all kingdoms, commanding them
under the pain of Imperium Romanum: Lying by means of this distres, very
weak and in danger of faling, her counsel and body politic, devised by
lies and witchcrafte (wherein was all her pleasure from her youth) to restore
the supremacye and honor of her name, under the color of Ecclesia Dei.

Wherein this race of presumptuous horns excelled the sin of all the horns
that foretime ruled in her, for they, as in whom Satan dwelt but literally, did
but in open hostility fight against the highest, setting before him a god made
of a wicked man, whose fathers blood cries out for vengeance night and day,
whose bedfellowe was and Soror and coniux, and whose wife was id quod dicere
nolo. But this race of presumptuous and deceitful Kings, as in whom Satan
dwells spirituallye, in a hidden treasure of blasphemy, sets up the Highest
against himself, and under the visar of the Church, and the name of God,
blasphemeth his Sanctuary, and the Lord thereof. No marvel then, tho she and
Syon be at ods, for as gold can body it self with any metal liquisiable,
latten excepted, which notwithstanding in outward face and show of all metals
is most like unto it: so, no Church is more capital enemy to the true Church,
then she, who in outward gesture, grace and countenance, is likest like the
chaste and virgin spouse, and is indeed a whore.

Then I numbered her contrary Verse 11.
feathers, and behold they were eight of them. In the third verse of this
Chapter, the Prophet made mention of these contrary feathers, which in their
thoughts conspirde to raise their house with the ruins of Rome. And here
proceeds more perticularly to declare their number, foretelling there should
be eight of them, whom we will here call out by name, that if occasion serve,
we may the better know them. The first were West-gothes, under Alaricus. The
second Attalas. The third Vandals, their head, Genserick. The Odoacer. The fifth
East-gothes, their Theodorick. The sixth Totilas, bred Alboinus. The eight and
last, a home conspiracy,

And although many others besides these, as Radagais^, the Alani now called
Almans, the Burgonians conducted by Gundibald, the Vngers, Saracens, etc. were
al in their time as costly enemies to The Empire as some of these, yet none did
humble the great City, the mother of wickedness but these eight only. And
therefore the rest may not be allowed to sit at this table, but may serve to
justify the judgment of the Beast, which was thus wounded again and stricken
of al, as she had wounded and strickenal.

And if in reading doubt arise, how these eight feathers may be contrary to the
Egle, that is, resisters of her power and dominion, and yet be feathers of the
Egle, that is, mainteiners of the same? The answer is, that they were
adversaries and contrary unto her, as she stood upon terms of Imperium or
bisterrae: but after she had changed her coppie, and claimed supremacy under
the cloak of Matter Ecclesia, they were for the most mainteiners of ^^^ pride,
and became drunk also with her worship, as other Kings and Princes of the earth.

And thus much for their number, and names, their several attempts, their
prosperities and end, shall be presented in their place.

After this I saw, and behold Verse 12.
upon the right side there arose one fether, and reigned over all the earth.
This fether here described is the first of the twelve, namely J. Caesar, who
(like an ill interpreter) translated Senatum Populumque romanum, into C^sarem
Augustum. Whose Image, which in this verse is so lively resembled, consis^^th
of 2. featurs* the first, shows the manner of his rising in these words.

And behold, upon the right side there arose one feather.

Which serve in stead of art, to discover the very true lines, and cast of his
happiness.

For the house of Cornelii was as eloquent as he, and Marius doubtless as good a
leader as he, and Catilin as nobly borne as he, and al these arose t'inuade the
commonwealth, and to translate it into a Kingdom as well as he, but none of
them rose on the right side but he. And thus much for the manner of this
speech; so we take this with-al, that these words (right side) in their natural
and proper intent, do signify (as through all this chap.) the surest and
strongest side.

The second feature in this resemblance to be observed, is his power, set forth
in these words. And he reigned over all the earth.

For after he had subdued France, broken the heart of Germany, made his name
known to England, he returned into Itali^, overthrew the great Protector of
the liberty Sr. Pompey and his host, in the fields of Pharsalie. And like the
fire of heaven (as one of her Poets says) with such celeritie drew after the
relics of that stricken faction, both in Africa and Spain, that in two years
space he brought to pas, that nether city nor creature durst open against him:
which done, he ascended into Italy, and took upon him as Lord thereof,
triumphing in the spoils of the world, and the blood of his country.

And knowing that the name of a King (which he so much affected) was odious to
the quality and nature of that People; invaded the government under the mask
of a perpetuel Dictator, preserving therunder (for he was wise above all the
feathers) some hope of recovering their late slain liberty, but indeed
establishing a kingdom from which it could never redeem it self again.

And when it had reigned, the Verse 13.
end of it came, and the place thereof appeered no more. But this newborn
prosperity (as is the nature of all this worlds felicity) lasted but a
while, for in the third year of his Dictatorship, he was saine in the Senate, by
the conspiration of 24. of whom the most both in his own (so dangerous is the
name of trust) and other men's opinions, were thought his cheifest friends, And
thus was this fether blown away, after it had inioyed his pleasure 56. years,
and reigned 3. A man for letters, arms, and counsel, famous far-aboue all his
succeeders, and in discreet bounty, and Princely clemencye (rare virtues in
such a fortune) without controversy, surpassing all Princes made of earth.

So the next stood up and Verse 14.
reigned, and it continued a long time, but after it had reigned his end also
came, and as the first it appeered no more. Next after him arose Octauius, the
adopted son of Julius: otherwise also near him in blood, as being the son
of his niece Accia, who having taken revenge upon the murderers of his father,
and obtained in all his wars, foreign and at home; triumphed Lord over all,
adding to his fathers pomp (which he had bought so deer) th'honors of Parens
patriae, and Augustus.

And this fether continued (as the Prophet saw) a long time, for it reigned
Triumuir with Anthony and Lepidus two years, and as Duumuir with Anthony
alone ten years, and then devouring his fellow in a Sea Fight at Actium,
reigned al alone 44. years.

But after it had reigned, his end also came, and (as the Prophet concludes)
he descended like the first, and appeared no more. For by the treason of Liuia
his wife, impatient to tarry th'inthronizing of her son (as is the nature of
ambition the nerer the goal, the faster it runs) his lingering soul was taken
from him at Nola, in the 70. and sixth year of his transgression, when he had
reigned 20. less.

Then there came a voice unto Verse 15.
it, and said. Hear thou that have kept Verse 16.
the earth so long, this I say unto thee, before thou beginst t'appeere no more.
There shall none after thee attain Verse 17.
unto thy time, nor yet to the half thereof. That we may know there is no God
like unto the Highest, who only holds the measures and times of al things in
his hand, the Prophet foresheweth, that none of the twelve should continue like
to Octauius, nor yet attain unto half his time: which according to the word
of the Lord was accomplished; for his son Tiberius of all the rest reigned
longest, and longer by eight years then any of the rest, and yet could not
attain to half the time of his father, which descended before him.

That God only might be honored in all his works, and justified when he
speal^^^.

Then arose the third, and Verse. ^^.
reigned as the other before, and it appeered no more also. Then stepped up
Tiberius, and reigned in great abomination, as did his fathers before him, but
after a while he descended also and appeered no more. No al his skill in
sortilege and wisdom mathematical, whereunto he had sold him-self from hisyouth,
could either fore-tel or fore-warn him of Caius his nephew, by whom he was
poisoned, in the 70. and 8. year of his mortality, and three and twentieth of
his reign.

And so came it to al the others, Verse 19
one after an other, so that every one reigned, and then appeered no more. In
like so^^ (says the (...)) (...) all the rest which of the 12. remained,
suc^^^^^^ely ^se reign and perish.

Of whom the first, in blasphemy ex^^^^^g, ^^ligula.
was (...) by the Captain of his guard, after he had sat in the chair of the
scorneful 29. years, and in the throne of his fathers almost 4.

The second, only wise in ^uil, was poisoned ^laudins.
by his incestuous wife his niece Agri^^ina, in the 64 year of his (...), and
14. of his reign.

The third, a monster, deformed in life, Nero.
in marriage, and end: his life scornful to the height of his fathers, his
marriage thrice more detestable, his end more unnatural then any of th^^rs; for
after he had reigned in sin fourteen years, and sin in him eighteen more,
fell by his own sword into the grave of his fathers, and in him des(...) the
house of the Iul^^.

The fourth was of an other extraction, ^alba.
but not of a better, descended of th'antient (...), rose up la^, but perished
early; for he was 60. and 3. years old before he tasted The Empire, which he
got and lost in 7. months.

The (...) like wise of a new house, but ^th^.
of the old building, got possession by the blood of his Predecessor, and by
spilling his own in three months and od days, lost it again, after he had
walkte in the abomination of his fathers, eight and thirty years.

The sixth also, was new and old, in nothing (save gluttony) excelling his
fellows, Vitellius.
thing (save gluttony) excelling his fellows, in life and death like filthy;
descended in the eight month of his tyranny, after he had wearied himself in
the pleasures of Capri^^um (wh^^ first his youth was branded) 7. and 10. years.

After him arose the seventh, who Vespatian.
bought the crown with the blood of his Mr. and ware it in base covetousness
ten years, but then was likewise blown down, having fulfild the pleasures of
59. more.

The eight was he which executed the Titus.
vengeance due to the great murtheres, th'earthly Jerusalem: who in the 40.
year of his pleasure, after he had reigned 2. years and so many months, was
also blown down, not without the suspected treason of his brother, and
successor.

The ninth and last and (if it (...) possible) Domitian.
the worst of all, who after he had reigned in the lust of his Fathers 15.
years, and lived therein 30. more, was murdered by the Gentlemen of his
chamber, and beaten down after the rest which descended before him. So that
every one of them (as this verse Prophesied) reigned, and then appeered no more.

Then I looked and behold Verse. 20.
in process of time, the feathers that followed stood up on the right side,
that they might rule also, and some of them ruled, but within a while they
appeered no more. And the Prophet observed and saw (after the twelve were
descended) the Emperors that followed to rise, that they might rule also; and
as many of them as rose on the right side, that is: in the strength and power
of the twelve, did in their place (according to the proclamation published in
the eight verse) spread their wings and reign also, (...).

Ner^^. Traian. Adrian. Antoninus. Marcus. Commodus. Perti^^x. Julian. Seuerus.
Caracalla. Macrinus. Heliogabalus. Alexander. Maximinus. and the rest, to the
third Valentinian.
Inwhose days, the power of The Eagle was so wounded, by th'incursion and
saccage of the two first contrary feathers, that she could never after recure
herself again but lay sick and kept the chamber some ten generations, which
also lasted but twice so many years, to the rising of Momillus, in whom
descended all that was left of the Empire, name, and title for ever.

So that all the feathers which the Prophet beheld in process of time to follow
the 12. and in their strength, their sin and cruelty, to defile the earth:
namely from Do^mitian, to the third Valentinian, were 50. and 3. Kings. Al
which in a while (as this verse concludes) vanished like the 12. and appeared
no more.

And some of them were set Verse 21.
up, but ruled not. As, Vindex. Piscenius Niger. Albinus. Diadume^^s. Maximus.
Balbinus. 30. Tirant^. Firmus. Saturninus. Proculus. Bonosus. Aper. Eugenius.
Quintillus. Rufinus. Constantinus non Magnus.
Heraclianus, and others, as in the description of times, may more plainly
appear.

After this I looked, and behold, Verse 22.
the twelve feathers appeered no more. Under the 12. wings or feathers (for both
betoken one) are comprehended by an intellection (as in the first verse) al,
which in the strength of the 12. followed, from Domitian to the third
Valentinian, who perished in the year 455. after he had reigned 30. and lived
5. more.

And thus according to promise made in the first verse, is presented a tragical
succession of all the Egles wings, from her first fether Iu, Caesar, in whom the
power of her pride began, to the third Valentinian, with whom it ended: who
after they had showed themselves, and trodden down the earth 500. and 30.
years, they departed for ever the stage of this world and al their pomp and
glory descended, and appeered no more.

And here my pen like to the earth which being delivered from her oppressors,
did thirst to be refreshed: so hating overcome this part of her talk, did think
to find some ease, but in their hopes they are both deceived, for after the
Egles feathers decended, the sorrows of the earth increased more and more, and
there arose (as seldom comes the better) a race of Sodomitical, and unnatural
Kings, who under the visar of Successors to Peter, and vicars to the Lamb, so
far excelled the whordoms of their fathers the Emperors (whose Vicars and
Successors indeed they are) that they enforced the Highest, to pour his
determined vengeance, upon the children of men. Who according to the judgment
foredenounc'd Revel. 16.
by his servant John, Poured out his wrath upon the Sea, that it became like to
the blood of the dead: that is to say, upon the great City and Empres of the
world, by scourg after scourg (as how often and grievous in the view of her
contrary feathers may appear) so at the full auenging himself, that there was
not a drop of Roman blood to be found on earth, these many hundredth years.

And as the defection and vn^^annes was general, so was the punishment; for
(as the Apostle in the same chap, propheseth) The wrath of the highest, was
poured Revel. 16.
out upon the rivers and fountains likewise, and they were turned into blood
also, that is: upon all People and Nations whatsoever, in such sort, as there is
not a kingdom this day on earth to be found, that has not bin (since the
rising of the beast) cut down by sword, and yielded her stock to strange
griffs, as by the bloody Registers of every particular Nation does so clearly
appeer, as if it were written with the beams of the Sun.

And as the days were evil above measure, so they exceeded in darkness and
ignorance; that my pen has no less ^roble, to be delivered of the rest of ^er
labor, then had the then-dwellers on earth, to endure the pains of their
oppression and travel; but to take into my way again, the Prophet adds.

Nor the two wings.

Figuring by the two wings, the two first contrary feathers, Alari^us, and (...).

The first arose in the 19. of (...), predecessor to the third Valentinian: And
was the first that slew the great City, the murtheres of all the world,
measuring her by famine, sword, and fire; according to the square whereby she
had judged others almost 12. hundredth years. Which woeful end (o^ rather
beginning of her woeful end:) made a certain ancient friend of hers, bewai^ing
the night wherein she Hierom.
was smitten, to cry, Nocte Moab capta est, nocte cecid^^ murus eius, quis
cladem illius noctis, quis funera fando explicet? And when this feather had
thus trodden down the pride of the Eagle, in the year 410. a 1157 years after
Romulus had raised her walls with the blood of his brother; proceeded to ^p up
her bowels, spoiling and burning her principal parts, Latium, Campania,
Apulia, Lucania, Calab^^a, where raging in his highest thoughts, devising how
to spread his glory over all, was by suddeine death blown away, and his place
appeered no more.

The Other arose in the 27 of the third Valentinian, in greater fear then did
the first, devouring at his entrance all that rest of Itali^ which Alaricus had
left uneaten, (...), V^^o^a, (...)ia, Concordia, with all the now (...) Venice:
but by the (...) dealing of the deceitful King, whose (...) then Pope Leo, was
(...) to (...) great City, and to depart (...) left as a wast, stinking in her
(...), and so repassing the Da^^^, (...) into his S^ythia again: (...) the
y^^^ following in top of his fulness, was in a (...) found strangled in his own
blood, (...) into he was disolued, by the(...) use of a wedding (...) and a
(...).

And thus perished this son of (...) (...), the scourg of God, and (...) men
(for so he caled him self) and which not only the fires of Italy, but his very
shape may well justify; for he is (...) a man of little stature, square (...)
little eyes, thin heir'd, (...) great and prominent, his color (...) and
gypson-like.

And there was no more upon Verse. 2^.
the Egles body, but two heads that rested, and six wings. And there were no
more triumphing feathers to be found on her, for all her glori^^^ power was
decended to two weak and feeble heads, which for they reigned not in the
strength of their predecessors, the Prophet day(...) (...) calruling feathers,
but resting heads.

The One stepped in the east at Constantinople, Martian.
whom Gens^rick the third contrary fether not long before had dishonorably
taken prisoner.

Th'^ther in the west at Rauenna, taken Val^ntin.
with such a Lethargy, that he another heard (...) the massacre of Vngarie,
committed by Hunns; not the loud and pitiful (...) of his cheifest provinces,
Spain and Africa, devoured by Goths and (...); (...) and deep lament of Gaul
and Britanie overflowed with Frank^ and Angles, people fron^ beyond the Rhone,
who not only with their blood and posterity, but with their name also have
stained both kingdoms to this day. So as the Prophet well concludes, there was
no more to be found upon th'Egles body, but the^e two drowsy heads, which
rested, and six contrary feathers, viz.

Gens(...). 1 (...). 2 Th^^do^^^k. 3 T^tilas. 4 The Longobands. 5 And the(...).
of which, in the verses following. 6
Then saw I also, the two Verse 24.
wings, divided themselves from the six, and remained under the head that was
upon the right side, but the four continued in their place. And the Prophet
saw, that two of the six divided the^-selues in counsel and manner of
proceeding, from the other four: for where as the four sought to be Lords of Rome
in fee, resolving in their thoughts, t'extinguish the name and majesty of her
Empire for ever, these 2. were of an other mind, for they agreed to remain
under the countenance and favor of th'egles right head, cote^^ed to wear a
crown tho with ^eaue of it: meaning by the right head the east Empire, so
called, in regard it was far stronger in power then the west: whose
broadspreading honor (as in the verse foregoing) was now become a staru'ling,
only his name and appellation continued some ten successions, viz.

1 Valentinian, 2 Max(...). 3 Auitus. 5 Malorianus. 4 S^^e^^s. 6 Anthe^ius. 7
Olybr^us. 8 Gly(...). 9 Julius Nepos. 10 Momillus.
Which al also vanished (as before is touched) in 20. years. And th'Egles pomp
which was at full in Augustus, was enterred with Augustulus (for so was Momyllus
caled) and with him descended the name and title of Imperi^m Roman^^ for ever.

And the two wings thus divided in policy from the four, were Genserick and
Theodorick.

Of which the first, trained into Italy by treason of th'Empres, entered Rom^
43. years after she had bin humbled by the Goths, and led into cap(...) al
her (...)sor, and (as is the fatal reward of such offenders) the traitres also
her-self. And after 14. days thus laden, departed into his Africa again;
wher-ouer he reigned in peace and pleasure 51. years.

The Other, having obtained of th'Easthead the scepter of Italy, according to
his patent proceeded, and got it by Conquest from Odoacer. But after he had
reigned 494.
ther-ouer 30 years, descended also leaving his fame and kingdom to his
posterity having fulfild his pleasures two and forty more.

But this counsel pleased not the other 4. for as the verse concludes, they
remained in other thoughts; drifting in their place to rise and reign, without
leave or license of any.

So I looked, and behold: the Verse 25.
vnder-wings thought to set up themselves, and to have the rule. And as the
Prophet beheld the four contrary feathers which were left, he saw how they also
strove in their hearts to establish the^-selues, but like a dream their purpose
vanished, in the next immediate verses following.

Then was there one set up, Verse 26.
but shortly it appeered no more. Then arose Odoacer, the first of the four;
leading a people begotten in the bowels and inmost parts of the North, who
hearing of the divided and weak estate of the Empire, was encoraged to move
from beyond 476.
the Danub, in much fear and blood descended into Italy, slew her last Lord
and Emperor Momylius Angustulus, destroyed the name of her Consuler dignity,
and blotted out for ever the memory of her holy Senate, the murderer of Romulus
their first King, and Julius their first Kayser; And not daring as base
begotten, to put on the presence and style of an Emperor (which name this
fether fatalie resisted) contented himself with the title of King of Italy.

But his glory endured not, for after he had reigned eighteen years,
Theodorick (as in the 24, verse) took his kingdom from him by force, and his
life by fraud; and he descended, and appeared no more.

And the second, was sooner Verse (...).
gone then the first. After him arose Totilas the second fether of the four, by
birth a Spaniard, by blood a West-gothe, (whose fearful fires burn in Rome
to this day) but this days were more in troble, and (as the Prophet foresaw)
in number fewer then Odoacer; from his first rising always in arms, and after
many hopes and as many dispaires, was at last put to flight by Narses, whom the
East head had made governor of Italy, and flying was wounded so deadlye, that
as soon as he gat his (...) he lost his life, after he had worn the crown (if
to fight for a crown be to wear a crown) 11. years.

Then I beheld, and lo the Verse 28.
two that remained, did think also in themselves to reign. So as of al
the eighth, there remained but the Longobards, and the intestine faction; which
thought also in themselves to reign.

The first inflamed by the letters of Nars^s, and with the goodness of Italy,
left their northern denns, and like a fearful storm fell down upon it, and in
two years overthrew it, crowning their leader Alboinus, King thereof at Milan;
who after he 570.
had spread him-self over the great City, and over al her Italy three years
and a half, was murdered by the treason of Rosimond his wife, leaving his
kingdom but not his honor, to his successors, who possessed it for 24.
generacions.

The eight and last, and of al other the most dangerous, was a home
conspiracy, plotting to raise from the dead, the ancient long-before buried
government of Rome, to reedifie her S. P. Q. R. And to root out the Priestly
prehe(...) and Church-superiority, which had so, (...)ningly eaten and
destroyed the seculer: Which faction after it had taken fire in the hearts of
many, and secretly burned a long time, at length brake out, like the fury and
violence of a risen stream, so as it might not be quenched, but with much blood
and exceeding labor, as in the one and thirteth verse appears.

But whilst they so thought, Verse 29.
behold there awaked one of the heads that were at rest, which was in the
midst, for that was greater then the two. And whilst they thus thought, behold
there awaked o^^ of the three Kingdoms, appointed to finish and end the
wickedness of th'Egle, figuring by this resting ^ead, the new west-empire, which
(...) of Supremacy the beast bestowed (as has bin always his practice to
run with the strongest) upon Charles king of F^ance, and (...) to Pepin the
traiter. This head is said to be awaked, when it was first raised, which was in
the year 801. wherein it received his augustal robe, his crown, and style, viz.
(...) Augusto a Deo coronato, magno and (...) Imperatori Romanorum, vita and
victoria. And the title of dignity imperial, which had la^en dead above 300
years, was in this year on Christmas day, thus raised up to life again, to the
end it might defend the proceedings of the great adulteres and murderes of
the earth, as by the form of oath exhibited at his consecration appears; In
nomine Christi spondeo, (...) po^^^eor ^go A^ Imperator, (...) Deo and (...)
Petro apostolo, me protectorem, ac defensorem fore huius Sanct^ romans Ecclesiae,
in omnibus vtilit ^^ibus, q^^tinus (...) fultus fuero adiutorio, pro-ut sciero,
poteroque.

In that this head is said to be in the midest, is meant, that it should be
chosen from among the Nations and Kingdoms of the earth, as by experience has
bin proved; first from France, then from diverse kingdoms and parts of Germany,
where it still remains.

And that the fear and power of this head has bin greater, (...) any other
christian king or kingdom (...), (...) not sufficiently read in the (...)
registers of every Nation?

And I saw, that the t^^o Verse 30.
heads were joined therewith. By the two heads, ar shadowed the two kingdoms
of France and Spain, whole unhallowed leage the Proph(...) faith; they should be
joined with this middle-head, and like three parts in one, accord and agree
together, to (...) themselves, their authority, and power before the Beast, and
for their Idol-she(...) fight against the Highest, (...) the breath of his
mouth they be scattered, like the dust which the wind disper(...).

And these a^ the 3. heads mentioned in the first, fourth, and ninth verses of
this chapter; and ar therefore said to finish and determine the last end and
wickedness of the whore, because tho (...) other kingdoms hate her and make her
(...) and naked, and eat her flesh, as England, and others have done: yet these
three heads shall love her still, and to their dying day shall burn in delight
with her, but when those three and every of them, shall also forsake her, there
shall not be found either kingdom or creature under heaven, that shall fall down
and worship her.

And behold, the middle head Verse. 31.
was turned with the^ that were turned with it, and did eat up the two under
wings which thought to reign. And the Prophet saw this middle head (the head
of evil,) impart his fellowship to al Princes and kingdoms, which desired to be
in leage with it. But my task which hastes to an end, will not suffer me now,
and here, to sound this gulf of Santa Liega suffiseth that for Syons sake the
Prophet passing by, does point thereat.

And the Prophet beheld, that this middle head did devour and eat up the under
wings, namely, the power of (...) (...)bards and the intestine faction, which
(...) also to reign.

The first by the sword of (...), surnamed (for his exceeding (...)) the great,
who at the command of Babylon his god, ascended into (...), (...) her King
Desiderius prisoner, and led him captive into France, and g^^^ his kingdom to
an other And (...) vanished this seventh contrary feather, after it had
humbled the whore, and sp^^d it self over al her quarters 200 and 4. years,
and the fear thereof descended, and it appeered no more.

The Other, first began in the (...) of Gono The Emperor, who having (...) of
contrary opinion, against Gregory the second (for so the beast was (...))
followed it so ho^^ly, that he brought his holiness into such disgrace, (...)
that (...) a desire in the hearts of many, to (...) their Prelat for a Prince,
and to (...) their first and ancient form of go(...). This desire thus begu^,
by time ((...) al conspiration does) gathered strength, and adventured (but
som-what to young) to check the Beast, who by reason he was so 798.
well guarded by his foresaid head and champion Charles, easily neckt it.
Notwithstanding some 100. and 50. years after, this ulcer now grown to a riper
head, under the practice of one Alberique and Octauian his son, brake out a
new, and charged the Beast in so sharp a manner, as without dout he had
received the mate, had not his head in the midst avoided it once again, whose
name was now changed from Charles the great, to Otho the great: who as being by
oath devoted, came to Rome, banished her new risen Consuls, hanged her Tribuns,
and mounted her Prefectus vrbis, Mr. of misrule, naked on an Ass, crouned and
attended through the city with great derision; from thence committed to
prison, and there executed with exquisite torments. And by this 967.
means, the heat of this defection was so asswag'd, that it appeared not for 7.
years after: but then (under the leading of one Cincius) flamed out anew, in so
furious a sort, as 974.
it had doutles fyr'd the Beast out of al his holds, had not his middle head
(Otho the second) hasted into Italy to quench the same: who (knowing how much
it imported to punish exemplarly so dangerous an evil) prepared in the Vatican
a sumtuous feast, invited thereto all the nobility and chief of the city: when
al were come, saluted and set: caused forthwith to be proclaimed, that no man
on pain of death, should either speak or move at any thing that should be seen
or heard: presently entered armed men and compassed the place round where the
guests were; whereat whilst every one amassed, doubting what this first course
meant, this middle head drew forth a paper, and whose names were therein written,
commanded to be drawn from the table, and in presence of al there to be slain.
The rest were courteously entertained, and were as merry as the fear of so
cruel a feast would give them leave. Ne yet for all this the fever so left
these patients, but that they fell some 162. years after into relapse 1136.
again, but Frederique the first (for so was now this head caled) with the
blood of a 1000. and the wounds and imprisonment of as many more, so branded
this Hydra, which had bin so often headed, as it could never after recover head
again, but her breath departed, and her purpose vanished and appeered no more.

And this head did put the Verse. 32.
whole earth in fear, and ruled therein, and over the dwellers thereof, with
much labor: and it held the gouerme^t of the world more, then all the wings that
had bin. That this head and his fellows, have more maintained and advanced the
rage and blasphemy of the Beast, then all the feathers that arose before them,
and made more diligent and cunning inquisition after the blood of Syon then
they, is it not eternally cronicled in the registers of every particular
Nation? And therefore they are caled the heads of th'egle, and who knows not
that heads ar more able in evil the^ feathers? And the Prophet beheld that this
head continued longer, and held the government of the world more then all the
feathers that had bin, for from the rising of the first fether Julius Casar, to
the end and expiration of Momyllus Augustulus the last, were not 560. years,
whereas this head arose in the year 801. and has already continued above 700.
and 90, and yet still continues, and shall, til he that now is be taken away.

And after this I saw, and behold, Verse. 33.
this middle head sodenlie vanished as did the wings. In that the Prophet saw
this middle head suddenly vanish, as did the wings, he signifies that it shall
not be rooted out by force or sword of any, but depart quietly, and die as it
were in bed; but yet (as the truth fore-saith in the chap. following) not
without pain: meaning, that th'Electors shall not choose to the liking of the
Beast, nor the Beast co^secrat to the liking of the^. And in this difference
this head shall die, ne shall this difference be exempted from pain.

But the two heads remained, Verse 34.
which also reigned over the earth, and over the inhabitants thereof. And when
the power of this great head, (which is now so little) like a tale that's told
shall be clean ended; yet the fear of the other two shall still remain, and have
dominion over the earth* and those that dwell therein; til the fulness of their
malice and tyranny be accomplished also: which may not long be vn-fulfild, for
behold, in the very next verse their destruction comes.

And I saw, and beheld, Verse 35
whilst the head on the right side, devoured that which was on the left. By the
right head is meant (as thorough all this prophecy) the strongest; so as the
Prophet implies, that the sword of Spain, shall divide the strength of
France, that her pride by division made less, may at the last (as every
divided kingdom does) return to nothing. Nether shall the prosperity of this
right-head, be long free from like retaliation, but as the truth fore-saith. He
that deuideth with the sword, Esd. 4. 12.
shall perish by the sword. For how may the sword for ever escape him, whom
heaven hates, and earth does persecute? and of whom may be truly said, which
was spoken of Ismael, Manus eorum contra omnes, and omnium contra illos.

And thus shall these heads perish, and have the faster to their end, because
the judgment of the Beast is nigh, in the very next verses attending to come in.

Then I heard a voice, which Verse 36.
said, look before thee, and consider the things which thou see. So I saw,
and behold, as it were Verse 37.
a Lion came hastily out of the wood, roaring; and I saw that he sent out a
man's voice unto the Eagle, and spoke, saying: Hear thou, and I shall tell Verse.
38.
thee, what the most High does say unto thee. The roaring of the Lion is the
breath of the Highest, which shall rebuke th'Egle for her unrighteousness, and
cast before her a^her spoils, and set her alive in judgment, and with the
spirit of his mouth rise up against her, and lay unto her charge as in the text
follows.

Art not thou he which of the Verse 39.
4. Beasts remainest, whom I made to reign in my world, that by them the end
of things might come? And the fourth is come, and Verse 40.
has overcome all the Beasts that were past, and obtained power over the world
with great fearefulnes, and over the whole compass of the earth with extreme
oppression, and has possessed so long time, all the world with deceit. For thou
have not judged the Verse 41.
earth with truth. But have troubled the meek, and Verse 42.
hurt the peaceful, and thou have loved liars, and destroyed the dwellings of
the^ which brought forth fruit, and have cast down the walls of such as did
thee no harm. So as thy unjust dealing is ascended Verse 43.
to the most High, and thy pride unto the Mighty. And therefore he that is
Highest, Verse 44.
has beheld the proud times, and behold they are ended, and their
abominations ar finished. And if thou plead not guilty hereunto, behold, a
thousand witnesses shall rise up against thee, and prove th'inditement true;
that the just judgment which has so long attended for thee, may at the length
be pronounced against thee, in form as in the text follows.

Therefore appear no more Verse. 45.
thou egle, nor thy fearful wings, nor thy wicked feathers, nor thy malicious
heads, nor thy cruel claws, nor thy vain body. And least in thy drunkenness
thou may think, thy sin may ouer-shoot this judgment to come, and in thy
madness glorify thy self as thou have ever done, persuading thy self thou
shall ever be, because thou have bin long, and like a fool have not considered,
the more thy years the nigher thy grave; behold, thus says the truth; In the
year which shall be 1666. this Revel. 13. 18.
judgment here pronounced shall lay hands on thee. And as al thy fearful
wings, and feathers, be already decended and blowe^ down; so before that day
(which is so nigh at hand) the tyranny of thy malicious heads, and cruel
claws, shall be consumed and brought to naught. And in that day, thy vain body
shall be burnt with fire, and shall so clean be cut of from the land of the
living, that nether son nor nephew (as the Prophet says) nor branch nor
remnant Esaias. 14. 22. Esaias. 14. 24.
of thy name, shall be found upon the earth. For as it is purposed, so shall it
come to pas; and as it is consulted, it shall stand. Go to now, take counsel of
thy Seers, and call thy inchanters about thee; build thy devises as high as
heaven, and lay their foundations low as hell, yet shall they not deliver thee
from the day appointed: but as Salmanazar destroyed Beth-arbel in the day of
battle, wherein the mother with the children was dashed in pieces; or like the
millstone, which the mighty Angel did cast into the Sea, with such violence
shall thou be thrown down, and be found no more. And al hell shall be moved at
thy coming and prepare it self, and raise up al her dead against that day to
meet thee, and all the Princes and Kings of Nations, whom thou have slain with
the cup of thy fornication; shall rise out of their torments against thy coming,
and at thy sight shall wonder, and Esaias 14, 10.
cry, and say unto thee. Art thou become weak also as we? art thou become like
one of us? Is thy pomp bowed down unto the grave? end ar thy pleasures
departed like ours? and is the worm spread under thee, and do the worms cover
thee also? how art thou falen from heaven O Lucifer, son of the morning,
which have cast lots upon the Nations? and said in thine heart: I will ascend
into heaven, and exalt my throne above, besides the stars of God, and I wilsit
upon the mount, even the holy mount of his Sanctuary, and Congregation: I will
ascend above the height of the clouds, and will be like the most High.

And al hell, which once did wonder, worship and kiss thy feet, beholding now
thy nakedness, thy shame and judgment, shall die for grief of mind, and dying
shall say. Is this the man that made the earth to Esaias 14.
tremble? and with his word did shake the Kingdoms? that made the world a
wilderness, and a wast of the Cities thereof? Then shall thou lying in torment,
death gnawing on thee, answer them and say. We have erred Wisd. 5.
from the way of truth, and the light of righteousness has not shined upon us,
nor has the Soon of understanding risen over us. We have wearied our selves
in the ways of wickedness, and we have gone through dangerous paths, but the
way of the Lord we have not known. What has pride profited us? or what profit
has the pomp of riches brought us? al these things are vanished like a shadow
and as a post that passes by. And casting up thy eye to heaven, shall see the
righteous stand in great boldness before thee, and before the face of such as
tormented the^, and took away their labors, and thou shall fear exceedingly
at the sight of them, and be amassed at their wonderful deliverance, and die for
grief of mind, and dying shall say. These are they whom we sometime had Wisd.
5.
in derision, and in a parable of reproach: we^ fools thought their life
madness, and their end without honor. But how ar they counted among the children
of God, and their portion among the Saints?

That all the earth may be refreshed, Verse 46.
and come again, as one delivered from thy violence, that she may hope for the
judgment and mercy of him that made her. And thy death shall comfort and refresh
the earth, and deliver Syon from her great and violent oppression: but their
prosperities may not long endure, as testifies the Chap. 12. 12. Ezech. 39
Prophet Daniel. For may Israel dwell safe, and the Kings of the east not know
it? Nay verily, they shall arise, and come down like a storm, and like a cloud
shall cover the earth, and compass round the tents of the Saints, and the
beloved City, til fire descend from God out of heaven (as it is Revel. 20. 9.
written) and devour them. And in those days shall be finished the mystery of
God, fore-declared to his servants the Prophets, and witnessed by the mighty
Angel which came down from heaven, and stood upon the Sea, and upon the earth,
and raised up his hand and voice to heaven, and swear by him that lives for
ever and ever. Revel. 10. Ezech. 39.
(...). Behold it is come, and it is done says the Lord, this is the day
whereof I have spoken.

For the hope of which day, the stones of Syon die day by day; tho little
esteeming seven thousand deaths, in regard of the precious assurance ingraue^
in their breasts, that they shall then and in that day, behold the L. that has
so mercifully gathered the^ from among the Nations; That has so wonderfully
preserved them, from the sorcerie of Babylon, which has destroyed all
the earth. That daily leads them in and out, before the skorners, the
covetous, and foolish wise of this world, so prudently, and so inuisibly, that
they seeing are not seen, and living are not known. That has bestowed on
the^, a thousand treasors more then these, so secreatly, as no man suspecteth
but they that have the^. That has so surely and fully persuaded them, that tho
they now go on their way weeping, yet they shall then return again with joy,
and bring their sheafs with them; and all the earth shall then know, which now
is hid, how much the Lord their Redeemer loved them, and night and day, shall
praise and magnify the just judgment and mercy of him, that has done al
these things for them. Which day in due time, He that is Highest, shall manifest
to al, He that is Prince and Lord above al, who only has immortality, and
dwells in the light, which none can attain unto, whom no man ever saw, nor
can see, unto whom be al honor and power everlasting.

Amen.
Zacha. 2. 7 Save thy self O Zyon, thou that dwell with the daughter of
Babel.
ANd thus (my L.) at length I am come a shore, deliuerd from a dangerous and
scopulous Sea, as any is in all the Ocean of the Scriptures; praying, if I have
made too bold t'impart my Voyage to your Lordship, you would be pleased
t'ascribe it, to the common humor of trauelers, who cannot choose but tell, what
adventures they have past, and what wonders they have seen: strange and long
were it, to tell your Ho. al I saw, and I fear in respect of your hours, I have
bin to long, to tell so much too much doubtless, in regard of my pen, which is so
sad, and so vncourtly, as were it not for that natural engraven noble courtesy,
wherewith your Lp. is beautified above al comparison, your H. might not endure
her plain and careless apparation. And so most humbly commending my Service to
your H. disposing, take a shorter leave then else I would, because I am setting
forth to Sea again, in hope Godwilling (if bread and water fail me not) to
discover the Revelation, and to make known to my Gracious Sovereign Princes,
that I also amongst the rest, may be bold to speak, tho I care not to be
known.


