EXPOSITION OF THE XI. XII. AND XIII. CHAPTERS OF THE REVELLATION.

Wherein most of the matters of greatest moment contained in the book of the
Revelation are unfolded.

By a late Writer, whose certain name is not known to the Publisher hereof,
only these two letters T. L. are in his Advertisement to Queen Elizabeth.

The Contents whereof are in the next Page.

Printed An. Dom. 1623.

The Contents of these three Chapters.
The estate of the Primitive Church before her dispersion. The Churches first
persecution by t^^ ^^athen Emperors. The flight of the Church into the
wilderness The two Witnesses. The rising of Antichrist: his seven hea^^ and ten
horns. The second Beast, and his two horns. The practice of Antichrist and
his Clergi^ against the Church. The Image of the Beast. The Mark of the Beast.
The name and number of the Beast. The end of the Beast, and destruction of h^^
City. And the end of the world.
The reasons that moved me to publis^ this same, are these two: first, the hope
o^ good that it may do to the Church o^ God, in these troublesome times: and
secondly, hoping that it may be a mean to bring forth the rest, either from
the Author, or from some other that may have it in keeping.

CHAP. XI.
1. The regenerate Christians only are the Church and heritage of God.

3. The residue are outcasts and refused.

7. Of the two testifiers and preseruers of truth.

13. Antichrist kills them, but the Lord restores them life again.

15. Great dissension arises thereupon: the day of judgment is foreshewed.

VERSE 1. And there was given me a reed, like unto a mete-yard; and the Angel
that stood by me, said, Rise, and measure the Temple of God, and the Altar, and
them that adore therein.


AS in a common field, a good Surveyor does measure out each intercommoners
several, by stake or by rod: so in the wide and common field of Christians,
the Lord commands his servant John to survey and apportion out his Church and
partage, which he seuereth from the residue of carnal Gospellers, and such
like outcasts; in recommending unto us their inward frame and renewed graces,
under the appellation and names of the Temple of God, the Altar, and them that
adore therein: meaning, that as in the Tabernacle of the congregation, the holy
and most holy places (wherein stood the Table of the Shewbread, Candlestick,
Altar of incense, Arc, propitiatory and oracle of God, ouercouered within and
without with Angell-gold, into which places none but the Priests might enter
and adore) were separated by a veil from the outer Court, where the brazen
altar was erected for all the house of Israel to enter and sacrifice, and which
therefore was called the Court of the people: so in the common field and
University of Christians, they only are the Church and heritage of God, which
are sanctified in heart, and holy in life and couuersation, and separated (by
the veil of regeneration, that is to say, by the tears of true repentance,
and the assurance of pardon and reconciliation unto God in Christ Jesus, in
graven in the tables of their hearts by the finger of the Spirit) from all
carnal professors and nominall Christians, in whom is but an outward face and
protestation of the name of Christ only.

Verse 2. But the base Court which is without the Temple, cast out, and measure
not, for it is given to the Gentiles: and the holy, City shall they tread
under foot two and forty months.


But as for those common Catholic Christians, here resembled to the base
court which is without the Temple, because they are but ouercast only with a
profession of my name, which hear my word and participate my Sacraments, and
yet are separated by an unregenerate heart, as by a veil, from those Altars
and Priests, in whom my name is honored: cast forth, says the Lord, and
measure not; for howsoever such unleavened companions seem to boast in the
name of my Church, and in the protestation of a Christian calling, yet they are
so far from belonging to my peculiar, says the Lord, as that I have given
them up in reckoning with the reprobate of the Gentiles, and they shall
justify mine account and reiection of them, by their like uncircumcised
carriage and heathenish conversation: for they shall no less defile my holy
City, that is to say, they shall no less hate, accuse, persecute, and keep
under water the true and sanctified Christian, then do the heathen and
uncircumcised, as by ouer-long experience is well known to the Church of God,
which has been, is, and shall be (till her captivity be returned) opposed for
melancholy, mad, new, factious, schismatic, heretical, by Christian
Catholics, politicians, Atheists, carnal Gospellers, and such heathenish
protestors like to these.

And that the Church of God may not look for other or better entertainment at
these her intercommoners hands, she is here (by the predeterminate counsel of
God) to be trodden like a way by these Gentiles and heathenish Christians, two
and forty months, meaning months of years, every month accounting (by
prophetical supputation) thirty years, as in the verse following shall be
further manifested; confounding therein the Remisaries of Rome, who sweat to
persuade that they are but months of days, thereby to turn the worlds eye
from the great Antichrist that now is, to a petty Antichrist which shall never
come.

Verse 3. And I will give to my two witnesses, and they shall prophecy a
thousand two hundred and sixty days clothed in sackcloth.


DVring which time of the Churches disgrace and desolatio^, for the greater
comfort of her children and judgment of her adversaries, I will, says the
Lord; I, by a wonderful outstretched providence, will preserve unto the world
the light and power of my two testaments, to guide their knowledge and
conversation into the ways of peace. Whereby the Lord manifestly reproves the
gross and vain expectation of those that translate his meaning in this place
to the coming of Henoch and Elias: whereas of Henochs return, either in flesh
or in spirit, there is no syllable of promise in all the Scriptures; and as
touching the spiritual return of Elias promised, is already performed, as the
Lord himself Mal. 4. 5. Mat. 11. 14
proves.

Now touching the time of their keeping watch while the world sleeps, the
Lord voweth it shall be two and forty months before mentioned; which being
dissolved into days, after the Calendar of the Hebrews (whose year did drive
thirty days to every month, and twelve months to every year) amount to the
just number of 1260 days here specified: which computation of the years is
observed throughout the whole Bible, Daniel only excepted, who counts after
the use and style of the Caldeans, in whose tongue and amongst whom he wrote;
and consequently the months being prophetical, that is to say, months of
years, which to each account thirty years, the reign of Antichrist must
needs endure 1260 years. Which manner of reckoning years by days, though it
seem strange, is usual notwithstanding with the Prophets of God, and
therefore is called Prophetical, as Ezekiel a day for a year; and Daniels
Ezekiel. 4. 6. Dan. 9. 24.
seventy weeks are weeks of years, every week containing seven years, as
throughout this prophecy. Also the months are months of years, to every month
accounting thirty years. From whence we conclude, Antichrists three years
and a half, both here and in Daniel, deciphered by a time, times, and half a
time, to be years of years, every year containing twelve months of years,
which amount to 360 years, and multiplied by three and a half, do in the
total amount to 1260 years.

And to the end the world may take better notice of these his two testifiers
and preseruers of truth, the Lord commends the knowledge of the parties, by
the description of their garments, in saying, they are clothed in sackcloth;
thereby not only disseuering their testimonies from all the soft and courtly
commentaries of flesh and blood, which for the most are raised with infected
matter, and vested with affected style; but also teaching us that no man can
retain to the Lord, before whom they minister, unless he serve in the same
livery that they do, and can turn over the leaves of his life and pilgrimage
in fasting and sackcloth, and true repentance, as these his servants the
Prophets and Saints have done.

Verse 4. These are the two olive branches and the two candlesticks which stand
in the presence of the Lord of the earth.


ANd these my two Testaments are those two olive trees (says the Lord)
described by my Prophet Zechary, which stand and fructify before the Ruler of
the earth for ever and ever. For their leaf, that is to say, their word and
judgments shall neither wither nor fade, though heaven and earth should perish
and melt away. And they are also two candlesticks, which carry in them the
light of my truth, and power of my Spirit, the great moderator of heaven and
earth.

Verse 5. And if any man will hurt them, fire shall come forth of their mouth
and devour their enemies; and if any man shall hurt them, so must he be slain.


ANd if any man shall wrest their word from the aim and intention of their
meaning (says the Lord,) or turn their prophecy out of the way, by
perverting or clipping the honor or purpose of their word, the fire of my
wrath denounced by the mouth of these my two testaments (for though they be
two, yet they have but one mouth) shall surely judge and execute those lovers
and makers of lies: and for the more assurance of this sentence against them,
the Lord does iterate the curse and vengeance of his heavy displeasure, saying,
And if any man will hurt them, so must he be slain; meaning (I say) by
hurting, all manner diminishing of the words of their testimony by false,
blasphemous, and lying expositions, as some have done.

Verse 6. These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of
their prophecy, and they have power over the waters, to turn them into blood,
and to smite the earth with all manner of plagues, so often as they will.


FOr the Lord has touched the mouth of these his two Prophets, as he did ye;
mouth of Jeremy, and the rest of his servants, of whom he says, Behold, this
day have I set thee over nations and over kingdoms, to pluck up, root out,
destroy and throw down, build and plant: and in another place, Therefore have
I cut them down by my Prophets, and slain them by the words of my mouth. Such
privilege the Lord has given to these his two Testaments, that if they once
shut the heavens that it rain not in the days of their prophecy, that is to
say, if they denounce a famine of the bread of life, to wit, the word and
knowledge of God; or pronounce a sword to come upon a nation, kingdom or
people, which the Lord here signifies by turning waters into blood; or if it
pleases them to prophecy (which the Lord here calls to strike) of any
pestilence, earthquake, or other judgment to come, such power is given them,
that if they say the word, it is done, as it is written, Heaven and earth shall
perish, but the words of their prophecy shall not pass, till all be fulfilled.

Verse 7. And when they shall have finished their testimonie^, the Beast which
ascends from the depth, shall wage battle against them, and kill them.


ANd when his servants the Prophets and Apostles shall have fulfilled their
course, and be translated from the land of their labors to the land of rest,
leaving to the world the inheritance (as it were) of their ministry sealed up
in the two Testaments of God, to preserve the fear of his name and the
knowledge of his pleasure among the sons of men, which the holy Ghost calls
finishing their testimony; Antichrist the Beast, whose proper place whence he
is and whither he must, is here described by the name of the depth, shall not
only hurt and wound them by slanderous and lying expositions, as his Clerks
and Assects do, but shall set his feet upon their necks, and tread down their
divine authority by the advancing of his cursed keys and the beauty of his
whorish Church above them, which the Spirit calls waging battle, inhibiting
them to prophecy or teach the words of their testimony vulgarly. And not
only putting them to silence, but also reproving, condemning them for
corrupters, seducers and sowers of heresies among the people; which
presumptuous blasphemy and murder, the Spirit discovers in saying that he
shall overcome them and kill them.

Verse 8. And their carkeises shall remain in the street of the great City,
which is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, where their Lord also was
crucified.


ANd the letter or text of their testimony, which the Spirit calls their
corpse or carkeises, shall remain in their houses, Cells, Temples, hang at their
girdles through all the cities and kingdoms where the Beast and his Church is
adored; which in regard of their number be here named the great City, so in
respect of their execrable worship and adulterous service, contrary to God and
his holy City, they are here called also spiritually Sodom; meaning, that as
Sodom her sister did forsake the lawful use and prescription of nature, and
wrought filthiness against nature; so these loathing truth, and loving lies,
should erect strange oblations and propitiations, as contrary to the offerings
and satisfactions of the Saints, as was the sin of Sodom opposite to nature.

And the Spirit further calls them by the name of Egypt, for that in blindness
and hardness of heart they every way match the presumptuous and indurate
Egyptians, still pursuing and persecuting the truth, as Pharaoh did Israel,
till the God of Israel destroy them by the Spirit of his mouth, as he did
Pharaoh and his host by water.

And in further detestation of the cruel murder and immanitie of this Beast and
his adherents, the holy Ghost lays the blood of the Prince of the Covenant to
their charge also, as cunningly as they think to convey his murder, and post
it over to Jerusalem. For as the Lord does lay the blood of his servant Abel to
the charge of the Scribes and Pharisees of his own time, although he were
slain long before those Pharisees were borne or Jerusalem builded, because they
were the very image and lively imitation of his brother that murdered him: so
the holy Ghost does here lay the innocent blood of the Lord of glory to the
charge of this crucifier and his citizens, because they are the children and
generation of that high Priest and those murderers which cried, Away with him,
crucify him, crucify him. And that we should not marvel thereat, the holy
Ghost in another place goes further, and says, In her shall be found the
blood of the Apostles and Prophets also, and all that ever for the testimony
of the truth were slain on earth.

Verse 9. And there shall of the tribes and people and Gentiles, see their dead
bodies three days and a half, and shall not suffer their corpse to be laid in
monuments.


ANd all nations and kingdoms where the Beast is worshipped (whom the holy
Ghost for their profanation in life and religion, calls Gentiles) shall
have, handle, and gaze upon the letter and corpse of his two witnesses three
days and a half, that is to say, the time, times, and half a time, wherein
the Beast shall reign and persecute, even three prophetical years and a
half, accounting (as in Ezekiel) all days for years. Neither shall they
suffer the word of their prophecy to be read, opened, understood, and laid up
in the hearts of the people, the true and natural monuments and sepulchers,
wherein the testimony of their words ought to be interred.

Verse 10. And the inhabitants of the earth shall be glad over them, and shall
send gifts one to another, because these two Prophets tormented them that dwell
upon the earth.


ANd all the worshippers of the Beast here noted for their number by the
inhabitants of the earth, shall clap their hands over their own inventions,
and rejoice in the death of the truth, and make merry with bonefires, Vigils,
Festiuals, Processions; and in token of joy, they shall send (as the Spirit
says) gifts one to another. Kings and Princes and people shall present and
endow the Beast and his Church with donations, immunities, possessions, gold
and silver offerings, etc; and the Beast (on the other side) shall requite
their kindness with titles, bells, pardons, bulls, and such like: and the Spirit
yields a reason of this their wicked and ungodly comfort, because they had
put out the eyes of his two Prophets, that their whoredoms and prophanations
might not be reproved; then which, nothing can be greater torment to the
wicked, nor more unsavory to them that perish.

Verse 11. And after three days and a half the spirit of life from God entered
into them, and they stood upon their feet, and great fear fell upon all that
saw them.


ANd forasmuch as in the death and extermination of Antichrist by way of
dependancie, consists the life and resurrection (as it were) of the
Scriptures; the Spirit foresheweth, that after the reign and persecution of
the Beast, which here (as in the ninth verse) is determined by three days and
a half, God will raise up faithful and prudent Priests, Shepherds of
understanding hearts, who shall rightly divide the words and testimonies of his
two witnesses; which the holy Ghost signifies, in saying that the spirit of
life from God entered into them: for as the letter and text of the Scripture is
the corpse thereof, so their true intent and meaning is the spirit and life of
them; and by the faithful ministry of such as the Lord shall raise in and
about that time, and for that purpose, the testimony of his two Prophets shall
be restored to their strength, and (as it were) to their walking again, which
the Spirit signifies in saying they stood upon their feet, as well to the
terror and astonishment of all lying and stipulous expositors, as to the fear
and admiration of the children and iustifiers of wisdom, as the holy Ghost
concludes, saying, And great fear fell upon all that saw them.

Verse 12. And I heard a loud voice from heaven, saying, Come up hither: and
they went up into heaven in a cloud, and their enemies saw them.


ANd the restoration of the true meaning of the Scriptures, which their
enemies so long kept under by all unjust and cunning shifts, shall be more
famously known and published, then that they may any longer hinder or stop the
glorious course of their wonderful instauration, which the Spirit intends in
saying that he heard a voice from heaven saying, Come up hither; meaning that
it should be more possible for their enemies to stay Elias chariot from
ascending, or pull the wind back from pursuing his point, then to resist the
wisdom of the same, the which shall vindicate the abuse of the Scriptures,
and by the power of their ministry (as in the strength of a cloud) shall hold
them up, and restore them to their spiritual and heavenly meaning again: and
the Beast with all his sorcerers and liers, which have been their long and
ancient enemies, shall see the glory of their regeneration, and wonder, and
die.

Verse 13. And in that hour there was made a great earthquake, and the tenth
part of the City fell, and there were slain in the earthquake names of men
seven thousand, and the rest were cast into a fear, and gave glory to the God
of heaven.


ANd at such time as it pleased God to begin his work of instauration, and to
cause the dayspring of his Gospel to shine out of the night of Antichrists
darkness; the abominable and desolate profanation of the Beast, which had so
long time ouercast the earth, was in such sort discovered, that the very root
of his throne and usurped authority was dangerously shaken, which the holy
Ghost closely foldeth up, in saying, there was made a great earthquake. And
further foresheweth, that out of this concussion there should arise so great
defection, that the tenth part of his worshippers should revolt from him, and
that this revolt and defection must cost the lives of many thousand men, which
the Spirit utters in a manner of speech strange to us, but usual with the
Scriptures, calling men names of men, as Chap. 3. 4. and meaning by seven
thousand many thousand, using the determinate number of seven indefinitely and
for a number indeterminate, as it is also in Scripture often. Which broiles and
bloodshed concerning the institution of religion, are so sufficiently reported
in the Commentaries of Bohemia and Germany, and in the troubles of France and
Flanders, and other nations, as if it were purposely registered in proof of
this prophecy.

Lastly, the Spirit concluding foretells that many kingdoms in this
defection should quite forsake the Beast, and haste them out of Babylon home
again to build the walls of Jerusalem, and to restore the morning and the
evening sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, as in the former time and in the
days of old, in saying, And the rest were cast into a fear, and gave glory
to the God of heaven.

Verse 14. The second woe is gone, and behold the third woe will come quickly.


THe first woe was the blasphemy of Arianisme, which the holy Ghost in the
ninth Chapter most aptly resembles unto a smoke ascending from the depth,
saying, that the Sun was darkened, and the air with the smoke of the pit;
meaby the Sun the Son of God, and by the air the word of his truth, by
whose only mean and interposition, the object of his Deity was truly
discerned; and in regard of this first woe which was kindled by Arius,
wherewith the inhabitants of the earth (as the Spirit foretold us) should be
tormented five months, meaning months of years, which by prophetical
account amounts to one hundred and fifty years, which was the time of the
Arian persecution, as in the Ecclesiastical histories more plainly appears.
The holy Ghost, I say, in regard of this first woe, calls the tragical
reign of Antichrist the second woe, whose long time of tyranny within this
Chapter in a general manner is declared, and in the thirteenth Chapter
following more particularly and exactly discovered; though at the writing of
this prophecy, it had his being only in the foreknowledge of God, and was not
yet begun to be acted, much less fully ended: yet in respect it is here in a
general manner fully revealed, the Lord (to whom all things past and to come
are present) says, the second woe is gone, upon determination whereof the
third woe must ensue, which, for it surpasses both the former in terror and
greatness, the holy Ghost brings it in with a word of audience, Behold, the
third woe will come, meaning the great and terrible day of the Lord, fore
denounced by his servants the Prophets, in the which all nations shall stand as
prisoners before him, and receive every one according to the ways wherein
their heart has walked.

And because the day of the Lords coming in glory and consummation of the
world shall not long tarry after the determination and consumption of
Antichrist, (as in the last verse of the thirteenth Chapter following shall be
more fully declared) the holy Ghost adds the word quickly, as a precise note
of his speedy coming, which our Lord also in another place confirms by a
like word immediately, saying, And immediately after the tribulation of those
days (speaking of Math. 24.
the tyrannous reign of the self same Antichrist) they shall see the Son of
man coming in the clouds of the air.

Verse 15. And the seventh Angel sounded with a Trumpet, and there were made
loud voices in heaven, saying, The kingdoms of this world are made our Lords
and his Christ's, and he shall reign for ever and ever. Amen.


THe understanding of this verse depends upon the eighth Chapter, where it is
said, And when he had opened the seventh seal, there was made silence in
heaven, etc. and I saw seven Angels stand in the sight of God, and there were
given them seven trumpets etc. where the holy Ghost means by the Lamb the
Son of God, and by opening the seventh seal, a more particular discovery of
all such things as concern the estate of his Church from his ascension to his
coming in majesty, divided into seven acts, declared by seven trumpets,
sounded by seven Angels, of which acts the sixth was the pageant of the
desolation of Antichrist, the seventh and last is the coming of the Lord in the
clouds of heaven, and consummation of the world, uttered in these words, And
the seventh Angel sounded with a trumpet, and with a loud voice proclaimed the
kingdom of this world, so long time usurped by Monarks and Antichrists, which
by right of Lordship and inheritance, did evermore belong to the God of heaven
and Prince of the Covenant, shall now at length be restored to the right Lord
and lawful owner, and of his reign, dominion, and glory, there shall be no
end, as the Spirit concludes, saying, And he shall reign for ever and ever,
Amen.

Verse 16. And the four and twenty Elders which sat on their seats in the
sight of God, fell on their faces, and adoring God, said, We thank thee Lord
God omnipotent, which art, which wast, and which shall come, because thou have
received thy great power and brightness.


BY the four and twenty Elders is meant the testimony of Moses and the
Prophets, who for that they spoke by the seven fold Spirit of majesty which
burns night and day about the throne of God, are here said to sit on their
seats in the sight of God. And for that their judgments denounced from time
to time against Antichrist and his worshippers, are now justified upon them,
and the everlasting kingdom of the Lord their God (who has stretched his
wings from sea to sea, and from the River to the end of lands) is now set up
for evermore; therefore the Spirit says, that they fell on their faces, and
adoring the justification of God, brake forth in praises and thanksgiving,
saying, We thank thee Lord God omnipotent, etc.

Verse 17. And the Gentiles were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time of
the dead to be judged, and to render reward to thy servants the Prophets and
Saints, and to them that fear thy name, little and great, and to destroy them
that have corrupted the earth.


ANd all kingdoms, nations and people which have evil entreated Jerusalem,
and made a sport of the shame and affliction of Jacob, shall now reap the fruit
of their savage and heathenish lives, and (mauger their fury) shall endure the
wrath and judgment of him, who with justice judges and fights, as the
Spirit affirms, saying, And the Gentiles were angry, and thy wrath is come,
and the time of the dead to be judged. And the Spitit further testifies, that
the Lord (for whose glory that day is made) shall render to every one their
due hire or wages, (for so the original imports, commonly interpreted
reward,) first to his Saints and servants, and all that overcome, their hire
and wages, which by promise and for his own name sake is due unto them; next,
to all execrable Atheists, blasphemous Catholics, incredulous heathen, liers,
heretics, carnal Gospellers, and all other brazen and unregenerate
Christians, the hire and wages, which to their works, and deeds, and merits is
due, as the Spirit concludes, saying, And to render reward unto thy servants
the Prophets and Saints, and to them that fear thy name, little and great, and
to destroy them that have corrupted the earth.

But concerning this seventh age, wherein the Lord shall come in majesty to
judge the quick and the dead, the holy Ghost deferreth yet a while to speak
more particularly thereof, and resumeth more exactly to entreat of the term
and persecution of Antichrist and his accomplices against the Church and Spouse
of Christ, that so the glory of his justice in their just condemnation and
judgment may be more bright and manifest.

CHAP. XII.
1. A confirmation of the prophecy following.

2. The description of the Church and of her first fruit.

4. The Churches first persecution raised by Ethnicke Rome, by whose immanitie
it came to pass that her beauty was no more seen in her visible and eminent
graces, but lived here and there dispersed and scattered over the face of the
earth.

8. The great battle between Christianisme and Paganism: Christ and his
truth overcomes Jupiter and his profanation.

18. The Empire remoueth his Throne, pretending to stop the floate of the
enemy, but intending to root out the dispersed remnant of the Church.

Verse 1. And the Temple of God was opened in heaven, and the Arc of his
Covenant was seen in his Temple, and there was made lightnings, voices,
thunders, earthquakes, and great hail.


THE Apostle having drawn in the former part of this prophecy a slight
draught (as it were) and designement of Antichrist, does now in the prophecy
following revisit and perfect the discovery of the Beast, and hang him up to
the view and discerning of heaven and earth. And to the end that this his work
of manifestation may carry in it fair and uncontrollable credit, the Apostle
in this verse assures us, that he reuealeth no other word concerning the
Church and her pressours here on earth, during the personal absence of her
Lord, then that which he heard at the Council table of God, which he delivers
in a manner of speech usual with the Prophets. And the Temple of God was opened
in heaven, and the Arc of his covenant was seen in the Temple, alluding to
the Temple of Jerusalem, and signifying thereunder, that the words of this his
Revelation are no less sooth and true, then if he had received them from the
Oracle of God, which spoke from over the Arc of his testament within the
Temple of Jerusalem, whose words and answers, for their divinity, majesty,
power and glory, are here as elsewhere figured by voices proper to God, and
not to man, as lightnings, thunders, earthquakes, and hail.

Verse 2. And a great sign appeared in heaven, a woman clothed with the
Sun, and the Moon under her feet, and on her head a crown of twelve
stars.


But before the Spirit takes in hand to discover the persecuters of the Church,
it pleases him first to describe the Church it self, that so the barbarous
immanitie of her enemies may be more apparent and justly abhorred, being used
against a creature of such virginal, innocent and patient modesty, who for her
rare and admirable beauty is here called a great sign, or heavenly apparition,
symbolizing her fearful, modest, sober and matronlike behavior, with the
appellation and quality of a woman; for so she is in holy Scriptures often
called, the fairest woman, the Kings daughter, daughter of Sion, daughter of
Jerusalem, the Spouse of Christ, Mother of the just, etc. And to the end she
may the better be discerned of us, the Apostle describes her garments and
wearing, saying, she was clothed with the Sun, meaning that she had put on the
Lord Jesus, Son of justice, that is to say, her soul was vested with an
assurance of the mercy and love of God in Christ Jesus her Lord; which justice
or justification of the Spouse and her children, is called in holy Scripture by
way of metaphor, the white stone, and the wedding garment. For as a stoale or
garment covers the shame and nakedness of our vile bodies: so the mercy and
love of God, insured us in Christ Jesus our Lord, hides the shame and
nakedness of our sinful souls. And to prove that her garment was truly wouen
of the two divine threads, to wit, the assurance of mercy and the assurance of
love in Christ Jesus her Lord; the Spirit gives in for evidence, the fruits of
this her lively and iustificall faith, closely hiding her newness of life, her
hatred of sin, and her love of God, as under a veil, in these words, And the
Moon under her feet; signifying thereby that she had now quite forsaken and
forgotten her fathers house, that is, had slain her natural sinful and
wonted affections, and was revived and renewed in mind, and with her Lord was
now risen and ascended up, as he into the heaven of heavens, so she to a new
custom and carriage of life, far above and higher then the Moon: for all her
study and hearts delight was now in heaven, where her hope, her love, her life,
and her dearest Lord lives and reigns, God, to be praised for ever and ever,
Amen.

Last of all, the Spirit sets forth her head attire, whereby her honor and
estate was best known, and wherein she most delighted, saying, that she wore
on her head a crown made of a metal much finer then gold, for it was made of
the doctrine of the twelve Apostles, who for that they are the Lords lights and
lanternes to guide the feet of sinners when sin has benighted them, are here
called by the names of Stars, And on her head a crown of twelve stars.

Verse 3. And being great with child, she cried, traveling and laboring to be
delivered.


ANd by the words which her ears received, her heart conceived, and she was
great with fear and godly sorrow, traveling under the burden of her sins,
and restless desire to be reconciled to God: which anguish and pains of her
sorrowful heart and broken spirit, the Apostle most excellently compares to
the sorrows of a woman in travel. In which her spiritual labor and pain,
she could by no means be relieved or eased, until her Lord were fashioned in
her, that is, until her heart were sanctified by faith: for no Treacle could
heal her miserable wounded soul, but the assurance of mercy only, nor any
water could quench the burning flames of her restless desire, but the love of
God only, insured her in Christ Jesus her Lord, and written in the fleshly
tables of her heart by the finger of God, according to his promise, his first
and last and everlasting covenant.

Verse 4. And another sign appeared in heaven, for lo a great red Dragon
having seven heads and ten horns, and on his heads seven diadems.


AS night does follow day, and the shadow the body; so must the Cross follow
Christ, and affliction his Church; whose Sun could no sooner shine, but the
envious man raised up a mighty storm of persecution to cloud the brightness
of her beautiful beams; which for the extraordinary fury thereof, the Apostle
calls a wonder or sign, meaning the Churches first and primitive persecution
raised by Ethnik Rome, who for his power, immanitie and malice to the Church of
God, is here called a great red Dragon; and both for that his Throne and City
was seated on seven hills; as also for that he was in all impiety, pride and
profanation, the total sum and epitome (as it were) of all the seven
Monarchies, unto whom (from the beginning of time, to the end thereof) was
given and granted the charter and commission of blaspheming God and corrupting
his world (as in the thirteenth Chapter following is more particularly
discovered) the Apostle adds, having seven heads.

And in regard his power did beat down the power of all nations, and made
spoil and purchase of all kings and kingdoms on earth, the Spirit says, he
had ten horns: for the horns signify kings and kingdoms, and the number of
ten include all, be they never so many, as all numbers are made of ten, and
their reduplication, be they never so infinite.

And because he came to advance his head so high by the power of his sword, his
Leaders and legions, the Spirit crowns his heads with magnificence and
diadems, saying, And on his heads seven diadems.

Verse 5. And his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and cast
them to the earth. And the Dragon stood before the woman which was ready to be
delivered, that when she had brought forth, he might devour her son.


THe head of this great red Dragon, was his Regal first estate, governed by
Romulus and six other successiue kingcoates, which Seneca calls his infancy
or nonage, wherein he lived swathed and nourished in blood 244 years, as his
own Historian reports.

The body of this great red Dragon, was his Consuls second estate, which
Seneca calls his full age, part Aristocraticall, part Democraticall, and was
therefore styled, Senatus populusque Romanus: from whence partly by reason of
his ouerweight and fulsome abundance, as one of his own notes, Romana laxitas
mundi and rerum amplitudo damno fuit; and partly for want of enemies abroad to
wreake their proud and kingly humors on, he fell into the intestine evil of
civil wars at home, which did cast him into his minority and wardship again.

And this his last estate of regiment Imperial, the holy Ghost here calls
his tail, which consists of a rout of Monarchs, seventy Keysars long, who
for that they so furiously persecuted and hauocked the blood of the chiefest
Saints and servants of God, the Spirit says that with his cursed tail he drew
the third part of the stars of heaven, and cast them to the earth.

And not contented with the slaughter of his fairest lights and stars of his
Church, proceeded to desolate the whole host of heaven, even all the seed of
the Spouse, named before the Churches child, and here her son, meaning those
in whom by the ministry of his fairest stars (his servants the Apostles)
Christ was now formed, and of whom the Church was now ready to be delivered;
for so much the Apostle unfolds in these words, And the Dragon stood before
the woman which was ready to be delivered, that when she should bring forth, he
might devour her son.

Verse 6. But she brought forth a man child, who was to govern all nations in
an iron rod: and her son was taken up to God and to his throne.


But notwithstanding all their fury, the Church brought forth her first fruit,
which for their faith, charity, labor and patience, the Spirit names a man
child: and because they followed the Lord in the regeneration, and overcame by
keeping his words and works unto the end, they received the self same honor
which to their Lord alone and in chief belongs, namely, that they shall
judge the Tribes of Israel, and have dominion over the nations, and shall rule
them with a rod of iron, and break their glory like a potters vessel, as the
Lord has promised, Math. 19. and Apoc. 2.

And in remembrance of the tender care and providence of God over the seed and
first fruit of his Church, the Spirit concludes, that when they had ended
their course, they were taken up to God and to his throne, far from the reach
and rage of their enemies.

Verse 7. And the Woman fled into the wilderness, where she had a place
prepared of God, that there they might feed her a thousand two hundred and
sixty days.


But the Church of God, here named the woman, mother of this fair and
primitive fruit, being no longer able to weather out her storms, was enforced
to hide her beauty, and to retire her self into the secret chambers of Gods
providence and her own conscience, and to take up her lodging in the desert;
not that her light was utterly extinguished, as her enemies reproach her: for
although she were dispersed, distressed, and enforced to hide her extraordinary
and eminent graces; yet the beauty of her true repentance and of her lively
faith, seconded with a charitable life and patient expectation of better things
to come, still shined as a candle in a dark place; and like a ship preserved
in a tempest, she remained still the same, of whom the world was not worthy;
never wanting the loving protection of her dearest Lord, who in all her
troubles was mindful of her, as of Elias his servant, or Israel his first
borne; careful to provide her both of honorable harbor and princely diet. Her
resting place was restless, strewed and scattered far and near over the face
of the earth; for such a lodging did best beseem her broken and restless
heart, which soiourned in earth, but dwelt in heaven; and did also best defend
her person from the furious inquisitions of her enemies.

Neither was her Lord less loving and provident concerning her food, for he
preserved for her diet the two witnesses of his eternal Covenant, that from
their breast she might suck the pure and wholesome milk of grace and life,
that so she might be both nobly harbored and princely fed during the tedious
and odious reign of the great Whore the Church of Rome, who during her exile
should usurp her Chair, and under the vizard of her name should persecute her
name and generation a thousand two hundred and sixty years, here (as before)
mystically deciphered under a thousand two hundred and sixty days.

Verse 8. And there was waged a battle in heaven, Michael and his Angels
fought with the Dragon; and the Dragon fought, and his Angels.


ANd at the same time that the Temple of God was opened in heaven, the Apostle
also foresaw that great and bloody contention, then which (since the days of
heaven) was never waged greater; great in regard of the armies, and great in
respect of the cause.

The armies great, as well for the greatness of the Generals, as for the
valor and number of their forces.

The General on the one side, was the power of God, sciphered by Michael the
Prince of the Covenant, who stood for the children and people of the Highest.
The General on the other side, was the power of Satan, figured by Ethnicke
Rome, here (as before) called the Dragon.

In their forces are to be considered the Leaders and the soldiers. The
Leaders and the Captains on the part of Michael were Diuus Petrus, Diuus
Paulus, Di^^^ Johannes, and the rest of that divine and noble order of Saints.
And on the Dragons part were Leaders and Chieftaines, diuus Tiberius, diuus
Caligula, diuus Claudius, diuus Nero, and the rest of that most filthy and
execrable train.

So great was the multitude and number of soldiers, that none of what degree,
sex, age, or condition soever, but must be pressed for the one side or for the
other; the valor and virtue of the soldiers exceeded all praise; few subdued
many, the weak overcame the strong, a handful of Christians a world of
infidels.

The cause was great, and higher then the heavens; whether God or Belial,
Christ or Jupiter, Christianisme or Paganism were more venerable for
antiquity, maiesticall for amplitude, more constant for continuance, and in
all other respects of wisdom, honor and majesty more worthy to be embraced
and adored of the sons of men; which was for life contended by the Dragon,
his Angels and assects, and was for life withstood and disapproued by Michael
and his Angels, and their followers. The issue of this contention follows.

Verse 9. But they prevailed not, neither was their place found any more in
heaven.


AS the battle was great, so was the victory glorious: for though the Dragon
with his sapient Senates, his profane Angels, and his unclean abbettors,
intended all their forces, moving (as it is in proverb) heaven and earth to
make room for the abomination of Jupiter, and to keep under water the
everlasting Lord and Prince of the Covenant; as among the many monuments of
time is sufficiently proved and maintained by Orosius, and by him to whom he
wrote in his book de Ciuitate Dei; yet the Spirit foreseeing the Dragons
folly, and how in vain he kicked against the spur, in scorn of his
presumption says, But he prevailed not; and concluding affirms, that the
possession of heaven (so long time usurped by incestuous murderers, and
execrable curtizans, gods and goddesses of their own forgeing) must be
resigned now to the true Lord and owner of all, who has taken his place at the
right hand of the Father, and has deposed for ever from their usurped titles
of deity, all gods and goddesses, phantasmes made of worms, created and
diuified by the inventions, relations, consecrations, and canonizations of the
Dragon, his Tail and successors, as the Spirit discovers in saying, Neither
the place of them was found any more in heaven.

Verse 10. And that great Dragon was thrown down, the old Serpent, called the
Devil and Satanas, which seduceth the whole world, and he was cast into the
earth, and his Angels were thrown down with him.


ANd the great and profane power of the Roman monarchy, which had so long
time oppressed and corrupted the earth, was now at length detected, and
thereupon disseized of, and from her usurped claim of heaven for ever, as the
Spirit discovers in saying, And that great Dragon was thrown down.

And for that the devil did corporally dwell (as it were) in her, spreading
the beams of his wickedness at full, in all idolatry, impiety and
presumption against God, and in all oppression, injustice and immanitie toward
man; the Spirit crowns her with the cognoments of her sire, calling her, for
her malice to the truth, a Serpent; for her crimination of the Saints, a
devil; and for hostility to God and his Saints, Satanas: speaking therein
after the manner of the Lord himself, who calls his treacherous steward a
devil, though he were a man, because the fullness of Satan did dwell in him,
filling his heart with such a perfect hatred of his innocent Lord, and
lamentable love of his guilty penie, yt he sold Canaan for Egypt, heaven for
hell, and God for silver.

And because the impiety of governors, is not only their own decay by evil
doing, but also by enforcement and evil example the ruin of their people; the
Spirit lays the seduction of the whole earth to the charge of the Dragon, for
the ruling it after the level and prescription of Rome, saying, which seduceth
the whole world; and thereupon gives just judgment and sentence of death
against him, namely, that as in his beginning he crept out of the earth, and by
the scale of his wickedness ascended so high, as to presume to thrust his
haughty head into heaven, and build his neast above the stars, as did his
antecessors, Assure, Beltassar, Darius, Alexander, and the rest of their
compeeres: so by a like power of sword and cruelty, he shall shortly return
to his friends again, and be made even with the earth, from whence his stock
and first estate was borrowed; and the power of his Cesars, council of his
Senators, sophistry of his Sorcerers (which with such indurate and obstinate
minds stood for the honor and worship of devils) should be no longer able to
uphold the reverence of their Jupiter Capitolinus, who was now deteced for a
rogue, and by the voices of Michaels Angels (as by whips and pasports) was sent
home again to the place of his birth, namely the earth, from whence his
mortal and vile genealogy was taken, and with him also were Cesars
vndiuified, and (for all their Senates proud relations) were made to take up
the grave for their latter end, and shame for their fame, and worms for their
heritage, as the Spirit foretells, saying, And he was cast down unto the
earth, and his Angels were thrown down with him.

Verse 11. And I heard a great voice in heaven, saying, Now is made salvation,
and force, and kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ, because the
accuser of our brethren is cast down, who accused them before the sight of our
God day and night.


NEither was this famous victory obtained in a corner, or spoken in the ear,
but (as the Spirit reports) so valorously gotten, and so audibly proclaimed,
that all the world heard the report thereof, witness the records of those
times, at which the holy Ghost points in these words, And I heard a loud
voice in heaven, saying, and sounding the victory of Christ and Christianisme
against the Dragon and his Angels, his sorcerers and their profane and
idolatrous paganism; in these devout and divine notes, Now is made salvation,
and force, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ; and
yields a reason of this so pious and triumphant joy, because the folly and
fury of the Dragon and his Angels, which so continually accused the Saints and
servants of God, for pestilent fellows, mouers of sedition, maintainers of
sects, polluters of the Temple, teachers of new gods, enemies to Caesar,
wordsowers, babblers, blasphemers, is now upon setting and going down for
ever. Which death and downfall of their spiritual whoredom, the holy Ghost
discloseth, in saying, because the accuser of our brethren is cast forth.

And for the greater comfort of the Church and judgment of her enemies,
concludes, that there is a perfect courtroule kept, as well of the sufferings
of the Saints, as of the slanders of their foes, so openly committed in the
face of the Court, and before a Judge of so clear a sight and eternal memory,
as that they shall never be discharged or forgotten, the Spirit infers,
saying, who accused them before the sight of our God day and night.

Verse 12. And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of
their testimony; and they loved not their lives even unto the death.


LAst of all the holy Ghost discovers the spiritual armor and weapons
wherewith the Angels and servants of Michael obtained this famous victory over
the Dragon and his sectaries, and says, that they were tempered of these two
divine virtues, faith and patience. For by the shield of faith, which the
Spirit (by a metonymie) calls, the blood of the Lamb, and with the sword of
his two witnesses, and by the word of their testimony, they overthrew all
forces and arguments drawn from reason or reading, which the Spirit observes
in these words, And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word
of their testimony, and all such arguments as were drawn from the block, as
fire, sword, persecution, interdiction, and such like, the children of the
Church quenched them with tears, prayers, patience and martyrdom, as their
Lord had given them charge, and left them example; which the Spirit uncovers
in saying, And they loved not their lives even unto the death.

Verse 13. Therefore rejoice O heavens, and you that dwell in them. Woe to the
earth and to the sea, because the devil is descended to you, having great
wrath, knowing that he has but a little time.


AS after victory follows division of spoil, so the Spirit shuts up this
heavenly conquest with triumph and joy, inuiting thereunto all the Saints and
servants of God, which have from time to time maintained and defended the
honor of his name against the Dragon, his sorcerers and sorceries. And because
by their good profession and godly conversation they testified the glory of
God (as do the heavens) by their obedient conuersions, the Spirit crowns
them with the name of the heavens, saying, Therefore rejoice O heavens, and you
that dwell in them.

And on the other part, pronounces woe, first to all nations and kingdoms
accessory to these spiritual whoredoms of the Dragon, whom (according to
their earthly mind) he most aptly resembles to the earth; next, to the Empire
it self, as the scelerum caput and stable of iniquity, whom for his fearful
power and unbridled rage, the Spirit most elegantly calls by the name of the
Ocean and the sea: and concludes his woe with a reason why, because both in
one and other, the power of Satan had taken such deep root, that the more the
light of the truth did bewray their madness, the more they strove and stormed
against it; and so much the rather, because their sin was now at the highest;
and that the kingdom of Christ did gather so fast upon them, that of necessity
a mutation of their fortunes must needs follow, with a subversion not only of
their Paganism, but also of their power Cesaricall, which the Spirit closely
foldeth up in these words, Knowing that he has but a little time; which one
Apostle also observes, 2 Thessalonians. 2.

Verse 14. And when the Dragon saw that he was thrown to the earth, he
persecuted the woman that brought forth the man child.


ANd when the raging Roman Empire saw that his maintenance of Jupiter and his
idol art of making shrines was to descend for ever, (as among many voices, some
even to this day are heard to cry vengeance upon his idols, enforcing them
with shame to resign their usurped titles of gods and claim of heaven to the
true Lord and owner thereof) he took the course of the wicked, whose custom is
(as one of their own notes) malitia alia aliam trudere, and to add sin to
sin, (as a holy one says) to quench his Deuteronomy. 29.
thirst with drunkenness: for so proceeded this Beast, adding to his
blindness boldness, redeeming his blasphemy with rage and persecution; and
was so far from coming to himself, and taking up repentance to wash away his
crying sins, that (as the Spirit concludes) he more and more pursued the
Church, and persecuted the woman which brought forth her first borne and
primitive fruit, here called for their faith, their patience, and their godly
valor the man child.

Verse 15. And there was given unto the woman two wings of the great Eagle,
that she might fly into the desert, unto her place, where she was nourished
for a time, and times, and half a time, from the face of the Serpent.


But the Lord, who had so dearly bought his Shunamite, was no less careful to
preserve and carry her to the place of her rest, with a strong and outstretched
providence, even upon his own two wings, whose feathers were made of the truth
of his promse, sealed and delivered by the hand of his two witnesses, which the
Bridegroom of purpose left with his Spouse, to accompany and guide her
whenever she remoueth. If she travel by day, they are her leading cloud; if
by night, they are her pillar of fire: if she fly, they lend her wings; if she
wander, they harbor her; if she be naked, they cover her; if in prison, they
visit her; if captive, they redeem her; if she be weak, they sustain her; if
blind, they lead her; if she be heavy, they comfort her; if sick, they
recover her; if she doubt, they resolve her; if she err, they direct her: if
she thirst, they give her to drink; and if she hunger, they feed her, and make
her so strong of constitution, that afflictions are reioycings to her,
banishment a haven, dispersion a friend, loss and death advantage. And by
these comforts (as by hands) they convey her to her solitude and restless
place of rest, as the Spirit discovers, saying, But there were given to the
woman two wings of the great Eagle, that she might fly into the desert, unto
her resting place, where ever since her primitive dispersion she has lived
strewed and scattered far and near over the face of the earth, seen and
known of her Lord, by whom she is protected, and of the children of wisdom,
of whom she is justified: and so does and must remain hidden and retired into
the privy chambers of Gods providence and her own conscience, during the
reign of Antichrist, whose cursed and arrogant supremacy was to rise out of the
ashes of the Dragons Emperioritie, as the holy Ghost prophesied.

And thus, hiding her eminent primitive graces, must closely and silently keep
the Lords watch, and stand upon her honorable guard three prophetical years
and a half, here (as in Daniel) determined by a time, and times, and half a
time, from the reach and rage of the Serpent, his tail and successors.

Verse 16. And the Serpent cast out of his mouth, after the woman, water, as it
were a flood, that he might make her to be carried away with the flood.


ANd when the Dragons train of Cesars (who for their malice to the truth, and
seducing the nations, are here called by the name of the ancient enemy and
seducer of mankind the Serpent) saw that they could no longer havoc the
Church of God, by reason of her close sight and secret dispersion, they devised
to pursue her with their bloody edicts and sacrilegious constitutions, which
they breathed out against her in such raging and furious manner, as the Spirit
therefore resembles the violence of their barbarous inquisitions and
unprincely rescripts unto the unmerciful rage and current of a flood, hoping
that as by their unplacable fury they had dispersed and driven the Spouse to
corners* so by the due execution of their cruel promulgations they might
utterly consume her generation, and blot out all letters of her honorable name;
for to that white only they aimed, as the Spirit concludes, That he might
make her to be carried away of the flood.

Verse 17. And the earth holp the Woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and
swallowed up the flood which the Dragon cast out of his mouth.


But in relief of the Churches pressures and persecutions, her Lord gave
charge unto his handmaide the earth, to comfort, help and succor her his
Spouse: and as Moab was charged to hide the chased Israel of God, and not
bewray him that was fled and escaped, but to dwell with him, and to give him
covert and protection from the face of the destroyer; so here the earth was
commanded to reach forth her helping hand, and to take in and harbor the Lords
exiles, in the seret chambers of her deserts, mountains and caves, that so she
might either afford her close and quiet saueguard, or in witness of her faith
and proof of her patience, receive the blood which her cursed brethren spilt;
which courtesy and tender favor, the Spirit remembers to the perpetual
praise of the benefactors of the Spouse, saying, But the earth holp the Woman,
and opened her mouth, and swallowed up the flood which the Dragon cast out of
his mouth.

Verse 18. And the Dragon was wroth against the Woman, and went to make battle
with the remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments of God, and have
the testimony of Jesus Christ.


ANd notwithstanding the Dragon by his tail of Cesars had thus massacred and
dispersed the Church, yet was he not so satisfied, but for very rage fell into
a melancholy mood, for cause he could not quite consume and root her honor
out, as the Spirit discloseth, saying, And the Dragon was wroth against the
Woman.

And forasmuch as the Churches beauty did most shine in the East Syria,
Greece, Asia, where she was borne and bred, the Dragon thought it his best (in
policy, which evermore with him was held for chiefest religion) to itch and
set forward his den, and hold his Court further East; which purpose of his, as
close as it was, the holy Ghost discovers, in saying, And he went; and notes
the true end wherefore he went, not so much to barricade and stop the floate
and incursion of the barbarous enemy, as he (forsooth) pretended, as to pursue
and consume the dispersed remainder of the Spouse, as the Spirit unfolds,
saying, to make battle with the remnant of her seed, who for that they were
just of the making and growth of the Churches first and primitive fruit,
holding the mystery of faith in a good conscience, as the first borne did, the
Spirit sets them forth in the same lively colors, saying, which keep the
commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ.

Verse 19. And he stood upon the sand of the sea.


ANd the Dragon removed his throne, and left his ancient seat and city of
Rome, where he had now kept court almost a thousand years, and went and
pitched his throne anew in a haven town, between Pontus Euxinus and Propontis
in the East of Thracia, anciently called Bysance, and there erected the new
city of Rome, and called it after his own name Constantinople the city of
Constantine; which translation of his residence and chair of estate, one of
his own also notes:

Constantinus apud Thraces, qua Bosphorus aequor
Thracius Euxinis Aegaeu^ ingurgitat vndis, constituit sedem Imperij.
CHAP. XIII.
The description of Antichrist, and his deuotaries.

The description of his Clergy and of his religion.

The Character of Antichrist.

The number of his days, and the end of his reign.

Verse 1. And I saw a Beast ascending from the sea, having seven heads and ten
horns, and upon his horns* ten diadems, and upon his heads names of
blasphemy.


ANd presently upon the remove and translation of the Empire, the Apostle
espied that wicked one, Antichrist, man of sin, in saying, And I saw; who in
regard of the tyrannous power and bloody use of the unbridled jurisdiction that
should be given him, he is here termed (as in holy Scriptures other Monarchs
are) A Beast, that is to say, a kind of government, kingdom, dominion or power
exercised and acted by a succession of tyrannous, bloody and beastly men.

And albeit his perfection in evil stood yet aloof, and was very far off,
young and tender, as lying in swathing clouts; yet the Apostle descrieth him, as
it were through a chinke, in saying, coming up. For after the translation of
the Empire, and that now Ethnicke Rome began to play the Christian, he was
welnigh a hundred years closely creeping and climing up, before he could
advance his cursed head and claim of supereminencie. Concerning which
ambitious puff of vain prioritie, so fair and evident mention is made in the
monuments of time, that the incredible boldness of the adversary is no less
marvelous then his incurable blindness, that has so long time stumbled at
this stone, and so often spurred us by way of vaunting, to show them (if we
dare or can) when this apostacy of Antichrist took her rise and first
commencement: which daring vaunt of theirs, the holy Ghost tripping over as a
thing which is or ought to be known unto us, namely, that the horn of
Antichrist and his apostacy did then first sprout out, when his Church first
obtained at the Dragons hand prioritie of place, suffrage and censure over all.
For as the tree pulls up the creeping ivy, so the primacie of the Church of
Rome pulled up the aspiring supremacy of the Bishop thereof; which Church
pre-eminence and prelation (after long ruffling and shouldring) was first
obtained at the hands of Honorius (though afterward upon greater concertation
and daggers drawing, it was by other Cesars and Kings confirmed, renewed and
ampliated) who by the advantage of the weakness and death of his elder brother
Arcadius, having obtained power and protectorship East and West, subjected the
Church of the East Empire (which most withstood the West and Roman supremacy)
with all other Churches whatsoever, to the Church and Sea of Rome, at the
instant suit and importunity of the now Bishop of Rome, whose name was then
Innocent the first, in the first year of his creation, and in the year of
Redemption 406.

But the holy Ghost (I say) passing over the punctual and exact moment of
time, when the egg of Antichrist and his Apostacy was first laid, as
otherwhere sufficiently preserved unto us, proceeds to detect the place where
and from whence he should arise, saying, that he saw him lift up his hardy head
from the sea, meaning by the sea, as in the sixteenth of this prophecy, the
surging, tumbling and raging Sea and City of Rome, where also by a like
loquution he calls all kingdoms subjected to her by the name of rivers. And
that this Beast should thence arise, and there (and not elsewhere) keep court
and residence, the Spirit proves by an argument drawn from the shape and
proportion of the Beast, for he had the seven heads and ten horns of the
Dragon, meaning that he should sit upon the Dragons hills, and reign in and
over the Dragons city, and array himself with the spoils of the world, and
hold in subjection the Kings and States on earth, as the Dragon did; for so
much the Spirit intends in saying, having seven heads and ten horns. And
lest the unwary Reader should mistake this great Antichrist for that great
Dragon, or this Beasts supremacy and his pestilent succession for that Beasts
supereminencie and his execrable tail (as many unwarily have done,) the holy
Ghost in emblazoning his coat, gives him a most exquisite difference, in
saying that he wore his diadems, not upon his heads, as the Dragon did, but
upon his horns; signifying thereby that he should not come to his Crown and
vainglory by the strength of his sword, his Leaders and his legions, as the
Dragon did, but by the base and voluntary submission of all such Cesars, Kings
and Princes as should with one counsel and force, deliver up their authority
and power secular to the devotion and pleasure of the Beast; and therefore the
Spirit crowns, not his heads, but his horns, saying, and upon his horns ten
diadems. And concluding shows (even by his head attire) how far unlike this
Dragons High Priest of Rome was and should be to the Lords High Priest of
Jerusalem, who (in stead of having his head-attire emblemished with holiness
to the Lord, as had his servant Aaron) should have his head-peece beslubbered
with names of blasphemy, and upon his heads names of blasphemy, whereof
proof is made in the sixth verse following.

Verse 2. And the Beast which I saw was like to a Leopard, and his feet as a
Bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a Lion, and the Dragon gave him his own
force, and his throne, and great power.


ANd forasmuch as the Apostle foresaw that this Beast should be a far greater
adversary, and a far longer persecuter of the Church of God then any of the
Monarchies which did arise before him; he shapeth him an outside answerable to
his inward making, framing his parts of the most notable persecuters that ever
were; as concluding him for his extraordinary wickedness the odd fellow, the
total sum and very accomplishment of all other.

And first for his presumption, in extolling himself above the Prince of the
Covenant, defouling his sanctuary, desolating his sacrifice, burning his
statutes, and enforcing the humble and meek to the abnegation of the truth, by
blood, fire, strappadoes, and such like exquisite torments; the Spirit
resembles him to his arch-type Antiochus descended from the Monarch of Greece,
here (as in Daniel) deciphered by a Leopard, And I saw the Beast like a Leopard.

Secondly, in pride of life, in pomp and luxury, the Spirit equalleth him with
the Monarch of Persia, and likeneth his arrogant and voluptuous gate to her ten
Kings, here (as in Daniel) deciphered by a Bear, And his feet as of a Bear.

Thirdly, the holy Ghost ascribes unto him the proud, profane and cursed
mouth of the Mornarch of Babylon, in commanding the dwellers on earth (upon
pain of fire and furnace) to adore his golden idol, which he had dedicated
with cornets, sackbuts, psalteries, dulcimers; which also the Spirit covers
(as Daniel does) under the mask of a Lion, And his mouth as the mouth of a
Lion.

And last of all, lest happily he should be least beholding unto his Bella
Nimpha, his dearest Lady and mistress of Rome, the holy Ghost says, that the
love of his Patroness the Dragon, was equal to the love of a father toward
his son; for she made him heir apparent and Lord of her Empire, subiecting
all things to the feet of his censure, and confirming unto him her throne and
palace of Lateran, with all the demefnes and glory of Latium, as one of his
own also notes, Latiumque relinquit Christo, and Romuleam septem cum collibus
vrbem.

Verse 3. And I saw one of his heads as it were slain to death, but the wound
of his death was cured, and all the earth was in admiration after the Beast.


ANd presently after this great Antichrist was risen, the Apostle foresaw such
a wound given to one of his heads, that the Beast was in eminent danger to be
stricken down again, and slain in the very egg; for so much the Spirit
notes in saying, And I saw one of his heads as it were slain to death. For
the better opening of which wou^d, we must not only remember the Beast has
seven heads, but we must also step a little forward, and crave the assistance
of the seventeenth Chapter concerning the interpetation of the seven heads,
which says, that the seven heads are seven hills, and they are also seven
kings; discovering the true seat and situation of the city of Rome, where
Antichrist should keep his court and residence, by the seven hills.

And by the seven kings the seven Monarchies, which from the beginning of the
world to this day have successively risen and reigned over the earth, of which
seven, the Assyrian monarchy was the first, and the Roman the sixth, of both
which and their pue-f^llowes, is further revealed in the seventeenth Chapter
following. Mean time we are here to observe, that as the holy Ghost does
therefore call his seven heads by the name of seven hills, because the seat of
Antichrist should be there, and not elsewhere placed and planted; so he names
them also seven kings, because the power of Antichrist should be an
extraordinary sovereignty, compounded of such spiritual and temporal claims
and jurisdictions, as should be equivalent in presumption and profanation, to
all the transgressions of the seven monarchies, which from the beginning
hitherunto have blasphemed God and corrupted his world.

This foundation laid, does show, that this deadly wound given to one of his
heads, which (as after appears) was the wound of a sword, cannot be meant of
any one of his heads after the first signification, as they are hills, but as
they are kings, and subject to the sword: and so by consequence intends that
one of his Imperial heads, and namely his fair Adonis, his minion, lord and
master of Rome, of whom he had so lately received his breath and being, was so
deadly wounded, as that the Beast himself thereby was in great danger of
extinctio^. Thus having found the head, let us look unto the wound, that so we
may the better discern the great danger the Beast was in, delivered in these
words, as it were slain to death. This deadly wound was given and driven home
to the head, by the sword and incursion of the West Goths, under the leading
of Alaricus, who in the nineteenth year of Caesar Honorius (of whom the Beast
some four years before had received his life) entered Italy, and gave such a
deadly stroke unto his powerful pate, that for very fear the Beast locked
himself up in his den at Rauenna, while the enemy ripped up the streets of his
Imperial city, filling them with famine, fire and sword; which night of woe,
or rather beginning of her woeful night, made an ancient friend of hers to
bewail and bind up her deadly wounded head, with an old Ballad, after the tune
of the burning of Troy:

Quis cladem illius noctis, quis funera fando explicet?
Aut possit lachrimis aequare labores?
Vrbs antiqua ruit multos dominata per annos.
And having thus mortally wounded the head of the Beast (in the year of
salvation 410, and 1157 years after Romulus had raised her walls with his
brothers blood) proceeded to seize upon the rest of his dignities, hauocking
and burning his chiefest honors, Latium, Campania, Apulia, Lucania, Calabria,
where raging and devising how to extermine the power of the Empire for ever,
and to spread his glory over all, was by sudden death blotted out, leaving his
purpose and his army royal to his wives brother Ataulphus, who in like raging
haste and fury returned to Rome, with an obstinate intent and resolution to
obliterate the ancient name of Rome for ever, and to call her (in honor of his
people) Gothia, or after his own name Ataulpha; which counsel and purpose of
his, had it been effected, sir Antichrist with all his primacies and
supremacies had bid us good night long ago; and all his gainful enterludes of
fides vestra, and ne deficiat fides tua, and pasce oues, and tibi dabo claues,
and quorum remiseritis, with all his pestilent painted train of succession,
had been dashed in repeating, before ever they had come on stage. But to the end
this recovery might be the plaguesore of the earth, his deadly wound was
healed, as the Spirit sath, but the wound of his death was cured. For by the
pleasing prayers and subtle intercessions of the Emperors sister Placidia,
whose beauty and body was espoused to Ataulphus, for such a time his fury
was auerted, and his design dissolved, and himself not only content at her
amorous mediation to grant the city of Rome pardon for her name, but also to
leave her eclipsed and dying honor, with all her Italy, to her stupefied
Honorius, who for fear was crept into his earth at Rauenna; and taking his
spouse Placidia with such dower as himself listed, departed Italy, and pitched
his tabernacle in France, then one of the chiefest provinces of the West
Empire. And to this plaster the Spirit points, in saying, but the wound of
his death was cured.

And the holy Ghost foreseeing the greatness of the Beasts power to come,
which was yet but like unto his sin; and how that Satan his creator, who had
formed him after the image and perfection of his own wickedness, should
afford him such letters commendatory to all the world, which naturally loves
wicked inventions, that the primacie of his Church and supremacy of his person
should ouerspread all, and obtain the praise of the earth; concludes of him
in this manner, And all the earth was in admiration of the Beast.

Verse 4 And they adored the Dragon which gave power to the Beast; and they
adored the Beast, saying, Who is like unto the Beast, or who may war with him.


ANd the children of misbeliefe ascribed to the Dragon inhibited honors,
decking his heathenish Christendom with names of holy and most holy titles,
due to God alone; and they adored his execrable inventions and doctrines of
devils, worshipping and diuifying his uncircumcised train of Cesars, who had
granted unto Antichrist such power incomparable and uncontrollable
jurisdiction, which the Spirit anatomiseth in these words, And they adored the
Dragon which gave power to the Beast.

And as in evil there is no mean, so these children of unbelief went on, and
bestowed like titles and magnifications upon this base and vile Antichrist, who
as the Prophet long ago foretold us, by Dan, 8.
policy should prosper, and by peace destroy many, and strike his adorers with
such a spiritual drunkenness, that they should not only hang their gold, but
their faith also upon him, and verily believe that this vile and despicable
Antichrist, Delegate to Romulus, and Deputy to Caesar, was Vicar to the Lamb,
and Successor to Peter. And thus rejoicing over the error of their own
fantasy, should with Pigmalion admire and dote upon the idol of their own
caruing, and falling down should adore and cry with that drunken King, Great
art thou, O Bell, and in thee is no deceit: which occasioneth the Spirit (in
detestation of their madness) to disclose their shame, saying, And they adored
the Beast, and said, Who is like unto the Beast, or who may war with him?

Verse 5. And there was given to it a mouth, speaking great things and
blasphemies, and power was given to it to work forty two month.


ANd as the Dragon did bequeath unto Antichrist his throne and his power in so
large and ample manner, that his priestly key was in cutting and killing, so
like the Dragons sword, that he that is wise may easily perceive one craftsman
made them both: so Satan the master and seducer of them both, endowed his
Antichrist with mouth and lips so like his own, that whosoever hears him open,
may truly say, quam similes habent labra lactucas, like lips like lettice; at
which the Spirit points, in saying, And there was given to it a mouth; and
proves it by an argument drawn from the fruit of his lips, speaking great
things and blasphemies. Whereof the Prophet Daniel Dan. 7.
also inditeth him, foretelling that he should open his execrable mouth, and
speak words against the most High; of which presumptuous magniloquence the
holy Ghost arraigneth him more particularly in the verse following.

And the Prophet also further reports, that times and laws and great power
Dan. 7.
should be given into his hand, for a time and times, and the dividing of a
time; butting and bounding his tyrannous reign and government within the
selfsame circle and period, as here the Spirit does, by another like
prophetical construction, saying, And power was given unto it to work forty
two months.

Verse 6. And he opened his mouth unto blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his
name, and tabernacle, and those which dwell in heaven.


IN discovering ye blasphemous mouth of Antichrist, the holy Ghost does first
and principally challenge him for presuming to lay hand upon his divine and
spiritual sword, and to wear the name and title of Vicar to the Lamb, which
title, name and honor is only due to the Spirit of the Lamb, the only
moderator, comforter and commander of all the Lambs affairs and forces in
heaven and in earth: and of this principal blasphemy the Apostle condemns
him, in saying, And he opened his mouth unto blasphemy against God.

Next, the Lord challenges him for presuming to blaspheme the word of God,
superaduancing his whorish church above the divine eternal testimony, in and
by which the Son of God is named and known; which contumely offered to his
most holy word, the Lord accounts as done to himself and his most holy name;
for so the holy Ghost speaking of that Lord that is faithful and true, who
with justice judges and fights, says, that he was clothed with a garment
sprinkled with blood, and his name is called, The Word of God. The pourtraiture
of which divine and essential Word, is the engraven Scripture of his most holy
and written word, and of this blasphemy the Spirit inditeth him in these
words, to blaspheme his name. Less marvel then if like a raging flood, down
bearing all before him, and ouerflowing all banks of obedience toward God, he
dare extol his cursed head above all that is called or named God, that is to
say, all magistracy, authority and power secular, which by Gods own
ordinance and commandment, is the only true, lively and immediate
representation of his own person, justice and government here on earth, in and
over all temporal causes and persons, as well Ecclesiastical as civil, of
which high treason one Apostle also conuinceth him, 2 Thessalonians. 2.

No marvel then, if thus daring to blaspheme the Lord of the house and his
anointed Deputies, he dare blaspheme the house of God, wherein his name is
honored, cursing, reuiling and reputing it a house of schismatiques,
heretics, excommunincates; which blasphemous and undeserved wrong, the holy
Ghost lays to his charge, in these words, and his tabernacle.

And last of all, to show that there is neither end nor measure in his black,
presumptuous and blasphemous mouth, the Spirit further charge him with
blaspheming the Saints and servants of God deceased, cursing, reuiling and
condemning their doctrine, and yet blessing, adoring and erecting their
shadows, sepulchers and shrines, for mediators, intercessors and reconciliators
between God and the sinner; like their cursed fore-elders the Israelites, who
boasted in the descent of their father Abraham, and yet blasphemed the faith of
Abraham their father, of which blasphemous and indicible contumely against the
Son of God and his most holy Spirit, the Apostle condemns him, saying, And
those that dwell in heaven.

Verse 7. And it was given unto him to make battle with the Saints, and to
overcome them: and power was given him upon every people, tribe, tongue, and
nation.


ANd as after lightning follows thu^der, so after Antichrists blasphemy
follows his persecution, as the Spirit testifies, saying, And it was given
him to bid battle to the Saints; which the Prophet Daniel by way of exposition
also plainly sets forth, saying, that he should murder and consume the
Saints and servants of the most high.

And in further amplification of this his carnificious fury, the Spirit
sets forth the largeness of his charter and commission, by an excessive
loquution, foretelling us that it should be so large and general, that the fire
of his profane and sycophantical keys should take hold upon every nation and
tribe; as if we please to cast an eye upon the times past, and confer what he
had, with what he has, we shall easily discern the meaning of the holy Ghost
in these words, And power was given him upon every Tribe, people, tongue and
nation.

Verse 8. And all that inhabit the earth adored it, whose names be not written
in the book of life, of the Lamb which was slain from the beginning of the
world.


THe holy Ghost having in the former part of this Chapter discovered the birth,
place, person, power, blasphemy and persecution of Antichrist, descends now
to the description of his creatures and deuotaries, foretelling us that they
should be such only (for unto such only the particle all is here restrained)
as have their portion and interest in this life, whose piety, heaven, hope and
glory is here, and not elsewhere; which kind of out and ouercast Christians,
the Spirit describes by a periphrasis most proper to their natural and inbred
disposition, saying, they are those that inhabit the earth; therein
discovering them as by a difference diuisiue from such as are the Lords
pilgrims and strangers on earth, having here no permanent abode or place of
rest, but seeking the things which are above, attend with patience the
revelation of a life and city to come, not made with hands, where their Lord
and their Redeemer lives.

And the Spirit proceeding shows further, the supreme, hidden and
vnperceiuable reason why the adorers of Antichrist thus defiled the ornaments
of their calling, and why they loved lies more then truth, the Beasts penance
more then Gods repentance, the Beasts belief more then faith toward God; the
Beasts miserable merits more then the fruits of the Spirit, hatred of sin and
love of God, because (as holy David says) they were not found in the Lords
record, nor written with the righteous: for so much the Spirit unfolds,
saying, whose names be not written in the book of life, of the Lamb which was
slain from the beginning of the world.

Verse 9. If any man have an ear, let him hear.


THe Apostle having sufficiently deciphered the nature and carriage of
Antichrist and his creatures, comes now to discover his reward and judgment,
which howsoever it tarry little or long, is of necessity the reward of sin.
But before the Spirit draws out his sword, it pleases him in his accustomed
mercy to awake his Church and her enemies, and to move them to a fear and
reverent attention, by a general summons, proclaiming, If any man have an
care, let him hear.

Verse 10. He that shall lead into captivity, goes into captivity; and he
that shall kill with the sword, must be killed with the sword: here is the
patience and the faith of the Saints.


THe holy Ghost in this verse calls Antichrist to the Bar, and sets him
before the world, for the very he, on who^ the wrath of God and his heavy
displeasure is to be executed. For he, who under color and pretense of weeding
out and rooting up of heretics, has brought into the Church captivity,
inquisitions, tortures and torments, to the horrible murder and slaughter of
the Saints, when in such cases (notwithstanding) he had neither precept nor
example in the life of the Lamb or his Apostles so to do; he, even he, says
the Lord, is that party, against whom this just judgment of taliation is laid
up in store to be executed upon him in that day, when the Lord shall bring
again the captivity of his Church, which for their sins he has given up to
the sword and fury of the Beast, until she have borne the burden of her
shame, and (as the Ezekiel. 39.
Prophet says) renewed her beauty by her sorrows, and her glory by her
persecutions; and then shall be fulfilled that which was spoken by the Prophet,
Woe to thee that spoiledst, and wast not spoiled; and did deal wickedly,
when they did not Esa. 33.
wickedly against thee: for when thou shall cease to spoil, thou shall be
spoiled; and when thy sin is ended, thou shall be rewarded; as here also the
Spirit denounces, contesting that God shall scourge him with his own
inventions, and repay him home in his own coin, saying, He that shall lead
into captivity, shall go into captivity; and he that shall kill, shall be
killed.

And in consolation of the Spouse, concludes, that howsoever Antichrist and
his Delegates foolishly thought, by afflicting the Church, to destroy the
Church, yet in her afflictions consists the very strength and approbation of
her children; for by the things they suffer, they learn obedience, and through
patience their faith is consecrated, by the which they are perfected and made
inheritable of the promise of God: all which mercy and favor is commended
unto them under the hand and seal of afflictions, by which their mad and
drunken adversaries thought to consume them, and like fools did not consider
that as the workman does square the stone by strokes, and as the snake does
cast his old skin by passing through sharp stones, so the Lord does renew his
Spouse by stripes, and brusheth off her old affections by passing her through
the asperitie of tribulation; which holy and hidden consideration, causes the
Spirit to honor the sufferings of the Saints so highly, as to ascribe unto
them the chiefest stays and supportations of their precious hope and calling,
namely, patience and faith, saying, here is the patience and faith of the
Saints.

Verse 11. And I saw another Beast coming up from the earth, and he had two
horns like the Lamb, but he spoke like the Dragon.


THe holy Ghost in the verse foregoing, having pronounced sentence of death
against Antichrist, before he comes to the execution thereof, descends to the
arai^^^ment and condemnation of his Clergy, that so they may be carted to the
valley of Hinnom both together, whom the Lord here figureth under the name of
the Beast, saying, And I saw another Beast; comprehending under the singular
number of one Beast, by a manner of speech common to the holy Scriptures, the
whole corporation and university of false and lying teachers, who from the
first Eremite, Hypocrite, Father, Priest, Monk, Friar, to the last trumping
and vagabond Jesuit, have avouched the honor and adoration of Antichrist. And
is most aptly deciphered by their earthly, sensual, and devilish minds, in
pointing to their country and place of extraction, whence and where such weeds
do grow, saying, coming up from the earth. And commends their making and
acquaintance to us, by two exquisite tokens, the one their person, the other
their doctrine. Touching their shape and person, the Spirit says, that it was
in robe and exterior appearance the very face and countenance of the Lamb,
decked and garnished with his own two horns, to wit, the Law and the Gospel,
wherew(...)he Lamb does save and kill; for so the Spirit says, And he had two
horns like the Lamb.

But as concerning the use and force of the horns, the Spirit says, they were
therein so contrary to the Lamb, that when they did open, either to teach the
Law or preach the Gospel, they spoke and taught like the Dragons Doctors, and
like the Priests of Jupiter, teaching and preaching unto the children of the
world, that they ought to worship the God of heaven, as the Dragons Priests had
taught their fathers to worship the gods of the heathen. Which detestable
propha^ation of the worship of God, and preposterous adoration of his name, the
Spirit detecteth, in saying, but he spoke like the Dragon.

Verse 12. And all the power of the first Beast he did in his sight, and he
made the earth and the inhabitants therein to adore the first Beast, whose
wound of death was cured.


BY the power of the first Beast, is meant the purpose and plot of the Dragon
for the upholding and establishment of their false and godless religion, to
the profanation and extinction of the true worship and service of God; which
forasmuch as he could not effect by force and open enmity, I mean by the
bloody persecutions of his profane and Ethnicke Cesars, he did devise to put a
new string to his old bow, and to work it out by fraud and falsehood of
friends, and thereupon persuaded his Ethnicke Cesars, that in policy it was
the best to play Christians, forasmuch as the world was now so given, as
Jupiter with all his idols must needs give place to Christ, because most voices
went that way.

And the better to bring the mystery of iniquity to pass, he caused his new
Christened Cesars to set up a race of Sycophanticall, high and princely
Priests, who under color of proctering the affairs of the Lamb, should
cunningly clap Jupiters coat upon the Lambs back, and bestow all the
ceremonies and rituals of Jupiter and his idols upon Christ; that so by turning
Jupiters worship into Christianisme, he might turn the worship of God into
Paganism and idolatry, and that so he might at the least profane and
desolate the true worship of the true God, whose majesty and truth of deity
they could no way blemish.

And for the better success in this their project, should cause to be erected
throughout all kingdoms and nations, certain Couents and swarms of false,
ungodly and prostituted Clerks, who by auouching and maintaining against all
comers, that Antichrists name is Simon Peter; and that the supremacy his
Cesars and his Kings gave him, is the very keys of heaven and hell, which the
Lamb committed to the dispensation of his Saints and servants; and that the
throne and seat of wickedness, is Peter's Chair and Sea Apostolic; and that
the execrable form of Jupiters worship, wherein his Lords and Cesars
delighted, is the very true worship and service of God, which the Lamb and his
Apostles delivered.

And by these mists, legerdemains, and new editions of old idolatry, should
establish in the sight of Antichrist, the self same profanation and devout
impiety which his antecessors the Cesars so ardently embraced; for so much the
Spirit rippeth up, in saying, And all the power of the first Beast he did in
the sight of Antichrist: and thereby so strongly deluded and seduced the
children of disobedience (most properly here, as elsewhere, described by the
name of the earth and the inhabitants therein) that they loathed the sacrifices
of the God of heaven, and refused to worship as the Lord commanded, and chose
rather (as the Spirit says) to adore the first Beast, that is to say, to
worship ye god of their fathers, as the Dragon commanded them, just after the
prescription of his Cesars and manner of the heathen.

And that we may the better discern from whom those Proctors of Don Antichrist
borrowed this their abominable Church-seruice, the Spirit remembers the
repaired wound of their masters creditors pate, mentioned in the third verse,
whose wound of death was cured.

Verse 13. And he did many signs, so that he made fire to come down from
heaven to the earth, in the sight of men.


THe holy Ghost having arraigned and condemned the Clergy of Antichrist
touching their doctrine, proceeds further to detect their abomination and
forgery, in seeking to confirm their false doctrine by lying signs and works
of wonder; condemning therein first their vanity; secondly their presumption.
For as nothing can be more vain and ungodly, then to seek by lying signs and
wonders to confirm the doctrine of the Lamb and his servants, which is all
sufficiently established by their own magnificent and divine miracles, unto
which the Church of God upon her allegiance is enjoined to subscribe: so
nothing can be more presumptuous and wicked, then to attempt by signs and
wonders the confirmation of any other doctrine then that which the Lamb and his
two witnesses have sealed and delivered unto us, according to the statute of
God, Deuteronomy. 13.

And though their signs were many, as the Spirit reports, saying, And he did
many signs; yet were they but forgeries and lies, not wrought in truth and
dignity, but in falsehood and fallacy, as our Lord himself and his servant
Paul foretold us, Mat. 24. 2 Thessalonians. 2. In which regard the holy Ghost squaring
the miracles of these exorcists after the rule of their doctrine, which was in
show the Lambs, but in truth the devils; calls also their lying signs,
heavenly fires, saying, so that he made fire to come down from heaven to the
earth, in the sight of men: not that they were in deed and in truth so, but
that they seemed so to be in the eyes of men, because they were wrought by
these vagabond exorcists, under a pretended and colorable imitation of the
name of the Lord Jesus, who of all heavenly powers and fires is the true Lord
and sovereign commander; that so these Clerks of Antichrist might be suitable
in their wickedness, that as their doctrine was opposite to the truth of
Christ, so their wonders might contrary the power of Christ, by a colorable
imitation of the miracles of Christ, and might be a true and perfect
deprauation of the same.

Verse 14. And he seduced the inhabitants on the earth, through the signs
which were given him to do in the sight of the Beast, saying unto them that
dwell on the earth, that they should make the image of the Beast which had the
stroke of the sword and lives.


ANd the Spirit further disclosing the happy success of these unhappy
brokers and slaves of Antichrist touching their mists and miracles, foretells
us, that as the first Elias by the miracles of heavenly fire did induce and
draw the good unto the fear of God, so these imposters of Antichrist, by the
lure of their false and lying fires, should seduce and draw all dunghill and
earthly minded men from the fear of God, in such sure and devoted sort, as
that they should persuade them to make the picture and image of the Beasts
religion, and to embrace and erect such a Christianisme, as should in all
points counterfeit and represent the Paganism of the Dragon, attiring and
decking Jupiters profanation with the holy and honorable names of God, Jesus,
Spirit, Scriptures, Church, Sacraments, Saints, etc. like excellent Comedians
who deck themselves with Crowns, Scepters, purples, and representations of
Kings, whenas indeed they are the basest of the people. And as the Lord
commanded his servant Moses to erect such a Tabernacle of witness here on
earth, as should be in all points after the Idea, model and platform of that
divine and eternal Tabernacle which he saw in the mount: so Antichrist (Lord
of misrule) commanded his propudious Clergy to cause all people, nations and
kingdoms to set up such a Christianity as should in all points answer the
Idea, model and platform of that profane and execrable heathenisme wherewith
he saw the Gentiles enamoured; and hereby so strongly seduced the inhabitants
on earth, that they verily thought the mystery of Iniquity to be pure and
undefiled Christianity; and that the abomination of desolation, forespoken by
Daniel the Prophet, is the only true, ancient, Catholic and Apostolic
religion; teaching them that perish by consenting unto lies, that they ought to
worship God as the Gentiles did worship Jupiter; persuading them that as the
Gentiles had their Arae, so Christians must have their Altars; and as the
heathen had their bloody sacrifices, so Christians must have their unbloody
sacrifices, and offer bread and wine to God, as the heathen did to Ceres and
Bacchus; and as the Pagans had their Poutifex maximus, so Christians must have
their Pope; and as Ethnicks had their Sacerdotes, so must Christians have their
Priests; and as the Gentiles had their gods and goddesses, so must Christians
have their he Saints and she Saints; and as the Dragon had his Pantheon, so
Antichrist must have his All Saints; and as the heathen had their idols, so
Christians must have their images; and as the Pagans did consecrate their
Temples to Idols, so Christians must dedicate their Churches to Saints; and as
the Ethnicks had their supplications, so Christians must have their
processions; and as the Gentiles had their lustrations, so Christians must have
their holy water; and as the Dragon in his Church-seruice had his Cerei, so
Antichrist in his Church-seruice must have candles; and as the Dragon had his
Acerra or Thuribles, so Antichrist must have his Censors; and as the Dragon had
his Nouendiall sacrifices, so must Antichrist have his Masses of Requiem; and
as the Dragon had his Hecatombes, so Antichrist must have his Trentals; and as
the D^agon had his Colleges Sodaliu^ and Arvalium fratra^, so must Antichrist
have his Cloisters of Monks and Friars; and as the Dragon had his Vestals, so
Antichrist must have his Nuns and Sanctimonials; and as the Dragon did
celebrate the birth days of his Cesars, so Antichrist must solemnize the
nativity of his Saints; and as the Dragon had his Annals, so must Antichrist
have his Legends; and as the Dragon had his secular Spectacles, so Antichrist
must have his Jubilees; and as the Dragon had his Bacchanals, so Antichrist
must have his Carnivals; and as the Dragon had his Lupanaries, so must
Antichrist have his Stews; and as the Dragon had his inchanters, so Antichrist
must have his exorcists; and as the Dragon had his Asyla, so Antichrist must
have his Sanctuaries; and as the Dragon had his Exequies and Parentals, so
Antichrist must have his Diriges and his de profundis; and as the Dragon had
his comitia centariata, so Antichrist must have his Councels oecumenicall; and
as the Beast had his comitia curiata, so Antichrist must have his Councels
provincial; and as the Dragon did diuifie his Cesars, so must Antichrist
canonize his Saints; and as the Dragon enacted civil laws, so Antichrist must
enact Canon laws; and as the Dragon had his Imperial rescripts, so Antichrist
must have his Decretall Epistles; and as the Dragon had his Tribunitial
intercessions, so Antichrist must have his uncontrollable interdictions; and as
the Dragon had and used his prescriptions, so Antichrist must have and use his
excommunications; and as that Beast commanded his heathen to please their
goddess Juno with cane vota libens, so this Beast commanded Christians to
please their God with vows; and as the Dragon had his Triceps Hecate, so
Antichrist must have his triple tiara, to signify his triple pretended
jurisdiction; and as the Dragon had his Hexaphoron, so must Antichrist be
carried up and down; briefly, as the Dragons priests did teach the heathen to
worship Jupiter as God, so Antichrists Clergy must teach their Christians to
worship God as Jupiter; and look what form of religion, what manner of life
the Dragon led, the same must Antichrist in his person parallel and maintain.

And to the end we may undoubtedly discern what and of whose image the Apostle
speaks, the Spirit remembers now the third time his recured wound, which*
here speaking more plainly out, he calls the stroke of a sword; not that it
was the only stroke, (for many swords did pierce the Dragon, as his had
pierced many,) but the first stroke of a sword, which from the beginning and
rising of the Dragons Empire and regiment by Cesars, did remeasure the fury of
the sword upon his own head and chair of state, as the Spirit notes, saying,
Which had the stroke of the sword, and lives.

Verse 15. And it was given to him to give spirit to the image of the Beast,
and that the image of the Beast should speak, and should make that whosoever
honored not the image of the Beast, be slain.


ANd such art and perswasible power was given to those inchanters and apostates
of Antichrist, that they infused such a quickening spirit, such a life, giving
animation into the Ethnicke dead and desolate image of the Dragons religion, by
gilding it over with the reverend, divine and honorable names of God
omnipotent, Christ Jesus the righteous, his holy Spirit, his precious blood,
his sacred word, his blessed Sacraments, etc. that they easily persuaded the
bleareyd world to think and believe, that the execrable form and image of
Jupiters abominatio^, commanded by the Dragon and his Cesars, was the very true
worship and service of God, commanded by the Lamb and his servants; and that
the picture of Jupiter Olimpius which their Lord Epiphanes had set up and
placed in Sanctum sanctorum, was the very Arc and propitiatory of God, set up
and erected by Moses his servant; and their abominable mystical Mass, the
sacrifice of an unbloody Messiah, made of bread of their own baking (which
their fathers the Patriarks, Prophets and Apostles never heard nor dreamed of)
is a sacrifice not Eucharisticall but propitiatory, and so allsufficient for
the atonement and reconciliation of God unto the sinner, as if it were figured
and sealed in the precious blood of the Lord of the covenant; and that the
horrible profane and detestable supper of Thyestes, is the very true, holy and
comfortable commemoration of the Lords love in giving his life for the children
of the Church, and their thankful communion and celebration of the same.

And by these and such like enchantments, these Proctors of Antichrist so
baffled and blinded the Princes and Protectors of their synagogues, that they
inzealed them to authorize and erect inquisitions, executions and torments
against all such as refuse to honor and adore the idol-seruice and desolation
of their Antiochus; and that all such as do but mutter against the
magnificence of their Church and her worship, which all the world adoreth,
should be accounted as infoelix Lolium, weeds, Lollards, heretics,
excommunicates, and sons of death, to the admirable confirmation of the
Spirits prediction in this place, saying, that it was given to him to give such
spirit to the image of the Beast, that the image of the Beast should speak and
make that whosoever honored not the image of the Beast, be slain.

Verse 16. And he should make all, little and great, rich and poor, free and
bond, to have a character in their right hand or on their foreheads.


ANd the power of these prostibulous Clerks was so catholic and universal,
that they caused all kingdoms and nations (figured here by a numeration of
their estates, conditions and callings, little, great, rich, poor, bond,
free,) to confederate and unite themselves by a resolute and determinate
purpose of believing and living after the laws and prescriptions of
Antichrist; which league of voluntary and resolute subjection, the Spirit
calls the character of the Beast: for as unity and love in truth, and a
resolved purpose to live after the commandments of God, is the character and
cognizance of the Lamb; so unity, conspiration and banding against the truth,
with resolution to live after the traditions of Antichrist, is the crest and
character of the Beast. Which profession of obedience was so studiously
embraced, and with such joy received of all the clients and creatures of
Antichrist, that the Spirit says, they did no less pride themselves in their
errors and abominations, then in the wearing of their bracelets and
abillements, delivering it in manner of speech usual with holy Scripture, when
it intends to express an ardent and hearty affection approved both by word
and action, by practice and profession, as Deuteronomy. 6. 8. and 11. 18. where the
holy Ghost uses the selfsame phrase, in their right hand or on their
foreheads.

Verse 17. And that no man may buy or sell but he that has the Character or
the name of the Beast, or the number of his name.


ANd in further proof that Antichrist and his apostaticall Clergy should drive
the nail of their impiety home to the very head, the Spirit says, that by
them and means of their authority, it should be enacted, that none should
trade or live (for so much the inhibition of buying and selling does infer)
but such as acknowledge and adore the prerogative royal, religion and
discipline of the Beast and his holy Catholic Church (for so by a figurative
kind of blasphemy she must be called) as is confirmed by Antichrist himself,
then named Martin the fifth, in his Bull directed to the Inquisitors of
heretical prauitie (for so it pleases him to term the profession of the
truth) nec domicilia habeant, nec larem foueant, nec contractus ineant, nec
negotiationes and mercatur as exerceant, nec humanitatis solatia cum Christi
fidelibus habeant, etc. All which their dominering, rage or madness, the holy
Ghost by way of prevision most admirably epitomizeth in these words, And that
no man may buy or sell, (no one excepted out of the King of Babylons decree)
save those only that carry his signing and fleshmark in their hands or hearts,
as beasts do in their fells, meaning such as under or above board, privately or
in public, are obstinately and resolutely devoted to live and die as the
Beast commands; which the Spirit unfolds in saying, but he that has the
character, or are otherwise allied as it were by way of cognomination unto
Antichrist or his Church Catholic, and are hereafter cleped Papists or
Catholics, revealed in these words, or the name of the Beast; or last of all
are found to adore within the very verge or lists of his reign and Empire
Pontificial, here butted and bounded within the circle and comprehension of
these words, or the number of his name, of which more at large in the verse
following.

Verse 18. Here is wisdom; he that has understanding, let him count the
number of the Beast, for it is the number of a man, and his number is six
hundred sixty six.


THe holy Ghost intending to reveal in this verse the secret counsel and
purpose of God concerning the period and final end of Antichrist and his
Church-dominion, prepares his Reader to attention by a little short preface,
intimating that it is the discovery of a mystery and point of high
understanding, saying, here is wisdom; wherein lest we should ouer-rashly
judge (as many have done) the Spirt makes choice of his auditors, and adds
for a bar, not he that will, but he that can and has understanding, let him
audite and count the number of the Beast; He that has understanding, let him
count the number of the Beast; whom l^st we should imagine to be a spirit or
other creature of strange shape (as some have vainly phantased) the Spirit
calls him a man, saying, for it is the number of a man, comprehending by a
Synecdoche under the word man, a successiue state and kingdom of men, after
the speaking and style of the Prophets: for so the Lord informed his servant
Moses to speak, Let my son go, Exodus 4.
that is, let my people of Israel depart; and so in Daniel, under the form and
Dan. 7.
name of four singular Beasts, are designed four several Monarchies, most of
Dan. 8.
them containing a long succession of many Monarchs, The Ram which thou
saw are the Kings of the Medes and Persians: after which manner of speaking,
the Spirit speaks also in this place, and under the name of a man presents
unto us the whole race and succession of men of sin, whose total sum is
one Antichrist, the bounds and limits of whose dominion and tyranny, the holy
Ghost impaleth within the circuit of a certain sure prefixed period and
determinate number of years, saying, and the number of him is six hundred
sixty six. Wherein many, as well ancient as late writers (as in the rest) they
have vainly imagined, that Antichrist is one singular person, which must
suddenly start up, and after three civil years and a half depart again; and
that he must be by birth a Jew, and of the Tribe of Dan, when notwithstanding
those cursed scatterbags have neither Tribe nor shadow of Tribe left amongst
them; and that he must reign in Jerusalem, of which City and Temple, there is
not any one stone left upon another; and that he must kill Enoch and Elias, who
are to appear about the Kalends of Greece; with diverse other such legendary
fantasies, never meant nor sent from God: so in this point also concerning the
number of Antichrist, they have given up an account so far from the audite of
truth, as nothing can be more. And as men that thought it worth the labor to
find a knot in a rush, so by a conceited framing and anagramming of letters,
they have endeavored to find out such a name as by characters might express
the number 666; and withal might something square either with the name,
nature, blasphemy, or residence of the Bishops of Rome, as (...) for (...),
Remiith Adonikam, filius perditionis, etc. whereunto also may be added the
conjectures of John Wickliff^, John Bale, Francis Iunius, men otherwise of good
and worthy memory in the Church of God; as also the conjectures of others as
worthy and honorable as they, that have referred the number of 666 to the time
of Antichrists revealing and year of rising, when notwithstanding it is a
strange voice, and not known to the ears of the Scriptures, for the word
number to be used for the beginning and rising of any term of time limited and
predicted by the Prophets, but only for the end, period, and determination
thereof.

But if it were lawful to smile in so grave an inquisition, amongst all
fantastical charms and cabalisticall conjectures upon this word number,
there is none more ridiculous then that which most pleases out Rhetorical
Rhemists, who by a rare supputation of characters, have as roundly found out
the Beasts number, as the Sodomites did the doors of Lot, in the name Luderus,
which in the Almain tongue is the name of Luther: and although we are sure,
they cannot so much as think upon the poor Friar Luther, but for very fear
they stink all the world over; yet this device so tickleth the Clergy of
Antichrist, that they pretend to laugh for joy. But as for their prefixed time
of three natural or civil years and a half (which they allot to the reign
and rage of their Antichrist) it does so unevenly square with Luther or
Lutherans continuance, that these miserable Serdonians are feign to eat their
word, and to endure the foolish world to laugh at them, whiles as dying they
feign would seem to laugh at it. But to leave these cursed leaders of the
cursed blind, and return again to those that have thought to calculate and
find out the mystery of Antichrists number 666, in a word, we say, they are
deceived and err, not knowing the power and construction of the Scripture. For
first, by the word name, delivered in the former verse, in these words, or the
number of his name, is meant the very existence and person of the man of sin,
by a propriety of speech common to holy Scriptures, as Acts 1. 15. Apoc. 3. 4.
and 11. 13. where (by an Hebraisme) names signify men, and are converted with
the parties and persons themselves, as the name of God in holy Scripture is
often taken for God himself: and therefore as in the former verse the
Scripture calls it the number of his name, so in this verse he calls it the
number of a man, understanding by a man (as is before said) the total sum of
that succession of beastly men, which make and constitute the existence and
person of one Antichrist: and by the word number, is meant the fatal end and
final determination of their reign and government; for so the finger of God
speaks to Baltazar, God has numbered thy kingdom, that is, God has ended
and finished the days of thy kingdom: so that the number of his name, or the
number of the man, is nothing else but the period and final determination of
the usurped tyranny and domination of Antichrist; which the Lamb the Lord and
preserver of Israel, for the glory of his name, consolation of his Church, and
confusion of her foes, with a mighty and outstretched arm shall bring to pass
in the year which shall be 666.

Forasmuch as the egg of Antichristianisme was laid in the days of Innocent
the first, successor to Anastasius the first also of that name, in the year of
salvation 406, as is before declared; and that by express commission there was
furthermore granted to the Beast, his heirs and successors 1260 years, for
the hatching, fostering and perfecting this child of perdition and mystery of
iniquity, which being added to 406, by rule of true audite must needs verify
this admirable judgment, which the Spirit of God has here denounced and
determined to make good upon him in the year which shall be 1666. In which
account and discovery of his end, the holy Ghost of purpose leaves out the
millenarie number, as not only known perfect and immutable (for that these
vile and evil days shall not exceed more thousands then one) but as
respecting also the common use of all nations, as well Hebrews as Gentiles,
who in their styles (for brevity sake) do no less often speak Vide
Calendarium He^raieum Sebastianl Munsteri.
and write by the imperfect number, omitting the millenary, then after the
perfect adding the millenary, as Munster well observes. And in that year my
Lord of Rome shall lay down his proud waves; and although he fortify never so
strong, and lay his foundation as low as hell, and build his turrets as high as
heaven, and place his Miter above the stars, yet in that day he shall die the
death of the uncircumcised, and perish like the Amorite, whose fruit is
destroyed from above, and root from beneath; and the multitude of his offenses
shall consume the multitude of his forces; and it shall be more possible for
him and easy unto him to weigh the fire, or measure the wind, or call again
the day that is past, or recover the verdure of the withered grass, (as a holy
one says) then to avoid this counsel and decree of his downfall here
determined by the Spirit against him, saying, and the number of him is 666. And
then all kingdoms and people shall see the eternity of that eternal city
(as one of her own calls it) and the immortality of her soul, meaning the
sovereign power and supremacy of her Cesars and high Priests, to wither, die,
and forsake the earth for ever: and as Babylon her mother left unto her the
inheritance of her pride and prophanations, so shall she also leave unto her
the heritage of her death and judgments: for as her glory has been great, so
shall her dishonor, when all her excellency shall be translated into shame
and sorrow.

Now therefore as King Baltasher cried aloud when he saw the handwriting
against him, that they should bring the Caldeans, Astrologians and Inchanters
to read and interpret; so thou that once and long before our days have been
deemed by laws of all nations a power so sovereign and holy, call now about
thee thy Council and thy Clergy (who call themselves Good men, learned and
wise, whose only grace is to love antiquity, gravity, wisdom and
constancy,) call them I say, cloth them with purple and chain them with gold,
yet shall they not deliver thee from this judgment to come; but as the
millstone which the mighty Angel took and cast into the sea, which may not
rise and floate again, with such violence thou and thy Church in that hour
shall be thrown down, and shall be found no more. And all such Kings on
earth, or rather Kings of earth, whose love thou have stolen, to the loss of
their souls, that have lived in drunkenness, delights and wantonness with
thee, shall weep and wail for thee (as for their first borne) when they shall
see the smoke of thy torments ascend, and the apples which thy soul lusted
after, to depart from thee, and no man to buy thy trasn and commodities any
more; for that God which judges thee is a strong Lord, and thy derision shall
be the joy and Alleluia of Sion.

But her fair and halcyon day may not long endure, before the Lord (that with
justice judges and fights) shall come in the clouds of heaven, to render
unto every man according to the ways wherein his heart has walked, as more
directly is revealed in the 20 Chapter following. But as concerning the day and
hour of the coming of that Lord, who for the glory of his name shall bring
these things to pass, it is fast sealed up in the treasury of God, far beyond
the aim of all his servants in earth, or Angels in heaven; and yet his beloved
servant Daniel is bold in spirit, and lays down the year to be the five and
fortith year (according to his Caldaicall supputation) after the consumption
and extermination of Antichrist, that it may be fulfilled which was spoken by
the Prophet, Verily the Lord of hoasts will do nothing, but he reuealeth his
secrets unto his servants the Prophets. Amos 3.


FINIS.

